--- PAGE 1 ---
864
© 2024 Conscientia Beam. All Rights Reserved.
Digital transformationmodel foruniversities: A preliminaryproposal
Javier Manuel
Munoz Acuna1+
Felipe Hernandez-
Perlines2
Manuel Alejandro
Ibarra Cisneros3
1
Faculty of Administration and Business, Autonomous University of Chile,
Temuco Campus, Chile.
Email:javier.munoz@uautonoma.cl
2
Faculty of Law and Social Sciences University of Castilla-La Mancha C/
SanPedroMartir s/n.45071,Toledo, Spain.
Email:Felipe.HPerlines@uclm.es
3
Faculty of Administrative Sciences, Autonomous University of Baja
California, Mexicali, Baja California, Mexico.
Email:manuel_ibarra@uabc.edu.mx
(+ Correspondingauthor)
ABSTRACT
Article History
Received: 8 May 2023
Revised: 27 September 2023
Accepted: 16 October 2023
Published: 21 May 2024
Keywords
Digital maturity
Digital transformation
Educational technology
Higher education
Information technology.
This article presents the results of a research project aimed at designing a theoretical
model for digital transformation at the Autonomous University of Chile. The research
methodology adopts a case study approach with a mixed method combining
quantitative and qualitative techniques. This approach provides a nuanced and
comprehensive understanding of the dimensions and factors shaping the digital
transformation model, incorporating insights from 97 students and eight experts. The
model comprises three phases, nine dimensions, and 54 indicators, emphasizing the
integral connection between digital maturity and value creation for students. Key
success determinants in the university's digital transformation processes are outlined,
including the strategic approach, organizational culture, utilization of technological
infrastructure, and technology management capabilities. Practical implications
underscore the significance of acknowledging the impact of power relations during the
digital transformation journey, influencing internal processes, IT governance
coordination, roles of personnel in technical and managerial positions, teachers’
performance, and students' trust and loyalty to the institution. The article concludes by
identifying factors that influence the institution's capacity to implement technological
changes aligned with its strategic, technical, and logistical requirements. Future studies
could redefine the roles of administrative, teaching, and student staff, fostering
increased digital maturity, continuous innovation in services and processes, and the
creation of new digital learning spaces centeredaround studentneeds.
Contribution/Originality: The originality of this study lies in its design of a specific digital transformation
model for a Chilean university using structural equations for the first time. It addresses a gap in the literature
concerning theempirical approach to digital transformation in higher education institutions in Latin America.
1. INTRODUCTION
The value offered by information technology in a society based on the knowledge economy has been studied
from the perspective of the profitability that could be obtained by implementing a technological infrastructure in a
certain organization until reaching digital transformation through the establishment of relationships between the
strategy, structure, and technology to respond assertively to the challenges posed by a digital environment
(Drechsler, Gregory, Wagner, & Tumbas, 2020). This evolution implies the adoption of strategic thinking oriented
toward innovation, not only in terms of products and services, but also in terms of the interactions that occur
International Journal ofEducationandPractice
2024 Vol.12,No.3, pp.864-895
ISSN(e):2310-3868
ISSN(p):2311-6897
DOI:10.18488/61.v12i3.3762
© 2024 ConscientiaBeam.AllRightsReserved.

--- PAGE 2 ---
InternationalJournalof Education and Practice,2024,12(3): 864-895
865
© 2024 Conscientia Beam. All Rights Reserved.
between users and technology, which impacts finances, the processes of value creation, the way of using
technological resources and theorganizational structure itself (Matt, Hess, & Benlian, 2015).
In the context of higher education, which shows different characteristics from other industrial and service
sectors, figures have not yet been found that elucidate the success rate of digital transformation projects (Catlin,
Scanlab, & Willmott, 2015) but it is known that this transformation process it has not kept up with the pace of
change that society has been experiencing (Rodríguez-Abitia & Bribiesca-Correa, 2021). It has not even been an
obeyed university strategy but, on the contrary, it has been a discretionary power of teachers that has not been
accompanied by any type of support from the university. In addition, it has been argued that one of the great
challenges facing universities is represented by generational differences between digital native students and faculty
(Balyer & Öz, 2018), inadequate leadership, organizational culture that is resistant to change, poor planning for
digitization and unavailability of the financial resources necessary to execute the plans (Rodríguez-Abitia &
Bribiesca-Correa, 2021). Even if the development of a specific set of digital capabilities leads to a greater digital
maturity, there is a whole conceptual base and model to evaluate the effectiveness of digital transformation efforts
in companies (Castro, Tamayo, Burgos, & Martens, 2022) but there is still no measurement framework for digital
maturity in academic work (Rossmann, 2019).
Knowledge management is a strategic factor for the digital transformation of universities (Ramírez-Montoya,
2020) and cannot be subject to the temporality of a specific crisis, such as the Covid-19 pandemic, or the simple
acquisition of technological platforms to support academic processes. It refers to the adoption of profound cultural
changes accompanied by new management, teaching, and innovation models in their organizational, technological,
and sociocultural dimensions (Castro et al., 2022).
In the context of higher education institutions, digital transformation is a deep and accelerated transformation
of processes, skills and models to make the most of the changes and opportunities offered by digital technologies
(Demirkan, Spohrer, & Welser, 2016). It is also viewed as a management process that guides the culture, strategy,
methodologies, and capabilities of an organization based on the use of digital technologies (Crespo & Pariente,
2018) and as a process of change, disruptive or incremental, that begins with the use of digital technologies to
evolve toward the holistic digital transformation of the organization (Teichert, 2019). With digital transformation,
a new global and intensely interconnected scenario is presented that gives importance to ideas, innovation, and
relationships (Kelly, 1999). However, despite the fact that digital transformation in the last two decades has become
a global priority (Schwab, 2016; Xu, David, & Kim, 2018) there are still organizations that fail to change their work
routines, processes, structure and culture (Almatrodi & Skoumpopoulou, 2023) which has broad implications for
strategic management, governance, knowledge management and innovation.
The dynamic and evolutionary nature of digital transformation leads to understanding the process as an
integrated framework that allows measurement of the way in which the key capabilities lead to success in the new
digital era (Lorenzo, 2016). This maturation process requires progressive changes and incremental improvements
aimed at maximizing the value of technology in organizations. In this sense, digital transformation requires the
presence of an interdisciplinary and multidimensional model that defines the bases and premises on how the
organization interrelates with its ecosystem to generate value (Lorenzo, 2016). However, relatively recent
theoretical developments in digital transformation practices appear to be generic, making them suitable for
application in various sectors, but none of them offer a specific framework of action for a specific university.
In Chile in 2019 there were 61 universities with a total enrollment of 749,000 students in technical and
professional careers, in addition to postgraduate programs (Kerrigan, 2020). Although all of them carry out their
own activities to identify and anticipate the digital skills required by the labor market, no studies have been found
that reflect the factors that are considered to develop holistic digital transformation processes within universities,
much less to measure the evolution of said processes in terms of digital maturity.

--- PAGE 3 ---
InternationalJournalof Education and Practice,2024,12(3): 864-895
866
© 2024 Conscientia Beam. All Rights Reserved.
This gap in the literature makes it difficult to establish solid foundations to implement a digital transformation
project in higher education institutions that allow the different areas of university activity to be addressed in terms
of the online teaching modality, the science and innovation system, the digitization of knowledge, and the
digitization of university management itself. Although digital transformation in the university context is not a
recent issue, there is still no uniform understanding of its implications or how to manage it (Kopp, Gröblinger, &
Adams, 2019).
Consequently, considering that the success of any model of disruptive change in the field of higher education
requires knowing the cultural and financial particularities of each university, the research was aimed at building a
digital transformation model for the specific case of the Autonomous University of Chile based on the factors that
are considered essential both by the student population and by experts in this area. Therefore, this article answers
the following question: What is the theoretical model of digital transformation that the Autonomous University of
Chile can implement?
This is part of a broader investigation, having been fundamentally oriented to elaborate the theoretical design
of a digital transformation model for this specific university using a small sample and without trying to validate it
using factorial analysis. Nor was it intended to determine the new functions and responsibilities required of the
teaching and administrative staff to manage the transformation process, increase the level of digital maturity of the
university, promote the creation of new digital spaces for the students, and strengthen the capacity of permanent
innovation in products, services, and processes.
To avoid possible confusion, it should be made clear that the digital transformation model describes a change
process that uses technology as the basis for its design and implementation. Therefore, in this article, the
expressions "digital transformation model" and "digital transformation process" are used in an equivalent way for
the purposes of disseminating theresults of this research.
2. LITERATURE REVIEW
2.1. Conceptual Elements of Digital Transformation
From a conceptual standpoint, digital transformation has been approached through various lenses. Some view it
as a dynamic process, either disruptive or incremental, commencing with the utilization of digital technologies and
progressing toward the comprehensive digital transformation of an organization (Teichert, 2019). It has been
defined as "a process aiming to enhance an entity by inducing significant changes in its properties through
combinations of information, computing, communication, and connectivity technologies" (Vial, 2019). Another
conceptualization perceives digital transformation as an organizational process (Brdesee, 2021) fostering the
development of new models and competencies strategically supported by digital technologies and insights into
student success factors, resource allocation, and the effectiveness of educational and institutional programs (Adam
Marks, Al-Ali, & Rietsema, 2016).
An alternate perspective characterizes digital transformation as "the profound and expedited transformation of
activities, processes, competencies, and business models to fully leverage the changes and opportunities presented
by digital technologies in a strategic and prioritized manner" (Demirkan et al., 2016). Contrarily, some authors
conceive digital transformation not as a transformation process but as a management process guiding an
organization's culture, strategy, methodologies, and capabilities based on the use of digital technologies (Crespo &
Pariente, 2018). Similarly, it has been defined as a strategic process to integrate digital technologies such as data
analysis and automation, instigating changes in work routines, processes, structure, and culture (Almatrodi &
Skoumpopoulou, 2023).
Regardless of the chosen approach, there is a consensus in the literature that the digital transformation process
extends beyond the technological realm, influencing organizational culture and structure. This aligns with the
assertion by Hess, Benlian, Matt, and Wiesböck (2016) who emphasized that this process not only impacts the

--- PAGE 4 ---
InternationalJournalof Education and Practice,2024,12(3): 864-895
867
© 2024 Conscientia Beam. All Rights Reserved.
emergence of new business models and the enhancement of customer experience but also entails the redefinition of
business objectives, leadership, and hierarchical structures.
The intricacy of factors involved in digital transformation has been emphasized by Rossmann (2019) who
highlighted the need to cultivate capabilities related to leadership, market understanding, operations, workforce
skills, culture, governance, and technology. Other scholars relate digital transformation to organizational values
(culture), management capacity, organizational infrastructure, and workforce capabilities (Muehlburger, Rückel, &
Koch, 2019). However, the literature also documents a high failure rate in digital transformation projects (87.5%),
primarily attributed to the formulation of unrealistic expectations, governance errors, and limited scope (Wade &
Shan, 2020).
Brdesee (2021) posits that digital transformation rests on five foundational pillars: (1) a digital business
strategy, (2) the organization's commitment to customers and users, (3) a culture of innovation, (4) technology, and
(5) data analysis. This suggests that digital transformation transcends technological boundaries to become a
strategic component of the value creation system. It has been argued that the true driving force behind digital
transformation is strategy, not technology (Kane, Palmer, Phillips, Kiron, & Buckley, 2015). This viewpoint is
supported by Bounfour (2016) who outlines four dimensions of digital transformation: purpose, scope or degree of
digitization, speed of implementation of the digital transformation strategy, and sources of value creation in the
digital space. Similarly, Hess et al. (2016) argue that the fundamental components of this strategy include the use of
technology, changes in valuecreation, structural changes, and finance.
In light of the above, it can be inferred that any digital transformation process is inherently complex,
necessitating organizations to adopt a systematic approach that considers the multifaceted dimensions that extend
beyond technology. The absence of a comprehensive approach might impede the timely identification of problems or
overlook optimal solutions tailored to each organization's specific circumstances.
2.2. Digital Transformation in Higher Education Institutions
Literature on the maturity of digital transformation in higher education is scarce (Marks, AL-Ali, Atassi,
Abualkishik, & Rezgui, 2020). The Covid-19 crisis and the accelerated development of digitization has not only
changed the conditions in which education occurs but has also modified the foundations of education itself (Stare,
Klun, & Dečman, 2023). For this reason, teachers and students face the challenge of strengthening their digital
skills, which are a dynamic combination of skills, knowledge, and ways of thinking about information,
communication and digital technologies (Saienko, Kurysh, & Siliutina, 2022).
This dynamism is driven by the significant changes that are taking place in a highly volatile, uncertain,
complex, and ambiguous environment (Nowacka & Rzemieniak, 2021) in which not only the adoption of
technologies by companies and consumers is accelerating, but also the ability to innovate. Therefore, society is
facing a radical change due to the development of digital technologies and their deep incursion into all areas,
whether personal, work, or professional. This forces academic institutions to embrace creativity and technology as
part of the core skill setrequired bysuccessful organizations (Christensen, McDonald, Altman, & Palmer, 2018).
The phenomenon of digital transformation has been widely explored in different academic domains, but
knowledge on this object of study is still fragmented and ignores the existence of a methodology that allows the
digitization of business models, the stages that must be considered, and the factors that enhance this process
(Sayabek, Suieubayeva, & Utegenova, 2020). Zaoui and Souissi (2020) pointed out that the main concern in this
transformation is defining a vision and a roadmap that determine the path to follow. In the context of higher
education, even when universities offer complete, up-to-date and consistent information on their key assets through
various digital services and communication channels, they also face the challenge of the diversity of intrinsic data
that is duplicated and dispersed, making it difficult to correlate due to the different formats, conventions and

--- PAGE 5 ---
InternationalJournalof Education and Practice,2024,12(3): 864-895
868
© 2024 Conscientia Beam. All Rights Reserved.
terminology used (Maltese, 2018). These are factors that threaten organizational efficiency, with digital
transformation being the most important factor (Brdesee, 2021).
García-Peñalvo (2021) pointed out that the development of digital skills in higher education institutions has
been a positive leap; however, if the maturity of digital transformation strategies is analyzed, it can be deduced that
full digital transformation is still far from being achieved. This would force the governing bodies of the universities
to reflect on the transformation model they require, but always understanding it from a systemic perspective that
considers the social, cultural, economic, and environmental dimensions (Cerdá Suárez, Núñez-Valdés, & Quirós y
Alpera, 2021).
Considering the fundamental mission of higher education institutions and understanding digital transformation
as a response to development globally (Bagdasarian, Stupina, Goryacheva, & Shmeleva, 2020), it is evident that
universities, initially seen as organizations, must be transformed internally to be able to play their pivotal role in
today's digital world. At the same time, they must be seen as reliable channels of knowledge distribution for society
and can be called upon to improve the understanding and application of management concepts and practices that
allow a more strategic use of technologies with an approach that responds to the challenges of the digital revolution
(Chinkes & Julien, 2019).
For universities to be able to effectively fulfill their social mission in today's digital world, a better
understanding of the needs of the labor market, society and their students, teachers and researchers is required. In
addition, they must generate a culture of collaboration with greater flexibility, more agility and better adaptability.
According to Chinkes and Julien (2019) digital transformation "must be approached without delay, but also with a
critical and reflective approach under the particularities of each institution." Investment in the implementation of
digital technology must take place "in an integrated way with all the dimensions of the organization: strategy,
people and culture, structure and management systems, business processes, and, of course, technology" (Lorenzo,
2016).
An insightful addition to the literature comes from Awdziej, Jaciow, Lipowski, Tkaczyk, and Wolny (2023),
who posit that the success of digital transformation in universities necessitates a culture of digital maturity among
all stakeholders in addition to having technical and support infrastructure. This implies that university staff must
possess the requisite skills and knowledge to design and deliver digital learning experiences to students.
Simultaneously, students should have the capacity to effectively utilize digital tools to enhance learning and
personal development, demonstrating ethical and responsible use of technology, fostering critical thinking, and
embodying digital citizenship principles.
The need to develop digital transformation strategies in universities is consistent with the need to remain
competitive in global education, which means considering the long-term implications of the interactions among
politics, economics, science, technology, and society (Mohamed, Tlemsani, & Matthews, 2022).
2.3. Digital Transformation Models
In the research literature on digital transformation, “models do not play a prominent role” (Gray & Rumpe,
2017). The conceptual models of digital transformation are of vital importance so that universities can be
sustainable in a context characterized by rapid technological changes; however, in the literature there are few
models of digital transformation that combine technologies, systems and educational phenomena aimed at students
obtaining both cognitive and emotional learning (Mohamed Hashim, Tlemsani, & Duncan Matthews, 2022).
Consequently, the digital transformation in higher education, with a focus on sustainability, implies the need to
consider that transformation strategies, sustainable practices and technology-based education are relatively
different areas but are intrinsically interrelated. Therefore, the success of any effort in this sense would force us to
consider it as a dynamic phenomenon that is influenced by global changes and new technological developments,
requiring careful management and control at the same time (Mohamed Hashim et al., 2022).

--- PAGE 6 ---
InternationalJournalof Education and Practice,2024,12(3): 864-895
869
© 2024 Conscientia Beam. All Rights Reserved.
Perhaps for this reason, and as indicated above, no digital transformation models have been found that are
specific to the case of universities; therefore, it is necessary to adapt models created for other business and service
sectors, such as that of Westerman, Bonnet, and McAfee (2012) who demonstrated the existence of a clear
correlation between digitization and competitiveness and designed a model that offers an integrated structure that
allows any type of organization to evolve gradually and progressively regarding the development of key capabilities
to be successful in the new digital age.
In this study, in which 400 North American companies participated, they conceived the concept of 'digital
maturity' that describes the way in which different companies react to digital opportunities and designed a
pioneering model called the Digital Maturity Indicator (DMI) that has four levels of maturity that depend on the
combination of two closely related aspects: (1) digital intensity, or the level of investment in technology initiatives
aimed at changing the way the company operates; and (2) the intensity of transformation management, which is the
level of investment in leadership capabilities required to create digital transformation within an organization,
shaping a new futurebased on governance and commitment to implement technology-based change (see Table 1).
Table 1. Digitalmaturity indicatormodel.
Digital identity
Highdigitalintensityandlowtransformation
managementintensity
Fashionistas, or followers of digital fashion, who
are strongly motivated to bring about digital
change, but with a strategy that is not based on
relevant knowledge of how this transformation
can and should add value to the business.
Highdigitalintensityandtransformation management
Digital experts who know how to add value to the business
through digital transformation. They combine vision and
governance with a commitment to investment. Thanks to
the global vision and the integration of the entire
organization in the digital transformation strategy, they
successfully develop a digital culture that allows them to
incorporate recent changes into their business model.
Lowdigitalandtransformation management
intensity
Beginners or digital beginners who have
experienced and implemented technological
solutions. They lack a coordinated strategy and a
comprehensive vision of the transformation.
Low digital intensity and high transformation
managementintensity
Conservatives, or digital conservatives, who understand the
importance of strategy, coordination, governance issues and
organizational culture when addressing a transformation
process, but who are skeptical of the value of digital in these
processes. However, they are willing to invest in digital
change, but their slowness leads to them losing
opportunities to other organizations.
Intensity of transformation management
Note: Information extracted from Westerman et al. (2012).
One model that stands out for its simplicity is the McKinsey model, presented by Catlin et al. (2015), who
conducted a study of 150 companies globally to understand the challenges of digitization in organizations. This
model, which the author called "Digital Quotient", incorporates a set of dimensions and factors that measure the
digital maturity of a company, as shown in Table 2.
This model begins with the establishment of a clear and precise digital strategy, an integral part of the
company's overall strategy, that emphasizes the critical role of alignment for successful digital transformation.
Three key points are proposed to design an effective digital strategy: identify the most relevant opportunities and
threats, assess the potential speed and scale of digital disruption in the sector, and determine the optimal proactive
opportunities and resource reallocation strategies in response to significant threats. A second crucial aspect involves
organizational culture, which is considered paramount in the digital transformation process. Culture is viewed as
instrumental in fostering skills related to speed, flexibility, open innovation, and learning based on the lean start-up
model (Lorenzo, 2016; Ries, 2011). Lorenzo (2016) defines digital culture as the collection of behaviors and habits
cultivated and applied by managers and employees to leverage the potential of new technologies. It is argued that
the presence of digital technologies signifies the existence of a digital culture, encapsulating the artifacts and
communication systems that definecontemporary ways of life (Uzelac, 2008).

--- PAGE 7 ---
InternationalJournalof Education and Practice,2024,12(3): 864-895
870
© 2024 Conscientia Beam. All Rights Reserved.
Table 2. Dimensionsand factorsofthe McKinsey digitalquotientmodel.
Dimension Factors
Strategy Bold, long-term orientation
Linked to business strategy
Focused on customer needs
Culture Risk appetite
Speed/agility
Test and learn
Internal collaboration
Externalorientation
Organization Roles and responsibilities
Talent and learning
Governance
Digital investment
Capabilities Connectivity
Contents
Customer experience
Decision-making based on data
Automation
IT architecture
Source: McKinsey composite.
Catlin et al. (2015)
A third dimension of the model points to the development of a set of practices related to processes, structure
and talent, mainly at the middle management level, since they are the ones who execute digital initiatives and are
responsible for thedevelopmentof new products, services, and organizational models (Lorenzo, 2016).
The last aspect included in the McKinsey Digital Quotient is associated with capabilities around three key
functions: (1) translating business needs into digital language; (2) developing insights to leverage new data sources
and quality algorithms; and (3) verifying that future data requirements are adequate and complete (Catlin et al.,
2015).The capabilities listed in Table 3 are characterized as critical.
Table 3. Criticalcapabilitiesthat must be developed accordingtothe digitalquotient model.
Capability Description
Data-drivendecision making Changes in decision-making processes, from models where a manager
bases his decisions on experience to decision models based on evidence
and data
Connectivity Using technology to unleash deeper relationships and connections
betweenbrands and customers.
Process automation Automation efforts in key business processes
Two-speed information
technology
Operation of two technological capacities; the first is associated with
the platforms designed to deliver rapid results to customers and the
identified opportunities, and the second is associated with the
technologies already implemented to optimize the organization's
traditional and back office operations
Source: Lorenzo (2016)
Subsequently, to help telecommunications service providers understand their digital maturity at a given
moment and support them in the development of a vision and path for digital transformation, Valdez-de-Leon
(2016) designed a digital maturity model with a focus on the function of universities as organizations that provide
educational services. The author states that, although the model has been designed for the telecommunications
sector, the conceptual framework could be used in other service organizations. The model presents the seven
dimensions indicated in Table 4:

--- PAGE 8 ---
InternationalJournalof Education and Practice,2024,12(3): 864-895
871
© 2024 Conscientia Beam. All Rights Reserved.
Table 4. Initialstructure ofthe maturitymodelfortelecommunicationsservice providers.
Dimensions Description
Strategy Vision, governance, planning, and management of processes that will
support the execution of the digital strategy
Organization Changes in culture, structure, training, and knowledge management that
will enable the organization to become a digital player
Customer New benefits created in the customer experience through digital changes in
their journeys
Ecosystem Development and support of partner ecosystems as a key element for a
digital business
Operations Capacities that support the provision of services; increased maturity
because of more digitized, automated,and flexibleoperations
Technology Effective technology planning, deployment, integration, and use of
technology to support digital business
Innovation New flexible and agile ways of working that will form the basis for an
effectivedigital business
Source: Valdez-de-Leon (2016).
In this model, Valdez-de-Leon (2016) considers that the speed of digital transformation does not occur equally
in all dimensions, which is why he conceives a progressive approach with a six-level maturity scale with the
following meanings:
• Level0: Not started:The organization has not takenany steps to transform itself.
• Level 1: Initiating: The organization has decided to move toward a digital business and is taking the first
steps in thatdirection.
• Level 2: Enabling: the organization is implementing initiatives within the dimension that will form the basis
of its digital business.
• Level 3: Integration: the initiatives of the organization are integrated throughout the organization to support
the capabilities from one end to another.
• Level 4: Optimization: The organization's digital initiatives within the dimension are being adjusted and used
to further increase overall performance.
• Level 5: Pioneering: The organization is breaking new ground and advancing the state of the practice within
the dimension.
This means that, at a given moment, each dimension of the model will be at a certain level of digital maturity,
serving as a diagnostic tool for the vision, context, and challenges that the organization will face during its
transformation process.
In the specific context of higher education institutions, although universities have been pioneers in the use of
digital technologies and have been establishing digital educational solutions for some time, they have not yet
achieved digital transformation. According to Bygstad, Øvrelid, Ludvigsen, and Dæhlen (2022) the digitization of
core university tasks has followed separate and non-integrated paths, in addition to the fact that educational
solutions were fragmented and generally supported by the simple implementation of digital tools, stimulating some
incremental improvements butwithout achieving disruptive changes.
The different approaches and the diversity of the dimensions used in the literature on digital transformation in
the university context and its impact on maturity reveal a fragmented image that, according to Teichert (2019)
reveals the impact of culture on transformational capabilities, which in turn would explain the existence of multiple
visions of maturity of digital transformation seen as a holistic concept. From the foregoing, it can be inferred that
any digital transformation model must respond to the characteristics of the context in which it will be applied since
cultural, economic and structural factors are involved that are particular to each one.
One of the models oriented toward digital transformation in universities is that of Castro et al. (2022) in which
five levelsof maturity are established (see Table 5).

--- PAGE 9 ---
InternationalJournalof Education and Practice,2024,12(3): 864-895
872
© 2024 Conscientia Beam. All Rights Reserved.
Table 5. Maturity levelsofthe digitaltransformationprocess.
Maturity level Description
Unrated The university lacks defined objectives and a digital transformation strategy. The
success of some digital initiatives usually depends on individual effort, and the
benefits obtained do not extend to other departments, programs and/or faculties.
It lacks information on digitalization processes, or it is an incipient process. Staff
(Students, teachers, administrators) have little to no digital skills. The technology
availableto the university does not allow the digitization of the business.
Under The university has identified the need to increase discrete digital initiatives to
solve isolated business problems and allocates financial resources for their
execution. However, the worldview remains unchanged. Some internal initiatives
of digital products and services that have been successful in the past are beginning
to be replicated in other departments, programs and/or faculties. The staff
(Students, teachers, administrators) have basic digital skills. There is strong
resistance to change. The university has the technological equipment to execute
digital initiatives; however, the budgetary availability required to acquire them is
restricted.
Moderate The university analyzes its worldview and sees the need to make changes in the
medium-term university objectives. It incorporates digitization initiatives and
digital user experiences, although it does not yet focus on the disruptive potential
of transformation. Therefore, the investment and use of new technologies is done
with caution. The staff (Students, teachers, administrators) have moderate digital
skills and resistance to change is still evident.
High The university has understood, accepted, and internalized the new digital
paradigm, and has decided to transform itself. Therefore, the digital
transformation capacities of the university are perfectly adapted and incorporated
into the vision, strategy, objectives, and processes of the university, and it also has
strategic planning that enables a successful transition to the new digital
transformation paradigm. The university's business model has been modernized, is
focused on the user, and is adapted to the digital age. The university begins to
obtain competitive advantages over other universities. The staff (Students,
teachers, administrators) have the required digital skills, resistance to change does
not persist, digital culture has been internalized. The university has the necessary
technology to achieve digital transformation.
Very high The university is very innovative in its use of technology and new business
models. It flows naturally in the new digital paradigm and continuously evaluates
new technologies and their possible application. The processes are automated, and
advanced data analysis is used for decision making. It is a visionary and intelligent
university. The staff (Students, teachers, administrators) is immersed in a new
digital culture.
Source: Castro et al. (2022)
This study approaches the process of digital transformation of universities from three main perspectives:
organizational, sociocultural and technological. Based on the postulates of Chanias (Castro et al., 2022), five aspects
have been identified that are implicit in this process: (1) strategic transformation management, (2) supply of digital
products and services, (3) digitization of processes and internal operations, (4) digital interaction with clients, and
(5) the use and development of information technology. Once some models of digital maturity have been
characterized, Table 6 presents a summary of these contributions in terms of their main dimensions, which
constitute thestructural basis for the construction of a digital transformation model for universities.
Table 6. Contributionsofthe literature consideredforthe constructionofthe digitaltransformation modelforuniversities(Modeldimensions).
Digital maturity indicator model
(Westerman et al.,2012)
McKinsey digital quotient
model (Catlin et al., 2015)
Maturity model for
telecommunications service
providers (Valdez-de-Leon,2016)
• Investmentin leadership skills
• Digital initiatives
• Management in digital transformation
• Digital culture
• Strategy
• Culture
• Organization
• Capabilities
• Customer
• Ecosystem
• Operations
• Technology

--- PAGE 10 ---
InternationalJournalof Education and Practice,2024,12(3): 864-895
873
© 2024 Conscientia Beam. All Rights Reserved.
A brief review of the theoretical contributions that support the design of the digital transformation model for
universities allows us to confirm the presence of the five aspects in said process, as mentioned by Castro et al.
(2022).
Based on the literature, Table 7 shows the dimensions that will make up the preliminary structure of the digital
transformation model for universities.
Table 7. Preliminary structure ofthe digitaltransformationmodel foruniversities.
Theoretical support Dimension Description
Catlin etal. (2015) Key capabilities and
resources
This involves digitizing the aspects that generate value
within the organization and that are sources of
competitive advantages such as connectivity, customer
experience, decision-making based on data, automation,
architecture.
IT investment Adequate technical support. Digitization of physical
machines. Virtualization. From analog to digital.
Crespo and Pariente
(2018)
Institutional
strategic framework
focused on digital
transformation
A comprehensive strategy focused on the service
delivered by the university and driven by digital, which
involves all the processes that generate value in the long,
medium, and short terms. It involves adapting the
corporate, business, and functional strategy to a digital
modality.
Valdez-de-Leon
(2016)
Studentlife cycle New benefits created in the student experience thanks to
digital transformation. It involves the students' passage
through the university, promotion, recruitment
campaigns, registration, teaching, job search and follow-
up of alumni.
Ecosystem Focused on the experience of stakeholders, it refers to the
development of a strategic network of allies as a key
elementfor a comprehensive solution for the students.
Processes Transforming teaching for digital education.
Transforming the teaching and learning dynamics.
Gobble (2018) Organization and
Structure
Organizing functions within the university. Roles and
responsibilities, talent and learning, form of governance,
IT leadership, way of designing work and adapting it
through information and communication technology
(ICT).
Furedi (2011) Points of contact
with the students
Students need to be assisted at any time, from anywhere
and on any device. Service points must be digitized.
Salinas and Vio
(2011)
Flexible and
personalized
teaching
From a one-size-fits-all teaching to tailored teaching.
Managing individualized student information through
predictive data analysis to offer individualized counseling
systems.
Sánchez and
Fernández (2010)
Social networks and
profile research
This involves educational marketing and recruitment of
new students. Click-through rate is analyzed, which is a
digital marketing measure to evaluate the performance of
content on the internet, whether on Google or social
media. Understand the perception among the public
regarding the academic programs of the university,
identify points to improve in the service and create new
programs to respond to needs.
Westerman et al.
(2012)
Digital culture Dimension resulting from combining: (1) digital intensity
or the level of investment in technological initiatives, and
(2) the intensity of digital transformation management,
understood as the level of investment in leadership
capabilities to implement technology-based changes.

--- PAGE 11 ---
InternationalJournalof Education and Practice,2024,12(3): 864-895
874
© 2024 Conscientia Beam. All Rights Reserved.
As explained in Table 7, the structural basis for the creation of a digital transformation model for universities is
based on the models of Valdez-de-Leon (2016) and McKinsey (Catlin et al., 2015) and the contributions of Crespo
and Pariente (2018);Gobble (2018);Furedi (2011);Salinas and Vio (2011)and Sánchez and Fernández (2010).
The construction of the model starts from the premise that it is possible to reach a certain maturity of the
strategic processes of a university if the level of digitization of each dimension proposed in the construct reaches its
highest level(see Table 8); that is, if most of thefactors of each dimension are met (Oldfield& Baron, 2000).
Table 8. Implicit factorsineach ofthe dimensionsconsidered forthe digitaltransformationmodel.
Dimension Factors
1.Institutional
strategic framework
focused on digital
transformation
• Mission and vision statementsthatfocus on digital
• Strategic objectives with a focus on IT
• Positioning through digital platforms
• Studentloyaltystrategies with a digital approach
• Digital initiatives aligned with corporate strategy
2.Digital culture • Training that is focused on digital technologies
• Promotion of projects on digital issues
• Tolerance to changes
• Continuous learning ability
• Comprehensive approach to thestudentexperience
3.Organization and
structure
• Digital technologies usedin organizational processes
• Digitized administrative processes
• Digital technologies in workflows
• Organizational structure adaptableto digital
• Decision making thatincorporates IT
4.Critical capabilities
and keyresources
• Decision making guided bydata
• IT focus on studentloyaltyand university branding
• Problem solving for students with an IT approach
• Technologies for theoptimization of theorganization's back office
• Accessible services anywhere and at any time
5.Student life cycle
value
• Digitization of thestudent life cycle
• Incorporation of IT for studentsatisfaction and retention
• Academic and pedagogical support with a focus on IT
• Labor internships and job search with a digital focus
• Incorporation of IT for the continuity of studies
6.Ecosystem (partners
and strategic allies
thata university
should have)
• Relations with companies and corporations
• Relations with communities and social groups
• Relations with foundations/NGOs
• Relations with international universities
• Links with the educational community and professors from other
universities
7.Flexible and
personalized
teaching
• Incorporation of IT in the rhythm of studentstudy
• A teaching model appropriate to the physical location of thestudent
• Use of predictive data to anticipate student needs
• Individualized counseling system
• Adequacy of teaching to theprofile of each student
8.Points of contact
with the students
• Digitized library
• Digital platform for studentaffairs
• IT support to foster work groups
• Casino services with digital support
• Digital support for thestudent–director–secretary relationship
9.Social networks and
profile research
• Analysis of positioning indicators
• Analysis of students’perceptions of social networks
• Identification of points of improvement in digital services

--- PAGE 12 ---
InternationalJournalof Education and Practice,2024,12(3): 864-895
875
© 2024 Conscientia Beam. All Rights Reserved.
Dimension Factors
• Recruitment of potential studentsthrough social networks
• Promotion of collaborative learning through social networks
10.Processes of
transformation of
teaching for higher
education
• Application of ICT in the teaching and learning processes
• Training in digital pedagogical strategies
• Integration of a studentlife project – teaching strategy
• Incorporation of digital teaching strategies in pursuit of family
integration
• Integration of the socioeconomic levelof the student into digital
teaching strategies
11.IT investment • Investmentin learning platforms
• Qualitytechnical support in digital processes
• Automation of teaching services aimed atstudents
• Investmentin administrative technology platforms
• Improvement of contact points with studentsthrough ICT
In summary, from the review of the theoretical aspects that feed the design of the digital transformation model
for the Autonomous University of Chile, the need to address this process from a systemic perspective that
contributes to satisfying the needs of all agents is highlighted. It should be relevant to the university context and
consider the organizational, socio-cultural, and technological aspects in harmony with the requirements of the
educational community and in a manner consistent with theneeds and expectations of society.
3. METHODOLOGY
3.1. Research Design
As indicated in the literature review, any digital transformation effort must be oriented to ensure a satisfactory
user experience (Hess et al., 2016). Consequently, in the field of higher education, the focus of attention is the
student, so the design of a model that successfully faces the challenges that arise from a process of digital
transformation at the Autonomous University of Chile will depend fundamentally on the perceptions of the students
regarding each of the implicit factors in the process. However, students are not the only interested party. People
who hold positions of responsibility in the academic, technical, and administrative areas also have points of view
that contribute to mapping the critical aspects that must be considered in the design of a digital transformation
model consistent with the idiosyncrasies and cultural values of the university. Consequently, due to the fact that the
nature of the data necessary to develop the model had to be collected directly from the parties involved, a field
design with a mixed (quantitative and qualitative), cross-sectional and exploratory approach was used (Malhotra,
2004).
3.2. Sample Selection
Due to the different natures of the data to be collected, and given the exploratory level of the research, non-
probabilistic techniques (convenience sampling) were used (see Table 9) based on the approaches of Denzin and
Lincoln (2000).
Table 9. Sample composition.
Sample description
Sample
size
Gender
distribution
Distribution by study area
Technique
(Instrument)
Undergraduatestudents
at theAutonomous
University of Chile
97
55 Men (56.7%)
42 Women (43.3%)
Administration and economics
(73.2%)
Engineering (24.7%)
Other areas of study (2.1%)
Survey(Questionnaire)
Experts 8
6 Men (75%)
2 Women (25%)
- In-depthinterviews

--- PAGE 13 ---
InternationalJournalof Education and Practice,2024,12(3): 864-895
876
© 2024 Conscientia Beam. All Rights Reserved.
The selection of students who participated in the study was carried out according to the opportunity that was
presented to collect the data, always emphasizing the voluntary nature of participation. Consequently, no random
methods were used to select the informants and the sample was not intended to be statistically representative of the
studentpopulation.
On the other hand, the selection of the experts was made based on their suitability, availability, and motivation
to participate. Suitability was conditioned by two criteria: (a) cognitive domain regarding the concept and
implications of digital transformation processes in the educational field, and (b) direct involvement in decision
making at the Autonomous University of Chile. The personal data of the experts consulted were kept anonymous
throughout theresearch process.
3.3. Data Collection Instruments
A preliminary model composed of 11 dimensions and 55 underlying factors was created to collect student data
based on the contributions of the literature. Subsequently, its relevance and practical applicability were evaluated
through a questionnaire that was previously subjected to validation using the expert judgment technique with the
participation of 40 evaluators. Each expert was provided with a questionnaire detailing the dimensions and
preliminary factors linked to the construct together with the assessment criteria to indicate the degree of
importance of each item of the instrument. To do this, the respondents had three options: 'essential', 'useful but not
essential' or 'not essential'. With the data, and following Lawshe's model (Lawshe, 1975), the content validity ratio
(CVR and CVR´) was determined for each of the items, and the global content validity (CVI) was calculated for the
entire instrument.
Table 10. Formulasused todetermine thecontent validity ofthe instrument.
Calculation of the content
validity ratio for each item
Calculation of the content
validity ratio for each item
(Adjusted Lawshe’s model)
Calculation of the global
validity of the instrument
ne = Total number of experts
who consider the item as
“essential”
N = Total number of experts
who answered the instrument
CVR = Content validityratio for
each item
CVRi = Content validity
ratio of theaccepted items
M = Total items accepted in
the instrument
As a result of this process, the nine proposed dimensions were validated by obtaining a global validity of 0.661.
Regarding the implicit factors in the dimensions, only one could not be validated by obtaining an adjusted validity
ratio of 0.375. The overall content validity of the instrument was 0.714. Table 10 shows the formulas used to
determine the content validity ratio for each item (CVR); adjusted content validity ratio (CVR'), and content validity
index (CVI).
Once the questionnaire was validated, it was sent via Google Forms to the 97 students who participated in the
study.This questionnaire was structured in three sections:
• The first section collected the general data of the respondents (gender, academic level, and disciplinary area
to which they belong).
• The second section contained the eleven dimensions of the preliminary theoretical model, with their
respective definitions, so that the participants could indicate the degree of importance they attributed to each
dimension using a Likert scale with five response options. The response options were: 1 = Not important, 2
= Unimportant, 3 = Neutral, 4 = Important, and 5 = Very important.

--- PAGE 14 ---
InternationalJournalof Education and Practice,2024,12(3): 864-895
877
© 2024 Conscientia Beam. All Rights Reserved.
• The third section contained a set of 54 factors related to each of the dimensions listed in the previous section.
The participants were asked to attribute a degree of importance of each factor to manage the digital
transformation of a university. To do this, they used the Likert scale with five response options: 1 = Strongly
disagree, 2 = Disagree, 3 = Neither agree nor disagree, 4 = Agree, and 5 = Strongly agree.
In relation to the qualitative techniques for collecting information, eight semi-structured interviews were
conducted with managers from the Autonomous University of Chile and experts in digital transformation, who
contributed their knowledge, reflections, and assessments on the object of study. For this, an interview protocol was
previously prepared (see Appendix I) comprising 10 questions to be answered openly by the interviewees. This
protocol was only used as a guide for the researchers and allowed for the possibility of asking other questions
related to the accounts of the interviewees. All were carried out face to face where the informants carried out their
daily work activities. The averageduration of each interview was 1.4 hours.
3.4. Data Analysis Procedures
The data obtained through the questionnaires was processed using measures of central tendency. Firstly, the
relative weight of each dimension was determined by obtaining the relative weight that corresponded to each of the
factors. These results correspond to the data recorded in the second section of the questionnaire. The same
procedure was applied to each of the indicators in the third section. After obtaining the average valuation for each
indicator, this value was multiplied by the relative weight of the corresponding factor to obtain the weighted weight
of each indicator in the total set of the transformation model. This made it possible to determine the students’
assessment of each indicator.
Regarding the qualitative data, the interviews were recorded, transcribed, and subjected to a coding process in
which conceptual categories were assigned to the information segments that were of interest to achieve the
objectives of the study. The analysis was carried out in three phases: Firstly, a microanalysis of each interview was
carried out, beginning an open coding process with Atlas.ti software, which facilitated the preparation of analytical
memos in which the most important aspects were highlighted. In this phase, a global idea of the data was obtained,
and it ended with a broad description of each of the categories analyzed. In the second phase, the data obtained in
the previous phase was grouped and classified using descriptive codes that gave meaning to each of the questions
asked to the interviewees. Through axial coding, these descriptive units were grouped into categories, and new
memos were produced describing the properties of each one. Finally, in the third phase, through the elaboration of
an intensity matrix, significant relationships and guidelines were created that allowed the theoretical model of the
digital transformation process of a university to be elaborated. In this sense, this model consolidates and integrates
the information provided by both the studentswho answered the questionnaire and theexperts interviewed.
4. RESULTS
This section details the results obtained during data collection that allowed the structuring of the theoretical
model for the digital transformation process for a university. The section is divided into three sections: (1)
quantitativeresults, (2) qualitativeresults, and (3) description of the model.
4.1. Quantitative Results
The quantitative results shown below derive from the analysis of the data collected through the questionnaire
administered to 97 undergraduate students (55 men and 42 women) of the Administration and Economics
curricular programs (73.2%), Engineering (24.7%), and other subjects (2.0%) at the Autonomous University of
Chile, obtaining a Cronbach's alphareliability coefficient of 0.9478.
The quantitative analysis of the results showed an equitable distribution of the importance attributed to each of
the dimensions implicit in the digital transformation of a university (see Figure 1), with the understanding that said

--- PAGE 15 ---
InternationalJournalof Education and Practice,2024,12(3): 864-895
878
© 2024 Conscientia Beam. All Rights Reserved.
transformation is the management process that guides the culture, strategy, methodologies, and capacities of an
organization from theuse of digital technologies (Crespo & Pariente, 2018).
Figure1. Implicit dimensionsinthe digitaltransformation (DT)processofauniversity andthe importanceattributedtoeach.
Table 11. Implicit factorsinthe digitaltransformationprocessofauniversity(By dimensionand weighted weight).
Dimension/Factor
Average
rating
Relative
weight
Weighted
weight
D1: Institutional strategic framework focused on digital transformation [0.088]
Digital initiatives aligned with corporate strategy 4.577 0.404 1.838
Positioning through digital platforms 4.495 0.397 1.805
IT-focused strategic objectives 4.485 0.396 1.801
Studentloyaltystrategies with a digital focus 4.443 0.392 1.785
Mission and vision statementsthatfocus on digital 4.423 0.391 1.776
D2: Digital culture [0.094]
Continuous learning ability 4.588 0.430 1.957
Change tolerance 4.567 0.429 1.948
Comprehensive approach to thestudent experience 4.557 0.428 1.944
Training focused on digital technologies 4.505 0.423 1.922
Promotion of projects on digital issues 4.433 0.416 1.891
D3: Organization and structure [0.092]
Organizational structure adaptableto digital 4.567 0.420 1.909
Digitized administrative processes 4.505 0.414 1.883
Digital technologies presentin organizational processes 4.474 0.411 1.870
Decision making incorporating IT 4.469 0.411 1.868
Digital technologies in workflows 4.454 0.409 1.862
D4: Critical capabilities and keyresources [0.090]
Accessible services anywhere and at any time 4.629 0.426 1.939
Solving problems for students,with an IT-based approach 4.495 0.405 1.840
Technologies in theback-office optimization of the organization 4.464 0.402 1.827
Data-drivendecision making 4.443 0.399 1.815
IT focus on studentloyaltyand university brand 4.402 0.396 1.802
D5: Student life cycle value [0.092]
Academic and pedagogical support with a focus on IT 4.505 0.415 1.887
Incorporation of IT for continuity of studies 4.495 0.414 1.862
Labor practices and job searches with a digital approach 4.454 0.410 1.866
IT incorporation for studentsatisfaction and retention 4.443 0.409 1.862
Digitization of thestudent life cycle 4.402 0.406 1.844
D6: Ecosystem (partners and strategic allies that a university should have) [0.091]
Relations with international universities 4.577 0.416 1.891
Relations with companies and corporations 4.546 0.413 1.878
Links with the educational community and professors from other
universities
4.485 0.408 1.853
Relations with communities and social groups 4.412 0.401 1.823
Networks with foundations/NGOs 4.320 0.393 1.785
D7: Flexible and personalized teaching [0.090]

--- PAGE 16 ---
InternationalJournalof Education and Practice,2024,12(3): 864-895
879
© 2024 Conscientia Beam. All Rights Reserved.
Dimension/Factor
Average
rating
Relative
weight
Weighted
weight
Individualized counseling system 4.433 0.401 1.935
Teaching model appropriate to thephysical location of the
student
4.423 0.400 1.819
Using predictive datato anticipate studentneeds 4.412 0.399 1.815
Incorporation of IT into the students' studyrhythm 4.402 0.398 1.810
Adequacy of teaching to theprofile of each student 4.381 0.396 1.802
D8: Points of contact with the students[0.092]
Digital platform for studentaffairs 4.619 0.426 1.935
IT support to foster work groups 4.588 0.423 1.922
Digital support for thestudent–director–secretary relationship 4.588 0.423 1.922
Digitized library 4.526 0.417 1.896
D9: Social networks and profile research [0.089]
Identification of points of improvement in digital services 4.433 0.396 1.802
Analysis of positioning indicators 4.371 0.391 1.777
Analysis of students’perceptions of social networks 4.351 0.389 1.768
Promotion of collaborative learning through social networks 4.351 0.389 1.768
Recruitment of potential studentsthrough social networks 4.330 0.387 1.760
D10: Teaching transformation processes for higher education [0.090]
Application of ICT in the teaching and learning processes 4.515 0.405 1.840
Training in digital pedagogical strategies 4.515 0.405 1.840
Integration of the students' socioeconomic levelwith digital
teaching strategies
4.505 0.404 1.835
Integration of a studentlife project – teaching strategy 4.485 0.402 1.827
Incorporation of digital teaching strategies in pursuit of family
integration
4.443 0.398 1.810
D11: Investmentin information technology [0.091]
Investmentin learning platforms 4.577 0.418 1.900
Qualitytechnical support for digital processes 4.557 0.416 1.892
Improvement of contact points with studentsthrough ICT 4.505 0.411 1.870
Investmentin administrative technology platforms 4.485 0.409 1.862
Automation of teaching services aimed at the students 4.454 0.407 1.849
Note: 1. Data obtained from the questionnaire administered to students.
2. The average assessment (Mean value) refers tothe average score obtained for each factor using the 5-point Likert scale.
3. The relative weight is the result of multiplying the average score obtained for each factor by the relative weight of the dimension to which it
belongs (Shown in brackets).
4. The weighted weight is the result of dividing the relative weight of each factor by the sum of all the relative weights. It indicates the
percentage contribution of each factor in the digital transformation process of a university.
In view of the results shown in Table 11, and even though the difference between the dimensions is barely
0.005, it is striking that Institutional Strategic Framework has been considered the least relevant in the process of
digital transformation in a university context, understanding that such appreciation is the product of the approach
thatis typical of theacademic profile of the population surveyed.
From the data in Table 11, three main factors in the digital transformation process of a university and,
therefore, in determining its degree of digital maturity were identified for "Digital culture”. In order of importance,
these are:
• Continuous learning ability (1.96%)
• Tolerance to changes (1.95%)
• Comprehensive approach to thestudentexperience (1.94%)
Conversely, the three factors that the respondents considered less relevant during the digital transformation of
a university belong to "Social networks and profile research." In descending order, these are indicated below:
• Analysis of students’perceptions of social networks (1.77%)
• Promotion of collaborative learning through social networks (1.77%)
• Recruitment of potential studentsthrough social networks (1.76%)

--- PAGE 17 ---
InternationalJournalof Education and Practice,2024,12(3): 864-895
880
© 2024 Conscientia Beam. All Rights Reserved.
In view of the results, each of the factors contributes to the digital transformation process with an average of
1.852% and a standard deviation of just 0.052%. This reveals the absence of significant differences between factors;
therefore, allof them will be considered for the design of the theoretical model of digital transformation.
4.2. Qualitative Results
The results after processing the information gathered through the interviews with the eight experts are shown
below. The codes in brackets are the codes assigned to each of theinterviewees.
Firstly, there is a clear tendency to focus on the student as one of the fundamental elements in the digital
transformation process [M1, M2, M3, M5, M6, M7, M8]; in fact, it was insistently stated that the priority areas for
digitalization are associated with students receiving complete, truthful, timely and real information in relation to
the academic and administrative processes that concern them [M1, M3, M4], including the digitization of libraries
[M7] and the efficient use of learning platforms [M7].
The importance of this aspect is highlighted when it was pointed out that the degree of digital maturity that a
university has reached is rooted in student satisfaction [M2, M6, M7], noting that this degree of maturity is always
relative since it will depend on user perception [M2]. It is understood that digital maturity incorporates a
subjective component that transcends processes, financial aspects and technological capabilities, inferring that the
focus on the student experience is vital in the digital transformation processes of universities, and that this approach
reflects the institutional culture, its strategic vision, and its capacity to manage thattransition.
The previous appreciations are ratified by arguing that the digitization of academic activities is only justified
when it affects student satisfaction by improving the online class system, offering attractive digital content, and
facilitating the teaching and learning processes [M1, M6], while the digitization of internal processes is justified
when it facilitates the exchange of timely and reliableinformation [M3].
It was also pointed out that another determining factor of a university's digital maturity is computer
governance [M6], which facilitates the generation of initiatives and the implementation of digitalization options,
affirming that mature universities will be those that have internalized and systematized both the transformation
processes and thedecision-making processes in this area.
In addition to governance, other indicators of a university's digital maturity are the correlation between
academic performance and job positioning [M4], and the possibility for students to conduct their academic
activities from home [M8]. This last statement could be revealing a restricted vision of digital transformation,
limiting it to the use of online platforms for the purposes of the teaching–learning process; therefore, for the
purposes of the investigation, and since a holistic perspective of the process is not evidenced, this statement will
only be used for referentialpurposes.
Apart from the effects derived from the pandemic in terms of the accelerated implementation of digitization
processes in fundamental academic areas [M1, M3], and having warned that digitization should not be used as the
solution to problems [M2], the interviewees consider the main drivers of digital transformation in universities to
be: (1) corporate purposes (vision, mission, strategic objectives) encompassed in culture and organizational strategy
[M5], including the desire to stay ahead of the vanguard of knowledge and technology [M7]; (2) commitment to
change processes, which is achieved through the training of all members of the educational community [M1]; (3)
the learning curve that is acquired through the gradual development of the transformation process [M6]; and (4)
effective communication that allows managing the technological base and decision making [M2], understanding
that communicative interactions promote technological integration and innovation, even more so when it comes to
matrix organizations [M2].
In this sense, assuming that the meaning of digitization is to achieve something that can only be made possible
through it, it has been argued that carrying out a digital transformation process implies transforming people's

--- PAGE 18 ---
InternationalJournalof Education and Practice,2024,12(3): 864-895
881
© 2024 Conscientia Beam. All Rights Reserved.
talents so that they are clear about the strategic approach in terms of what is to be kept and what is to be changed
[M5].
From another perspective, it was pointed out that digital maturity implies going through three phases: (1)
availability of digital resources, (2) how to use those resources, and (3) integration of technological platforms [M7].
From this assessment, it can be inferred that the digital maturity indicators should be associated with the factors
that measure the degree of progress in the transformation process based on the objectives to be achieved (see Figure
2).
It was also indicated that one of the drivers of digital transformation is the need to level the requirements
regarding the admission of students to public and private universities. This statement was only pointed out by one
interviewee [M4] and is not considered significant in thedesign of thedigital transformation model.
Figure 2. Phases of the digital transformation process in a university.
Note: Based on the qualitative analysis of the interviews conducted with experts.
However, as it has been mostly indicated that the conditions are in place to initiate digital transformation
processes in Chilean universities, certain difficulties associated with aspects of cultural and financial natures were
also recognized due to the need to make the corresponding investments in technology. According to the
interviewees, these elements (culture and investment in new technologies) can make a difference in terms of the
level of digital maturity that the university has reached, to which the type of technology that is being used should
be added [M1, M5], the skills to manage that technology [M1, M4, M5], the capacities for decision making [M1],
the leadership that is exercised [M5], and the skills to manage change [M4, M5, M6]. In this sense, criticism has
been drawn about the way in which new technologies are being used, pointing out that their full potential has not
yetbeen recognized [M5].
Regarding cultural aspects, the influence of the generational component [M2, M7] has been highlighted in the
possibility of initiating and managing processes of innovation and integration of digital technologies, arguing the
need to incorporate young academics (age component) with a vision of the digital context [M2] and with high
learning capacity [M7]. This could be why one of the main obstacles to digital transformation in the university
context lies in the resistance to change [M5, M7], its inadequate management [M2], and the lack of conviction
regarding the needfor digitization [M3], which is closely linkedto theculture of theorganization.
It was also pointed out that the difficulty in combining hard technical skills with soft skills could create
difficulties in conducting digital transformation processes, especially in the early phases, which justifies the need for
constant monitoring to anticipate possible risks that could lead to a failure of the digitization project [M4]. This
becomes more relevant if the differences derived from the structural aspects that characterize the Chilean university
system are considered. In fact, although there is a general conviction among those interviewed that both publicand

--- PAGE 19 ---
InternationalJournalof Education and Practice,2024,12(3): 864-895
882
© 2024 Conscientia Beam. All Rights Reserved.
private universities need to initiate profound digital transformation processes, significant differences between them
havebeen pointed out, highlighting the following:
• Private universities are more student-centeredthanpublicuniversities [M1]
• Private universities show greater interest in addressing digital transformation processes [M3]
• Private universities incorporate changes faster than publicuniversities [M2]
• Public universities have a deeply rooted bureaucratic system and greater regulatory rigidity than private
universities, which can translateinto slower decision making [M2, M6, M7].
• Public universities have more resources than private universities to start digital transformation processes
[M7]
Regardless of the type of university, be it public or private, there is a broad consensus that the leadership of
transformation processes should be assumed by the higher levels of the organization, who should also be charge of
planning, innovation and development [M2, M3] from which it can expand to the various functional areas to
structure a team responsible for the overall transformation [M5]. The importance of understanding the digital
transformation process as an institutional policy emanating from the board of directors or the university
government [M3] from which people are mobilized to address the changes that are required [M6] has been
stressed to promote innovation [M7] and integrate digital technologies in the various areas of the university
[M7]. Having recognized the existing gap between human capacities and the way of managing changes [M6], the
danger of trying to digitize the entire organization abruptly has been pointed out, with the advisability of carrying
out pilot transformation projects aimed at obtaining small changes that serve to leverage other larger ones [M6].
In this way, the importance of permanent learning has been highlighted [M6, M7] as one of the factors capable of
promoting the digital transformation process, together with the leadership that must be assumed, both by the area
responsible for managing information technology [M4]and bythe academic area [M8].
The above allows us to highlight three issues that seem to be fundamental in the digital transformation
processes: (1) the set of cultural aspects that characterize the university from which the strategic decisions on
technological base and financial resources necessary for the digital transformation emerge; (2) the focus on the
students as a central element for decision making related to the design and management of the new academic and
administrative processes; and (3) the technical skills and leadership capacities to manage the internal processes that
leadto an effectivetechnological transformation of the university.
5. THEORETICAL MODEL OF THE DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION PROCESS OF A
UNIVERSITY
The results in the previous section show the structural components of the digital transformation process of a
university, which are described below. Figure 3 illustrates the mutual relationship between digital maturity and the
digital transformation process.
Figure3. Recursionbetweenthe digitaltransformationprocessand thedegree ofdigitalmaturity.

--- PAGE 20 ---
InternationalJournalof Education and Practice,2024,12(3): 864-895
883
© 2024 Conscientia Beam. All Rights Reserved.
The model is based on the premise that any process aimed at the digital transformation of higher education
institutions is consistent with the degree of digital maturity that it has reached. This means that there is a close and
unequivocal relationship between "digital transformation" as a process and "digital maturity" as the result;
however, both constructs feed each other constantly. As the transformation process determines the degree of
maturity reached, this again impacts the process in search of new transformations. Figure 4 shows this recursive
property.
Figure4. Phasesofthe digitaltransformationprocessofauniversity.
The digital transformation process is made up of three phases that represent a continuum, since the variations
in the current situation will occur gradually as actions to increase the degree of digital maturity are carried out. As
reflected in Figure 4, the three phases of the digital transformation process are: (1) availability of digital resources,
(2) use of digital resources, and (3) integration of digital technologies.
Each of these phases impacts the digital maturity of the university according to the percentage contribution
indicated in Figure 5.
Figure5. Percentagecontributionofeach phase ofthe digitaltransformation processtothe digitalmaturity ofauniversity.
Note: Analysis of data obtained from the questionnaire answered by the students.

--- PAGE 21 ---
InternationalJournalof Education and Practice,2024,12(3): 864-895
884
© 2024 Conscientia Beam. All Rights Reserved.
The previous figure shows that the greatest contribution to the digital maturity of a university does not come
from its financial resources or the available technological base, but from how it uses the available technological
resources and its capacity to manage theintegration of the various technologies.
For the three phases that the digital transformation process of a university goes through (according to experts),
the initial 11 dimensions were reduced to nine dimensions (see Table 12). The distribution of the dimensions to each
phase was carried out according to the nature of the factors that are implicit in each of them, which is described
below in paragraphs 5.1,5.2 and 5.3.
Table 12. Phasesand dimensionsofthe digitaltransformationprocessofauniversity.
Phase Dimensions
1. Availability of digital resources 1.1. Strategyand culture
1.2. Financial resources
1.3. Technological basis
2. Utilization of digital resources 2.1. Focus on thestudents
2.2. Teaching and learning processes
2.3. Economic and administrative processes
3. Integration of digital platforms 3.1. IT governance
3.2. Capabilities and skills
3.3. Internal process management
5.1. Phase 1: Availability of Digital Resources
Any digital transformation process should include the review and adaptation of the technical context that will
increase the degree of digital maturity of the university. This requires the design of specificstrategies supported by
clear leadership, the conviction about the need to invest in equipment and infrastructure and being able to count on
highly qualified personnel capable of managing the process. Consequently, three areas of influence are observed that
feed the first phase of the process: strategy and culture, financial resources, and technological base, with the latter
referring to equipment, infrastructure, connectivity, and technical support. This phase is consubstantiated with the
strategic approach and organizational culture.
5.1.1. Dimension Strategy and Culture
Culture represents the strategic basis for the digital transformation of universities as it is related to the
interactions between people and technologies to satisfy the requirements of people and society. This dimension
includes the adoption and implementation of decisions related to university policies and strategies related to
obtaining, using, and integrating digital technologies. The 'Strategy and Culture' dimension incorporates three
indicators:
• Mission and vision statementsthatfocus on thedigital context
• Formulation of strategicobjectives focused on information technology
• An organizational structure adaptabletothe demands of thedigital environment.
5.1.2. Dimension: Financial Resources
Financial management affects the way in which the digital transformation of any organization occurs, including
higher education institutions, and represents the basis for improving internal processes and productivity,
differentiating from the competition by providing a better customer/student experience. It helps organizations to
stay ahead of the trends of the digital age both in terms of learning and administrative platforms; therefore, this
second dimension includes the following indicators:
• Investmentin learning platforms
• Investmentin administrative technology platforms.

--- PAGE 22 ---
InternationalJournalof Education and Practice,2024,12(3): 864-895
885
© 2024 Conscientia Beam. All Rights Reserved.
5.1.3. Dimension: Technological Base
For the descriptive purposes of the theoretical model of the digital transformation of a university, the
technological base is constituted by the equipment, applications and infrastructures that allow the generation or
improvement of the academic and administrative processes that are produced by the use of different technologies.
The technological base is representedby the following components:
• Availability of a digitized library
• Availability of digital technologies in organizational processes
• Availability of a digital platform to manage studentaffairs
• ICT support to promote work groups
• Digital support for thestudent–director–secretary relationship
• Availability of quality technical support in digital processes.
5.2. Phase 2: Use of Digital Resources
For the purposes of the proposed model, the use of digital resources refers to the way in which the
technological base obtained in the previous phase is used, both in terms of academic and administrative processes,
and implies recognition of the potential of new technologies to generate and implement initiatives that favor the
student experience, facilitate the management of internal processes, and increase competitiveness. This phase is
consubstantiated with the use and exploitation of the technological base, with its fundamental elements of its focus
on the student experience, the improvement of the teaching and learning processes, and the use of technological
capacities for the greater effectivenessof theeconomic and administrative processes.
5.2.1. Dimension: Focus on theStudent Experience
The digital transformation process must be based on the need to increase the centrality of the students to
improve their experience in terms of academic and administrative matters that concern them and optimize
communication aspects that allow them to offer timely and real information. Hence, the main focus of digitization is
student satisfaction, and this premise must be internalized in decision-making processes. The following indicators
correspond to this dimension:
• A comprehensive approach to the studentexperience.
• IT focus on studentloyaltyand university brand.
• Problem solving for students, with an IT approach.
• Accessible services anywhere and at any time.
• Digitization of thestudent life cycle.
• Incorporation of IT for studentsatisfaction and retention.
• Incorporation of IT for the continuity of studies.
• Integration of a studentlife project – teaching strategy.
• Improvement of contact points with studentsthrough ICT.
5.2.2. Dimension: Teaching-Learning Processes
The teaching-learning processes represent the core of the system that generates value for the student by
involving the interaction between teachers and students with the mediation of digital technologies. Here lies the
effectiveness of the pedagogical action and the social justification of the university in accordance with the new
training scenarios and the requirements of the labor market. The following indicators are included in this
dimension:
• Use of predictive data to anticipate student needs.
• Individualized counseling system.

--- PAGE 23 ---
InternationalJournalof Education and Practice,2024,12(3): 864-895
886
© 2024 Conscientia Beam. All Rights Reserved.
• Academic and pedagogical support with a focus on information technology (IT).
• Labor internships and job search with a digital focus.
• Incorporation of IT in the student's studyrhythm.
• Teaching model appropriate to thephysical location of the student.
• Adaptation of theteaching model to theprofile of each student.
• Application of ICT in the teaching-learning process.
• Incorporation of digital teaching strategies in pursuit of family integration.
5.2.3. Dimension: Economic-Administrative Processes
In the digital transformation model, economic-administrative processes play a fundamental role in ensuring the
operational and financial sustainability of the university, maintaining flexibility to adapt to the socioeconomic
conditions of students, providing study alternatives, optimizing the use of resources improving response time and
facilitating the generation of useful information for the student. Along with the teaching-learning processes,
economic-administrative processes impact the student experience and can be a determining factor in decisions about
continuing studies. This dimension is substantiatedwith the following indicators:
• Digitized administrative processes
• Integration of the student's socioeconomic levelwith digital teaching strategies
• Recruitment of potential studentsthrough social networks
• Studentloyaltystrategies with a digital focus.
5.3. Phase 3: Integration of Digital Technologies
This last phase of the digital transformation process relates the internal capacities of the university with the
changes that occur as a consequence of the techno-cultural evolution of society; In other words, it refers to the links
between technology and the environment, including the development of capacities and the implementation of new
proposals and initiatives aimed at improving institutional management, even though the reconfiguration of the
classic organizational structures, always maintaining Focus on the student experience. This phase is
consubstantiated with the competencies and capabilities to manage technology, its fundamental elements being IT
governance, competencies and capabilities, and the management of internal processes.
5.3.1. Dimension: IT Governance
Computer governance is related to the ability to lead, on the one hand, the processes aimed at centralizing
information to be able to understand and decode it to improve decision-making processes based on data from
different sources; and on the other, from an external perspective, IT governance is related to the management of
links with the different entities that make up the university ecosystem. In this sense, this dimension is essential in
the digital transformation process as it is consubstantiated with the management and control of all processes
mediated by information technology, which contribute to achieving strategic objectives. The indicators associated
with IT governance are:
• Analysis of students’perceptions of social networks.
• Analysis of positioning indicators.
• Identification of points for improvement in digital services.
• Digital initiatives aligned with thecorporate strategy.
• Promotion of projects on digital issues.
• Automation of teaching services aimed atstudents.
• Positioning through digital platforms.
• Relations with companies and corporations.

--- PAGE 24 ---
InternationalJournalof Education and Practice,2024,12(3): 864-895
887
© 2024 Conscientia Beam. All Rights Reserved.
• Relations with communities and social groups.
• Relations with foundations/NGOs.
• Relations with international universities.
• Links with the educational community and professors from other universities.
5.3.2. Dimension: Competences and Capacities
This dimension covers the cognitive, emotional, and attitudinal skills required to integrate digital technologies
and reduce the technological gap between the people who make up the various levels of the university.
Competencies with a focus on digital technologies cover a wide range of capacities, including technical knowledge,
continuous learning, collaborative work, leadership, resilience, information management, strategic vision and
decision making, and focus on student/customer experience. The indicators of this dimension have been grouped as
follows:
• Training focused on digital technologies.
• Training in digital pedagogical strategies.
• Tolerance to changes.
• Continuous learning ability.
• Promotion of collaborative learning through social networks.
5.3.3. Dimension: Internal Process Management
Finally, the management of internal processes covers all the processes that must be conducted to achieve the
strategic objectives of the university in a context characterized using integrated digital technologies, both to
support workflows and for making decisions related to improving performance and relations with students,
teachers, administrators, and other stakeholders.This dimension incorporates the following indicators:
• Digital technologies in workflows.
• Technologies in back office optimization of the organization.
• Decision making thatincorporates IT.
• Data-drivendecision making.
The percentage contribution of each dimension to the digital transformation process of a university is shown in
Figure 6.
Figure6. Dimensionsofthe digitaltransformationprocessand thepercentagecontributionstodigitalmaturity.

--- PAGE 25 ---
InternationalJournalof Education and Practice,2024,12(3): 864-895
888
© 2024 Conscientia Beam. All Rights Reserved.
The indicators associated with each of the dimensions that make up the theoretical model of the digital
transformation process of a university are shown in Table13.
Table 13. Matrixofindicatorsofthe digitaltransformationprocessofauniversityand theweighted weightsthat should beusedtode termine
the degree ofdigitalmaturity.
Phaseof digital
transformation
Dimension Indicators
Weighted
weights
1. Availability of digital
resources(20.68%)
1.1. Strategy and
culture (5.49%)
Organizational structureadaptable to digital 0.0191
Strategic objectives with a focus on information
technology
0.0180
Mission and vision statements focused on digital 0.0178
1.2. Financial resources
(3.76%)
Investment in learning platforms 0.0190
Investment in administrative technology platforms 0.0186
1.3. Technological basis
(11.43%)
Digital platform for student affairs 0.0193
ITsupport to foster workgroups 0.0192
Digital support for the student–director–secretary
relationship
0.0192
A digitized library 0.0190
Quality technical support for digital processes 0.0189
Digital technologies present in organizational
processes
0.0187
2. Use of digital resources
(40.53%)
2.1. Focuson the
students (16.8%)
Comprehensive approach to the student experience 0.0194
Accessible servicesanywhere and at any time 0.0194
Incorporation of ITfor the continuity of studies 0.0188
Improvement of contact points with students
through ICT
0.0187
IT incorporation for student satisfaction and
retention
0.0186
Solving problems for students, with an IT-based
approach
0.0184
Digitization of the student life cycle 0.0184
Integration of a student life project – teaching
strategy
0.0183
ITfocus on student loyalty and university brand 0.0180
2.2. Teaching and
learning processes
(16.47%)
Academic and pedagogical support with a focus on
IT
0.0189
Labor practices and job searches with a digital
approach
0.0187
Application of ICT in the teaching and learning
processes
0.0184
An individualized counseling system 0.0182
A pedagogical model appropriate to the physical
location of the student
0.0182
Use of predictive data to anticipate student needs 0.0181
Incorporation of ITinto the student's study rhythm 0.0181
Incorporation of digital teaching strategies in pursuit
of family integration
0.0181
Adaptation of the teaching model to the profile of
each student
0.0180
2.3. Economic and
administrative
processes(7.26%)
Digitized administrative processes 0.0188
Integration of the students' socioeconomic level with
digital teaching strategies
0.0184
Student loyalty strategies with a digital focus 0.0178
Recruitment of potential students through social
networks
0.0176
3. Integration of
technological platforms
(38.77%)
3.1. ITgovernance
(21.96%)
Promotion of projects on digital issues 0.0189
Relations with international universities 0.0189
Relations with companies and corporations 0.0188
Automation of teaching servicesaimed at students 0.0185
Links with the educational community and
professorsfrom other universities
0.0185
Digital initiatives aligned with corporate strategy 0.0184
Relations with communities and social groups 0.0182
Positioning through digital platforms 0.0181
Identification of points of improvement in digital
services
0.0180
Analysis of positioning indicators 0.0178

--- PAGE 26 ---
InternationalJournalof Education and Practice,2024,12(3): 864-895
889
© 2024 Conscientia Beam. All Rights Reserved.
Phaseof digital
transformation
Dimension Indicators
Weighted
weights
Relationships with foundations/NGOs 0.0178
Analysis of students’ perceptions of social networks 0.0177
3.2. Capabilities and
skills (9.44%)
Continuous learning ability 0.0196
Change tolerance 0.0195
Training focused on digital technologies 0.0192
Training in digital pedagogical strategies 0.0184
Promotion of collaborative learning through social
networks
0.0177
3.3. Internal process
management (7.37
%)
Decision making that incorporates IT 0.0187
Digital technologies in workflows 0.0186
Technologies in back-office optimization of the
organization
0.0183
Data-driven decision making 0.0181
Note: Data obtained from the questionnaire administered to students.
The theoretical model of the digital transformation process of a university is shown in Figure 7, and it shows
that the foundation of this process is the generation of greater value for the student. As indicated by the experts
consulted, no digitalization effort would make sense if it did not focus on the students' experience and the need to
haveclear, precise and timely information.
Figure7. Theoreticalmodelofthe digitaltransformationprocessofauniversity.
6. DISCUSSION
Based on the results obtained, the digital transformation model of the Autonomous University of Chile reflects
the close relationship between digital maturity and the generation of value for the students through the teaching
and learning processes and the economic administrative processes, which are linked to: (1) the approach strategic
and organizational culture; (2) the use and exploitation of the available technological base; and (3) the competencies
and abilities that are demonstrated to manage the technology. These three elements are determinants of the success
of the university's digital transformation process and require that the student be assumed as the center of attention
in the decision-making process (student-centricity), but also requires commitment, training and the permanent
learning of the people responsible for managing technological change, which in turn demands clear leadership, as

--- PAGE 27 ---
InternationalJournalof Education and Practice,2024,12(3): 864-895
890
© 2024 Conscientia Beam. All Rights Reserved.
well as adequate communication and coordination between the academic administrative areas that are responsible
for managing the institution's processes.
The preceding concept is encapsulated in the definition provided by Pelletier and Hutt (2021) who defined
digital transformation as "a series of profound and coordinated shifts in culture, workforce, and technology that
facilitate new educational and operational models. This transformation alters an institution's business model,
strategic directions, and value proposition" (p. 30). This underscores the necessity for innovative leadership at all
levels within the institution, demanding effective coordination among different units. The expansive and significant
spectrum of technological change impacts higher education institutions and is particularly evident in the realms of
values and operations. This has been corroborated by Núñez, Quirós, and Cerdá (2021) with explicit reference to
the case of Chilean universities and aligns with thefindings of this study.
Any effort to change toward the digitization of university systems and processes implies that the model to
which it aspires has been previously recognized and is in harmony with the social mission of the university. This
will not only boost the mechanisms that guarantee a higher educational quality but will also ensure a
transformation process that takes into account the digital skills (current and desired) of students, teachers and those
responsible for managing the incorporation of technology in academic administrative processes, the challenges
posed by digitalization and consolidate regional, national and supranational alliances that serve as a support to
initiate other disruptive processes to anticipate new scenarios derived from scientific technological advances in the
global context.
The financial difficulties that a university may be going through, its cultural tradition, regulatory rigidity, the
absence of a clear vision of what is to be achieved through the digital transformation process and the mistakes that
can be made both in the change management and the implementation of new technologies are factors that could not
only reduce the institutional capacity to implement technological changes, but could also have contradictory effects
on the economic and social dimensions of theuniversity's sustainability strategy.
On the other hand, the design of the model verifies what Xiao (2019) highlighted when he argued that
digitalization, as perceived by universities in China and other countries, seems to be oriented toward the creation of
digital campuses and the development of innovations in academic processes but lacks sufficient incentives for digital
technologies to improve research capacity and serve a broader community. In fact, during the data collection
process, none of the experts mentioned the improvement of scientific activity, one of the substantive activities of
universities. This aspect was not reflected in any of the models that were used as a basis to build the theoretical
model of digital transformation of the Autonomous University of Chile, which merits further studies to determine
the reasons why, in the case of higher education, the transformation process seems to be delimited to the internal
context of the institutions.
In the field of IT governance, which is the dimension of the transformation process that contributes the most to
the digital maturity of a university (21.96%), it is necessary to elucidate how the digital structure of the institution
aligns the strategic, technical and logistical needs with the redefinition of the roles of administrative staff, teachers
and students, in order to promote continuous innovation of services and processes and create new student-centered
digital learning spaces. This gives rise to future studies that try to elucidate what the potential problems are, the
needs that arise in terms of the new technological interactions that will take place within the university, and the
identification of the new opportunities offered bysuch links in thecontext of social responsibility.
7. CONCLUSIONS
Based on the findings presentedin this study,the following conclusions are established:
1. The digital transformation model for the Autonomous University of Chile was designed based on the
dimensions and factors thatstudentsand teachers ratedas essential.

--- PAGE 28 ---
InternationalJournalof Education and Practice,2024,12(3): 864-895
891
© 2024 Conscientia Beam. All Rights Reserved.
2. The digital maturity of the Autonomous University of Chile will be mainly determined by its way of using
the availabletechnological resources and its capacity to integrate thedifferent technologies.
3. Computer governance is the dimension that contributes the most (21.96%) to achieving the digital maturity
of the university. Curiously, investment in administrative and learning technology platforms only contributes
3.76%of thedigital maturity achieved.
4. The digital maturity of the university is a variable closely interrelated with the digital transformation
process, which is influenced by: (1) the skills and abilities to manage technology, (2) the use and exploitation
of thetechnological base, and (3) the organizational culture and strategic focus of the institution.
5. The factors that facilitate the process of digital transformation at the university are: (1) its focus on the
students; (2) permanent learning and the commitment shown by the entities responsible for carrying out said
process; and (3) theeffectivecoordination and management of theprocesses carried out in the areas involved.
6. The main factors that could hinder the implementation of the digital transformation process are: (1) the lack
of leadership and a long-term vision; (2) slowness in decision-making processes; (3) the generational gap
betweenteachers and students;and (4) littleinvestment in the technological base.
8. RECOMMENDATIONS
Due to the exploratory level of this research, it is recommended that new studies be carried out to verify the
consistency, reliability, and validity of the digital transformation model of the university using structural equation
modeling. Even if the model presented in this article is validated, it is recommended that its impact on students be
determined before its implementation; for this purpose, the Student Satisfaction Index model can be used, which
was proposed by Turkyilmaz, Temizer, and Oztekin(2018).
Additionally, considering the findings, new questions arise that need to be answered from a scientific
perspective. For example, a future area of research could be to analyze the influence of organizational routines in
the adoption of a culture in accordance with the demands of the digital ecosystem in the context of higher education
and to evaluatethepotentialimpact of digital transformation on thesustainability of the University.
From a non-scientific perspective, it is suggested that the people responsible for managing the implementation
of the digital transformation model at the university consider the influence of power relations during the transition
toward digital transformation since this will affect the coordination of internal processes associated with
information governance, the behaviors of people with technical and management responsibilities, the performance of
teachers, and the confidence of studentsregarding futureacademic and administrative processes.
Funding:Thisstudy received no specific financial support.
Institutional Review Board Statement: The Ethical Committee of the Autonomous University of Chile,
Chile has granted approval for this study on 3 October 2022.
Transparency: The authors state that the manuscript is honest, truthful, and transparent, that no key
aspects of the investigation have been omitted, and that any differences from the study as planned have been
clarified. This study followed all writing ethics.
CompetingInterests: Theauthorsdeclare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ Contributions: All authors contributed equally to the conception and design of the study. All
authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
REFERENCES
Almatrodi, I., & Skoumpopoulou, D. (2023). Organizational routines and digital transformation: An analysis of how
organizational routines impact digital transformation transition in a Saudi University. Systems, 11(5), 1-30.
https://doi.org/10.3390/systems11050239
Awdziej, M., Jaciow, M., Lipowski, M., Tkaczyk, J., & Wolny, R. (2023). Students digital maturity and its implications for
sustainable behavior. Sustainability, 15(9),1-22.https://doi.org/10.3390/su15097269

--- PAGE 29 ---
InternationalJournalof Education and Practice,2024,12(3): 864-895
892
© 2024 Conscientia Beam. All Rights Reserved.
Bagdasarian, I., Stupina, A., Goryacheva, O., & Shmeleva, Z. N. (2020). The university digital transformation as a tool for human
capital development. Journalof Physics:Conference Series,1691(1),012184.
Balyer, A., & Öz, Ö. (2018). Academicians' views on digital transformation in education. International Online Journal of Education
andTeaching,5(4),809-830.
Bounfour, A. (2016). From IT to digital transformation: A long term perspective in a. bounfour (ed.), digital futures, digital
transformation:From leanproduction to acceluction. Cham: Springer International Publishing.
Brdesee, H. (2021). A divergent view of the impact of digital transformation on academic organizational and spending efficiency:
A review and analytical study on a university E-service. Sustainability,13(13),1-16.
Bygstad, B., Øvrelid, E., Ludvigsen, S., & Dæhlen, M. (2022). From dual digitalization to digital learning space: Exploring the
digital transformation of higher education. Computers & Education, 182, 104463.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2022.104463
Castro, L. M., Tamayo, J. A., Burgos, D., & Martens, A. (2022). Measuring digital transformation in higher education
institutions – content validity instrument. Applied Computing and Informatics Ahead-of-Print.
https://doi.org/10.1108/ACI-03-2022-0069
Catlin, T., Scanlab, J., & Willmott, P. (2015). Raising your digital quotient | mckinsey mckinsey quaterly. Retrieved from
https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/strategy-and-corporate-finance/our-insights/raising-your-digital-
quotient#/
Cerdá Suárez, L. M., Núñez-Valdés, K., & Quirós y Alpera, S. (2021). A systemic perspective for understanding digital
transformation in higher education: Overview and subregional context in Latin America as evidence. Sustainability,
13(23),1-19.https://doi.org/10.3390/su132312956
Chinkes, E., & Julien, D. (2019). Higher education institutions and their role in the digital era the digital transformation of the
university: Transformed or transformative? Ciencia Educación, 3(1), 21–33.
https://doi.org/10.22206/cyed.2019.v3i1.pp21-33
Christensen, C. M., McDonald, R., Altman, E. J., & Palmer, J. E. (2018). Disruptive innovation: An intellectual history and
directions for future research. JournalofManagementStudies, 55(7),1043-1078.https://doi.org/10.1111/joms.12349
Crespo, B., & Pariente, E. (2018). Barometer on digital maturity in Spain 2018. Retrieved from
https://circulodeempresarios.org/transformacion-digital/wp-content/uploads/PublicacionesInteres/11.barometro-
madurez-digital-espana-2018.pdf
Demirkan, H.,Spohrer, J.C., & Welser, J. J.(2016).Digital innovation and strategic transformation. IT Professional,18(6),14–18.
https://doi.org/10.1109/MITP.2016.115
Denzin, N. K., & Lincoln, Y. S. (2000). The discipline and practice of qualitative research In N. K. Denzin & Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.),
Handbook of qualitative research.In (2nd ed., pp.1–34). Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications.
Drechsler, K., Gregory, R., Wagner, H.-T., & Tumbas, S. (2020). At the crossroads between digital Innovation and digital
transformation. Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 47(1), 1–23.
https://doi.org/10.17705/1CAIS.044XX
Furedi, F. (2011). The objectification of fear and the grammar of morality in h. sean (ed.), moral panic and the politics of anxiety.
In (pp.90–103).London: Routledge.
García-Peñalvo, F. J. (2021). Digital transformation in universities: Implications of the COVID-19 pandemic. Education in the
KnowledgeSociety, 22,e25465. https://doi.org/10.14201/eks.25465
Gobble, M. M. (2018). Digitalization, digitization, and innovation. Research-Technology Management, 61(4), 56–59.
https://doi.org/10.1080/08956308.2018.1471280
Gray, J., & Rumpe, B. (2017). Models for the digital transformation. Software & Systems Modeling, 16(2), 307–308.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10270-017-0596-7
Hess, T., Benlian, A., Matt, C., & Wiesböck, F. (2016). How german media companies defined their digital transformation
strategies. MIS Quarterly Executive, 15(2),103-119.

--- PAGE 30 ---
InternationalJournalof Education and Practice,2024,12(3): 864-895
893
© 2024 Conscientia Beam. All Rights Reserved.
Kane, G. C., Palmer, D., Phillips, A. N., Kiron, D., & Buckley, N. (2015). Strategy, not technology, drives digital transformation
MITSloan management review. Retrieved from
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/fr/Documents/strategy/dup_strategy-not-technology-drives-
digital-transformation.pdf
Kelly, K.(1999). New rulesfor the new economy: 10radicalstrategiesfor a connected world. New York:Penguin
Kerrigan, G. R. (2020). Technological change: Development and demand for digital skills and adjustments in the supply of education and
training in Chile (Project Documents (LC/TS.2020/76), S). Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
(ECLAC). Retrieved from
https://repositorio.cepal.org/bitstream/handle/11362/45832/S2000427_es.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
Kopp, M., Gröblinger, O., & Adams, S. (2019). Five common assumptions that prevent digital transformation at higher education
institutions. Paper presented at the In Inted2019 Proceedings IATED.
Lawshe, C. H. (1975). A quantitative approach to content validity. Personnel Psychology, 28(4), 563–575.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6570.1975.tb01393.x
Lorenzo, O. O. (2016). Digital maturity models: What do they consist of and what can we learn from them? Boletín de Estudios
Económicos, 71(219),573-590.
Malhotra, N.(2004). Marketresearch (4thed.).México: Pearson Educación.
Maltese, V. (2018). Digital transformation challenges for Universities: Ensuring information consistency across digital services.
Cataloging& Classification Quarterly,56(7),592–606. https://doi.org/10.1080/01639374.2018.1504847
Marks, A., AL-Ali, M., Atassi, R., Abualkishik, A. Z., & Rezgui, Y. (2020). Digital transformation in higher education: A
framework for maturity assessment. InternationalJournalof AdvancedComputer Science andApplications, 11(12),504–513.
https://doi.org/10.14569/IJACSA.2020.0111261
Marks, A., Al-Ali, M., & Rietsema, K. (2016). Learning management systems: A shift toward learning and academic analytics.
InternationalJournalof EmergingTechnologiesin Learning,11(4),1-6.https://doi.org/10.3991/ijet.v11i04.5419
Matt, C., Hess, T., & Benlian, A. (2015). Digital transformation strategies. Business & Information Systems Engineering, 57, 339-
343.
Mohamed Hashim, M. A., Tlemsani, I., & Duncan Matthews, R. (2022). A sustainable university: Digital transformation and
beyond. Education andInformation Technologies,27(7),8961-8996. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-022-10968-y
Mohamed, M. A., Tlemsani, I., & Matthews, R. (2022). Higher education strategy in digital transformation. Education and
Information Technologies,27(3),3171–3195. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-021-10739-1
Muehlburger, M., Rückel, D., & Koch, S. (2019). A framework of factors enabling digital transformation americas conference on
information systems, cancun. Retrieved from https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/A-Framework-of-Factors-
Enabling-Digital-Muehlburger-R%C3%BCckel/93be7eff8a9ae2da441899164f8803a1c64c47a9
Nowacka, A., & Rzemieniak, M. (2021). The impact of the VUCA environment on the digital competences of managers in the
powerindustry. Energies, 15(1),1-17.https://doi.org/10.3390/en15010185
Núñez, K., Quirós, S., & Cerdá, L. M. (2021). An institutional perspective for evaluating digital transformation in higher
education: Insightsfrom the chilean case. Sustainability, 13(17),1-27.https://doi.org/10.3390/su13179850
Oldfield, B. M., & Baron, S. (2000). Student perceptions of service quality in a UK university business and management faculty.
Quality AssuranceinEducation,8(2),85-95.https://doi.org/10.1108/09684880010325600
Pelletier, K., & Hutt, C. (2021). Digital transformation: Equipping advisors for the journey, students for success. Change: The
Magazineof Higher Learning,53(3),30–36.https://doi.org/10.1080/00091383.2021.1906142
Ramírez-Montoya, M. S. (2020). Digital transformation and educational innovation in Latin America in the framework of
COVID-19.Campus Virtuales, 9(2),123-139.
Ries, E. (2011). The lean startup: How today’s entrepreneurs use continuous innovation to create radically successful businesses (1st ed.).
New York:CrownBusiness.

--- PAGE 31 ---
InternationalJournalof Education and Practice,2024,12(3): 864-895
894
© 2024 Conscientia Beam. All Rights Reserved.
Rodríguez-Abitia, G., & Bribiesca-Correa, G. (2021). Assessing digital transformation in universities. Future Internet, 13(2), 1-16.
https://doi.org/10.3390/fi13020052
Rossmann, A. (2019). Digital maturity: Conceptualization and measurement model. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the
International Conference on Information Systems: Bridging the Internet of People, Data, and Things (39th ICIS 2018).
New York, Association for Information Systems (AIS) 1 -9.
https://aisel.aisnet.org/icis2018/governance/Presentations/8.
Saienko, V., Kurysh, N., & Siliutina, I. (2022). Digital competence of higher education applicants: New opportunities and
challenges for future education. Futurity Education,2(1),37-46. https://doi.org/10.57125/fed/2022.10.11.23
Salinas, J., & Vio, F. (2011). Health and nutrition programs without State policy: The case of school health promotion in Chile.
Revista Chilena de Nutrición, 38(2),100–116. https://doi.org/10.4067/S0717-75182011000200001
Sánchez, A., & Fernández, M. P. (2010). Generation 2.0 Report 2010: Habits of adolescents in the use of social networks. Comparative
study between autonomous communities Camilo José Cela University. Retrieved from
https://www.observatoriodelainfancia.es/ficherosoia/documentos/2824_d_generacin2-0-100706100017-phpapp01.pdf
Sayabek, Z., Suieubayeva, S., & Utegenova, A. (2020). Digital transformation in business in s igorevna, m. vochozka, & v.
vyacheslavovna (eds.),digital age:Chances, challenges and future. In(pp. 408–415).Cham: Springer.
Schwab, K. (2016). Thefourth industrialrevolution. New York:World Economic Forum.
Stare, J., Klun, M., & Dečman, M. (2023). A case study on the development of digital competences of teachers at the University
of Ljubljana. The NISPAcee Journal of Public Administration and Policy, 16(1), 138–166. https://doi.org/10.2478/nispa-
2023-0006
Teichert, R. (2019). Digital transformation maturity: A systematic review of literature. Acta Universitatis Agriculturae et
Silviculturae MendelianaeBrunensis,67(6),1673–1687. https://doi.org/10.11118/actaun201967061673
Turkyilmaz, A., Temizer, L., & Oztekin, A. (2018). A causal analytic approach to student satisfaction index modeling. Annals of
Operations Research,263(1),565-585. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-016-2245-x
Uzelac, A. (2008). How to understand digital culture: Digital culture - a resource for a knowledge society? In A. Uzelac & B.
Cvjetičanin (Eds.), Digital Culture: The Changing Dynamics (Culturelink Joint Publication). In (pp. 7-21). Zagreb:
Institute for International Relations (IMO).
Valdez-de-Leon, O. (2016). A digital maturity model for telecommunications service providers. Technology Innovation Management
Review, 6(8),19-32.
Vial, G. (2019). Understanding digital transformation: A review and a research agenda—sciencedirect. The Journal of Strategic
Information Systems, 28(2),118–144. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis.2019.01.003
Wade, M., & Shan, J. (2020). Covid-19 Has accelerated digital transformation, but may have made it harder not easier. MIS
Quarterly Executive, 19(3),213-220. https://doi.org/10.17705/2msqe.00034
Westerman, G.,Bonnet, D., & McAfee, A.(2012). Theadvantagesof digital maturity.MIT sloan managementreview. Retrieved from
https://sloanreview.mit.edu/article/the-advantages-of-digital-maturity/
Xiao, J. (2019). Digital transformation in higher education: Critiquing the five-year development plans (2016-2020) of 75
Chinese universities. DistanceEducation, 40(4),515–533.https://doi.org/10.1080/01587919.2019.1680272
Xu, M., David, J. M., & Kim, S. H. (2018). The fourth industrial revolution: Opportunities and challenges. International Journal of
FinancialResearch,9(2),90–95.https://doi.org/10.5430/ijfr.v9n2p90
Zaoui, F., & Souissi, N. (2020). Roadmap for digital transformation: A literature review. Procedia Computer Science, 175, 621-628.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2020.07.090
APPENDIX
Appendix I.Interviewprotocol.
1. In your opinion, which areas are most likelyto be digitized to add valueto the university and its students?

--- PAGE 32 ---
InternationalJournalof Education and Practice,2024,12(3): 864-895
895
© 2024 Conscientia Beam. All Rights Reserved.
2. Of theareas you havenamed, which would be the most important to you and why?
3. In your opinion, which activities carried out at the university will have a greater impact on student
satisfaction when digitized? Could you briefly describe the impact it would have?
4. As you know, we are designing a theoretical model to measure the degree of digital maturity of a
university. Based on your experience, what do you think are the factors that determine this degree of
maturity?
5. We understand that many universities have not yet started a modernization process oriented toward their
digital transformation. Do you think that the conditions are currently right for Chilean universities to start
this process?
6. What do you think is thearea that should leaddigital transformation projects at the university?
7. From your point of view, what are the reasons that could drive the digital transformation of a university?
Would there bedifferences betweenpublicand private universities?
8. Conversely, what are the reasons that could make this transformation difficult? Would there be differences
betweenpublic and privateuniversities?
9. How do you think innovation and the integration of digital technologies could be promoted in the various
areas of the university?
10. Do you want to add any other comments on the possible impact of digital transformation on Chilean
universities?
Views and opinions expressed in this article are the views and opinions of the author(s). The International Journal of Education and Practice shall not be
responsible oranswerable foranyloss,damage,orliability,etc.,causedinrelationto/arisingfrom the use ofthe content.