--- PAGE 1 ---
Vol.:(0123456789) 1 3
InformationSystemsFrontiers(2023)25:1161–1178
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10796-022-10277-2
ManagingIn‑CompanyITStandardization:ADesignTheory
Frederik Ahlemann1
· Sven Dittes2
·Tim Fillbrunn1
· Kevin Rehring1
· Stefan Reining1
· Nils Urbach3
Accepted:4April2022/Publishedonline:29April2022
©TheAuthor(s)2022
Abstract
Today’s companies rely heavily on in-company information technology standards (ICITS) to reduce costs, ensure flexibil-
ity, and facilitate the planning, implementation, and operation of IT systems. Steering and managing ICITS has proven to
be challenging, revealing the need for efficient governance mechanisms. But even though prior research demonstrates the
challenges of ICITS, viable advice on how to implement ICITS is scarce. In this paper, we develop an organizational design
theory for the management of ICITS based on the framework of organizational control theory. We conducted a critical case
study to identify basic goals, constitutive elements, and fundamental mechanisms of a working ICITS management. The
resulting design goals and principles were then evaluated and further refined in the light of additional expert interviews.
With our work, we wish to extend the body of theoretical knowledge on the management of ICITS and help practitioners
master the various challenges occurring in this domain.
Keywords IT standardization · In-company IT standards · Design theory · IT management · IT governance
1 Introduction
Standardization has become an established approach for
organizations to coordinate and organize their resources
and processes to ensure product and service quality and to
raise work efficiency (Choi et al., 2019; Kondo, 2000; Wül-
lenweber et al., 2008). Companies operating worldwide in
particular rely heavily on standards to leverage economies
of scale through uniform business processes. Thus, it is not
surprising that also most information technology (IT) depart-
ments pursue standardization (Curran, 2010). The objects
of standardization include network technologies, operating
systems, database systems, applications, or IT management
processes. The importance of in-company standards for IT
departments has increased steadily over time, due to the
growth and increasing costs of IT in almost all departments
in large organizations. Also, the implementation of auto-
mated and standardized processes can help to reduce the
complexity of technological environments, resulting in a bet-
ter control of cost (Foorthuis et al., 2016). A survey by the
Boston Consulting Group indicates that organizations with
a well standardized IT infrastructure can decrease IT infra-
structure costs by 15% and overall IT costs by 33% (Thiel
et al., 2004). Another survey of IT leaders from across the
world finds that they rate in-company IT standards (ICITS)
as one of the three most valuable activities in their compa-
nies (Curran, 2010). While the academic discourse mainly
refers to terms like IS company standards (van Wessel et al.,
2005) or corporate IT standardization (van Wessel, 2010),
ICITS can be applied at different levels and organizational
units within companies. They can apply to a company as a
whole or only to certain parts of it, e.g., in the case of larger
corporations. For this reason, we use the terms company and
organization interchangeably in this article.
* Stefan Reining
stefan.reining@uni-due.de
Frederik Ahlemann
frederik.ahlemann@uni-due.de
Sven Dittes
sven.dittes@fernuni-hagen.de
Tim Fillbrunn
timfillbrunn@gmail.com
Kevin Rehring
kevin.rehring@uni-due.de
Nils Urbach
nils.urbach@fim-rc.de
1
University of Duisburg-Essen, Duisburg, Germany
2
FernUniversität in Hagen, Hagen, Germany
3
University of Bayreuth, Bayreuth, Germany

--- PAGE 2 ---
1162 InformationSystemsFrontiers(2023)25:1161–1178
1 3
The implementation of ICITS is a costly endeavor involv-
ing activities such as the identification of areas that require
standardization, the specification and documentation of
standards, their approval, the training of staff, the monitor-
ing of their usage, and the resultant reporting. Noncompli-
ance is a major risk when implementing ICITS and it may
affect an organization very negatively. Non-compliance pre-
vents ICITS from having positive effects on the complex-
ity of IT architectures and processes. This in turn means
that intended cost savings cannot be realized. In addition,
responsible managers lose credibility and respect due to
their failure to enforce ICITS. Eventually, IT staff may be
negatively impacted in terms of morale and commitment.
Organizations therefore try their best to enforce compliance
with organizational IT standards, but often without success.
While reliable data on non-compliance with organizational
IT standards is generally difficult to obtain, some data sug-
gests that more than 50% of employees use certain IT com-
ponents without approval of their respective IT departments
(Silic, 2015). Herath and Rao (2009) state that employees’
negligence and non-compliance are often responsible for
failing security policies. Prior research suggests that this
adoption problem is multifaceted with causes on both the
individual and organizational level (Emmerich et al., 1999;
Liang et al., 2012). While these causes are increasingly well-
understood and documented through models of ICITS suc-
cess and adoption (Dittes et al., 2015; Müller et al., 2015),
practitioners and researchers alike still struggle finding the
right approach to successfully manage ICITS.
Despite the practical importance of ICITS, little, and
rather fragmented, research has been carried out on stand-
ards within organizations’ IT departments so far (De Vries
et al., 2006; van Wessel et al., 2005). Besides the richer
body of knowledge on non-organizational, industry-related
IT standards, such as standards set by international consortia
and official bodies (e.g. ISO norms, government standards)
(Backhouse et al., 2006; Schmidt & Werle, 1998), only few
studies investigate aspects of ICITS. Managerial recommen-
dations are also fragmentary and isolated, making it diffi-
cult to understand and anticipate which set of managerial
approaches can lead to a sustainable and successful stand-
ardization initiative. Moreover, such recommendations often
lack theoretical underpinnings and justification.
We address this gap by proposing an organizational
design theory describing the constituent elements and mech-
anisms of an effective and efficient management of ICITS.
Design theories in Information Systems are prescriptive
theories that integrate different aspects into design paths
with the goal to design a process that is more effective and
feasible (Ngai et al., 2009; Walls et al., 1992). Our theory
includes fundamental design goals, basic ICITS manage-
ment principles, and explanations (in the form of proposi-
tions) of how these principles lead to the attainment of the
aforementioned goals. The theory thereby offers research-
ers a more comprehensive understanding of how ICITS can
unfold their potential. At the same time, it serves as a guide-
line for practitioners in their endeavor to implement ICITS.
We conceptualize the problem of ICITS management as a
process of planning and controlling activities enforcing com-
pliant behavior of IT staff, so that ICITS are actually used in
a beneficial manner. Accordingly, we chose organizational
control theory (OCT) (Ouchi, 1978, 1979, 1980) for our
problem analysis and as a theoretical foundation of subse-
quent design activities. OCT allows us to capture the domain
of ICITS as a control problem where individual behavior
needs to be aligned so that organizational and individual
goals match and desired behavior is enforced. As the reasons
for deviant behavior and low adoption rates in the area of
ICITS can be diverse (Chua et al., 2014; Dittes et al., 2015)
and many of these reasons are not yet well understood, we
decided to first explore the problem in more depth before
developing our design theory. Therefore, we started with
a critical interview study that allowed us to understand the
multifaceted phenomenon of ICITS. Based on the insights
gained from this interview study, we developed a first ver-
sion of our design theory, which was later evaluated and
refined through a series of interviews with subject-matter
experts from different companies and industries.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows.
Section 2 presents related work on ICITS, conceptualizes
ICITS as an organizational control problem, and describes
how OCT was used as a theoretical lens for our work. Sec-
tion 3 outlines the research method applied and describes the
critical case we used for exploring the problem. In Sect. 4,
we present our design theory and in Sect. 5, we present the
results of its evaluation. In Sect. 6, we discuss our findings,
summarize the paper, and give an outlook on future research.
2  In‑Company IT Standardization
as an Organizational Control Process
Following Dittes et al. (2015), we define an ICITS as any
formal rule or guideline within organizations based on a
clear motivation aimed at harmonizing tangible and intan-
gible objects related to or consisting of information tech-
nology within that organization. Van Wessel (2010) defines
three abstract domains for ICITS: technological standards
(e.g. standards determining the brand and type of servers
in data centers), data standards (e.g. specific data structures
and their semantics), and process standards (e.g. security
guidelines or project management processes). While these
domains differ significantly in terms of their content, their
management is fairly similar. They all require the same
activities such as definition, approval, communication,
use, monitoring, and maintenance. Moreover, they all offer

--- PAGE 3 ---
1163 InformationSystemsFrontiers(2023)25:1161–1178
1 3
a significant potential for complexity and cost reduction,
because low degrees of standardization lead to a need for
more staff with specific knowledge and more specific opera-
tional and management processes, e.g., in the case of operat-
ing systems for installing security patches, running backups,
updating the systems etc. Independent from these domains,
ICITS may further be categorized according to their form.
In this sense, ICITS may occur as: a) a reference to external
standards (e.g. ISO norms or standard software) adopted by
the organization, b) a modified version of an external stand-
ard, c) a subset of an external standard; d) a reproduction
of (parts of) other external documents, or e) a self-written
standard (De Vries, 1999, p. 231).
The implementation of ICITS is often more difficult than
companies expect, as revealed by reports about failed imple-
mentation attempts or significant problems when it comes
to actually benefitting from implemented IT standards (Jun
& Cai, 2003; Zhu & Fu, 2009). ICITS often come along
with great uncertainties regarding their costs and benefits
and thereby also with uncertainties regarding adequate plan-
ning and control strategies (Weitzel, 2003, p. 64). One tradi-
tional problem facing standardization and standards usage in
organizations is that of demonstrating its contribution to the
organization’s overall success (Hesser & Inklaar, 1998). This
issue naturally results in motivational barriers. Accordingly,
studies indicate that many ICITS efforts often fail due to low
acceptance rates among staff, and that adherence to the rel-
evant standards tends to be superficial (Russo et al., 1996).
As stated by Bird (1998), companies’ standardization efforts
often leave too much room for employees to use non-stand-
ard components, emphasizing the importance of a proper
enforcement of ICITS. Given these motivational, planning
and controlling challenges, we argue that ICITS can best
be conceptualized as an organizational control problem.
Organizational control theory is particularly well-suited for
capturing the phenomenon of ICITS because ICITS failures
are an immediate result of a misalignment of organizational
(ICITS) goals and individual usage behaviour. A working
management of ICITS must avoid deviant usage behaviour
and foster higher ICITS adoption rates.
The problem of misaligned goals and behavioural pat-
terns has long been explored in academic research. Given the
insight that organizations’ and their employees’ goals par-
tially diverge (Barnard, 1968), it has been regarded as worth
investigating how to effectively direct individuals’ efforts
towards organizational goals (Flamholtz, 1983). Throughout
this paper, the term “organizational control” shall denote
“mechanisms (both processes and techniques) designed to
increase the probability that people will behave in ways that
lead to the attainment of organizational objectives.” (Flam-
holtz et al., 1985, p. 38).
Organizational control has traditionally been divided
into three types: formal outcome control, formal behavior
control, and informal clan control (Ouchi, 1978, 1979,
1980). Formal control is realized through formal mecha-
nisms, including project plans, test protocols, and reports. In
contrast, informal control works through social events, social
norms, and peer pressure (Kirsch, 2004, p. 378). In the case
of ICITS, tasks are usually very clearly specified through
process guidelines, handbooks specifying the standards, etc.,
which suggests that formal control mechanisms are most
suitable in this case.
Individual control types are usually not used in isolation.
Rather, they tend to be combined to achieve complex goals
(Tiwana, 2010; Turner & Makhija, 2006), while showing
significant synergy effects (Cardinal et al., 2004; Kirsch,
1996). Accordingly, the analysis and evaluation of different
control types should be done collectively to avoid conflicts
that may weaken the desired effect (Kirsch, 2004; Tiwana,
2010). Flamholtz et al. and’s (1985, p. 38) integrative frame-
work (a modified version of which is depicted in Fig. 1) is
not only one of the most influential models of organizational
control, but it is also among the few frameworks that con-
sider the above-mentioned insights by integrating several
control types.
As depicted in Fig. 1, the framework describes a core
control system surrounded by a control context, consisting
of organizational structure, culture, and the organization’s
external environment. While the core control system is sup-
posed to provide control mechanisms to directly influence
the employees’ behavior, the control context contains mecha-
nisms with indirect control functions (Flamholtz et al., 1985,
p. 38). Corresponding to the fact that this model focuses on
the control of human agents rather than of machine pro-
cesses, the operational subsystem at the center of the core
control process comprises “human systems within an organ-
ization, at the individual, group and organizational levels
of analysis” (Flamholtz et al., 1985, p. 38). The processes
illustrated by the arrows in Fig. 1 can be summarized as fol-
lows: First, the planning component generates standards that
are communicated to the operational subsystem and form
the basis of an evaluation-reward mechanism. Adherence
to these standards is monitored and measured, leading to
advice on corrective action for the operational subsystem
and generating input for the execution of the evaluation-
reward mechanism. The feedback provided to the operational
subsystem is also fed back to the planning component for
adjustment of generated standards. The elements of the
control context can have a facilitating or an inhibiting influ-
ence on the core control system’s effectiveness, depending
on whether the configurations of the contextual component
provide an environment conducive to the communication,
acceptance, and monitoring of ICITS. For instance, given
appropriate context configurations, organizational control
has even been found to potentially strengthen employ-
ees’ trust in the organization, contrary to what had been

--- PAGE 4 ---
1164 InformationSystemsFrontiers(2023)25:1161–1178
1 3
suggested in previous literature, thus enhancing employee
performance not only directly through forms of coercion, but
also indirectly through enhanced trust (Verburg et al., 2018).
The organizational culture element also influences in how far
the core control mechanisms are realized in terms of formal
behavior control or informal clan control.
In the remainder of this paper, we take Flamholtz’s frame-
work as premise and conceptual foundation for our design
theory of the management of ICITS.
3 Research Method
Prior literature on ICITS reports on successful ICITS man-
agement in different firms that varies significantly in terms
of processes, structures and policies. Therefore, we posit
that there is no general ICITS approach for all firms. Instead,
our research is built on the presupposition that there are
general, crucial characteristics of ICITS implementations
shared across different IT organizations. For this reason, our
theoretical model will offer guidelines to practitioners for
the design of their ICITS while leaving enough room for
firm-specific adaptations.
In doing so, our research includes the following core
components of an information systems design theory: To
specify the (1) purpose and scope of our design theory, we
clearly defined a set of four design goals as the boundaries
of our work. These goals capture the specific organizational
challenges of ICITS and how these translate into specific
desired end states. Thereby, we abstract from a narrow,
idiosyncratic problem and refer to a class of problems the
design theory can solve. (2) Principles of form and func-
tion define how solutions based on the design theory work.
They describe an abstract architecture for solving a class of
problems. We describe eight design principles for successful
ICITS management, which are consistent with OCT’s core
propositions. (3) The design principles are supported by test-
able propositions. These propositions are truth statements
about the theory and can be tested against their validity on
instantiation of the solution artifact. We formulate fourteen
testable propositions for our ICITS approach that basically
link design principles to design goals, thus explaining how
the design theory is supposed to address ICITS related chal-
lenges. (4) Finally, justificatory knowledge refers to kernel
theories underlying the design theory. This knowledge is
relevant with respect to the understanding of the design of an
artifact and its working. In our case, we use OCT as a kernel
theory informing our design.
Our research was conducted in three phases that allowed
us to (1) identify challenges and design goals for a success-
ful ICITS management by means of an exploratory interview
study (see Sect. 3.1 for details), (2) develop a design theory
Fig.1  Analytical framework for this study derived from organizational control theory (based on Flamholtz et al., 1985)

--- PAGE 5 ---
1165 InformationSystemsFrontiers(2023)25:1161–1178
1 3
for ICITS management, consisting of design principles and
corresponding testable propositions, based on the design
goals identified in phase 1 and an analysis of relevant ICITS
literature, and (3) evaluate the design theory through a round
of confirmatory expert interviews (see Sect. 3.2 for details).
3.1 TheCaseofaLargeAutomotiveManufacturer
While the difficulties of implementing successful ICITS has
often been stressed in the literature, little is known about
the detailed intricacies of this problem. In order to deepen
our knowledge on the specific causes of ICITS success and
failure, the first phase of our research consisted of a case
study of a large automotive manufacturer from Germany.
This critical case was chosen because it displays a very
complex IT/IS architecture with thousands of IT infrastruc-
ture elements, applications and processes. Moreover, it was
complex in terms of organization and governance with a
highly distributed IT organization dispersed over multiple
countries, legal entities and organizational units. Not sur-
prisingly, ICITS is a major challenge for this organization.
Several far-reaching ICITS initiatives cover large parts of the
enterprise architecture. Some of them were successful, some
of them were partially successful and some of them may be
considered a failure. Therefore, studying this firm allowed
us to compare different embedded cases, which gives us the
opportunity to distinguish successful managerial practices
from less successful ones.
In this case study, we conducted 11 interviews with pro-
fessionals from the organization’s IT departments at differ-
ent levels of hierarchy (Table 1). The interviews took 45
to 60 min each and were conducted in German. Hereby,
minutes were taken and important quotes and statements
were written down. As proposed by Weston et al. (2001),
the interview minutes were reviewed by the interviewees
to avoid a wrong or incomplete description of the interview
content. After the interviewees had confirmed their inter-
view statements, all statements and quotes relevant regarding
ICITS challenges were stored in a database for the purpose
of coding and categorization. Based on an in-depth analysis
of the coded interviews, we identified six core challenges
for IT standardization. We then generalized these findings
to derive a set of four design goals (Sect. 4.1). These design
goals define the purpose and scope of our design theory.
Based on the developed design goals, OCT, and relevant
further literature, we went on to develop a set of design prin-
ciples and formulated corresponding testable propositions.
3.2 Evaluation
In the final phase, we evaluated our design theory in a con-
firmatory interview round with subject-matter experts from
practice. In this round, we reached out to 126 experts that
we identified through personal and professional networks
(e.g. XING). The acquisition through professional networks
was based on several keyword searches. We targeted profes-
sionals with job descriptions including the terms IT stand-
ardization, IT architecture or IT governance. Additionally,
for the purpose of the design theory, we exclusively focused
on experts from companies of middle to large size. We con-
ducted telephone interviews with seven of these experts
after which results converged and no further insights could
be generated (“theoretical saturation”). These participants
have a work background in several different industries. All
of them are currently employed in either middle or top man-
agement positions. Table 2 shows some detailed information
about the participants.
The interviews lasted approximately 40 to 60 min each
and started with exploratory, open-ended questions on major
challenges and success factors of ICITS as well as current
ICITS practices in the expert’s organization. We then pre-
sented the participants with the design goals and asked them
Table1  Interviewees from the exploratory round of interviews
Number Role Experience with IT standardization
1 Technical project manager No active involvement in IT standardization projects yet, only passive experience
2 Team leader Daily experience with component standards, current involvement in a tool standardization project
3 IT architect Central role in one standardization project in the past
4 IT architect Database officer in a (failed) standardization project in the past
5 IT process manager Process owner in ITIL (information technology infrastructure library) processes
6 IT architect Has defined and established standards in past projects
7 Infrastructure coordinator Manages Oracle and MSSQL standards
8 IT architect Supportive role in several standardization projects in the past
9 IT architect Experience with the development, implementation, and acceptance of architecture standards as
consultant and committee leader
10 IT architecture manager No active involvement in IT standardization projects yet, only passive experience
11 Enterprise architecture manager Supportive role in standardization projects and manager of standardization processes

--- PAGE 6 ---
1166 InformationSystemsFrontiers(2023)25:1161–1178
1 3
for an evaluation, using a five-point Likert scale measuring
the participants’ degree of agreement with each design goal.
We repeated this process for the design principles and test-
able propositions. We concluded with open-ended questions
on strengths and weaknesses of the current design as well as
on the participants’ personal and professional background.
Furthermore, in each section, participants were given the
chance to suggest further design goals, design principles,
testable propositions, and add comments. As in the explora-
tory interview round, the transcripts were recorded, tran-
scribed and reviewed by the interviewees to avoid wrong or
incomplete descriptions of the interview content, and after
that, all relevant quotes from the sections involving open-
ended questions were collected in a database, coded, and
categorized. The results of the analysis of the coded quotes
will be presented in Sect. 5.
4 DesignTheory
In the following, we will discuss our design theory’s final
components, ground them in OCT and illustrate them with
narratives from our critical case and quotes from our inter-
views with subject-matter experts. The purpose and scope of
our design theory is specified in Sect. 4.1. Principles of form
and function and the corresponding testable propositions are
presented in Sect. 4.2.
4.1 BoundariesandDesignGoals
The purpose of our design theory is to help organizations to
successfully implement ICITS standards through an effec-
tive management approach. Our approach is applicable
within the boundaries of medium to large companies with
medium to high complexity IT/IS landscapes. We explic-
itly exclude smaller organizations and less complex IT/IS
architectures for two reasons. First, in smaller organiza-
tion, the degree of division of labor and specialization is
usually lower which requires less complex role models and
processes. For instance, in smaller organizations it will be
hard to install dedicated ICITS managers or establish com-
plex lifecycle models of ICITS. Second, certain challenges
are more prevalent with more complex architectures. For
instance, the problem of architectural transparency is a lot
less relevant for simple architectures. Consequently, ICITS
management in the context of complex architectures requires
more processes for establishing transparency and monitor-
ing progress. Along similar lines, our design theory’s appli-
cability is restricted to organizations that display a certain
level of IT management maturity. In particular, we assume
that organizations have (a) a working and to some extent
standardized project management, (b) a working enterprise
architecture management (EAM) that provides a minimum
of architectural transparency and control, and (c) an estab-
lished governance framework the ICITS management can
be built on. Within the framework of these boundary condi-
tions, our design theory is supposed to address four different
design goals (Table 3) that have been identified through our
empirical work. In the following, these design goals as well
as some central factors hindering their achievements will be
introduced with references to representative points from our
first round of interviews.
One of the most frequently mentioned reasons why com-
panies promote standardization initiatives is the reduction
of IT costs. Cost reductions are expected due to a reduc-
tion of the number of IT staff, the reduction of the number
Table2  Participants from the confirmatory round of interviews
Interviews Experts Organizations
7 6
Industry ICT consultancy Electronics distribution Steel and armaments Public services
2 2 2 1
Age (in years) <25 25–30 31–45 46–60 >60 N/A
0 1 3 3 0 0
Work experience (in years) <1 1–3 3–5 5–10 >10 N/A
0 0 1 2 4 0
IT management experience <1 1–3 3–5 5–10 10 N/A
1 0 3 0 3 0
IT management domain IT governance IT architecture IT consultancy Professional ser-
vices
3 2 1 1
Management level Top Management Middle Management
3 4

--- PAGE 7 ---
1167 InformationSystemsFrontiers(2023)25:1161–1178
1 3
of necessary licenses, and the advantage resulting from a
stronger position towards suppliers, namely, scale effects
resulting from the reduction of ordered products. Accord-
ingly, a study by the Boston Consulting Group (Scantlebury
et al., 2004) also shows that standardizing organizational IT
can decrease IT infrastructure costs by up to 33%. However,
the goal of cost reduction was generally perceived not to be
reached yet. Rather, a poor communication and adherence
to standards has so far resulted in project delays, as finished
systems that turned out not to meet certain standards could
not be handed over to the organization.
A further goal of IT standardization is increasing organi-
zational flexibility by significantly decreasing the introduc-
tion effort for new applications. As Tiwana and Konsynski
(2010) point out: “Paradoxically […] rigidity in IT architec-
tures (e.g. standardization to increase modularity) increases
IT agility” (p. 299). However, as noted by some interview-
ees, agility through standards can only be properly realized
if the standards themselves can be quickly adjusted to market
dynamics. Accordingly, the need was expressed for faster
cycles of standard definition and introduction.
Another major goal of IT standardization is reducing IT
complexity due to less hardware and software heterogeneity
and lower maintenance and support effort, resulting in bet-
ter IT manageability and controllability. As Boh and Yellin
(2006) maintain: “By standardizing across different tech-
nologies, vendors, platforms, and application architectures,
organizations can potentially reduce the complexity of their
operations, control the number of skills required to maintain
their IT systems […]” (p. 166). Furthermore, ICITS were
generally perceived to foster fail-safety due to a higher vali-
dation of systems, and troubleshooting as well as various
other kinds of changes were reported as considerably easier.
Lastly, IT standardization aims to improve the qual-
ity of IT services by reducing the number of errors during
implementation and utilization of new software. Addition-
ally, it significantly fosters customer satisfaction. In fact,
a successful mapping of customer requirements on ICITS
was frequently mentioned both as one of the major goals
of ICITS and as a criterion for the success of ICITS imple-
mentation. However, a tendency to accommodate customer
wishes at all costs was also perceived as an inhibitory factor
by some.
4.2 DesignPrinciplesandTestablePropositions
In this sub-section, we present and explain the principles of
form and function of our design theory (Table 4). For each
principle, we specify the design goals the respective princi-
ple aims at and derive corresponding testable propositions.
4.2.1 DesignPrinciple1:EstablishDedicatedSteering
andMonitoringofICITS
OCT teaches us that observing ICITS adoption (not neces-
sarily individual behavior) and measuring ICITS outcome
will likely have a positive impact on individuals’ compli-
ant behavior (OCT construct Measurement). Moreover, this
monitoring is the basis for any form of deviance analysis and
definition of counteractions. As a formal control mechanism,
monitoring can be time-consuming and complicated as data
has to be collected, analyzed, and conclusions have to be
drawn. While some required data collection can certainly
be automated, some may not. Given the fact that medium
to large IT organizations often maintain dozens (if not hun-
dreds) of different ICITS for IT infrastructure, applications,
and processes, we conclude that a dedicated organizational
instance should be responsible for steering and monitoring
activities. We therefore propose:
DP1. There is a structural element within the organiza-
tion that is responsible for steering and monitoring (the
usage of) ICITS.
Dedicated ICITS steering and monitoring presumably
allows for controlling key standardization aspects such
Table3  Design goals for an IT standardization management framework. (as mentioned by the informants)
Label Design goal Description Mentioned in interview
DG1 Cost reduction IT standardization aims to reduce business IT costs by
• Decreasing the size of IT support staff
• Reducing the number of applications and necessary licenses
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11
DG2 Flexibility IT standardization aims to increase business flexibility on an organizational level by
• Decreasing the introduction effort for new applications
1, 2, 4, 8
DG3 Manageability and
controllability
IT standardization significantly increases IT manageability and controllability by
• Reducing IT complexity
• Lowering IT maintenance and support effort
4, 5, 6, 7, 8
DG4 Quality improvement IT standardization aims to improve the quality of IT services by
• Reducing implementation and utilization errors
• Fostering customer satisfaction
2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 10, 11

--- PAGE 8 ---
1168 InformationSystemsFrontiers(2023)25:1161–1178
1 3
as cost–benefit relation, standard diffusion, and standard
adoption. DP1 therefore directly aims at DG3 (enhanced IT
manageability and controllability). Furthermore, dedicated
ICITS steering and monitoring is expected to allow monitor-
ing the behavior of users of standards, reveal critical areas
which require action. DP1 therefore also directly aims at
DG4 (improved quality of IT services). Accordingly, we for-
mulate the following testable propositions for DP1:
TP1a. Dedicated ICITS steering and monitoring improve
IT manageability and controllability.
TP1b. Dedicated ICITS steering and monitoring improve
the quality of IT services.
4.2.2 DP2.IntroduceaStandardLifecycleConcept
Advanced organizations ensure that standards are regularly
checked in terms of up-to-dateness. ICITS that are no longer
current or useful are discontinued and eventually removed
from the ICITS catalogue. From the perspective of OCT this
represents a reaction to changing environmental conditions
and requires regular planning and adjustment of goals (OCT
constructs External Environment, Planning). We therefore
posit that ICITS run through a series of lifecycle phases:
DP2. The management of ICITS is based on a structured
lifecycle model that describes ICITS’ phases from initia-
tion to shutdown.
In the ICITS context, we distinguish four phases of a
standard lifecycle based on Dittes et al., (2014, p. 36). In
the first phase, a standard is initiated, conceptualized and
approved. In the second phase, the standard is introduced,
and IT staff is prepared to use it. During this phase, benefit
communication and convincing users as well as stakehold-
ers are pivotal. During the next phase, the ICITS is used by
IT staff. At the same time, utilization is monitored and – if
necessary – audits are carried out to enforce compliance.
Support and maintenance might also be necessary. The dis-
continuation and shutdown phase includes information of IT
staff as well as the initiation of subsequent ICITS that can
replace the discontinued standard. Here, responsible roles
might start a new ICITS development process.
Introducing a lifecycle concept can not only ensure that
the maintenance and discontinuation of standards are taken
seriously. It also serves as a general framework for the man-
agement of ICITS. Moreover, a lifecycle concept is expected
to ensure a consistent management of ICITS thus increas-
ing general transparency, which eventually allows managers
to better oversee ICITS. DP2 is therefore directed at DG3
(enhanced IT manageability and controllability), and we
posit the following testable proposition:
TP2. Introducing a standard lifecycle concept improves
IT manageability and controllability.
4.2.3 DP3.LinkIndividualandOrganizationalGoals
As already outlined earlier, a key hindrance for ICITS suc-
cess is the lack of acceptance of ICITS by IT staff. OCT
suggests that such a lacking motivation of pursuing organi-
zational goals can be alleviated through aligning them with
individual goals, e.g. through rewards and/or other mecha-
nisms (OCT construct Evaluation-Reward). Management
by objectives (MBO) allows for passing goals down the
organizational hierarchy and motivates employees to reach
Table4  Design principles for an IT standardization management framework, (as mentioned by the informants)
Label Design Principal Description Mentioned in interview
DP1 Steering and Monitoring There is a structural element within the organization that is responsible
for steering and monitoring (the usage of) ICITS
2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 11
DP2 Lifecycle Concept The management of ICITS is based on a structured lifecycle model that
describes ICITS’ phases from initiation to shutdown
2, 9, 10, 11
DP3 Individual and organizational goals Incentives and sanctions for the utilization of/non-compliance with ICITS
are defined, communicated, and applied
4, 5, 6
DP4 Technical Change Technical change resulting in the need for an update of ICITS is antici-
pated and handled quickly
1, 4, 7
DP5 Information Push Those affected by an IT standard should be provided with all relevant
information regarding its utilization and benefits, so that users do not
have to ask for information first
1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10
DP6 Integration into existing processes Standard management is integrated into the organization to corroborate
the significance of ICITS within the organization and avoid contradic-
tory decision-making
9, 10, 11
DP7 Role Concept Establish a role concept with clear responsibilities 3, 5, 6, 7, 11
DP8 Limitation of Component Standards The number of standards for single, small components is minimized. Plat-
form standards covering a significant functional range are used instead
10, 11

--- PAGE 9 ---
1169 InformationSystemsFrontiers(2023)25:1161–1178
1 3
business goals as they become linked to their own (Bell,
1980, p. 20). MBO further increases awareness for business
objectives and improves results and communicative per-
formance (Shetty & Carlisle, 1974, p. 159). Münstermann
et al. (2010) further identify incentives as a key instrument
in reaching ICITS success. To support a standard oriented
management by objectives approach, we thereby propose the
implementation of an incentive system for standard users,
including positive and negative sanction mechanisms: Posi-
tive sanctions should be used to encourage specific user
behavior. In practice, positive sanctions may simply be not
using negative sanctions. Negative sanctions should increase
the individual cost of deviant behavior. Noncompliance to
IT standards should be possible but only at exceedingly high
individual costs.
Such an incentive system supports the implementation of
control mechanisms to reveal critical compliance issues and
help to initiate countermeasures. Thus, we posit:
DP3. Incentives and sanctions for the utilization of/non-
compliance with ICITS are defined, communicated, and
applied.
We expect such incentives and sanctions to increase
acceptance rate and adoption, which is a necessary pre-
condition for ICITS to unfold their potential. Beyond this,
incentives and sanctions make it easier for responsible man-
agers to enforce compliance thus making it easier and less
effortful to manage and control standards. DP3 thereby pro-
motes DG3 (enhanced IT manageability and controllability).
Standard-oriented MBO is further expected to counteract
employees’ deviant behavior towards ICITS. DP3 thus also
promotes DG4 (improved quality of IT services). We there-
fore formulate the following testable propositions:
TP3a. Linking individual and organizational goals
improve IT manageability and controllability.
TP3b. Linking individual and organizational goals
improve the quality of IT services.
4.2.4 DP4.AnticipateTechnicalChangeandHandleit
Quickly
IT standards are subject to constant technical change (Han-
seth & Braa, 2001), organizations need to make a continuous
effort to maintain the technical usefulness and integrity of
an IT standard throughout its lifecycle. Moreover, changes
regarding an IT standard induce further changes in its envi-
ronment (Allen et al., 2013; Hanseth & Braa, 2001). This
requires supervision of the standard itself and its technical
environment. Another aspect related to technical change
management is system up-to-dateness. Organizations need to
constantly challenge the task-technology fit of IT standards.
The literature on task-technology fit and technology accept-
ance suggests that task performance is influenced by the
degree to which technology appropriately meets the task’s
requirements and the user’s demands (Goodhue, 1995; Ven-
katesh & Davis, 2000; Zigurs & Buckland, 1998). We thus
posit:
DP4. Technical change resulting in the need for an update
of ICITS is anticipated and handled quickly.
Anticipating technical change and handling it quickly is
expected to reduce the response time for technical change
management. DP4 thereby aims at DG2 (increased organi-
zational flexibility). Furthermore, anticipating technical
change and handling it quickly presumably reduces the cost
and effort of technical change management. DP4 thus pro-
motes DG3 (enhanced IT manageability and controllability).
We therefore formulate the following testable propositions:
TP4a. Quickly anticipating and handling technical
change leads to higher organizational flexibility.
TP4b. Anticipating and handling technical change
improves IT manageability and controllability.
4.2.5 DP5.PushallRelevantInformationtotheUsers
An open communication culture in which knowledge is
made available to users has positive impacts on individual
productivity (Andres & Zmud, 2002, p. 62). Along simi-
lar lines, OCT stresses the role of culture for organizational
control systems (OCT construct Organizational Culture). As
our first round of interviews additionally revealed, “passive”
organizational communication mechanisms were perceived
as a major reason for insufficient knowledge on the user side.
Participants stated that they were often confronted with situ-
ations in which they had to take initiative (e.g., access the
newest manual) to get necessary information about IT stand-
ards rather than being provided with it in the first place. We
argue that organizations should reduce effort on the user side
and establish active (push-oriented) communication mech-
anisms. This concerns information about the introduction
of new standards, associated individual and organizational
benefits, aspects of usage, and areas of application. As our
design theory aims at medium to large-sized organizations,
we assume that intranet networks are already installed and
relatively stable, thereby serving as a foundation for sharing
knowledge through multiple channels such as email, bro-
chures, manuals, meetings, and workshops. We thus posit:
DP5. Those affected by an IT standard should be pro-
vided with all relevant information regarding its utiliza-
tion and benefits, so that users do not have to ask for
information first.

--- PAGE 10 ---
1170 InformationSystemsFrontiers(2023)25:1161–1178
1 3
Pushing all relevant standard information to the users is
expected to counteract faulty user behavior and, thereby, the
creation of unnecessary costs and deficient IT services. DP5
thus targets DG1 (IT cost reduction) and DG4 (improved
quality of IT services). Pushing all relevant information to
the users also presumably reduces the effort and resistance
on the user side, thus promoting DG3 (enhanced IT manage-
ability and controllability). We therefore posit the following
testable propositions:
TP5a. Pushing all relevant standard information to the
users reduces business costs.
TP5b. Pushing all relevant standard information to the
users improves IT manageability and controllability.
TP5c. Pushing all relevant standard information to the
users improves the quality of IT services.
4.2.6 DP6.IntegrateStandardManagementintoExisting
ProcessesandStructures
Implementing IT standard management as we propose in
this paper has interdependencies with existing business
operations (e.g. new process standards) and managerial
decision-making (e.g. which standards should be introduced
regarding which processes). OCT also suggests, that work-
ing control systems require a careful consideration of organi-
zational structure (OCT construct Organizational Structure).
Structural integration helps realizing additional coordina-
tion capacities in the context of high-level interdependency
between IT, business, and standard management (Puranam
et al., 2009). Process integration further enables an organiza-
tion to steer and coordinate activities across internal borders
(Rai et al., 2015). For instance, existing structures such as
IT executive meetings can be adjusted with relative ease by
including standards managers in order for IT management
decisions regarding standardization topics to not contradict
those of standard management (Dittes et al., 2014). We thus
posit:
DP6. Standard management is integrated into the organi-
zation to corroborate the significance of ICITS within the
organization and avoid contradictory decision-making.
Integrating standard management into existing processes
and structures is expected to improve standard decision-
making, procedural integrity, and structural integration. DP6
thus aims at DG3 (IT manageability and controllability), and
we formulate the following testable proposition:
TP6. Integrating standard management into existing
processes and structures improves IT manageability and
controllability.
4.2.7 DP7.EstablishaRoleConceptwithClear
Responsibilities
Approaching OCT from the perspective of organizational
roles, Collins (1982) argues that in order to achieve effective
social control, it is necessary to communicate and internalize
role expectations (OCT construct Organizational Structure).
Literature in this field further suggests that people identify
with the social norms and expectations associated with roles
and aim to satisfy these expectations (Biddle, 1986). Moreo-
ver, prescribed roles reinforce stability and predictability of
the organizational structure (Rogers, 1983, p. 349). Moreo-
ver, an effective implementation of a role concept improves
accountability, which plays a significant part in reducing
non-compliance to policies (Vance et al., 2013, 2015). We
therefore posit:
DP7. There is be a clear definition of all relevant roles in
the ICITS process.
Establishing a role concept with clear responsibilities is
expected to lead to better personal accountability and to help
employees understand their obligations. DP7 therefore aims
at DG3 (IT manageability and controllability). We thus posit
the following testable proposition:
TP7. Establishing a role concept with clear responsibili-
ties improves IT manageability and controllability.
4.2.8 DP8.MinimizetheNumberofComponentStandards
In our first round of interviews, it already became clear that
the sheer number of standards can become a significant
problem regarding the overall process of the implementation
of ICITS. Participants did not only emphasize the high num-
ber of standards they were confronted with, but also men-
tioned that they were sometimes “uncertain which compo-
nent standards work together.” While this issue is related to
DP5 (Push all relevant information to the users), the extent
of difficulties regarding unnecessary standard redundancy
merits its separate treatment. The participants further sug-
gested platform standardization as a potential solution for
these transparency issues. We therefore posit:
DP8. The number of standards for single, small compo-
nents is minimized. Platform standards covering a signifi-
cant functional range are used instead.
Minimizing the number of component standards is
expected to decrease redundancy caused by functionally
overlapping standards and to reduce the likelihood of dys-
functional integration of standards. DP8 therefore promotes

--- PAGE 11 ---
1171 InformationSystemsFrontiers(2023)25:1161–1178
1 3
DG1 (IT cost reduction). Minimizing the number of com-
ponent standards also presumably increases the procedural
transparency for users and improves the functional interac-
tion of standards. DP8 therefore also aims at DG4 (qual-
ity of IT services). We thus posit the following testable
propositions:
TP8a. Minimizing the number of component standards
reduces business costs.
TP8b. Minimizing the number of component standards
improves the quality of IT services.
Table 5 summarizes how the testable propositions link
design principles and design goals.
5 Evaluation
5.1 EvaluationResultsofDesignGoals
In general, the participants expressed strong agreement1
with
the design goals. This is reflected by average values (AVG)
of agreement with the design goals ranging from 4.29 to
4.86 on a scale from 1 (full disagreement) to 5 (full agree-
ment), and a maximum standard deviation (STD) of 0.95
as shown in Table 6. All participants noted that the current
design goals cover all relevant objectives of ICITS and no
participant named any additional ICITS goal not covered
by the current design. Most experts further emphasized
that the design goals strongly represent the practitioner’s
perspective.
With respect to DG1, it was confirmed that IT cost reduc-
tion is a major driving point for organizations to initiate
ICITS projects. The participants proposed increased hard-
and software homogeneity and realization of economies of
scale as the main reasons for this.
Participants further commented that the degree to which
ICITS reduce IT costs strongly depends on the current IT
management maturity and the ability to bundle know-how
on employees in ICITS steering positions, as hypothesized
above. DG2 has the lowest average value with 4.29 and
the highest standard deviation at 0.95. The interviewees
acknowledged that organizations aim to increase flexibility
through, e.g., simplified application landscapes, even though
this may come at the cost of individual flexibility. DG3 and
DG4 had the highest agreement throughout all interviews.
Table 6 summarizes the quantitative parts of the design
goals’ evaluation.
5.2 EvaluationResultsofDesignPrinciples
andtheirTestablePropositions
In this section, we first discuss the general feedback regard-
ing strengths and weaknesses of the current design and
examine the evaluation results for each design principle and
its testable propositions in detail.
Regarding the strengths of the current design, most
interviewees agreed that the current DPs are complete in
the sense that they provide guidance in all relevant areas
of ICITS. One participant commented that the DPs “have
a good level of granularity while still covering all rele-
vant aspects of [ICITS]”. A further strength identified by
the interviewees consists in the relevancy of each DP for
the ICITS process as well as the fact that the DPs guide
organizations in efficient steering and managing of ICITS
projects. Furthermore, there was a consensus that the DPs
are applicable to any organizational context as long as the
necessary decision-making and steering functions to get top
management support for ICITS are guaranteed and as long
as the specifics of an organization are not neglected during
Table5  Summary of testable propositions, design principles and
design goals
Testable
Proposition
Design
Principles
DG1 DG2 DG3 DG4
TP1a DP1 X
TP1b DP1 X
TP2 DP2 X
TP3a DP3 X
TP3b DP3 X
TP4a DP4 X
TP4b DP4 X
TP5a DP5 X
TP5b DP5 X
TP5c DP5 X
TP6 DP6 X
TP7 DP7 X
TP8a DP8 X
TP8b DP8 X
Table6  Design goals’ evaluation results
Design goal N AVG STD
DG1. Reduced IT costs 7 4.57 0.53
DG2. Increased organizational flexibility 7 4.29 0.95
DG3. Enhanced IT manageability and controllability 7 4.86 0.38
DG4. Improved quality of IT services 7 4.86 0.38
1
More specifically, we asked for the participants’ respective degree
of agreement with statements of the form “IT standardization aims
at…”.

--- PAGE 12 ---
1172 InformationSystemsFrontiers(2023)25:1161–1178
1 3
the implementation of the DPs. The clear structure of the
DPs was also positively noted.
None of the interviewees named any overall weaknesses
of the presented DPs. However, we noticed issues with the
wording of some DPs – in particular the term ‘dedicated’ for
DP1 as well as the lack of a clear reference to redundancy
in the title of DP7 caused confusion for some participants.
We also noticed an issue with the evaluation design. In par-
ticular, we used applicability and adequacy as a combined
criterion for evaluating each design principle. It seems that
these two constructs target different aspects as most partici-
pants answered the item ‘applicability and adequacy’ in two
separate parts. The first part referred to whether the design
principle can be applied in practice and the second part to
whether it accurately supports ICITS. The experts further
pointed out that our current design overlooks some inter-
dependencies between design principles and design goals,
which provides an interesting avenue for future research.
5.2.1 EvaluationResultsofDP1anditsTestable
Propositions
The experts generally agreed that DP1 is purposeful and
relevant (Avg: 4.71). They also agreed with it being appli-
cable and adequate for supporting ICITS (Avg: 4.71). One
participant pointed out that the applicability of DP1 depends
on an organization’s management capabilities and size.
This person suggested that while it makes sense to define
responsibilities for standard steering and monitoring in large
organizations, medium-sized organizations may choose to do
so by defining appropriate roles for employees rather than
establishing a dedicated institution.
This suggests that we may need to address differences
between medium and large organizations when defining
DP1. Two interviewees further expressed that there is a gen-
eral risk of overregulation. One of them said that “especially
in Germany there is a regulation frenzy” that needs to be
considered when organizations decide how to implement
DP1.
The evaluation of the testable propositions for DP1
affirmed their validity with an average rating of 4.29 to 4.43
and a maximum standard deviation of 0.76. Participants
agreed that dedicated steering and monitoring supports the
control of key standardization aspects and hence improves
IT manageability and controllability (TP1a). In particular,
experts from large organizations commonly described that
they already use dedicated standard steering and monitoring
(e.g. in the form of standard offices) and stated that it signifi-
cantly reduces ICITS management complexity. They further
validated that monitoring standard user behavior counter-
acts noncompliance and positively influences the quality of
IT services (TP1b). Most experts agreed that performance
indicators can be used to quickly evaluate key ICITS aspects.
One participant mentioned key performance indicators to
be a prerequisite for controlling the ICITS process. Another
participant pointed out that DP1 can lead to overall business
IT cost reduction if implemented thoroughly and efficiently.
5.2.2 EvaluationResultsofDP2anditsTestable
Propositions
All participants fully agreed that a standard lifecycle con-
cept is purposeful and relevant for successful ICITS. They
also generally confirmed the applicability and adequacy of
DP2 (Avg: 4.71). However, only few of the experts were
aware of a standard lifecycle in their organization. Instead,
they commonly referred to general patterns of the introduc-
tion and the use of IT standards in their companies. Most
of them argued that the IT standard lifecycle varies signifi-
cantly depending on its organizational purpose. Some par-
ticipants further stated that their organization follows ITIL
(Information Technology Infrastructure Library) definitions
and ISO norms rather than having an abstract lifecycle for
IT standards.
With reference to TP2, the average rating is 4.71 with a
standard deviation of 0.49. The experts acknowledge that
a standard lifecycle concept helps with the awareness of
phase-specific challenges as well as establishing standardi-
zation as an ongoing process, and thereby positively influ-
ences IT manageability and controllability. One participant
commented that understanding the lifecycle of an IT stand-
ard is a critical requirement for large scale ICITS. Three
participants further stated that DP2 allows for better plan-
ning of organizational resources.
5.2.3 EvaluationResultsofDP3anditsTestable
Propositions
One participant did not evaluate DP3 due to lacking experi-
ence with the management by objective (MBO) approach.
The remaining experts fully agreed with the purpose and
relevancy of DP3 and generally confirmed its applicabil-
ity and adequacy (Avg: 4.33). One expert expressed doubts
regarding the applicability of an incentive system with posi-
tive sanctions for standard compliance and hence gave lower
ratings for all items of DP3 and its testable propositions,
except purpose and relevancy.
With reference to the testable propositions, five partici-
pants confirmed the validity of TP3a stating that standard-
oriented MBO fosters the linkage of individual and organi-
zational goals (Avg: 4.00). They agreed that it leads to better
understanding of organizational ICITS goals and increasing
the motivation of employees to work towards them, thereby
positively influencing IT manageability and controllability.
They further confirmed that including employees and lower
management into the definition of ICITS objectives as well

--- PAGE 13 ---
1173 InformationSystemsFrontiers(2023)25:1161–1178
1 3
as introducing an incentive system counteracts employees’
deviant behavior towards IT standards and therefore posi-
tively affects the quality of IT services (TP3b). Two partici-
pants said that their organizations run mandatory enterprise-
wide application control.
5.2.4 EvaluationResultsofDP4anditsTestable
Propositions
Six of the seven interviewees fully agreed with the purpose
and relevancy (Avg: 4.86) as well as applicability and ade-
quacy (Avg: 4.57) of DP4. One participant criticized the
applicability of DP4 and described that most organizations
avoid change until no longer possible. While it may be true
that organizations avoid change, we believe this emphasizes
the purpose and relevancy of DP4 as it speaks to the exact
problem of organizations avoiding change rather than han-
dling it in a timely manner.
TP4b had the lowest rating of all testable propositions
(Avg: 3.70). As mentioned above, one participant fully disa-
greed with the need for organizations to welcome change,
arguing that in practice, organizations tend to preserve
systems that are deemed to work well. Another participant
stayed neutral towards TP4b as this person was not con-
vinced that the overall cost-savings of anticipating techni-
cal change outweigh the cost for establishing anticipatory
change management. The other five participants expressed
their approval of TP4b. TP4a, on the other hand, received
overall acceptance with an average of 4.57.
5.2.5 EvaluationResultsofDP5anditsTestable
Propositions
All experts considered DP5 to be purposeful and relevant for
ICITS and confirmed its applicability and adequacy (Avg:
4.71). They named communication as a major driver for pro-
cess transparency.
The interviewees regarded all three testable propositions
as valid. They agreed that organizations should provide their
employees with all relevant information regarding the use of
newITstandardsaswellastheirindividualandorganizational
benefits. They generally confirmed that this counteracts faulty
userbehavior,thusleadingtoreducedbusinessITcosts(TP5a)
and improved quality of IT services (TP5c). One participant
mentionedthatemployeesshouldreceiveregulartraining(e.g.
regular workshops) to prevent misuse of standards and user
frustration. The experts further agreed that DP5 reduces the
effort for obtaining necessary information on the user side
and counteracts resistance to standards, thereby supporting
IT manageability and controllability (TP5b). However, they
emphasized that organizations need to avoid flooding their
employees with irrelevant information when implementing
DP5. According to the participants, organizations need to
make use of efficient communication channels when provid-
ingemployeeswithinformationandavoidprovidingtoomuch
unnecessary information as standard resistance may increase
otherwise. All participants described that their organizations
communicate information about new IT standards but most
of them stated that there is no communication of the ben-
efits of standards. Additionally, they commented that infor-
mation about new IT standards is usually kept to basic user
instructions.
5.2.6 EvaluationResultsofDP6anditsTestable
Propositions
Allexpertsexpressedfullagreementwiththepurposeandrel-
evancyofDP6forsuccessfulICITS.Mostexpertspointedout
that (management) integration is a key topic of ICITS. There
was general consent that it is applicable and adequate for sup-
porting the ICITS process in organizations (Avg: 4.57). Most
participants acknowledged the integration of current business
and IT management with standard management as a manda-
tory precondition for ICITS.
They also validated that existing processes and structures
– such as executive meetings – should be complemented with
IT management mechanisms to avoid contradictory decision
making,ensuretheintegrityofIT(standard)relatedprocesses,
improvestructuralintegration,andtherebyultimatelyenhance
IT manageability and controllability (TP6). One participant
suggestedthatDP6alsopositivelyinfluencescostreductionas
integrated decision-making avoids faulty process design and
therefore prevents processes from failing.
5.2.7 EvaluationResultsofDP7anditsTestable
Propositions
The interviewees fully agreed with DP7 being purposeful
and relevant for ICITS. They also confirmed that a role con-
cept with clear responsibilities is applicable in practice and
supports organizational ICITS.
The experts validated that a role concept leads to bet-
ter personal accountability and helps employees understand
their obligation, thus improving IT manageability and con-
trollability (TP7). Most participants further agreed that roles
need to be clearly defined to keep the ICITS process trans-
parent. One participant commented that DP7 addresses the
quality of IT services (DG4), arguing that clear role defini-
tions lead to a higher compliance to IT standards as people
can be held accountable for their actions.
5.2.8 EvaluationResultsofDP8anditsTestable
Propositions
The experts fully confirmed the purpose and relevancy
of DP8. They generally agreed with its applicability and

--- PAGE 14 ---
1174 InformationSystemsFrontiers(2023)25:1161–1178
1 3
adequacy (Avg: 4.86). They stated that avoiding unneces-
sary redundancy is an important aspect of keeping ICITS
processes transparent for users. However, there seem to be
some issues with the exact phrasing of DP8, as most experts
initially misunderstood it and thought that it promotes a
reduction of ICITS rather than controlling unnecessary
redundancy.
With reference to TP8a, the participants agreed that by
minimizing small component standards and controlling
unnecessary standard redundancy, functional overlaps and
integration errors can be reduced, thus leading to reduced IT
costs. They also agreed that decreasing the number of com-
ponent standards increases process transparency for users,
improves the functional interaction of standards, and thereby
improves the quality of IT services (TP8b). The interviewees
pointed out that the successful implementation of DP8 criti-
cally depends on the maturity of the large standards replac-
ing old standards. One participant further mentioned that
DP8 enhances IT manageability and controllability (DG3)
as it reduces the complexity of the IT landscape. Another
participant suggested that by reducing the number of stand-
ards in an organization, standards can be replaced with less
effort and it becomes easier for employees to focus on cer-
tain standards. That person concluded that this leads to lower
reaction times for the ICITS support staff, thus increasing
organizational flexibility (DG2).
Table 7 summarizes the quantitative parts of the evalua-
tion of the design principles and their testable propositions.
6 Discussion and Conclusion
The aim of this paper was to develop a design theory for the
management and governance of organizational IT standards.
The theory is grounded on Organizational Control Theory,
additional relevant literature, as well as on an exploratory
Table7  Evaluation results for
the design principles and their
testable propositions
* One of the seven interviewees could not provide information regarding DP4 and the corresponding TPs
Design principles and their testable propositions N AVG STD
DP1. Steering and monitoring – Purpose and relevancy 7 4.71 0.49
DP1. Steering and monitoring – Applicability and adequacy 7 4.71 0.49
TP1a. Improved IT manageability and controllability 7 4.29 0.76
TP1b. Improved IT services quality 7 4.43 0.54
DP2. Lifecycle concept – Purpose and relevancy 7 5 0
DP2. Lifecycle concept – Applicability and adequacy 7 4.71 0.49
TP2. Improved IT manageability and controllability 7 4.71 0.49
DP3. Linking goals – Purpose and relevancy 6* 5 0
DP3. Linking goals – Applicability and adequacy 6 4.33 0.82
TP3a. Improved IT manageability and controllability 6 4 1.1
TP3b. Improved IT services quality 6 4.17 0.75
DP4. Anticipate and handle technical change – Purpose and relevancy 7 4.86 0.38
DP4. Anticipate and handle technical change – Applicability and adequacy 7 4.57 1.13
TP4a. Improved organizational flexibility 7 4.57 0.79
TP4b. Improved IT manageability and controllability 7 3.7 1.38
DP5. Push communication – Purpose and relevancy 7 5 0
DP5. Push communication – Applicability and adequacy 7 4.71 0.49
TP5a. Reduced IT costs 7 4.57 0.54
TP5b. Improved IT manageability and controllability 7 4.71 0.49
TP5c. Improved IT services quality 7 4.57 0.54
DP6. Integrate standard management – Purpose and relevancy 7 5 0
DP6. Integrate standard management – Applicability and adequacy 7 4.57 0.79
TP6. Improved IT manageability and controllability 7 4.86 0.38
DP7. Clear role concept – Purpose and relevancy 7 5 0
DP7. Clear role concept – Applicability and adequacy 7 4.86 0.38
TP7. Improved IT manageability and controllability 7 4.57 0.79
DP8. Minimize small component standards – Purpose and relevancy 7 4.86 0.38
DP8. Minimize small component standards – Applicability and adequacy 7 4.14 1.22
TP8a. Reduced IT costs 7 4.86 0.38
TP8b. Improved IT services quality 7 4.86 0.38

--- PAGE 15 ---
1175 InformationSystemsFrontiers(2023)25:1161–1178
1 3
and a confirmatory interview study. Based on our qualita-
tive exploratory study at a large automotive manufacturing
organization, we posited four design goals indicating that
IT standardization should be managed so as to lower busi-
ness costs, increase organizational flexibility, enhance IT
manageability and controllability, and improve the quality
of IT processes and services. Based on these goals and an
analysis of relevant literature, we developed eight design
principles with corresponding testable propositions that
can be applied in practice in order to manage organizational
IT standardization. Finally, the resulting design theory was
evaluated through a quantitative and qualitative interviews
study involving subject-matter experts from different com-
panies and industries.
Our research contributes to theory as well as practice: To
the best of our knowledge, our work is the first design theory
to provide a detailed, holistic management framework for
organizational IT standardization. While previous studies
about the management of IT standardization mostly concern
non-organizational, industry-related standards set by higher
authorities, investigations of in-company IT standards are
fragmented and do not provide a holistic set of managerial
recommendations. Furthermore, existing recommendations
regarding ICITS mostly lack any theoretical underpinnings.
Our theory, in contrast, showcases the adaptability of OCT
in the context of ICITS, thus adding to the theory’s valid-
ity and generalizability. The holistic nature of our theory,
its empirical foundations, and its theoretical underpinnings
together form a valuable contribution to the existing body of
theoretical knowledge on the management of ICITS.
Further, we provide hands-on management mechanisms
to guide future standardization endeavors in practice. Apply-
ing our design principles in practice, organizations can bet-
ter understand IT standardization, minimize deviant behav-
ior towards organizational IT standards and thus decrease
costs, enhance flexibility, ensure manageability and improve
the service quality of the organizational IT. However, our
research also revealed that companies should not blindly fol-
low and implement these principles. Instead, the proper way
of applying our theory to specific organizations varies with
several factors, including the following: size of the organiza-
tion, organizational IT maturity, degree of IT standardiza-
tion, and organizational attitude towards change. In what
follows, we will address the role of each of these factors.
First, while our theory only addresses medium to large
sized companies, there may still be significant implemen-
tation differences between medium and large companies.
For instance, it may not be necessary for medium-sized
companies to introduce an incentive system if the organi-
zation size allows for relatively easy control of standard
compliance. On the other hand, an incentive system might
be necessary for controlling standard compliance in large
companies. The responsible authorities in large companies
may, for instance, consider regular application scans in
order to guarantee adherence to IT standards. Furthermore,
it may be efficient for large companies to employ members
who are fully dedicated to steering and monitoring stand-
ards, while medium-sized companies may assign these
responsibilities to existing roles.
A second factor we anticipate affecting our theory’s
implementation is organizational IT maturity. We expect
organizations with high IT maturity (e.g., high expertise
in IT governance, high level of IT integration, experience
with ICITS) to already use some of our design princi-
ples and also to have processes as well as structures in
place that facilitate the implementation of the other design
principles. We assume this is particularly likely for DP1
(steering and monitoring), DP2 (lifecycle concept), DP4
(technical change standard change management), and DP7
(clear role concept).
Third, we hypothesize that the degree of organizational
IT standardization influences the ease of implementation
as well as the acceptance of the design principles. In par-
ticular, organizations with a high degree of standard diffu-
sion are likely to already use some of our design principles
in practice and implement further ones more efficiently.
Additionally, we suspect acceptance of standards and
corresponding management processes to be higher since
employees are already used to IT standards and recognize
their importance.
Finally, we consider an organization’s attitude towards
change as a fourth factor influencing the ease of imple-
menting the principles. That is, we expect organizations
that promote organizational change and motivate employ-
ees to give them feedback about current management prac-
tices to experience less resistance to ICITS.
Our research underlies certain limitations. Since the
evaluation of our design theory is still in an early phase, we
were not yet able to observe all our current design princi-
ples fully applied in practice, as recommended by Gregor
and Jones (2007). Additionally, we are not yet in a position
to confidently attribute individual weights concerning the
importance of each design principle. Accordingly, we plan
to further evaluate our theory by developing a measurement
model and conducting a study using quantitative methods in
order to determine the importance of each design principle
for organizational IT standardization. Another avenue for
future research that we are currently planning to pursue con-
cerns an empirical investigation of interdependencies both
among the design goals and among the design principles.
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt
DEAL.

--- PAGE 16 ---
1176 InformationSystemsFrontiers(2023)25:1161–1178
1 3
Declarations
Conflict of Interest All authors declare that they have no conflicts of
interest.
OpenAccess This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in
the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a
copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.
References
Allen, D. K., Brown, A., Karanasios, S., & Norman, A. (2013).
How should technology-mediated organizational change be
explained? A comparison of the contributions of critical real-
ism and activity theory. MIS Quarterly, 37(3), 835–854.
Andres, H. P., & Zmud, R. W. (2002). A contingency approach to
software project coordination. Journal of Management Informa-
tion Systems, 18(3), 41–70. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​07421​222.​
2002.​11045​695
Backhouse, J., Hsu, C. W., & Silva, L. (2006). Circuits of power in
creating de jure standards: Shaping an international information
systems security standard. MIS Quarterly, 30(Special Issue),
413–438.
Barnard, C. I. (1968). The Functions of the Executive. Harvard Uni-
versity Press.
Bell, M. L. (1980). Management by objectives. Journal of Nursing
Administration, 10(5), 19–26.
Biddle, B. J. (1986). Recent development in role theory. Annual
Review of Sociology, 12, 67–92.
Bird, G. B. (1998). The business benefit of standards. StandardView,
6(2), 76–80. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​301688.​301691
Boh, W. F., & Yellin, D. (2006). Using enterprise architecture stand-
ards in managing information technology. Journal of Manage-
ment Information Systems, 23(3), 163–207. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
2753/​MIS07​42-​12222​30307
Cardinal, L. B., Sitkin, S. B., & Long, C. P. (2004). Balancing and
rebalancing in the creation and evolution of organizational con-
trol. Organization Science, 15(4), 411–431. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1287/​orsc.​1040.​0084
Choi, B., Raghu, T. S., Vinzé, A., & Dooley, K. J. (2019). Effec-
tiveness of standards consortia: Social network perspectives.
Information Systems Frontiers, 21, 405–416. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1007/​s10796-​017-​9759-x
Chua, C., Storey, V., & Chen, L. (2014). Central IT or Shadow IT?
Factors Shaping Users’ Decision to Go Rogue With IT. ICIS
2014 Proceedings, 1–14. https://​aisel.​aisnet.​org/​icis2​014/​proce​
edings/​ISGov​ernan​ce/2. Accessed 18 Apr 2022.
Collins, F. (1982). Managerial accounting systems and organiza-
tional control: A role perspective. Accounting, Organizations
and Society, 7(2), 107–122. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​0361-​
3682(82)​90015-0
Curran, C. (2010, May 6). CIO Dashboard » Governance, Analytics
and Standards. http://​www.​cioda​shboa​rd.​com/​it-​strat​egy/​analy​
tics-​gover​nance-​stand​ards/. Accessed 18 Apr 2022.
de De Vries, H. J., Slob, F. J. C., & Zuid-Holland, V. G. (2006).
Best Practice in company standardization. International Journal
of IT Standards and Standardization Research (IJITSR), 4(1),
62–85. https://​doi.​org/​10.​4018/​jitsr.​20060​10104
De Vries, H. J. (1999). Standardization: A Business Approach to
the Role of National Standardization Organizations. Kluwer
Academic Publishers.
Dittes, S., Urbach, N., & Ahlemann, F. (2014). IT-Standardis-
ierung—Vom Lippenbekenntnis zu nachhaltigem Nutzen.
Wirtschaftsinformatik & Management, 6(4), 29–39. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1365/​s35764-​014-​0440-6
Dittes, S., Urbach, N., Ahlemann, F., Smolnik, S., & Müller, T.
(2015). Why don’t you stick to them? Understanding factors
influencing and counter-measures to combat deviant behavior
towards organizational IT standards. Proceedings of the 12th
International Conference on Wirtschaftsinformatik (WI), Osna-
brück, Germany, 615–629.
Emmerich, W., Finkelstein, A., Montangero, C., Antonelli, S., Armit-
age, S., & Stevens, R. (1999). Managing standards compliance.
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 25(6), 836–851.
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​32.​824413
Flamholtz, E. G. (1983). Accounting, budgeting and control sys-
tems in their organizational context: Theoretical and empiri-
cal perspectives. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 8(2),
153–169.
Flamholtz, E. G., Das, T. K., & Tsui, A. S. (1985). Toward an
integrative framework of organizational control. Accounting,
Organizations and Society, 10(1), 35–50. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1016/​0361-​3682(85)​90030-3
Foorthuis, R., van Steenbergen, M., Brinkkemper, S., & Bruls, W. A.
G. (2016). A theory building study of enterprise architecture prac-
tices and benefits. Information Systems Frontiers, 18, 541–564.
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10796-​014-​9542-1
Goodhue, D. L. (1995). Understanding User Evaluations of Information
Systems. Management Science, 41(12), 1827–1844.
Gregor, S., & Jones, D. (2007). The anatomy of a design theory. Jour-
nal of the Association for Information Systems, 8(5), 313–335.
Hanseth, O., & Braa, K. (2001). Hunting for the treasure at the end of
the rainbow: Standardizing corporate IT infrastructure. Computer
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW), 10(3–4), 261–292. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1023/A:​10126​37309​336
Herath, T., & Rao, H. R. (2009). Protection motivation and deter-
rence: A framework for security policy compliance in organisa-
tions. European Journal of Information Systems, 18(2), 106–125.
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1057/​ejis.​2009.6
Hesser, W., & Inklaar, A. (1998). An Introduction to Standards and
Standardization (2nd ed.). Beuth.
Jun, M., & Cai, S. (2003). Key obstacles to EDI success: From the US
small manufacturing companies’ perspective. Industrial Manage-
ment & Data Systems, 103(3), 192–203. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1108/​
02635​57031​04656​70
Kirsch, L. J. (1996). The management of complex tasks in organiza-
tions: Controlling the systems development process. Organization
Science, 7(1), 1–21.
Kirsch, L. J. (2004). Deploying common systems globally: The dynam-
ics of control. Information Systems Research, 15(4), 374–395.
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1287/​isre.​1040.​0036
Kondo, Y. (2000). Innovation versus standardization. The TQM Maga-
zine, 12(1), 6–10. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1108/​09544​78001​02871​77
Liang, H., Xue, Y., & Wu, L. (2012). Ensuring employees’ IT com-
pliance: Carrot or stick? Information Systems Research, 24(2),
279–294. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1287/​isre.​1120.​0427
Müller, T., Dittes, S., Ahlemann, F., Urbach, N., & Smolnik, S. (2015,
January). Because Everybody is Different: Towards Understand-
ing the Acceptance of Organizational IT Standards. Proceedings
of the 48th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences.

--- PAGE 17 ---
1177 InformationSystemsFrontiers(2023)25:1161–1178
1 3
Münstermann, B., Eckhardt, A., & Weitzel, T. (2010). The performance
impact of business process standardization: An empirical evalu-
ation of the recruitment process. Business Process Management
Journal, 16(1), 29–56. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1108/​14637​15101​10179​
30
Ngai, E. W. T., Poon, J. K. L., Suk, F. F. C., & Ng, C. C. (2009). Design
of an RFID-based Healthcare Management System using an Infor-
mation System Design Theory. Information Systems Frontiers, 11,
405–417. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10796-​009-​9154-3
Ouchi, W. G. (1978). The transmission of control through organiza-
tional hierarchy. Academy of Management Journal, 21(2), 173–
192. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2307/​255753
Ouchi, W. G. (1979). A conceptual framework for the design of
organizational control mechanisms. Management Science, 25(9),
833–848.
Ouchi, W. G. (1980). Markets, bureaucracies, and clans. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 25(1), 129–141.
Puranam, P., Singh, H., & Chaudhuri, S. (2009). Integrating acquired
capabilities: When structural integration is (un)necessary. Organi-
zation Science, 20(2), 313–328. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1287/​orsc.​1090.​
0422
Rai, A., Arikan, I., Pye, J., & Tiwana, A. (2015). Fit and misfit of plural
sourcing strategies and IT-enabled process integration capabili-
ties: Consequences of firm performance in the US electric utility
Industry. Mis Quarterly, 39(4), 865–885.
Rogers, E. M. (1983). Diffusion of Innovations (3rd ed.). The Free
Press.
Russo, N. L., Hightower, R., & Pearson, J. M. (1996). The Failure of
Methodologies to Meet the Needs of Current Development Envi-
ronments. Proceedings of the British Computer Society’s Annual
Conference on Information System Methodologies, 387–393.
Scantlebury, S., Thiel, W., Datel, A., & Kimmel, S. (2004). From IT
Complexity to Commonality: Making Your Business More Nim-
ble (Opportunities for Action in Information Technology). Boston
Consulting Group.
Schmidt, S. K., & Werle, R. (1998). Coordinating Technology: Stud-
ies in the International Standardization of Telecommunications.
MIT Press.
Shetty, Y. K., & Carlisle, H. M. (1974). Organizational correlates of a
management by objectives program. The Academy of Management
Journal, 17(1), 155–160. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2307/​254780
Silic, M. (2015). Emerging from the Shadows: Survey Evidence of
Shadow IT Use from Blissfully Ignorant Employees (SSRN Schol-
arly Paper ID 2633000). Social Science Research Network. https://​
papers.​ssrn.​com/​abstr​act=​26330​00. Accessed 18 Apr 2022.
Thiel, W., Datel, A., Scantlebury, S., & Kimmel, S. (2004, May). From
IT Complexity to Commonality. Bcg.Perspectives. https://​www.​
bcgpe​rspec​tives.​com/​conte​nt/​artic​les/​infor​mation_​techn​ology_​it_​
organ​izati​on_​from_​it_​compl​exity_​to_​commo​nality/. Accessed 18
Apr 2022.
Tiwana, A. (2010). Systems development ambidexterity: Explaining
the complementary and substitutive roles of formal and informal
controls. Journal of Management Information Systems, 27(2),
87–126. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2753/​MIS07​42-​12222​70203
Tiwana, A., & Konsynski, B. (2010). Complementarities between
organizational IT architecture and governance structure. Informa-
tion Systems Research, 21(2), 288–304. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1287/​
isre.​1080.​0206
Turner, K. L., & Makhija, M. V. (2006). The role of organizational con-
trols in managing knowledge. Academy of Management Review,
31(1), 197–217. https://​doi.​org/​10.​5465/​AMR.​2006.​19379​631
van Wessel, R. (2010). Toward corporate IT standardization manage-
ment: Frameworks and solutions. Information Science Reference.
van Wessel, R., Ribbers, P., & Vries, H. de. (2005). On the effects of
IS company standards on business process performance. The 4th
Conference on Standardization and Innovation in Information
Technology, 2005., 254–267. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​SIIT.​2005.​
15638​13.
Vance, A., Lowry, P. B., & Eggett, D. (2013). Using accountability to
reduce access policy violations in information systems. Journal
of Management Information Systems, 29(4), 263–290. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​2753/​MIS07​42-​12222​90410
Vance, A., Lowry, P. B., & Eggett, D. (2015). Increasing account-
ability through user-interface design artifacts: A new approach to
addressing the problem of access-policy violations. MIS Quar-
terly, 39(2), 345–366.
Venkatesh, V., & Davis, F. D. (2000). A theoretical extension of the
technology acceptance model: Four longitudinal field studies.
Management Science, 46(2), 186. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1287/​mnsc.​
46.2.​186.​11926. Accessed 18 Apr 2022.
Verburg, R. M., Nienaber, A.-M., Searle, R. H., Weibel, A., Den Har-
tog, D. N., & Rupp, D. E. (2018). The role of organizational con-
trol systems in employees’ organizational trust and performance
outcomes. Group & Organization Management, 43(2), 179–206.
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​10596​01117​725191
Walls, J. G., Widmeyer, G. R., & El Sawy, O. A. (1992). Building an
information system design theory for vigilant EIS. Information
Systems Research, 3(1), 36–59. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1287/​isre.3.​1.​36
Weitzel, T. (2003). A Network ROI. Proceedings of the 2003 MISQ
Academic Workshop on ICT Standardization (Pre-ICIS Work-
shop), Seattle (WA), 62–79.
Weston, C., Gandell, T., Beauchamp, J., McAlpine, L., Wiseman, C.,
& Beauchamp, C. (2001). Analyzing interview data: The devel-
opment and evolution of a coding system. Qualitative Sociology,
24(3), 381–400.
Wüllenweber, K., Beimborn, D., Weitzel, T., & König, W. (2008). The
impact of process standardization on business process outsourcing
success. Information Systems Frontiers, 10, 211–224. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1007/​s10796-​008-​9063-x
Zhu, H., & Fu, L. (2009). Quality of Data Standards: Empirical Find-
ings from XBRL (SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 1556678). Social Sci-
ence Research Network. https://​papers.​ssrn.​com/​abstr​act=​15566​
78. Accessed 18 Apr 2022.
Zigurs, I., & Buckland, B. K. (1998). A theory of task/technology fit
and group support systems effectiveness. MIS Quarterly, 22(3),
313–334.
Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
FrederikAhlemann holds the chair for Information Systems and Stra-
tegic IT Management at the University of Duisburg- Essen, Germany.
He obtained his doctorate from the University of Osnabrück in 2006.
He subsequently joined the European Business School, Germany as
an Assistant Professor where he headed a competence center for stra-
tegic IT/IS management. In 2012 he was appointed full professor at
the University of Duisburg-Essen. Prof. Ahlemann’s research interests
are digital transformation, digital business models, project portfolio
management, enterprise architecture management, and Smart Cities.
SvenDittes is a researcher at the University of Hagen and management
consultant. His research interests lie in the areas of (digital) strategy,
digital work, adoption, IS success and change management.
TimFillbrunn works as a Solution Architect at the Mercedes Benz AG
in Germany, Duesseldorf. He started working at his current position
after finishing his Master’s Degree in Business Information Systems
at the University of Duisburg-Essen.

--- PAGE 18 ---
1178 InformationSystemsFrontiers(2023)25:1161–1178
1 3
Kevin Rehring is Acting Chief Information Security Officer (CISO)
& Enterprise Architect at DVV - Duisburger Versorgungs- und
Verkehrsgesellschaft mbH. He obtained his doctorate from the Uni-
versity of Duisburg-Essen, Germany in 2021, where he did research in
the area of enterprise architecture management and augmented reality
as well as smart city and IoT.
Stefan Reining is a full-stack developer at FUNKE Mediengruppe
GmbH & Co. KGaA. He obtained his Ph.D. degree in Analytic Phi-
losophy at the University of Barcelona, Spain, in 2014 and worked as
a research asscociate at the chair of Information Systems and Strategic
IT Management at the University of Duisburg-Essen, Germany, until
2021.
NilsUrbach is Professor of Information Systems, Digital Business and
Mobility as well Director of the Research Lab for Digital Innovation
& Transformation (ditlab) at the Frankfurt University of Applied Sci-
ences. Furthermore, he is Deputy Director of the Finance & Informa-
tion Management (FIM) Research Center and the Project Group Busi-
ness & Information Systems Engineering of the Fraunhofer Institute
for Applied Information Technology FIT as well as Co-Founder and
Director of the Fraunhofer Blockchain Lab.