--- PAGE 1 ---
A Measurement Instrument for Enterprise Architecture Resilience Research:
A Pilot Study on Digital Transformation
Adina Aldea
University of Twente
a.i.aldea@utwente.nl
Amitrajit Sarkar
Ara Institute of Canterbury
Amit.Sarkar@ara.ac.nz
Abstract
Enterprise Architecture can contribute positively to
enterprise resilience. In this connected dynamic world
Enterprise Architecture Resilience is an emergent area
of Information Systems research that is characterized
through an abundance of conceptual work with little
empirical research. To fill this gap, this paper reports
on the development and validation of an instrument to
measure various resilience attributes and barriers in
context to digital transformation in organizations. We
advance an extended model for a multi-stage
measurement instrument development procedure, which
incorporates feedback from both academics and
practitioners. We identify two main contributions: First,
we provide a validated measurement instrument for the
study of Enterprise Architecture Resilience factors in
context to digital transformation in organizations,
which can be used to assist in further empirical studies
that investigate phenomena associated with the
enterprise architecture domain. Second, in doing so, we
describe in detail a procedural model for developing
measurement instruments that ensure high levels of
reliability and validity, which may assist fellow scholars
in executing their empirical research.
1. Introduction
In uncertain, turbulent, dynamic, continuously
evolving environments only adaptable, agile, and
relentlessly dynamic organizations will survive and
forge ahead. In this digital era, organizations are
increasingly dependent on Information Systems (IS) for
both innovation and operations. Organizations of any
typeandsizeincreasinglyrelyoncomplexISanddigital
platforms to manage their businesses, which require IS
to operate dependably under a range of adverse
circumstances. Previous research has addressed
business continuity planning, contingency planning,
emergency planning, disaster recovery, and other
pertinent issues. Organizational research has included
all of these issues in the concept of organizational
resilience, which is commonly defined as the
organization's ability to operate reliably under a range
of adverse circumstances, but the concept of IS
resilience has yet to be developed [1].
The resource-based view of firms describes a firm as
a specific collection of resources and capabilities that
can be deployed to achieve a competitive advantage.
Firm resources are defined as all tangible and intangible
assets and capabilities belonging to or controlled by a
firm that can be used to implement competitive
strategies [2]. Firm-specific resources and capabilities
must be protected and made difficult to transfer, imitate,
or replicate [3]. Therefore, by protecting their valuable
resources against imitation or substitution, firms can
sustain existing advantages. RBV in dynamic
environments where rapid and sudden changes are
common. To address this issue, the dynamic capability
emerged to explain how firms react, adapt, and respond
to changes in volatile environments. The dynamic
capability perspective suggests that new forms of
competitive advantage are achieved by creating new
resources to achieve congruence with the changing
environment and emphasizes understanding how
organizations develop new resources and capabilities to
support business strategy in rapidly changing
environments [2].
In recent times, the COVID-19 pandemic has been
spreading globally and has affected numerous countries,
societies, and organizations. As of April 2021, the virus
had already caused more than 2.5 million deaths
worldwide. However, the impact of the pandemic
extended beyond the health status of the population and
damaged economic development as well. The effects of
the pandemic ranged from delivery bottlenecks by
suppliers to the partial stoppage of the company's
production facilities. To counteract such risks, research
in the areas of disaster preparedness and recovery, as
well as business continuity management, has been
conducted for years. The findings from these areas are
intended to provide solution approaches with which a
company can prepare itself for crises and, if the scenario
occurs, can survive them.
Proceedings of the 55th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences | 2022
Page 7182
URI: https://hdl.handle.net/10125/80205
978-0-9981331-5-7
(CC BY-NC-ND 4.0)

--- PAGE 2 ---
One of the aspects that the COVID-19 pandemic has
highlighted over the past few months, is that there is a
strong need for enterprise-wide resilience. With the
awareness and better understanding of cloud platforms,
it is forecasted that implementation of cloud solutions
will increase significantly, and the next wave of digital
transformation is at doorstep. This transformation can
be designed using Enterprise Architecture (EA).
Specifically, the ability of organizations to design
resilient EAs and to assess EA resilience is becoming
increasingly critical for dealing with uncertainty.
However, even though the concept of resilience is
widely studied since the seventies, little research and
literature is available about EA resilience and its
implications; little is known about the possible
approaches that organizations and EA practitioners can
consider to EA resilience and its related design,
measurement, and control. In turn, there is a need to
have abetter understandingofpublishedresearch on EA
resilience to incentivize further discussion. Also, it is
critical to identify the success factors and the barriers of
EA resilience and to create an instrument that can
measure the level and maturity of EA resilience in
context to the digital transformation in organizations.
This research paper responds to this need. To our best
knowledge, at this point in time, no instrument has been
developed nor empirically tested relating to EA
resilience [4].
The goal of this paper is to explore and potentially
overcome the identified research gap in Enterprise
Architecture (EA) literature regarding Resilience
preparedness in the case of Digital transformations.
Thus, to help achieve this goal, we have formulated the
following research question:
Which factors are relevant for Enterprise
Architecture Resilience preparedness for Digital
transformation in organizations?
By answering this research question, we aim to
provide useful insights for decision-making to both EA
practitioners and the top management team within an
organization. More specifically, in this paper, we aim to
design an instrument to:
• Provide an indication of resilience priorities for
Enterprise Architecture design.
• Provide a validated set of generic EA Resilience
factors for Digital transformations.
• Confirm the extent to which EA Resilience
preparedness for Digital transformation is
considered necessary.
This paper is structured as follows. Section 2
presents the theoretical framework and conceptual that
is used as a basis for designing our survey questionnaire
instrument, which is described in Section 3. In Section
4, we introduce the results of our pilot study and in
explain how this has led to changes in the questionnaire.
The paper concludes in Section 5 with a discussion on
the contributions of our work, the limitations and future
work.
2. Theoretical framework
2.1. IT Governance
IT governance, the term defined as “specifying the
decision rights and accountability framework to
encourage desirable behavior in the use of IT” [5],
constitutes the most universal and systematic approach
to solve the problems connected with supporting the
business with IT in the organizational context.
According to Weill and Ross [5], IT governance
encompasses five major decision domains:
• IT principles comprise the high-level decisions
about the strategic role of IT in the business.
• IT architecture includes an integrated set of
technical choices to guide the organization in
satisfying business needs.
• IT infrastructure consists of the centrally
coordinated, shared IT services that provide the
foundation for the enterprise’s IT capability and
were typically created before precise usage needs
were known.
• Business application needs are the business
requirements for purchased or internally developed
IT applications.
• Prioritization and investment decisions determine
how much and where to invest in IT.
When defining these five decision domains for IT,
Weill and Ross [5] are mostly focusing on aspects of
Information Systems (IS) and how they relate to the
business aspects of an organization.
When relating these five decision domains to the
topic of our research, we can argue that all of them are
covered to some degree. First, resilience can be
considered a principle that guides the decisions of an
organization. Enterprise resilience can help
organizations with managing unexpected events by
identifying vulnerabilities, having the ability to change
and adapt, and recovering quickly from unexpected
events [6]. Second, EA is a discipline that focuses on the
holistic management of the enterprise, based on the
elements from its architecture (e.g.: business processes,
applications, information, hardware, etc.) as well as the
relations between them [7]. Thus, it covers the
management, design and implementation of and
architecture and its corresponding elements.
Furthermore, EA is identified to improve the Business
and IT alignment in an organization [8], which implies
that business needs are considered when designing the
Page 7183

--- PAGE 3 ---
EA. Finally, in the past few decades, many of the
investment organizations have made can be related to
their Digital transformation initiatives [9]. This effect
hasalsobeenamplifiedduetotheCOVID-19pandemic,
where many organizations had to invest in and
implement digital solutions to deal with the impact of
the pandemic [10]. Thus, Digital transformation can be
seen as one of the drivers for investment in IT.
Another description by De Haes and Van
Gembergen [11] describes IT Governance as “the
organizational capacity … to control the formulation
and implementation of IT strategy”. Executed by
various administrative bodies, the aim is to merge the
demands and objectives of thebusiness with those of the
IT unit. This interpretation overlaps with the following
definition describing IT Governance as the interplay of
management, organizational structures, and processes
through which business intentions can be carried out
without simultaneously neglecting IT [11]. This study
takes the essence of both definitions and emphasizes the
“alignment of business and IT, and the primary
responsibility of the board and senior management.
IT governance can be deployed using a mixture of
various structures, processes, and relational
mechanisms.IT governance structures include
organizational units and their roles and responsibilities
formakingITdecisions.Anexampleofthesestructures,
processes and relational mechanisms are provided in
Figure 1.
Figure 1. IT Governance Framework
In this research the focus is on to develop an
instrument to identify who, what and how decisions are
prioritized to ensure EA resilience, this will be an
important contribution of this research.
2.2. Resilience
The concept of resilience has been a prominent and
emerging topic in various scientific fields. However, as
resilience research encompasses a wide range of
disciplines (e.g.: ecology, psychology, engineering,
organization management, etc.), as well as different
research contexts and topics, it is not surprising that the
concept lacks an accepted common definition across
disciplines [12].
The first definition of resilience was introduced by
Holling [13] in his work on stability and resilience in
ecological systems. Here, resilience is defined as the
capacity of a system to adapt to change and deal with
surprise while retaining the system’s basic function
[13].
The earliest research on organizational resilience
describesresilienceasapurelydefensivereaction,while
a change of understanding has taken place, resulting in
concentrating on adaptation and anticipation [14-16].
The aspect of moving forward and expanding
business actions during uncertain events also
distinguishes a resilient firm from a robust organization
[16]. However, resilience and robustness are
intermediate stages on the way to develop from a fragile
organization to an antifragile, with antifragile
enveloping the state of resilience and the skill to prosper
during disturbances [17].
Scholars describe the coupling of capabilities,
resources, characteristics, and abilities of an
organization [17] as key steps for becoming resilient.
Duchek [16] divides organizational resilience into the
three stages of anticipation, coping, and adoption, for
the time intervals before, during, and after an event. The
importance of capabilities and their anchoring in the
social context is emphasized as the main drivers during
the coping stage.
Denyer [15] describes the level of resilience as
mainly influenced by the behaviors and actions during
the stages of preventative control, mindful action,
performance optimization, and adaptive innovation. For
mature resilience, one must balance resources,
objectives, actions, and desires among these stages.
For our research, we focus on defining and
understanding resilience from the perspective of two
interrelated domains. Namely, IS resilience, which has
been studied for the past decade, and EA resilience
whichhasonlyrecentlybeeninvestigatedbyacademics.
2.3. IS Resilience
According to Sarkar et al. [18], a clear interpretation
of IS resilience was nonexistent at the time of their
research. Therefore, they defined IS resilience as
follows:
IS resilience is a function of an organization’s
overall situation awareness related to Information
Systems, management of Information Systems
vulnerabilities, and adaptive capacity, risk intelligence,
flexibility, and agility of Information Systems in a
complex, dynamic, and interconnected environment.
Accordingto thisdefinition,ISresilience is based on
six attributes – situation awareness, management of
Page 7184

--- PAGE 4 ---
vulnerabilities, adaptive capacity, risk intelligence,
flexibility, and agility [18]. The attributes adaptive
capacity, risk intelligence, flexibility, and agility
suggest that IS resilience also addresses initiative-taking
measures to adapt and improve IS. Therefore, the
robustness of the system is not the sole focus point, but
an intermediate. This proactive tone also characterizes
organizational resilience, which shows that IS resilience
is a subarea of organizational resilience. These terms are
defined in Table 1.
Another perspective on IS resilience is provided by
Aldea et al. [4]. The authors perform a systematic
literature review where they investigate available
research to determine the state-of-the-art on several
aspects, including thecharacteristics of IS resilience and
the strategies for IS resilience.
Aldea et al. [4] present a list of IS resilience
characteristics gathered from multiple papers that
expands on the attributes provided by Sarkar et al. [18].
Namely, the following characteristics are mentioned:
diversity, efficiency, adaptability, cohesion, self-
organization, robustness, learning, redundancy,
rapidity, flexibility, equality, agility, vulnerability to
risk, responsiveness.
Following the classification by Ramezani and
Camarinha-Matos [19], the authors identify 33
resilience strategies that organizations can use. The
strategies are classified based on three phases of
resilience, namely Readiness (preparation for
disturbances), Responsiveness (once the disruption has
occurred), Recovery (after the disruption has ended).
Some of the strategies mentioned range from creating a
disruption management culture, forecasting and risk
assessment (Readiness), to acceptance of the
consequences, revision of the systems and
postponement of decision-making (Responsiveness), to
collaboration with all stakeholders, knowledge
management and sense-making (Recovery).
2.4. EA Resilience
To the best of our knowledge, Aldea et al. [4] were
the first to coin the term EA resilience and to provide a
definition for it, namely:
EA resilience is the ability of an organization to
identify and assess the vulnerabilities of enterprise
resources in its integrated architecture and prepare for
disruptions, by designing specific measures in an EA to
increase its capabilities to adapt to new or changing
circumstances and restore full capability after an
unexpected disruption.
Bemthuis et al. [20], present another view on EA
resilience by studying it from the perspective of cyber-
physical systems of systems and emergent behaviors.
Additionally, the authors coin the term Enterprise
resilience as a type of resilience that can be facilitated
by designing EA models.
The idea of resilience by design is relatively new
and it originates from the field of civil engineering.
After the disaster brought on by Hurricane Sandy, the
US Department of Housing and Urban Development
proposed a new way to address the structural and
environmental vulnerabilities exposed by the hurricane
and to develop solutions that could provide better
protection from natural events [21]. Thus, according to
Linkov et al. [22], the resilience by design paradigm
defines that a system must be designed to recover its
functions from disruption on its own or else the system
will fail. In terms of EA, this would translate to the idea
that the EA of an organization must be designed with
resilience in mind.
Regarding the attributes and strategies for EA
resilience, Aldea et al. [4] argue that all of the ones
identified for IS resilience might be suitable for EA as
well. However, the authors only theorize this and do not
provide any validation of their assumption. In our
current paper, we aim to address this issue by designing
a survey questionnaire that includes several items
regarding the suitabilityofthese attributes andstrategies
for EA resilience.
To study the value-generating mechanisms of EA
resilience, we use the resource-based view (RBV) as a
theoretical lens. The RBV has been applied successfully
to explain how value is generated through the use and
management of IT. In this study, we opt for an in-depth
literaturereview,whichextendsthesystematicliterature
review by Aldea et al. [4], to develop an instrument to
investigate the resources and capabilities developed
with EA Governance and analyze how they improve
existing IS capabilities.
It will be most useful for the present investigation to
focus on the basic kinds of resources that are most
relevant in the context of EA Resilience: (1) human
beings taking over EA roles, (2) the technological assets
used for documenting and analyzing a firm’s EA, and
(3) the standards, techniques, and process models, etc.
guiding a firm’s EA Governance[23].
2.5. EA Maturity
Maturity models are typically used to measure and
assess the current level of competence of an
organization in a particular domain [24]. One of the
earliest maturity models that have served as a basis for
many of the models in the software and IT domain is the
Capability Maturity Model.
According to Vallerand et al. [25], several other
maturity models have been developed over the years,
such as the CMMI, Gartner’s IT Score for EA,
Forrester’s EA maturity assessment tool, the Center for
Page 7185

--- PAGE 5 ---
Information Systems Research at MIT EA management
maturity framework, etc.
Meyer et al. [24] provide a comparison of several
maturity models that were available at the time, such as
IT-CMF, EAMM, SAMM, COBIT, and more. The
authors conclude that the IT-CMF is the most suitable
one to assess the EA maturity of an organization due to
its ability to provide both a high-level and in-depth
analysis.
Another maturity model that is identified by both
Meyer et al. [24] and Vallerand et al. [25] is the
Architecture Capability Maturity Model (ACMM)
developed by the US Department of Commerce. The
ACMM is notable because it has been adopted and
incorporated in the TOGAF standard [26], which is the
most used EA framework by practitioners [27].
Finally, a recent trend in EA research has emerged
which identifies EA agility as a means to address EA
complexity and the dynamic environment of
organizations [28]. In line withthis, the Open Group has
started developing the Open Group Agile Architecture
Framework which contains an Agile Architecture
Maturity Model (OAMM) that extends the CMMI with
agile concepts [29].
For our research, we have considered including the
IT-CMF, the ACMM and theOAMM. However, the IT-
CMF is fairly detailed due to the 37 capabilities that
need to be assessed. Thus, we considered it not suitable
for inclusion in our survey questionnaire since EA
maturity is just one aspect of our research and not its
main focus. On the other hand, the ACMM and the
OAMM are relatively high-level and cover two
important aspects that we would like to include. First,
the ACMM can help assess the EA maturity of
organizations utilizing the traditional measures and
understanding of the EA practice. Second, the OAMM
can be used to assess the degree to which agility is
incorporated in the EA practice. Considering that agility
is one attribute of EA resilience, including the OAMM,
can help with understanding the relationship between
EA maturity and resilience.
2.6. Digital Transformation Maturity
The COVID-19 pandemic has led to a lot of
organizations undertaking digital transformation
programstobeabletooperateproperlyinthisdisruptive
period [10]. However, digital transformation is not a
new trend. It has been pursued by many organizations to
a varying degree of success since the diffusion of the
Internet at the turn of the millennium [30].
Digital transformation can be seen as an ongoing
process of adopting digital technologies to meet the
expectations of customers, employees and partners [31].
It is seen as a way for organizations to transform their
business models quickly by implementing new digital
capabilities based on technologies, such as 5G, artificial
intelligence, 3D printing, social media, cloud
computing, big data and analytics, etc. [10, 31]. Thus,
there is a natural relation between digital transformation
and EA. Anthony Jnr [32] argues that EA facilitates
digital transformation by enabling an alignment
between digital technologies and business models, and
by increasing the success of the transformation.
However, digital transformation is not only about
implementing new digital technologies. It facilitates a
complete change of an organization from multiple
perspectives, such as vision, strategy, organizational
structure, processes, capabilities, culture, etc. [9]. Thus,
several stakeholders need to be involved in prioritizing
investments and managing this transformation.
For this purpose, several digital maturity models to
help assess the state of the organization’s digital
initiatives have been formulated over the years. Teichert
[31], performed a systematic literature review that
analyzed several maturity models both from academia
and practice and identified the maturity areas that are
assessed by them. These areas cover the following
aspects: digital culture, technology, operations and
processes, digital strategy, organization, digital skills,
innovation etc. [31].
Similarly, to EA maturity models, these digital
transformation areas (also called dimensions) are
assessed with the help of certain maturity levels.
Valdez-de-Leon [33] provides an example of these
maturity levels: level 0 (not started), level 1 (initiating),
level 2 (enabling), level 3 (integrating), level 4
(optimizing), and level 5 (pioneering). When comparing
these levels to the OAMM, we can see that there are
quite some similarities, even though the naming differs.
Rossmann [34] provides another perspective on
digital transformation maturity assessment. Instead of
relying on the maturity levels and the high-level
dimensions,theauthorspecifiesforeachdimensionfour
items. These items are statements that can be assessed
based on a Likert scale ranging from strongly disagree
to strongly agree.
For our research, we choose to use a combination of
the aforementioned research papers. We choose to use a
combination of the dimensions proposed by Teichert
[31] and Rossmann [34]. Furthermore, we incorporate
the maturity levels as defined by Valdez-de-Leon [33].
2.7. Conceptual Model of EA Resilience in the
context of Digital Transformation
Based on the literature from Sections 2.1 – 2.6, we
have formulated a conceptual model to structure our
research. In this model we have included three core
concepts, namely:
Page 7186

--- PAGE 6 ---
- EA maturity as the level of competence that an
organization has in the EA practice.
- Digital transformation maturity as the level of
the organization’s digital initiatives.
- EA resilience as the ability of an organization to
design their EA to prepare for disruptions.
From the reviewed literature, several relations
between these three concepts can be concluded:
- Organizations that have an EA practice
implemented can lead to successful digital
transformation.
- Organizations that have an EA practice can
design their EA with resilience in mind.
- EA resilience can have several
characteristics/attributes and certain resilience
strategies can be used to address disruptions.
Based on this information, we formulated the
conceptual model which can be seen in Figure 2.
Figure 2. Conceptual model
The conceptual model has led to the formulation of
three hypotheses which will be tested with the help of
the survey questionnaire instrument that we present in
Section 3. We have chosen to refine the concept of EA
resilience into Resilience Strategies and Resilience
Attributes. Thus, we consider that an organization that
aims at incorporating resilience in their EA should
consider implementing several resilience strategies and
attributes.
H1: Enterprise Architecture maturity positively
influences the Digital Transformation maturity of the
organization.
H2a: Enterprise Architecture maturity positively
influences the number of Resilience Strategies that are
being implemented by the organization.
H2b: Enterprise Architecture maturity positively
influences the number of Resilience Attributes that are
being considered by the organization.
3. Survey Questionnaire Instrument Design
1
https://bit.ly/3vo6zPz
Quantitative data collection methods can provide a
generalizable understanding of a topic [35]. One of the
most used quantitative data collection methods is the
surveyquestionnaire.Duetoitsnature,itisverysuitable
for collecting large amounts of responses in a less time-
consuming manner [36].
One of the main aspects to pay attention to with
questionnairesissamplebiaswhichcanleadtoconcerns
regarding the generalizability of the results [36]. This
can be addressed by ensuring a large number of
responses. For our research, we aim to distribute the
questionnaire through many different local and
international channels to ensure the generalizability of
our results.
Quantitative methods such as questionnaires are
usually criticized due to their limitation on
understanding the context in which the respondents are
expressing their opinions [35]. Thus, a mixed-methods
approach combining quantitative and qualitative
research can help ameliorate this. To address this in our
research, we will ask the respondents to indicate
whether they would be willing to participate in a follow-
up interview to dive deeper into the topic of EA
resilience in the context of digital transformation.
According to Lietz [37], there are several best
practices when formulating questions and answers for
questionnaires. For questions, the length should be a
short as possible while still including all necessary
information, grammar complexity should be kept to a
minimum by using an active voice, negatively worded
questions should be avoided, and the order of questions
should be from the most generic to the most specific.
Regarding the answers, there are a lot of best practices
regarding the usage of scales, adding a don’t know
option, and the order of the answers. However, there are
no straightforward recommendations for the answers, as
it depends on what the goal of the questionnaire is.
The questionnaire has been created with the
Qualtrics tool and has been published online1
. In the
following sections, the design of the questionnaire is
explained together with the relation between the
questions and the literature that supports them.
3.1. Starting Page and Consent Form
Since this is a self-administered questionnaire, the
starting page of the questionnaire needs to provide
enough information about theresearch that is performed
for the respondent to make an informed decision about
their participation. Thus, several aspects are included.
Namely, the purpose of the research, what is expected
from the respondent if they choose to participate, how
the data collected will be managed and processed
Page 7187

--- PAGE 7 ---
according to the General Data Protection Regulation of
the EU, how the results of the research will be used, and
how the respondents can contact the researchers.
The consent form includes a series of statements that
describe what the participants agree to if they choose to
participate in the research. Some examples are that they
understand what is required and agree to participate in
the research, that they understand that the opinions they
provide will be kept confidential and will not identify
the respondents or their organization, that they can
contact the researchers if they have questions, etc. The
respondents can start the questionnaire only if they give
their explicit consent by ticking a checkbox and
submitting their response.
3.2. Background Information
To have a better understanding of the context of the
respondents, several questions are formulated. These
questions cover aspects such as the industry their
organizationoperates in, thesize of the organization, the
geographical location of their office, the role of the
respondents within the organization, and their main
responsibilities.
This type of information can help with identifying if
there are certain characteristics of the organizations or
the respondents which can justify the results obtained in
the other sections of the questionnaire.
3.3. Enterprise Architecture Maturity
As indicated in the conceptual model from Figure 1,
EA maturity is one of the core concepts that we would
like to investigate. For this purpose, we have chosen to
include several questions on aspects, such as the current
maturity of the EA practice and the types of EA
frameworks and modelling languages that are used by
the organization.
Thus, this allows us to analyze whether
organizations that have different levels of EA maturity
also exhibit differences in the other areas from the
conceptual model. Furthermore, we can relate the usage
of certain frameworks and modelling languages to the
maturity of the EA practice to get a more in-depth
understanding.
3.4. Digital Transformation Maturity
Similarly, to the EA maturity section of the
questionnaire,wehavealsodefinedseveralquestionson
Digital transformation maturity. These questions
include an assessment of the current digital
transformation initiatives of the organization on several
dimensions and an evaluation of the impact and
struggles due to COVID-19 from a digital
transformation perspective.
While it would have been sufficient to ask
respondents to assess their Digital transformation
maturity, we consider that it is important to also
understand the changes brought on by the pandemic.
This information can be used to explain certain outliers
as many organizations had to implement Digital
transformation initiatives very quickly to mitigate the
impact of the pandemic on their operations.
3.5. EA Resilience Strategies and Attributes
Two similar sections of the questionnaire are
dedicated to understanding several aspects regarding
EA Resilience. In both sections, respondents are
provided with a list of Resilience Strategies and a list of
Attributes, respectively. The purpose of this is to
understand which Resilience Strategies and Attributes
are currently implemented by the organization of the
respondent and which ones they consider to be relevant
to EA resilience.
Additionally, there are a few other questions relating
to the support from top management for implementing
EA Resilience, best practices to ensure EA Resilience,
and how Resilience by design could be implemented in
an EA practice.
Thus, these questions provide an insight into the
status of EA resilience with the organizations of the
respondents and give an overview of which aspects are
considered by the respondents are important for
ensuring EA resilience.
3.4. General Feedback and Follow-up
In the concluding section of the questionnaire, we
ask the participants whether they would like to provide
any additional feedback. The purpose of this is to gather
any information that was not covered by the other
sections of the questionnaire.
Additionally, the respondents are asked whether
they would like to participate in a follow-up interview
and/or if they would like to receive the results of this
research. For both questions, if the respondents agree,
they are asked to fill in their email address as a means
for the researchers to contact them.
4. Pilot Study and Instrument Verification
For our survey questionnaire instrument, a set of 25
questions, was developed according to the guidelines
delineated by earlier research [38]. In this section, we
describe a procedural model for developing valid and
reliable measurement instruments for theoretical
constructs.Thisproceduralmodelisproposedforuseby
researchers who wish to create new measurement
Page 7188

--- PAGE 8 ---
instruments for conceptually defined theory constructs.
The procedural model is not concerned with developing
theory, instead, it applies to the stage of the research
where such theory exists and is sought to be empirically
tested.
The first stage of the procedural model is item
creation, which is concerned with specifying the
theoretical constructs for which measurement items are
to be developed and deriving pools of candidate items
for each construct. This task is carried out through an
analysis of the relevant literature. The next stage is
substrata identification, the purpose of which is to sort
the candidate items into meaningful separate domain
subcategories to display construct, convergent, and
discriminant validity. This task is carried out with the
help of apanel study withexperts of theselected domain
of study, which provides input to the sorting task. The
third stage is item identification, the purpose of which is
to identify from the pool of candidate items a revised set
of items that show good potential for high content
validity. This task is also carried out employing an
expert panel study, which provides input to the ranking
task. The fourth stage is item revision, the purpose of
which is to re-specify and further improve the set of
candidate items as well as to get an initial indication of
reliability and validity. This task is carried out through
a practitioner and expert panel study, to obtain input
from a sample representative of the target research
population. The last stage is instrument validation,
which is concerned with obtaining statistical evidence
for the reliability and validity of the developed
measurement items. This task is carried out using the
survey research method to obtain a sufficiently large
number of responses from the target population of the
respective study [38].
A set of statements should represent the concourse
of interest in the same way that a sample of people
should represent the population in a classical
correlational study. Therefore, certain prescribed
guidelines are adopted in the selection of statements to
achieve the highest probability of "representativeness"
of the domain of the concourse: 1) review of the
literature, 2) conversations and interviews with people
who participate in the concourse, and 3) input from
domain experts about the content of the sample of
statements.
A pilot test was conducted on a small convenience
sample of IT professionals from different organizations
in New Zealand and The Netherlands to obtain feedback
from respondents about the length, content, and
structure of the questionnaire. For this pilot study, we
have used a convenience sample of Senior Practitioners
to help as evaluators with the item selection phase. For
this research, a CIO (n=1) of a large organization,
several IS professionals (n=4) and academics (n=3), and
domain experts (n=2) were recruited to help as
evaluators with the item selection phase. Following the
guidelines for instrument development, feedback from
the evaluators was incorporated into the statement and
EA Resilience instrumentation. After several iterations
of the instrument development guidelines, the
evaluators confirmed that the instrument is ready and
should function as intended. We then approached all
participants from New Zealand and the Netherlands, to
answer the questionnaire to test the statistical properties
of the question set and evaluate the survey instrument.
Furthermore, to test the theoretical structure
incorporated into the survey question set, a CIO of a
large public organization was recruited to provide
his/her suggestions. Respondents spent 20 to 30 minutes
completing the questionnaires.
We used a semi-structured interview template of
topics to cover. We specifically asked for, (a) the length
of the questionnaire, (b) is there any questions missing,
(c) The clarity of each question along with the category
that they are placed in, (d) whether any question has
been included which should not be added, (e) whether
the same question has been added more than once.
The kappa statistic is frequently used to test
interrater reliability. The importance of rater reliability
lies in the fact that it represents the extent to which the
data collected in the study are correct representations of
the variables measured. Measurement of the extent to
which data collectors (raters) assign the same score to
the same variable is called interrater reliability. Cohen’s
kappa was developed to account for the possibility that
raters guess on at least some variables due to
uncertainty. Like most correlation statistics, the kappa
can range from −1 to +1.
All the kappa coefficients were evaluated using the
guideline outlined by Landis and Koch [39], where the
strength of the kappa coefficients =0.01-0.20 slight;
0.21-0.40 fair; 0.41-0.60 moderate; 0.61-0.80
substantial; 0.81-1.00 almost perfect. Overall percent
agreement was 98% and kappa = 0.92, which signifies
almost perfect agreementamong raters in ourpilot study
[39]. Table 1 displays the items in their final wording.
Table 1: example items per construct
Theory
Construct
Item Definition
Page 7189

--- PAGE 9 ---
EA practice What is the current status regarding the
Enterprise Architecture practice in your
organization?
Digital
transformation
journey
Based on the information about
Dimensions and Levels from theprevious
section, what is current status of the
Digital transformation within your
organization?
Resilience
Strategy
Which of the following Resilience
strategies does your organization use to
handle disruptions?
Resilience
Strategy
Which of the following Resilience
strategies do you think are the most
relevant for Enterprise Architecture?
EA Resilience
Strategy
Which of the following Resilience
attributes do you think are the most
important to ensure a resilient Enterprise
Architecture?
5. Findings and Conclusion
By proposing a theory-led perspective on value
generation through Enterprise Resilience, this study
adds to the research stream on Enterprise Resilience
benefit realization. Our findings have significant
theoretical and practical implications. The instrument
development procedure described in this paper provides
several contributions. First, propose a way to integrate
knowledgeonseveral topics,namely, EA,IS, resilience,
and digital transformation, under the umbrella of IT
governance. Second, we reported on the process of
developing a valid and reliable instrument to measure
EA Resilience factors in context to digital
transformation. We believe that this instrument can be
used in various studies including our future research to
examine the factors determining EA resilience in
context todigital transformation in organizations. Third,
we described in detail a model for instrument
development. We believe that fellow researchers to be
able to successfully adopt this model in their empirical
studies.
Our study has some limitations, like any other
research. First, there is limited research available on EA
resilience, so we had to rely on knowledge from related
fields, such as IS. While there is overlap between these
two fields, we currently don’t have good understanding
of which aspects from IS resilience would also be
applicable for EA resilience. Thus, we designed the
questionnaire to collect opinions from EA practitioners
on which aspects of IS resilience are also relevant for
EA resilience. Second, the phenomenon we aim to study
is very complex. While the conceptual model we
designed focuses on the major concepts and
relationships resulting from literature, we cannot ensure
that it is complete as there could be additional concepts
and relationships that are possible and relevant.
Therefore, with this research, we hope to provide a
starting point for further and more specific, studies on
EA resilience.
Moreover, the framework for our analysis was IT
governance and the RBV, which provided us with a rich
set of concepts for the analysis of the EA value
generation process. Despite the power of this approach,
it might be fruitful to investigate how contextual factors,
like culture, certain motivation mechanisms, and
institutional processes, shape the building and
exploitation of the EA Resilience capabilities. We plan
on investigating these aspects in our future research
using our instrument. In view of this study’s
contributions and limitations, we further propose that
future research should use this study’s findings and
instrument that has been developed to measure changes
in the identified EA Resilience capabilities and
maturity. For instance, as suggested in our study, it
would be valuable to learn how EA Resilience can help
in building digital transformation capabilities in
organizations embarking on a digital transformation
journey. We also encourage further investigations of
how frameworks, methods, and tools can support value
generation in particular scenarios.
6. References
[1] A. Sarkar, S. C. Wingreen, and J. Ascroft, "Top
management team decision priorities to drive IS resilience:
Lessons from Jade Software Corporation," 2016.
[2] K. M. Eisenhardt and J. A. Martin, "Dynamic
capabilities: what are they?," Strategic management journal,
vol. 21, no. 10‐11, pp. 1105-1121, 2000.
[3] D. E. Leidner, G. Pan, and S. L. Pan, "The role of IT in
crisis response: Lessons from the SARS and Asian Tsunami
disasters," The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, vol.
18, no. 2, pp. 80-99, 2009.
[4] A. Aldea, E. Vaicekauskaitė, M. Daneva, and J. P. S.
Piest, "Assessing Resilience in Enterprise Architecture: A
Systematic Review," 2020 2020: IEEE, pp. 1-10.
[5] P. Weill and J. W. Ross, IT governance: How top
performers manage IT decision rights for superior results.
Harvard Business Press, 2004.
[6] O. Erol, D. Henry, B. Sauser, and M. Mansouri,
"Perspectives on measuring enterprise resilience," 2010 2010:
IEEE, pp. 587-592.
[7] A. Aldea, M. E. Iacob, J. van Hillegersberg, D. Quartel,
and H. Franken, "Strategy on a Page: An ArchiMate‐based
tool for visualizing and designing strategy," Intelligent
systems in accounting, finance and management, vol. 25, no.
2, pp. 86-102, 2018.
Page 7190

--- PAGE 10 ---
[8] A. Aldea, M.-E. Iacob, D. Quartel, and H. Franken,
"Strategic planning and enterprise achitecture," 2013 2013:
IEEE, pp. 1-8.
[9] V. Gurbaxani and D. Dunkle, "Gearing Up For
Successful Digital Transformation," MIS Quarterly Executive,
vol. 18, no. 3, 2019.
[10] A. Priyono, A. Moin, and V. N. A. O. Putri, "Identifying
Digital Transformation Paths in the Business Model of SMEs
during the COVID-19 Pandemic," Journal of Open
Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity, vol. 6, no.
4, p. 104, 2020.
[11] S. De Haes and W. Van Grembergen, "IT governance
and its mechanisms," Information systems control journal,
vol. 1, pp. 27-33, 2004.
[12] G. Müller, T. G. Koslowski, and R. Accorsi,
"Resilience-a new research field in business information
systems?," 2013 2013: Springer, pp. 3-14.
[13] C. S. Holling, "Resilience and stability of ecological
systems," Annual review of ecology and systematics, vol. 4,
no. 1, pp. 1-23, 1973.
[14] K. Burnard and R. Bhamra, "Organisational resilience:
development of a conceptual framework for organisational
responses," International Journal of Production Research,
vol. 49, no. 18, pp. 5581-5599, 2011.
[15] D. Denyer, "Organizational Resilience: A summary of
academic evidence, business insights and new thinking," BSI
and Cranfield School of Management, pp. 8-25, 2017.
[16] S. Duchek, "Organizational resilience: a capability-
based conceptualization," Business Research, vol. 13, no. 1,
pp. 215-246, 2020.
[17] M. K. Linnenluecke, "Resilience in business and
management research: A review of influential publications
and a research agenda," International Journal of Management
Reviews, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 4-30, 2017.
[18] A. Sarkar, S. Wingreen, and J. Ascroft, "Towards a
practice-based view of Information Systems Resilience Using
the Lens of Critical Realism," 2020 2020.
[19] J. Ramezani and L. M. Camarinha-Matos, "Approaches
for resilience and antifragility in collaborative business
ecosystems," Technological Forecasting and Social Change,
vol. 151, p. 119846, 2020.
[20] R. Bemthuis, M.-E. Iacob, and P. Havinga, "A Design of
the Resilient Enterprise: A Reference Architecture for
Emergent Behaviors Control," Sensors, vol. 20, no. 22, p.
6672, 2020.
[21] H. Lochhead, "Resilience by design: can innovative
processes deliver more?," Procedia Engineering, vol. 180, pp.
7-15, 2017.
[22] I. Linkov, B. D. Trump, M. Golan, and J. M. Keisler,
"Enhancing Resilience in Post-COVID Societies: By Design
or By Intervention?," Environmental Science & Technology,
vol. 55, no. 8, pp. 4202-4204, 2021.
[23] F. Ahlemann, C. Legner, and J. Lux, "A resource-based
perspectiveofvaluegeneration through enterprisearchitecture
management," Information & Management, vol. 58, no. 1, p.
103266, 2021.
[24] M. Meyer, M. Helfert, and C. O’Brien, "An analysis of
enterprise architecture maturity frameworks," 2011: Springer,
pp. 167-177.
[25] J. Vallerand, J. Lapalme, and A. Moïse, "Analysing
enterprise architecture maturity models: a learning
perspective," Enterprise Information Systems, vol. 11, no. 6,
pp. 859-883, 2017.
[26] The Open Group, "The TOGAF® Standard, Version
9.2," The Open Group, 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://pubs.opengroup.org/architecture/togaf9-doc/arch/
[27] M. Roelfsema, A. Aldea, M. Lankhorst, and H. Franken,
"How about Strategy?: A Survey into the Pitfalls of Strategic
Alignment," Journal of Enterprise Architecture, vol. 12, no. 1,
pp. 7-18, 2016.
[28] T. Kaddoumi and M. Watfa, "A proposed agile
enterprise architecture framework," 2016: IEEE, pp. 52-57.
[29] The Open Group, "The Open Group Agile Architecture
Framework Draft Standard,"TheOpen Group,2021. [Online].
Available: https://pubs.opengroup.org/architecture/o-
aaf/snapshot/Agile_Architecture_Framework.html#aaf-
maturity-model
[30] S. Schneider and O. Kokshagina, "Digital
transformation: What we have learned (thus far) and what is
next," Creativity and Innovation Management.
[31] R. Teichert, "Digital transformation maturity: A
systematic review of literature," Acta universitatis
agriculturae et silviculturae mendelianae brunensis, vol. 67,
no. 6, pp. 1673-1687, 2019.
[32] B. Anthony Jnr, "Managing digital transformation of
smart cities through enterprise architecture–a review and
research agenda," Enterprise Information Systems, pp. 1-33,
2020.
[33] O. Valdez-de-Leon, "A digital maturity model for
telecommunications service providers," Technology
innovation management review, vol. 6, no. 8, 2016.
[34] A. Rossmann, "Digital maturity: conceptualization and
measurement model," in 39th International Conference in
Information Systems, San Francisco, 2018.
[35] J. W. Creswell and V. L. P. Clark, Designing and
conducting mixed methods research. Sage publications, 2017.
[36] B. Blumberg, D. Cooper, and P. Schindler, Business
Research Methods. McGraw Hill, 2014.
[37] P. Lietz, "Research into questionnaire design: A
summary of the literature," International journal of market
research, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 249-272, 2010.
[38] J. Recker, "Opportunities and constraints: the current
struggle with BPMN," Business Process Management
Journal, 2010.
[39] J. R. Landis and G. G. Koch, "The measurement of
observer agreement for categorical data," biometrics, pp. 159-
174, 1977.
Page 7191