--- PAGE 1 ---
sustainability
Article
Enterprise Architecture: A Business Value
Realization Model
Ayed Alwadain
Computer Science Department, King Saud University, Riyadh 11451, Saudi Arabia; aalwadain@ksu.edu.sa
Received: 30 July 2020; Accepted: 7 October 2020; Published: 14 October 2020


Abstract: Today, as organizations face constant change, they must rapidly adapt their strategies and
operations. This involves continuous business transformation. However, guiding and managing such
transformationcanbeanintimidatingtaskbecauseoforganizationalcomplexity. Hence,organizations
resort to Enterprise Architecture (EA) to address this complexity and achieve their transformation
goals. Nonetheless, there is a lack of research on EA benefits realization and a dearth of conclusive
evidence on how EA enables business transformation and delivers value to organizations. Therefore,
this research uses a case study method to explore how EA investment is converted into organizational
value. This research makes two contributions. The first of these is the development of an EA value
realization model, which comprises three iterative and interrelated processes: the EA conversion
process, the EA use process, and the EA competitive process. The second contribution is the
identification of factors that may influence the value realization process.
Keywords: enterprise architecture (EA); EA business value; EA benefits; EA value realization process;
case study
1. Introduction
Enterprise Architecture (EA) is defined as “a coherent whole of principles, methods, and models
thatareusedinthedesignandrealizationoftheenterprise’sorganizationalstructure,businessprocesses,
informationsystems,andinfrastructure”[1]. Itdefinesthebaselineandtargetstatesofanorganization’s
capabilities, processes, applications, data, and technology infrastructure. It also facilitates the
development of a roadmap for achieving the defined target state [2,3].
Despite the growing interest in EA research, considerable gaps remain in the literature about
EA. Two of the most notable gaps is the lack of theory-based studies of EA [4–6], and the dearth of
conclusive evidence on how EA delivers value to organizations [4]. Many organizations doubt EA’s
potential and view it as an abstract mechanism that demands significant investment with elusive
to obtain value [5]. EA benefits are difficult to attain and the EA benefit realization process itself is
unclear [7].
Some empirical studies have addressed EA benefits [5,8–10]. Yet, studies of EA benefits often
offer implicit viewpoints of the EA benefit realization process, e.g., [11,12]. Furthermore, studies of EA
success have mostly examined the establishment and implementation stages of EA, rather than the
post-implementation phases, such as EA use [5]. Despite its criticality for realizing EA benefits [6],
EA use has not been extensively examined [13].
The EA value realization process has recently been explored [3,5,7,10]. However, these studies
provided varying views on how to achieve EA benefits, which suggests the need for further
research [5,6,14]. Despite these efforts, it is still unclear how EA business value is realized [7].
As a result, there are great challenges in implementing EA and understanding the EA value realization
process [7]. Although research shows that EA can improve organizational performance, some issues
Sustainability 2020, 12, 8485; doi:10.3390/su12208485 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability

--- PAGE 2 ---
Sustainability 2020, 12, 8485 2 of 17
remain unexplored [8], and further research should focus on how organizational benefits are delivered
by EA [10].
Considering the various benefits of EA without seeing the bigger picture cannot provide an
appreciation of the benefits of EA or an understanding of the EA value realization process. A more
profound exploration of the dimensions of EA benefit realizations is required [14].
The lack of an EA benefit realization process model leads to the following issues. First, such a
lack means there is no common perspective on EA’s capabilities development and how EA improves
organizational performance. Second, it makes it difficult to communicate a strong value proposition
for EA. Third, it restrains the development of a clear business case for an EA because of the ambiguous
justifications of EA’s business value [15].
Consideringtheseissues,thisresearchendeavorstoprovidetheoreticallygroundedandempirically
supported answers to the following questions.
1. How does EA investment lead to improved organizational performance?
2. What are the potential factors that influence EA value realization?
This study endeavors to unpack the process by which EA adds value to organizations. It aims to
develop a theoretical EA benefit realization process to enrich the understanding of how EA leads to
improved organizational performance. For this purpose, a process theory—“how IT creates business
value” [16]—is used to connect the dimensions that support the description and analysis of the EA
benefit realization process. This theory offers an analytical lens that provides insights on how EA
investments lead to improved organizational performance and to identifies some of the factors that
affect EA value realization.
This research uses a case study method to explore these issues, and makes two main contributions.
First, this research provides an overarching model that describes and unpacks the EA value realization
process. It does this by breaking the process into three interrelated processes: the EA conversion
process, the EA use process, and the EA competitive process. Second, this research identifies some
factors that influence EA value realization.
From a practical perspective, having answers to these research questions would enable
organizations to recognize the complexity surrounding EA business value realization and better
plan their EAs. These answers would also enable organizations to make informed decisions about EA
investments, which most organizations are still struggling to make [6].
Thissectionhasexplainedthemotivationforthisresearch, andpresenteditsobjectiveandresearch
questions. The following sections presents an overview of EA.
2. Enterprise Architecture
EA is a collection of models and principles that are used to design and realize organizational
business processes, applications, and technology infrastructure [1]. EA encompasses current and target
representations of an enterprise’s business capabilities, processes, applications, and systems, as well
as their interrelationships and the extent to which these assets are shared by different parts of the
enterprise [3,6]. EA is both a process and products to be shared and used by different parts of the
organization [7].
EA may be adopted for various reasons. It is used to manage complex business and Information
Technology (IT) landscapes of an organization and to facilitate the alignment of strategy, operations,
and resources [5,14]. It is also used to manage complexity and change and to enhance resources
used to achieve organizational goals [6,14]. Organizations use EA for various purposes such as
business transformation [4,7], strategy execution [17], business and IT alignment [18], IT standards
management [12], complexity management, better communication [10], Information Technology (IT)
management [19] and project compliance [10].
Enterprise Architecture Management (EAM) is concerned with the establishment and continuous
development of EA [20]. It goes beyond EA modelling and focuses on EA management tasks such

--- PAGE 3 ---
Sustainability 2020, 12, 8485 3 of 17
as establishment, planning, governance, and architectural change management [20]. It includes
the managerial activities necessary to establish, develop, and maintain an organization’s EA [5].
This research addresses an important aspect of EAM by exploring the EA benefits realization process.
This study builds on previous EA benefits research since the focus of this study is EA
benefits realization process. Key studies that have addressed the issue were identified and
reviewed [3,5–7,10,11,14,15,21,22]. In some of these, EA benefit realization is presented as a simple
process whereby particular factors are associated with particular benefits (e.g., [11,21,23]), while others
studies EA suggest that EA benefits are influenced by indirect intermediary factors [3,5,7,10,22].
This research adopts a similar view to that presented in [7] whereby EA benefits realization is seen as a
complex process comprising interrelated processes and relationships.
3. Theoretical Foundations
This study adopted a process theory that describes IT business value realization. This theory
is based on three interrelated process models that constitute a chain of value creation as shown in
Figure 1. The first model, “IT Conversion Process”, describes how an IT investment is converted into
IT assets. The second model, “IT Use Process”, describes how IT assets produce IT impacts. The third
model, “Competitive Process”, connects IT impacts to organizational performance [16].
Figure 1. How information technology creates business value: A process theory [16].
The theory is developed to apprehend the process by which IT investment is converted into a
preferred organizational performance. It stipulates the fundamentals conditions and a chain of events
that are fundamental for achieving the preferred organizational performance. It also proposes that
desired outcomes are not always achieved. It is anticipated that some important conditions or events
may fail to occur at any point in the process, disrupting some or all of the preferred outcomes [16].
The theory is developed to describe how a preferred organizational performance could be achieved
through IT investment, without necessarily explaining why the anticipated results are not realized [16].
In this research, that theory is used to understand the process of converting an EA investment into
the desired organizational performance. It specifies a chain of events and conditions that are crucial for
realizing organizational performance. It also considers that desired outcomes are not always realized.
It is expected that some essential conditions or events might not happen, affecting some, or all, of the
estimated outcomes [16].
3.1. The EA Conversion Process: From EA Investments to EA Assets
Based on the theory, an IT investment is an essential condition for the conversion process,
resulting in IT assets. Nevertheless, converting investments into assets is not accomplished with
the same efficiency by every organization, because it depends on the effectiveness of the conversion
process. There are some factors that influence the conversion process such as IT strategy, organizational
structure, and IT project management [16].

--- PAGE 4 ---
Sustainability 2020, 12, 8485 4 of 17
The same is proposed for EA. The EA conversion process examines the development of an EA
investment into EA assets. An EA investment is a necessary but not adequate condition for obtaining
good EA assets [16]. Converting an EA investment into EA assets is influenced by some conversion
factors. For a certain level of EA funds, some organizations would successfully gain a great mix
of EA assets while others would not. Investment in EA is not an adequate condition for achieving
organizational benefits. Hence, it is vital for organizations to identify and build EA capabilities to
enable business transformation and achieve organizational benefits [4]. Further, EA implementation
shouldnotbeseenasaprojectthatcanprovideimmediatereturns. EArequiresconstantandcontinuing
development of its operations [6,24,25]. Funding EA using a project fixed-term mechanism is not
suitable for EA development, and it significantly hinders the effective implementation of EA in
organizations [24].
Further, established foundations such as strategically positioned EA, organizational support,
EA promotion, a skilled team, and adequate funds are proposed to enable an effective EA
implementation [5,8]. Similarly, established EA processes such as communication and governance
facilitate the development of EA artifacts and services [14].
Therefore, this is the first process in the EA value realization model. It takes in an EA investment
as a condition that is essential, yet is not adequate for generating quality assets, as the effectiveness of
the conversion process is influenced by conversion factors.
3.2. The EA Use Process: From EA Assets to EA Impacts
The use process explores how IT assets are used to realize IT benefits. It proposes that for an
organization to attain the value of IT impacts it must have quality IT assets [16]. In addition, IT assets
must be accompanied by appropriate use if the IT impacts are to be realized [16].
In the literature on EA, activities produce various types of EA artifacts, such as architectural
models, principles, standards, and roadmaps. These artifacts mostly describe some aspects of an
organization such as its current state, its future state, and its transition roadmap [6,13].
These artifacts are supposed to be used. Yet, a substantial issue facing EA is the ambiguity of
using EA artifacts in organizations [26]. Furthermore, having attractive EA artifacts and guidelines is
not enough if they are not used appropriately [13]. Organizations often become trapped by developing
EA artifacts without identifying the intended stakeholders and planning their purposeful use [13].
Large numbers of EA artifacts are often used poorly or are even found to be useless or outdated [27].
Thus, to enable the effective use of EA artifacts, it is recommended that artifacts be linked to their
associated organizational activities and expected benefits [9].
The literature on EA has a strong focus on EA artifacts and their management and use, but artifacts
by themselves will not bring value to an organization [3,5]. Thus, recent studies have paid attention to
other dimensions of EA use such as processes, and services [3,13]. This research adopts an expanded
view of EA use not only by focusing on EA artifacts but also by including other EA assets, such as EA
capabilities, processes, and services.
Thus, based on the adopted theory and the material from EA literature, it is proposed that the EA
use process must have quality EA assets and appropriate use of those assets to realize EA benefits.
3.3. The EA Competitive Process: From EA Impacts to Organizational Performance
Improved organizational performance is the ultimate intended outcome. Achieving enhanced
organizational performance because of an IT investment requires achieving the first essential condition,
“IT impacts”. The “IT impacts” are considered an intermediate state that must be attained before
improved organizational outcomes can be achieved [16]. Further, IT impacts cannot be sufficient.
This is primarily because of factors outside an organization’s control. In other words, only if business
conditions are favorable can there be enhanced organizational performance because of IT impacts [16].
Previous research on EA has recognized the importance of identifying intermediate EA outcomes
that should ultimately result in the achievement of end organizational goals [8,10,23]. Reported EA

--- PAGE 5 ---
Sustainability 2020, 12, 8485 5 of 17
benefits include business/IT alignment, improved insights, reduced complexity [10], increased IT reuse,
business process improvements [19], and improved project planning, quality, and compliance [15].
EA direct benefits, although valuable in themselves, have a substantial role in attaining
organizational goals [10]. In the literature on EA, organizational performance is represented
as the degree to which the EA-related end goals are achieved at the organization level [10].
Previous studies noted that EA benefits can lead to organizational efficiency, organizational
alignment [14], costs reduction, and improved organizational agility [10].
Thus, in light of the adopted theory, it is proposed that organizations that can realize the
intermediate benefits of EA are expected to achieve a positive, subsequent, and often indirect impact
on organizational performance [8], assuming that business conditions are favorable [16].
In light of the presented theoretical foundations, Figure 2 shows the proposed EA value realization
processmodel. Themodelisanalytical, as, inreality, thethreeprocessesareinterconnectedanditerative.
Figure 2. The Enterprise Architecture (EA) value realization process.
4. Research Methodology
As indicated in Section 3, this study endeavors to explore and describe the process of EA value
realization. In particular, it examines the main processes and practices that should be in place to realize
the intended organizational benefits from an EA investment.
Consideringthepurposeandnatureofthisstudy,casestudyisanappropriateresearchmethod[28].
The issue to be examined is contemporary and must be explored in its context. The case study method
is a well-suited approach, as it allows the researcher to explore research issues with various dimensions
of interest and it uses various sources of evidence [28,29]. A multiple-case study design was adopted,
and the unit of analysis was the EA program. Four cases were explored, and they have been selected
to maximize what can be learned [30]. The selected cases are government agencies with EA practices
that have been established for at least two years. An overview of the cases is presented in Table 1.
The data were collected using multiple data collection techniques to triangulate sources of
evidence [28]. In this study, an exploratory open-ended qualitative survey and group interviews
were used. First, as suggested in [30], an exploratory open-ended qualitative survey was used,
see Appendix A. A qualitative survey was sent to the head of EA at each of the selected government
agencies. The survey was designed to gather information about the organization and its core business,
in addition to its EA initiative and its drivers, implementation, use, benefits, issues, and challenges.
Each agency returned one completed survey.
Following this, structured group interviews were conducted with participants from each agency.
They were used to obtain any information that might not have featured in the survey, develop a richer
understanding of their EA program, increase the depth of the data gathered, expand the number of
sources of information, and obtain documentation to support each case evidence. Group interviews
were chosen, as suggested by [31], to further understand the issue under investigation.

--- PAGE 6 ---
Sustainability 2020, 12, 8485 6 of 17
Table 1. Descriptions of the cases.
Name of
Organization
Case 1 Case 2 Case 3 Case 4
Government/private Government agency
Government
agency
Government
agency
Government
agency
Size of
organization
Very large Very large Very large Medium
Size of EA Small Small Small Small
EA budget
Yearly—continuous,
with some funding
issues in the last year
Yearly—with issues
of inadequate
funding
Yearly—continuous
Yearly—part of
business
transformation
Length of EA
adoption
5 years 2 years 9 years 2 years
The collected data for each case (the survey, the interviews and the collected documentations) were
combined. Table 2 shows the interview participants and collected documents. Notes were taken during
the interviews and combined with the survey data. Then, the obtained documents were reviewed to
extract useful data that might support the analysis and ultimately answer the research questions.
Table 2. Interview participants and collected documents.
Case 1
One group interview—90 min, two participants: chairman of EA, and enterprise architect.
Obtained documents provide information about the organization, EA, EA tool, EA maturity
assessment, e-services, and organizational performance dashboard.
Case 2
One group interview—90 min, four participants: chief enterprise architect, enterprise architect
and two EA consultants.
Obtained documents provide information about the organization and its EA program.
Case 3
One group interview—120 min, three participants: chief enterprise architect, and two
enterprise architects.
Obtained documents provide information about the organization, EA charter, EA governance
and strategic planning, and EA processes.
Case 4
One group interview—90 min, two participants: EA project manager and EA consultant.
Document obtained provide information about EA maturity assessment, baseline EA,
target EA, EA roadmap (initiatives), and provided e-services.
The data were analyzed using thematic analysis including both a deductive analysis (derived
from the adopted theoretical model) and inductive analysis (themes emerging from collected data) [32].
For the deductive analysis, the three processes of the adopted theory (EA conversion, EA use,
and EA competitive processes) were used as broad themes to guide and scope the analysis of the data.
In addition, an inductive analysis was undertaken to enrich the understanding of each process and
identify potential factors that might affect EA benefits realization. Text from that data was coded to
form generic themes (factors), and they are reported in the following section.
5. Findings
This section presents the results of the analysis of the case studies in accordance with the
three process models of the adopted theory: the conversion process, the use process, and the
competitive process.
The focus of the analysis was to explore each process and identify factors that help to produce the
outcomes of each process specifically and the whole value-generation process in general.

--- PAGE 7 ---
Sustainability 2020, 12, 8485 7 of 17
5.1. The Conversion Process
The EA conversion process examines the development of an EA investment into EA assets.
An initial EA investment is an essential condition for the conversion process. To convert that
investment into valuable EA assets, effective conversion management is needed.
The data showed that EA investments varied in terms of size and importance among the four
cases. Some cases had a dedicated yearly EA budget, while others reported that funds were not
enough after the initial investment, and one case reported that the EA budget was part of a business
transformation program. Besides the investment of funds, the data showed that there were some
factors that affected the conversion process and its outcomes. The analysis yielded six main factors that
were found to influence the effectiveness of the conversion process. They were management support,
communication and collaboration, EA team capability, EA framework and tools, EA vision, and EA
governance. The following subsections present each factor.
5.1.1. Management Support
The findings showed that an effective conversion process requires effective management support.
“Top management support” was considered “vital to the successful adoption of EA practices within any
organization”—Case 3. Without such support “EA will not have power and visibility to involve and guide
strategic initiatives”—Case 3. Further, senior management involvement was essential for developing
a valuable organizational EA practice, and “without the [agency’s] senior management support, some of
EA’s potentials would not be achieved”—Case 1. Management support and involvement were required
to produce deliverables that “meet their requirements” and their approval. EA deliverables had to be
“approved by senior management or [other] stakeholders before further actions”—Case 1.
Management support should be maintained by showing EA value and quick wins. EA teams
should present “EA value as well as quick wins to both business and IT stakeholders in order to maintain their
support and keep them interested in EA practices”—Case 1.
5.1.2. Communication and Collaboration
Thefindingsshowedthateffectivecommunicationandcollaborationwasimportantforaneffective
conversion process. EA programs require the involvement and participation of many stakeholders and
business units in the organization. “Enterprise Architecture practices require significant cultural changes.
For e.g., instead of silo and stove-piped style, EA demands transparency and information sharing”—Case 3.
A communication plan and stakeholders’ management plan were valuable enablers to facilitate EA
communication and coordination activities. “It was very essential to have a formal communication plan and
stakeholder management plan to be able to succeed in the EA initiative”—Case 4. Effective communication
and collaboration are important for an EA program and its products. It was stated that “Enterprise
Architecture products are only as good as the information collected ... . If quality information is not shared,
then EA artifacts will not depict the true picture”—Case 3.
5.1.3. EA Team Capability
The data showed that forming a capable and skillful EA team was crucial for establishing an
effective EA program. “Without proper skills, knowledge, and required experience it would be difficult to
establish an effective EA practice”—Case 1. A skillful EA team contributes to increased awareness and
acceptance of EA and the delivery of quality EA assets. “Management has acknowledged continuous
training as an important part for enhancing the quality of EA artifacts”—Case 3.
Further, experienced architects “would be able to understand and realize the complexities that arise
when various building blocks across EA domains are connected”—Case 1. Engaging external consultants and
experienced architects was reported as an enabling mechanism for EA programs and their deliverables.
That was because “their previous engagement in several other similar programs served a lot in utilizing the
most effective techniques, overcoming the challenges and [improving] the overall quality of delivery”—Case 4.

--- PAGE 8 ---
Sustainability 2020, 12, 8485 8 of 17
A skillful and capable team adopts an incremental value delivery approach. As EA programs
often require a long time before realizing the ultimate desired value, an incremental value delivery
approach was recommended. “It’s important to plan EA actions in increments in order to deliver value as fast
as possible. Without doing so, EA risks becoming a theoretical practice that produces unusable artifacts”—Case 2.
5.1.4. EA Framework and Tools
This factor includes the EA framework, methodology, reference models, templates, and tools,
which were used to support the EA conversion process. “The deliverables are produced after careful research
of the existing trends and standards as well as the requirements of the stakeholders”—Case 1. The findings
showed that framework and tools were needed, and their lack may limit the progress of EA. “We lack
EA tools, but we have requested this from top management as an important aspect going forward”—Case 2.
It was also reported that the EA framework and tools may need to be tailored to suit organizational
needs. During the establishment phase, an EA framework was tailored, and formats of deliverables
were specified to meet organizational requirements. It was recommended to “tailor [the EA framework]
if needed to cater for any special requirements ... [and] specify all file formats for deliverables and notations of
diagraming”—Case 4. Further, “selection or development of the right meta-model that fulfills the requirements
of the [organization] was an essential for the success of EA practice”—Case 1. A rich meta-model provides a
proper mechanism “for modeling various building blocks of [the agency] while preserving relationships among
them. ... EA has to be based on a rich meta-model to enable thorough data collection”—Case 1.
5.1.5. EA Vision: Business-Driven EA
The data showed that a well-defined business-driven EA vision was important for the EA
programs. This meant that the EA program was linked to the business strategy and based on business
needs. “EA must be driven by business. It must be viewed as a tool that translates business strategy and the
business model into an executable operating model”—Case 2. If not, “EA risks being IT-driven which yields
projects and investments that do not provide business value”—Case 2. EA vision should be “aligned with the
business vision of the organization and it should be value-driven”—Case 1. “Indulging in some contemporary
activities just for the sake of doing those without any benefit to the organization should be avoided”—Case 1.
A business-driven EA facilitates EA’s integration with existing organizational practices, and it increases
the effectiveness of EA. “EA process has been established, and interactions with other frameworks are also
incorporated. Touch-points with PMO, ITIL, strategy management, and SDLC were defined as part of [the EA]
framework”—Case 3.
5.1.6. EA Governance
The data analysis showed the importance of EA governance, e.g., governance structure, standards,
and processes. It was stated that “governance is [an] important aspect of any EA program”—Case 3.
For effective EA implementation and use, organizations need a well-defined EA governance practice.
“EA governance is very crucial to the success of EA implementation and use. Thus, it is recommended to ensure
that EA governance practices are well-defined and established”—Case 1.
Defining EA principles and standards should be based on best practices and organizational
requirements. It was reported in Case 4, “EA principles were derived from both the industry best practices
and [the agency’s] internal environment”—Case 4. It was also important to align EA governance with
existing organizational and project governance practices.
EA activities and deliverables must be governed by an EA governance committee. “EA committee
has to govern EA activities, procedures, and plans. It also has to make sure that EA practices and processes
are frequently revised and updated. A frequent update of EA content and practices is essential to keep EA
relevant”—Case 1. EA governance processes must be established to ensure the quality of deliverables.
It was also reported in Case 4, that “a review process of all deliverables consisted of multiple stages” involving
“theconsultationcompanyinternalqualityassurance”and“formalreviewfrombusinessstakeholdersonbusiness
documents and technical stakeholders on technical documents”—Case 4.

--- PAGE 9 ---
Sustainability 2020, 12, 8485 9 of 17
5.2. The EA Use Process
This section reports the findings about the EA use process. It should be noted that the factors
reported in the previous sections are still relevant during this process. They must be maintained during
this process to enable a better EA use process.
As the theory suggests, a first condition for realizing EA benefits was the availability of quality EA
assets. The quality of EA assets depends on the effectiveness of the previous process, the conversion
process. EA assets must be of good quality to be useful. “Needless to say, the EA team must produce
quality output”—Case 2.
The quality of EA assets must be maintained by establishing proper mechanisms for their use and
updating. “Procedures also were defined to ensure proper updates of both the EA repository and the EA portal”
and “the frequency of updates to the repository is very important because the [agency] cannot afford to make
decisions based on outdated data”—Case 1.
Further, quality EA assets by themselves do not guarantee that EA benefits will be realized.
They must be used appropriately. That means using the right EA assets for the right purpose at the
right time. The data analysis showed some enablers of appropriate EA use.
First, asset representation and communication could facilitate appropriate use.
Different stakeholders have different requirements for EA. Hence, the EA team must properly assess
stakeholders’ requirements and provide them with assets that “are relevant to them by creating various
architectural views and reports”—Case 3. EA tools also facilitate the centralization and representation of
EA assets. Tools were reported to be useful in structuring EA assets, customizing them, and making
them accessible for use. For example, a centralized repository based on an EA tool was used and
customized where “several reports were customized to meet stakeholder information needs”—Case 3.
Second, integrating EA practices with the existing organizational practices such as project
management, IT operations, and service delivery increased the appropriate use of EA assets.
It helped to develop specific events that triggered the use of certain EA assets. For example, “EA is
involved in assessing architectural changes arising from various sources such as change initiatives/projects,
IT operations, and service delivery” and “changes are assessed and managed” according to EA’s “policies and
principles”—Case 3. In another instance, “EA plays an integral role throughout the project lifecycle ... all
the key deliverables are also delivered to EA for assessment and making sure that the project deliverables are
produced in alignment with the developed target architecture”—Case 1.
5.3. The Competitive Process: From EA Impacts to Organizational Performance
The findings showed that organizations expected to realize EA benefits, which ultimately would
lead to organizational benefits. Some reported a struggle in realizing both EA benefits and the ultimate
organizational goals while others reported partial achievement of both. As the theory suggests,
to realize their ultimate organizational performance, organizations must achieve the condition, the EA
benefits (impacts). The competitive process was also sensitive to external factors such as business and
environmental conditions that might influence the realization of desired organizational performance.
For example, it was reported that a merger was affecting EA. “Due to the merger, we are now still unaware
of the new strategy. The new EA cycle depends on this”—Case 2.
The data showed that achieving the ultimate organizational performance from investments
in EA might take years. All the cases had been operating their EA programs for many years.
Thus, some organizations chose a “cycles of EA” approach. In such an approach, the organization
focuses on achieving some EA benefits in each cycle that leads to a certain organizational performance.
For example, “the first EA cycle was to redesign and automate our IT operation processes in order to achieve the
goal of ‘reducing costs and increasing customer satisfaction’” while “the second cycle is to respond to the goal of
‘improving agility and reduce time to market’”—Case 2.

--- PAGE 10 ---
Sustainability 2020, 12, 8485 10 of 17
6. Discussion
This section discusses the findings in light of the adopted theory and the literature about EA.
It is organized into three subsections: the EA conversion process, the EA use process, and the EA
competitive process.
6.1. The EA Conversion Process: From EA Investments to EA Assets
The conversion process proposes that organizations spend on an EA program and, subject
to the effectiveness of their EA conversion process, obtain EA assets. The first dimension of the
conversion process is EA investment. EA investment is an essential but not adequate condition
for producing quality EA assets. As the findings showed, the organizations varied in terms of
their EA funds. Some organizations had sufficient yearly EA funding while others did not. As an
essential condition, EA investment affects the quality of the conversion process and its outcomes,
EA assets. Thus, sufficient EA funding should become part of the organizational budgeting process to
implement EA successfully [8]. When an EA team has access to adequate ongoing funding, it is likely
to produce useful artifacts [6]. Based on the findings and the supporting literature, the first proposition
is formulated.
P1: Adequate ongoing funding is an essential condition for an effective EA conversion process.
Having adequate funding is not enough. The findings also showed that the effectiveness of the
conversion process was influenced by the conversion factors. Those factors affected the conversion
process and its outcomes, “EA assets”. Those factors were management support, communication and
collaboration, EA team capability, EA framework and tools, EA vision (business-driven EA), and EA
governance. Organizations vary in their EA configuration and implementations based on the factors
that influence the effectiveness of the conversion. The way organizations form their EA program
influences EA outcomes [33] and EA configurations affect EA processes and the quality of EA services
and products [7]. This leads to the second proposition.
P2: EA’s conversion process effectiveness is influenced by conversion factors.
The second dimension of the conversion process is its effectiveness. There are six factors that
influence the effectiveness of the EA conversion process. The first one is management support. It has
been found to be a key enabler of an effective conversion process. It provides the power and visibility
needed for EA conversion. Other literature also emphasized the significance of management support
for the success of EA establishment [5,8]. On the other hand, the lack of management support is
one of EA’s major issues [34,35]. The lack of support limits the productivity of the EA team and the
effectiveness of EA activities [36]. Thus, to improve the EA conversion process, EA programs should
be supported by senior management. This leads to the following proposition.
P3: Management support increases the effectiveness of the EA conversion process.
An effective conversion process requires solid communication and collaboration mechanisms.
Having formal communication and collaboration plans increases the effectiveness of EA conversion.
It is important to avoid miscommunication and fragile collaboration [37] because they lead to
the collection of unsuitable data and the development of useless artifacts [35]. Without proper
communication, business units cannot agree on shared goals and form a common understanding [35].
Thus, proper communication and collaboration mechanisms facilitate the EA conversion process by
avoiding silo-thinking and isolation issues that negatively affect the conversion process. This leads to
the following proposition.

--- PAGE 11 ---
Sustainability 2020, 12, 8485 11 of 17
P4: EffectivecommunicationandcollaborationmechanismsincreasetheeffectivenessoftheEAconversionprocess.
The findings showed that a capable and skillful team was important for EA conversion. Such a
team increases the awareness of EA activities, promotes the acceptance of EA, and delivers useful
EA assets. The findings are in line with the literature on EA. A skillful and experienced team strives
to establish a successful EA program [35,37]. It can engage business and IT stakeholders to think
strategically and envision the future of EA [38]. This leads to the fourth proposition.
P5: EA team capability influences the effectiveness of the EA conversion process.
The findings suggested that the EA framework and tools play a role in converting EA investments
into assets. Selecting and tailoring an appropriate EA framework, tools, reference models, meta-models,
and guidelines to suit organizational needs enables and guides EA activities during the conversion
process. This helps to structure and guide EA activities, such as EA documentation and planning.
Previous studies presented similar views that EA frameworks and methodologies help architects.
They provide architects with templates and guidelines that facilitate the development of EA [7,35,37].
The careful selection of methodologies and approaches improves EA activities and presentation of
assets [6]. This leads to the following proposition.
P6: An EA framework and tools influence the effectiveness of the EA conversion process.
The data showed that an EA vision influences the conversion process. A business-driven EA
vision links the EA initiative to the business strategy and shapes it based on business needs. On the
other hand, an IT-driven EA minimizes EA’s value and yields projects and assets that do not provide
the ultimate business value. A business-driven EA helps to integrate EA within existing practices
such as project management, IT operations, and service delivery. Further, the lack of a clear EA vision
decreases the effectiveness of EA activities [25,37]. A vague or incomplete vision might result in EA
assets of questionable value [37]. This leads to the following proposition.
P7: EA vision influences the effectiveness of the EA conversion process.
The data analysis showed that EA governance influenced the conversion process. EA governance
includes establishing and operationalizing an EA governance structure, standards, and processes.
EA governance is an important aspect of any EA program and vital for both the implementation
and use of EA. EA activities, procedures, and plans must be governed to keep them aligned with
the organization and to produce the right EA assets. EA governance was widely discussed in the
literature on EA. An ambiguous structure for EA governance was recognized as a potential reason for
ineffective EA implementation [36]. A proper governance mechanism would enable better integration
of EA processes with organizational ones [34] and facilitate the development of architectural assets [24].
This leads to the following proposition.
P8: EA governance influences the effectiveness of the EA conversion process.
In light of the adopted theory and the findings of this study, it could be proposed that these
conversion factors and their configurations and interactions influence the effectiveness of the EA
conversion process and its outcomes, EA assets. Each EA program has its special characteristics,
and some factors may have a greater influence than others. Thus, organizations must pay attention to
the conversion factors in light of their own needs and maturity [39,40].

--- PAGE 12 ---
Sustainability 2020, 12, 8485 12 of 17
6.2. The EA Use Process: From EA Assets to EA Impacts
This section discusses the findings about the EA use process. The data analysis showed some
potential factors that facilitated the EA use process to achieve EA benefits. The factors reported in the
previous conversion process are still relevant and important for this process.
The EA use process proposes that the first condition for effective use is the availability of quality
EA assets. Yet, quality EA assets were not enough for EA benefits to occur. It stresses that these assets
must be used appropriately to obtain the desired EA benefits.
As discussed for the previous process, EA investment and the effectiveness of the conversion
process determine the quality of EA assets. The findings showed that EA assets such as artifacts,
tools, processes, and services must be of good quality to be useful. Previous studies emphasized the
availability of high-quality EA information for EA use [6]. Quality EA assets are characterized by
accuracy, relevance, timeliness, completeness, interpretability, and accessibility [6]. Low-quality EA
assets undermine its usability. Developing low-quality EA assets is one of the major challenges that
hinder EA usefulness [26,34,35]. This leads to the following proposition.
P9: Quality EA assets are an essential condition for an effective EA use process.
Further, having quality EA assets does not guarantee the realization of EA benefits. EA assets
must be used appropriately to have the intended impacts. Though, how do organizations enable
the appropriate use of EA assets? The data analysis showed some enablers of appropriate use.
First, assets must be properly represented and communicated to enable their appropriate use.
TherequirementsofEAstakeholdersmustbecarefullyassessedtoprovideeachstakeholdergroupwith
the needed assets and guidelines to use them [33]. Appropriate EA frameworks and tools facilitate the
classification, centralization, and representation of EA assets. Second, EA assets must be integrated and
aligned with existing organizational practices such as project management, IT operations, and service
delivery to facilitate their appropriate use. These findings regarding the appropriate use of EA assets
comport with the perspectives of several earlier studies [3,7,9]. Thus, the following proposition
is formulated.
P10: Quality EA assets must be used appropriately to achieve EA benefits.
6.3. The Competitive Process: From EA Impacts to Organizational Performance
As the theory suggests, to realize the ultimate organizational performance, organizations must
achieve the essential condition, EA benefits (impacts). Besides that, external factors such as market and
business conditions must be favorable to realize the desired organizational performance. The findings
showed that external factors led to a disruption of EA activities and use, which ultimately affected
the anticipated organizational performance. This echoed previous studies that found that realizing
EA benefits can increase organizational performance [8,10,23]. The direct benefits of EA, although
valuable in themselves, have a substantial role in helping an organization attain its goals [10] such as
efficiency and organizational alignment [14].
The findings showed that some organizations used cycles of the EA value realization process.
Each cycle was focused on certain EA benefits, which were expected to lead to certain improvements
in organizational performance. For example, in one case, “the first EA cycle was to redesign and automate
our IT operation processes in order to achieve the goal of ‘reducing costs and increasing customer satisfaction’”
while “the second cycle is to respond to the goal of ‘improving agility and reduce time to market’”.
In summary, organizations that could realize the intermediate benefits of EA were expected to
experience a positive but often indirect impact on organizational performance [8,14], providing that
the business and market conditions were favorable [16]. Thus, the following could be proposed:
P11: The realization of EA benefits is an essential condition for the ultimate organizational performance.

--- PAGE 13 ---
Sustainability 2020, 12, 8485 13 of 17
and
P12: Business and market conditions must be favorable to realize the ultimate organizational performance.
7. Conclusions
This research has developed a theoretical process model to offer insights into how EA investment
is converted into desired organizational performance. The process model links and unpacks the process
into three iterative and interrelated processes: the EA conversion process, the EA use process, and the
EA competitive process.
The first contribution made by this research is the development of the EA benefits realization
model. This model comprises essential conditions and the three interrelated processes mentioned
above. First, organizations invest in EA and, conditioned by the varying effectiveness of the EA
conversion process, attain EA assets. Second, quality EA assets, if appropriately used, lead to desired
EA impacts. Third, attained EA impacts, if not adversely affected by external factors, yield enhanced
organizational performance.
Articulating a complete process model for the way that EA creates business value offers several
benefits, as follows. First, this model provides an analytical lens to comprehend why EA funding
does not always result in improved organizational performance. This might stimulate further
research to look beyond the simple relationships between EA and organizational performance.
Second, it offers a framework to explore the conditions and processes that are associated with EA
business value realization.
The second contribution is the identification of the various factors that influence EA business
value realization. The effectiveness of the conversion process is influenced by management support,
communication and collaboration, EA team capability, EA framework and tools, EA vision, and EA
governance. Organizations vary in their EA configuration and implementation based on the factors
that influence the effectiveness of the conversion. Furthermore, within the EA use process, appropriate
use of EA assets is influenced by the representation of EA assets and communication about them,
as well as the integration and alignment of those assets with existing organizational practices.
This study has highlighted areas where further research is most needed. As it appears, the EA
value creation process is complex, and needs to be broken down into manageable pieces. This research
achieves this by categorizing the overall process into three interrelated processes whereby each process
has its own enablers, issues, activities, and outcomes. This research has provided a beginning for
understanding the EA process, but more research is needed. For example, further investigation should
be conducted into many aspects of the conversion process, including EA funding, the details of the
activities in the EA conversion process, conversion issues, and the interactions between conversion
factors. The same is true for the second process, it is necessary to examine issues such as the variety of
assets, what constitutes their appropriate use, how the use of assets differs across different contexts,
and how to promote the appropriate use of EA assets.
Furthermore, the outcomes of such empirical research provide viable support to practitioners
on important aspects of EAM such as understanding the complexity surrounding EA’s business
value realization, the key processes, primary enablers, and the types of EA assets, their quality,
and appropriate use.
This research also has limitations. The first of these arises from the nature of the research method.
A case study of only four public sector organizations was used, which limits the generalizability of the
findings since it cannot be claimed that the processes and factors identified in these cases would be
similar in other settings. Thus, future research is needed to further examine the developed model in
different contexts.
The second limitation relates to the qualitative data obtained for this study; although the data
describe what the participants considered to be important, other aspects might not have been covered.
Therefore, the model and factors that have been developed are by no means a comprehensive or

--- PAGE 14 ---
Sustainability 2020, 12, 8485 14 of 17
ideal representation of EA value realization. Although this research endeavors to describe the EA
value realization process, the overall scope of the study could be extended. For instance, longitudinal
research is desirable to further recognize how EA value evolves over time, reflecting the influence of
the three sub-processes; this would lead to a richer understanding of both the sub-processes and the
overall EA value realization process.
Funding: This research was funded by the Deputyship for Research & Innovation, Ministry of Education in Saudi
Arabia, project number IFKSURG-1442-122.
Acknowledgments: The author extends his appreciation to the Deputyship for Research & Innovation, Ministry
of Education in Saudi Arabia for funding this research work through the project number IFKSURG-1442-122.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Appendix A
About Your Organization
This part is about the general information about your organization, IT and EA. Please describe the
major role of your organization, for example, your organization vision, mission and the most important
services you provide.
Organization Structure (IT Organization should be included)
Organization Structure of IT Department
Organization Structure of EA
EA and IT Budget and Employees
Table A1. EA and IT budget and Employees.
Employees Internal External
IT
EA
Budget by year (last 3 years)
IT
EA
About IT Department
This part is about information systems and plans in your IT department
Major Information Systems
Current Major IT projects
Future Plans for IT
About EA
This part is about EA activities. In this part, please provide information as much as possible
in details
History of EA with major activities
Table A2. History of EA with major activities.
Year Description of Activities Major Objectives Current Status

--- PAGE 15 ---
Sustainability 2020, 12, 8485 15 of 17
Please provide/describe your EA framework/methodology?
Future plans of EA, e.g., what are the planned projects related to EA?
Detailed Characteristics of EA
The following items are about major aspects of EA. Please complete the following table by
describingtheimportanceofeachitemtoyourorganizationandtheactualpracticesinyourorganization.
Suggested items are EA Objectives, EA principles, EA framework, EA methodology, EA team,
EA governance, EA assets, EA resources, EA maturity, EA reference models, EA deliverables, EA scope,
EA implementation, and EA use.
Table A3. Characteristics of EA.
Aspect Description
Success Factors
Please describe any factor that is considered to be important for the successful implementation of
EA in your organization
Table A4. Success Factors.
Factor How?
Benefits of EA
Table A5. Benefits of EA.
Benefit Description Realized or not?
Difficulties and Obstacles.
If you have any difficulties or obstacles for the successful implementation of EA,
please describe them
Table A6. Difficulties and Obstacles.
Difficulties Description
References
1. Lankhorst, M. Enterprise Architecture at Work: Modelling, Communication and Analysis; Springer:
Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2005.
2. Zachman, J.A. A framework for information systems architecture. IBM Syst. J. 1987, 26, 454–470. [CrossRef]
3. Shanks, G.; Gloet, M.; Someh, I.A.; Frampton, K.; Tamm, T. Achieving benefits with enterprise architecture.
J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 2018, 27, 139–156. [CrossRef]
4. Van de Wetering, R. Dynamic Enterprise Architecture Capabilities and Organizational Benefits: An Empirical
Mediation Study. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth European Conference on Information Systems
(ECIS2020), Marrakesh, Morocco, 15–17 June 2020.

--- PAGE 16 ---
Sustainability 2020, 12, 8485 16 of 17
5. Lange,M.; Mendling,J.; Recker,J.AnempiricalanalysisofthefactorsandmeasuresofEnterpriseArchitecture
Management success. Eur. J. Inf. Syst. 2016, 25, 411–431. [CrossRef]
6. Tamm, T.; Seddon, P.B.; Shanks, G.; Reynolds, P. How does enterprise architecture add value to organisations?
Commun. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 2011, 28, 10. [CrossRef]
7. Niemi, E.; Pekkola, S. The Benefits of Enterprise Architecture in Organizational Transformation. Bus. Inf.
Syst. Eng. 2019. [CrossRef]
8. Hazen, B.T.; Bradley, R.V.; Bell, J.E.; In, J.; Byrd, T.A. Enterprise architecture: A competence-based approach
to achieving agility and firm performance. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 2017, 193, 566–577. [CrossRef]
9. Kurnia, S.; Kotusev, S.; Taylor, P.; Dilnutt, R. Artifacts, Activities, Benefits and Blockers: Exploring Enterprise
Architecture Practice in Depth. HICSS 2020. [CrossRef]
10. Foorthuis, R.; van Steenbergen, M.; Brinkkemper, S.; Bruls, W.A.G. A theory building study of enterprise
architecture practices and benefits. Inf. Syst. Front. 2016, 18, 541–564. [CrossRef]
11. Schmidt, C.; Buxmann, P. Outcomes and success factors of enterprise IT architecture management:
Empirical insight from the international financial services industry. Eur. J. Inf. Syst. 2011, 20, 168–185.
[CrossRef]
12. Boh, W.; Yellin, D. Using Enterprise Architecture Standards in Managing Information Technology. J. Manag.
Inf. Syst. 2007, 23, 163–207. [CrossRef]
13. Niemi, E.; Pekkola, S. Using enterprise architecture artefacts in an organisation. Enterp. Inf. Syst. 2017, 11,
313–338. [CrossRef]
14. Niemi, E.I.; Pekkola, S. Enterprise Architecture Benefit Realization: Review of the Models and a Case Study
of a Public Organization. ACM SIGMIS Database DATABASE Adv. Inf. Syst. 2016, 47, 55–80. [CrossRef]
15. Boucharas, V.; van Steenbergen, M.; Jansen, S.; Brinkkemper, S. The Contribution of Enterprise Architecture
to the Achievement of Organizational Goals: A Review of the Evidence. Trends in Enterprise Architecture Research
(TEAR 2010) Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing; Proper, E., Ed.; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg,
Germany, 2010; pp. 1–15.
16. Soh, C.; Markus, M.L. How IT creates business value: A process theory synthesis. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Ion Sources (ICIS 1995), Whistler, BC, Canada, 10–16 September 1995; pp. 29–41.
17. Gregor, S.; Hart, D.; Martin, N. Enterprise architectures: Enablers of business strategy and IS/IT alignment in
government. Inf. Technol. People 2007, 20, 96–120. [CrossRef]
18. Bradley, R.V.; Pratt, R.M.E.; Byrd, T.A.; Outlay, C.N.; Wynn, D.E., Jr. Enterprise architecture, IT effectiveness
and the mediating role of IT alignment in US hospitals. Inf. Syst. J. 2012, 22, 97–127. [CrossRef]
19. Espinosa, J.A.; Boh, W.F.; DeLone, W. The organizational impact of enterprise architecture: A research
framework. In Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, Kauai, HI, USA,
4–7 January 2011.
20. Aier, S.; Gleichauf, B.; Winter, R. Understanding Enterprise Architecture Management Design—An Empirical
Analysis. In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Wirtschaftsinformatik (WI 2011), Zurich,
Switzerland, 16–18 February 2011.
21. Lagerstrom, R.; Sommestad, T.; Buschle, M.; Ekstedt, M. Enterprise architecture management’s impact on
information technology success. In Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System
Sciences, Kauai, HI, USA, 4–7 January 2011.
22. Lange, M. Evaluating the Realization of Benefits from Enterprise Architecture Management: Construction and
Validation of a Theoretical Model; CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform: Scotts Valley, CA, USA, 2012.
23. van Steenbergen, M.; Foorthuis, R.; Mushkudiani, N.; Bruls, W.; Brinkkemper, S.; Bos, R. Achieving
Enterprise Architecture Benefits: What Makes the Difference? In Proceedings of the 2011 IEEE
15th International Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Conference Workshops, Helsinki, Finland,
29 August–2 September 2011.
24. Seppänen,V.FromProblemstoCriticalSuccessFactorsofEnterpriseArchitectureAdoption; UniversityofJyväskylä:
Jyväskylä, Finland, 2014.
25. Hauder, M.; Roth, S.; Schilz, C.; Matthes, F. An examination of organizational factors influencing enterprise
architecture management challenges. In Proceedings of the 21st European Conference on Information
Systems, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 6–8 June 2013.
26. Kotusev, S.; Singh, M.; Storey, I. Investigating the usage of enterprise architecture artifacts. In Proceedings of
the 23rd European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS 2015), Münster, Germany, 26–29 May 2015.

--- PAGE 17 ---
Sustainability 2020, 12, 8485 17 of 17
27. Carvalho, J.A.; Sousa, R.D. Enterprise architecture as enabler of organizational agility: A municipality case
study. In Proceedings of the 20th Americas Conference on Information Systems (AMCIS 2014), Savannah,
GA, USA, 7–9 August 2014.
28. Yin, R. Case Study Research: Design and Methods; Sage Publications, Inc.: Thousand Oaks, CA, USA, 2003.
29. Baxter, P.; Jack, S. Qualitative case study methodology: Study design and implementation for novice
researchers. Qual. Rep. 2008, 13, 544–559.
30. Tellis, W.M. Application of a case study methodology. Qual. Rep. 1997, 3, 1–14.
31. Frey, J.H.; Fontana, A. The group interview in social research. Soc. Sci. J. 1991, 28, 175–187. [CrossRef]
32. Fereday, J.; Muir-Cochrane, E. Demonstrating rigor using thematic analysis: A hybrid approach of inductive
and deductive coding and theme development. Int. J. Qual. Methods 2006, 5, 1–11. [CrossRef]
33. Dang, D.D.; Pekkola, S. Root causes of enterprise architecture problems in the public sector. In Proceedings
of the 2016 Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Chiayi, Taiwan, 27 June–1 July 2016.
34. Lucke, C.; Bürger, M.; Diefenbach, T.; Freter, J.; Lechner, U. Categories of enterprise architecting
issues-an empirical investigation based on expert interviews. In Proceedings of the Multikonferenz
Wirtschaftsinformatik, Braunschweig, Germany, 29 February–2 March 2012.
35. Banaeianjahromi, N.; Smolander, K. Understanding obstacles in Enterprise Architecture Development.
In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS), İstanbul, Turkey,
12–15 June 2016.
36. Ajer, A.K.; Olsen, D.H. Enterprise Architecture Challenges: A Case Study of Three Norwegian Public Sectors.
In Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS2018), Portsmouth,
UK, 23–28 June 2018.
37. Lucke, C.; Krell, S.; Lechner, U. Critical issues in enterprise architecting—A literature review. In Proceedings
of the 2010 Americas Conference on Information Systems, Lima, Peru, 12–15 August 2010.
38. Kurnia, S.; Kotusev, S.; Dilnutt, R. The Role of Engagement in Achieving Business-IT Alignment Through
PractiScing Enterprise Architecture. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Information Systems,
Marrakesh, Morocco, 15–17 June 2020.
39. Aier, S.; Schelp, J. A reassessment of enterprise architecture implementation. In The International Workshops
on Service-Oriented Computing; ICSOC/ServiceWave 2009; Dan, A., Gittler, F., Toumani, F., Eds.; Springer:
Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2010; pp. 35–47.
40. Laschitza, J.; Undén, M. Enterprise Architecture Implementation A Qualitative Study in Opportunities and Obstacles
of EA Implementation; University of Gothenburg: Gothenburg, Sweden, 2017.
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional
affiliations.
© 2020 by the author. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).