--- PAGE 1 ---
HAL Id: hal-05335175
https://hal.science/hal-05335175v1
Submitted on 28 Oct 2025
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive
for the deposit and dissemination of scientific re-
search documents, whether they arepublished or not.
Thedocumentsmaycomefromteachingandresearch
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or pri-
vate research centers.
L’archiveouvertepluridisciplinaireHAL,estdes-
tinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents scien-
tifiquesdeniveaurecherche, publiésounon, émanant
des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche
français ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou
privés.
Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 - Attribution - International License
A Practical Approach to Evaluate Operational Business-IT
Alignment
Pascal Andre, Ali Benjilany, Hugo Bruneliere, Dalila Tamzalit
To cite this version:
Pascal Andre, Ali Benjilany, Hugo Bruneliere, Dalila Tamzalit. A Practical Approach to Evaluate Operational
Business-IT Alignment. Enterprise Information Systems, 567, Springer, pp.376-408, 2025, Lecture Notes in
Business Information Processing (LNBIP), ⟨10.1007/978-3-032-08573-3_17⟩. ⟨hal-05335175⟩

--- PAGE 2 ---
A Practical Approach to Evaluate Operational
Business-IT Alignment
Pascal André1[0000−0002−1112−2973]
, Ali Benjilany1
, Hugo
Bruneliere2[0000−0002−5987−2175]
, and Dalila Tamzalit1[0000−0002−0985−0226]
1
Nantes Université, École Centrale Nantes, CNRS, LS2N, UMR 6004, F-44000
Nantes, France
2
IMT Atlantique, CNRS, LS2N, UMR 6004, F-44000 Nantes, France
{Firstname.Lastname}@univ-nantes.fr, hugo.bruneliere@imt-atlantique.fr
Abstract Business-IT Alignment (BITA) is an important mean of eval-
uating the performance of IT systems operating within a business organ-
isation. In this context, it remains challenging for software architects to
represent, analyse and interpret the alignment situations, before trying
to fix potential misalignments. Despite different initiatives in the last
two decades, current solutions are too diverse and limited, making their
generalisation difficult, if not impossible. We consider that more meth-
odological guidelines are still needed to improve the support for BITA.
In this chapter, we address practical tracks for Core Operational BITA
(COBITA), a subset of BITA which targets the operational integration of
business and application artefacts. To this end, we first propose a general
framework, in the line of Enterprise Architecture, to establish a carto-
graphy of the as-is state: business and application layer modelling and
linking. We then propose to evaluate the alignment state using different
evaluation means (metrics, consistency rules, anti-patterns). The object-
ive is to provide indicators for domain experts and software architects to
assess the quality of the alignment between the two layers. The practical
aspects include principles, techniques and tooling: a partial version of
the approach has been implemented in the Archi tool and experimented
on the SoftSlate Open-Source Java Ecommerce Solution.
Keywords: Information Systems · Enterprise Architecture · Core Op-
erational Business-IT Alignment · Modelling · Assessment.
This chapter is a revised and extended version of the ICEIS 2024 conference
paper titled "Towards a link mapping and evaluation approach for Core Opera-
tional Business-IT Alignment" [6].
1 Introduction
An Information System (IS) is a socio-technical system covering both social
(i.e. organisation, business, enterprise) and information technology (IT) aspects.
These aspects require to consider different paradigms. For example, concerning

--- PAGE 3 ---
2 André et al.
the social aspects, an organisation needs to answer to the five W questions (Who
- What - When- Where - Why) by describing its activities and processes. For the
IT aspects, it mostly has to answer to the ’how’ question regarding the automated
part of its information system. In this case, the focus is put on the collection,
storage and processing of data. Generally, a main concern of IS architects is
to design efficient IT solutions that match with the business activities of their
organisations.
In this context, Business-IT Alignment (BITA) is a mean to measure and
evaluate the consistency between these complementary aspects. In the liter-
ature, the term alignment refers to both the process of establishing the links
(i.e. aligning or re-aligning) and the result of this process (i.e. fitting state).
In other words, the first interpretation is "alignment as an action" while the
second is "alignment as a state". When the alignment is not correct, it generally
refers to quality issues related to integration (e.g. Business-IT gap, alignment
problem [23], misalignment [40]). Alignment is a fractal concept since several
viewpoints can be considered according to stakeholder concerns. For example,
organisational alignment handle people, location, resources, etc. while strategic
alignment focuses mainly on value and objectives. Given one viewpoint, the
main questions are related to consistency and completeness. For instance, from
the people perspective, consistency means that people have the skills to process
the activities, and completeness means that all activities (related to people) have
operators and that all people are busy.
The Strategic Alignment Model (SAM) [21] is a reference model for BITA.
It separates the strategic and operational levels for both the business and IT
points of view. Still, it remains too informal to be applied in practice. Enterprise
Architecture (EA) [26] provides a more convenient framework. It covers many
stakeholder’s points of view, from business strategy to IT infrastructure. In EA,
alignment is about connecting layers via concepts of their underlying models.
A later work [20] reduced the scope to Operational BITA, i.e. the alignment of
business requirements with business processes and software systems. This defini-
tion is interesting to compare existing approaches. However, mixing requirements
with processes in business models can be confusing, and no supporting frame-
work has been provided up to know. Very recently, the scope has been narrowed
down to Core Operational Business-IT Alignment (COBITA) as the operational
integration of the business and application layers [1]. This is the actual core area
where the business view meets the IT view.
COBITA is a central preoccupation for IS architects (e.g., Enterprise Archi-
tects, Solution Architects, Technical Architects) in charge of maintaining legacy
applications. In practice, they use a combination of modelling and document-
ation to analyse the alignment and recommend evolution scenarios. However,
the existing BITA surveys [38,20,17,1] mention the lack of methodological and
tooling support to assist these architects in feeding the models, discovering the
alignment links, evaluating the obtained cartography, proposing evolution scen-
arios and, ideally, carry out necessary alignment. Thus, in the COBITA context,
several research questions have to be explored [1]. They concern (i) the impact

--- PAGE 4 ---
A Practical Approach to Evaluate Operational Business-IT Alignment 3
of how the business and application layers are modelled; (ii) the variety of the
stakeholder’s concerns, called dimensions; (iii) the tool support to perform the
COBITA continuous process and (iv) case studies or benchmarks to compare
existing approaches.
The work presented in this chapter is a first step towards addressing these re-
search questions. In particular, we cover the following COBITA steps: (1) Identify
the concepts to be considered from the two layers, (2) Build the layer models, as a
motherboard chipset for BITA; (3) Specify different types of links between these
concepts, considering various dimensions; (4) Establish concrete links between
elements from the two layers to obtain a cartography; (5) Evaluate this carto-
graphy by applying various means (metrics, logical rules for consistency/com-
pleteness, patterns or anti-patterns, etc.); (6) Contribute to the tool support by
partially automating several steps of the process; (7) Propose an open case study
for experimenting with our approach.
The remainder of this chapter is organised as follows. Section 2 introduces the
background on which we build our approach. Section 3 describes the concepts and
techniques used to establish an alignment state (i.e. a cartography) for COBITA.
Section 4 provides different means (metrics, consistency rules, anti-patterns) to
explore the cartography and produce information to evaluate the quality of the
COBITA. Section 5 presents the current tool support coming with our approach.
Section 6 illustrates the practical application of our tooled approach on a case
study. Section 7 discusses the related work, before Section 8 concludes and opens
on future work.
2 Background
In this section, we introduce the main concepts and related definitions on which
we built the work presented in this chapter.
2.1 COBITA
Figure1. BITA vs. COBITA
As introduced in Section 1, BITA
is about evaluating how IT systems
fit with enterprise business activities.
This is denoted by the ’full BITA’
arrow in Figure 1, whose scope is
wide especially when taking into ac-
count the different EA abstraction
layers and the viewpoints of the vari-
ous stakeholders. For the sake of uni-
formity, the layer colors are inspired
from Archimate [35]. Full BITA re-
quires to compare very distant, and
consequently distinct, concepts. This
is very complex to realize in practice.

--- PAGE 5 ---
4 André et al.
Thus, we rather promote a step-by-step alignment between peer layers, denoted
by the arrows between peer layers in Figure 1. Aligning vertical peer layers con-
sists in connecting quite comparable concepts since they remain in the same
domain (vertical arrows in Figure 1), concepts having an abstraction/refine-
ment relation. On the one hand, Alignment SA is mainly concerned with stra-
tegic alignment between business processes and goals/objectives. This topic has
been largely studied since 1990 [2,36,38,40] and a corresponding maturity model
has even been proposed (SAMM) [28]. On the other hand, alignments 1 and 2
are more related to software abstraction and reverse engineering [3,29] and re-
main an open field (for instance to discover architectural structures [1]). Aligning
horizontal peer layers is more difficult because the concerned concepts belong to
different domain (horizontal arrow in Figure 1), concepts having an mapping
relation. As a solution, COBITA reduces the scope to aligning the business layer
(mostly the business processes organising the enterprise activities) and the ap-
plication layer (an architectural view of the IT systems). It focuses on the difficult
part of BITA dealing with non-immediately comparable concepts.
2.2 EA Layers and Links
Figure 2 zooms on the COBITA perimeter. We consider two layers, namely
business and application, represented by two distinct models. The geometric
figures represent model elements which are instances of different concepts at
the business process-level (activities, events, actors, business objects, etc.) and
application-level (components, libraries, services, tasks, data object, etc.). These
elements are connected by links3
inside a given layer (intra-layer links) or
between layers (inter-layer links). Intra-layer links can be, for instance, data
flow or control flow in the business layer and association or inheritance in the
application layer. Inter-layer links represents a correspondence, traceability, re-
finement or dependency between concepts of the two layers. In the context of
our work, a set of inter-layer links is called a mapping.
2.3 Dimensions
A dimension is a point of view on the alignment. In Figure 2, two dimensions
are represented, and denoted by the dashed lines and the filled arrows (respect-
ively). Such dimensions target the possible concerns of the different stakeholders,
e.g. functions, data, urbanisation, actors, security or privacy. For example, in IS
modelling, we usually make a distinction between the structure, the functional
behavior and the dynamic behaviour (cf. the Function-Behaviour-Structure On-
tology [18]). In this chapter, we consider only two dimensions (functions and
data) which are the two most commonly studied ones in COBITA [1]. It is im-
portant to note that the intra-layer links belong to the models of the business
3
In the ISO 42010 standard [22], a link is called a correspondence, defines a rela-
tion between model elements called architecture description elements, and can be
governed by correspondence rules.

--- PAGE 6 ---
A Practical Approach to Evaluate Operational Business-IT Alignment 5
Figure2. COBITA links schematisation [6]
and application layers (cf. Section 3.1), while the inter-layer links are defined by
the enterprise architect when establishing the cartography (cf. Section 3.3).
2.4 Alignment State Evaluation
Both types of links can be considered when evaluating the COBITA, especially
when detecting patterns or applying consistency rules (cf. Section 4). According
to state-of-the-art [1], performing COBITA evaluation includes (i) checking the
consistency and completeness of the alignment, (ii) calculating metrics and rates
to evaluate the alignment, (iii) computing the coverage for different dimensions,
(iv) analysing change impact for maintenance and evolution. In this chapter, we
focus on defining the state of alignment and thus consider only the three first
items. Modifying an existing alignment (i.e. the last item) is currently out of the
scope of the presented work. To achieve our goals, we first propose metrics related
to the implementation of business and application functions (cf. Section 4.1);
then, we provide a set of consistency rules (cf. Section 4.2) and anti-pattern
detection (cf. Section 4.3) in order to evaluate the quality of the established
COBITA cartography.

--- PAGE 7 ---
6 André et al.
3 Building an Alignment State
Figure 2 is a schematic view of an alignment state that shows the elements we
require. Notably, a model for each one of the two concerned layers and links
between concepts of these two layers are needed.
3.1 Defining COBITA Layers
To be able to detect an alignment state, we first need to have a representation of
the concepts of each layer, and thus of the layers themselves. Having such rep-
resentations allows to handle these layers in terms of modelling and evaluation.
There are several main standard modelling languages which are often considered
in a COBITA context, including UML and BPMN 2.0 for instance [1]. However,
for the presented work, we chose to rely on Archimate because (i) it includes
the concept of layers and aspects (notably the business and application ones) to
structure the models; (ii) it is generic enough to serve as a pivot language for
future interoperability with other languages; (iii) it already offers several types
of links between concepts (that can be used as a basis for COBITA links). Archi-
mate also comes with a reference tool support (cf. Section 5). Finally, Archimate
is possibly compatible with BMPN or UML via dedicated model transformations
(cf. Section 5.2).
We selected Archimate concepts that are particularly representative for COB-
ITA. We summarized them in Table 1. In the context of our work, we considered
the two usual dimensions that can be found in the literature [20,1], namely func-
tional and data. The former refers to functionalities that implement business
activities or IT processes, it belongs to the behavior in Archimate. The latter
refers to the data and information existing in any IS, it belongs to the passive
structure in Archimate. The business layer models are represented using yellow
diagrams in Archimate, while the application layer models are represented using
blue diagrams.
Table 1. Selected Archimate concepts for COBITA [6]
In Table 1, we mention only the main concepts that are involved in inter-layer
links for the functional and data dimensions. In the next section, we define the
inter-layer links and bind them to these two dimensions.

--- PAGE 8 ---
A Practical Approach to Evaluate Operational Business-IT Alignment 7
3.2 Modelling COBITA Layers
Once the modelling language is chosen, the modelling activity can start. An im-
portant assumption in our work is that we start from legacy situations. This
means that we do not align models implicitly by construction, like in BITA ap-
proaches that implement business processes by service-oriented applications [24,34,39].
In legacy cases, a main issue is adequacy, meaning that the models must
reflect the reality. In practice, we observed that IS architects write manually
their business and application models. However, inferring the models from exist-
ing information could significantly increase the confidence in the resulting layer
models.
Business process models are usually designed by architects from informal
specifications, and then later extended with goal/objective information for any
strategic alignment (the alignment arrow labelled with "SA" in Figure 1). For
example, ArchiMate, e3value and business model canvas (BMC) are combined
in [10]. Consequently, few assistance is available to the architects. However, mod-
els may exist but expressed in another modelling languages. In particular, BPMN
is the most frequent language for business processes [1] and model transforma-
tion are helpful facilities to automatically import such models (e.g. from BPMN
to Archimate-Business, cf. Section 5.2).
Inferring application models from legacy software by reverse engineering pro-
grams (source code, deployed binaries, configuration files, etc.) is a well-known
activity. Quite surprisingly, few existing BITA approaches deal with reverse en-
gineering and provide a corresponding tool support [3,29].
– Reverse engineering enables to extract the legacy code structure (the alig-
ment arrow labelled with "1" in Figure 1).
– Still, abstracting it to software architecture models requires the architects
expertise (the aligment arrow labelled with "2" in Figure 1).
In the experimentation stage, we modelled both layers by interpreting jointly
the legacy source code and available documentation of the information system
we studied (cf. Section 6).
3.3 Defining Inter-layer Links
In Section 2, we introduced the notions of inter-layer link, dimension and map-
ping. The links are relations between layer model concepts. There are many
ways to represent the links, and even more semantics associated to them. For
example, UML provides three kinds of structural relations with variants: asso-
ciation4
(var: unidirectional association, aggregation, composition), inheritance
(var: implementation) and dependency (var: instantiation). These relations can
be customised by stereotypes. Archimate defines 11 relationships5
divided into
4
Associations are bidirectional by default.
5
https://pubs.opengroup.org/architecture/archimate31-doc/chap05.html

--- PAGE 9 ---
8 André et al.
four categories6
. Most are variants of UML relations, except the two dynamic
relationships (triggering, flow) which are used to model behavioral dependencies
between elements. All these relationships can be used to represent intra-layer
links (cf. Figure 2). Non-dynamic relationships can also be used to represent
inter-layer links (cf. Figure 2). However, we face two problems to define inter-
layer links: (i) Having too many variants to express one link leads to questioning,
discussion, confusions and arguments between stakeholders7
. According to the
Occam principle, we proposed to reduce the variety and we applied the same
strategy for the layer concepts in Table 1. (ii) Archimate uses dependencies or
inheritance for inter-link, meaning that the layers are ordered in a refinement
way (i.e. a dependency can be interpreted with a traceability semantics). This
is correct when we stay in the same domain but is not true in COBITA when
linking elements of different domains. As a consequence, we propose to use only
bidirectional associations to represent the links, and to define only one variant
per dimension.
We define two types of inter-layer links between the concepts of Table 1: im-
plementation links (related to the functional dimension) and representation links
(related to the data dimension). These two links are generic and independent
from any modelling language (e.g. BPMN, UML, Archimate). In the illustrating
figures, they are both implemented as Associations, i.e. dependency relationships
of Archimate. Note that we did not use other types of Archimate relationship
(such as Serving or Realization) because they are too specific to functions and
processes.
Definition 1 (Implementation link). An implementation link expresses that
a concept of the Business layer in the functional dimension is implemented by
a concept of the Application layer in the functional dimension. It means that a
A-funct concept is part of the implementation of the behaviour of a B-funct
concept.
Implementation links are illustrated on the left side of Figure 3: a business
process bp-orderProcess is composed of three business processes: bp1, bp2,
bp3. Each of them is implemented by one application function (respectively
af1, af2, af3).
Definition 2 (Representation link). A representation link expresses that a
concept of the business layer in the data dimension (e.g. a B-data concept) is
represented by a concept of the application layer in the data dimension (e.g. a
A-data concept).
Representation links are illustrated on the right side of Figure 3, where two
Business objects, Order and Cart are represented by the Data Objects Order-
DAO and CartDAO respectively. However, Whislist is not represented by any
A-data concept.
6
It is surprising that inheritance is not considered as a structural relation while real-
ization is.
7
The modelling methodology would have to explain precisely which kind of relation-
ship to use and why.

--- PAGE 10 ---
A Practical Approach to Evaluate Operational Business-IT Alignment 9
Figure3. Illustration of functional implementation (left) and data representation
(right) custom links [6]
We define a cartography as a collection of mappings that connect the
business and application layers. Each mapping is associated to one particular
dimension. Having several dimensions enables a customised evaluation of the
alignment. We address the actual evaluation process in Section 4.
3.4 Establishing Inter-layer Links
Once the layers are modelled (cf. Section 3.2), the next step is to add the inter-
layer links we defined in Section 3.3. To this end, any model element of the
business layer model could be possibly linked to any model element of the ap-
plication layer model (cartesian product), generating a large set of situations.
To avoid a combinatorial explosion, we consider only the layer model concepts
indicated in Table 1 and one type of link per dimension.
Inferring the links is difficult because there are many ways to implement
business concepts in applications:
– A business process (or function) can be implemented by a set of services or
methods. A Business object can be define by one or more database relations.
– An application service or a method can be part of the implementation of
several business processes or functions. Several business object can be merge
in one database relation for efficiency reasons.
– To avoid redundancy, only direct links are to be stored. For example, if a
business function is part of a business process the application concepts that
are mapped to the business function must not be explicitly defined as links
(there are computed by transitivity).
– Using lexical inference (name matching), may be useful if the software de-
velopers started from business requirements and follow some strict naming

--- PAGE 11 ---
10 André et al.
rule. Otherwise, name correspondence defined by regular expressions provide
random candidates for one to one mapping.
– Pattern matching (structured collection of business concepts mapped to a
structured collection of application concepts) provides the best results but
are the more difficult to define.
Of course, the inter-layer link depends on the semantics of the linked concepts,
but also on the used software development method. The knowledge of such in-
formation enables different heuristics.
– Establishing links separately on given dimensions enables to reduce the com-
plexity (divide and conquer), despite the fact that the link analysis for align-
ment evaluation may proceed on several dimensions and use the inter-layer
links to detect patterns (cf. Section 4).
– Semantically distant concepts can be brought closer via intermediate up-
grades or transformations. For example, if the application layer information
contains only software packages, the architect should explore the main func-
tions, the API, and the control flows in order to detect application function
or main services than can be linked to business functions or processes. If the
application layer is already presented as a Service Oriented Architecture, the
link establishment can benefit from lexical matching, gain for 1-to-1 corres-
pondence.
– When the software has been developed from requirements using a clear meth-
odology, candidate patterns appear to build the link. For example, there are
rules to define database schemes from conceptual data or business objects.
– Configurations files or meta-information (XML structures) are valuable in-
formation to detect concept mapping and establish the links.
In the experimentation stage, we established the links by interpreting the
business processes and functions we previously extracted from the legacy source
code and available documentation of the information system we studied (cf. Sec-
tion 6).
4 Evaluating an Alignment State
As mentioned before, COBITA evaluation usually relies on the knowledge of
domain experts and architects. However, the more the studied information sys-
tem is big, the more they will need support to detect potentially good or bad
situations. Alignment and misalignment are the two sides of the same coin8
.
Thus, detecting eventual bad situations is almost as important as asserting an
alignment level.
In this work, we opted for a combination of various quantitative and qual-
itative techniques in order to evaluate a COBITA state: metrics, logical rules,
8
Both keywords have to be taken into account for any systematic bibliography review,
e.g. the review mentioned in this chapter [40].

--- PAGE 12 ---
A Practical Approach to Evaluate Operational Business-IT Alignment 11
pattern matching, etc. The application of these techniques should be as auto-
mated as possible to be relevant for the architects. In what follows, we define
different metrics to quantify alignment, logical rules to evaluate the consistency,
and anti-pattern to detect misalignment. Based on these, we consider both the
functional and data dimensions, as well as the representation links defined in
Section 3.3 and their implementation discussed in Section 5.
4.1 Quantitative Evaluation Based on Metrics
The set of metrics we defined and support includes 1. the degree of coverage
of business concepts by application concepts, 2. the level of implementation of
business concepts, and 3. the level of application concepts implementing business
concepts. These metrics are inspired from a main reference for software quality
measurements [12], and from a main reference for relationship fitness measure-
ment in BITA [15]. For each metric, we provide both the computation logic and
the interpretation of the obtained result.
Metric 1 : Number of implementation links of a given Business func-
tional concept. The objective is to calculate the number of implementation
links, named M1, in which a business functional concept participates in. Three
different cases require a particular attention:
1. M1 = 0: The business functional concept is not implemented. Such a value
is a warning for domain experts and software architects who have to decide
whether this is actually indicating a misalignment situation or not.
2. M1 = 1: The business functional concept is implemented once, corresponding
to the ideal alignment situation. However, the architects still have to check
if the linked implementation is correct or not.
3. M1 ≻ 1: The business functional concept is implemented more than once.
This is generally an indicator of bad alignment that the domain experts and
software architects should consider. It is then up to them to decide whether
the situation is really problematic or not. Such situation is not a problem
if this choice has been done on purpose. In fact, in some cases, refining
the implementation of a business functional concept by multiple application
functions is required. However, we consider that the higher the number of
implementation links is, the bigger is the risk of misalignment. Indeed, it
could indicate occurrences of the "multiple functional implementation" anti-
pattern [19].
Metric 1 reveals situations of misalignment related to the implementation of one
specific business functional concept. The following metrics exploit this metric
in order to evaluate the implementation state by considering all the business
functional concepts.
Metric 2 : Rate of unimplemented business functional concepts. Apply-
ing Metric 1 on all the business functional concepts allows to calculate the total

--- PAGE 13 ---
12 André et al.
number of unimplemented ones. Given the total number of business functional
concepts, we can calculate Metric 2 by Rate of unimplemented B-funct con-
cepts = Number of unimplemented B-funct concepts/Total number of B-funct
concepts. The result of Metric 2 is also a relevant indicator for the software
architects. For instance, along with business domain experts and IT developers,
they can set a threshold from which the rate of unimplemented B-funct con-
cepts becomes a warning. Such threshold can be a contract between business
and IT representatives, in which the architect plays the role of mediator.
Metric 3: Critical implemented business functional concepts. Relying
on Metric 1, it is possible to sort out the B-funct concepts from the most to
the less implemented. This allows the architect to have a clear overview on the
most demanding B-funct concepts in terms of implementation. Therefore, such
an information allows to identify more easily the B-funct concepts to keep under
control.
Metric 4. Number of implementation links of an application functional
concept. While Metrics 1-2-3 focus on the links where B-funct concepts are
involved, Metric 4 focuses on the links where application functional concepts
are involved. The objective is to calculate M4, the number of B-funct concepts
implemented by one A-funct concept. Three different cases require a particular
attention:
1. M4 = 0: If an application functional concept A-funct does not have any
related implementation link, it means that this A-funct concept is not im-
plementing any B-funct concept, at least directly. In fact, an A-funct concept
is sometimes called by another A-funct concept which is itself implementing
a B-funct concept. However, this situation can produce inconsistencies, lead-
ing to occurrences of the Pure technical integration BITA Antipattern [19].
2. M4 = 1: The A-funct concept implements one Bus-Func concept, corres-
ponding to the ideal alignment situation. However, this cannot automatically
ensure the quality of the linked implementation.
3. M4 ≻ 1: An A-funct concept implementing more than one B-func concepts
should be alerting. Such a situation can notably occur in the context of
legacy monolith applications. This corresponds to possible occurrences of
the Monolith application BITA anti-pattern [19].
Globally, the results of Metric 4 are useful to reveal situations of misalign-
ment related to the number of implementations provided by a A-funct concept
for B-funct concept(s). The next step is to exploit further this metric in order
to evaluate the implementation state by considering all the A-funct concepts.
Metric 5. Rate of application functions concepts not implementing
business function concepts. By grouping the Metric 4 M4 results applied
on all application function concepts, i.e. all A-func concepts, we can calculate

--- PAGE 14 ---
A Practical Approach to Evaluate Operational Business-IT Alignment 13
the number of them that do not implement B-func concepts. In addition, given
the total number of A-func concepts, we can calculate the resulting Metric
5 by Rate of A-func concepts that are not implementing B-func concepts =
number of A-func concepts that are not implementing A-func concepts / total
number of A-func concepts. This metric gives a general overview of the degree
of A-func concepts currently involved in the alignment mapping. For instance,
supposing that more than half of the A-func concepts are not implementing at
least one B-func concepts, this would be a questionable situation to deal with.
Several reasons can be the cause of such a situation. It can be symptomatic
of accumulated dead code (e.g. due to wrong architecture decisions). It can be
simply due to code that does not conform to the designed architecture. It can also
be caused by an evolution in the organization related to some legacy software.
Metric 6. Application function concepts most implementing business
function concepts. Based on the results of Metric 4, we can also identify the
A-func concepts which are implementing B-func concepts the most.
This metric can be an indicator about the global application functions concepts
organisation and usage. For instance, having an A-func concept that implements
the third of existing B-func concepts, while some others are not (directly) im-
plementing any B-func concept, might reveal a too important dependency to
(and workload for) this A-func concept.
We proposed two metrics to calculate the number of implementation and
representation links, two metrics to calculate rates of implemented versus non-
implemented B-func concepts and A-func concepts implementing versus non-
implementing B-func concepts and, finally, two metrics to calculate the most
implemented B-func concepts and the most A-func implementing B-func con-
cepts. These metrics represent a first evaluation mean of the cartography linking
the business and application layers and following the functional and data dimen-
sions. We now present a second and complementary mean of evaluation.
4.2 Qualitative Evaluation Based on Consistency Rules
While metrics can help to evaluate the alignment quantitatively, other means are
needed in order to provide a more qualitative evaluation. To this end, we define
and propose some logical rules that enable consistency verification involving
different concepts of the two dimensions. Compared to the evaluation based
on metrics, consistency rules allow to deal with more structural aspects. Thus,
we try to identify patterns of links composed of 1) inter-layer links between
concepts of a same dimension (but different layers) and 2) intra-layer links
between concepts of a same layer (but different dimensions).
Considering the following sets BfC=B-func concepts, BdC=B-data concepts,
AfC=A-function concepts and AdC=A-data concepts, in addition to (bfc,bfd) ∈
BfC × BdC and (afc,adc) ∈ AfC × AdC, we have the following propositions:
– A : bfc accesses bdc
– B : afc accesses adc

--- PAGE 15 ---
14 André et al.
– C : bfc is implemented by afc
– D : bdc represented by adc
Based on these, we define the following consistency rules:
(A ∧ B) ∧ C =⇒ D (1)
(A ∧ B) ∧ D =⇒ C (2)
(1) We verify for each pair (bfc,bdc) where bfc accesses bdc. If there is an
afc implementing bfc then adc, that is accessed by afc, should represent bdc.
For instance, in Figure 4, the pair (bfc,bdc) (Create a test customer account,
Customer) shows that Create a test customer account accesses Customer. There
is also the afc Register that implements the bfc Create a test customer account.
The consistency rule will return true if the adc CustomerDAO represents the
bdc Customer. It will return false if this is not the case, as illustrated in the left
part of Figure 5.
Figure4. Rules for consistency verification [6]
Figure5. Non-verified Rule 1 & 2 [6]
(2) We verify for each pair (bfc,bdc) where bfc accesses bdc. If there is an adc
representing bdc then afc, that accesses adc, should implement bfc. For instance,
in Figure 4, the pair of (bfc,bdc) (Create a test customer account, Customer)
shows that Create a test customer account accesses Customer. There is also

--- PAGE 16 ---
A Practical Approach to Evaluate Operational Business-IT Alignment 15
the adc CustomerDAO that represents the bdc Customer. The consistency rule
will return true if the afc Register implements the bfc Create a test customer
account. It will return false if this is not the case, as illustrated in in the right
part of Figure 5.
We currently propose two consistency rules in order to illustrate this kind of
evaluation mean. However, we could envision many more. As a result, a library
of consistency rules could be created and then progressively extended.
4.3 Detection of Misalignment Anti-patterns
Complementary to metrics, pattern matching contributes to the qualitative eval-
uation of the alignment. Indeed, patterns can be used to detect good, bad or
suspicious alignment situations. In the context of our work, we looked more spe-
cifically for misalignment situations to be handled in a future evolution of the
information system. A misalignment may simply come from a bad initial soft-
ware design. However, in many cases, it is originated from adaptations made into
legacy code and applications, evolving business processes, facing technical debt,
etc. Patterns and anti-patterns refer to common best practices often emerging
from practical experiences at both the business and application layers. We did
not establish a reference style (i.e. a reference model) to comply to because the
legacy systems we target can follow various software architectural styles [30].
Still, we followed base foundations for modular system design which are loose
coupling and strong consistency.
Like anti-patterns in software engineering, corresponding to common soft-
ware design errors [8], BITA anti-patterns illustrate recurring alignment errors.
In a base work on such alignment anti-patterns [19], these errors were identi-
fied and then classified from studies (audits) concerning about thirty different
information systems. A four-layer Enterprise Architecture (business processes,
business functions, software, hardware) was considered, that is slightly different
from our COBITA context (cf. Figure 1): (i) the COBITA business layer is split
into two levels (process, functions) and the hardware layer merely correspond to
the implementation layer in Figure 1, that is outside COBITA; (ii) they focus
on the "function" dimension only (cf. Section 2.3), because their reference archi-
tectural style is micro-service architectures, while we target several dimensions
with no particular software architectural style in mind. Consequently, the links
between the layers 1 and 2 in this base work correspond to intra-layer links in our
approach. Similarly to this base work, we also deal with the links between the
layers 2 and 3. 14 BITA anti-patterns were identified in the considered informa-
tion systems, each corresponding to a recurring bad scenario. Four of them were
presented with more details and formalized via identity cards including: Label
- Definition - Visualization - Causes - Consequences - Effects on evolution, on
use, ease and recovery time. Finally, no actual detection techniques nor related
tools were proposed. We propose to adapt this base work to our context, and to
consider anti-patterns as additional COBITA evaluation means.
For each of the supported anti-patterns, we provide a general definition. We
also detail one example of an associated algorithm to detect the occurrences of

--- PAGE 17 ---
16 André et al.
such an anti-pattern (for AP2). This algorithm, as well as all the others (for
the three other supported anti-patterns), are presented on the dedicated Web
appendix 9
. The proposed algorithms are then implemented with the scripting
language jArchi to be executed in the modeling environment Archi (cf. Sec-
tion 5.1). Their application in the context of the SoftSlate case study is de-
scribed in Section 6.3. Complementary details can also be found from a past
publication (in French only) [5].
Anti-pattern AP1. Pure technical integration
Definition 3. This anti-pattern occurs when different software applications call
each other either directly or through other software, without corresponding links
appearing at the business layer level.
Examples of such a missing traceability are numerous in practice. This is
notably the case when the software architecture has been designed from soft-
ware requirements without a business process reference. Thus, the execution
control flow follows the application structure instead of the user experience. The
associated algorithm is available from the Web appendix9
.
Anti-pattern AP2. Functional SILO
Definition 4. This anti-pattern refers to the existence of a block isolated from
the rest of the information system. A block is characterized by a succession of
business tasks linked to a corresponding succession of application functions.
Instances of this pattern can occur in large information systems covering
several business activities that share common applications or internal (hidden)
software components. As an illustration, Listing 1.1 shows the algorithm for de-
tecting the Anti-Pattern AP2. It starts by creating a collection bfuncConcepts of
the concepts from the business layer to be possibly aligned. Then, it checks for
each business concept the absence of a link (a flow or a composition) to other
business concepts (direct or indirect implementation). In case of absence, and
if the concept is implemented (presence of implementation links) by applica-
tion concepts that are targets of these links and connected to other application
concepts of type application−function, then these application concepts must not be
the implementation of other business concepts. Otherwise, an alert is raised to
indicate the presence of AP2 related to the considered business concept.
Listing 1.1. Algorithm for detecting AP2
// STEP 1 : Collect a l l B func concepts
busprocess = GetElement("business - process ")
busfunction = GetElement("business - function ")
businteraction = GetElement("business - interaction ")
bfuncConcepts = Concat( busprocess , Concat( busfunction , businteraction ) )
collection = GetElement( bfuncConcepts )
ForEach concept in collection
9
https://uncloud.univ-nantes.fr/index.php/s/5ZrjSnbdb3neBTP

--- PAGE 18 ---
A Practical Approach to Evaluate Operational Business-IT Alignment 17
i = 0
Output(’----- next concept -------’ , concept )
j = 0
ForEach bprel in GetRels( concept )
// STEP2: Verify i f there is intra business layer link
If j is 0
If bprel . type is ’flow - relationship ’ or bprel . type is ’composition -
relationship ’
j++
writeln (’OK − > CHECK NEXT BP ’)
Else
If bprel . specialization is ’Implementation link ’
ForEach a f r e l in GetRels( bprel . target )
//STEP3: Verify i f there is intra application layer link
If a f r e l . target . type is ’application - function ’ and a f r e l . type is
’triggering - relationship ’
i++
End If
End ForEach
End If
End If
End If
End ForEach
If j is 0 and i is 0
writeln (’WARNING : Anti pattern 2 DETECTED on ’ , concept )
End If
End ForEach
Anti-pattern AP3. Monolithic Application
Definition 5. This anti-pattern occurs when a single application concept imple-
ments several distinct business functions.
The algorithm to identify AP3 creates a collection of all the concepts that
we consider in the application layer. For each concept, we filter, in the collection
of association links, the direct or indirect implementation links to the business
layer. If none are detected, an error is raised. If several are found, this is a
potential case of AP3 anti-pattern. The associated algorithm is available from
the Web appendix9
.
Anti-pattern AP4. Functional Multiple Implementations
Definition 6. This anti-pattern refers to the implementation of a single busi-
ness layer concept by multiple application layer concepts. The main identified
reason is the lack of understanding of business models, and their functional part
in particular.
Examples are multiple copies of same functions with light modifications (or
not) thus leading to redundant and often separately evolving pieces of software.
When different implementations of one business function exist, they must be
linked in the application layer. For instance, paying an invoice with credit card,
check or cash. The associated algorithm is available from the Web appendix9
.
In Section 4, we provided an overview of several techniques to evaluate an align-
ment state. In particular, we presented three complementary means to evaluate

--- PAGE 19 ---
18 André et al.
the alignment between the two layers and according to the two dimensions: six
metrics on pairs of concepts from the Business and Application layers, two con-
sistency rules and four anti-patterns. These means provide relevant indicators to
domain experts and software architects about the current state of the alignment
of their systems. However, their list is not exhaustive and could be complemen-
ted in the future. In the next section, we propose some tool support for them in
order to assist the enterprise architects.
5 Automating User Assistance
Establishing the links and evaluating the alignment are complex and tedious
activities, especially for large information systems frequently evolving over time.
Indeed, COBITA activities need to the repeated periodically in order to pre-
serve a good alignment. Thus, to be applicable in practice, the evaluation means
presented in Section 4 must be implemented and supported by a tool for en-
terprise Architects. There are several requirements to fulfil related to: (1) layer
models, (2) link cartography, (3) metrics and rule statements. These are not
separated concerns and must share a common technical environment (cf. Sec-
tion 5.1). Still, each context specific to a given case study requires a customised
tool support (cf. Section 5.2).
5.1 Tool Support Background
General purpose case tools for modelling can be used, especially those including
reverse engineering facilities for automatically abstracting models from source
code (e.g. Modelio10
).
There are various existing EA tools such as VisualParadigm, SmartEA, En-
terprise Architect or Modelio BA. To implement the tool support associated
to our proposed approach, we decided to rely on the open source Archimate
modelling tool named Archi11
for different reasons: (i) Archi is an Enterprise
Architecture solution fully implementing the Archimate standard language that
allows to properly model the two layers and related concepts we target in the
context of COBITA (cf. Section 3.1); (ii) Archi is an open source solution that
can be freely reused and/or refined according to our needs, for instance to rep-
resent and handle the COBITA links as extensions of standard Archimate links
(cf. Section 3.3); (iii) Archi comes with an ecosystem and community offering
several additional plugins, including notably jArchi12
that allows to navigate
and query Archimate models for evaluating the alignment (cf. Section 4).
As a result, the current version of the provided base tool support is structured
as follows:
10
https://www.modelio.org/
11
https://www.archimatetool.com/
12
https://www.Archimatetool.com/blog/2018/07/02/jArchi/

--- PAGE 20 ---
A Practical Approach to Evaluate Operational Business-IT Alignment 19
– Base Archi to model the business and application layers. For layers mod-
elling, we directly rely on the Archimate modelling features provided by the
Archi tool. This includes a graphical model editor covering the Archimate
standard language. We customised Archimate aspects in order to implement
the COBITA dimensions.
– Extended Archi to support the COBITA links. Archi allows defining new
types of relationships by specialising these base types. In the present work,
we specified the proposed new types of COBITA links by specialising the
Association relationship offered by Archimate (cf. Figure 6). Note that the
interface provided by default in Archi also gives the number of occurrences
of each one of the newly specified types of links.
Figure6. Specialisation Manager of Archi for specifying the COBITA links [6]
– jArchi for exploiting the models and links to evaluate the alignment. jArchi
is a scripting plugin provided by the developers of Archi but not integrated
by default. Thus, we had to deploy and build it ourselves so that it can
then be used within our Archi workbench. Thanks to jArchi, the Archimate
models are handled, including the alignment links, to collect the information
needed to compute the proposed metrics. We also used jArchi to navigate
these models with the objective to check the proposed consistency rules.
In what follows, we provide concrete examples of script implementations.
Note that we removed some of the comments and modified the indentation, for
the sake of readability and length.
Example of Metric Script Implementation Listing 1.2 shows the imple-
mentation in jArchi of a script for calculating Metric 2 (cf. Section 4.1). The
result of the running of the script/metric is the list of all unimplemented BPs in
the model, and the total number of unimplemented BPs.
Listing 1.2. Script in jArchi implementing Metric 2
console.log(’The unimplemented business functional concepts are : \n’);
// Collect all elements of type business process
var collection = $("element");
var busprocess= collection.filter(’business -process’)
var busobject= collection.filter(’business -object’)
var busfunction = collection.filter(’business -function’)

--- PAGE 21 ---
20 André et al.
var businteraction = collection.filter(’business -interaction’)
var bfuncConcepts = busprocess.concat(busfunction).concat(businteraction)
//Set a counter
var count=0
//Loop on all business functional co
bfuncConcepts.forEach(function(obj) {
if($(obj).rels(’association -relationship’).length ===0)
{console.log(obj.name);
count++}
})
console.log(’\n There are’, count , ’unimplemented business functional
concepts among’, bfuncConcepts.length ,’. Which gives a rate of’, count/
bfuncConcepts.length*100 ,’%’)
Example of Consistency Rule Implementation Listing 1.3 shows the code
in jArchi to verify the consistency rule CR1 (cf. Section 4.2). The preparatory
phase consists in collecting the BFC concepts in a collection, then collecting the
AFCs in another collection. The algorithm starts by retrieving - for each BFC
- the target BDC(s) of the intra-layer link(s), here access-relationship (STEP
1). This is the verification of the proposition A. Then, the algorithm retrieves -
for each BFC - the target AFC concept of the implementation link (STEP 2).
This is the verification of the proposition C. After that, the algorithm checks
that the proposition B is true (STEP 3), i.e. there is at least one intra-layer link
connecting the AFC concept to an ADC concept. If this is the case then the
last step (STEP 4) consists in checking, for each ADC concept, that each of its
inter-layer links connects it with the same BDC concept identified in STEP 1
and currently iterating. This is the verification of the proposition D. Finally, if
the algorithm reaches this stage and D is true, the consistency rule is verified
and a message is returned to indicate it.
Listing 1.3. Script in jArchi implementing CR1
console.log("New Archi Script for CR 1");
//Collect all b func concepts
var busprocess= $("business -process")
var busobject= $("business -object")
var busfunction = $("business -function")
var businteraction = $("business -interaction")
var bfuncConcepts = busprocess.concat(busfunction).concat(businteraction)
//Collect all a func concepts
var appfunction= $("application -function")
var dataobject= $("data-object")
var appprocess = $("application -process")
var appinteraction = $("application -interaction")
var afuncConcepts = appprocess.concat(appfunction).concat(appinteraction)
//Algo CR1
//Step 1 : For each B-func Concept, get the B-data Concept target of the
access relationship : OK === Proposition A
bfuncConcepts.forEach(function(bfc){
$(bfc).rels(’access -relationship’).forEach(function(rel){
console.log(bfc, ’accesses to’ ,rel.target , ’----’);

--- PAGE 22 ---
A Practical Approach to Evaluate Operational Business-IT Alignment 21
//Step 2 : For each B-func Concept - get the A-func Concept target of the
COBITA Link === Proposition C
$(bfc).rels(’association -relationship’).forEach(function(imp){
if(imp.specialization===(’Implementation link’))
console.log(bfc, ’is implemented by’ , imp.target , ’--------’);
//Step 3 : For each "afc=asso.target", si afc accessed by adc (Proposition
B) , then adc should represent bdc= rel.target (Proposition D)
$(imp.target).rels(’access -relationship’).forEach(function(acc){
console.log(’xxxxx’ , imp.target , ’accesses to’ , acc.target , ’xxxxx’);
//Step 4 : then for each adc i.e target of acc relationship with afc, check
that every COBITA link wich adc is source/target, is linked to bdc has an
access relation to bfc implemented by afc
$(acc.target).rels(’association -relationship’).forEach(function(data){
if (data.specialization ===(’Data link’) && data.source.id === rel.target.
id)
console.log (’xxxxxxxxxxx’, acc.target , ’is represented by’ , data.source ,
’which is the same than the’, rel.target ,’accessed by’,bfc,’---------
-> CR1 VERIFIED !!! xxxxxxxxxxx \n’);
}) }) }) }) })
Example of Anti-Pattern Detection Script Listing 1.4 shows the imple-
mentation in jArchi of a script for detecting the AP2 Anti-Pattern (cf. Sec-
tion 4.3). The result of the running of the script/metric is the list of potential
issues of missing business elements.
Listing 1.4. Script in jArchi implementing AP2
console.log("Archi Script for identifying anti pattern 2 : FUNCTIONAL SILO");
// Collect all b func concepts : OK
var busprocess= $("business -process")
var busobject= $("business -object")
var busfunction = $("business -function")
var businteraction = $("business -interaction")
var bfuncConcepts = busprocess.concat(busfunction).concat(businteraction);
bfuncConcepts.forEach(function(concept){
i=0; // incremented when the target AF is linked by a triggering link.
console.log(’----- next concept -------’ , concept)
// Step 2 : get the BP links, including composition
j=0; // incremented by the BP triggering intra-links
$(concept).rels().forEach(function(bprel){
if (j==0) {
if (bprel.type === (’flow-relationship’)|| bprel.type===(’composition
-relationship’)) {j++; console.log(’OK -> CHECK NEXT BP’)} //
console.log(’Detected’ , bprel, concept, ’ OK -> CHECK NEXT BP \n
’)
// Step 3 : check the AF target of implementation links
else{ if (bprel.specialization===(’Implementation link’))
$(bprel.target).rels().forEach(function(afrel){
if ((afrel.target.type===(’application -function’) && afrel.
type === (’triggering -relationship’))) {i++}
})
} } })
if (j==0&&i==0) console.log(’WARNING : Anti pattern 2 DETECTED on’ , concept)
})

--- PAGE 23 ---
22 André et al.
The source code of the implemented components, as well as the complete
models we used in the context of our experiments on our illustrative system
(cf. Section 6), are all available online13
.
5.2 Customised Tool Support
Additional tool support notably include import/export facilities. For example,
we developed in ATL14
a model-to-model transformation to transform BPMN
models into corresponding Archimate (Business) models. Figure 7 gives an over-
view of the conceptual mapping realised in this transformation. After the ex-
ecution of such a transformation, we loose some information since BPMN is a
richer business process modeling language than Archimate (Business). However,
this is not an issue since this loss of information relates to elements which are
not directly pertinent in our COBITA context.
Figure7. From BPMN to Archimate
As mentioned in Section 3.4, customised tool support can be needed to take
into account the particular characteristics of each enterprise or case study (e.g.
when the software development processes and associated practices or guidelines
vary). Transformational or generative approaches usually provide implicit links
(in up to 66 % of the cases [1]) but this often corresponds to best case situations
where the software architecture complies to the business architecture [24,32,33,34,37,39].
For instance, a prior work already focused on an automatic semantic process
aimed at discovering the services that can be used to implement the business
processes [33]. Another work proposed a solution based on metamodels & trans-
formation rules to automatically discover a data model from business process
models (BPMN + UML activities) [7]. Overall, the goal of these approaches is
to implement business processes (alignment by construction) while this chapter
rather addresses the problem of better aligning legacy Information Systems.
13
https://tinyurl.com/y6rd5v9z
14
https://eclipse.dev/atl/

--- PAGE 24 ---
A Practical Approach to Evaluate Operational Business-IT Alignment 23
6 Experimenting on a Case Study
We illustrate our solution in practice on the SoftSlate Commerce Java shopping
cart system that powers dozens of E-commerce websites. This is a suitable can-
didate for performing the experiments for different reasons: (i) We did not find
available benchmarks or models in the literature or on the Web. (ii) A concrete
implementation of this system, the SoftSlate web application15
, is directly avail-
able online including its complete source code and documentation. (iii) Some
business processes have already been built from this implementation by using
reverse engineering techniques based on user interactions with the web applica-
tion [14]. Thus, it is an interesting starting point for the modelling of the business
layer. (iv) SoftSlate is reasonably complex in terms of structure and relatively
large in terms of number of lines of code.
Figure8. Excerpt of the SoftSlate’s cartography of COBITA alignement [6]
6.1 Modelling the COBITA layers
In this section, we report our experience on building models for the business and
application layers.
Business Layer of SoftSlate Different business processes have already been
automatically extracted from the SoftSlate Web application [14]. They describe
the main actions that customers can do with the system, namely “Login”, “Re-
gister”, and “SaveCartItem”. To complement this initial set of business processes,
15
https://www.softslate.com/category/archivedDocs

--- PAGE 25 ---
24 André et al.
we also studied the provided user guide16
. In particular, we identified additional
business processes related to the system administrators in charge of managing
products, orders, etc. In what follows, we focus on two of these newly identified
business processes BPs which are also modelled in yellow in the full cartography
from Figure 8: (1) BP1: Add a product to the list of products & Order that
product (cf. Figure 9); (2) BP2: Configure shipping costs (cf. Figure 10).
Figure9. Order Process of SoftSlate
Figure10. Shipping Configuration Process of SoftSlate
Application Layer of SoftSlate As explained before, no software architec-
ture was directly available. To overcome this, we used Modelio17
to get a first
abstraction (the alignment arrow labelled with "1" in Figure 1) by reverse en-
gineering the legacy code structure. Then, we complemented the modelling of
the application artifacts by directly looking into the source code of the available
16
http://www.softslate.com/documentation/userGuide2x.pdf
17
https://www.modelio.org/

--- PAGE 26 ---
A Practical Approach to Evaluate Operational Business-IT Alignment 25
implementation of SoftSlate, in addition to the provided user documentation. It
is a Web application developed in Java with the J2EE framework, and composed
of five main packages: Customer, Administration, Business Objects, DAO, In-
staller. The Customer package and the Administrator package provide the
core features of the system. The Business Object package and DAO package
are also important because they are directly used by the Administrator pack-
age. Such an implementation facilitates the mapping for the Data dimension.
However, these five main packages contain a large number of sub-packages
(46 in total), each one of them containing a significant number of classes. Thus,
in the context of the current experiments, we focused on the Administrator
package. The Administrator package contains a set of Java classes of differ-
ent types by following the Model–View–Controller (MVC) software design pat-
tern. Servlet classes implement the "Controller" part, JSP classes implement the
"View" part, while Bean, Processor and DAO classes implement the "Model"
part. Moreover, the Administrator package is responsible for implementing the
previously mentioned business processes BP1 and BP2.
Following a similar approach, we modelled six Application Components, namely
"Account Management", "Cart Management", "Product", "Payment", and "Ship-
ping". For example, the application component OrderProcessing has been mod-
elled by studying the Order sub-package from the Administrator package. This
sub-package contains interrelated Java classes we represent as application func-
tions AFs (Add Order, Delete Order,Edit Order). Finally, the Order sub-package
also contains DataAccessObject (DAO) classes we represent as a single DataOb-
ject (OrderDAO).
Figure11. Excerpt of the Application model of SoftSlate
As a result, the complete application model we built is shown in Figure 11
and also in blue in the full cartography from Figure 8.
Based on the previously described models of the business and application lay-

--- PAGE 27 ---
26 André et al.
ers, we can move on to the next step and work on establishing alignment links
between the models of these two layers.
6.2 Establishing the Inter-layer links
As introduced before, Figure 8 displays the two business processes of the business
layer in yellow, and the application components of the business layer in blue. We
established manually multiple COBITA links between model elements from these
two layers. These links are of various types (cf. Section 3.3) which are graphically
represented by different colors. Red links correspond to implementation links
(functional dimension), while the blue links correspond to representation links
(data dimension). Such a cartography is already useful to get an overview of
the situation in terms of alignment. However, it is not sufficient to evaluate the
actual quality of this alignment. A deeper analysis of the models and COBITA
links is thus needed.
6.3 Evaluating the Alignment State
In this section we apply the evaluation means presented in Section 4. For the sake
of readability and length, we only describe illustrative parts of the application
of these evaluation means.
A) Quantitative Evaluation Based on Metrics
In what follows, we apply different metrics we proposed in Section 4 and
illustrate our work with three of them (note that the related conference paper [6]
illustrated six metrics).
Metric 2. Figure 12 shows the output, in the jArchi console, of the script
that lists all the unimplemented BPs. The number of unimplemented BPs is
10, among 24 BPs in the whole model (i.e. 41,6 % of unimplemented BPs). At
first look, this number can be considered as too high. However, such a conclu-
sion can be mitigated when analysing the unimplemented BPs. For instance, BPs
such as Order Process and Shipping Order do not have implementation links to
AFs. Instead, these BPs contains other BPs that are themselves implemented by
AFs. Thus, Metric 2 could be further refined in order not to integrate composite
BPs into the computation.
Metric 4. Figure 13 shows the output, in the jArchi console, of the script that
enables to verify if a given AF is implementing any BP and, if this is the case, also
provides the number of implementation links related to that AF. The selected
AF is "Log in", and has one implementation link Impl_Link_1.
Metric 5. Figure 14 shows the output of the jArchi script that lists all the AFs
that are not directly implementing BPs. The number of these AFs is 14, among
26 AFs in the whole model (i.e. 53,8 % of the AFs). Similarly to the result of
Metric 2, this number can be considered as too high. However, once again, such

--- PAGE 28 ---
A Practical Approach to Evaluate Operational Business-IT Alignment 27
Figure12. Result of Metric 2 on SoftSlate [6]
Figure13. Result of Metric 4 on SoftSlate [6]
a conclusion can be mitigated when analysing the non-implementing AFs. For
instance, Update Password is not directly implementing any BP. Instead, this
AF is related to a BP that is not modeled yet, i.e. a BP that allows a user to
change its password. Thus, the actual coverage is likely to be better than what
is currently visible in our cartography.
We briefly described the result of the execution of some metrics to evaluate
quantitative aspects (e.g. completeness ratios). However, more relevant indicat-
ors can be built on a hierarchic aggregation of individual metrics (along with
other complementary evaluation means).
B) Qualitative Evaluation Based on Consistency Rules
We illustrate the evaluation of the consistency rules defined in Section 4.2
with the consistency rule CR1 that we implemented in jArchi (cf. Section 5.1).
Figure 15 shows the output of the jArchi script checking that the business objects
handled by given business functions or processes are link to application data
by the applications functions or components that are linked to these business
functions or processes. The execution of the rule returns "VERIFIED" in this
case.

--- PAGE 29 ---
28 André et al.
Figure14. Result of Metric 5 on SoftSlate [6]
Figure15. Result of rule CR1 on SoftSlate
C) Detect Misalignment with Anti-patterns
The execution of the implemented scripts raised an alert only for AP3, (cf.
Figure 16). A "WARNING" alert is displayed because the application concept
Add Shipping Rate has 3 implementation links to 3 different business concepts. The

--- PAGE 30 ---
A Practical Approach to Evaluate Operational Business-IT Alignment 29
other situations not detecting AP3 are ignored. However, we still compute the
number of links for each of the application concepts browsed.
Figure16. AP3 detection on SoftSlate
The existence of a single occurrence of an implementation link can be inter-
preted as an indicator of a relatively good alignment of the system. However, it
should be related to the other means (metrics, consistency rules) to evaluate the
quality of the link mapping (completeness, coherence). Two aspects can also im-
pact the result of our experiments: (i) Quality of the modeling. The SoftSlate
model is incomplete (only two business processes) and not domain-validated (our
model is not controlled by actual business teams and development teams). Fur-
thermore, we may have made errors of interpretation on our side. (ii) Quality of
detection algorithms. The detection algorithms that we propose may not detect
alignment errors present in the system (false negatives) or detect errors that, in
reality, are not errors (false positives).
Figure17. A SoftSlate mutant
To overcome the potential lack of efficiency of the algorithms, we were in-
spired by mutation techniques in software testing to create different situations
of misalignment to test the algorithms. For instance, Figure 17 shows a subset
of a mutant model in the context of SoftSlate. Considering such an example,
Figure 18 displays the result of the execution of AP2 for which we provided the

--- PAGE 31 ---
30 André et al.
detection script presented in Listing 1.4. We can see a "WARNING" alert noti-
fying of a possible alignment error relating to the business concept Login as seller .
The other business concepts, however, are not concerned.
Figure18. AP2 detection on a SoftSlate mutant
All the implementation resources related to these experiments on our illus-
trative information system are available online13
.
7 Related Work
We studied the related work contributing to inter-layers links, as well as align-
ment evaluation and the associated tooling support. In each case, we discuss lay-
ers modelling, mapping links, evaluation means, available tooling and practical
experiments. A general and more detailed comparison of COBITA approaches
can be found in a previous study [1].
Aversano et al. proposed a BITA framework with tool support [3], in wich
they use UML diagrams for layers modelling. The inter-layer links are mater-
ialised as ’functions’ from business entities (activities) to software components
(operations, artifact classes). The alignment evaluation considers two quality
attributes (Technological Coverage and Technological Adequacy) on activities,
actors, artefacts and transitions. The obtained results are then aggregated by
summing the values of the computed metrics in order to calculate a degree of
alignment that covers a wider scope than COBITA, including notably strategy.
The overall approach is a major reference because it provides mapping links and
tool support with metrics to suggest evolution actions. Unfortunately, both the
tool and the SantaClaus case study are not publicly available up to our cur-
rent knowledge. They also propose a semantic analysis based on identifiers and
lexical information. This becomes pertinent only if the IS provider use strict
development rules including traceability information, which is rarely the case in
practice. Moreover, the alignment evaluation is based mainly on the functional
dimension and come with a limited analysis. We are convinced that considering
multiple dimensions increases the power of alignment evaluation (consistency
verification, alignment metrics). This way, we can possibly detect occurrences of
more complex alignment patterns (combining data and functions for example).
The work of Etien et al. [15] is based on ontologies. In their approach, align-
ment is called ’fitness’ because it is centered on metrics. The authors define

--- PAGE 32 ---
A Practical Approach to Evaluate Operational Business-IT Alignment 31
two types of links: maps is an inter-layer link, and represents is an abstraction
of inter-layer link at the concept level of the ontologies. The evaluation part
leans on ten different metrics. These metrics represent four factors (intentional
- informational - functional - dynamic) which are inspired by a reference soft-
ware quality measurement framework [12]. Experiments are led on a Renault/-
DIAC case study which is unfortunately not publicly available. This work is a
reference in terms of metrics but is limited regarding other aspects: (i) Onto-
logies are not common notations for EA architects and thus require to develop
tools for managing import/export in different formats. (ii) Like other BITA ap-
proaches [11,33], it is inspired from Ontology alignment [16] that aims to match
’similar’ concepts. However, business and application layers may have very differ-
ent concepts. This is more particularly the case in legacy systems where software
components and application may be defined while service and functions may not.
(iii) There is no tool support at all stages of the proposed approach. We intend
to overcome these limitations by relying on a standard EA modeling language for
modeling the layers, offering different kinds of evaluation means, and providing
a corresponding tooling support.
The work of Pepin et al. covers the full range of activities related to COB-
ITA [29]. In their approach, three layers are involved: business (BPM), applic-
ation (App) and functional (Fun). Fun denotes an urbanisation concern with
blocks and functionalities, and corresponds to EA practice in French compan-
ies [27]. A link metamodel is provided that distinguishes data and functions.
The alignment is implemented by model weaving to remain non-intrusive on the
layer models, thus enabling OCL-like requests on the full model. Is is evalu-
ated through consistency rules, completeness metrics and clustering techniques
that provide an alignment dashboard. The provided tooling focuses on reverse-
engineering source code to feed the App models, a plug-in of the EMF Facet
project to define and query the inter-layer links, and OCL queries to evaluate
alignment. Experiments were performed on three legacy cases provided by three
French insurance companies, but they are not publicly available unfortunately.
This work is closer to our context because it focuses on COBITA in practice and
provides both guidelines and tools. However, ad-hoc layer models is a weakness
to pervasive EA practice. We rather advocate for relying on standard model-
ing languages and notations. Also, having three layers to align instead of two
is not an usual COBITA practice. If the dimensions cover the three layers, it
really becomes challenging to capture and express the mapping links. In our
approach, the dimension paradigm enables to filter the various stakeholder con-
cerns. Similarly, the detection of anti-patterns is made easier using two layers
with dimensions rather than three layers (or more).
Other existing works provide a variety of inter-layer links playing the role
of mapping layer between the model layers. These approaches are interesting
in terms of alignment tuning and evolution. In particular, a past work accepts
several models for each layer which can be interesting in some cases [25]. An-
other work uses links as transformation operators, thus proposing an operational
vision of COBITA to implement business process and align legacy code [9]. In a

--- PAGE 33 ---
32 André et al.
third work [23], alignment applies between business layers (BP2BP), IT-Layers
(IT2IT) and between Business-IT layers (BP2IT). The BT2IT alignment con-
siders allocation and alignment models. However, providing general rules for
alignment is very confusing for the EA analysts because there exist at least two
different semantics of alignment. The problem of such rich inter-layer links is
that they require much work for alignment. Unfortunately, the alignment eval-
uation and tool support is less reusable in other contexts. Compared to these
works, our approach provides more explicit links with a clearer representation
and semantics, thus easier to compute into EA layer models. This enables further
alignment evaluation and exploitation which are main concerns for information
systems practice. Moreover, we focus on evaluating alignments with operational
means. On the contrary, other approaches focus on change impact and evolution
that we currently consider as a future step of our work.
In another past work [31], COBITA has been also partially tackled in the
context of Archimate, UML and BPMN. To this end, the Archimate metamodel
was extended with UML elements (operation, activity, object state) for allowing
a fine-grained description. However, the focus was set on the "function" dimen-
sion, the proposed solution was dealing specifically with consistency (rather than
alignment) for a particular type of legacy applications, and practical guidelines
were missing. Related to mappings, an interesting baseline has been provided in
order to identify or compare them [39]. Provided clustering algorithms enable
to analyse dependencies among data and tasks captured in business processes,
and to group the strongly dependent tasks and data into a software compon-
ent. Nevertheless, a tool support is missing and the approach is limited by the
selected input formats.
Finally, other case studies could be considered in order to enrich our experi-
ments and to consolidate the evaluation of our proposed approach. A reference
example is ArchiMetal Case Study that is provided by the Open Group to il-
lustrate Archimate [4]. In such a case, all the models are already provided and
fully conform to the Archimate standard. However, it is quite different from
Softslate since the modelled application is already aligned by construction via
transformation from the business layer. Thus, using such a case study for align-
ment evaluation purposes does not appear to be relevant. The lack of publicly
available case study is an actual problem that we intend to partially address by
proposing in open source the complete COBITA resources related to Softslate.
8 Conclusion and Perspectives
In this chapter, we proposed an approach for establishing Core Business-IT
Alignment (COBITA) links and using them in order to evaluate the quality of
the alignment. We first selected the concepts from the Business and Application
layers which are relevant for COBITA. Then, we defined two kinds of inter-layer
links, one for the functional dimension and the other for the functional dimen-
sion. Based on these links, we proposed three different kinds of evaluation means
(metrics, consistency rules and anti-patterns) to evaluate the alignment state.

--- PAGE 34 ---
A Practical Approach to Evaluate Operational Business-IT Alignment 33
We implemented the models and links in Archi, the reference Archimate tool,
and the evaluation means with jArchi, a script language provided as an ex-
tension of the Archi tool. The results of our initial experiments show that the
proposed approach is applicable in the context of a realistic information sys-
tem like SoftSlate. This case study could also be reused by the community as a
common benchmark for COBITA experiments.
With this chapter we reached a first milestone, similarly to a first sprint cov-
ering the whole alignment process in an Agile vision. However, there is still room
for improvement concerning several aspects of the approach. Firstly, we worked
on very general links while, in Archimate (for example), different relationships
can be used to provide a more precise semantics. Indeed, a more elaborated tax-
onomy of possible COBITA links could be proposed to further improve the qual-
ity of the cartography in terms of alignment links. Considering additional tools
like Design Structure Matrix (DSM) could also be helpful to represent large set of
mapping links [29]. Secondly, more work is needed in order to enrich the provided
library of metrics, consistency rules and anti-patterns. Having different means
to evaluate the alignment state raise the question of their consistency. To this
end, we currently work on their aggregation as adequate indicators via different
weights to be inserted into dashboards. Thirdly, we proposed a set of alignment
activities but the associated methodology remains implicit and could be formal-
ised. The overall objective is to better support the architects in detecting issues
or asserting a quality level. To this end, having a more formalised methodology
and COBITA process is needed. Fourthly, we manually built the models and fed
the cartography with links up to now. However, assistance is crucially requested
by the architects in order to perform such tasks, e.g. concerning the application
layer [3,29] or the links [33]. For example, a recommendation component could
automatically propose potential COBITA links to the system architects based on
pre-defined patterns. Finally, and as already mentioned before in this chapter,
we currently focus on establishing a cartography and evaluating the alignment.
To complement our approach, we also plan to address in future work the next
COBITA steps, including notably change impact and evolution [3,13,33].
References
1. André, P., Bruneliere, H., Tamzalit, D., Benjilany, A.: Core Operational Business-
IT Alignment: Current Trends and Open Challenges, pp. 41–62. Springer Nature
Switzerland, Cham (2024)
2. Aversano, L., Grasso, C., Tortorella, M.: A literature review of Business/IT align-
ment strategies. In: Enterprise Information Systems, pp. 471–488. No. 141 in
LNBIP, Springer (2013)
3. Aversano, L., Grasso, C., Tortorella, M.: Managing the alignment between business
processes and software systems. Inf. Softw. Technol. 72, 171–188 (2016)
4. Band, I., Bjeković, M., Else, S., Kroese, R., Lankhorst, M.: ArchiMetal Case Study.
The Open Group (2016), https://publications.opengroup.org/, version 2
5. Benjilany, A., André, P., Bruneliere, H., Tamzalit, D.: Détection d’anti-patrons
d’alignement dans les SI : Vers une approche automatisée. In: Chevalier, M., Benali,

--- PAGE 35 ---
34 André et al.
K. (eds.) Actes du 42ème Congrès INFORSID, Nancy, France, May 28-31, 2024.
pp. 37–52 (2024)
6. Benjilany, A., André, P., Tamzalit, D., Bruneliere, H.: Towards a link mapping
and evaluation approach for core operational business-it alignment. In: Filipe, J.,
Smialek, M., Brodsky, A., Hammoudi, S. (eds.) Proceedings of the 26th Interna-
tional Conference on Enterprise Information Systems, ICEIS 2024, Angers, France,
April 28-30, 2024, Volume 2. pp. 557–568. SCITEPRESS (2024)
7. Brdjanin, D., Banjac, D., Banjac, G., Maric, S.: Automated two-phase business
model-driven synthesis of conceptual database models. Comput. Sci. Inf. Syst.
16(2), 657–688 (2019)
8. Brown, W.H., Malveau, R.C., McCormick, H.W.S., Mowbray, T.J.: AntiPatterns:
Refactoring Software, Architectures, and Projects in Crisis. John Wiley & Sons,
Inc., USA, 1st edn. (1998)
9. Buchwald, S., Bauer, T., Reichert, M.: Bridging the gap between business process
models and service composition specifications. In: Service Life Cycle Tools and
Technologies: Methods, Trends and Advances, pp. 124–153. IGI Global (2012)
10. Caetano, A., Antunes, G., Pombinho, J., Bakhshandeh, M., Granjo, J., Borbinha,
J., da Silva, M.M.: Representation and analysis of enterprise models with semantic
techniques: an application to archimate, e3value and business model canvas. Know-
ledge and Information Systems 50(1), 315–346 (Mar 2016)
11. Castellanos, C., Correal, D.: A framework for alignment of data and processes
architectures applied in a government institution. J. Data Semant. 2(2-3), 61–74
(2013)
12. Cavano, J.P., McCall, J.A.: A framework for the measurement of software quality.
In: Proceedings of the Software Quality Assurance Workshop on Functional and
Performance Issues. p. 133–139. Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA (1978)
13. Dahman, K., Charoy, F., Godart, C.: Alignment and change propagation between
business processes and service-oriented architectures. In: IEEE SCC 2013, Santa
Clara, CA, USA. pp. 168–175. IEEE Computer Society (2013)
14. Di Francescomarino, C., Marchetto, A., Tonella, P.: Reverse engineering of business
processes exposed as web applications. In: 2009 13th European Conference on
Software Maintenance and Reengineering. pp. 139–148. IEEE (2009)
15. Etien, A., Rolland, C.: Measuring the fitness relationship. Requirements Engineer-
ing 10(3), 184–197 (Aug 2005)
16. Euzenat, J., Mocan, A., Scharffe, F.: Ontology Alignments, pp. 177–206. Springer
US, Boston, MA (2008)
17. Gellweiler, C.: IT architects and it-business alignment: a theoretical review. In:
CENTERIS 2021 - ProjMAN 2021 - HCist 2021, Braga, Portugal. vol. 196, pp.
13–20. Elsevier (2021)
18. Gero, J.S., Kannengiesser, U.: The Function-Behaviour-Structure Ontology of
Design, pp. 263–283. Springer London, London (2014)
19. Gouigoux, J.P., Tamzalit, D.: Business-IT alignment anti-patterns: a thought from
an empirical point of view. In: ISD 2021, Valencia, Spain (2021)
20. Habba, M., Fredj, M., Benabdellah Chaouni, S.: Alignment between business re-
quirement, business process, and software system: a systematic literature review.
Journal of Engineering 2019 (2019)
21. Henderson, J.C., Venkatraman, H.: Strategic alignment: Leveraging information
technology for transforming organizations. IBM Systems 38(2.3), 472–484 (1999)

--- PAGE 36 ---
A Practical Approach to Evaluate Operational Business-IT Alignment 35
22. ISO/IEC/IEEE: Systems and software engineering – architecture description.
ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010:2011(E) pp. 1 –46 (1 2011). https://doi.org/10.1109/
IEEESTD.2011.6129467
23. Kassahun, A., Tekinerdogan, B.: Bita*: Business-it alignment framework of mul-
tiple collaborating organisations. Information and Software Technology 127,
106345 (2020)
24. Koehler, J., Hauser, R., Küster, J.M., Ryndina, K., Vanhatalo, J., Wahler, M.: The
role of visual modeling and model transformations in business-driven development.
Electron. Notes Theor. Comput. Sci. 211, 5–15 (2008)
25. Küster, J.M., Völzer, H., Favre, C., Branco, M.C., Czarnecki, K.: Supporting dif-
ferent process views through a shared process model. Softw. Syst. Model. 15(4),
1207–1233 (2016)
26. Lankhorst, M.M.: Enterprise Architecture at Work - Modelling, Communication
and Analysis (3. ed.). The Enterprise Engineering Series, Springer (2013)
27. Longépé, C.: The enterprise architecture IT project: the urbanisation paradigm.
Elsevier (2003)
28. Luftman, J.: Assessing business-it allignment maturity. In: Strategies for informa-
tion technology governance, pp. 99–128. Igi Global (2004)
29. Pepin, J., André, P., Attiogbé, J.C., Breton, E.: A method for business-it alignment
of legacy systems. In: Hammoudi, S., Maciaszek, L.A., Teniente, E. (eds.) ICEIS
2015, Barcelona, Spain. pp. 229–237. SciTePress (2015)
30. Pressman, R.: Software Engineering: A Practitioner’s Approach. McGraw-Hill
higher education, McGraw-Hill Education (2015)
31. Repa, V., Svatos, O.: Alignment of business and application layers of archimate.
In: BIR 2018, Stockholm, Sweden. vol. 2218, pp. 57–69. CEUR-WS.org (2018)
32. Rhazali, Y., Hadi, Y., Mouloudi, A.: A methodology for transforming cim to pim
through uml: From business view to information system view. In: WCCS 2015.
pp. 1–6. IEEE (2015)
33. Sánchez, E.S., Clemente, P.J., Conejero, J.M., Prieto, A.E.: Business process exe-
cution from the alignment between business processes and web services: A semantic
and model-driven modernization process. IEEE Access 8, 93346–93368 (2020)
34. Shishkov, B.: Designing Enterprise Information Systems - Merging Enterprise Mod-
eling and Software Specification. Springer (2020)
35. The Open Group: Archimate 2.1 Specification. Van Haren Pub (2013)
36. Ullah, A., Lai, R.: A systematic review of business and information technology
alignment. ACM Trans. Manage. Inf. Syst. 4(1), 4:1–4:30 (2013)
37. Yao, Q., Zhang, J., Wang, H.: Business process-oriented software architecture for
supporting business process change. In: Yu, F., Luo, Q., Chen, Y., Chen, Z. (eds.)
ISECS 2008, Guangzhou, China. pp. 690–694. IEEE Computer Society (2008)
38. Zhang, M., Chen, H., Luo, A.: A systematic review of business-it alignment research
with enterprise architecture. IEEE Access 6, 18933–18944 (2018)
39. Zhao, X., Zou, Y.: A business process-driven approach for generating software
modules. Softw. Pract. Exp. 41(10), 1049–1071 (2011)
40. Őri, D., Szabó, Z.: A systematic literature review on business-it misalignment
research. Information Systems and e-Business Management (2024), ISSN 1617-
9854