--- PAGE 1 ---
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
A Methodology for IT Governance by Viable System
Modeling (VSM): an Action Research in Designing
a Data Center
Ali Akbar Arghand1
& Mahmood Alborzi1
& Ali Rajabzadeh Ghatari2
Accepted: 1 February 2021/
# The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC part of Springer Nature 2021
Abstract
This paper attempts to introduce a methodology as a tool for designing and diagnosing IT
governance by the VSM approach. The viable IT governance can guarantee a dynamic
alignment of the business strategy with IT business value in today’s complex situations.
Organizations are becoming more and more dependent on IT and capital investment in IT
has been increased in recent years. To create business value from IT, business and IT
should be aligned. On the other hand, because of the complexity of the business
environment, organizations should be adaptable to this uncertainty to guarantee their
viability. Dynamic business and IT alignment can be achieved by viable IT governance in
the ever-changing environment by the VSM approach. A methodology as a tool for the
design and diagnosis (IT projects and IT operations) of viable IT governance has been
proposed and action research in the real environment did in this study. Systematic action
research did in the private sector in Iran which is responsible for designing and
implementing data centers. A methodology for designing and diagnosing the viable IT
governance is proposed based on VIPLAN method that was customized for IT gover-
nance. A methodology for designing and implementing IT governance by VSM is
proposed. Dynamic alignment of business and IT is achieved by this approach. Action
research did for designing and implementing the data center project by VSM. In a
complex and dynamic environment, organizations should be adaptable and flexible in
business strategies and operational structures. VSM is a cybernetics approach that can be
used for organizational systems to overcome these complexities. At the same time, VSM
can be used for IT governance and management to create a dynamic alignment of
business and IT. Dynamic alignment can guarantee to achieve business value from IT.
Keywords Dynamicenterprisegovernanceofinformationtechnology.ViableSystemsModel
(VSM).DynamicalignmentofITandbusiness.EnterpriseGovernanceofIT(EGIT)
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11213-021-09559-8
* Ali Akbar Arghand
aliakbararghand@yahoo.com
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
Publishedonline:17March2021
SystemicPracticeandActionResearch(2022)35:131–152

--- PAGE 2 ---
Introduction
It is perhaps a truism that the role and impact of information technology (IT) on today’s organiza-
tions has significantly changed over the last decade. Across a wide spectrum of markets and
countries, IT is transcending its traditional “back office” role and is evolving toward a “strategic”
rolewiththepotentialnotonlytosupportchosenbusinessstrategies,butalsotoshapenewbusiness
strategies (Henderson and Venkatraman 1999).
BecauseofthegrowingpervasivenessofIT,organizationaldecision-makersareincreasinglyfacing
important IT-related decisions at all managerial levels. Previously, governing boards (boards of
directors)andseniormanagementcoulddelegate,ignore,oravoidIT-relateddecisions.Inmostsectors
andindustries,suchattitudesarenowill-advised.ThealignmentbetweenbusinessandITresultsinIT
businessvalueandachievementofITbusinessvaluereliesongoodITgovernance.Capitalinvestment
of IT increased in recent years and senior managers expect that they can generate value from this
investment in their business. Disciplines like IT governance and management can assist the organiza-
tions in assuring the alignment of business strategy and IT value. Enterprise governance of IT can
coverandensureappropriatecontroloverITtoenablethecreationandprotectionofITbusinessvalue.
Indeed,theoutcomeofenterprisegovernanceofITisthecreationandprotectionofITbusinessvalue,
which is enabled through the mediating mechanism of business/IT alignment (De Haes et al. 2020).
On the other hand, the complexity and uncertainty in the business environment require organi-
zational flexibility in adapting their strategies and operational structure to an ever-changing envi-
ronment to guarantee their viability. Adaptability in business strategies requires adaptability in IT
governancetoallowdynamicalignmentofbusinessandITtocreatevaluefromITinthecomplexity
of today’s conditions. The lack of adaptability of IT governance in today’s complex environment
can fail the alignment of business strategy and IT business value.
In this research, the authors tried to introduce dynamic governance of IT by using viable system
models (VSM) as a cybernetic approach and proposed a methodology for designing and
implementing viable Enterprise Governance of IT (EGIT). In the VSM approach, the alignment
of business and IT is dynamic and whenever the condition is changed (due to digital disruption,
business strategies, economic change, etc.,) the impacts of these changes on EGIT must be
distinguished and be considered.
There are some conceptual researches about using the VSM approach for IT governance in
recent years, but what distinguishes this research from others is that, in this research, we have
proposed a methodology for designing and diagnosing IT governance by the VSM approach. To
design and diagnose the VSM approach in organizational systems there are some methodologies
such as VIPLAN which is introduced by Espejo, Bowling and Hoverstadt (Espejo et al. 1999). For
ITgovernance,wecustomizedVIPLANmethodologyforuseinviableITgovernance.Atthesame
time, in a real environment, we used this methodology for action research in designing and
implementing a disaster datacenter in this research.
Background and Literature Review
Enterprise Governance of Information Technology (EGIT)
Information systems and technology both operationally and strategically are critical for
organizations today, the governance of information technology has become a key issue and
concern (Peppard 2005).
132 SystemicPracticeandActionResearch(2022)35:131–152

--- PAGE 3 ---
In 1999, Henderson and Venkatraman in their famous research explained that even though
information technology has evolved from its traditional orientation of administrative support
toward a more strategic role within an organization, there is still a glaring lack of fundamental
frameworks within which to understand the potential of IT for tomorrow’s organizations. They
argued that the inability to realize value from IT investments is, in part, due to the lack of
alignment between the business and IT strategies of organizations so they developed a model
which is termed, strategic alignment model. Figure 1 shows the model of strategic
alignment(Henderson and Venkatraman 1999). As Fig. 1 shows, the business and IT align-
ment is the fit and integration among business strategy and IT strategy, business structures, and
IT structures (two types of integration, strategic and operational integration).
Kearns and Sabherwal in 2006 in research argued about the importance of knowledge
management consideration in the alignment of business and IT. They argued that research in
information systems (IS) suggests that achieving strategic alignment between business and IT
is essential to improving organizational performance. Due to the increasingly strategic role of
IT, resource constraints, and enhanced need for integration of new and existing systems,
strategic management of IT has continued to receive attention from researchers and
managers(Kearns and Sabherwal 2006).
Information technology (IT) enhances the ability of enterprises to survive in the highly
competitive global marketplace of the twenty-first century has become more and more evident.
The effective use of information technology, however, relies heavily on good IT governance
(Wu et al. 2015).
Weill and Ross in 2004 in their book stated that effective IT governance is the single most
important predictor of the value an organization generates from IT(Weill and Ross 2004).
Business strategy IT Strategy
External
Strategic Fit Automaon Linkage
Internal
Business IT
Business
Scope
Business
Governance
Detecve
Competencies
Technology
Scope
Systemic
Competencies
IT
Governance
Administrave
Infrastructure
Processes Skills
Architectures
Processes Skills
Organizaonal infrastructure & processes I/S infrastructure & processes
Fig. 1 Strategic Alignment Model (Henderson and Venkatraman 1999:476)
133 SystemicPracticeandActionResearch(2022)35:131–152

--- PAGE 4 ---
In 2017 Benaroch and Chernobai in their research pointed out the importance of effective
IT governance for the creation and protection of IT business value (Benaroch and Chernobai
2017).
De Haes, Van Gremberge, Joshi, and Huygh, in their 2020 book, present a conceptual
model which is shown in Fig. 2. They define the enterprise governance of IT (EGIT) is an
integral part of corporate governance for which, as such, the board is accountable (De Haes
et al. 2020).
As Fig. 2 shows, the outcome of EGIT is the alignment of business and IT which ultimately
results in the business value that is derived from IT investment.
Viable System Model (VSM)
Organizational cybernetics is a powerful system approach formulated for steering complex
systems in a turbulent environment. Feedback, variety and black boxes are the main cybernetic
concepts used by Stafford Beer (Beer 1972, 1979; 1985).
According to Beer, the cybernetic concepts of a black box, negative feedback and variety,
are ideal for helping us to understand and improve complex systems, like organizations, that
are characterized by extreme complexity, self-regulation, and probabilism (Jackson 2005).
A company is viable if, and only if, its structure fulfills several number of requirements,
which the theory specifies. According to Schwaninger(Schwaninger 2006), a viable organi-
zation must dispose of five managerial subsystems and their interrelationships, as set forth by
the theory: (1) System 1, basic units with their respective management are called primary units.
System 1 elements are directly engaged in creating value(Hoverstadt 2011) and perform the
main activities of the system which are directly related to purposes(Jackson 2005) . (2) System
2, coordination of subsystems, attenuation of oscillations between them. As its name implies,
system 2 is responsible for coordinating system 1 elements by using regulatory mechanisms
such as rules, protocols, standards, schedules, etc. so that the different parts of the system act
cohesively and don’t get in each other’s way (Christopher 2007) (Jackson 2005). (3) System 3,
Operative management of a collective of subsystems. System 3 corresponds to the base brain.
It is called operational control or operational direction and is responsible for operational
programming and control, and services (like human resources) management (Christopher
2007; Jackson 2005). (4) System 3*, auditing and monitoring channel. (5) System 4, man-
agement for the long term, relationships with the overall environment. (6) System 5, normative
management, corporate ethos. System 5 is responsible for the direction of the whole enterprise.
It formulates policy and communicates this downward, to System 3, for implementation by the
divisions (Jackson 2005).
Perhaps the most useful feature of the VSM is that its structure and communications
channels are repeated from the smallest productive unit to the largest. It is a recursive model
in which parts are nested within the whole like a series of Russian dolls (Leonard 2009).
Figure 3 shows the subsystem of the VSM model(Ríos 2012).
enable enable
Enterprise
Governance of IT
Business / IT Alignment IT business value
Fig. 2 EGIT-Alignment-Value conceptual model (De Haes et al. 2020:3)
134 SystemicPracticeandActionResearch(2022)35:131–152

--- PAGE 5 ---
Methodology for VSM
One of the famous methodologies for VSM is the VIPLAN method which was presented by
Espejo, Bowling, and Hoverstadt (Espejo et al. 1999). In 2011, Espejo and Reyes also
dedicated part of their book about this methodology which is a useful tool to diagnose and
design organizational structures(Espejo and Reyes 2011). They introduce a 5 steps model to
diagnose and design a viable organizational system.
Figure 4 shows VIPLAN methodology. As we can see in Fig. 4, in the first step, they
discussed naming systems as a tool to explore an organization’s identity.
Step 2 shows how to find activities, and their relations, that are necessary to carry out the
transformation in step 1. Each activity is a chunk of complexity including highly
Management
Total environment
Future environment
System 3*
Audit
Operaon
Environment of
Operaons
System 5
Policy
System 4
Intelligence
System 3
Integraon
Mgt.Op.U.1
Mgt.Op.U.2
Mgt.Op.U.3
Opr.
Unit1
Oper.
Unit2
Oper.
Unit3
Accountability Instrucons
S2
Algedonic
Channel
Resource
Bargain
System 1 Management Operaon
Fig. 3 The viable system model (Ríos 2012:22)
135 SystemicPracticeandActionResearch(2022)35:131–152

--- PAGE 6 ---
interconnected sub-activities. The primary activities are those that produce the services or
products and supportive activities are those that support the primary activates to produce the
services to customers(Espejo and Reyes 2011).
The third step is studying the organization’s unfolding of complexity. This activity is at the
core of working out an organization’s recursive structure. The unfolding of complexity is a
useful tool to describe and design the way an organization groups its primary activities.
In the fourth step, they used the results of step 3 to discuss the distribution of resources and
discretionfromtheorganization’sgloballeveltothelocallevelofthemostbasicprimaryactivities.
Forthispurpose,theyusedtheRecursion/Functionstable.Thisisatooltodiscussthecentralization
and decentralization of organizational resources and decision-making. They stated that for a
primary activity to be autonomous, and viable in its own right, it needs resources and discretion
to make decisions and develop its own identity(Espejo and Reyes 2011).
The last step is to design a structural mechanism (5 sub-systems of VSM).
Enterprise Governance of IT by Viable System Modeling
Peppard in 2005 in research studied the application of the Viable Systems model to informa-
tion technology governance. In this research, he proposed Beer’s viable systems model (VSM)
as a guiding framework in considering IT governance. He suggested the cybernetics approach
for IT governance and the VSM model used as a guiding framework for describing, diagnos-
ing, and designing IT governance structures. He used Ashby laws of requisite variety and
cybernetics theory for introducing IT governance based on the VSM (Peppard 2005).
Rakers and Rosenkranz, in 2008, in a case study research in the banking sector, used a
viable system model for a data warehouse project. They used this approach for managing and
controlling an IT project (Rakers and Rosenkranz 2008).
Lewis and Millar, in 2009, in research introduced the viable governance of the IT model.
Their model is a theoretical model of IT governance that is based on the laws and principles of
cybernetics as embodied in Stafford Beer’s viable system(Lewis and Millar 2009).
In 2018, Huygh and De Haes presented their research about using the VSM approach to
study dynamic IT governance and, they did a case study at a company that is an HR service
provider in Belgium(Huygh and De Haes 2018).
Overview
Forming identy
Statement
Structural
Modeling
Unfolding
Complexity
Evaluang
Management
Discreon
Diagnosc
Points
Interviews and observaons
Organizaon
Data
Debrieﬁngs
Fig. 4 VIPLAN methodology (Espejo et al. 1999:667)
136 SystemicPracticeandActionResearch(2022)35:131–152

--- PAGE 7 ---
In 2020, De Haes et al., published a book about EGIT and for the importance of viable IT
governance, they dedicated part of their book about this concept. They said that they proposed a
holistic organizing logic for IT governance that is based on the strong interdisciplinary perspective
of the Viable System Model(De Haes et al. 2020). They argued that the VSM-based model can be
used for IT governance to provide strong theoretical underpinnings for this field.
As we can see, some researches have been done in recent years about viable IT governance
by the VSM approach, but they didn’t present a brief methodology for implementing this goal.
In this research, we introduced a methodology of the VSM approach for modeling IT
governance. It can be used as a tool for the design and diagnosis of IT governance based on
the VSM in the IT projects and IT operations.
Research Methodology
This research has been done with a systematic approach in action research presented by Peter
ChecklandandHolwell(ChecklandandHolwell1998).Actionresearchisabranchofaqualitative
research method, which is based on the collaboration between researchers and practitioners. The
authors chose the action research method introduced by Checkland and Holwell (1998) which is
basedontheFMAframework(whereFisaframeworkofideas;Misthemethodologyapplied,and
A is the area of concern) to guide the planning and implementation of action research (Fig. 5). In
this study, the process done by the authors is as follows: the research issue in the real world was to
propose a methodology for viable IT governance by the VSM approach for designing and
diagnosing viable IT governance, the authors collected information about this filed by study the
related researches and documented and interviews with IT and business experts about the impor-
tance of dynamic (adaptable) alignment of IT and business.
Since one of the authors is a member of the board in an IT company (with more than 300
employees and distributed regional offices all around Iran and is responsible for IT services in
Fig. 5 The process of systematic action research (Checkland and Holwell 1998:15)
137 SystemicPracticeandActionResearch(2022)35:131–152

--- PAGE 8 ---
the banking sector), they formed an expert grouped (consists of 30 IT experts and operational
staff) for this project. Since the VSM method is not a popular approach in IT, the authors
introduced the VSM for IT governance to the teamwork and used this methodology in a real
environment in designing and implementing a disaster data center.
Finding and Results
A Methodology as a Tool for Designing and Diagnosing the Viable IT Governance
The purpose of this research is to provide a methodology for designing and diagnosing viable
IT governance in organizations based on the viable system model. In this research, we used
VIPLAN methodology as a strong theoretical underpinning for developing a methodology for
viable IT governance. Since Espejo et al., introduced VIPLAN for organizational structure, we
should customize it for use in IT governance. Because the general concepts of the systems are
the same (organizational systems, biological systems or information systems), we can custom-
ized VIPLAN for IT governance. Figure 6 shows the proposed methodology for viable IT
governance.
Step 1: Identify the Enterprise governance IT (EGIT)
Since the VSM is a systematic approach, so we should look at EGIT from the systematic
perspective (input, output, transformation, feedback, black box). To implement viable IT
governance in any organization, we first consider some basic aspects of that organization
(from business perspective). What is the context of organizations? Who are the stakeholders?
What are the primary and support activities (to determine IT transformation)? What is the
scope of IT governance? What is the boundary (physical and logical) of EGIT?
In this section, we use the first step of the VIPLAN methodology. As Espejo and et al.
explained in VIPLAN methodology, this step can be done by defining the TASCOIprocess for
IT governance. T stands for IT transformation (primary and support IT activities), A (Actors of
the IT systems), S (supplier of the IT systems), C (customer of IT services), O (owner of the IT
systems), and I (intervener of the IT systems). This step shows us the holistic approach of the
EGIT (subsystems and super system), the stakeholders who have expectations from IT value
(customers, owners, suppliers, and interveners), the scope of viable IT governance, the context
Systemac approach: -Informaon assets -Alignment approach
- Organizaonal context
-Primary IT services
-Support IT services
(Infrastructure)
-Scope OF EGIT
-Stakeholders
Idenfy
EGIT
Structural
Modeling
Unfolding
Complexity
Asset
Management
Alignment
Business/IT
Design
S1-S5
Fig. 6 The proposed methodology for viable IT governance inspired by VIPLAN
138 SystemicPracticeandActionResearch(2022)35:131–152

--- PAGE 9 ---
of an organization that IT governance is supposed to implement there. (Figure 7 shows the first
step).
Step 2: Structural modeling
This step is the same as the VIPLAN methodology. Finding the activities and their relations
that are necessary to carry out the IT transformation process (IT primary activities) is the
purpose of this step. We chunk each IT primary activity into smaller tasks for decreasing the IT
variety. We chunk IT primary activities to make them more manageable and show how inputs
transformed into output for IT related services to customers. This step helps to structure the IT
operational layers and should be done in such a way that maintains their autonomy (ingenious
chunking). Espejo et al. pointed out that technology, geography, customers, and time are the
complexity drivers that can be used for chunking primary activities in the VIPLAN method-
ology for organizational systems. In EGIT, we can use these complexity drivers for chunking
IT’s primary transformation. For example in POS (point of sale) service in the banking system,
all POS equipment is distributed through the country for providing electronic financial services
to customers. In this IT service, technology, customers, geography and time are the complexity
drivers that can be used to chunk IT transformation (POS service). Figure 8 shows the
technological chunking of the POS service in the second step.
Step 3: Unfolding complexity
This step is related to the complexity management of information systems and is the same as
VIPLAN methodology. We should integrate the four chunking models (technology, geogra-
phy, customer, and time) in the second step for complexity management. Figure 9 shows the
unfolding complexity of the POS service.
The output of this step is necessary for the recursive structure of the IT operational layer.
Owner Transformaon Intervener
Supplier customer
Banking services
Input
Actors
Scope of EGIT
IT
Primary
Services
IT
Support
Services
(Infrastructure)
Fig. 7 The systematic approach of EGIT
139 SystemicPracticeandActionResearch(2022)35:131–152

--- PAGE 10 ---
Fig. 8 An example of technological modeling in POS service
Technological
Geographical
Customers
POS
Services
Security Applicaon Database
Tehran
West
East
North
South
Pharmacies
Hyper
Markets
Hospitals
Fig. 9 An example of unfolding complexity of the POS service
140 SystemicPracticeandActionResearch(2022)35:131–152

--- PAGE 11 ---
Step 4: Identifying information assets (Fig. 10)
In this step, for controlling and managing information systems in any organization, we should
identify information assets from three aspects of the organization. Technology, people, and process
are the main information assets in any organization. When we want to design or diagnose viable IT
governance,wemustconsidereachaspectoftechnology(hardware,software,network,etc.),people
(and related skills), and the processes (work process of operations in information systems such as
system maintenance, monitoring, and etc.). The output of this step is a document of all information
assets including hardware, software, network devices, all people and their related experience and
skills in the scope of EGIT, and all the process for each service. This step is necessary for both
diagnosing a current IT governance and designing new IT governance.
Step 5: Alignment of business strategy with IT business value
This step is necessary to clarify the governance approach to evaluate the alignment of business
strategy with IT business value. If we want to implement an information system in organiza-
tions, we should evaluate this information system according to enterprise goals. Each infor-
mation system should align with the business strategy.
Otherwise, IT continues its way without considering the business needs. In this step, we
should identify the alignment.
In recent years many types of researches have been done in this field and many researchers
have developed models that attempt to propose the alignment methodologies.
For this step, we can use one of the well -known alignment approaches such as the
matching and moderation approach, the profile deviation approach (Sabherwal and Chan
2001), the scoring approach, and so on (De Haes et al. 2020).
The output of this step shows us if the information system aligned with our business goals
or not.
Fig. 10 The holistic approach of viable IT governance in identify information assets
141 SystemicPracticeandActionResearch(2022)35:131–152

--- PAGE 12 ---
Step 6: Design structural mechanism (S1-S5)
This step is the same as the VIPLAN method. Identifying each information system is like
organizational modeling in the VSM approach.
In Table 1, we summarized step 5 for designing the system 1–5.
Designing a data center by viable IT governance
The proposed methodology can be used as a tool for managing and governing a new IT project
(designmod)ordiagnosingdailyIToperationalsystems(runIT).Inthisresearch,weusedproposed
methodology for the design mode in a disaster datacenter project. One of the authors formed an
expert team to design, build, and implement a disaster datacenter for a well-known bank in Iran.
According to the methodology proposed in this research, we used the following steps:
Step 1: Identify the enterprise governance of IT (EGIT)
The results of this step identify the organization (context of organizations, primary activities,
and support activities), and the information systems related to the primary and support
activities. The scope of EGIT (physical and logical boundaries of EGIT), and the stakeholders
of EGIT are studied in this step.
Inthisresearch,thedisasterdatacenterbelongstothebankingsystemandisoursysteminfocus.
It is responsible for providing banking services (electronic services and branch-based services) to
customers. The recursion level of 0 is the upstream system that is the primary data center. The
system in focus (recursion level 1) is the disaster data center which the viable IT governance is
supposed the implement there. The recursion level 2 is the regional offices’ datacenters (Fig. 11).
In Table 2 we summarized the results of this step.
Transformation: IT transformation include electronic financial services such as:
1. ATM and POS services (primary service)
2. Mobile banking services (primary service)
3. Internet banking services (primary service)
4. Branch-based services (core banking services such as cash services, bank guarantee
service, credit service, etc.) which are primary IT activities in the branches across the
country.
5. Internal services (Human resources, ERP, financial services, etc.) which are used for
internal support services.
6. Telephone banking services (IT primary services)
7. External services (B2B banking services, corporate banking, stock market financial
services, etc.).
8. Data backup and recovery services for data protection. (Support services of IT
infrastructure)
9. IT infrastructure services such as providing the resource for computing, storage, network
and communications, software, security, electrical, cooling … that should be provided to
the primary IT services. (Supportive services)
Infrastructure services play a supportive role to support primary activities requirements such as
providing computing resources, storage resources, network, and communications. NOC and
142 SystemicPracticeandActionResearch(2022)35:131–152

--- PAGE 13 ---
Table 1 design the system of viable governance of IT
Function IT governance
VSM
System 5 (IT governance of EGIT) Defining the role of IT for organizations and cover these questions:
What are the priorities of IT-related strategies goal?
How can we align the enterprise goals to IT-related goals?
How can we assure get business value from IT investment?
Is the information systems can effectively cover the benefits realization?
How can we keep stability between the current and future use of IT in our
organization?
Monitoring external conformance regulations and compliance
Evaluate IT risk and IT cost.
The IT governance Steering committee consists of a member of the board,
chief information officer (CIO), business domain managers are present in
this committee.
System 4 (intelligence of EGIT) Keep up with emerging technologies, scanning for digital transformations
and sense opportunities and threats in IT and defining strategies plan for
maintaining the viability of IT systems and covers the questions:
How is the technological trend in IT?
How can we anticipate the future trend of information systems?
How our competitors use their information systems?
What are the opportunities and threats of new technology?
What is the current state of IT in our organizations?
How adaptability to the future trend of IT can be achieved?
What are the emergent technologies?
What is the benefit and threat of emergent technologies?
In this system, a team consisting of IT experts as a research and
development team will be formed.
System 3 (IT operational
Management of EGIT)
Responsible for the integrity and cohesively of IT assets as a whole IT
system and cover these questions:
How can we ensure that IT current use work cohesively?
How can we ensure that all components of IT work in alignment with
enterprise goals?
How effective resource bargaining is achieved between system 1?
How IT-related strategies are translated to IT operational plan?
How synergies achieved in system 1?
How the overall performance of system 1 evaluated?
How IT changes can be managed?
How is the quality of day to day IT services?
Monitoring and controlling internal conformance regulations
IT risk management (the risk committee is a subcommittee of the executive
committee)
IT performance management
IT resource management
The executive committee consists of CIO (full member), IT infrastructure
experts, and related domain business managers present in this committee.
System 3* (IT audit of EGIT) Audit channels help system 3 to evaluate system 1 performance and cover
these questions:
How IT audit can be achieved in system 1?
Do IT operational levels do their job well?
IT- related audit,security audit,and IT project audit achieve in this system
System 2 (coordination of IT
operational of EGIT)
Coordination between and within digital assets, coordination of IT
operational activities, avoid duplication of IT projects and cover these
questions:
How coordination achieved between systems 1?
How can we assure avoiding conflict and oscillation between systems 1
activities?
143 SystemicPracticeandActionResearch(2022)35:131–152

--- PAGE 14 ---
SOC play IT monitoring and controlling role for supporting primary activities. Figure 12
shows identify the EGIT in the first step.
Step 2: Structural modeling
Finding the activities and their relations that are necessary to carry out the IT transformation
process (IT primary activities) is the purpose of this step. In this project for each IT service we
Table 1 (continued)
Function IT governance
VSM
What are IT related standards and how we can use them for coordination?
Some standard such as ITIL and ISO 27001 can be useful for this system
System 1 (IT operational layer of
EGIT)
Creating and preserving IT business value and action-oriented IT systems
(Run IT and Project IT) and cover these questions:
What are the IT operational systems?
What are the local managements of IT systems?
Do IT operational systems have enough autonomy to respond quickly to
changes?
Activity steering committees for each business domain that is responsible
for digital assets and activities (in that filed) is suitable for this system
Local autonomy should be provided for this system
Fig. 11 The recursion levels of EGIT of the disaster data center
144 SystemicPracticeandActionResearch(2022)35:131–152

--- PAGE 15 ---
have specific structural modeling. For internet banking service the technological modeling
shows in Fig. 13. The geographical modeling of this service consists of the whole country. The
customer modeling of this service consists of ordinary people (for financial services) and
companies for B2B services. The time modeling of this service is a 24 h service.
Step 3: Unfolding complexity
This step is the core of the recursive structure of the operational layer. To reduce the
complexity of the IT environment and increase the responsiveness of the IT operational layer,
we unfold complexity from 4 aspects. Services (for example internet banking service),
technology related to internet banking (security service, application service, database service),
geographical modeling of internet banking (across the country by internet), customer modeling
(to ordinary people who can work with internet and companies for B2B services) and time
modeling that is 24 h service.
In the disaster datacenter, services include internet banking services, mobile banking
services, branch-based services, POS and ATM services, intranet services, external services
(B2B). Fig. 14 shows the unfolding complexity for internet banking in disaster data center.
Table 2 identifying the EGIT of the disaster data center
Identify EGIT Results
Identify the whole system: A disaster data center (system in focus) for the banking
system that can provide service continuity in disaster
conditions when the primary data center would not
be available.
The system in focus, upstream system, and subsystems.
Organization context: The banking system The upstream system is the primary datacenter.
IT Primary activities: banking services to customers
such as branch-based services, internet banking,
mobile banking, etc.
Subsystems are the regional office’s datacenter across
the country
IT Support services: such as ERP, internal services,and
IT infrastructure services
Providing banking services such as internet banking,
mobile banking, branch-based banking, etc.
Providing support services
The purpose of the system: Business continuity. Protect critical customer data
What does a disaster datacenter do? When the primary data center would not be available,
this data center can continue its financial services to
customers.
Housing critical data and applications
What is the upstream system? (Recursion level 0) The primary data center is the upstream system
What is the system in focus? (Recursion level 1) The disaster data center which is located in another city
(Fig. 11)
What is recursion level 2? All the regional data centers that located in the regional
offices of the bank.
Who are the IT stakeholders? (TSCOI) Actors: All IT experts and consultants who have
experience in data enter design and implement
IT Suppliers: who provide different IT equipment
(hardware, application, communication, etc.)
Customers: ordinary people who that receive financial
services.
Companies who receive corporate banking
services.(B2B services)
IT Owner: All the managers (business and IT).
IT Interveners: Competitors, regulators
145 SystemicPracticeandActionResearch(2022)35:131–152

--- PAGE 16 ---
Step 4: Identify information assets
For effective control and management of IT systems, we need to collect information assets in
our EGIT (for our research is disaster data center IT assets). In this step, we identified the list of
technology, people, and process of each service in the data center. The information assets for
internet banking service consists of:
– A list of hardware (computing and storage resources) for the internet banking service.
– A list of applications for internet banking service.
– A list of network resources for this service.
– A list of people (experts, employees, and related experience) for this service.
– A list of work process related to this service
In our research, a list of assets was collected in the data center for all services.
Context: banking system Idenfying informaon systems
E banking services
Input: Output
Informaon Customers
Suppliers
Regulaons
TASCOI (Transformaon, Actor, Customer, Owner, Intervener)
ATM
Service
Mobile
Service
POS
Service
Branch
Services
Internet
banking
Services
IT infrastructure services
(Support services)
IT primary services
Fig. 12 Identify the systematic approach of EGIT for the disaster data center
Fig. 13 The technological model for internet banking service
146 SystemicPracticeandActionResearch(2022)35:131–152

--- PAGE 17 ---
Step 5: Alignment of Business strategy with IT business value
In this step, we should evaluate the alignment of implementing this project to the
enterprise goals. For our project, the disaster datacenter belongs to one of the major banks
in Iran and providing financial services, and protecting customer’s data in a critical
situation.
Our study about enterprise goals (investigate related documents and interviews with the
senior manager of the bank) showed that the bank is focused on the customer-oriented
service, and providing reliable service to customers is one of the major goals in that bank.
So alignment of business strategy with IT business value is achieved by implementing
disaster data centers.
The output of this step can guarantee that the capital investment in the disaster datacenter is
aligned with enterprise goals and we can get business value from this project.
Technological
Geographical
Customers
Internet
Banking
B2B
Services
ATM
POS
Branch
Services
Internal
Services
Security Applicaon Database Authencaon
Across
The country
People
B2B
companeis
Fig. 14 The unfolding complexity of internet banking service in disaster data center
147 SystemicPracticeandActionResearch(2022)35:131–152

--- PAGE 18 ---
Step 6: Design structural mechanism (S1-S5)
System 1 design: system 1 is the action-oriented of EGIT. It includes all main information
services such as internet banking, mobile banking, etc.
For each business domain (primary activity) the activity steering committees (the project
steering committee for projects and the maintenance steering committee for maintenance of
IT operational systems) were formed. In this project, the project activity steering committee
was formed for each service. IT experts (related to each service) and business domain manager
director related to each business domain are presented in each committee.
System 2 design: this system coordinates all functions in system 1 to avoid conflicts.
Some standards such as ISO 27001 (security standards), ITIL (for service management),
and some instructions and procedures (such as the instructions for data backup, instruc-
tion for maintenance, instruction for security updates, instruction for change management,
etc.) are used for this purpose to coordinate all system 1 functions.
System 3 design: this system is responsible for controlling system 1 (daily management)
and is responsible for the management of the total assets of the datacenter. Resource
bargaining, performance measurement, and translating IT policies to operational plans are
the other responsibility of this system.
Table 3 the viable IT governance for data center
Functions
Functions and roles
Viable IT governance
(recursion level 1)
System 1
(operational IT services in the disaster
data center)
Internet banking service
Mobile banking service
Branch-based services
Card-base service (ATM,POS)
External services
Internal services
System2
(coordination of IT operational services
in the disaster data center)
IT standards such as ISO 27001 and ITIL
Instructions for maintenance, change management, incident
management
Event management
Problem management
System 3
(the daily management of the disaster
data center project)
Executive committee consisting of:
CIO, data center manager
Data center project manager
IT infrastructure experts, some business managers, data center audit
team
Risk committee, security audit team
System 4
(the intelligence committee of the disaster
data center project)
Research and development team consisting of Some data center
experts for tracking the future trend of data center and emergent
technologies
Define strategic plan for data center during this project
System 5
(the governance committee of the data
center project)
The data center steering committee consisting of: The CIO, a member
of the board of the bank, some business managers of banking
systems
148 SystemicPracticeandActionResearch(2022)35:131–152

--- PAGE 19 ---
In this research, an executive committee consisting of data center managers, IT infrastructure
experts, risk management officer, some domain business managers, and the CIO was formed.
System 3* design: this system is responsible for the inspection and auditing of system 1.
The datacenter audit team is responsible to help data center managers to evaluate the
system 1 performance.
System 4 design: this system is responsible for the future environment and adaption
process of the data center. A research and development team consists of datacenter
experts who track the future trend of data centers and predicts the future approach for
the data centers and banking solutions. This system plays the most important role in the
dynamic alignment of business strategy with IT business value. IT governance adaption
and viability achieved by this system.
System 5 design: this system is responsible for the governance of IT. Unlike the
management system (system 2 to system 4), system 5 evaluates, directs, and monitors
the management systems to control and ensure that alignment is achieved. In our research,
Future environment
Audit (3*)
Environment
SYSTEM 1 (acon-oriented)
IT governance
IT strategy commiee
(S5)
Research &development
Strategic plan of EGIT
(S4)
Operaonal management
(CIO, datacenter managers, IT
infrastructure experts, project manager)
(S3)
Internet banking
(Internet banking project manager)
Mobile banking
(Mobile banking project manager)
Branch services
(Branch service project manager)
IB
Experts
Mobile
Experts
Branch
Experts
IB
MB
Branch
S2
Fig. 15 The system in focus (recursion level 1) of the viable EGIT for the disaster data center
149 SystemicPracticeandActionResearch(2022)35:131–152

--- PAGE 20 ---
the data center steering committee consisting of the CIO, a member of the board, and
some business domain managers was formed.
Table 3 shows the entire viable IT governance systems for the datacenter. Figs. 15 and 16
show the entire viable EGIT for the disaster data center.
The Validity of the Model
Since VSM system modeling is one of the soft system models, validation in soft system
models is different from other validation methods. In this soft system model, the validation
depends on the view of the system stakeholders. This research is a systematic action research
approach and has been confirmed by stakeholders in the field of information systems.
Datacenter experts and managers have taken help to confirm this model.
Future environment
Audit (3*)
Environment
SYSTEM 1 (acon-oriented)
IT governance
IT strategy commiee internet
Banking (S5)
Research &development
Strategic plan for IB
(S4)
Operaonal management
Internet banking acvity steering
Commiee (S3)
Internet banking
(Applicaon manager)
Internet banking
(Database manager)
Internet banking
(Security manager)
App.
Expert
Database
Experts
Security
Experts
IB
IB
IB
IB
S2
Fig. 16 The recursive nature of viable EIGT at the IT operational layer (internet banking)
150 SystemicPracticeandActionResearch(2022)35:131–152

--- PAGE 21 ---
Conclusions
Today, IT plays a strategic role and can reshape business strategies. Senior managers under-
stand that they have to change their approach to see IT from traditional support tools to a
strategic tool that can support and reshape their business strategies. So global capital invest-
ment increased in recent years and as a result of this growth in IT investment and the
importance of IT, disciplines like IT management and IT governance emerge to assist
organizations to appropriate control over IT. Senior managers expect to create value from IT
investment in their business. An appropriated IT governance can generate value from IT and at
the same time, inappropriate IT governance can waste all investment in IT. On the other hand,
in today’s complex environment and uncertain situation, companies should be flexible and
adapt their strategies and their structures to these conditions. So they should implement a
dynamic IT governance that can cope with complex conditions. Traditional IT governance
cannot align IT with business in an ever-changing environment. In recent years, some
conceptual researches have been published for viable IT governance, but in this research,
the authors tried to introduce a methodology for implementing an adaptable IT governance in
information systems as a socio-technical system by VSM approach. Action research did in a
real environment by designing and implementing a disaster datacenter by using viable IT
governance. Adaptability is achieved by viable IT governance because the system in the viable
model can sense changes and predict the future and reshape strategic plans for enterprise
governance of IT. Despite all benefits of the VSM approach, it has some limitations. This is a
new approach in modeling information systems, so it has received less attention from IT
experts in recent years and less practical research has been done. We suggest more action
research for information systems by VSM approach for stronger validation of applicability of
the VSM in IS researches.
References
Beer S (1972) Brain of the firm: A Development in Management Cybernetics. Herder and Herder, New York
Beer S (1979) The heart of enterprise, vol 2. Wiley, New York
Beer S, Beer S (1985) Diagnosing the system for organizations. Wiley, Chichester
Benaroch M, Chernobai A (2017) Operational IT failures, IT value-destruction, and board-level IT governance
changes. MIS Q, Forthcoming
Checkland P, Holwell S (1998) Action research: its nature and validity. Syst Pract Action Res 11(1):9–21
Christopher WF (2007) Holistic management: managing what matters for company success, vol 46. Wiley,
Hoboken
De Haes S, Van Grembergen W, Joshi A, Huygh T (2020) Enterprise governance of IT, alignment, and value. In:
Enterprise Governance of Information Technology (pp. 1-13): Springer
Espejo R, Reyes A (2011) Organizational systems: Managing complexity with the viable system model. Springer
Science & Business Media
Espejo R, Bowling D, Hoverstadt P (1999) The viable system model and the Viplan software. Kybernetes
28(6/7):661–678
Henderson JC, Venkatraman H (1999) Strategic alignment: leveraging information technology for transforming
organizations. IBM Syst J 38(2.3):472–484
Hoverstadt P (2011) The fractal organization: Creating sustainable organizations with the viable system model.
Wiley, Chichester
Huygh T, De Haes S (2018) Using the viable system model to study IT governance dynamics: evidence from a
single case study. Paper presented at the proceedings of the 51st Hawaii international conference on system
sciences
151 SystemicPracticeandActionResearch(2022)35:131–152

--- PAGE 22 ---
Jackson MC (2005) Systems thinking: creative holism for managers. 2003. Wiley, West Sussex
Kearns GS, Sabherwal R (2006) Strategic alignment between business and information technology: a
knowledge-based view of behaviors, outcome, and consequences. J Manag Inf Syst 23(3):129–162
Leonard A (2009) The viable system model and its application to complex organizations. Syst Pract Action Res
22(4):223–233
Lewis E, Millar G (2009) The viable governance model-A theoretical model for the governance of IT. Paper
presented at the 2009 42nd Hawaii international conference on system sciences
Peppard J (2005) The application of the viable systems model to information technology governance. ICIS 2005
Proceedings, 5
Rakers M, Rosenkranz C (2008) Organizational impact on project management in financial data warehousing: a
case study
Ríos JP (2012) Diagnosis and design of organisations. In: Design and diagnosis for sustainable organizations (pp.
65–139): Springer
Sabherwal R, Chan YE (2001) Alignment between business and IS strategies: a study of prospectors, analyzers,
and defenders. Inf Syst Res 12(1):11–33
Schwaninger M (2006) Design for viable organizations: the diagnostic power of the viable system model.
Kybernetes Int J Syst Cybern 35(7–8):955–966
Weill P, Ross JW (2004) IT governance: How top performers manage IT decision rights for superior results.
Harvard Business Press, Boston
Wu SP-J, Straub DW, Liang T-P (2015) How information technology governance mechanisms and strategic
alignment influence organizational performance: insights from a matched survey of business and IT
managers. MIS Q 39(2):497–518
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional affiliations.
Affiliations
Ali Akbar Arghand1
& Mahmood Alborzi1
& Ali Rajabzadeh Ghatari2
Mahmood Alborzi
mahmood_alborzi@yahoo.com
Ali Rajabzadeh Ghatari
alirajabzadeh@modares.ac.ir
1
Department of IT management, Science and research branch, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Iran
2
Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran
152 SystemicPracticeandActionResearch(2022)35:131–152