--- PAGE 1 ---
Citation: Atencio, E.; Bustos, G.;
Mancini, M. Enterprise Architecture
Approach for Project Management
and Project-Based Organizations: A
Review. Sustainability 2022, 14, 9801.
https://doi.org/10.3390/su14169801
Academic Editor: Indra Gunawan
Received: 17 June 2022
Accepted: 3 August 2022
Published: 9 August 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affil-
iations.
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
sustainability
Review
Enterprise Architecture Approach for Project Management and
Project-Based Organizations: A Review
Edison Atencio 1,2,3,* , Guillermo Bustos 1 and Mauro Mancini 3
1 School of Industrial Engineering, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Valparaíso, Av. Brasil 2241,
Valparaíso 2340000, Chile
2 School of Civil Engineering, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Valparaíso, Av. Brasil 2147,
Valparaíso 2340000, Chile
3 Department of Management, Economics and Industrial Engineering, Politecnico di Milano,
Via Lambruschini 4b, Bovisa, 20156 Milan, Italy
* Correspondence: edison.atencio@pucv.cl
Abstract: Project-based organizations (PBOs) derive income from conducting projects for their clients.
Maintaining the most effective and efficient project governance style is an ongoing process for
these organizations as the context continuously changes. Enterprise architecture (EA) is a systemic
approach that supports organizations in modeling and describing themselves in different layers, such
as strategy, business, application, and technology. This literature review describes the current state
of EA usage in improving and quickly revising project management governance in PBOs to benefit
practitioners and researchers for an integrated view of EA, PM, and PBO, and identification of future
research gaps. This review used an EA model composed of layers as an analytical framework. The
extracted bibliometric and content data from selected articles were processed using the VOSviewer
tool for identifying and understanding the relationships between main concepts through network
mapping. The selected articles are oriented to internal organization projects, mainly in information
technology (IT). The need to align projects with business is highlighted, with EA positioned as a
governance tool. It was found that application of EA in PBOs is rare. A trend toward using popular
PM and EA frameworks, such as PMBOK and ArchiMate, was observed.
Keywords: project-based organizations; PBO; project management; enterprise architecture; business
process management
1. Introduction
Organizations and projects are important aspects of modern socioeconomic life. Man-
agers devote significant time and effort to improving operations. Their initiatives are often
implemented through projects [1]. In the last thirty years, the PM field has evolved consid-
erably [2], with increased visibility and relevance [3]. In conventional organizational theory,
projects were conceived as specific activities in a permanent organization (parent company).
However, the focus is now on the project concept, its complexity, and the executive team
that supports it. In this context, a project is conceived as a temporary organization [1].
Some organizations partially or completely sustain their value through projects and their
respective temporary organizations, project-based organizations (PBOs) [4–6]. PM is a core
competence in PBOs [7]. The study of PBOs has focused on specific domains in a PBO con-
text, including resource management, portfolios, programs, and knowledge management.
The study of holistic design in PBOs is still in its early stages [8].
PBO design has been primarily approached from an organizational development
perspective [4]. The Star Model is a widely accepted PBO design guideline that uses this
approach [5]. The model adapts Galbraith’s framework for organizational design [9] and
considers the development and alignment of five components: Strategy, processes, behavior,
human resources, and structure. This approach has the advantage of establishing the
Sustainability 2022, 14, 9801. https://doi.org/10.3390/su14169801 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability

--- PAGE 2 ---
Sustainability 2022, 14, 9801 2 of 25
interdependence of these components and a holistic view of PBO design. Other approaches
address these components independently [8].
For organizational design from a systems-thinking perspective, enterprise architecture
(EA) is an alternative for modeling, analyzing, and designing an organization [10–12]. EA
presents a coherent set of principles, methods, and models to design a company struc-
ture using components, considering their business processes, information systems, and
IT infrastructure [13,14]. Interest in EA has increased in recent years. Organizations con-
tinue to discover challenges in the field regarding the development and implementation
of EA [15–17]. The use of EA as a management tool has several benefits, as an instrument
allowing companies to evaluate, adjust, and align policies and systems to achieve business
objectives [18,19]. EA is also recognized as a tool that facilitates digital transformation,
a trend affecting process transformation and sustainable business development [20,21].
However, EA is still expanding as a formally adopted management discipline in organi-
zations worldwide [22]. The value of EA to an organization is not always evident. The
perception is that EA is a technical discipline, not a business discipline. Thus, professionals
and executives are often reluctant to use EA [13].
To help position EA as a business management tool, PBO design integrated with PM
practices can help construct a perspective including systems thinking and current PBO
design and management knowledge. It is helpful to consider that organizations have
become more integrated into a systems approach for more successful transformations [23].
First, it is necessary to review the literature concerning EA in PM and PBOs to understand
what has been accomplished. This study considers the following research questions:
• RQ1: What are the current state and key dimensions of EA approaches for PM? This
question concerns research that formally applies EA to PM. The main contributions of
these studies are discussed.
• RQ2: What are the current state and key dimensions of EA approaches for PBO design?
This question concerns research that formally applies EA to PBO design. The main
contributions of these studies are discussed.
• RQ3: What are the tendencies of frameworks in EA application in PM and PBOs? This
question seeks to identify frameworks used in studies of EA, PM, and PBOs over time.
• RQ4: How integrated are the EA, PM, and PBO domains? This question seeks to
holistically assess how the EA, PM, and PBO domains are integrated in the literature.
• RQ5: What are the main challenges in PM practices with EA presented as an alternative
solution? This question seeks to recognize the main challenges in applying EA in the
PM domain.
This study aims to determine the state of the art of EA application in PM and PBOs. As
such, the findings in the literature are synthesized and summarized using a methodology
combining a bibliometric review and a systematic literature review [24]. Fifty-nine articles
were selected for review from PM journals and engineering management.
A review of the articles was conducted using the EA model conceived in [25], using
an analytical framework with four component layers: Strategy, business, application, and
technology. Bibliometric and content data were processed through co-occurrence maps and
frequency graphs to guide the analysis.
The review indicated no EA applications in PBOs, although some isolated EA compo-
nents were identified in some papers. In contrast, applications of EA were found in PM.
These studies focused on the alignment of local projects with the organization and PM
activities in business processes, most focused on IT projects. PM and EA frameworks were
identified in the reviewed articles, indicating strong adherence to PMI standards and use
of ArchiMate (EA modeling language proposed by The Open Group (OMG) based on IEEE
1471 standard for describing software-system architecture [25]).
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the materials and methods used
in this research. Section 3 presents the results and a discussion. The conclusions, research
questions, and future research directions are presented in Section 4.

--- PAGE 3 ---
Sustainability 2022, 14, 9801 3 of 25
2. Research Method and Article Selection Process
2.1. Research Method
EA applications in PM and PBO design were identified, including the level of integra-
tion between these domains. To achieve this objective, a three-stage method was developed
according to [26], as shown in Figure 1.
Thispaperisorganizedasfollows.Section2presentsthematerialsandmethodsused
in this research. Section 3 presents the results and a discussion. The conclusions, research
questions, and future research directions are presented in Section 4.
2. Research Method and Article Selection Process
2.1. Research Method
EA applications in PM and PBO design were identified, including the level of inte-
gration between these domains. To achieve this objective, a three-stage method was de-
veloped according to [26], as shown in Figure 1.
Research tools
Bibliometric
review
Activities
Data acquisition
Mapping and
bibliometric study
Deliverables
Article database
Keyword co-occurrence mapping
and cluster analysis
Systematic review
PBO and PM
addressing sub-
domains identification
Identification of EA
components applied
List of sub-domains identified
List and frequencyof EA
components applied
Bibliometric and
systematic review
Bibliometric and
systematic results
analysis
Answers to the research questions
(1)
Study of PBO, PM,
and EA domain
interrelation
(2)
Identification of EA
approach in PBO and
PM
(3)
Answers to the
research questions
Stage
Most relevant PBO,PM and EA
concerns
Figure 1. Research method.
The first stage seeks to understand the interrelation between PBO, PM, and EA do-
mains. To achieve this objective, an analysis was developed from a meta-based perspec-
tive using bibliometric data obtained from an extraction protocol proposed by [27] and
adapted by [28]. The analysis was complemented with a bibliometric data analysis, allow-
ing visualization of structural and dynamic aspects of scientific research [29]. These tech-
niques allow the mapping of bibliometric data, providing a graphical visualization of the
study domains and their relationships [30]. The outputs of this stage are the selected arti-
cles and bibliometric data extracted and mapped. The second stage focuses on under-
standinghowthecomponentsofEArelatetoaspectsofthePBOandPMdomainsthrough
a systematic literature review (SLR) method from a content-based perspective. The con-
tent was extracted and structured from successive readings of the articles, according to
[27,28]. In this stage, the main layers of the ArchiMate language are considered as EA
components [25]: (1) Strategy, (2) Business, (3) Application, (4) Technology. The strategy
layer (1) considers capabilities, resources, and the course of action required to model the
strategy of the organization. The business layer (2) considers the business processes, ser-
vices, functions, and events of the business units. The application layer (3) considers the
softwaresupportingbusinesscomponentswithapplicationservices.Thetechnologylayer
(4) considers the hardware and infrastructure communication required to run the appli-
cations [25]. Some papers could also have a cross-cutting relationship to the four layers of
Figure 1. Research method.
The first stage seeks to understand the interrelation between PBO, PM, and EA do-
mains. To achieve this objective, an analysis was developed from a meta-based perspective
using bibliometric data obtained from an extraction protocol proposed by [27] and adapted
by [28]. The analysis was complemented with a bibliometric data analysis, allowing visual-
ization of structural and dynamic aspects of scientific research [29]. These techniques allow
the mapping of bibliometric data, providing a graphical visualization of the study domains
and their relationships [30]. The outputs of this stage are the selected articles and biblio-
metric data extracted and mapped. The second stage focuses on understanding how the
components of EA relate to aspects of the PBO and PM domains through a systematic litera-
ture review (SLR) method from a content-based perspective. The content was extracted and
structured from successive readings of the articles, according to [27,28]. In this stage, the
main layers of the ArchiMate language are considered as EA components [25]: (1) Strategy,
(2) Business, (3) Application, (4) Technology. The strategy layer (1) considers capabilities,
resources, and the course of action required to model the strategy of the organization.
The business layer (2) considers the business processes, services, functions, and events of
the business units. The application layer (3) considers the software supporting business
components with application services. The technology layer (4) considers the hardware
and infrastructure communication required to run the applications [25]. Some papers could
also have a cross-cutting relationship to the four layers of architecture. These articles are
then associated with a fifth typology referred to in this study as (5) “all EA layers”.
The deliverables obtained in this stage are the EA-PBO-PM sub-domains identification
and the understanding of how the EA components are applied in these domains and
sub-domains. PBO and PM domain characteristics were obtained by data extraction using

--- PAGE 4 ---
Sustainability 2022, 14, 9801 4 of 25
the framework proposed by [31]. Their application begins with initial familiarization from
reading the articles, identifying initial codes, and transforming them into potential themes.
Similarities between the themes are identified to define the main dimensions, as presented
in Table 2, further on.
The third stage integrates the developed bibliometric and systematic reviews, high-
lighting key areas to ensure in-depth research, according to [32]. Then, the results are
analyzed to respond the research questions and identify the most relevant PBO, PM, and
EA concerns.
2.2. Article Selection Process
To the best of the authors’ knowledge, no SLR of the EA approach for an integrated
view of PBO and PM design has been conducted. No SLRs were found regarding EA
application to PM in general. However, the study by Miterev et al. [8] is considered a
related work, with a review of PBO design from an organizational design perspective. Our
study was conducted from a systems-thinking perspective. In response to the research
questions, relevant documents were investigated according to the structure and keywords
in Table 1. The PBO keywords correspond to those found in the literature, as summarized
in [4]. The EA keywords pertain to topics that are elements of or related to EA. Some of
these topics were synthesized in [33].
Table 1. Keywords and Boolean operator used to search relevant articles.
Keyword/Terms Boolean Operator Keyword/Terms
Project-based organization (PBO) Enterprise Architecture (EA)
Project-based firm Architecture
Multi-project firm Business process architecture (BPA)
Project-intensive firm AND Business process management (BPM)
Project-oriented organization Design
Project-based company Governance
Project management Landscape
Structure
Map
In selecting relevant documents for this study, certain inclusion criteria were met. If
the documents met at least one exclusion criterion (EC), they were discarded. The exclusion
criteria were: (EC1) Repeated document, and (EC2) The article does not report an EA
application in a PBO or PM domain.
A total of 347 papers were identified using the search string, including duplicates. The
articles were obtained between August–November 2021. After application of exclusion
and inclusion criteria, 59 articles remained. The following search engines were used:
(1) Scopus, (2) Web of Science (WoS), (3) ResearchGate. The article selection process is
shown in Figure 2.
Sustainability 2022, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 27
Webof
Science
Scopus
Initial Sample
516 articles
EC1
Documents
discarded:
N = 76
Documents
selected:
N = 440
EC2
Documents
selected:
N = 59
Documents
discarded:
N = 381
Research
Gate
Figure 2. Document selection flowchart.
The data extraction form used in this research is presented in Table 2. The metadata
was obtained using DEM1–DEM7. Content-based data were extracted using DEC8–
DEC15 and answered the research questions in Section 3.2.
Table 2. Data extraction form.
Figure 2. Document selection flowchart.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Sustainability 2022, 14, 9801 5 of 25
The data extraction form used in this research is presented in Table 2. The metadata
was obtained using DEM1–DEM7. Content-based data were extracted using DEC8–DEC15
and answered the research questions in Section 3.2.
Table 2. Data extraction form.
ID Approach Field Question Value
DEM1 Meta-perspective Title What is the name of the approach? Name
DEM2 Meta-perspective Authors Who are its authors? Author list
DEM3 Meta-perspective Year What is its publication year? Year
DEM4 Meta-perspective Country What is the first author’s country? Country
DEM5 Meta-perspective Journal What is the journal? Journal name
DEM6 Meta-perspective Type What is the publication vehicle name?
Conference paper OR journal OR
thesis OR book chapter
DEM7 Meta-perspective Citation count
How many citations does the work
have according to InCites Citation
Report, Scimago Journal and Country
Rank, or Research Gate?
Number
DEC8
Content-based
perspective
PM Focus What is the PM focus of the article?
Data extracted from successive
readings of articles (project scope,
PMIS, project control)
DEC9
Content-based
perspective
Relation to EA
What is the main approach with EA
components?
Strategy OR/AND Business
OR/AND Application OR/AND
Technology OR/AND
All EA layers
DEC10
Content-based
perspective
Framework, standard, or
language reference
What EA–PM frameworks, standards,
or language are used in the article?
Data extracted from successive
readings of articles (PMBOK,
PRINCE, TOGAF,
ArchiMate, Zachman)
DEC 11
Content-based
perspective
Type of PBO identified What type of PBO is identified? Internal OR external
DEC 12
Content-based
perspective
Integration
Does the article holistically integrate
EA, PM, and PBO domains?
Domains integrated: EA/PM,
EA/PBO, EA/PM/PBO
DEC 13
Content-based
perspective
Complementary
information
What additional relevant information
is provided?
(Dis)advantages, emphasis, others
DEC 14
Content-based
perspective
Needs addressed
What are the needs of the EA
application?
Data extracted and generalized
from successive readings of articles
(establishing project policies,
communication problems,
connecting Agile with EA, projects
affecting EA)
DEC 15
Content-based
perspective
Challenges identified for
future research
What challenges are proposed for
future research?
Data extracted and generalized
from successive readings of articles
(case study, architect–project
manager integration, adding
complexity)
3. Results
In this section, the bibliometric and content data are processed and analyzed using the
research method described in Section 2.
3.1. Annual Quantitative Distribution of Literature
Meta-perspective findings for bibliometric analysis were summarized using descrip-
tive statistics. Figure 3 shows the distribution of the 59 selected articles by year.
The oldest article is from 1996 and takes a process approach to PM [34]. The years
with the greatest productivity were 2010, 2018, and 2021, with six, seven, and 13 articles,
respectively. Since 2005, there has been constant development in the field, with at least one
article per year. A growth trend is observed over time.

--- PAGE 6 ---
Sustainability 2022, 14, 9801 6 of 25
In this section, the bibliometric and content data are processed and analyzed u
the research method described in Section 2.
3.1. Annual Quantitative Distribution of Literature
Meta-perspective findings for bibliometric analysis were summarized using desc
tive statistics. Figure 3 shows the distribution of the 59 selected articles by year.
Figure 3. Number of relevant articles published from 1996 to 2021.
The oldest article is from 1996 and takes a process approach to PM [34]. The y
with the greatest productivity were 2010, 2018, and 2021, with six, seven, and 13 arti
respectively. Since 2005, there has been constant development in the field, with at l
one article per year. A growth trend is observed over time.
3.2. Country Distribution of Selected Articles
The articles are from 23 nations (primary author country of origin), as shown in
ure 4.
1 1
3
1
3
5
1
6
1
2
3
2
1 1
3
7
2
3
13
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
1996
2001
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
Number of papers
Year of publication
Figure 3. Number of relevant articles published from 1996 to 2021.
3.2. Country Distribution of Selected Articles
Thearticlesarefrom23nations(primaryauthorcountryoforigin),asshownin Figure 4.
Sustainability 2022, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7
Figure 4. Productivity by country: Number of papers and citations.
The top five countries by number of papers are China, the Netherlands, US, Br
and Portugal. The top five countries by number of citations are the US, South Africa
Netherlands, Finland, and Portugal.
3.3. Quantitative Analysis of Main Journals and Conferences
Of the 59 articles, most were conference papers, followed by journal papers (31
shown in Figure 5. One book chapter and one doctoral thesis were selected.
11
6 6
5 5
3 3
2 2 2 2
1 1 1
1
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
20
72
142
6
39
9
75
33
3
9 6
0
49
1
28
4 0 6
15
0
10
5 0
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
China
Netherlands
USA
Brazil
Portugal
Germany
South Africa
Italy
Poland
Colombia
Iran
Indonesia
Finland
Estonia
Russia
Morocco
UAE
UK
South Korea
Australia
Turkey
Tunisia
Romania
Number of citations
Number of papers
Country
Number of papers Citations
Figure 4. Productivity by country: Number of papers and citations.
The top five countries by number of papers are China, the Netherlands, US, Brazil,
and Portugal. The top five countries by number of citations are the US, South Africa, the
Netherlands, Finland, and Portugal.
3.3. Quantitative Analysis of Main Journals and Conferences
Of the 59 articles, most were conference papers, followed by journal papers (31), as
shown in Figure 5. One book chapter and one doctoral thesis were selected.
The 59 selected papers come from 51 different sources, mainly covering the disciplines
of project management, engineering management, and computer engineering. Table 3
shows the journals that group more than one article. The first journal focuses on PM.
The second extends this field of knowledge to IT. The remaining sources correspond to
conference papers focused on computer engineering.

--- PAGE 7 ---
Sustainability 2022, 14, 9801 7 of 25
and Portugal. The top five countries by number of citations are the US, South Africa, the
Netherlands, Finland, and Portugal.
3.3. Quantitative Analysis of Main Journals and Conferences
Of the 59 articles, most were conference papers, followed by journal papers (31), as
shown in Figure 5. One book chapter and one doctoral thesis were selected.
Figure 5. Distribution of papers by type.
The 59 selected papers come from 51 different sources, mainly covering the disci-
plines of project management, engineering management, and computer engineering. Ta-
ble 3 shows the journals that group more than one article. The first journal focuses on PM.
The second extends this field of knowledge to IT. The remaining sources correspond to
conference papers focused on computer engineering.
Table 3. Sources with two or more papers.
Source (Journal/Conference) No. of Papers
International Journal of Project Management 4
Figure 5. Distribution of papers by type.
Table 3. Sources with two or more papers.
Source (Journal/Conference) No. of Papers
International Journal of Project Management 4
ACM International Conference Proceeding Series 2
International Journal of Information Technology Project Management 2
Procedia Computer Science 2
Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing 2
IFIP International Federation for Information Processing 2
3.4. Keyword Co-Occurrence Analysis
There were a total of 186 different author–keywords in the selected articles. After a
standard coding process (‘project’ was grouped with ‘projects’, ‘business process manage-
ment’ with ‘BPM’, etc.), a total of 181 keywords remained. The bibliometric metadata was
processed in VOSviewer to produce a co-occurrence map. The minimum occurrence value
was two keywords, meaning that a keyword appears on the map when two papers cite
it. With this parameterization, the number of keywords was reduced to 25. The resulting
map shows five clusters (represented in green, purple, blue, red, and yellow), as shown in
Figure 6. A larger label and circle indicate greater element weight. The distance between
two keywords roughly indicates their co-occurrence relationship. The closer the keywords
are, the stronger their relationship [35]. Table 4 shows keywords with more than three
occurrences, part of Figure 6.
Table 4 summarizes the top keywords in Figure 6 and their occurrences, links, and
weight. The ’number of occurrences’ value means that there are n-papers that mention a
keyword. The ‘Links’ column describes the number of connections between keywords (the
keyword is addressed in a paper with another term together quantity times the number
of ’links’). The ‘Total Link Strength’ column indicates the weight of these links [26]. For
instance, in the case of the ’governance’ term, there is a ’number of occurrence equal’ to
three and ’links’ equal to nine. It means three papers mention this term, and this term is
connected nine times with others (for instance, project management or roles in this case, as
shown in Figure 6). If the term does not have a link, it will appear as a point on the map.
Clustering of keywords generates five clusters: (1) Green: Enterprise architecture
(EA), (2) Purple: Project management (PM), (3) Blue: Business process management (BPM),
(4) Yellow: Project components, (5) Red: Mix of architecture components.

--- PAGE 8 ---
Sustainability 2022, 14, 9801 8 of 25
With this parameterization, the number of keywords was reduced to 25. The resulting
map shows five clusters (represented in green, purple, blue, red, and yellow), as shown
inFigure6.Alargerlabelandcircleindicategreaterelementweight.Thedistancebetween
twokeywordsroughlyindicatestheirco-occurrencerelationship.Thecloserthekeywords
are, the stronger their relationship [35]. Table 4 shows keywords with more than three
occurrences, part of Figure 6.
Figure 6. Keyword co-occurrence map.
Table 4. Keywords in selected papers with three or more occurrences.
n Keyword Occurrences Links Total Link Strength
1 enterprise architecture 19 20 46
2 project management 17 16 39
3 business process management 13 6 15
4 projects 5 12 27
5 process 4 3 4
6 governance 3 9 18
Figure 6. Keyword co-occurrence map.
Table 4. Keywords in selected papers with three or more occurrences.
n Keyword Occurrences Links Total Link Strength
1 enterprise architecture 19 20 46
2 project management 17 16 39
3 business process management 13 6 15
4 projects 5 12 27
5 process 4 3 4
6 governance 3 9 18
Figure 7 presents the bibliometric information in Figure 6 by article year. Darker colors
represent the oldest, and lighter colors represent the most recent articles.
Each of the five generated clusters in Figure 6 is analyzed in the following sections.
3.4.1. Enterprise Architecture
InFigure6, theEAcluster(GreeninFigure6)hasthegreatestweightofthefive clusters.
The keywords in this domain are ‘project portfolio management’, ‘IT governance’, ‘PM-
BOK’, and ‘ArchiMate’. The last two keywords correspond to widely used frameworks
in the literature. PMBOK is considered the most popular PM standard [36]. ArchiMate
is a widely accepted language for modeling EAs [37,38]. The concept of IT governance
is highlighted in this cluster, reflecting the orientation to IT projects in EA applications
and the use of EA as a management tool to align the technological components of an
organization [13,18].

--- PAGE 9 ---
Sustainability 2022, 14, 9801 9 of 25
as shown in Figure 6). If the term does not have a link, it will appear as a point on the
map.
Clustering of keywords generates five clusters: (1) Green: Enterprise architecture
(EA), (2) Purple: Project management (PM), (3) Blue: Business process management
(BPM), (4) Yellow: Project components, (5) Red: Mix of architecture components.
Figure 7 presents the bibliometric information in Figure 6 by article year. Darker col-
ors represent the oldest, and lighter colors represent the most recent articles.
Figure 7. Keyword co-occurrence map by year of citation.
Each of the five generated clusters in Figure 6 is analyzed in the following sections.
3.4.1. Enterprise Architecture
In Figure 6, the EA cluster (Green in Figure 6) has the greatest weight of the five
clusters. The keywords in this domain are ‘project portfolio management’, ‘IT govern-
ance’, ‘PMBOK’, and ‘ArchiMate’. The last two keywords correspond to widely used
frameworks in the literature. PMBOK is considered the most popular PM standard [36].
ArchiMate is a widely accepted language for modeling EAs [37,38]. The concept of IT gov-
ernance is highlighted in this cluster, reflecting the orientation to IT projects in EA appli-
cations and the use of EA as a management tool to align the technological components of
an organization [13,18].
Figure 7. Keyword co-occurrence map by year of citation.
3.4.2. Project Management
In Figure 6, the PM cluster (Purple in Figure 6) is directly connected with the EA and
BPM clusters. There is a link between PM and BPM at the beginning of the research time
window. The PM cluster has the second greatest weight in the map. The main keywords
in this group are ‘collaboration’ and ‘Agile development’, which connect the PM and EA
clusters. This relationship is visible in an organization’s adherence to Agile approaches
through projects. Agile methodologies have their origins in IT [39]. However, there is
concern regarding the relationship between EA and Agile approaches. Agile tends to
neglect the architectonic design of information systems [40], challenging the flexibility and
agility of an organization (and the EA) when it must adapt to environmental changes [41].
3.4.3. Business Process Management
In Figure 6, the main keywords in the blue cluster are ‘process’, ‘workflow’, ‘process
modeling’, and ‘product data management’ (Blue in Figure 6). The BPM cluster is mainly
connected with the PM cluster. The process concept has been widely implemented in PM
practices to articulate activities and artifacts, as in PM standards such as PMBOK [42] and
PM2 [43]. The PMBOK standard describes its body of knowledge in five process groups
broken down into 49 processes.
3.4.4. Project Components
In Figure 6, the main keywords in the yellow cluster are ‘project conformance’ (Yellow
in Figure 6), ‘systems development’, and ‘analysis and design artifacts’. This cluster
is connected to the EA cluster and to the architecture components cluster (red). The
interrelated concepts in this cluster reflect the organizational concern for projects with an
existing EA and components affected by changes produced by such projects [44–47]. To
maintain the alignment of architecture components after the project, the project must be
pre-aligned to the EA [47].

--- PAGE 10 ---
Sustainability 2022, 14, 9801 10 of 25
3.4.5. Architecture Components
In Figure 6 (Red in Figure 6), the main keywords in the red cluster are ‘programs’,
‘governance’, ‘reference architecture’, ‘portfolios’, ‘layers’, ‘competencies’, and ‘roles’. These
concepts are included in the most current publications (Figure 7). The concept of gover-
nance connects with all cluster keywords. Governance has gained relevance in PM domain
research. In the projects domain, governance refers to interactions between project partici-
pants and mechanisms that affect engagement between stakeholders and the project [48,49].
In the EA domain, governance is recognized as internal directives for enforcing plans and
principles outlined in the EA and ensuring that projects that affect the EA are properly
integrated [18]. With multiple projects, as the complexity between them increases, a man-
agement tool is required [50]. It has been shown that using a reference architecture helps
align an organization’s components and projects, effectively managing the project [51].
3.5. Content-Based Data Perspective Analysis
This section presents a systematic analysis of the 59 selected papers based on mapping
of referenced EA layers and the main concepts of PBO and PM found by extracting data
from Table 2.
3.5.1. Main PM Concepts Related to EA Layers
A co-occurrence map was developed from the extraction of the main focus of the
articles in the PM domain (The DEC8 data, obtained with the form described in Table 2)
withEAcomponentlayers (TheDEC9dataobtained, accordingtoTable 2). Everypaperwas
labeled regarding one or more EA layers and PM focus, then developing a co-occurrence
map. Figure 8 shows the relationship between the five EA layers and nine concepts in the
PM domain.
Fourteen concepts were extracted, as shown in Figure 8. The metrics are presented in
Table 5. The concepts highlighted with a red ellipse in Figure 8 correspond to the EA layers.
The first three concepts in Table 5 represent the most weighted concepts from the blue, red,
and green clusters generated.
Figure 8 shows that three clusters are formed for the mapped concepts: (1) EA business
layer (blue), (2) EA application layer (red), (3) EA project management (green). The number
of connections and weights for these three clusters are analyzed below.
EA Business Layer Cluster (Blue)
The blue cluster has the greatest weight, consisting of ‘strategy’, ‘project governance’,
and ‘the general approach of PM’. The business layer is the most common in the selected
articles (in 31 of the 59 selected articles).
This cluster reflects the concern of researchers for adopting PM practices into the
business as a whole to achieve these objectives. Aligning projects with the strategy and
achieving their benefits is an objective of organizations that develops internal projects [52].
Moreover, PMBOK defines the portfolio as a strategical viewpoint of projects. This concern
has been achieved in the literature by the work of Cordeiro et al. [51,53], developing an
architecture for balancing the time-cost-quality project constraints with the desired benefits.
The above is proposed as a governance instrument by verifying deviations and detecting
the architecture portfolio-program-project (PPP) model that best suits the context of an
organization [51,53].
The business layer is related to a general approach of PM, considering how the PM
practices affect processes, roles, functions, and events. On the one hand, Peng et al. [54]
relate the business model with the PM organizations’ activities through architecture models.
On the other hand, Cui et al. [55] focus on the roles in multi-enterprise environments for the
compliance of services and functions. This proposal is based mainly on models of processes
and some relationships with applications.
Also in this group are 14 papers that use business process modeling notation (BPMN)
to model business processes. Process design has become a research topic of interest from

--- PAGE 11 ---
Sustainability 2022, 14, 9801 11 of 25
different perspectives. The relationship between BPM and PM domains has been studied
holistically [56], and the PMBOK framework has been translated into a BPMN language to
integrate PM activities with those of the business more efficiently [57]. Another application
approach is from the PM to the BPM domain. PM practices have been formalized to develop
BPM projects using PMBOK [58] and aligning projects to IT governance standards such as
COBIT [59].
Project management and business processes have one common component that can be
leveraged (tasks) [34].
Sustainability 2022, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 27
occurrence map. Figure 8 shows the relationship between the five EA layers and nine con-
cepts in the PM domain.
Figure 8. Co-occurrence map of the main focus of PM domain in terms of EA layers.
Fourteen concepts were extracted, as shown in Figure 8. The metrics are presented in
Table 5. The concepts highlighted with a red ellipse in Figure 8 correspond to the EA lay-
ers.ThefirstthreeconceptsinTable5representthemostweightedconceptsfromtheblue,
red, and green clusters generated.
Table 5. Main focus of PM domain in terms of EA layers extracted from selected papers.
n Focus Occurrences Links Total Link Strength
1 business 31 12 50
2 application 21 9 46
3 EA project management 16 8 30
4
PMIS (project management infor-
mation systems)
16 6 36
5 technology 15 8 35
6 all EA layers 15 5 24
7 internal projects 11 8 18
8 APM (Agile project management) 10 6 21
9 project alignment 7 6 13
10 general approach of PM 6 6 10
11 project governance 4 4 8
12 project control 4 4 7
Figure 8. Co-occurrence map of the main focus of PM domain in terms of EA layers.
Table 5. Main focus of PM domain in terms of EA layers extracted from selected papers.
n Focus Occurrences Links Total Link Strength
1 business 31 12 50
2 application 21 9 46
3 EA project management 16 8 30
4 PMIS (project management information systems) 16 6 36
5 technology 15 8 35
6 all EA layers 15 5 24
7 internal projects 11 8 18
8 APM (Agile project management) 10 6 21
9 project alignment 7 6 13
10 general approach of PM 6 6 10
11 project governance 4 4 8
12 project control 4 4 7
13 strategy 3 4 6
14 project quality 2 2 4

--- PAGE 12 ---
Sustainability 2022, 14, 9801 12 of 25
EA Application Layer Cluster (Red)
Twenty-one papers are related to the EA application layer. This cluster is related to the
EA technology layer and PM concerns such as ‘PMIS’ (project management information
systems), ‘project control’, and ‘project quality’. The relationship between these concepts
can be explained by the need for automated support for PM activities. Automating through
PMIS facilitates planning, evaluation, communication, documentation, and reuse of project
information [34]. PMIS proposals are based on an EA framework such as the Depart-
ment of Defence Architecture Framework (DoDAF) [60] and Unified Modeling Language
(UML) [61]. PMIS was also developed by integrating BPM workflows with the Open
Project application for scheduling [62] and project control [63,64]. It is known that using a
process perspective in PM positively influences productivity and improves communication
between project participants [63], collaboration, and information flow [58]. For project
quality assurance, a PMIS proposal based on ISO 9000 [65] and a PMIS connected with
the collaborative environment of architecture, engineering, and construction (AEC) indus-
try projects were found [66]. Likewise, in manufacturing quality management, a process
perspective continuously improves quality [65].
EA Project Management Cluster (Green)
The green cluster concentrates all EA layers and PM concerns, including project
alignment, internalprojects, APM(Agileprojectmanagement), andEAprojectmanagement.
This group contains 15 of the 59 selected papers, highlighting the need to align internal
projects with the organization, with EA as the tool for this purpose [67]. Alignment can
be achieved with a pre-existing EA, as in studies by Ralph Foorthuis [44–47]. Since 2007,
he has investigated how internal projects (mainly IT projects) should be coupled to an
existing EA to properly integrate the project. For IT projects, the EA approach has been
extended with organization of artifacts produced by projects, highlighting at the portfolio
level [68], as with Foorthuis, the importance of aligning these artifacts with the company,
from strategy to infrastructure.
The green cluster is also strongly linked to the EA project management cluster, consid-
ering that project management for this type of project is predominantly transversal to all
EA layers.
3.5.2. EA and PM Languages and Standards
The languages and standards used in the selected papers were extracted using the form
in Table 2. All findings were mapped through their co-occurrences, as shown in Figure 9.
Sustainability 2022, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 27
The green cluster concentrates all EA layers and PM concerns, including project
alignment, internal projects, APM (Agile project management), and EA project manage-
ment. This group contains 15 of the 59 selected papers, highlighting the need to align in-
ternal projects with the organization, with EA as the tool for this purpose [67]. Alignment
can be achieved with a pre-existing EA, as in studies by Ralph Foorthuis [44–47]. Since
2007, he has investigated how internal projects (mainly IT projects) should be coupled to
an existing EA to properly integrate the project. For IT projects, the EA approach has been
extended with organization of artifacts produced by projects, highlighting at the portfolio
level [68], as with Foorthuis, the importance of aligning these artifacts with the company,
from strategy to infrastructure.
The green cluster is also strongly linked to the EA project management cluster, con-
sidering that project management for this type of project is predominantly transversal to
all EA layers.
3.5.2. EA and PM Languages and Standards
Thelanguagesandstandardsusedintheselectedpaperswereextractedusingtheform
in Table 2. All findings were mapped through their co-occurrences, as shown in Figure 9.
Figure 9. Co-occurrence map of EA and PM languages and standards.
The map in Figure 9 contains 17 findings in five clusters. The number of occurrences,
number of links, and weight are presented in Table 6.
Table 6. PM and EA languages and standards used in selected papers.
Figure 9. Co-occurrence map of EA and PM languages and standards.

--- PAGE 13 ---
Sustainability 2022, 14, 9801 13 of 25
The map in Figure 9 contains 17 findings in five clusters. The number of occurrences,
number of links, and weight are presented in Table 6.
Table 6. PM and EA languages and standards used in selected papers.
Language/Standard Domain Description Occurrences Links
Total Link
Strength
BPMN EA
BPMN: This language is widely used for its
expressiveness, semantics, and simplicity [69]
16 8 12
PMBOK PM Body of knowledge for project management [40] 13 9 15
APM PM
Agile project management is an emerging approach
used mainly in the IT industry [70]
8 4 5
ArchiMate EA EA modeling language [25] 7 4 7
Zachman EA
The first EA framework proposed by Zachman in the
1980s [71]
4 5 7
TOGAF EA
Architecture framework providing methods and tools
for developing and maintaining an EA [72]
3 3 5
CANVAS EA
Management tool for designing business models,
structured in nine components: Customer segments,
value propositions, channels, customer relationships,
revenue streams, key resources, key activities, key
partnerships, and cost structure [73]
2 4 4
ISO 21505 PM
Guidance for project, program, and portfolio
governance [74]
2 3 4
PRINCE PM
Projects in Controlled Environments is a method for
project management based on processes [75]
2 2 3
Hammer EA
Maturity model for business process management
proposed by Michael Hammer [76,77]
2 1 1
Scrum PM
Methodology developed from technology-based
companies, suitable for projects requiring speed and
flexibility. Its main components are the product
backlog (user requirements) and the sprint backlog
(items for completing each sprint) [78]
2 1 1
APQC EA
Taxonomy of business process for different industries,
useful for addressing a common language, organizing,
and mapping processes [79]
1 3 3
PM2 PM
PM methodology developed by the Centre of
Excellence in Project Management of the European
Commission created for EU institutions using [80]
1 2 2
COBIT EA
Control Objectives for Information and Related
Technologies is a framework for developing,
implementing, and improving IT governance and
management [81,82]
1 1 1
FEAF EA
Federal Enterprise Architecture Framework is a tool
developed to help US government planners address a
common language. This standard is structured in five
domains: Strategy, business, data applications,
infrastructure, and security [83,84]
1 1 1
SYSML EA
Systems Modeling Language, proposed by OMG
(Object Management Group) as a general language for
systems engineering [85]
1 1 1
In Figure 9 and Table 6, the most heavily weighted findings per cluster are (1) BPMN
(red), (2) PMBOK (yellow), (3) APM (green), (4) ArchiMate (blue), (5) CANVAS (purple).
PMBOK and BPMN are strongly connected. There is a relationship regarding the pro-
cess approach for managing PM activities. In Figure 10, the relationship between PMBOK
and BPMN is located early in the research time window. These clusters are also connected
using the CANVAS model [86,87], APQC reference process framework [87], and Agile
Project Management (APM) [40,86,88]. Over time, the relationship turned to EA, beginning

--- PAGE 14 ---
Sustainability 2022, 14, 9801 14 of 25
with Zachman’s EA framework [89–91] and later the ArchiMate language [51,53,92–95]
and the TOGAF framework [91,96].
Sustainability 2022, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 15 of 27
Figure 10. Co-occurrence map of EA and PM languages and standards by citation year.
With PMBOK, PM PRINCE standards are displayed, indicating that these standards
are most commonly used by researchers and practitioners [97,98].
3.5.3. Type of Projects Studied in Selected Articles
According to the data extraction form in Table 2, the types of projects studied in the
selected articles are shown in Figure 11:
Figure 11. Types of projects studied in selected articles.
The types of projects displayed in Figure 11 are also described in Table 7.
Table 7. Description of each type of project displayed in Figure 11.
Type of Project Description
19
14
9
6
3 2 2 1 1 1 1
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
General
IT projects
AEC
EA projects
Product
development
BPM projects
Re-eingeneering
projects
Oil and Gas
Science and
Technology projects
Capital projects
PM improvement
Number of papers
Type of project
Figure 10. Co-occurrence map of EA and PM languages and standards by citation year.
With PMBOK, PM PRINCE standards are displayed, indicating that these standards
are most commonly used by researchers and practitioners [97,98].
3.5.3. Type of Projects Studied in Selected Articles
According to the data extraction form in Table 2, the types of projects studied in the
selected articles are shown in Figure 11:
Sustainability 2022, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 15
Figure 10. Co-occurrence map of EA and PM languages and standards by citation year.
With PMBOK, PM PRINCE standards are displayed, indicating that these stand
are most commonly used by researchers and practitioners [97,98].
3.5.3. Type of Projects Studied in Selected Articles
According to the data extraction form in Table 2, the types of projects studied in
selected articles are shown in Figure 11:
Figure 11. Types of projects studied in selected articles.
The types of projects displayed in Figure 11 are also described in Table 7.
Table 7. Description of each type of project displayed in Figure 11.
Type of Project Description
19
14
9
6
3 2 2 1 1 1 1
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
General
IT projects
AEC
EA projects
Product
development
BPM projects
Re-eingeneering
projects
Oil and Gas
Science and
Technology projects
Capital projects
PM improvement
Number of papers
Type of project
Figure 11. Types of projects studied in selected articles.
The types of projects displayed in Figure 11 are also described in Table 7.

--- PAGE 15 ---
Sustainability 2022, 14, 9801 15 of 25
Table 7. Description of each type of project displayed in Figure 11.
Type of Project Description
General
Applications of EA to a general viewpoint of projects and not the specified type of project,
e.g., [51,93]
IT Projects Applications of EA on IT projects or IT project management needs, e.g., [23,96].
AEC Architecture, Engineering, and Construction projects [99,100].
EA projects Focus on EA projects and the PM practices for improving them [45,101].
Product development EA is used to improve the product lifecycle and development through projects [54,61,102].
BPM projects Focus on BPM projects and the PM practices for improving them [58,59].
Re-engineering projects
Focus on re-engineering the organization and understanding the PM practices for achieving
the project’s objective. Articles take advantage of the models offered by EA [86,103].
Oil and gas Managing the data complexity on Oil and Gas projects [104].
Science and technology projects
Proposing an integrated data-business model for Science and Technology projects funded
by the government [105].
Capital projects Managing the complexity of city asset improvement projects [106].
PM improvement Improvement of PM practices applying the business layer and BPM [63].
Figure 11 shows the application of EA with a general view of PM, and its application
in IT and AEC projects. Organizations in the AEC industry generate most of their income
from projects for external clients and can be classified as PBOs according to the criterion
in [4]. EA applications are found in these articles. Only one article explicitly acknowledges
the concept of PBO [107]. The uses of EA in this group focused on project scope control [58],
the strategy of the organization [90], collaboration networks in AEC projects [66], the
organizational maturity of project management [107], and project governance [87].
3.5.4. Type of PBO Addressed
The selected articles used different approaches and EA intensities in their projects.
The articles do not directly refer to PBO, except for [64]. However, it is possible to identify
whether the focus of the projects is the organization (internal projects) or external clients.
In terms of project type and PBO in the articles, 45 were internal PBOs, 14 were external
PBOs (Figure 12).
Sustainability 2022, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 16 of 27
General
Applications of EA to a general viewpoint of projects and not the specified type of pro-
ject, e.g., [51,93]
IT Projects Applications of EA on IT projects or IT project management needs, e.g., [23,96].
AEC Architecture, Engineering, and Construction projects [99,100].
EA projects Focus on EA projects and the PM practices for improving them [45,101].
Product development
EA is used to improve the product lifecycle and development through projects
[54,61,102].
BPM projects Focus on BPM projects and the PM practices for improving them [58,59].
Re-engineering projects
Focus on re-engineering the organization and understanding the PM practices for achiev
ing the project’s objective. Articles take advantage of the models offered by EA [86,103].
Oil and gas Managing the data complexity on Oil and Gas projects [104].
Science and technology pro-
jects
Proposing an integrated data-business model for Science and Technology projects
funded by the government [105].
Capital projects Managing the complexity of city asset improvement projects [106].
PM improvement Improvement of PM practices applying the business layer and BPM [63].
Figure 11 shows the application of EA with a general view of PM, and its application
in IT and AEC projects. Organizations in the AEC industry generate most of their income
from projects for external clients and can be classified as PBOs according to the criterion
in [4]. EA applicationsare found in thesearticles. Onlyone article explicitly acknowledges
the concept of PBO [107]. The uses of EA in this group focused on project scope contro
[58], the strategy of the organization [90], collaboration networks in AEC projects [66], the
organizational maturity of project management [107], and project governance [87].
3.5.4. Type of PBO Addressed
The selected articles used different approaches and EA intensities in their projects
The articles do not directly refer to PBO, except for [64]. However, it is possible to identify
whether the focus of the projects is the organization (internal projects) or external clients
In terms of project type and PBO in the articles, 45 were internal PBOs, 14 were externa
PBOs (Figure 12).
Figure 12. Distribution of papers in terms of PBO type.
3.5.5. Integration of PM, PBO, and EA Domains
TheselectedarticleswereclassifiedaccordingtothelevelofgeneralizationofthePM
PBO, and EA study and whether integration between these domains could be identified
Thirty-one articles indicate a holistic relationship between domains, as shown in Figure
13.
Figure 12. Distribution of papers in terms of PBO type.
3.5.5. Integration of PM, PBO, and EA Domains
The selected articles were classified according to the level of generalization of the PM,
PBO, and EA study and whether integration between these domains could be identified.
Thirty-one articles indicate a holistic relationship between domains, as shown in Figure 13.
Two articles applied EA in organizations that can be considered as PBOs, but do not
explain the conceptual integration. Management tools such as EA, Capability Maturity
Model Integration (CMMI), PMBOK, and PRINCE have been studied for claims not ade-
quately addressed in the AEC industry [90]. Use of these standards and an architecture
approach help this industry achieve strategic objectives [90,108]. It is confirmed again in
this study that joint application of the concepts surveyed in the literature is mainly found
in IT projects.

--- PAGE 16 ---
Sustainability 2022, 14, 9801 16 of 25 Sustainability 2022, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 17 of 27
Figure 13. Distribution of papers in terms of EA-PM-PBO integration.
Two articles applied EA in organizations that can be considered as PBOs, but do not
explain the conceptual integration. Management tools such as EA, Capability Maturity
Model Integration (CMMI), PMBOK, and PRINCE have been studied for claims not ade-
quately addressed in the AEC industry [90]. Use of these standards and an architecture
approach help this industry achieve strategic objectives [90,108]. It is confirmed again in
this study that joint application of the concepts surveyed in the literature is mainly found
in IT projects.
Twenty-nine articles generally addressed EA with PM. This includes the work of
Foorthuis, who investigated the conformity of project artifacts with an existing EA [44–
47]. At the project portfolio level (PPM), connections between EA and PPM were identi-
fied, with the need to align these domains with the business [51,68,92]. However, EA and
PPM rarely appear related in the literature and connections between EA and PM have not
been analyzed [68]. A building block toward integrating EA with PM was developed [68]
but is still pending for cases scaling the EA approach. There are two articles in this group
with greater generalization in the analysis of EA and PM domains. A model integrating
the FEAF and PMBOK frameworks for developing EA projects was proposed [67]. A de-
scription of the body of knowledge of the PMBOK framework in ArchiMate language was
developed[95].However,onlythemainconceptsofthePMBOKwereconsidered,leaving
alignment of motivation layer concepts at different levels of company, projects, and pro-
cess for future research [95].
4. Discussion
This research has described the current application of EA on PBO and PM domains
and gives an overview of the integration between these domains. From a bibliometric per-
spective, it is possible to identify the increasing productivity of research in the studied
field. Northern hemisphere countries concentrate most of the articles, coinciding with the
originofthemainEAandPMstandardscitedintheliterature.Mostoftheselectedarticles
are conference papers. Understanding that these kinds of articles are works in the process
of maturing, this situation can be seen as an opportunity for the research field to take
current knowledge to the next level. The above could confirm that the systems thinking
in PBO and PM are still in their early stages.
Processing the keywords of selected papers—using the data extraction form de-
scribed in Table 2—through co-occurrence maps, clusters and interrelationships can be
identified, as shown in Figures 6 and 7. The three most weighted concepts are EA, PM,
and BPM, with PM as a central cluster. It can be seen that early researchers addressed the
PM–BPM relationship. Over time, research interest expanded to include EA, culminating
in EA–PM components such as governance, layers, portfolio, and programs. This trend is
observedinthePMdomain.InthefirstsixversionsofthePMBOKframework,knowledge
was structured in ‘processes’ [42] and hierarchical composition of PM knowledge [104].
However, the recent 7th version of PMBOK deploys knowledge through systemically in-
terrelated ‘domains’ [52,109].
Figure 13. Distribution of papers in terms of EA-PM-PBO integration.
Twenty-nine articles generally addressed EA with PM. This includes the work of
Foorthuis, who investigated the conformity of project artifacts with an existing EA [44–47].
At the project portfolio level (PPM), connections between EA and PPM were identified,
with the need to align these domains with the business [51,68,92]. However, EA and PPM
rarely appear related in the literature and connections between EA and PM have not been
analyzed [68]. A building block toward integrating EA with PM was developed [68] but
is still pending for cases scaling the EA approach. There are two articles in this group
with greater generalization in the analysis of EA and PM domains. A model integrating
the FEAF and PMBOK frameworks for developing EA projects was proposed [67]. A
description of the body of knowledge of the PMBOK framework in ArchiMate language
was developed [95]. However, only the main concepts of the PMBOK were considered,
leaving alignment of motivation layer concepts at different levels of company, projects, and
process for future research [95].
4. Discussion
This research has described the current application of EA on PBO and PM domains
and gives an overview of the integration between these domains. From a bibliometric
perspective, it is possible to identify the increasing productivity of research in the studied
field. Northern hemisphere countries concentrate most of the articles, coinciding with the
origin of the main EA and PM standards cited in the literature. Most of the selected articles
are conference papers. Understanding that these kinds of articles are works in the process
of maturing, this situation can be seen as an opportunity for the research field to take
current knowledge to the next level. The above could confirm that the systems thinking in
PBO and PM are still in their early stages.
Processing the keywords of selected papers—using the data extraction form described
in Table 2—through co-occurrence maps, clusters and interrelationships can be identified,
as shown in Figures 6 and 7. The three most weighted concepts are EA, PM, and BPM,
with PM as a central cluster. It can be seen that early researchers addressed the PM–
BPM relationship. Over time, research interest expanded to include EA, culminating in
EA–PM components such as governance, layers, portfolio, and programs. This trend is
observed in the PM domain. In the first six versions of the PMBOK framework, knowledge
was structured in ‘processes’ [42] and hierarchical composition of PM knowledge [104].
However, the recent 7th version of PMBOK deploys knowledge through systemically
interrelated ‘domains’ [52,109].
The content data extracted (using the form of Table 2) were processed for five types of
analyses in Section 3.5: (1) the relationship through EA layers and PM focuses identified
in selected papers. The ‘business‘ layer in an EA is most often addressed in the articles.
The above was also reflected in the keyword analysis (Figure 6), with the management
of business processes (BPM) as activities within an EA. The work of Werewka [95] is
highlighted in the blue cluster (Figure 8), which describes a part of PMBOK 6th edition
through an EA model and using the business layer ArchiMate artifacts. As the author
mentions, the PMBOK content is best represented through the concepts of business and

--- PAGE 17 ---
Sustainability 2022, 14, 9801 17 of 25
strategy layers. Moreover, the business layer of an EA is composed of processes. BPM
approach is an effective tool for process-oriented organizations allowing for improved
performance through sustained application [110]. PM field has also taken advantage of this
and has extended its knowledge from a process perspective, as has already been mentioned
with the case of the PMBOK. ‘Application‘ and ‘Technology‘ are also most linked layers
with other PM concepts (e.g., PMIS, project control and project quality), mainly covering
the need for supporting and automating PM activities. EA brings the language and the
structure for modeling the relationship with PM activities from a high level (e.g., task)
to a low level (e.g., data architecture). These relationships would reinforce the idea that
EA helps organizations to facilitate their digital transformation process, thanks to the
integration of its components organizations (from strategy to data), and allow a better
understanding of them even as complexity increases [20,111,112]. (2) The EA and PM
languages and standards were analyzed through their connections (Figure 9). PMBOK, as
a PM standard and BPMN and ArchiMate as an EA language, are the most used on the
selected papers and confirm their wide acceptance again, as shown in Section 3.4.1. (3) The
type of projects mentioned in elected papers were analyzed regarding their frequency. In
this case, it was expected that EA applications would mainly focus on IT projects. However,
the interest of the AEC industry is surprising because of the attention they have given
to EA as a management tool. This relationship can be explained by the current need
for digitalization of the AEC sector, characterized by its artisanal processes on site and
occupying last place in productivity compared to other sectors [113]. (4) Selected articles
do not directly refer to PBO. This situation would, in principle, show that no EA on PBO
has been applied. However, the term PBO might not be fully diffused. Then, alternatively,
by analyzing the type of organization mentioned in the articles or where EA is expected to
be applied, it is possible to infer the type of PBO alluded to. Therefore, it is observed that
EA is mainly being applied (45 out of 59 articles) from an internal PBO perspective, i.e., for
projects that are developed within an organization for internal objectives. The rest of the
articles focus on offering projects to external clients. This point becomes relevant because
some of these articles consider a pre-existing EA to connect projects and their results. It is
a coincidence that in the group of external PBOs, we find the AEC industry, which is not
characterized by being managed through EA as a business but has been approaching EA
as a tool to improve the performance of their projects and facilitate their management. (5)
The analysis of EA-PM-PBO integration has a pure systemic objective for understanding
the representations of PM knowledge or practices from an EA perspective. The findings
confirm the statement of [68] regarding the lack of integration between these domains and
the articles presenting some connections focused on specific PM sub-domains or applying
a specific layer of EA. However, there is no complete integration between all layers of an
EA and, for example, all PM bodies of knowledge.
The challenges and future research were identified on selected papers and extracted
and mapped, as shown in Figure 14.
Figure 14 contains five clusters. The green cluster (1) is the most heavily weighted.
Increasing complexity and study scope in current papers are identified as challenges
for future research. Many studies start with simplified models for a proof of concept
(POC). Authors have highlighted the need for business analysis automation tools for
more complex models [60,93,95,114–117]. The red cluster (2) is the second most heavily
weighted. Authors in this group have emphasized developing a case study to validate
proposals [68,100,114,118]. A theoretical approach is a constant in these articles. Regarding
the POC approach of the proposals, authors mentioned the need to increase the analysis
scope, such as extending the EA application to other EA layers [45,65] and measuring the
proposal performance in actual conditions [57,119]. Another concern in this cluster is the
trend to rigidise EA applications. A proper mix using the Agile approach may produce a
more flexible EA [51,53]. The blue cluster (4) indicates author concerns regarding practical
application of their proposals. For better proposal applicability in organizations (models,
reference architectures), greater standardization of practices and generalization are required

--- PAGE 18 ---
Sustainability 2022, 14, 9801 18 of 25
to facilitate integration [34,94]. These concerns must be considered simply as means for
use [62,86,120].
Sustainability 2022, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 19 of 27
Figure 14. Challenges identified for future research and co-occurrence mapping of findings.
Figure 14 contains five clusters. The green cluster (1) is the most heavily weighted.
Increasing complexity and study scope in current papers are identified as challenges for
future research. Many studies start with simplified models for a proof of concept (POC).
Authors have highlighted the need for business analysis automation tools for more com-
plex models [60,93,95,114–117]. The red cluster (2) is the second most heavily weighted.
Authors in this group have emphasized developing a case study to validate proposals
[68,100,114,118]. A theoretical approach is a constant in these articles. Regarding the POC
approach of the proposals, authors mentioned the need to increase the analysis scope,
such as extending the EA application to other EA layers [45,65] and measuring the pro-
posal performance in actual conditions [57,119]. Another concern in this cluster is the
trend to rigidise EA applications. A proper mix using the Agile approach may produce a
more flexible EA [51,53]. The blue cluster (4) indicates author concerns regarding practical
application of their proposals. For better proposal applicability in organizations (models,
reference architectures), greater standardization of practices and generalization are re-
quired to facilitate integration [34,94]. These concerns must be considered simply as
means for use [62,86,120].
The yellow cluster (5) reflects the challenge for EA and PM integration, which must
be systemic to achieve interoperability between project and organization [23]. There must
also be integration and collaboration between project managers and EA to achieve better
coupling of solutions with the organization [121]. Thus, training of project managers and
architects is a concern in this cluster.
PM needs to be filled through the application of EA in the selected articles were iden-
tified and mapped through co-occurrence, as shown in Figure 15.
Figure 14. Challenges identified for future research and co-occurrence mapping of findings.
The yellow cluster (5) reflects the challenge for EA and PM integration, which must
be systemic to achieve interoperability between project and organization [23]. There must
also be integration and collaboration between project managers and EA to achieve better
coupling of solutions with the organization [121]. Thus, training of project managers and
architects is a concern in this cluster.
PM needs to be filled through the application of EA in the selected articles were
identified and mapped through co-occurrence, as shown in Figure 15.
Sustainability 2022, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 20 of 27
Figure 15. Co-occurrence map of needs identified in selected articles.
Figure 15 shows that EA application needs consist of five clusters. The green cluster
(1) considers business and project alignment, the most heavily weighted EA application.
In developing internal projects, requirements and outcomes must be aligned and inte-
grated with the organization for successful achievement of business goals through the
project [121]. EA provides the resources and tools to translate strategy and project objec-
tives into daily operations [93]. In the green cluster, the use of EA is identified for improv-
ing PM practices [57] and PM maturity [107], reflecting that EA promotes organizational
Figure 15. Co-occurrence map of needs identified in selected articles.
Figure 15 shows that EA application needs consist of five clusters. The green cluster
(1) considers business and project alignment, the most heavily weighted EA application. In
developing internal projects, requirements and outcomes must be aligned and integrated

--- PAGE 19 ---
Sustainability 2022, 14, 9801 19 of 25
with the organization for successful achievement of business goals through the project [121].
EA provides the resources and tools to translate strategy and project objectives into daily
operations [93]. In the green cluster, the use of EA is identified for improving PM prac-
tices [57] and PM maturity [107], reflecting that EA promotes organizational maturity to
complete projects and improve performance [106].
The second most heavily weighted cluster is purple (2) in Figure 15. This cluster
contains a study about how project development affects an existing EA. This concern was
addressed by Foorthuis [44–47], who proposed a framework for coupling a local project to
the EA, known as the Project Conformance Framework (PCF) [45] to achieve conformance
between the project and the EA, considering all of their components, including artifacts,
relationships, and processes.
Application of EA (3) to establish project policies is the third most heavily weighted
cluster (yellow) in Figure 15. This concern is related to the use of EA for project governance,
reflecting the organizational need for a decision-making and management framework with
transparency, accountability, and well-defined roles [122]. EA provides tools for establish-
ing policies and governance statements for managing projects and their relationship to
the organization.
The blue cluster (4) connects the need to use EA to automate PM activities and manage
project complexity. Some projects are developed by combining different organizational com-
ponents, creatinganorganizationalchallengeinmanagingcomplexenvironments [117,123].
EA helps to reduce and manage project complexity with detailed understanding and dis-
cretization of organizational and project components and their relationships [60]. Au-
tomation of PM activities goes hand-in-hand with complexity management. Using PM
automation tools such as PMIS makes PM tasks more sustainable, allows for better decision-
making, and increases the chances of project success [99].
The red cluster (5) indicates the use of EA for the reuse of organizational components
and knowledge, managing communication problems, and connecting EA with Agile. This
cluster reflects the dynamism that organizations face today, with market changes and
constant reconfiguration [102]. Organizational sustainability requires a representative
architecture to sustain business decisions and transformation projects to maintain market
competitiveness [92]. Agile methods have been used for projects with significant adherence
in rapidly changing environments [124]. Thus, this cluster indicates researcher concern in
using EA and the Agile approach for organizational transformation. Combining EA and
Agile is a challenge. Agile allows flexibility, and EA provides consistency and long-term
focus. These benefits sometimes oppose each other [40].
Finally and regarding the research questions, in response to RQ1, ‘What are the current
state and the key dimensions of EA approaches for PM?’, it was found that the key dimensions in
applying EA in the PM domain are focused on the business layer. The process perspective
facilitates application of PM practices, mainly in early research stages. The use of EA as a
tool for project governance is also visualized. In different types of projects in the articles,
the need for aligning projects, artifacts, and products with the layers of technology and
infrastructure of the organization at the strategic level is highlighted. Most of the referred
projects were related to IT.
In response to RQ2, ‘What are the current state and the key dimensions of EA approaches for
PBO design?’, the main finding was that there are no explicit applications of EA. However,
it can be inferred that organizations classifiable as PBOs were considered, with the AEC
industry appearing in five articles. The application of EA layers has gained research
interest in this industry, relieving the need for coordination between different actors in
AEC projects. For instance, one case in the AEC industry identified connections between
structural engineering and architecture specialties. Such specialties must be properly
integrated to achieve the project objectives [57]. EA was positioned as an alternative
solution.
In response to RQ3, ‘What are the tendencies of using frameworks in the application of
EA in PM and PBO?’, some trends have been identified in PM and EA frameworks. The

--- PAGE 20 ---
Sustainability 2022, 14, 9801 20 of 25
main PM framework in the selected articles was PMBOK, confirming its position as the
most popular PM standard among researchers and professionals. From an architectural
perspective, BPMN is the most-used modeling language (for processes) in the selected
articles. ArchiMate is recognized as the most widely used EA language.
Regarding the level of integration between EA, PM, and PBO domains, objects of
RQ4, ‘What is the level of integration between the EA, PM, and PBO domains?’, 31 articles
considered these domains from a holistic perspective. However, not all were integrated as
such. Integration was concentrated between EA and PM domains for individual projects
and portfolios. Of these articles, two stand out with a higher generalization level, relating
to the FEAF–PMBOK and ArchiMate–PMBOK frameworks.
In response to RQ5, ‘What are the main challenges in PM practices where EA is presented
as an alternative solution?’, there were gaps filled by selected papers. The main PM need
with the EA approach is alignment between projects and business. EA is considered a
governance tool for management. Proper connection of projects and their outcomes with
the organization is a concern highlighted in the articles.
5. Conclusions
A literature review was conducted analyzing bibliometric and content information
through a systematic review. Of 516 articles found using a keyword group, 59 articles
were selected for review. From a meta-based perspective, the works relating EA with
PBO or PM domains date from 1996. Since 2005, there has been at least one article per
year. An increasing trend was identified and 2021 produced the most articles. The selected
works originated mainly from Asia, Europe, and North America, conference papers in
most cases. The selected works were categorized in five clusters based on the analysis of
co-occurrence of article keywords. EA, PM, and BPM were the most heavily weighted and
connected clusters. Over time, this map reflects that in the early stages, PM used a process
approach for displaying knowledge (PMBOK 1st–6th editions). It has been demonstrated
that a business process approach produces better productivity, quality communication,
collaboration, and more efficient information flows in projects. At present, the tools are
disseminated in architectural components interconnected in a domain approach (PMBOK
7th edition). PMBOK 7th edition [52] indicates the importance of systems thinking for PM
knowledge, understanding, application, and emerging Agile approaches for flexible PM.
Future research could focus on adding complexity to EA solution proposals for PM.
However, the authors reported that automation tools must accompany this objective to
facilitate design and analysis. Other challenges identified include the continuing study
of EA and PM integration, which must be developed at a conceptual level and between
people, such as project managers and enterprise architects. There is an understanding of
the benefits of EA for project success, but authors report that sometimes EA adds rigidity.
For this issue, Agile is considered an alternative solution, connecting the benefits of EA
with the flexibility of Agile.
EA has mostly been applied in IT. The origin of EA is related to IT. The Agile perspec-
tive was born from the same field. It seems that the IT sector can anticipate behavior in
other sectors, visualizing how industries such as AEC have historically conducted their
projects using traditional PM approaches and original IT practices to improve their results.
The world is becoming increasingly digital. Coexistence of people and technology is
becoming more intense. Digital transformation is no longer the exclusive concern of the
IT sector. Digitalization needs permeate all types of activities, organizations, and projects.
Harmonious coexistence with technology as it becomes more complex requires systemic
thinking to understand, manage, and improve it. As a management tool with a systemic
perspective, EA is considered in different industries and seems to be a means of integrating
organizations and developing projects in the digital era.
This study is expected to contribute to researchers and practitioners systemically
considering EA and PM domains and demonstrate the value of using EA in project man-
agement. From a practical perspective, this article indicates trends such as concerns in

--- PAGE 21 ---
Sustainability 2022, 14, 9801 21 of 25
using EA and the need for collaboration between project managers and architects. From a
research perspective, this article demonstrates that EA is connected to the digital transfor-
mation trend and that further development is required to improve the use of EA in more
complex environments.
Application in the PBO domain is still a challenge and future research should consider
the architecture that characterizes this type of organization.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, E.A. and G.B.; methodology, E.A. and G.B.; software, E.A.;
formal analysis, E.A. and G.B.; writing—original draft preparation E.A.; writing—review and editing,
E.A., G.B. and M.M.; visualization, E.A., G.B. and M.M.; supervision, G.B. and M.M. All authors have
read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: The authors wish to thank the School of Industrial Engineering and Civil
Engineering of the Pontificia Universidad Católica de Valparaíso (Chile), where the research was
started and also, to the Department of Management, Economics, and Industrial Engineering of the
Politecnico di Milano where this paper was finished.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1. Lundin, R.A.; Söderholm, A. A theory of the temporary organization. Scand. J. Manag. 1995, 11, 437–455. [CrossRef]
2. Wawak, S.; Woźniak, K. Evolution of project management studies in the XXI century. Int. J. Manag. Proj. Bus. 2020, 13, 867–888.
[CrossRef]
3. Fernandes, G.; Ward, S.; Araújo, M. Improving and embedding project management practice in organisations—A qualitative
study. Int. J. Proj. Manag. 2015, 33, 1052–1067. [CrossRef]
4. Miterev, M.; Mancini, M.; Turner, R. Towards a design for the project-based organization. Int. J. Proj. Manag. 2017, 35, 479–491.
[CrossRef]
5. Turner, R.; Miterev, M. The organizational design of the project-based organization. Proj. Manag. J. 2019, 50, 487–498. [CrossRef]
6. Puranam, P.; Alexy, O.; Reitzig, M. What’s “new” about new forms of organizing? Acad. Manag. Rev. 2014, 39, 162–180. [CrossRef]
7. Huemann, M. Benchmarking the PM-competence of project-oriented organistions. In Proceedings of the IPMA World Conference
London, London, UK, 22–25 May 2000.
8. Miterev, M.; Turner, J.R.; Mancini, M. The organization design perspective on the project-based organization: A structured review.
Int. J. Manag. Proj. Bus. 2017, 10, 527–549. [CrossRef]
9. Galbraith, J. Designing Your Organization; Bass, J., Ed.; Wiley: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2007; ISBN 9780787994945.
10. Aler, S.; Riege, C.; Winter, R. Enterprise architecture—Literature overview and current practices. Wirtschaftsinformatik 2008, 50,
292–304. [CrossRef]
11. Gorkhali, A.; Xu, L. Da Enterprise architecture, enterprise information systems and enterprise integration: A review based on
systems theory perspective. J. Ind. Integr. Manag. 2019, 4, 1950001. [CrossRef]
12. Tao, Z.G.; Luo, Y.F.; Chen, C.X.; Wang, M.Z.; Ni, F. Enterprise application architecture development based on DoDAF and TOGAF.
Enterp. Inf. Syst. 2017, 11, 627–651. [CrossRef]
13. Lankhorst, M. Enterprise Architecture at Work, 4th ed.; Springer: Berlin, Germany, 2009; ISBN 9783662539323.
14. Kotusev, S. Enterprise architecture and enterprise architecture artifacts: Questioning the old concept in light of new findings. J.
Inf. Technol. 2019, 34, 102–128. [CrossRef]
15. Al-Kharusi, H.; Miskon, S.; Bahari, M. Enterprise architecture development approach in the public sector. Int. J. Enterp. Inf. Syst.
2018, 14, 124–141. [CrossRef]
16. Niemi, E.I.; Pekkola, S. Enterprise architecture benefit realization: Review of the models and a case study of a public organization.
Tamp. Univ. Technol. 2016, 47, 55–80.
17. Iyamu, T. Understanding the complexities of enterprise architecture through structuration theory. J. Comput. Inf. Syst. 2019, 59,
287–295. [CrossRef]
18. Shanks, G.; Gloet, M.; Asadi Someh, I.; Frampton, K.; Tamm, T. Achieving benefits with enterprise architecture. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst.
2018, 27, 139–156. [CrossRef]
19. Perez-Castillo, R.; Ruiz, F.; Piattini, M.; Ebert, C. Enterprise architecture. IEEE Softw. 2019, 36, 12–19. [CrossRef]

--- PAGE 22 ---
Sustainability 2022, 14, 9801 22 of 25
20. Masuda, Y.; Zimmermann, A.; Bass, M.; Nakamura, O.; Shirasaka, S.; Yamamoto, S. Adaptive enterprise architecture process for
global companies in a digital IT era. Int. J. Enterp. Inf. Syst. 2021, 17, 21–43. [CrossRef]
21. Kutnjak, A. Covid-19 accelerates digital transformation in industries: Challenges, issues, barriers and problems in transformation.
IEEE Access 2021, 9, 79373–79388. [CrossRef]
22. Lapalme, J.; Gerber, A.; Van Der Merwe, A.; Zachman, J.; De Vries, M.; Hinkelmann, K. Exploring the future of enterprise
architecture: A Zachman perspective. Comput. Ind. 2016, 79, 103–113. [CrossRef]
23. Sousa, P.; Lima, J.; Sampaio, A.; Pereira, C. An approach for creating and managing enterprise blueprints: A case for IT blueprints.
In Advances in Enterprise Engineering III: 5th International Workshop, CIAO! 2009, and 5th International Workshop, EOMAS 2009, held
at CAiSE 2009, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 8–9 June 2009.; Albani, A., Barjis, J., Dietz, J.L.G., Eds.; Springer: Amsterdam, The
Netherlands, 2009; pp. 70–84.
24. Donthu, N.; Kumar, S.; Mukherjee, D.; Pandey, N.; Marc, W. How to conduct a bibliometric analysis: An overview and guidelines.
J. Bus. Res. 2021, 133, 285–296. [CrossRef]
25. The Open Group The ArchiMate®Specification. Available online: https://www.opengroup.org/archimate-home (accessed on
7 June 2022).
26. Galaz-Delgado, E.I.; Herrera, R.F.; Atencio, E.; La Rivera, F.M.; Biotto, C.N. Problems and challenges in the interactions of design
teams of construction projects: A bibliometric study. Buildings 2021, 11, 461. [CrossRef]
27. Houy, C.; Fettke, P.; Loos, P.; Houy, C.; Fettke, P.; Loos, P. Empirical research in business process management – analysis of an
emerging field of research. Bus. Process Manag. J. 2011. [CrossRef]
28. Gonzalez-Lopez, F.; Bustos, G. Integration of business process architectures within enterprise architecture approaches: A literature
review. EMJ—Eng. Manag. J. 2019, 31, 127–140. [CrossRef]
29. Cobo, M.J.; López-Herrera, A.G.; Herrera-Viedma, E.; Herrera, F. Science mapping software tools: Review, analysis, and
cooperative study among tools. J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol. 2011, 62, 1382–1402. [CrossRef]
30. van Eck, N.J.; Waltman, L. Software survey: VOSviewer, a computer program for bibliometric mapping. Scientometrics 2010, 84,
523–538. [CrossRef]
31. Clarke, V.; Braun, V. Thematic analysis. J. Posit. Psychol. 2017, 12, 297–298. [CrossRef]
32. Yin, X.; Liu, H.; Chen, Y.; Al-Hussein, M. Building information modelling for off-site construction: Review and future directions.
Autom. Constr. 2019, 101, 72–91. [CrossRef]
33. Gonzalez-Lopez, F.; Bustos, G. Business process architecture design methodologies—A literature review. Bus. Process. Manag. J.
2019, 25, 1317–1334. [CrossRef]
34. Shih, H.M.; Tseng, M.M. Workflow technology-based monitoring and control for business process and project management. Int. J.
Proj. Manag. 1996, 14, 373–378. [CrossRef]
35. Van Eck, N.J.; Waltman, L. VOSviewer Manual; VOS Viewer: Leiden, The Netherlands, 2021.
36. Fitsilis, P.; Gerogiannis, V.; Anthopoulos, L. Ontologies for Software Project Management: A Review. J. Softw. Eng. Appl. 2014, 7,
1096–1110. [CrossRef]
37. Buchalcevova, A. Using ArchiMate to model ISO/IEC 29110 standard for very small entities. Comput. Stand. Interfaces 2019, 65,
103–121. [CrossRef]
38. Kotusev, S. TOGAF-based enterprise architecture practice: An exploratory case study. Commun. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 2018, 43, 321–359.
[CrossRef]
39. Papatheocharous, E.; Andreou, A.S. Empirical evidence and state of practice of software agile teams. J. Softw. Evol. Process. 2014,
26, 855–866. [CrossRef]
40. Van Wessel, R.M.; Kroon, P.; de Vries, H.J. Scaling Agile Company-Wide: The Organizational Challenge of Combining Agile-
Scaling Frameworks and Enterprise Architecture in Service Companies. IEEE Trans. Eng. Manag. 2021, 1–21. [CrossRef]
41. Ragin-Skorecka, K. Agile Enterprise: A Human Factors Perspective. Hum. Factors Ergon. Manuf. 2016, 26, 5–15. [CrossRef]
42. PMI. A Guide to the Project Management. Body of Knowledege, 6th ed.; The University of Pennsylvania Press: Philadelphia, PA,
USA, 2017.
43. Comisión Europea. Metodología de Gestión de Proyectos; Publicaciones de la UE: Brussels, Luxemburg, 2021; ISBN 9789276313816.
44. Foorthuis, R.; Brinkkemper, S. Best practices for business and systems analysis in projects conforming to enterprise architecture.
Int. J. Enterp. Model. Inf. Syst. Archit. 2008, 3, 36–47.
45. Foorthuis, R.; Brinkkemper, S.; Bos, R. An artifact model for projects conforming to Enterprise Architecture. Lect. Notes Bus. Inf.
Process. 2008, 15, 30–46. [CrossRef]
46. Foorthuis, R.; Brinkkemper, S. A framework for local project architecture in the context of enterprise architecture. J. Enterp. Archit.
2007, 3, 51–63.
47. Foorthuis, R. Project Compliance with Enterprise Architecture; Utrecht University: Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2014.
48. Derakhshan, R.; Turner, R.; Mancini, M. Project governance and stakeholders: A literature review. Int. J. Proj. Manag. 2019, 37,
98–116. [CrossRef]
49. Turner, R. How Does Governance Influence Decision Making on Projects and in Project—Based Organizations ? White Rose University
Press: York, UK, 2020.
50. Stumpe, F.; Katina, P.F. A cybernetic ontology for project management. Int. J. Syst. Syst. Eng. 2017, 8, 42–73. [CrossRef]

--- PAGE 23 ---
Sustainability 2022, 14, 9801 23 of 25
51. Cordeiro, G.; Vasconcelos, A.; Fragoso, B. Project, program, portfolio governance model reference architecture in the classic
approach to project management. In Proceedings of the ICEIS 2020—22nd International Conference on Enterprise Information
Systems, Prague, Czechia, 5–7 May 2020; pp. 619–630.
52. PMI. A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK®Guide), 7th ed.; Project Management Institute: Newtown
Square, PA, USA, 2021.
53. Cordeiro, G.; Vasconcelos, A.; Fragoso, B. Reference Architecture for Project, Program and Portfolio Governance; Springer: Cham,
Switzerland, 2021; pp. 804–832.
54. Peng, W.-L.; Lu, R.; Liu, Z. Process management of product design projects and its realization. Jisuanji Jicheng Zhizao Xi-
tong/Computer Integr. Manuf. Syst. 2008, 14, 89–95.
55. Cui, W.; Meng, X.; Liu, S. A Service-Oriented Architecture of Virtual Enterprise for Manufacturing Industry. In Proceedings of the
2010 14th International Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work in Design, Shanghai, China, 14–16 April 2010.
56. Kluska, R.A.; Lima, E.P. De Correlation process in content analysis for a BPM modeling project. In Proceedings of the 22nd
International Conference on Production Research, Paraná, Brazil, 28 July–1 August 2013.
57. Aquere, A.L.; Lima, R.M. Project management: Integrating architecture and structural engineering design processes. In Proceed-
ings of the First International Conference on Structures and Architecture (ICSA 2010), Guimaraes, Portugal, 21-23 July 2010; CRC
Press: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2010.
58. Lückmann, P.; Feldmann, C.; Lückmann, P.; Feldmann, C. Success Factors for Business Process Improvement Projects in Small
and Medium Sized Enterprises—Empirical Evidence. Procedia Comput. Sci. 2017, 121, 439–445. [CrossRef]
59. Zur Muehlen, M.; Ho, D.T. Risk Management in the BPM Lifecycle. In Proceedings of the Lecture Notes in Computer Science; Springer:
Berlin, Germany, 2005.
60. Browning, T.R. Managing complex project process models with a process architecture framework. Int. J. Proj. Manag. 2014, 32,
229–241. [CrossRef]
61. Wuliang, P. A Project Management System for Product Development. In Proceedings of the Proceedings—3rd International
Symposium on Information Processing, Berkeley, CA, USA, 26–27 April 2004; pp. 78–82.
62. Enrique, J.; Alarc, A.C. Alternative Interoperability Between BPMn and Project Management Tools. In Proceedings of the 13th
International Conference, KMO 2018, Žilina, Slovakia, 6–10 August 2018. [CrossRef]
63. Costa do Carmo, W.; Bessa Albuquerque, A. Project Management suported by Business Process Management: A Case Study in a
Brazilian Justice Organization Welkey. In Proceedings of the 2014 9th International Conference on the Quality of Information and
Communications Technology Project, Guimaraes, Portugal, 23–26 September 2014.
64. Jallow, A.K.; Demian, P.; Anumba, C.J.; Baldwin, A.N. An enterprise architecture framework for electronic requirements
information management. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 2017, 37, 455–472. [CrossRef]
65. Peng, W.; Lu, R.; Wang, C. An enterprise-wide project quality management system in manufacturing industry. IFIP Int. Fed. Inf.
Process. 2008, 255, 1335–1346. [CrossRef]
66. Menzel, K.; Keller, M. Distributed model management for collaborative networks in AEC. IFIP Int. Fed. Inf. Process. 2006, 224,
245–252.
67. Anajafi, F. Developing effective Project Management for Enterprise architecture projects. In Proceedings of the 2010 2nd
International Conference on Software Technology and Engineering, San Juan, PR, USA, 3–5 October 2010.
68. Gellweiler, C. Connecting enterprise architecture and project portfolio management: A review and a model for IT project
alignment. Int. J. Inf. Technol. Proj. Manag. 2020, 11, 99–114. [CrossRef]
69. Zarour, K.; Benmerzoug, D.; Guermouche, N.; Drira, K. A systematic literature review on BPMN extensions. Bus. Process. Manag.
J. 2019, 26, 1473–1503. [CrossRef]
70. Conforto, E.C.; Amaral, D.C.; da Silva, S.L.; Di Felippo, A.; Kamikawachi, D.S.L. The agility construct on project management
theory. Int. J. Proj. Manag. 2016, 34, 660–674. [CrossRef]
71. Zachman, J.A. A framework for information systems architecture. IBM Syst. J. 1999, 38, 454–470. [CrossRef]
72. The Open Group. The TOGAF Standard—Version 9.2; British Computer Society: Singapore, 2018.
73. Salwin, M.; Jacyna-Gołda, I.; Kraslawski, A.; Waszkiewicz, A.E. The use of business model canvas in the design and classification
of product-service systems design methods. Sustainability 2022, 14, 4283. [CrossRef]
74. Preview, T.S. Project, Programme and Portfolio Management—Guidance on Governance; International Organization for Standardization:
Geneva, Switzerland, 2017; Volume 2017, pp. 1–20. ISBN 978 0 580 86828.
75. Group, I. PRINCE: PRoject IN Controlled Environments. Available online: https://www.prince2.com/uk/prince2-methodology
(accessed on 8 June 2022).
76. Hammer, M. The process audit. Harv. Bus. Rev. 2007, 85, 111. [PubMed]
77. Dave, B. Business process management—A construction case study. Constr. Innov. 2017, 17, 50–67. [CrossRef]
78. Jiménez, V.; Afonso, P.; Fernandes, G. Using agile project management in the design and implementation of activity-based costing
systems. Sustainability 2020, 12, 10352. [CrossRef]
79. APQC APQC Process classification framework (PCF). Available online: https://www.apqc.org/resource-library/resource-
listing/apqc-process-classification-framework-pcf-cross-industry-excel-10 (accessed on 8 June 2022).
80. European Comission. PM2 Project Management Standard; Publications Office of the European Union: Luxembourg; Brussel,
Belgium, 2021; ISBN 978-92-76-31380-9.

--- PAGE 24 ---
Sustainability 2022, 14, 9801 24 of 25
81. Solana-González, P.; Vanti, A.A.; García Lorenzo, M.M.; Bello Pérez, R.E. Data mining to assess organizational transparency across
technology processes: An approach from it governance and knowledge management. Sustainability 2021, 13, 10130. [CrossRef]
82. ISACA. A Business Framework for the Governance and Management of Enterprise IT, 5th ed.; ISACA: Rolling Meadows, IL, USA, 2012;
ISBN 9781604202373.
83. US Federal Government. The Common Approach to Federal Enterprise Architecture, 1st ed.; US Federal Government: Washington,
DC, USA, 2012.
84. CIO. Federal Enterprise Architecture Framework, 2nd ed.; US Federal Government: Washington, DC, USA, 2013; ISBN 10580530.
85. OMG. OMG Systems Modeling Language (SysML); OMG: Needham, MA, USA, 2019.
86. Falcone, D.; Di Bona, G.; Silvestri, A.; Forcina, A.; Belfiore, G.; Petrillo, A. An integrated model for an advanced production
process—Agile Re-engineering Project Management. IFAC-PapersOnLine 2018, 51, 1630–1635. [CrossRef]
87. Costa, L.; Barbosa, M.B.A.; Baldam, R.D.L.; Coelho, T.D.P., Jr. Challenges of process modeling in architecture and engineering to
execute projects and public works. J. Constr. Eng. Manag. 2019, 145, 05018015. [CrossRef]
88. Saragih, L.R.; Dachyar, M.; Zagloel, T.Y.M. Implementation of telecommunications cross-industry collaboration through agile
project management. Heliyon 2021, 7, e07013. [CrossRef]
89. Branch, S.DesigningEnterpriseOperatingSystemwithPRINCE2Framework. InProceedingsofthe2010InternationalConference
on Computer and Communication Technologies in Agriculture Engineering, Chengdu, China, 12–13 June 2010.
90. Ireland, V. Some neglected variables in construction management research contributing to a competitive advantage research
approach. In Proceedings of the CME 2007 Conference—Construction Management and Economics: “Past, Present and Future”,
Reading, UK, 16–18 July 2007; pp. 837–851.
91. Rojas, L.M.; Llamosa, R. Processes of Organizational Leadership in Enterprise Architectures. UIS Ing. 2016, 15, 52–59. [CrossRef]
92. Werewka, J. Developing Conformance Between Project Management and Enterprise Architecture Governance on the Basis of
a PMBOK Case. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Information Systems Architecture and Technology, NYSA,
Poland, 16–18 September 2018. [CrossRef]
93. Sousa, P.; Carvalho, M. Dynamic Organization’s Representation. Linking Project Management with Enterprise Architecture. 2018, 2,
170–174. [CrossRef]
94. Costa, J.; Vasconcelos, A.; Fragoso, B. An enterprise architecture approach for assessing the alignment between projects and goals.
Int. J. Inf. Technol. Proj. Manag. 2020, 11, 55–76. [CrossRef]
95. Quartel, D.; Steen, M.W.A.; Lankhorst, M.M. Application and project portfolio valuation using enterprise architecture and
business requirements modelling. Enterp. Inf. Syst. 2012, 6, 189–213. [CrossRef]
96. Ilyin, I.V.; Grigoreva, A.A.; Zapivakhin, I.M. Architectural Solution as a tool for planning and approval of changes in projects for
information systems implementation and customization. Bus. Inform. 2017, 2, 68–78. [CrossRef]
97. Sobieraj, J.; Metelski, D.; Nowak, P. PMBoK vs. PRINCE2 in the context of Polish construction projects: Structural equation
modelling approach. Arch. Civ. Eng. 2021, 67, 551–579. [CrossRef]
98. Felipe Sanchez-Arias, L.; Solarte-Pazos, L. The body of knowledge of the Project Managmenent Institute—PMBOK Guide, and
the especifities of Project Management—A critical review. Innovar-Rev. Cienc. Adm. Y Soc. 2010, 20, 89–100.
99. Choi, J.; Ha, M. Validation of project management information systems for industrial construction projects. J. Asian Archit. Build.
Eng. 2021, 1–12. [CrossRef]
100. Udokwu, C.; Norta, A.; Wenna, C. Designing a Collaborative Construction-Project Platform on Blockchain Technology for
Transparency, Traceability, and Information Symmetry. In Proceedings of the 2021 2nd Asia service sciences and software
engineering conference, Macau, Macao, 24–26 February 2021. [CrossRef]
101. Benade, S.J.; Pretorius, L. System architecture and Enterprise Architecture: A Juxta Position? S. Afr. J. Ind. Eng. 2011, 23.
[CrossRef]
102. Zhou, L.; Weiwei, L. Research on the reconfiguration of product development project. In Proceedings of the Chinese Control and
Decision Conference, Shandong, China; 2008; pp. 1679–1682.
103. De Felice, F.; Petrillo, A.; Silvestri, A. Relocation of production processes towards low-cost countries through the project
management & process reengineering performance model. Bus. Process. Manag. J. 2015, 21, 379–402. [CrossRef]
104. Alsaeedi, A.A.A.S.; Elabrashy, M.M.M.; Alzeyoudi, M.A.; Albadi, M.M.; Soni, S.; Isambertt, J.; Tripathi, D.; Shah, A. Big Data
IAOM Project Management and Workflow Automation in a Giant Gas Field Digitization Drive. In Proceedings of the Abu Dhabi
International Petroleum Exhibition & Conference, Society of Petroleum Engineers, Dallas, TX, USA, 17 November 2021.
105. Wang, Z.; Wang, D.; Li, Q. Data Visualization on the Life Cycle of Science and Technology Projects. In Proceedings of the 2021
IEEE 6th International Conference on Cloud Computing and Big Data Analytics (ICCCBDA), Chengdu, China, 24–26 April 2021.
[CrossRef]
106. Nalewaik, A.; Rose, C. An enterprise architecture approach to project optimization. AACE Int. Trans. 2012, 3, 1742–1752.
107. Johnson, R.D. Project-based organizational maturity in architecture, engineering, and construction: A theoretical premise for
practical purposes. In Developing Organizational Maturity for Effective Project Management; IGI Global: Hershey, PA, USA, 2018;
pp. 55–77. [CrossRef]
108. Ayyagari, M.R.; Atoum, I. CMMI-DEV Implementation Simplified A Spiral Software Model. Int. J. Adv. Comput. Sci. Appl. 2019,
10, 445–450.

--- PAGE 25 ---
Sustainability 2022, 14, 9801 25 of 25
109. Faraji, A.; Rashidi, M.; Perera, S.; Samali, B. Applicability-Compatibility Analysis of PMBOK Seventh Edition from the Perspective
of the Construction Industry Distinctive Peculiarities. Buildings 2022, 12, 210. [CrossRef]
110. Ubaid, A.M.; Dweiri, F.T. Business process management (BPM): Terminologies and methodologies unified. Int. J. Syst. Assur. Eng.
Manag. 2020, 11, 1046–1064. [CrossRef]
111. Masuda, Y.; Zimmermann, A.; Viswanathan, M.; Bass, M.; Nakamura, O.; Yamamoto, S. Adaptive enterprise architecture for the
digital healthcare industry: A digital platform for drug development. Information 2021, 12, 67. [CrossRef]
112. Julia, K.; Kurt, S. How Digital Transformation affects Enterprise Architecture Management—A case study. Int. J. Inf. Syst. Proj.
Manag. 2018, 6, 5–18. [CrossRef]
113. Muñoz-La Rivera, F.; Mora-Serrano, J.; Valero, I.; Oñate, E. Methodological-Technological Framework for Construction 4.0. Arch.
Comput. Methods Eng. 2021, 28, 689–711. [CrossRef]
114. Ait-Lamallam, S.; Yaagoubi, R.; Sebari, I.; Doukari, O. Extending the ifc standard to enable road operation and maintenance
management through openbim. ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 2021, 10, 496. [CrossRef]
115. Júnior, P.S.S.; Barcellos, M.P.; Falbo, R.D.A.; Almeida, J.P.A. From a Scrum Reference Ontology to the Integration of Applications
for Data-Driven Software Development. Inf. Softw. Technol. 2021, 136, 106570. [CrossRef]
116. Wang, D.; Li, Q.; Xu, C.; Wang, P.; Wang, Z. Research of Data Warehouse for Science and Technology Management System. In
Proceedings of the 2021 International Conference on Service Science (ICSS), Xi’an, China, 14–16 May 2021. [CrossRef]
117. Denicol, J.; Davies, A.; Pryke, S. The organisational architecture of megaprojects. Int. J. Proj. Manag. 2021, 39, 339–350. [CrossRef]
118. Zhang, K.; Zhang, X. Research on the overall architecture design of project management information system based on SOA. In
Proceedings of the 2021 International Conference on Service Science (ICSS), Dalian, China, 24–26 September 2021. [CrossRef]
119. Wannes, A.; Ghannouchi, S.A. KPI-Based Approach for Business Process Improvement. Procedia Comput. Sci. 2019, 164, 265–270.
[CrossRef]
120. Madison, J. Agile and architecture Agile—Architecture Interactions. IEEE Softw. 2010, 27, 41–48. [CrossRef]
121. Van der Merwe, A.P. Project management and business development: Integrating strategy, structure, processes and projects. Int.
J. Proj. Manag. 2002, 20, 401–411. [CrossRef]
122. Müller, R.; Pemsel, S.; Shao, J. Organizational enablers for project governance and governmentality in project-based organizations.
Int. J. Proj. Manag. 2015, 33, 839–851. [CrossRef]
123. Vaz-Serra, P.; Edwards, P.; Aranda-Mena, G. An early-stage project complexity assessment tool for the AEC industry. Constr.
Innov. 2022, 22, 242–262. [CrossRef]
124. Uludag, O.; Putta, A.; Paasivaara, M.; Matthes, F. Evolution of the Agile Scaling Frameworks. In Proceedings of the Agile
Processes in Software Engineering and Extreme Programming (XP 2021), Virtual Event, 14–18 June 2022; Gregory, P., Lassenius,
C., Wang, X., Kruchten, P., Eds.; Springer International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2021; Volume 419, pp. 123–139.