--- PAGE 1 ---
Citation: Guerrero-Avendaño, A.;
Nieto Bernal, W.; Luna Amaya, C.
Governance and Corporate
Management System Supported by
Innovation, Technology, and Digital
Transformation as a Driver of
Change. Sustainability 2023, 15, 13150.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
su151713150
Academic Editors: Chun-Liang Chen,
Chih Kai Chen and Yao Chin Lin
Received: 18 June 2023
Revised: 23 August 2023
Accepted: 24 August 2023
Published: 1 September 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
sustainability
Article
Governance and Corporate Management System Supported by
Innovation, Technology, and Digital Transformation as a Driver
of Change
Alexander Guerrero-Avendaño 1,* , Wilson Nieto Bernal 2 and Carmenza Luna Amaya 3
1 Facultad de Ingeniería, Universidad Francisco de Paula Santander, Ocaña 546551, Colombia
2 Departamento de Ingeniería de Sistemas, Universidad del Norte, Barranquilla 081007, Colombia;
wnieto@uninorte.edu.co
3 Departamento de Ingeniería Industrial, Universidad del Norte, Barranquilla 081007, Colombia;
cluna@uninorte.edu.co
* Correspondence: aguerreroav@ufpso.edu.co
Abstract: Governance and Corporate Management Systems have become key tools for the compre-
hensive management of organizations, which, when implemented, guarantee corporate success,
which can materialize in obtaining corporate goals, strategic objectives, KPIs, and KRP. This paper
is the product of research exercises where a Governance and Corporate Management System is
exposed, supported by three main pillars: Technology Management, Innovation Management, and
Digital Transformation, which we will call GCMS+ from now on. The work developed is based on
a quasi-experimental longitudinal research methodology, in which three key phases are addressed;
the first phase corresponds to the systematic review of the literature, which allows the identification
of the key components of the proposed GCMS+ system. The second phase of the methodology
focused on the modelling of the GCMS+ system, which visually and descriptively describes the
structural components, flows, and control mechanisms. The third phase of the methodology focuses
on the validation of the GCMS+ system proposed from the discussed literature and contrasting the
position of the authors, which is identified through a conceptual discussion. In this case, it seeks to
validate the structural elements of GCMS+, the constraints, adoption of good practices, integration of
standards, adoption of principles, integration of drivers, strategic taxonomy, organizational struc-
tures, governance and management approach, as well as methodologies, roles, initiatives, metrics,
and indicators.
Keywords: technology management; innovation management; strategy; digital transformation;
organisational transformation; corporate government; enterprise architecture
1. Introduction
In recent years, research has emerged on organisational change management [1],
innovation processes and models [2–7], the use of resources to increase sustainability [8,9]
and to assess the growth capacity of organisations [1,10,11]. The model presented in this
study has a corporate approach, which seeks to improve the response capacity to the
global market.
Organisations are constantly challenged to innovate in different areas, not to fail,
and to remain competitive [12–14]; they resort to the implementation of several types
of models, such as Technology Management models that generate value through the
effective use of technology [2,15,16], Innovation Management models for the creation of
new knowledge and generation of ideas to develop new or improved products, processes,
and services [17,18], Digital Transformation models facilitate the reorganisation of processes
to increase digital capabilities and generate more excellent value for customer [19–21], and
Sustainability 2023, 15, 13150. https://doi.org/10.3390/su151713150 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability

--- PAGE 2 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 13150 2 of 18
Organisational Transformation Models that creates changes in business vision and impact
the ability to compete [22], creating actions that allow innovation to be generated [23].
These models and processes allow organisations to learn about global trends in technol-
ogy, corporate governance and reduce risk by strengthening their capabilities, optimising
their resources, generating new knowledge and managing their commercial, manufactur-
ing, and service operations more effectively. All of this is possible once the challenges of
adopting new business models and collaborative strategies are overcome [24].
As previously mentioned, the use of new technologies has its complications; emerging
economic markets are affected by product Innovation [14,25]; emerging economies and
their measurement variables are constantly changing, which requires ensuring the growth
and projection of the sector [26], by estimating its evolution through an economic model.
With the incorporation of appropriate management systems, organisations can contin-
ually monitor and, thus, more easily standardise their activities; management systems take
advantage of the knowledge of their environment and make it the main asset to devise their
technology. It must be understood that management systems and platforms are different
from each other [12], and prototypes must be designed for each type of organisation [27].
For best results, management systems should be incorporated into the construction of
strategic plans to align system implementation with projected objectives and ensure greater
success during development [28].
This study proposes to design a conceptual model of Governance and Corporate
Management System (GCMS+) that integrates Technology Management, Innovation Man-
agement and Digital Transformation. The creation of a new business model configuration
with transparency as a principle, combining digital management with sustainability guide-
lines to develop strategic and sustainable innovation capabilities, is proposed.
The structure of this article begins with a review of the literature on the concept of
corporate governance and the most representative models. Through these initial readings,
the concept of a Governance and Corporate Management System and its elements are
explored in depth. The Materials and Methods section details the data collection and
analysis stage, the bibliometric analysis, and its components. The fourth section details the
system principles and components and describes the flow of the system.
2. Theoretical Background
2.1. Corporate Governance
Corporate Governance (CG) refers to how organisations are administered, managed,
and controlled. Many studies have focused on ensuring transparency, accountability, equity,
and sustainability in the functioning of organisations [29–32], ensuring that leaders and
managers act in accordance with the organisation’s strategic goals and the best interests of
all stakeholders [29].
Some authors indicate that corporate governance is an essential factor for the success
and sustainable performance of an organisation regardless of its size [33,34]; they also
suggest that effective and quality governance can improve the productivity of organisations,
provide an enabling environment for sustainable success, improve management efficiency,
and reduce the adverse effects of economic shocks [35].
Wahyuningrum et al. define Corporate Governance as the set of activities and rules for
the proper functioning of organisations in terms of the processes by which organisations
are directed and controlled [30], while Du Plessis et al. define Corporate Governance as
the structure of rules, practices and processes used to run and manage a business, which
essentially involves balancing the interests of the many public and private stakeholders in
the organisation [36].
Internationally, legislation has been issued to support corporate governance that seeks
to provide guidelines to reduce risks to shareholders, employees, and consumers, such as
the UK Cardbury Report [37] in 1992, the Corporations Act of Australia [38] in 2001, and
the USA Sarbanes–Oxley Act [39] in 2002.

--- PAGE 3 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 13150 3 of 18
Among the organisations that have issued a concept of corporate governance and
provided a framework for the application of good governance is the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), which states that corporate governance
refers to a set of interactions and relationships that occur between different actors within an
organisation “the management of the organisation, its board of directors, its shareholders
and other interested parties” [40], in 1999. The OECD first published principles for corpo-
rate governance were reviewed and approved by the G20 leaders in 2015, and, in its most
recent version (2023), they have been designated by the Financial Stability Board (FSB) as
one of its standards [41].
2.2. Corporate Governance Models
Several studies have attempted to explain the different styles of corporate governance
through models [42]; the Anglo-American model, also known as the Anglo-Saxon model,
is based on the idea that the shareholders are the owners of the organisation [43] and have
the right to control management and make essential decisions [44]. This model is the basis
of corporate governance in countries such as the United States, Australia, Great Britain,
and Canada. Among the advantages attributed to this model are strong protection of
shareholders rights and high transparency in financial disclosure [45], which indicates that
there must be a strict enforcement of disclosure rules and ensures that shareholders have
access to relevant information to make informed decisions and be able to effectively control
the management of the organisation [46]. The disadvantages of the Anglo-American model
are its focus on short-term profit and its disregard for minority stakeholders, which can
lead to short-term decisions that are not beneficial to the organisation in the long term.
The Japanese corporate governance model changed significantly after the bubble
crisis of the 1990s, influenced by the 1999 and 2015 OECD Principles of Corporate Gover-
nance [40], where at least one independent external director was introduced on the board
of directors of organisations [47], increasing internal control and the active participation
of strategic shareholders in the management process to stimulate economic efficiency and
harmonise the interests of the organisation’s partners and employees [48]. This model
facilitates the flexible supervision and financing of organisations, as well as effective com-
munication between them and banks, which are the main source of financing [49]. The
Japanese model seeks to provide the best benefit to shareholders (who can also be creditors,
suppliers, or customers), which encourages long-term decision-making and promotes the
sustainability of the organisation [49]. A disadvantage of the model is that in some organi-
sations, the funders are in senior management positions, which limits the decision-making
power of shareholders [50], leading to a possible lack of transparency and a decrease in
investor confidence.
The German corporate governance model is characterised by practices of separation of
management and control, allowing shareholders and employees to make crucial decisions
in the organisation in order to control its management [51]. Significant shareholders actively
participate in the management process to stimulate economic efficiency; this model features
a more robust and active monitoring approach than the Anglo-American model [46,52].
The German governance system focuses on the influence of strong capital markets and not
on internal control, as in the Japanese model [47].
In Latin America, there is no standard model of corporate governance; however, the
importance of developing balanced internal control and corporate governance structures is
highlighted [53], and each country adapts according to its business culture and regulatory
framework [54]. In Mexico, the corporate governance model is based on the general
shareholders’ meeting, which appoints the review of financial statements, emphasising
the independence of the board of directors and the protection of shareholders’ rights,
which brings it closer to the Anglo-American model [42]. On the other hand, the Brazilian
corporate governance model combines elements of the Anglo-American model with greater
stakeholder participation and the adoption of social inclusion policies [55]. In Colombia, the
Code of Good Corporate Governance is the basis of the corporate governance model and

--- PAGE 4 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 13150 4 of 18
focuses on transparency, social responsibility, and the active participation of the different
governing bodies in strategic decision-making and oversight of corporate management,
in addition to the fact that the board of directors must form an audit committee and a
nomination committee [55].
3. Materials and Methods
This study seeks to determine the elements to build a Governance and Corporate
Management System, for which a systematic review of the literature was used, analysing
articles covering Corporate Governance, Corporate Management, Technology Management,
Innovation Management, Digital Transformation, and Organisational Transformation. The
article describes the processes involved in the model. It presents a schematic diagram of
the processes and the feedback developed with the flow, as well as the interactions with
the environment and the systems that support capacity enhancement.
3.1. Data Collection
The review was conducted primarily as a structured search for keywords and terms
such as “Corporate Management”, “Corporate Governance”, “Organisational Transforma-
tion”, “Digital Transformation”, “Innovation Management”, and “Technology Manage-
ment”, in combination with “system”, “innovation”, “strategy”, “business”, and “Model”.
The search for articles was carried out mainly in the Web of Science bibliographic database
between 2000 and 2022, filtered by type of document selecting only articles and reviews in
English and Spanish; the result was organised by the most cited.
To approach the systematic literature review, a characterisation of the search terms
was carried out using as a guide a study on research and Technology Management [56] and
bibliometrix, a tool in R for the comprehensive analysis of scientific mapping [57].
Terms were searched across titles, abstracts, and keywords to obtain several articles
focusing on corporate governance and management.
3.2. Data Download
Fourdatasamplesweredownloaded: (1)CorporateGovernancewith263observations,
(2) Technology Management, (3) Innovation Management, and (4) Digital Transformation.
The articles resulting from the search were downloaded in BibTex (bib) format from
the Web of Science database, with all author information, affiliations, citations, abstracts,
keywords, and bibliographic information.
The data was then prepared for mapping analysis using the bibliometrix library,
version 3.0.2 in RStudio 1.3.959 for macOS.
3.3. Bibliometric Analysis of the Data
For the analysis of this study, bibliometrics was first used to analyse the characteristics
of the literature as an object of research; critical items (country, citation, keyword) were
analysed quantitatively using statistical and mathematical methods [57]. The sample group
performed the result of the bibliometric mapping analysis; relevant results are shown in
Table 1 and Figure 1 below.
For the Corporate Governance sample, 358 documents were collected, with the USA
being the leader in article publication, while China ranks second. The United States, Italy,
and the United Kingdom had the most citations. In this sample, the keyword plus (repeated
terms from the titles of the articles cited in the bibliography) most used in the articles were
Performance and Ownership.
Of the 387 documents in the Technology Management sample, China had the highest
number of articles published, and the USA was in second place. For the countries with
the most citations, the results showed the following: USA first, then China, and Germany.
Performance, Impact, and Adoption were the most used keywords in this sample.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 13150 5 of 18
Table 1. Statistical details on publications 2000–2022.
Year 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
Corporate
Governance
4 8 3 5 8 13 12 18 16 16 21
Technology
Management
1 7 7 5 8 5 7 7 11 13 10 15
Innovation
Management
5 10 8 5 9 18 13 16 26 29 23
Digital
Transformation
2 1 1 2
Year 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Total
Corporate
Governance
11 9 16 15 16 6 31 32 27 30 41 358
Technology
Management
13 16 15 5 9 11 32 30 22 50 88 387
Innovation
Management
24 28 35 34 35 20 42 47 34 28 9 498
Digital
Transformation
2 1 2 3 1 11 20 33 62 105 246
Sustainability 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 18
Of the 387 documents in the Technology Management sample, China had the highest
number of articles published, and the USA was in second place. For the countries with the
most citations, the results showed the following: USA first, then China, and Germany.
Performance, Impact, and Adoption were the most used keywords in this sample.
Table 1. Statistical details on publications 2000–2022.
Year 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
Corporate Governance 4 8 3 5 8 13 12 18 16 16 21
Technology Management 1 7 7 5 8 5 7 7 11 13 10 15
Innovation Management 5 10 8 5 9 18 13 16 26 29 23
Digital Transformation 2 1 1 2
Year 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Total
Corporate Governance 11 9 16 15 16 6 31 32 27 30 41 358
Technology Management 13 16 15 5 9 11 32 30 22 50 88 387
Innovation Management 24 28 35 34 35 20 42 47 34 28 9 498
Digital Transformation 2 1 2 3 1 11 20 33 62 105 246
Finally, the sample on Digital Transformation was made up of 246 documents, with
China, Germany, and the USA being the countries with the highest number of article pub-
lications, and Germany and the USA with the most cited articles. Management, Innova-
tion, Technology, and Performance were the most used keywords in the articles.
Figure 1.Bibliometric analysisof countries with the most publications on(a)Corporate Governance,
(b) Technology Management, (c) Innovation Management, and (d) Digital Transformation.
Figure 1. Bibliometric analysis of countries with the most publications on (a) Corporate Governance,
(b) Technology Management, (c) Innovation Management, and (d) Digital Transformation.

--- PAGE 6 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 13150 6 of 18
Finally, the sample on Digital Transformation was made up of 246 documents, with
China, Germany, and the USA being the countries with the highest number of article publi-
cations, and Germany and the USA with the most cited articles. Management, Innovation,
Technology, and Performance were the most used keywords in the articles.
The results of the sample on Innovation Management, in which 498 documents were
used, revealed that the countries with the highest number of article publications were
China, Spain, the United Kingdom, and the United States. From the sample, the countries
with the highest number of citations were the USA, United Kingdom, China, and Spain,
and the most used plus keywords in the articles were Performance, Impact, Research and
Development, and Capabilities.
3.4. Content Analysis
In this study, the content analysis complemented the bibliometric analysis to identify
and characterise the elements and extract knowledge about the existing research studies [56]
on Corporate Governance, Technology Management, Innovation Management, and Digital
Transformation. The authors of this study conducted a detailed content analysis of the
articles they considered to be the most influential in identifying the preliminary elements
that would make up the Governance and Corporate Management System.
After the content analysis, the preliminary list of elements was confronted through an
expert judgment to discuss the relevance and functionality of each of the elements [58,59];
as a result of the analysis and the expert judgement, Table 2 lists the elements and items
analysed to make up the system.
Table 2. Relevant articles for the construction of the Governance and Corporate Management System.
Capacities Elements Authors
Technology management
Strategic Direction,
Collaboration Networks.
[60,61]
Policies. [62–64]
Impact metrics. [65]
Planning and Management
System.
[66–69]
Innovation management
Motivations and Resources. [13,26,70–73]
Functional dynamics. [10,64,74,75]
Organisational routines. [76,77]
Framework, Roles, Standards,
Policies.
[63,73,78–82]
Digital Transformation
Environments, Partnerships,
Capabilities.
[83–86]
Risk mitigation tools. [87,88]
Framework, Roles, Standards,
Policies, Research.
[12,14,86,89–95]
IT Resources, Social networks. [96–98]
Organisational
Transformation
Entrepreneurship, Interface
Design.
[23,99,100]
Process Change,
Organisational Culture.
[99,101–106]
Business and Government
Environment Technologies.
[23,102]
Communication Strategy. [103,104,107–111]

--- PAGE 7 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 13150 7 of 18
3.5. Validation Using the Expert Judgement Technique
The expert judgement technique was implemented to confirm the validity of the con-
ceptual model of the Governance and Corporate Management System, its components and
elements [112]. Expert judgement is a validation method increasingly used in research [113]
and serves to verify the reliability of the study through the informed opinion of qualified
experts who can provide information, judgements, and assessments [114]; for the expert
judgement, the support of eight professionals with a master’s degree and more than ten
years of experience in at least one of the components of the system was requested.
As a result of the expert judgement, experts have affirmed that the model is accept-
able. However, they have recommended describing the components and the flow of the
system details. They suggest these adjustments are essential to ensure the model faithfully
represents the system and its behaviour. The requested adjustments are detailed below.
3.6. Governance and Corporate Management System
Governance aims to find an efficient way to manage an organisation and optimise the
resources used in each activity. Governance refers to an optimal relationship or interaction
of procedures, policies, instruments, and the organisation that allows the protection of
knowledge to take place.
For Deloitte, the concept of Corporate Governance refers to the set of principles,
procedures and standards that regulate the functioning of the organisation’s governance
areas [115].
The concept of governance came into use some decades ago in European countries,
Canada, the United States, and Australia as a consequence of the need of minority share-
holders of an organisation to know the state of the company in which they had invested
and to know what the future expectations of the company were [116].
It has been mentioned that governance is vital for organisations in general to achieve
success [117], and the best strategy to achieve this is through good corporate governance
practices; as a solution, instruments were developed to generate trust; in this way, corporate
governance management is currently an essential criterion in organisations, with the
generation of value being the main asset to be protected. The OECD states that corporate
governanceencompassesasetofrelationshipsbetweenthemanagementoftheorganisation,
its board of directors, shareholders, and other stakeholders [40].
Organisations that apply good governance practices thrive on reliability and security
in their processes and operations as well as in their products and services, thus, increasing
their level of recognition. Although implementing good governance practices does not
guarantee the success of organisations, it does have a positively impact on the value and
image of the brand, thus, facilitating access to foreign markets and external investment.
3.7. Technology Management as a Component of the Governance and Corporate Management
System
Technology Management (TM) is conceived as the set of complex and multidimen-
sional processes or activities aimed at the acquisition, incorporation, optimisation, control,
learning, dissemination, and continuous improvement of the technology necessary for the
execution of the processes developed in the organisation [62,118–120]. It also involves the
innovation processes through Research and Development (R&D) of both product and pro-
cess technologies, as well as those used in management functions [61], and is, therefore, a
vital determinant of technological change for the success or failure of organisations [60,121].
Since technological change is a dynamic process [75] which constantly creates new
challenges and opportunities for new products, services, processes, and organisational
development [69], a frequent analysis of the characteristics that affect innovation is nec-
essary [71], in which the links among competitive advantages [60], competitive priorities,
and organisational competencies are understood [66,121]; a transformation is then required
that integrates technological change with strategic aspects in an innovation system. In con-

--- PAGE 8 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 13150 8 of 18
clusion, understanding technological change requires expert guidance [62,67] that guides
Technology Management towards a dynamic innovation system approach [75].
However, Technology Management is conceived as the set of techniques enabling an
organisation to develop and implement its innovation and improvement plans to maintain
or increase its competitive position [122]; therefore, although with the implementation of
Technology Management, some organisations have not been able to increase the capabilities of
their organisations in terms of innovation and improvement [65] and satisfaction rates [60,68],
other studies suggest that Technology Management is the recommended way to protect and
combine the strategic orientation, processes, human, technical and financial resource structure,
and the management of the technology and the environment [61,123] in each activity [69] to
meet the objectives of the organisation.
Technology Management also allows a better articulation between research, industry,
and society through strategies introduced in the strategic plan for technological devel-
opment [124] through inventorying, monitoring, evaluating, enriching, optimising, and
protecting [125].
3.8. Innovation Management as a Component of the Governance and Corporate Management System
The set of activities aimed at the application of knowledge for the introduction of a
new device, method, or material into a product or process that improves its characteristics,
capabilities, or performance [73,81] is known as Technological Innovation; however, if
the innovation developed also increases organisational productivity through increased
sales volume of new products, thus gaining market acceptance, it is known as Innovation
Management (IM).
Innovation Management is therefore an efficient combination of change management
and innovation management [63,73] and the management of innovation processes [76]; the
former aims to promote the process of generating new knowledge while maintaining a
culture of sustainable innovation [77], and the second is incorporated into change manage-
ment, acquiring a greater capacity to adapt and anticipate or provoke ruptures, to improve
competitive advantages based on of the management coverage level.
Innovation Management as a system allows us to evaluate the impact of interactions
of elements of the environment in the field of interest and to manage innovation [26]; it is
necessary to analyse the elements that make up the innovation system, which must then
be articulated according to its level of effectiveness in the development of innovation [71]
and its integration with the dynamics of the system environment [64,73]. The above is to
establish those elements that allow the business environment to increase its technological,
learning, innovation, strategic management, and resource management capabilities [64,65].
The International Standards Organisation ISO, in its ISO 56000 standard, is a guide
for the use of tools and methods “For innovation partnership”, the standard describes
guidelines and criteria for generating value by developing joint activities; the document
covers product, business process, marketing and organisational innovation and provides a
structured approach for organisations seeking to enter into an innovation partnership with
another organisation [126].
Innovation Management and Technology Management in the business environment
can share the stages of creation or acquisition, diffusion, and use of technology when it
comes to the development of technological innovations; however, it is possible to develop
innovations outside of technology when these are not technological or refer to organisa-
tional or strategic aspects. Furthermore, in innovation, the use of knowledge beyond the
industrial application considers the introduction and diffusion or acceptance in the market
of new or improved products, processes, business models, or organisational or marketing
methods, as they are technological innovations that depend on advances in knowledge [76].
3.9. Digital Transformation as a Component of the Governance and Corporate Management System
Digital Transformation (DT) has led industries to face a fundamental change associated
with the rapid emergence of digital technology applications [91,127,128] in all aspects.

--- PAGE 9 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 13150 9 of 18
Digital Transformation is the application of digital capabilities across processes, products
andassetstoimproveefficiency, enhancecustomervalue[83], managerisk[87]anddiscover
new revenue-generating opportunities.
Digital Transformation rebuilds the dynamics of organisations to adapt them to the
needs of the present and the future; a definition of Digital Transformation, associated with
this dynamic of change [94], is the one mentioned by Vial (2019), where he states that digital
technologies create disruptions that trigger strategic responses for value creation while
managing structural changes [86].
Digital Transformation is seen as the final stage and the new beginning in the adoption
of digital technologies [85], which starts with the acquisition of the competencies required
to use digital technology (digital literacy), which will then be implemented and used to
finally solve the challenges of organisations [129].
With the implementation of Digital Transformation strategies in organisations to gen-
erate changes in the culture of innovation [94], resources are better distributed to modernise
the customer experience [12,94], creating connections between organisations [85] and new
business models through the incorporation of digital technologies [83] and encouraging
the use of social networks [97] to examine organisational relationships [98] and obtain
more innovative and agile responses [130,131] in real time [92]. In conclusion, Digital
Transformation strategies offer more efficient solutions [93] that contribute to business
performance [83,132].
Digital Transformation is already being implemented at the government level; in
Europe, the German Research Foundation (DFG) approved a project entitled “Taking digital
transformation to the next level”, an innovative information infrastructure for research [90].
3.10. Organisational Transformation as a Component of the Governance and Corporate
Management System
For Hellriegel, Jackson, and Solcum (2005), organisational change refers to the trans-
formation associated with the design or operation of an organisation [133]; this change
requires planning processes that involve Organisational Transformation with changes
based on the business vision, actions that permeate the culture, and actions that permeate
the culture of the organisation [101] and the ability to compete [22], employing simultane-
ous and exploration strategies [108], actions to evaluate its performance, variations in its
structure [104], and constantly test new ways of generating innovation [23].
As previously stated by the authors, Organisational Transformation always implies
changes that will require the organisation to adjust to the demands of the environment,
for which it must define future strategies and create a long-term vision to increase its
competitiveness. With this clear picture, organisations that are involved in transformation
processes seek to optimise the use of resources and adjust for the specialisation of functions
reflected in the organisation’s structure.
Organisations engaged in a competitive struggle [23], an attitude of renewal and
permanent learning [100], have always managed to innovate in the right way, and the
success of obtaining this result is due to the adoption of Organisational Transformation
(OT) [102].
Wischnesvky (2004) states that Organisational Transformation is a novel change in
organisational dimensions such as strategy, structure, and systems [134].
The scientific literature related to Organisational Transformation processes indicates
that there are generally four critical stages within the process: the initial definition of the
vision or ultimate goal, followed by the identification of the competencies required to meet
the goal, the definition of strategies, budget and implementation plans, and finally the
assessment of the availability of the necessary resources, according to whose feasibility
the implementation of the strategies begins. Thus, achieving a planned organisational
transformation with a synergetic and holistic transformation framework will depend on
the monitoring of the stages described above.

--- PAGE 10 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 13150 10 of 18
4. Conceptual Model of the Governance and Corporate Management System
Figure 2 represents the Governance and Corporate Management System, elaborated
under the innovation processes and systems approach, which is made up of elements
and the relationships between them, belonging to the productive, financial, scientific, and
technological environments within an institutional, legal, and cultural framework, typical
of the interaction area of the Governance and Corporate Management Systems.
Sustainability 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 18
Figure 2. Proposed Governance and Corporate Management System.
The principles, components, description, and flow of the Governance and Corporate
Management System are specified below:
4.1. Principles of the System
The proposed Governance and Corporate Management System model has the fol-
lowing special features:
• Holistic: The model incorporates human, process, and technology perspectives
linked to management and corporate governance across strategic, operational, and
organisational areas.
• Integrated: applies the paradigms of reliability and value for money to integrate
standards and common elements from the core of management and corporate gov-
ernance, from which emanates the set of policies that impact management and oper-
ation, covering all levels and organisational processes and defining a single ethical
framework of organisational behaviour.
• Transparency: by integrating digital management with sustainability guidelines in
corporate governance, the system allows the substitution of administrative behav-
iour controls for the validation of the service by diﬀerent users, favouring not only
the transparency of corporate and organisational management but also the execution
of processes and procedures reliably, making eﬀective use of economic and financial
information.
4.2. Components
The Governance and Corporate Management System model, in addition to the Techno-
logical Management, Innovation Management and Digital Transformation components
mentioned above, consists of a set of components or support tools, such as (a) business
intelligence applications required by corporate governance in the functions of strategic
direction, Audit and Senior Management; (b) an information system composed of a core
system and resource planning systems that support corporate management; (c) infor-
Figure 2. Proposed Governance and Corporate Management System.
The principles, components, description, and flow of the Governance and Corporate
Management System are specified below:
4.1. Principles of the System
The proposed Governance and Corporate Management System model has the follow-
ing special features:
• Holistic: The model incorporates human, process, and technology perspectives linked
to management and corporate governance across strategic, operational, and organisa-
tional areas.
• Integrated: applies the paradigms of reliability and value for money to integrate stan-
dards and common elements from the core of management and corporate governance,
from which emanates the set of policies that impact management and operation, cov-
ering all levels and organisational processes and defining a single ethical framework
of organisational behaviour.
• Transparency: by integrating digital management with sustainability guidelines in corpo-
rate governance, the system allows the substitution of administrative behaviour controls
for the validation of the service by different users, favouring not only the transparency
of corporate and organisational management but also the execution of processes and
procedures reliably, making effective use of economic and financial information.
4.2. Components
The Governance and Corporate Management System model, in addition to the Techno-
logical Management, Innovation Management and Digital Transformation components
mentioned above, consists of a set of components or support tools, such as (a) business
intelligence applications required by corporate governance in the functions of strategic

--- PAGE 11 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 13150 11 of 18
direction, Audit and Senior Management; (b) an information system composed of a core
system and resource planning systems that support corporate management; (c) information
systems with sub systems, modules, and components to support the different operational
and primary activities; (d) IoT, Big Data, machine learning to facilitate Digital Transfor-
mation, applications for planning, and agile methods to support Innovation Management,
and applications for technological management and Operation Technologies to support
Technology Management.
4.3. System Description
The proposed model developed under the corporate approach of innovation processes
and systems, can integrate and complement the processes of Technology Management, In-
novation Management, Digital Transformation, and Organisational Transformation around
the patterns of governance, management, and operation at the core of the organisations,
whose moderating input is given by the models and standards of Innovation Management
and the organisational scientific and technological capabilities, the financial capabilities
and the corporate capacity of the environment, these inputs are given by the elements of
the innovation system of the scenario, in which the organisations interact.
During the literature review, the main capacities suggested in previous studies were
analysed to select the processes that are part of the proposed system, with the respective
elements configuring them (see Table 2). Based on the critical processes identified, the
system is constructed under the paradigm of interaction and adaptation to the externalities
of the economic environment through processes of organisational transformation.
This model stipulated that innovation standards and management should be aligned
with the regulations governing the development of innovation activities, the Innovation
Management support system, and all existing governmental instruments.
The main contribution of the model is to facilitate the identification of groups of actors,
according to the organisational characteristics and capacities that must be applied in the
form of interaction to activate the value chain.
It is essential to highlight that the principle of transparency proposes to integrate digital
management with sustainability guidelines in corporate governance, thus allowing it to
permeate all areas of the organisation, decision-making, risk management, and business
strategy; another essential point is that, at a higher level, it is possible to periodically evaluate
the performance of the system and make effective use of economic-financial information.
The different capacities of the environment represented in the system may or may
not be part of the geographical, political, and technological limits of the organisations,
with whose elements relationships or interactions can be established for the acquisition
of technologies and knowledge that promote management and transformation processes,
based on internal capacities that support such interactions or through intermediaries or
corporate partners that guarantee the achievement of strategic objectives.
4.4. Flows of the Governance and Corporate Management System
The flow of the Governance and Corporate Management System starts from its core in
the Governance pattern, radiating to the entire organisation the regulatory framework, poli-
cies, strategic, operational, and monitoring roles for proper control and direction to ensure
transparency, integration, sustainability, and a holistic approach in the governance pattern;
it is defined as putting each of the components into operation, and the necessary parameters
for the delimitation of capabilities are obtained. The plans, objectives, and strategies are
specified in the manual of functions and administrative procedures, the strategic plan,
the operational plan, among others, by the pattern of management through a model of
process structure, which seeks to plan, define actions, metrics, controls, competencies, and
strategic guidelines to obtain the goals of the organisation. The operation pattern provides
the means through which the system flow works as a value chain that represents each one
of the processes involved in the organisational transformation of organisations based on

--- PAGE 12 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 13150 12 of 18
the governance patterns framed in the models and standards of Innovation Management.
Innovation and Digital Transformation are managed using this technology.
In the end, processes and operations generate business value, and with a continuous
improvement approach, the operations procedures are continuously transformed, and the
system is strengthened with the contribution that is developed through interaction in the
model flow.
5. Discussion
The objective of this research was to identify elements, restrictions, and evidence of good
practices based on the review of literature on models, standards, management, innovation,
and transformation in areas related to governance and organisational management, with
which a holistic and systematic structure was obtained that allowed the construction of a
Conceptual Model of a Governance and Corporate Management System. The study also
determined the key capabilities offered by the different support systems for model setup.
In addition, it became evident that sustainable Governance and Corporate Manage-
ment Systems remain relatively understudied; therefore, this research also aims to close
this gap by integrating Innovation Management models and standards into the proposed
system to enable the responsible use of resources and ensure sustainable development of
organisations.
ThestudyincorporatesthevalueofTechnologyManagementandInnovationManagement
models and standards in the implementation and articulation of multidimensional dynamic
processes focused on the development and execution of technology innovation plans, from
which activities that generate new knowledge and strengthen the characteristics and capabilities
of the organisation can maintain a culture of continuous and sustainable innovation.
To complement and strengthen the digital capabilities in the processes of the concep-
tual model of the Governance and Corporate Management System, Digital Transformation
was added as a component. With the application of the strategies and technologies of this
component, it is expected to create new links between organisations, new business models,
and increase customer experience and value.
As can be seen, this study presents a new configuration of the business model, which
was elaborated under the holistic approach of innovation processes and systems, with
fundamental principles of transparency and integration. The governance pattern is the one
that defines the functioning of each of the components, interactions, control, and direction
of the organisation.
Surrounding the patterns of governance, management, and operation are the models
and standards of Technology Management, Innovation Management, and Digital Transfor-
mation; these components generate a constant interaction, and as a consequence, a flow is
generated in the system, which causes the frequent transformation of the business model,
forcing the system to be in continuous evolution, allowing the reformulation of the strategic
objectives, and, consequently, generating a transformation of the organisation.
The Governance and Corporate Management System model has been proposed as a
value chain so that, in this way, strategic actions can be established in the organisational
context, promoting the development of its strategic objectives, the fulfilment of its goals
established in its indicators performance key and represented in each of the processes
involved in the organisational transformation of companies. The model presented is simple
and can be easily implemented in MSMEs. For this, it is necessary to select the KPIs of
the companies; it is essential to consider various factors depending on the sector, such as
size, structure, processes, complexity, KPIs, goods, and services, and whether it is a public,
private, or mixed entity. Therefore, it is advisable to take into account the following factors.
Strategic alignment aims to align and understand the strategic objectives and key
performance indicators of a company, with strategic objectives that can be structured from
technology, innovation, and digital management. Different organisations have different
purposes; some focus on operational excellence (quality), profitability (profit), and others
on environmental, social, or political objectives, or are perhaps more balanced regarding

--- PAGE 13 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 13150 13 of 18
sustainability. Essentially, it is about ensuring that business objectives align with the goals
derived from the strategic triad of Innovation, Digital Transformation, and Technology.
Risk management is crucial during any transition or transformation. It is essential to
assess the existing level of risk and identify key indicators that require close monitoring.
Focus on areas where the probability and impact of risk are high without ignoring the
possibility of hidden risks that need to be managed.
Finally, a preliminary assessment is a helpful tool that helps identify the current status
and maturity level of an organisation in implementing tripartite management. It also
provides a snapshot of the levels of Technology management, Digital Transformation, and
Innovation Management. By comparing it to the future state of the organisation, a gap can
be established, which can help determine desirable indicators for the organisation. This
information is crucial for developing a tripartite management implementation plan tailored
to the unique characteristics of the organisation.
6. Conclusions
Previous studies have focused on analysing the influence of independent factors or
components on corporate development. Consequently, this study can contribute to the
literature with a new conceptual model that offers a novel perspective of integrating various
factors or components and including sustainability guidelines in corporate governance to
promote corporate sustainability performance.
In addition, there are various approaches to Innovation Management models and
Technology Management models; a large number of the proposals focus on enabling the
implementation of technology, but none implies the creation of a sustainable competitive
advantage with a holistic and systematic structure that includes Governance, Innova-
tion Management, and Technology Management together with Digital Transformation
to develop capacities for strategic and sustainable innovation to generate Organisational
Transformation.
In this study, as a contribution to solving this need, evidence is presented of a concep-
tual model that includes sustainability guidelines in the principle of transparency, which
consists of an Open Governance and Corporate Management System with a dynamic per-
spective supported by the implementation of the processes mentioned above and obtaining,
in the end, as a result of the interaction with the environment, the feedback of the Organisa-
tional Transformation process, which is vital to achieving sustainable development.
The system proposed in this study establishes a new configuration of the business
model, which involves a regulatory foundation, the principle of transparency with guide-
lines for the management of sustainability and innovation, from which technology is
managed, constituting a strategic element in which the organisation must interact with the
environment through the capabilities offered by the different support systems and thus be
able to obtain transparent sources of information that allow it to generate innovation and
break down the barriers that prevent organisations from long-term sustainability.
Future work is expected to define the groups of organisational actors according to
the capabilities that are part of the support systems to complement the model, to define
the indicators that allow performance measurement, and to present a new structure of the
proposed model involving the concept of Enterprise Architecture (EA). This new proposal
will facilitate the implementation, verification, monitoring, and greater integration of the
system in the organisation.
Author Contributions: A.G.-A. investigation, conceptualization, methodology, software, writing
original draft preparation; W.N.B. validation, formal analysis, writing review and editing, supervision,
funding acquisition; C.L.A. validation, formal analysis, supervision. All authors have read and agreed
to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Data Availability Statement: No additional data are available.

--- PAGE 14 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 13150 14 of 18
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1. Sikdar, A.; Payyazhi, J. A process model of managing organizational change during business process redesign. Bus. Process.
Manag. J. 2014, 20, 971–998. [CrossRef]
2. Chao, R.O.; Lenox, M.J. Towards a unified model of innovation and technological change. J. Enterp. Transform. 2017, 7, 75–90.
[CrossRef]
3. Foster, C.; Green, K. Greening the innovation process. Bus. Strat. Environ. 2000, 9, 287–303. [CrossRef]
4. Peñalosa, M. Tecnología e Innovación: Factores claves para la competitividad. Actual. Contab. Faces 2007, 10, 82–94.
5. Tohidi, H.; Jabbari, M.M. Different Stages of Innovation Process. Procedia Technol. 2012, 1, 574–578. [CrossRef]
6. Macedo, M.A.; Miguel, P.A.C.; Filho, N.C. A Caracterização do Design Thinking como um Modelo de Inovação. RAI Rev. Adm.
Innov. E 2015, 12, 157–182. [CrossRef]
7. Uthaman, V.S.; Vasanthagopal, R. A Comprehensive Multidimensional Conceptual Model to Assess the e-Governance Service
Quality at Common Service Centers in India. In Proceedings of the Special Collection on eGovernment Innovations in India, New
Delhi, India, 7–9 March 2017; pp. 99–106. [CrossRef]
8. Bocken, N.M.P.; Short, S.W.; Rana, P.; Evans, S. A literature and practice review to develop sustainable business model archetypes.
J. Clean. Prod. 2014, 65, 42–56. [CrossRef]
9. Rosca, E.; Arnold, M.; Bendul, J.C. Business models for sustainable innovation—An empirical analysis of frugal products and
services. J. Clean. Prod. 2017, 162, S133–S145. [CrossRef]
10. Maradana, R.P.; Pradhan, R.P.; Dash, S.; Zaki, D.B.; Gaurav, K.; Jayakumar, M.; Sarangi, A.K. Innovation and economic growth in
European Economic Area countries: The Granger causality approach. IIMB Manag. Rev. 2019, 31, 268–282. [CrossRef]
11. Niehaves, B.; Poeppelbuss, J.; Plattfaut, R.; Becker, J. BPM capability development—A matter of contingencies. Bus. Process.
Manag. J. 2014, 20, 90–106. [CrossRef]
12. Sebastian, I.M.; Ross, J.W.; Beath, C.; Mocker, M.; Moloney, K.G.; Fonstad, N.O. How Big Old Companies Navigate Digital
Transformation. MIS Q. Exec. 2017, 16, 197–213. [CrossRef]
13. López-Torres, G.C.; Maldonado Guzmán, G.; Pinzón Castro, S.Y.; García Ramírez, R. Collaboration and innovation activities in
SMEs. Contad. Adm. 2016, 61, 568–581. [CrossRef]
14. Hess, T.; Matt, C.; Benlian, A.; Wiesböck, F. Options for Formulating a Digital Transformation Strategy. MIS Q. Exec. 2016, 15,
123–139.
15. De Mori, C.; Batalha, M.O.; Alfranca, O. A model for measuring technology capability in the agrifood industry companies. Br.
Food J. 2016, 118, 1422–1461. [CrossRef]
16. Hanpo, H.; Xiaoqian, Y.; Hao, Z. Enterprise Technological Innovation Models and Implementation Based on Internet. In
Proceedings of the 2010 International Conference on E-Business and E-Government, Guangzhou, China, 7–9 May 2010; pp.
1132–1135. [CrossRef]
17. Qi, Z.; Yunjie, A. Technological Innovation Model of SMB in International Operation. In Proceedings of the 2009 Second
International Conference on Future Information Technology and Management Engineering, Sanya, China, 13–14 December 2009;
pp. 452–454. [CrossRef]
18. Wu, W.; Yu, B.; Wu, C. How China’s equipment manufacturing firms achieve successful independent innovation. Chin. Manag.
Stud. 2012, 6, 160–183. [CrossRef]
19. Bertola, P.; Teunissen, J. Fashion 4.0. Innovating fashion industry through digital transformation. Res. J. Text. Appar. 2018, 22,
352–369. [CrossRef]
20. Koseoglu, O.; Keskin, B.; Ozorhon, B. Challenges and Enablers in BIM-Enabled Digital Transformation in Mega Projects: The
Istanbul New Airport Project Case Study. Buildings 2019, 9, 115. [CrossRef]
21. Savastano, M.; Amendola, C.; Bellini, F.; D’Ascenzo, F. Contextual Impacts on Industrial Processes Brought by the Digital
Transformation of Manufacturing: A Systematic Review. Sustainability 2019, 11, 891. [CrossRef]
22. Newman, K.L. Organizational Transformation during Institutional Upheaval. Acad. Manag. Rev. 2000, 25, 602–619. [CrossRef]
23. Vladušić, L.; Lalić, N. Corporate Entrepreneurship as a Function of Organizational Transformation. Strateg. Manag. 2015, 20,
26–33.
24. Leitner, K.-H. Digital and open innovation: Implications for business models and research strategies of private and public
organizations. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Knowledge Technologies and Data-Driven Business, Graz,
Austria, 21–22 October 2015; p. 32. [CrossRef]
25. Geldes, C.; Felzensztein, C.; Palacios-Fenech, J. Technological and non-technological innovations, performance and propensity to
innovate across industries: The case of an emerging economy. Ind. Mark. Manag. 2017, 61, 55–66. [CrossRef]
26. García-Pérez De Lema, D.; Gálvez-Albarracín, E.J.; Maldonado-Guzmán, G. Efecto de la innovación en el crecimiento y el
desempeño de las Mipymes de la Alianza del Pacífico. Un estudio empírico. Estud. Gerenciales 2016, 32, 326–335. [CrossRef]
27. Bernard, A.; Fischer, A. New Trends in Rapid Product Development. CIRP Ann. Manuf. Technol. 2002, 51, 635–652. [CrossRef]
28. Brilhuis-Meijer, E.; Pigosso, D.C.; McAloone, T.C. Integrating Product and Technology Development: A Proposed Reference
Model for Dual Innovation. Procedia CIRP 2016, 50, 32–37. [CrossRef]

--- PAGE 15 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 13150 15 of 18
29. Cardoni, A.; Kiseleva, E.; Lombardi, R. A sustainable governance model to prevent corporate corruption: Integrating anticorrup-
tion practices, corporate strategy and business processes. Bus. Strategy Environ. 2020, 29, 1173–1185. [CrossRef]
30. Wahyuningrum, I.F.S.; Chegenizadeh, A.; Humaira, N.G.; Budihardjo, M.A.; Nikraz, H. Corporate Governance Research in Asian
Countries: A Bibliometric and Content Analysis (2001–2021). Sustainability 2023, 15, 6381. [CrossRef]
31. Cheng, M.; Li, Z.; Ma, C. Public governance and corporate innovation: Evidence from a quasi-natural event in China. Appl. Econ.
2023, 55, 2413–2437. [CrossRef]
32. Malik, M.S.; Younus, S.; Sattar, S. The Impact of Corporate Governance with Mediating Effect of Digital Innovation on Firm
Performance. Sustain. Bus. Soc. Emerg. Econ. 2022, 4, 179–194. [CrossRef]
33. Júnior, D.M.B. Corporate governance and capital structure in Latin America: Empirical evidence. J. Cap. Mark. Stud. 2022, 6,
148–165. [CrossRef]
34. Nasrallah, N.; El Khoury, R. Is corporate governance a good predictor of SMEs financial performance? Evidence from developing
countries (the case of Lebanon). J. Sustain. Financ. Invest. 2022, 12, 13–43. [CrossRef]
35. Almustafa, H.; Nguyen, Q.K.; Liu, J.; Dang, V.C. The impact of COVID-19 on firm risk and performance in MENA countries:
Does national governance quality matter? PLoS ONE 2023, 18, e0281148. [CrossRef]
36. Du Plessis, J.J.; Hargovan, A.; Bagaric, M.; Harris, J.R. Principles of Contemporary Corporate Governance, 4th ed.; Cambridge
University Press: Port Melbourne, VIC, Australia, 2018.
37. Cadbury Report. 1992. Available online: https://www.icaew.com/technical/corporate-governance/codes-and-reports/cadbury-
report (accessed on 1 April 2021).
38. Treasury, A. Corporations Act. 2001. Available online: https://www.legislation.gov.au/Details/C2018C00031 (accessed on
1 April 2021).
39. Sarbanes-Oxley Act. LII/Legal Information Institute. 2002. Available online: https://www.law.cornell.edu/wex/sarbanes-
oxley_act (accessed on 1 April 2021).
40. OCDE. Principios de Gobierno Corporativo de la OCDE y del G20; Editions OCDE: Paris, France, 2016. [CrossRef]
41. OECD.ORG. OECD Legal Instruments: Recommendation of the Council on Principles of Corporate Governance. OECD Legal
Instruments. 2023. Available online: https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECD-LEGAL-0413 (accessed on
28 June 2023).
42. Mendoza Velázquez, A.; Ortuño Barba, L.C. Indicador global de adhesión a las mejores prácticas de gobierno corporativo:
Sociedades anónimas bursátiles mexicanas. Contad. Adm. 2019, 64, 8. [CrossRef]
43. Andreasson, S. Understanding Corporate Governance Reform in South Africa: Anglo-American Divergence, the King Reports,
and Hybridization. Bus. Soc. 2011, 50, 647–673. [CrossRef]
44. Rissy, Y.Y.W. The stakeholder model: Its relevance, concept, and application in the Indonesian banking sector. J. Bank. Regul. 2021,
22, 219–231. [CrossRef]
45. Smith, N.C.; Rönnegard, D. Shareholder Primacy, Corporate Social Responsibility, and the Role of Business Schools. J. Bus. Ethics
2016, 134, 463–478. [CrossRef]
46. Bottenberg, K.; Tuschke, A.; Flickinger, M. Corporate Governance Between Shareholder and Stakeholder Orientation. J. Manag.
Inq. 2017, 26, 165–180. [CrossRef]
47. Asaoka, D. Corporate governance reform in Japan: A behavioral view. Corp. Board Role Duties Compos. 2020, 16, 47. [CrossRef]
48. Morris, J.; Delbridge, R.; Endo, T. The Layering of Meso-Level Institutional Effects on Employment Systems in Japan: Meso-Level
Institutional Effects on Japanese Employment Systems. Br. J. Ind. Relat. 2018, 56, 603–630. [CrossRef]
49. Hoshi, T.; Koibuchi, S.; Schaede, U. The decline in bank-led corporate restructuring in Japan: 1981–2010. J. Jpn. Int. Econ. 2017, 47,
81–90. [CrossRef]
50. Renou, T.; Carraz, R.; Burger-Helmchen, T. Japan’s Corporate Governance Transformation: Convergence or Reconfiguration?
Adm. Sci. 2023, 13, 141. [CrossRef]
51. Ceschinski, W.; Freidank, C.-C.; Handschumacher, F. Which characteristics determine the quality of corporate governance
reporting? Concepts, reporting practices and empirical evidence from Germany. Corp. Ownersh. Control 2020, 17, 279. [CrossRef]
52. Quick, R.; Schenk, N.; Schmidt, F.; Towara, T. The impact of corporate governance on auditor choice: Evidence from Germany.
J. Manag. Gov. 2018, 22, 251–283. [CrossRef]
53. Jara, M.; López-Iturriaga, F.; San-Martín, P.; Saona, P. Corporate governance in Latin American firms: Contestability of control
and firm value. BRQ Bus. Res. Q. 2019, 22, 257–274. [CrossRef]
54. Huacca-Incacutipa, R.; Argandoña, R.A.J.F.; Pérez, L.W.M.V.; Nuñez-Vizcarra, A. Internal control and corporate governance in
family businesses: A review of studies and approaches from a Latin American perspective. J. Pharm. Negat. Results 2022, 13,
666–675. [CrossRef]
55. Gómez-Betancourt, G.; Zapata-Cuervo, N. Gobierno Corporativo: Una comparación de códigos de gobierno en el mundo, un
modelo para empresas latinoaméricanas familiares y no familiares. Entramado 2013, 9, 98–117.
56. Shum, V.; Park, A.; Maine, E.; Pitt, L.F. A Bibliometric Study of Research-Technology Management, 1998–2017. Res. Manag. 2019,
62, 34–43. [CrossRef]
57. Aria, M.; Cuccurullo, C. bibliometrix: An R-tool for comprehensive science mapping analysis. J. Informetr. 2017, 11, 959–975.
[CrossRef]

--- PAGE 16 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 13150 16 of 18
58. Werner, C.; Bedford, T.; Cooke, R.M.; Hanea, A.M.; Morales-Nápoles, O. Expert judgement for dependence in probabilistic
modelling: A systematic literature review and future research directions. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 2017, 258, 801–819. [CrossRef]
59. Drescher, M.; Edwards, R.C. A systematic review of transparency in the methods of expert knowledge use. J. Appl. Ecol. 2019, 56,
436–449. [CrossRef]
60. Karimi, J.; Somers, T.M.; Gupta, Y.P. Impact of Information Technology Management Practices on Customer Service. J. Manag. Inf.
Syst. 2001, 17, 125–158. [CrossRef]
61. Siriram, R.; Snaddon, D. Linking technology management, transaction processes and governance structures. Technovation 2004,
24, 779–791. [CrossRef]
62. Liao, S.-H. Technology management methodologies and applications: A literature review from 1995 to 2003. Technovation 2005, 25,
381–393. [CrossRef]
63. Weber, K.M.; Rohracher, H. Legitimizing research, technology and innovation policies for transformative change. Res. Policy 2012,
41, 1037–1047. [CrossRef]
64. Markard, J.; Stadelmann, M.; Truffer, B. Prospective analysis of technological innovation systems: Identifying technological and
organizational development options for biogas in Switzerland. Res. Policy 2009, 38, 655–667. [CrossRef]
65. Wu, W.; Li, T.; Yu, B.; Wang, J. Technological capability and technology management. Chin. Manag. Stud. 2014, 8, 180–200.
[CrossRef]
66. Temiz, A.S.; Özkan, B.Y.; Üçer, A.S. A Product-Based Strategic Technology Management Methodology for Developing Countries.
Int. J. Innov. Technol. Manag. 2016, 13, 1650011. [CrossRef]
67. Levin, D.Z.; Barnard, H. Technology management routines that matter to technology managers. Int. J. Technol. Manag. 2008, 41,
22–37. [CrossRef]
68. McDermott, C.; Kang, H.; Walsh, S. A framework for technology management in services. IEEE Trans. Eng. Manag. 2001, 48,
333–341. [CrossRef]
69. Cetindamar, D.; Phaal, R.; Probert, D. Understanding technology management as a dynamic capability: A framework for
technology management activities. Technovation 2009, 29, 237–246. [CrossRef]
70. Rosenblatt, M. The use of innovation awards in the public sector: Individual and organizational perspectives. Innovation 2011, 13,
207–219. [CrossRef]
71. Antolín-López, R.; Martínez-del-Río, J.; Céspedes-Lorente, J. Fostering product innovation in new ventures: Which public
instruments are more effective? Eur. Res. Manag. Bus. Econ. 2016, 22, 38–46. [CrossRef]
72. Hue, T.T. The determinants of innovation in Vietnamese manufacturing firms: An empirical analysis using a technology–
organization–environment framework. Eurasian Bus. Rev. 2019, 9, 247–267. [CrossRef]
73. Yaghoubi, M.; Teymourzadeh, E.; Bahadori, M.; Ghardashi, F. Conceptual Model of Innovation Capability in Industrial and
Academic Research Centers: A Systematic Review. Iran. J. Manag. Stud. 2017, 10, 609–640. [CrossRef]
74. Bergek, A.; Jacobsson, S.; Carlsson, B.; Lindmark, S.; Rickne, A. Analyzing the functional dynamics of technological innovation
systems: A scheme of analysis. Res. Policy 2008, 37, 407–429. [CrossRef]
75. Hekkert, M.; Suurs, R.; Negro, S.; Kuhlmann, S.; Smits, R. Functions of innovation systems: A new approach for analysing
technological change. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 2007, 74, 413–432. [CrossRef]
76. Acuña, P.V.R. Innovation as a process and its management in the organisation: An application for the Colombian graphics sector.
Suma Neg. 2016, 7, 125–140. [CrossRef]
77. Meelen, T.; Farla, J. Towards an integrated framework for analysing sustainable innovation policy. Technol. Anal. Strat. Manag.
2013, 25, 957–970. [CrossRef]
78. Nyström, A.-G.; Leminen, S.; Westerlund, M.; Kortelainen, M. Actor roles and role patterns influencing innovation in living labs.
Ind. Mark. Manag. 2014, 43, 483–495. [CrossRef]
79. Jacobsson, S. Innovation system analyses and sustainability transitions: Contributions and suggestions for research. Environ.
Innov. Soc. Transit. 2011, 1, 41–57. [CrossRef]
80. Markard, J.; Truffer, B. Technological innovation systems and the multi-level perspective: Towards an integrated framework. Res.
Policy 2008, 37, 596–615. [CrossRef]
81. Westerlund, M.; Leminen, S.; Rajahonka, M. A Topic Modelling Analysis of Living Labs Research. Technol. Innov. Manag. Rev.
2018, 8, 40–51. [CrossRef]
82. Baregheh, A.; Rowley, J.; Sambrook, S. Towards a multidisciplinary definition of innovation. Manag. Decis. 2009, 47, 1323–1339.
[CrossRef]
83. Warner, K.S.R.; Wäger, M. Building dynamic capabilities for digital transformation: An ongoing process of strategic renewal.
Long Range Plan. 2019, 52, 326–349. [CrossRef]
84. Subramaniam, M.; Iyer, B.; Venkatraman, V. Competing in digital ecosystems. Bus. Horiz. 2019, 62, 83–94. [CrossRef]
85. Thomas, I.; Takebe, A.; Menk, C. Cloud Software to Drive Digital Transformation in Composite Businesses. Fujitsu Sci. Tech. J.
2018, 54, 55–63.
86. Vial, G. Understanding digital transformation: A review and a research agenda. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 2019, 28, 118–144. [CrossRef]
87. Shah, S.; Shah, B.; Amin, A.; Al-Obeidat, F.; Chow, F.; Moreira, F.J.L.; Anwar, S. Compromised user credentials detection in a
digital enterprise using behavioral analytics. Futur. Gener. Comput. Syst. Int. J. EScience 2019, 93, 407–417. [CrossRef]

--- PAGE 17 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 13150 17 of 18
88. Kaidalova, J.; Kurt, S.; Ulf, S. How Digital Transformation affects enterprise architecture management—A case study. IJISPM Int.
J. Inf. Syst. Proj. Manag. 2018, 6, 5–18. [CrossRef]
89. Agarwal, R.; Gao, G.; DesRoches, C.; Jha, A.K. Research Commentary—The Digital Transformation of Healthcare: Current Status
and the Road Ahead. Inf. Syst. Res. 2010, 21, 796–809. [CrossRef]
90. Lipp, A. “Continuing to design digital Transformation”—The Position Paper of the German Research Community on an
innovative Information Infrastructure. Z. Bibl. Bibliogr. 2012, 59, 291–300. [CrossRef]
91. Valdez-de-Leon, O. A Digital Maturity Model for Telecommunications Service Providers. Technol. Innov. Manag. Rev. 2016, 6,
19–32. [CrossRef]
92. Chatfield, A.T.; Reddick, C.G. A framework for Internet of Things-enabled smart government: A case of IoT cybersecurity policies
and use cases in U.S. federal government. Gov. Inf. Q. 2019, 36, 346–357. [CrossRef]
93. Nandico, O.F. A Framework to Support Digital Transformation. In Emerging Trends in the Evolution of Service-Oriented and Enterprise
Architectures; ElSheikh, E., Zimmermann, A., Jain, L.C., Eds.; Intelligent Systems Reference Library; Springer: Berlin, Germany,
2016; Volume 111, pp. 113–138. [CrossRef]
94. Ananyin, V.; Zimin, K.; Lugachev, M.; Gimranov, R.; Skripkin, K. Digital organization: Transformation into the new reality. Bus.
Inform. 2018, 2018, 45–54. [CrossRef]
95. Matt, C.; Hess, T.; Benlian, A. Digital Transformation Strategies. Bus. Inform. Syst. Eng. 2015, 57, 339–343. [CrossRef]
96. Chen, Y.-Y.K.; Jaw, Y.-L.; Wu, B.-L. Effect of digital transformation on organisational performance of SMEs. Internet Res. 2016, 26,
186–212. [CrossRef]
97. Lewis, S.C.; Molyneux, L. A Decade of Research on Social Media and Journalism: Assumptions, Blind Spots, and a Way Forward.
Media Commun. 2018, 6, 11–23. [CrossRef]
98. Dang-Pham, D.; Pittayachawan, S.; Bruno, V. Applications of social network analysis in behavioural information security research:
Concepts and empirical analysis. Comput. Secur. 2017, 68, 1–15. [CrossRef]
99. Bak, O. Investigating Organizational Transformation in Automotive Supply Chains: A Case Study on B2B and Extranet. Strateg.
Chang. Brief. Entrep. Financ. 2016, 25, 299–314. [CrossRef]
100. Hugentobler, H.K. Hacking the organization: Organizational Transformation by Design. Des. J. 2017, 20, S522–S530. [CrossRef]
101. Orlowski, J.P. Envisioning and Leading Organizational Transformation: One Organ Procurement Organization’s Journey. Cureus
2016, 8, e879. [CrossRef]
102. Canterino, F.; Cirella, S.; Shani, A.B. Leading organizational transformation: An action research study. J. Manag. Psychol. 2018, 33,
15–28. [CrossRef]
103. Hamner, M.P. Organizational Transformation: Impact of Redesigning the American Red Cross Disaster Services Human Resource
System. J. Homel. Secur. Emerg. Manag. 2008, 5. [CrossRef]
104. Zare, M.N.; Azzar, S.A.; Mardani, A.H.; Arein, M.A. From change to organizational transformation. Libr. Manag. 2015, 36, 157–167.
[CrossRef]
105. Yuhn, K.-H.; Park, S.R. Information Technology, Organizational Transformation and Productivity Growth: An Examination of the
Brynjolfsson-Hitt Proposition. Asian Econ. J. 2010, 24, 87–108. [CrossRef]
106. Yadav, O.P.; Nepal, B.P.; Rahaman, M.; Lal, V. Lean Implementation and Organizational Transformation: A Literature Review.
Eng. Manag. J. 2017, 29, 2–16. [CrossRef]
107. Riorda, M.; Conrero, S. Web management changes all management: Processes of organizational transformation in local govern-
ments following the use of digital social media. Austral Comun. 2017, 6, 5–44. [CrossRef]
108. Shibata, T.; Baba, Y.; Kodama, M.; Suzuki, J. Managing ambidextrous organizations for corporate transformation: A case study of
Fujifilm. R D Manag. 2019, 49, 455–469. [CrossRef]
109. Ferreira, M.J.; Moreira, F.; Seruca, I. Social Business. Int. J. Inf. Syst. Model. Des. 2015, 6, 57–81. [CrossRef]
110. Li, M.; Lin, K. A New Paradigm of Organizational Transformation: Enacting Wholeness Praxis in the Oneness of Problem and
Possibility. Syst. Pract. Action Res. 2011, 24, 107–132. [CrossRef]
111. Yang, M.-H.; Wu, J.-T.B.; Weng, S.-S.; Chen, M.-C. The organizational transformation of securities brokerage firms under electronic
commerce environment. J. Comput. Inf. Syst. 2007, 47, 111–117.
112. Alarcón, L.A.G.; Trápaga, J.A.B.; Navarro, R.E. Validez de contenido por juicio de expertos: Propuesta de una herramienta virtual.
Apert. Guadalaj. Jal 2017, 9, 42–53. [CrossRef]
113. Cabero Almenara, J.; Llorente Cejudo, M.D.C. La aplicación del juicio de experto como técnica de evaluación de las tecnologías
de la información y comunicación (TIC). Eduweb 2013, 7, 11–22.
114. Escobar Pérez, J.; Cuervo Martínez, Á. Validez de contenido y juicio de expertos: Una aproximación a su utilización. Adv. Medición
2008, 6, 27–36.
115. ¿Qué es el Gobierno Corporativo? Deloitte Spain. Available online: https://www2.deloitte.com/es/es/pages/governance-risk-
and-compliance/articles/que-es-el-gobierno-corporativo.html (accessed on 13 June 2020).
116. Superintendencia de Sociedades, Historia del Gobierno Corporativo. Available online: http://www.supersociedades.gov.
co/inspeccion-vigilancia-y-control/gobierno-corporativo-y-rse/documentos/Documentos%20RSE/Historia%20del%20
Gobierno%20Corporativo%20(14).pdf (accessed on 13 June 2020).

--- PAGE 18 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 13150 18 of 18
117. Al-Ruithe, M.; Benkhelifa, E. Cloud Data Governance In-Light of the Saudi Vision 2030 for Digital Transformation. In Proceedings
of the 2017 IEEE/ACS 14th International Conference on Computer Systems and Applications (AICCSA), Hammamet, Tunisia, 30
October–3 November 2017; IEEE: New York, NY, USA, 2017; pp. 1436–1442. [CrossRef]
118. Phaal, R.; Farrukh, C.; Probert, D. Technology management process assessment: A case study. Int. J. Oper. Prod. Manag. 2001, 21,
1116–1132. [CrossRef]
119. Small, A.; Wainwright, D. SSM and technology management: Developing multimethodology through practice. Eur. J. Oper. Res.
2014, 233, 660–673. [CrossRef]
120. Miniati, R.; Dori, F.; Iadanza, E.; Fregonara, M.M.; Gentili, G.B. Health technology management: A database analysis as support
of technology managers in hospitals. Technol. Health Care 2011, 19, 445–454. [CrossRef]
121. Erensal, Y.C.; Öncan, T.; Demircan, M.L. Determining key capabilities in technology management using fuzzy analytic hierarchy
process: A case study of Turkey. Inf. Sci. 2006, 176, 2755–2770. [CrossRef]
122. Solleiro, J.L.; Castañón, R. Gestión Tecnológica: Conceptos y Prácticas; Plaza y Valdés Editores: Ciudad de México, Mexico, 2008;
[En línea]; Available online: https://ezproxy.uninorte.edu.co:2113/lib/unortesp/reader.action?docID=3218657 (accessed on
8 November 2019).
123. Bergeron, F.; Raymond, L.; Rivard, S. Fit in strategic information technology management research: An empirical comparison of
perspectives. Omega 2001, 29, 125–142. [CrossRef]
124. Lee, H. Uncovering the multidisciplinary nature of technology management: Journal citation network analysis. Scientometrics
2015, 102, 51–75. [CrossRef]
125. Gallego-Alzate, J.B. Fundamentos de la Gestión Tecnológica e Innovación; Instituto Tecnológico Metropolitano: Antioquia, Columbia,
2005; p. 19.
126. ISO. International Organization for Standardization. Available online: http://www.iso.org/ (accessed on 8 November 2019).
127. Fukui, T. A Systems Approach to Big Data Technology Applied to Supply Chain. In 2016 IEEE INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE
ON BIG DATA (BIG DATA); Joshi, J., Karypis, G., Liu, L., Hu, X., Ak, R., Xia, Y., Xu, W., Sato, A.H., Rachuri, S., Ungar, L., Eds.;
IEEE: New York, NY, USA, 2016; pp. 3732–3736.
128. Basole, R.C. Accelerating Digital Transformation: Visual Insights from the API Ecosystem. IT Prof. 2016, 18, 20–25. [CrossRef]
129. Heavin, C.; Power, D.J. Challenges for digital transformation–towards a conceptual decision support guide for managers. J. Decis.
Syst. 2018, 27, 38–45. [CrossRef]
130. Bondar, S.; Hsu, J.C.; Pfouga, A.; Stjepandić, J. Agile digital transformation of System-of-Systems architecture models using
Zachman framework. J. Ind. Inf. Integr. 2017, 7, 33–43. [CrossRef]
131. Gurusamy, K.; Srinivasaraghavan, N.; Adikari, S. An Integrated Framework for Design Thinking and Agile Methods for Digital
Transformation. In Design, User Experience, and Usability: Design Thinking and Methods, Pt I; Marcus, A., Ed.; Lecture Notes in
Computer Science; Springer International Publishing AG: Cham, Switzerland, 2016; Volume 9746, pp. 34–42. [CrossRef]
132. Ylijoki, O.; Porras, J. A recipe for big data value creation. Bus. Process. Manag. J. 2019, 25, 1085–1100. [CrossRef]
133. Hellriege, D.; Jackson, S.; Solcum, J. Administración. Un Enfoque Basado en Competencias, 11th ed.; McGraw-Hill de México:
Ciudad de Mexico, México, 2005; [En línea]; Available online: https://www.academia.edu/33885343/Administracion-11ed-Don-
Hellriegel-S.-E.-Jackson-J.-W.-Slocum.pdf (accessed on 4 May 2020).
134. Wischnesvky, J.D. Change as the winds change: The impact of organizational transformation on firm survival in a shifting
environment. Organ. Anal. 2004, 12, 361–377.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.