--- PAGE 1 ---
Where Enterprise Architecture Development Fails
A multiple case study of governmental organizations
Negin Banaeianjahromi
Department of Information and Service Management
School of Business, Aalto University
Helsinki, Finland
Negin.banaeianjahromi@aalto.fi
Abstract—Enterprise Architecture (EA) adoption by
governmental organizations has been substantially increased not
only to improve performance and efficiency, but as a prerequisite
to E-Government implementation. Many efforts have been done
to create frameworks and methodologies for government sector
organizations to develop EA smoothly and flawlessly. Based on a
survey in 2004, governmental organizations in Iran had been
among the top ten countries in EA activities but since then it has
faced with an on-going decline. Therefore, the goal of this study is
to investigate the obstacles that governmental organizations have
encountered in recent years during EA development. Employing
multiple case study approach, the data were collected through
semi-structured interviews with 9 governmental organizations in
Iran. In total, 18 obstacles were identified. Moreover, a priority
framework was created to determine the precedence in
addressing these obstacles. In analogy to previous literature, five
of the identified obstacles have not been mentioned in the earlier
literature. This study is a great assist for both practitioners and
researchers because of the essentials of digital capability in the
success of businesses and EA being the central competence area
in digital transformation.
Keywords—Enterprise Architecture; Obstacles; Challenges;
Governmental organizations; E-Government; Iran; Multiple case
study.
I. INTRODUCTION
Promised to manage the organizational complexity and
align organizational business and IT, Enterprise Architecture
(EA) is increasingly being adopted by governmental
organizations to promote interoperability among information
systems, minimize the costs and maximize the return on
investment [1]. However, adopting EA is still a big challenge
in these organizations [2]–[4].
Many attempts have been done to develop frameworks and
methodologies, guideline and best practices and
recommendation to develop EA in governmental organizations
[5]–[11]. In Iran, most of the conducted EA studies have
focused on EA frameworks, methodologies, methods’
assessment, framework analyses, and suggesting best practices
[12]–[18]. There has not been any study regarding the obstacles
that governmental organizations in Iran face during EA
development.
The effort of developing an EA in an organization is
referred to as an EA project in Iran, which is usually performed
by an external EA-consultant. In Iran, efforts on developing
EA in governmental organization sector had been started since
2003 by establishing IT architecture committee, conducting
several EA workshops for governmental organizations, and
initiating the establishment of national enterprise architecture
[19]. In a web-form based survey conducted by Institutes for
Enterprise Architecture Developments, enterprise architecture
activity ranking was provided, to compare high ranked
countries in 2004 and 2005 regarding their EA activities [20].
According to this report in 2004, Iran placed among the top ten
countries regarding its EA activities, however in 2005 Iran’s
placed reduced to 13th
. Since 2005 no specific ranking has been
done on countries regarding their EA activities. However,
according to United Nations report in 2014 on world e-
government ranking, in which EA activities being considered
as one of the aspects that influenced on this ranking, Iran
places 105 in the world [21]. This robust collapse of Iran’s rank
among other countries regarding EA activities in governmental
sections motivated us to conduct this study. The aim of this
study is to identify obstacles that governmental organizations
in Iran faced during their EA projects. This study is particularly
interesting because of the unique nature of obstacles that were
identified during this research, which is due to the complexities
of the government.
Although many studies exist that discuss about EA
challenges in governmental organizations [10], [11], [22]–[30],
however none of these studies priorities the obstacles based on
their criticality to indicate which obstacles should be addressed
first.
To collect data 14 semi-structured interviews with EA
experts from 9 large governmental organizations in Iran were
conducted. Employing multiple case study approach, based on
qualitative analyses 18 obstacles were identified. To the
knowledge of the author, this study is the first study to
investigate the EA obstacles in large governmental
organizations in Iran.
In this paper, after surveying the background of this study,
in section III the research method is discussed and data
collection and data analysis are explained. In section IV,
findings of the study are presented and the discussion of the
Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 10:16:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 2 ---
findings is provided in section V. Finally, the conclusion is
presented in section VI.
II. BACKGROUND
Enterprise Architecture (EA) is promised to manage the
complexity of an organization through the structured
description of enterprise and its relationships [31]–[36]. EA is
still a challenging concept as there are many conceptions and a
variety of definitions that hinder a uniform view [37]. In this
study, we define EA based on the definition proposed by the
CIO Council’s Practical Guide to Enterprise Architecture [38]
as an “agency-wide roadmap to achieve an agency’s mission
through optimal performance of its core business processes
within an efficient information technology (IT) environment”.
EA is acknowledged to improve business and IT alignment
[39]–[41]. However, despite the popularity of EA practice,
many EA projects are confronting with obstacles and doomed
to failure. Several studies have presented challenges and
critical factors during EA development from different
countries, such as Finland, Sweden, Netherlands, Denmark,
Germany, and Unites States [10], [11], [22]–[27].
According to Cambridge dictionary, an obstacle means
“Something that blocks you so that movement, going forward,
or action is prevented or made more difficult.” In this study,
EA obstacle is defined as the factor that confronts the EA
project with difficulties and loss of resources and cannot be
solved easily and there is a risk of project termination.
[24], studied the challenges of government EA work from
stakeholders’ views through 21 semi-structured, in-depth
interviews. They identified three main categories of EA
challenges: implementation ability and governance, structure of
state government, and advancement of interoperability. [26],
discussed the key issues in EA implementation, studying two
governmental agencies. They determined three major sets of
interrelated factors of EA implementation in public
administration: the lack of establishing proper EA governance,
insufficient support for the development, and inadequate
resources to do the former two. Furthermore, [28], investigated
the role of EA in the E-Government program. During their
investigations, they determined few EA challenges: (1)
difficulties in order to introduce EA thinking to the whole
project, (2) executive group do not understand the meaning and
purpose of EA, (3) lack of shared understanding and
communication, and (4) lack of understanding the whole
picture. In another study, [29] proposed EA as a tool for
improving the coherency of the local government and its
alignment to IT and other resources through an action research.
They discussed the perceived challenges for EA in public
administration and identified few challenges, such as the cost
of change in personnel, challenges in adopting a common
framework for common understanding, lack of leaders’ trust,
and lack of coordination and collaboration.
[30] studied the challenges that enterprise architects faced
particularly in the South African organizational context.
Aiming to examine the non-technical aspects of the
architecting process, they conducted eight interviews with
enterprise architects working in the EA domain from different
industries. They identified five challenges: communication,
obtaining buy-in from the stakeholders, ownership, perceptions
of the enterprise architect, and organizational politics.
III. RESEARCH APPROACH
The aim of this study is to investigate obstacles during EA
development projects from practitioners’ perspective of large
governmental organizations in Iran. An exploratory, qualitative
strategy using multiple case study approach was selected in
order to identify the EA obstacles within the selected large
enterprises.
Conducting a holistic and in-depth investigation, case study
method seems ideal to employ [42]. According to [43], there
are three types of case study methods: exploratory, explanatory
and descriptive. To justify the employed research method the
first and most important condition to choose the suitable
research strategy is to determine the type of research question
[43]. The main research question being “what are the obstacles
during EA development of governmental organizations in
Iran?” [43] suggested conducting an exploratory case study to
develop pertinent hypothesis and propositions for further
inquiry.
A. Data Collection and Analysis
Data were collected in 2 phases. First, empirical data
through 14 interview sessions were collected. Second, data
from literature was collected by conducting literature review
study to validate and compare with empirical findings.
The interviews were conducted in the period from May to
July 2015. The interviewed organizations were large, with size
from 1500 to 35000 employees. Semi-structured interviews
were deemed to be suitable for data collection, because of the
complexity of EA practice and inductive approach [44]. This
way the interviewer makes sure that all the preplanned
questions are covered and the interviewee can think and reflect
about the topic and link their experience and perception to the
discussion [45]. 14 experts were interviewed including CEO,
CIOs, IT managers, and head of related departments with the
average duration of the interviews being 1 hour and 10
minutes. The main questions addressed obstacles that the
interviewees faced during the EA development project,
missions and goals of the project, and results and outcomes of
the project. The researcher reached the point of data saturation
after 12 interviews. Further data did not to add any meaningful
observations to what have already gained from the first 12
interviews. According to [43], data saturation was gained and
the rest of the interviews’ data repeated the points that had been
already mentioned previously. Table 1 presents the information
about the interviewed organizations.
To collect data from literature Google Scholar was selected
as the digital library since it is connected to the most of
important publishers in the field of Information Systems. The
search string was: [ “enterprise architecture” and (“obstacle” or
“issue” or “challenge” or “critical factor”)]. Applying this
search string Google Scholar returned 49 articles. Going
through the query results by reading the title and abstracts of
the articles the most relevant peer-reviewed journal and
conference articles were selected. Finally, 20 articles for
further analyses were selected.
Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 10:16:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 3 ---
TABLE I. INFORMATION ABOUT CONDUCTED INTERVIEWS AND THE
ORGANIZATIONS
Cases Number of
personnel
Number of
interviews
Interviewed roles
A 1500 1 CIO
N 1860 1 IT manager
G 10000 3 CIO
Head of systems analyze & design
Head of business process
development
D 20000 1 IT manager
H 9700 3 CEO
R&D director
Head of business process
development
I 35000 1 CIO
J 11000 2 CIO
Head of R&D
K 1570 1 CIO
M 1600 1 Head of systems analyze & design
A coding technique based on the open coding in Grounded
Theory was employed to analyze the empirical data [46]. To
analyze the data the interviews were transcribed as text and
imported into the Atlas.ti software, which is suitable for
qualitative analyses.
IV. FINDINGS
A. EA development obstacles
18 obstacles were identified from analyzing the interviews
with governmental organizations in Iran. Following is the
explanation of these obstacles.
(1) Political issues of the government
Confusion in government was mentioned as a common
obstacle in governmental organizations. Both of the CIOs from
Cases A and J mentioned that “the inappropriate definition of
business in the government” and “confusion in the government
regarding the long-term goals” affected their EA development
in the initial stages. Also, political changes in the country were
mentioned by Cases G and J. They imposed difficulties to the
organizations “for example when the government changes”. In
this situation, “the government changes, the cabinet will
change, the industry minister will change. Therefore, [the
organization’s] boss will change”. Thus, it is so likely that the
project will be terminated in the middle. Further, the
interviewee from Case M mentioned that because of political
sanctions their company is not up to date technologically. Also,
Case M stated that because of the political sanctions the
company that sells SAP licenses “refused to sell them the
required licenses”.
(2) Constant change of management
Constant change in management affects policies and
strategies of the organization. Changes in the organization
hinder the decisions that are needed for EA development.
Cases J and M mentioned this obstacle. In Case J, when the
management changed, it was not clear that the new
management “approved to continue the previous manager’s
works and projects.” Therefore, during the development of a
lengthy project like EA, it is very probable that management
changes several times during the project and the changes affect
the strategies and priorities of the company. In Case M, the EA
results were not accomplished, because the management
changed constantly and sometimes the projects, which are
initiated as the results of EA were terminated because “the new
manager did not approve the project”.
(3) Outdated organizational statutes
Having old and forgotten statutes mentioned by the CIO in
Case A to hinder their EA planning. The interviewee
mentioned the statutes as an input for the EA development
“which indicates the establishment goals and aims of legislator
or founder of [the organization]”. However, they realized the
obstacle when their EA consultant asked for these statutes and
they realized that “the organizational goals and objectives
were different from what organization was doing.”
(4) Fluctuation in personnel’s motivation
The CIOs of Cases A and K mentioned the effect of
fluctuation in personnel’s motivation on the EA development
process. For instance, the interviewee from Case A mentioned
the difficulty of coping with higher level management. Also,
the CIO of Case K stated that the personnel’s motivation
affects the progress of EA project as “Sometimes the employee
is in a good spirit and the project progresses very well but
sometimes the employee is not in the mood and then even
continuing the project seems so difficult”.
(5) EA conflict with governmental laws
According to the Head of System Analysis and Design of
Case G, EA development in a governmental organization is
more difficult than in private organizations because of
restricted rules and laws in governmental organizations. It was
stated that in governmental organizations “there are managers,
ministers, and a president who impose rules and restrictions on
the organization”. Case J faced with a situation in which laws
contradict with the EA results. As a result of EA, they realized
that sales management in one of their divisions that should be
removed. However, legislated laws of the county was against
this EA result.
(6) Lack of communication and collaboration
In Case G, some employees felt threatened by the EA
development and tried to” jeopardize” the project by giving
wrong information to the EA consultant intentionally. Some of
the employees wanted to “hide the truth” about their processes
because “they were afraid to lose their position in the
company”. Additionally, the EA consultant did not have all the
company’s knowledge and therefore they could not verify the
employees’ answers regarding their processes. Consequently,
the architecture became flawed and some analyses had to be
redone.
(7) Lack of management support
The CIO of Case K mentioned management
unsupportiveness as a problem. It took more than 6 months to
argue with the CEO of the company to convince him about
developing EA. Getting the CEO’s approval and support was
their “biggest obstacle”. Similarly, it was mentioned by the
Case A, that “managers do not pay enough attention to EA
when it is needed.” Cases K and A stated that managers just
ask for the EA results without wanting to be involved in the
Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 10:16:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 4 ---
project. However, “Managers’ supervision during the EA
project motivates the personnel” as they realize that the
management is also involved in the project. Further, Case M
complained about the managers being unsupportive during the
EA project, although they supported the project initially. Also
favouritism in hiring new and unqualified personnel by the
high management to be in charge of EA project hindered EA
development in Case M.
(8) Unable to set common understanding
The CIO of Case K stated that setting “a common desire
and goal in the whole company” was their biggest obstacle. It
is stated that everyone in the organization must reach a
common understanding of EA. Also, the representative of Case
M mentioned that everyone in the organization “must want”
EA to be developed.
(9) Unclear organizational strategies
The CIO of Case A considered EA development as a total
failure when the organization did not have a clear
organizational strategy. In order to reach the target situation,
the organization must know the “mission and vision” of the
project with “a clear and up to date strategy”.
Also, Case M started its EA development project with
“false assumptions” because the personnel did not cooperate
efficiently and costs increased as they had to “redo
everything”. Thus, the EA development took much longer than
what was expected.
(10)EA-consultant related issues
The CIO of Case J mentioned the Lack of professional EA
consultant as one of the major obstacles. Also, the EA
consultant of Case G was inexperienced with amateur
members. This situation faced the EA project with difficulties
as it took “much longer than expected” to finish and “almost
failed”.
According to the CIO of Case A, Lack of innovation in
consultant’s team is another EA development obstacle. The
interviewee mentioned that “consultant team just wants to
draw a diagram and to show that they have known and
modelled processes” without bringing any innovation to the
job, which results in consultant being inflexible. Further, the
interviewee mentioned that sometimes EA consultants become
inefficient in a way that “instead of consulting they were taking
orders and acted like our employees.”
(11)Organizational structure deficiencies
The interviewee from Case G mentioned that their “biggest
challenge” is that “there is not a central and powerful unit to
govern [their] EA” after development. The interviewee pointed
out that when the CEO does not directly manage the CIO; big
IT projects like EA develop progress slower with more
obstacles. Because “the manager of that department [which EA
is a sub-set to it] does not have enough IT knowledge or resist
to changes that IT brings by proposing new technologies and
the CIO’s proposal might never reach to the CEO.”
(12)Lack of personnel knowledge
In Case J, and A lack of personnel knowledge about EA
development was a challenge. The CIO of Case A stated that
because of personnel’s lack of knowledge “the data gathering
and interview sessions became longer than what was
expected”.
(13)Lack of change management tools
Lack of change management tools mentioned by the Case
M hindered an EA project. It was difficult for the EA team of
the company to manage changes as they had not had any
“monitoring tool”. Each unit in the company had a person who
was responsible for the changes in the company, which was not
acting efficiently. Further, as “the environment changes
rapidly and their time was limited” lack of a tool to monitor
and manage changes during EA development was challenging.
(14)Budget provision
In Case G, “budget provision” was the biggest obstacle.
The budget was too small to implement all the projects that
were defined as the EA results and they were “postponed each
year”. A limited budget also affects the selection of the
consultant. As it was mentioned by Case G, one of the
important criteria in selecting a consultant was the cost.
(15)Personnel change resistance
In Cases G, J, and M personnel resistance to change seemed
to hinder EA development greatly. Although organizations
tried to convince the personnel of their job safety, they still
faced resistance. The high-level management should “reassure
the personnel of their job safety by communicating and
involving”. According to the Case H, the reason for personnel
change resistance is that the employees are “too attached to
their desks and chairs”. The employees think if the processes
are improved and the tasks are performed automatically, they
might lose their jobs.
(16)High costs of training the personnel
Changes in the organizational structure are usually one of
the EA results. Therefore, implementing the results of EA
development often involves hiring and training new employees
or losing the trained ones. In Case M, high costs of hiring,
training, and losing personnel was an obstacle. The interviewee
from Case M stated that training human resources to become
experts in business process development is “an investment and
is expensive for the company” and when “[the trained
employee] leaves the company or moves to another division”
the company loses its “potential”.
(17)Lack of management knowledge
The CIO of Case G mentioned that the managers’ lack of
knowledge “make it so difficult to convince them about the
usefulness of developing EA”. Further, the interviewee
mentioned that because of lack of knowledge the manager did
not want to be “involved” in the project.
(18)Old infrastructure
Being function-oriented instead of process-oriented
mentioned by IT manager of Case D to be “the fundamental
problem with most of the organizations” and it is necessary to
Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 10:16:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 5 ---
“first fix this fundamental challenge to become process-
oriented, then think about EA development.”
B. Analyzing the identified obstacles
Further analyses of the identified obstacles, a priority
framework was created to determine the precedence in
addressing these obstacles. The levels of priorities in
addressing the obstacles are illustrated in Fig 1. Moving from
inner layer (Top Management Commitment) to the outer layer
(Personnel Engagement) the seriousness of the obstacles
alleviates. Top management commitment issue (containing
obstacles, such as constant change of management, lack of
management knowledge and support, and budget provision) is
the most critical issue in EA development. Without complete
management’s commitment to the EA project, this project
doomed to failure. Management should have enough
knowledge of EA to understand the necessity of EA
development for the organization and it is the job of enterprise
architects to provide management with enough information and
rational about the necessity of EA. When the management
supports the project, most probably enough budget and
resources will be allocated to the EA project. Although the
change of management is a big issue during EA development,
the EA team should be expert enough to convince the new
management to continue with the project. Nevertheless, in
some cases a change in management ceased the EA
development project.
The second most critical issue in EA development project is
to prepare the requirements and infrastructure for the project.
The infrastructure issue contains obstacles, such as lack of
communication and collaboration, outdated organizational
statutes, old infrastructure, lack of change management tools,
unclear organizational strategies, and organizational structure
deficiencies. The obstacles in this level are more of technical
and strategical type. The importance of communication and
collaboration in EA development have been well discussed in
[47].
After achieving management commitment and preparing
the organization from the technical and infrastructural aspects
for initiating the EA development, it is time to address
personnel related issues to ensure personnel’s engagement in
the EA project. Obstacles, such as unable to set common
understanding, lack of personnel knowledge, personnel change
resistance, and fluctuation in personnel’s motivation are in
personnel engagement level. To be successful in EA
development it is crucial to achieving a common understanding
regarding the EA and its benefits to the organizations. It is also
necessary to be clear about the intentions and processes of EA
to gain personnel’s trust and avoid their resistance to change.
Most of the personnel-related obstacles are rooted in
personnel’s lack of knowledge. The personnel’s lack of
motivation is another obstacle in EA development that hinders
the project.
In addition to the internal obstacles (personnel engagement,
infrastructure preparation and top management commitment),
we identified EA-consultant related issues, political issues of
the government, and rules imposed by the government as
external obstacles that hinder EA development in governmental
organizations. The power that government has over the
governmental organizations sometimes face EA projects with
difficulties or termination.
The external obstacles are as important of the internal ones.
Usually, external obstacles are out of enterprise architects
control, however, they can alleviate them by adopting
appropriate strategies. For example, EA team of the
organization must know the rules and regulations imposed by
the government in order to prevent conflicts between those
rules and the EA results. Furthermore, architects must be aware
of the political situation of the country in order to avoid future
complications. Some of the EA-consultant related issues can be
avoided when selecting an EA consultant for the organization.
For example, organizations (top management and the internal
EA team) must pay attention to the consultants’ resume and
reputation in their selection process to choose the best EA
consultant that can address their needs (based on their
resources).
Fig 1 Levels of priority in addressing EA development obstacles
Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 10:16:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 6 ---
V. DISCUSSION
By analyzing the cases, 18 obstacles were identified that
practitioners experienced during EA development in 9
governmental organizations in Iran. Table 2 presents the
comparison between the identified obstacles and the obstacles
that are mentioned in the 20 selected previous studies.
Numbers in the table represents the corresponding obstacle
from section 4.
TABLE 1 COMPARISON BETWEEN IDENTIFIED OBSTACLES FROM EMPIRICAL DATA AND IDENTIFIED OBSTACLES FROM LITERATURE
Literature
Obstacles
[48]
[25]
[22]
[23]
[24]
[49]
[26]
[50]
[51]
[52]
[27]
[30]
[53]
[28]
[29]
[54]
[55]
[56]
[39]
[57]
(6) ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
(7) ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
(8) ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
(9) ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
(10) ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
(11) ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
(12) ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
(13) ● ● ● ● ● ●
(14) ● ● ● ● ● ●
(15) ● ● ● ● ● ●
(16) ● ● ● ● ●
(17) ● ● ●
(18) ● ● ●
Comparing the findings from empirical data with the
literature it was understood that, five obstacles have not been
mentioned in any of the previous studies: political issues of the
government, constant change of management, outdated
organizational statutes, fluctuation in personnel’s motivation,
and EA conflict with governmental laws.
Political issues of the government: this issue consists
obstacles, such as confusion in government, political changes
of the country, and political sanctions. Confusion in
government is a challenge that many countries regardless of
being developed of developing country might be faced with for
a period of time [58]–[60]. Confusion in government
mentioned several times during the interviews that endangers
the EA development. Political changes of the country were
determined as another issue imposed by the government that
hinders the EA development. This is interesting to realize that
politics can influence the EA development of an organization.
However, none of the previous studies has mentioned this issue
as an obstacle to EA development. Maybe, this situation
happens more in developing countries that as the interviewee
from Case J mentioned when the government changes the
cabinet will change, the industry minister will change and
consequently the strategy and the management of the
organization will change. Even any changes in the middle of
this chain have an impact on the organization. Focusing on
governmental organizations in Iran, this issue seems to be
specific only for Iranian organizations due to the political
situation against Iran. This obstacle raises specifically because
the United States has enacted major sanctions against Iran since
1979 [61], [62]. The situation worsened in 2006 as the United
Nations imposed more sanctions against Iran [63]. Maybe it
was due to imposing more sanctions by United Nations against
Iran that Iran’s rank in the world regarding EA activities and e-
government faced with the on-going decline since 2005.
Surprisingly, political sanctions hinder the EA development in
Iranian organizations as they could not buy up to date and
advanced technologies.
Constant change of management: Interviewees from
Cases M and J, pointed out that constant change of
management caused a big problem during their EA
development. Looking for the cause of this obstacle, political
changes of the country was realized that caused by confusion in
government. When management of an organization changes, it
affects the whole organization as the strategies and priorities of
one manager are different from another manager. It was
realized from the data that some managers consider EA
development as a high priority task, whilst some consider it as
a luxury project and completely ignore the efforts that had been
done previously in the organization. In this situation,
sometimes the EA development was terminated.
Outdated organizational statutes: it was mentioned by
the interviewee of Case A that during EA development they
Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 10:16:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 7 ---
realized their organizational goals and objectives mentioned in
their statutes were different from what the organization is doing
currently. This issue caused huge difficulties for them during
EA development. Looking for the causes of this obstacle it was
realized that the organization suffered from the constant change
of management, and according to the political situation of the
country at the time, each management applied a different
strategy comparing to the previous managers. In this situation,
after some times and several changes in management, the main
strategy, objective, and structure of the organization was buried
somewhere far beyond their mind and they never updated.
Fluctuations in personnel’s motivation: this obstacle
occurs especially during the post-development phase of EA and
during the EA update phase when personnel is not motivated
enough to update EA. In addition, it was mentioned that
personnel’s motivation diminished when they feel that it is
hard to cope with the management. It was suggested to employ
rewarding systems to increase the personnel’s motivation.
EA conflict with governmental laws: As it was mentioned
by the interviewee of Case J, EA development in governmental
organizations is more difficult compared to private sector
organizations. Rules and laws that are imposed on the
organizations are more restricted in the governmental sector.
Due to these restrictions imposed by the government, Case J
faced with an unwilling situation that governmental laws
contradict with their EA results.
Besides these five never mentioned before obstacles three
of the obstacles were mentioned repeatedly by most of the
previous studies: lack of communication and cooperation, lack
of management support, and unable to set a common
understanding. It can be said that these three obstacles are the
ones that need more consideration during EA development.
Moreover, comparing the results with previous studies,
which have been carried out in different countries regardless of
being developed or developing countries and from different
industries, both governmental and private sectors, indicates
similar obstacles during EA development. Thus, the obstacles
during EA development are mostly the same in different
countries and different industries.
VI. CONCLUSION
Employing a multiple case study approach, obstacles during
EA development in governmental organizations in Iran were
identified to provide a better understanding of the topic. 18
obstacles from which five of them have not been mentioned in
the related literature before were identified: political issues of
the government, constant change of management, outdated
organizational statutes, fluctuation in personnel’s motivation,
and EA conflict with governmental laws.
Furthermore, this study proposed a priority framework
based on identified EA obstacles to address EA development
obstacles. Based on this framework the obstacles are either
internal or external. Managerial obstacles (internal) have
considered as the most critical issues that must be addressed
first. Second, obstacles related to infrastructure and
organizational strategies (internal) should be addressed and
finally, personnel related obstacles (internal) need attention.
External obstacles including, EA-consultant related issues,
political issues of the government, and rules imposed by the
government need careful consideration in EA development.
Some of the mentioned obstacles came up due to the
peculiar political situation of Iran, such as the political sanction
against Iran that hindered the EA development. The political
situation of countries might have a positive or negative effect
on EA development. In case of Iranian organizations, it had
negative effects. It was also realized that politics and country’s
relationship with the world influences the EA development.
Although the positive effect (no effect) of it may not be
comprehensible until something unusual happens in the
political process of a country (for example sanctions).
This study is a great assist for both practitioners and
researchers because of the essentials of digital capability in the
success of businesses and EA being the central competence
area in digital transformation. For EA practitioners, this study
is a great assist by providing a better understanding of issues
that they are going to encounter during EA development.
Reviewing and comparing the findings with the previous
literature, this study can be utilized by researchers in this field
who want to get a comprehensive overview of EA development
obstacles.
One of the limitations of this study is that the cases were
selected only from Iranian organizations. Investigating the EA
development obstacles in the governmental organizations from
other countries would increase the reliability and
generalizability of this study. Although interviewing the
management level of the organizations was a little difficult to
arrange but all the interviewees were from the management
level of the organizations. However, having other stakeholders’
perspectives, such as EA consultants and personnel could
clarify and explain some issues.
In future, in order to be able to make a generalization,
studying more cases from different countries is necessary.
Further, considering lack of communication and collaboration
as one of the fundamental obstacles, this issue will be more
investigated in future.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This study was funded by Academy of Finland.
REFERENCES
[1] Y.-J. Lee, Y.-I. Kwon, S. Shin, and E.-J. Kim, “Advancing
government-wide Enterprise Architecture - A meta-model approach,”
in 2013 15th International Conference on Advanced Communication
Technology (ICACT), 2013, pp. 886–892.
[2] M. K. Haki, C. Legner, and F. Ahlemann, “Beyond EA Frameworks:
towards an Understanding of the Adoption of Enterprise Architecture
Management.,” in ECIS, 2012, p. 241.
[3] S. Roeleven and J. Broer, “Why Two Thirds of Enterprise Architecture
Projects Fail,” ARIS Expert Pap., 2009.
[4] C. Schmidt and P. Buxmann, “Outcomes and success factors of
enterprise IT architecture management: empirical insight from the
international financial services industry,” Eur. J. Inf. Syst., vol. 20, no.
2, pp. 168–185, 2011.
Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 10:16:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 8 ---
[5] B. Bellman and F. Rausch, “Enterprise architecture for e-government,”
in Electronic government, Springer, 2004, pp. 48–56.
[6] Z. Ebrahim and Z. Irani, “E-government adoption: architecture and
barriers,” Bus. Process Manag. J., vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 589–611, 2005.
[7] L. Guijarro, “Interoperability frameworks and enterprise architectures
in e-government initiatives in Europe and the United States,” Gov. Inf.
Q., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 89–101, 2007.
[8] K. Hjort-Madsen and J. Gøtze, “Enterprise architecture in government-
Towards a multi-level framework for managing IT in government,” in
4th European Conference on e-Government, Dublin Castle, Ireland,
2004, pp. 365–374.
[9] K. Hjort-Madsen and J. Pries-Heje, “Enterprise Architecture in
Government: Fad or Future?,” in System Sciences, 2009. HICSS’09.
42nd Hawaii International Conference on, 2009, pp. 1–10.
[10] M. Janssen and K. Hjort-Madsen, “Analyzing enterprise architecture in
national governments: The cases of Denmark and the Netherlands,” in
System Sciences, 2007. HICSS 2007. 40th Annual Hawaii International
Conference on, 2007, p. 218a–218a.
[11] K. Valtonen, V. Seppanen, and M. Leppanen, “Government enterprise
architecture grid adaptation in finland,” in System Sciences, 2009.
HICSS’09. 42nd Hawaii International Conference on, 2009, pp. 1–10.
[12] M. Alaeddini and S. Salekfard, “Investigating the role of an enterprise
architecture project in the business-IT alignment in Iran,” Inf. Syst.
Front., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 67–88, 2013.
[13] N. Banaeianjahromi and K. Smolander, “What do we know about the
role of enterprise architecture in enterprise integration? A systematic
mapping study,” J. Enterp. Inf. Manag., vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 140–164,
Feb. 2016.
[14] M. R. Davoudi and K. Sheikhvand, “An approach towards enterprise
architecture analysis using AHP and fuzzy AHP,” Int. J. Mach. Learn.
Comput., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 46–51, 2012.
[15] M. Jafari, P. Akhavan, and E. Nouranipour, “Developing an
architecture model for enterprise knowledge: an empirical study based
on the Zachman framework in Iran,” Manag. Decis., vol. 47, no. 5, pp.
730–759, 2009.
[16] M. Javanbakht, R. Rezaie, F. Shams, and M. Seyyedi, “A new method
for decision making and planning in enterprises,” in Information and
Communication Technologies: From Theory to Applications, 2008.
ICTTA 2008. 3rd International Conference on, 2008, pp. 1–5.
[17] M. R. S. Moghaddam, A. Sharifi, and E. Merati, “Using Axiomatic
Design in the Process of Enterprise Architecting,” in Convergence and
Hybrid Information Technology, 2008. ICCIT’08. Third International
Conference on, 2008, vol. 1, pp. 279–284.
[18] B. Zarei and A. Ghapanchi, “Guidelines for government-to-government
initiative architecture in developing countries,” Int. J. Inf. Manag., vol.
28, no. 4, pp. 277–284, Aug. 2008.
[19] NEAC, “Important achievements of more than a decade on enterprise
architecture in Iran,” National Enterprise Architecture Committee,
2015. [Online]. Available: http://www.neac.ir/index.php. [Accessed:
14-Dec-2015].
[20] J. Schekkerman, “Trends in enterprise architecture 2005: How are
organizations progressing,” Inst. Enterp. Archit. Dev. Amersfoort,
2005.
[21] United Nations, “United Nations E-Governmnet Survey 2014, E-
Government for the Future We Want,” 2014.
[22] R. Bricknall, G. Darrell, H. Nilsson, and K. Pessi, “Enterprise
architecture: critical factors affecting modelling and management.,” in
ECIS, 2006, pp. 2349–2361.
[23] K. Hjort-Madsen, “Enterprise architecture implementation and
management: A case study on interoperability,” in System Sciences,
2006. HICSS’06. Proceedings of the 39th Annual Hawaii International
Conference on, 2006, vol. 4, p. 71c–71c.
[24] H. Isomäki and K. Liimatainen, “Challenges of government enterprise
architecture work–stakeholders’ views,” in Electronic Government,
Springer, 2008, pp. 364–374.
[25] S. H. Kaisler, F. Armour, and M. Valivullah, “Enterprise architecting:
Critical problems,” in System Sciences, 2005. HICSS’05. Proceedings
of the 38th Annual Hawaii International Conference on, 2005, p. 224b–
224b.
[26] V. Seppänen, J. Heikkilä, and K. Liimatainen, “Key issues in EA-
implementation: case study of two Finnish government agencies,” in
Commerce and Enterprise Computing, 2009. CEC’09. IEEE
Conference on, 2009, pp. 114–120.
[27] K. Winter, S. Buckl, F. Matthes, and C. M. Schweda, “Investigating the
State-of-the-Art in Enterprise Architecture Management Methods in
literature and Practice.,” MCIS, vol. 90, 2010.
[28] M.-M. Saarelainen and V. Hotti, “Does Enterprise Architecture Form
the Ground for Group Decisions in eGovernment Programme?
Qualitative Study of the Finnish National Project for IT in Social
Services,” in Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Conference
Workshops (EDOCW), 2011 15th IEEE International, 2011, pp. 11–17.
[29] K. Valtonen, S. Mäntynen, M. Leppänen, and M. Pulkkinen,
“Enterprise Architecture Descriptions for Enhancing Local
Government Transformation and Coherency Management: Case
Study,” in Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Conference
Workshops (EDOCW), 2011 15th IEEE International, 2011, pp. 360–
369.
[30] C.-H. Chuang and J. van Loggerenberg, “Challenges Facing Enterprise
Architects: A South African Perspective,” in 2010 43rd Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), 2010, pp. 1–10.
[31] K. D. Niemann, From enterprise architecture to IT governance, vol. 1.
Springer, 2006.
[32] J. W. Ross, P. Weill, and D. C. Robertson, Enterprise architecture as
strategy: Creating a foundation for business execution. Harvard
Business Press, 2006.
[33] D. Simon, K. Fischbach, and D. Schoder, “Enterprise architecture
management and its role in corporate strategic management,” Inf. Syst.
E-Bus. Manag., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 5–42, Feb. 2014.
[34] R. Winter and R. Fischer, “Essential layers, artifacts, and dependencies
of enterprise architecture,” in Enterprise Distributed Object Computing
Conference Workshops, 2006. EDOCW’06. 10th IEEE International,
2006, pp. 30–30.
[35] J. A. Zachman, “A framework for information systems architecture,”
IBM Syst. J., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 276–292, 1987.
[36] N. Banaeianjahromi and K. Smolander, “Understanding Obstacles in
Enterprise Architecture Development,” in ECIS 2016, 2016.
[37] M. Janssen, “Sociopolitical aspects of interoperability and enterprise
architecture in e-government,” Soc. Sci. Comput. Rev., vol. 30, no. 1,
pp. 24–36, 2012.
[38] U.S. Government Accountability Office, “A Practical Guide to Federal
Enterprise Architecture, Version 1.0 (Extended by GAO-03-584G),”
Feb. 2001.
[39] J. Löhe and C. Legner, “Overcoming implementation challenges in
enterprise architecture management: a design theory for architecture-
driven IT Management (ADRIMA),” Inf. Syst. E-Bus. Manag., vol. 12,
no. 1, pp. 101–137, 2014.
[40] T. Tamm, P. B. Seddon, G. Shanks, and P. Reynolds, “How Does
Enterprise Architecture Add Value to Organisations?,” Commun.
Assoc. Inf. Syst., vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 141–168, 2011.
[41] R. C.-Y. Wu and J. Lu, “Enterprise Integration Strategy of
Interoperability,” in Advances and Innovations in Systems, Computing
Sciences and Software Engineering, K. Elleithy, Ed. Springer
Netherlands, 2007, pp. 369–374.
[42] J. R. Feagin, A. M. Orum, and G. Sjoberg, A case for the case study.
UNC Press Books, 1991.
[43] R. K. Yin, Case study research: Design and methods. Sage
publications, 2013.
[44] M. D. Myers and M. Newman, “The qualitative interview in IS
research: Examining the craft,” Inf. Organ., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 2–26,
2007.
[45] M. Lange and J. Mendling, “An experts’ perspective on enterprise
architecture goals, framework adoption and benefit assessment,” in
Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Conference Workshops
(EDOCW), 2011 15th IEEE International, 2011, pp. 304–313.
[46] B. G. Glaser and A. L. Strauss, The discovery of grounded theory:
Strategies for qualitative research. Transaction Publishers, 1967.
[47] N. Banaeianjahromi and K. Smolander, “Lack of Communication and
Collaboration in Enterprise Architecture Development,” Inf. Syst.
Front., pp. 1–32, Aug. 2017.
[48] F. Armour and S. Kaisler, “Enterprise architecture: Agile transition and
implementation,” IT Prof., vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 30–37, 2001.
[49] T. Ylimäki, “Potential critical success factors for enterprise
architecture,” Eval. Enterp. Softw. Archit. Crit. Issues Metr. Pract.
Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 10:16:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 9 ---
Proj. 2005-2008Eetu Niemi Tanja Ylimäki Niina Hämäläinen Eds
Jyväsk. Univ. Jyväsk. Inf. Technol. Res. Inst. 2008-Tietotekniikan
Tutkimusinstituutin Julk. ISSN 1236-1615 18 ISBN 978-951-39-3108-7
CD-ROM, 2008.
[50] T. Iyamu, “The factors affecting institutionalisation of enterprise
architecture in the organisation,” in Commerce and Enterprise
Computing, 2009. CEC’09. IEEE Conference on, 2009, pp. 221–225.
[51] B. Jahani, S. Reza Seyyed Javadein, and H. Abedi Jafari,
“Measurement of enterprise architecture readiness within
organizations,” Bus. Strategy Ser., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 177–191, 2010.
[52] A. Nakakawa, P. van Bommel, and H. A. Proper, “Challenges of
involving stakeholders when creating enterprise architecture,” in 5th
SIKS/BENAIS Conference on Enterprise Information Systems, 2010,
pp. 43–55.
[53] C. Lucke and U. Lechner, “Goal-oriented requirements modeling as a
means to address stakeholder-related issues in EA.,” in
Wirtschaftsinformatik, 2011, p. 43.
[54] S. Roth, M. Hauder, M. Farwick, R. Breu, and F. Matthes, “Enterprise
Architecture Documentation: Current Practices and Future Directions.,”
in Wirtschaftsinformatik, 2013, p. 58.
[55] M. Hauder, S. Roth, C. Schulz, and F. Matthes, “An Examination Of
Organizational Factors Influencing Enterprise Architecture
Management Challenges.,” in ECIS, 2013, p. 175.
[56] F. Nikpay, H. Selamat, B. D. Rouhani, and P. Nikfard, “A Review of
Critical Success Factors of Enterprise Architecture Implementation,” in
Informatics and Creative Multimedia (ICICM), 2013 International
Conference on, 2013, pp. 38–42.
[57] H. Wan, A. Luo, and X. Luo, “How Enterprise Architecture Formative
Critical Success Facets Might Affect Enterprise Architecture Success:
A Literature Analysis,” in Service Science and Knowledge Innovation,
Springer, 2014, pp. 197–209.
[58] M. N. Cooper, The Transformation of Egypt (RLE Egypt). Routledge,
2013.
[59] T. Mc Namara et al., “Review of developments, structure and
management in the Public Sector 2007,” Adm.-DUBLIN-, vol. 55, no.
4, p. 1, 2008.
[60] W. H. Veazie and T. F. Connolly, “The Marketing of Information
Analysis Center Products and Services.,” Jun. 1971.
[61] S. Fayazmanesh, “The politics of the US economic sanctions against
Iran,” Rev. Radic. Polit. Econ., vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 221–240, 2003.
[62] K. Katzman, “The Iran Sanctions Act (ISA),” 2009.
[63] United Nations, “SECURITY COUNCIL IMPOSES SANCTIONS ON
IRAN FOR FAILURE TO HALT URANIUM ENRICHMENT,
UNANIMOUSLY ADOPTING RESOLUTION 1737 (2006) |
Meetings Coverage and Press Releases,” United Nations, 2006.
[Online]. Available: http://www.un.org/press/en/2006/sc8928.doc.htm.
[Accessed: 23-Dec-2015].
Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 10:16:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.