--- PAGE 1 ---
European Journal of Information Systems
ISSN: 0960-085X (Print) 1476-9344 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/tjis20
Strategic alignment of enterprise architecture
management – how portfolios of control
mechanisms track a decade of enterprise
transformation at Commerzbank
Jannis Beese, Kazem Haki, Raphael Schilling, Martin Kraus, Stephan Aier &
Robert Winter
To cite this article: Jannis Beese, Kazem Haki, Raphael Schilling, Martin Kraus, Stephan
Aier & Robert Winter (2023) Strategic alignment of enterprise architecture management
– how portfolios of control mechanisms track a decade of enterprise transformation
at Commerzbank, European Journal of Information Systems, 32:1, 92-105, DOI:
10.1080/0960085X.2022.2085200
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/0960085X.2022.2085200
© 2022 The Author(s). Published by Informa
UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis
Group.
Published online: 08 Jul 2022.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 7415
View related articles View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 13 View citing articles
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=tjis20

--- PAGE 2 ---
Strategic alignment of enterprise architecture management – how portfolios
of control mechanisms track a decade of enterprise transformation at
Commerzbank
Jannis Beesea
, Kazem Haki a,b
, Raphael Schillingc
, Martin Krausd
, Stephan Aiera
and Robert Wintera
a
Instituteof Information Management, University of St Gallen, St Gallen, Switzerland; b
Geneva School of Business Administration (HES-SO,
HEG Genève); c
Migros-Genossenschafts-Bund, Zurich, Switzerland; d
Commerzbank AG, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
ABSTRACT
Enterprise architecture management (EAM) is commonly employed by large organisa­
tions to coordinate local information system development efforts in line with organisa­
tion-wide strategic objectives while simultaneously avoiding redundancies and
inconsistencies. Even though EAM tools and processes have become increasingly mature
over the past decade, many organisations still struggle to generate impact from their
EAM initiatives. To this end, we describe how enterprise architects at Commerzbank,
a major international bank, employed a control mechanism portfolio perspective to
more effectively anchor EAM within the organisation. This approach allows to purpose­
fully combine a wide range of different formal and informal EAM control mechanisms,
thereby going beyond the formal, top-down driven mechanisms predominantly dis­
cussed in EAM literature. Furthermore, such EAM control mechanism portfolios provide
an effective means to purposefully realign EAM in reaction to major strategic shifts. The
application of this perspective is demonstrated by tracing the evolution of EAM at
Commerzbank for more than a decade (2008 to 2018) through a turbulent and challen­
ging competitive environment, resulting in several major strategic realignments that
required corresponding adjustments in EAM. We believe that such consciously designed
and diversified EAM control mechanism portfolios also provide a useful means for other
large organisations to more effectively conduct EAM.
ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 15 September 2020
Accepted 24 May 2022
KEYWORDS
Enterprise architecture
management; control
theory; control mechanism
portfolio; episodic change
1. Introduction
Modern organisations extensively rely on intercon­
nected information systems (IS) to support their core
business processes. Continuously changing competitive
environments and business requirements necessitate
the development of new IS as well as frequent changes
to existing systems. While such adaptations are inevi­
table, they also have the potential to create conflicts
among involved stakeholders with diverging perspec­
tives on IS development (M. K. Haki et al., 2016). Local
businessentities,suchasprojectteams,tendtoadvocate
for specialised IS solutions that fit their specific needs
and individual preferences. In contrast, global business
entities, such as strategic initiatives, aim to improve the
overall efficiency and effectiveness of the entire set of IS
in the organisation from an overarching, organisation-
wide perspective (Malaurent & Avison, 2016).
Enterprise Architecture Management (EAM)
addressestheseconflictsbytryingtoalignlocalandglobal
perspectives on IS development (Boh & Yellin, 2006;
Richardson et al., 1990; Zachman, 1987). Enterprise
Architecture (EA) thereby refers to the actual and
envisioned IS architecture of an organisation, covering
all IS components as well any interdependencies (ISO/
IEC/IEEE, 2011). EAM, in turn, encompasses all related
processes,methods,andtoolsthatareusedtodesignand
purposefully guide the evolution of EA (K. Haki et al.,
2020; Simon et al., 2013). Notwithstanding significant
advances in theseareas –including established andcom­
prehensive EAM frameworks (e.g., The Open Group,
2018) – and despite considerable efforts in organisations
toadoptandimplementEAM,manyEAMinitiativesstill
fail (Löhe & Legner, 2014) and organisations are witnes­
singrisinglevelsofIScomplexityintheirEA(Beeseetal.,
2016;Mocker,2009).Consequently,therestillisaneedto
betterunderstandhowEAMcanbeeffectivelyconducted
in large organisations.
To this end, we provide a first-hand report andreflec­
tion on the development of EAM at Commerzbank,
a large European financial service provider, from 2008
to 2018. During this period, Commerzbank was facing
a turbulent and challenging competitive environment –
including the 2008 financial crisis, the takeover of
a major competitor, and multiple technological
CONTACT Jannis Beese jannis.beese@unisg.ch; Kazem Haki kazem.haki@hesge.ch Geneva School of Business Administration (HES-SO, HEG
Genève) St Gallen, Switzerland
Submission for the Special Issue on Clinical Research from Information Systems Practice
This article has been corrected with minor changes. These changes do not impact the academic content of the article.
EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF INFORMATION SYSTEMS
2023, VOL. 32, NO. 1, 92–105
https://doi.org/10.1080/0960085X.2022.2085200
© 2022 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, and is not altered, transformed, or
built upon in any way. The terms on which this article has been published allow the posting of the Accepted Manuscript in a repository by the author(s) or with their consent.
EMPIRICAL RESEARCH

--- PAGE 3 ---
reorientations – resulting in four major strategic realign­
ments that necessitated corresponding adjustments in
EAM. Thus, we can observe multiple different
approaches to EAM within the same organisation at
different points in time. These shifts, often driven by
a perceived inadequacy of established EAM practices in
novel circumstances, highlight the need for a situated
and more nuanced approach to EAM that adequately
reflects the emerged organisational context, thereby
going beyond simple best-practices.
In order to generalise the insights gained within
Commerzbank, we suggest to conceptualise EAM as
a control function that aims to align local IS develop­
ment projects with global organisation-wide objectives
(Cram et al., 2016b). Control thereby refers to a dyadic
process, in which a controller tries to regulate or adjust
the behaviour of a controlee (Choudhury & Sabherwal,
2003). Since the effectiveness of control mechanisms
depends on the specific circumstances under which
they are employed, successful EAM requires to use
various control mechanisms – potentially in combina­
tion – which need to be adapted to accommodate
changes in the organisational context (Kirsch, 1997).
From this perspective, EAM can therefore be construed
as a situated portfolio of control mechanisms, i.e.,
a context-dependent set of means to align individual
behaviour with organisation-wide objectives.
OuranalysisofCommerzbank’sEAMjourneyempha­
sises the need for organisations to frequently review and
revise the control mechanism portfolio employed by their
EAM to be aligned with a continuously changing context.
Accordingly,weproposeasituatedapproachtoEAMthat
constantly re-evaluates EAM structures and activities
according to evolving opportunities and constraints
(Feldman et al., 2016). The proposed EAM control
mechanism portfolio perspective thereby offers a broader
understanding of control and its underlying mechanisms,
allowing organisations to draw upon a wide range of
different control mechanisms. Our findings further sug­
gestthat,dependingonthegivensituationandthecurrent
organisational culture, different types of control mechan­
isms can be emphasised, but the overall EAM control
mechanism portfolio should be balanced and aligned
with the organisation’s strategic initiatives and with the
priorities of the top management.
In the following, we first introduce the key concepts
of EAM and control theory, then present our case
analysis and results, and finally conclude with
a discussion of the key findings.
2. Enterprise architecture management and
control theory
Over the last decade, major changes in customer beha­
viour (e.g., the ubiquity of online banking) along with
significant technological (e.g., big data and machine
learning) and regulatory advances, require that financial
service providers, such as Commerzbank, continuously
adapttheirIStofit newrequirements.Akeychallengein
such a turbulent environment is to guide the develop­
ment of the overall IS architecture towards organisation-
wide objectives (K. Haki et al., 2020; Vessey & Ward,
2013). EAM aims to address this challenge by building
on a long tradition of established frameworks (Scheer &
Schneider, 2005; The Open Group, 2018; Zachman,
1987) and related tools (e.g., Jonkers et al., 2006; Ross,
2006),allowingtoanalyseISdevelopmentfromanarchi­
tectural perspective that considers all relevant entities
within the organisation as well as their interrelations.
After gaining traction both in research and practice
during the early 2000s (Ross et al., 2006), EAM frame­
works (e.g., The Open Group, 2017) have reached
mature stages and are now commonly employed by
large organisations (Rahimi et al., 2017), which rely on
comprehensive modelling languages (Lankhorst et al.,
2004) and related methods (Robert et al., 2019).
A survey conducted in 2011 (i.e., towards the beginning
of our engagement with Commerzbank) by Ross and
Quaadgras (2012) already reports that most organisa­
tions have reached a high level of EAM maturity, sup­
porting the development of increasingly robust
technology and process platforms. However, Ross and
Quaadgras (2012) also highlight that high levels of EAM
maturity do not correlate with the achievement of corre­
sponding business objectives in their study. They argue,
essentially, that EAM might become more mature and
formalised without generating a valuable impact within
an organisation (Ross & Quaadgras, 2012).
This observation sparked a number of subsequent
investigations on how to more effectively, in terms of
impact, control IS development from an overarching
perspective (K. Haki et al., 2020; Winter, 2014),
which also motivated our prolonged engagement
within Commerzbank. One hypothesis is that the
limited impact of EAM might be due to a too narrow
focus on top-down formalised modes of control to
spread EAM within an organisation (Brown &
Grant, 2005; K. Haki et al., 2020; Schilling et al.,
2019). For example, enterprise architects usually
aim to develop a future target architecture by con­
trasting the current state of IS in the organisation
with the organisation’s strategy and future business
objectives (Boh & Yellin, 2006). Such a target archi­
tecture is then often propagated and enforced
throughout the organisation in a straightforward,
centralised, top-down manner (Boh & Yellin, 2006).
In this case, however, the actors in local project
teams tend to perceive EAM primarily as an unwel­
come restriction of their individual design freedom,
which might lead to low levels of acceptance and
impact (Brosius & Aier, 2016). Consequently,
approaches to EAM that are solely grounded in
a centralised and deterministic understanding of
control may not be entirely suitable to manage
EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF INFORMATION SYSTEMS 93

--- PAGE 4 ---
complex socio-technical systems, such as large orga­
nisations that are manoeuvring through turbulent
changes in their organisational environment
(Ciborra et al., 2000).
2.1. Control theory
In the following, we introduce several concepts from
control theory that originate from general sociology
(e.g., Nye, 1958), but have since been frequently applied
in management research (e.g., Tannenbaum, 2019) and
more recently in studies of IS development (e.g., Wiener
et al., 2016). In line with Cram et al. (2016b) and Wiener
et al. (2016), we argue that – similar to their investiga­
tions of IS development efforts – control theory offers
a practical way to better understand how and why dif­
ferent control mechanisms function more or less effec­
tively in EAM in large organisations. Consequently, the
general ideas introduced in the following – in particular,
different modes of control and control mechanism portfo­
lios(Kirsch,1997;Wieneret al.,2016)– enableustotake
a more comprehensive perspective in our subsequent
analysis of Commerzbank’s EAM journey.
Furthermore, these concepts also gained traction within
Commerzbank during our prolonged engagement (see
Appendix A for the details) and were adopted by the
EAM teamto critically reflectandpurposefullyadapt the
prevalentEAMapproachesintheorganisationovertime.
CentraltoourapplicationofcontroltheorytoEAMis
thedifferentiationbetweendifferentformalandinformal
modes of control (Kirsch, 1997; Ouchi, 1979). Formal
modes of control are characterised by the existence of
some sort of explicit performance evaluation and incen­
tive system (Eisenhardt, 1985). In contrast, informal
modes of control are grounded in a person’s intrinsic
motivation and in interpersonal interactions, relying on
the self-regulation dynamics that implicitly govern the
behaviour of people within their social context. Control
theory typically distinguishes between three different
formal modes of control (input control, behaviour con­
trol, and outcome control) and two informal modes of
control (self-control and clan control; Choudhury &
Sabherwal, 2003; Kirsch, 1997; Wiener et al., 2016).
Related literature not only describes how these different
modesofcontroloperate,butalsoprovidesgeneralsitua­
tional considerations of contextual factors that are
expectedtoimpacttheefficacyofagivenmodeofcontrol
(see, Table 1 for an overview).
Regardingthe formal modesof control, inputcontrol
refers to control that is enacted by the controller (such
as high-level managers) through the allocation of
resources to the controlee (such as employees in an IS
development project) and by monitoring to which
extent the controlee utilises the allotted resources
(Wiener et al., 2016). This includes human, financial,
and material resources, as well as related organisational
structures and processes (e.g., recruitment criteria and
access to trainings). Effectively exerting input control
thus depends on the existence of limited yet desirable
resources – which ideally are related to the targeted
outcomes – and on appropriate organisational struc­
tures to manage and supervise this allocation.
In behaviour control the controller monitors and
rewards (or sanctions) the extent to which the controlee
follows defined rules, procedures, and processes (e.g.,
architecture principles or development methodologies).
Related organisational processes include regular status
meetings and reports (Cram et al., 2016b; Wiener et al.,
2016). In order to effectively enact behaviour control,
appropriate behaviours must both be known and obser­
vable, which may be difficult in situations where the
controller only has a limited capacity to oversee the
actual execution of tasks (Kirsch, 1997). Furthermore,
correspondingincentivestructurestorewardcompliance
(or punish non-compliance) are required (Wiener et al.,
2016).
Table 1. Classification of control mechanisms in control
theory.
Control
mechanism
Description and
operation Situational considerations
Formal modes of control
Input
control
(IC)
Control through
allocating
● Human resources,
● Financial
resources,
● Material resources
and
● Corresponding
organisational
arrangements.
Resources must be limited,
desirable and ideally related
to the targeted goals.
Appropriate structures to
allocate resources are
required.
Behaviour
control
(BC)
Control through
establishing
● Processes that gov­
ern individual
actions,
● Rules to guide indi­
vidual actions,
● Mechanisms to
observe compli­
ance and
● Reward systems
for compliance.
Incentives to reward compliance
are necessary.
Appropriate behaviours must
be known and observable.
Outcome
control
(OC)
Control through
establishing
● Specific desired
outcomes and
● Processes to mea­
sure and promote
outcomes.
Outcomes must be measurable
and in line with objectives.
Incentives to reward
compliance are necessary.
Informal modes of control
Clan
control
(CC)
Control through the
institution of
● Shared norms,
values, and beliefs,
● Reflective activ­
ities, and
● Strong interperso­
nal social ties.
Effects may be delayed and only
arise over time.
Works even without clear
target outcomes and
processes.
Self-control
(SC)
Control through
fostering
individuals’
● Intrinsic motiva­
tion and
● Personal
standards.
Employees must feel
autonomous in their work.
Difficult to influence directly.
94 J. BEESE ET AL.

--- PAGE 5 ---
A controller exerts output control by defining and
evaluating interim or final outputs (e.g., project mile­
stones or design documents) that the controlee needs
to deliver and by monitoring the extent to which these
outputs are achieved (Wiener et al., 2016). Effective
enactment of output control requires a set of measur­
able outputs that accurately represent the targeted
objectives as well as corresponding incentive struc­
tures to reward compliance (Wiener et al., 2016).
Regarding the informal modes of control, clan control
refers to behavioural changes of the controlee due to
shared norms and values within a peer group (e.g.,
a shared architectural vision and related goals).
Controllers, who are often outside the peer group, can
promote and reinforce desired behaviour through speci­
fic ceremonies and rituals (e.g., by publicly praising/
criticising observed actions) as well as by strengthening
social ties through activities (e.g., team events) and orga­
nisational structures (e.g., allowing for break-room dis­
cussions and activities; Kirsch, 1997). Clan control thus
represents a more indirect approach, requiring to care­
fully introduce norms, values, and beliefs into a social
peergroupovertime,butworkseveninsituationswhere
clear targets and related activities are not yet known
(Cram et al., 2016b; Kirsch, 1997).
Finally, self-control concerns the intrinsic motivation
of individuals to achieve personal goals and adhere to
their own standards (such as senior architects, who con­
tinuously strive to redefine and improve existing pro­
cesses). Consequently, effective use of self-control
requiresthatindividualsfeelempoweredandencouraged
toautonomouslyworktowardstheirgoals(Kirsch,1997).
2.2. Evolution of an EAM control mechanism
portfolio over time
Building on the preceding discussion of different types
of control mechanisms, we use the term EAM control
mechanism portfolio to refer to a situated combination
of any number of such control mechanisms. The port­
folio concept is intended to imply that the overall
effectiveness of all employed control mechanisms
depends on the portfolio’s internal consistency and
on whether the control mechanisms are both appro­
priate for the given context and in line with organisa­
tional objectives (Busby & Collins, 2014; Haki et al.,
2016). Consequently, changing circumstances and
objectives require organisations to be in
a continuously ongoing process of re-evaluating and
adjusting their portfolio in response (Cardinal et al.,
2004; Cram et al., 2016a; Wiener et al., 2016). From
this perspective, EAM activities can be conceptualised
as an ongoing organisational process that guides
a dynamic reconfiguration of EAM control mechan­
ism portfolios (i.e., purposefully altering the overall
setup of control mechanisms related to EAM in an
organisation in a particular way), which may include
different control mechanisms relating to different
modes of control at different points in time.
In our analysis, we distinguish three distinct epi­
sodes at Commerzbank, referring to periods of rela­
tive stability that are separated by “episodic changes”.
Such episodic changes are infrequent, discontinuous,
and intentional changes to the overall organisation,
which simultaneously impact a significant number of
components (e.g., business processes, organisational
structures, and information systems) in fundamental
ways (Pettigrew et al., 2001; Weick & Quinn, 1999).
While we acknowledge the importance of under­
standing the ongoing, evolving, and cumulative
changes to the EAM control mechanism portfolios
within the individual episodes in more detail, we
deliberately focus our investigation on the adjust­
ments that are made during episodic changes.
Lacking a solid literature base that investigates
EAM from a control mechanism portfolio perspec­
tive, the major reconfigurations that happen during
episodic changes provide a promising starting point
to not only describe changes in EAM control
mechanism portfolios over time, but also understand
how and why these changes were made.
In line with extant literature on organisational
change, we find episodic changes to be driven by
major environmental jolts (such as the 2008 financial
crisis) or series of cumulative changes, which in turn
lead to an overall major misalignment between the
organisation and external requirements (Pettigrew
et al., 2001). In response, the overall strategy of the
organisation shifts, which leads to significant changes
in diverse areas, such as organisational structures,
established practices, and the overall workforce as
well as senior management. These strategic shifts and
the resultant organisational changes then necessitate
a re-evaluation and purposeful reconfiguration of the
EAM control mechanism portfolios and its constitu­
ent control mechanisms, which must be realigned with
the overall strategy and adapted to fit the emerged
organisational context. This leads to fundamental
changes for all control mechanism types between epi­
sodes (IC1 → IC2 → IC3, ...; see, Figure 1).
3. Case description and method
Commerzbank AG is a major international bank
headquartered in Frankfurt, Germany, and operating
in more than 50 countries worldwide. In 2019,
towards the end of our data collection,
Commerzbank comprised 48ʹ512 employees who
managed approximately 463.6 billion € in assets and
generated an operating profit of 1.25 billion €
(Commerzbank, 2020). Over the last decade,
Commerzbank – and the financial services industry
in general – experienced fundamental changes in
EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF INFORMATION SYSTEMS 95

--- PAGE 6 ---
terms of customer behaviour, market structure, and
regulation. As a result, Commerzbank went through
several fundamental organisational restructurings and
considerable changes in its business and technology
strategy over the last decade. This encouraged us to
share our experience at Commerzbank, since the digi­
tal strategy of Commerzbank – and consequently the
portfolio of EAM control mechanisms – went through
significant changes over time. Throughout this pro­
cess, we managed to dynamically readjust the portfolio
of EAM control mechanisms to effectively achieve
desired EAM outcomes in very different circum­
stances, which could be of interest for other large
organisations.
This research paper is the result of a long-lasting
collaboration between Commerzbank’s EAM team
and a research group (see Appendix A). Starting with
first discussions in 2008, this collaboration intensified
in 2011, when we began to discuss different ways to
better anchor EAM within the overall organisation in
two tri-annual competence centres and through addi­
tional related workshops, exchanges of best practices,
joint participation at conferences, and training ses­
sions. When reviewing the evolution of the EAM
function within Commerzbank over time, we noticed
that the EAM control mechanism portfolio concept
(including the different types of control mechanisms)
was increasingly perceived to be helpful to guide EAM
activities in reaction to changing circumstances. For
example, the EAM control mechanism portfolio con­
cept was adopted by Commerzbank’s EAM team in
meetings and presentations to review EAM activities
and plan future changes. Consequently, in 2017, we set
out together to gather rich qualitative data that allows
us to retrace and explain shifts in the organisational
context and corresponding changes to the EAM con­
trol mechanism portfolio over time (Pettigrew, 1992).
The methodological details of our approach, including
the interview process as well as the coding and analysis
procedures, are described in Appendix B. An overview
of the overall process is provided in Figure 2.
In this process, we could on the one hand build on
data created and collected through our direct colla­
boration. This comprises, for example, a total of 218
sets of notes, presentations, and workshop results
from regular competence centre meetings between
2011 and 2018 along with notes from irregular meet­
ings between senior researchers and senior executives,
joint contributions to conferences, and strategy and
alignment documents that were shared during
ongoing discussions within our group. Furthermore,
we collected all publicly available shareholder commu­
nication between 2011 and 2018, including all annual
reports and additional communication, e.g., in reac­
tion to major takeovers or the financial crisis. All
documents were initially collected, grouped by type,
put into chronological order and then manually
reviewed by the author team.
Building on this vast set of data, we wanted to
complement our own impressions with an external
perspective of additional stakeholders outside of the
EAM department at Commerzbank, ensuring to cap­
ture the view of both IT and business functions within
the overall organisation. This led to an additional
tranche of data collection that took place between
July and October 2017, comprising a set of ten semi-
structured interviews with multiple stakeholders from
both business and IT and on different hierarchical
levels (top management and operational levels).
Questions were aimed at discovering major turning
points that led to adjustments in the EAM approach
and the portfolio of control mechanisms as well as
discovering misalignments between the perspectives
of different EAM stakeholders, which are likely to
trigger readjustment processes. Furthermore, we
were interested in discovering different formal and
Figure 1. EAM as a dynamic reconfiguration of control mechanism portfolios.
96 J. BEESE ET AL.

--- PAGE 7 ---
informal modes of control as well as identifying mea­
sures of success, as indicators of the effectiveness of
control mechanisms.
The obtained interview data was iteratively
coded (starting with codes for the different types
of control mechanisms derived from literature),
structured, and mapped against the timeline from
2008–2018. We then went back to our original data
and triangulated the coded interviews with the
information obtained through our direct collabora­
tion as well as the publicly available shareholder
communications. In combination, the rich data col­
lected during our prolonged engagement with
Commerzbank’s EAM department and the external
interview data from other stakeholders within the
organisation allows us to accurately trace and
explain the complex organisational dynamics
(Pettigrew, 1997; Vom Brocke et al., 2021) that
commonly underly the development of EAM in
large organisations.
Following a dynamic (vs. static) perspective and
to systematically analyse the evolution of EAM at
Commerzbank, we relied on process theory, which
is frequently employed to examine how organisa­
tional phenomena emerge over time (Markus &
Robey, 1988; Mohr, 1982; Pettigrew, 1997; Van de
Ven & Huber, 1990). Process studies analyse three
main components, namely antecedents, turning-
point episodes, and outcomes. Antecedents, which
trigger a turning-point episode, consist of external
(e.g., business ecosystem, technological) and inter­
nal (e.g., organisational culture) contextual factors.
In turn, outcomes are the results of each turning-
point episode. As such, a process represents
a sequence of collective episodes unfolding over
time (Pettigrew, 1997). In the context of our
inquiry at Commerzbank, each episode corresponds
to a major change in Commerzbank’s approach to
EAM. Therefore, next to the constituent constructs
of control theory (Table 1), we included the con­
structs of process theory in a coding scheme that
helped us analyse (1) the chain of events that col­
lectively brought about the most recent EAM
control mechanism portfolio, (2) the antecedents
that brought about the emergence of various EAM
control mechanism portfolios over time, and (3)
the outcomes of establishing various EAM control
mechanism portfolios over time.
4. Evolution of the EAM control mechanism
portfolio at Commerzbank
The EAM control mechanism portfolio concept was
used both to proactively develop EAM within
Commerzbank and to retrospectively describe and
evaluate past EAM activities in our analysis. Using
this lens, we find that the strategic development of
Commerzbank over the last decade can be roughly
grouped into three distinct episodes (see, Figure 3).
In the following, we use [IC], [BC], ... to mark obser­
vations relating to Input Control, Behavioural
Control, etc.
Following process theory, this section presents the
major turning-point episodes in the evolution of EAM
at Commerzbank along with each episode’s corre­
sponding antecedents, the resultant EAM control
mechanism portfolio, and outcomes.
Episode I (2008–2011). Antecedents: Prior to
2008, Commerzbank was operating in a rather stable
environment and generating good returns. Local orga­
nisational entities experienced a relatively low level of
formal control and were comparatively free in making
use of their IT budgets. EAM was perceived as an
“ivory tower”: While enterprise architects described
themselves to be “a central staff function defining the
future of the company’s IT architecture”, others per­
ceived EAM to be a “cumbersome” governance func­
tion, whose impact was perceived as being limited to
the “definition of the Java version that has to be used”.
Then, towards the end of 2008, the financial crisis
hit Commerzbank in full force, causing a drop in the
operating profit from 2ʹ513 million € in 2007 to
a deficit of 378 million € in 2008 and a deficit of
2ʹ270 million € in 2009 (Commerzbank, 2009a).
Furthermore, on August 31st
, 2008, Commerzbank
Figure 2. Overview of data collection and analysis process (also see, Table 3 in Appendix A).
EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF INFORMATION SYSTEMS 97

--- PAGE 8 ---
had announced to acquire Dresdner Bank, a major
competitor, and the merger was legally completed in
May 2009 (Commerzbank, 2009c).
ResultantEAMcontrolmechanism portfolio:Both
events, the financial crisis and the takeover of Dresdner
Bank,causedastrategicshiftintheorganisationwithan
emphasis on “focus, optimization, downsizing” [OC],
which became central in the strategic Roadmap 2012
ofCommerzbank(Commerzbank,2009b).Considering
the circumstances (a clear target, but high environmen­
tal uncertainty, financial pressures, and scarce
resources), rigid resource allocation and control
mechanisms [IC] were deemed to be most effective,
which could take effect immediately to direct involved
stakeholders towards a top-down defined target archi­
tecture. Consequently, a new architectural task force
was staffed [IC] to develop architectural blueprints for
the target landscape [OC], the execution of which was
overseen by management [BC] and tracked through
implementation roadmaps [BC]. Furthermore, archi­
tects were directly assigned to the core modules of the
merger project to supervise the integration efforts and
to ensure that ongoing activities are in line with the
overall architectural vision [BC].
Regarding informal control, there was a tacit agree­
mentbetweenallinvolvedstakeholdersin2008and2009
(while the merger was not fully completed, and the
financial crisis was still in full force) to mitigate risks as
muchaspossibleandtofocusonensuringthestabilityof
the IS [IC]. In this setting, EAM managed to position
itselfasawelcomeenablerofstabilityintheorganisation,
who could provide guidance and accountability on the
way forward [IC].
Outcomes: Overall, the chosen EAM approach was
successfulinthesensethatthecombinedCommerzbank/
Dresdner Bank was one of the very few banks that com­
pleted a major merger during the financial crisis and
managed to get rid of duplicate IS in a comparatively
short period of time. This outcome greatly strengthened
the perceived value of overarching target architectures
and EAM in general at Commerzbank.
Episode II (2012–2016). Antecedents: Following
the successful completion of the merger project and
the end of the Roadmap 2012 strategy, Commerzbank
had once again become profitable at the end of episode
I (Commerzbank, 2012a). A strategic shift at
Commerzbank regarding EAM was marked by the
appointment of a new CIO in 2012, who declared
a strong belief in the strategic value of EAM.
Aside from personnel and organisational changes,
management in Commerzbank had also noticed
a significant backlog of necessary adjustments and
updates in their core IT infrastructure, including central
components such as customer master data systems and
online banking platforms. Consequently, after years of
focusing the merger, a need to catch up with deferred
investments in the modernisation of the IT platform
triggered a series of large strategic transformation pro­
jects. The official communication at the Commerzbank
Investor’s Day in 2012 (Commerzbank, 2012b) high­
lights both the successful completion of the integration
of Dresdner Bank and the effective cost management
during the previous years, as well as the new strategic
focus on a “strong investment commitment in core infra­
structure” that would enable the bank to remain compe­
titive in the future.
Figure 3. Evolution of EAM control mechanism portfolios over time.
98 J. BEESE ET AL.

--- PAGE 9 ---
Resultant EAM control mechanism portfolio: The
newly appointed CIA extended the mandate of the new
head of enterprise architecture to include formerly
decentrally organised domain architects [IC] in order
to ensure clear responsibilities and an increased visibi­
lity of EAM in the organisation. Consequently, during
this episode, the chief enterprise architect emphasised
the architects’ role to build a connection between busi­
ness and IT sides through intensified networking activ­
ities [CC]. Based on initial experiences from new
implementation projects, the architecture team con­
cluded that effective guidance could not simply be
enforced by just designing blueprints of a future target
architecture [OC], but that relevant stakeholders from
business and IT need to be actively involved in these
architectural discussions [BC]. Initially, it was agreed
that project managers must regularly consult with the
EAM team [BC], while simultaneously striving for
a more active engagement of architects in IT projects
[BC] through new allocation processes [IC].
During phase II, projects were actively and volun­
tarily requesting support from the EAMteam [SC] and
architectural topics were discussed by a variety of
stakeholders [CC]. The increased demand for EAM
was further strengthened by a stronger regulatory
oversight, which mandated regular quality checks on
documentation, project structure, and software devel­
opment processes for banks [OC], helping to track
progress even during the initial discussions without
clearly established target pictures.
Architectural discussions were also organisationally
anchored in a variety of committees [BC], in which the
architects reiterated their message that a better inte­
gration of the various IS components in the bank
would allow for the creation of new business offerings.
This active participation of both business and IT man­
agement in the committees ensured a joint discussion
process towards commonly supported and agreed
architectural target pictures over time [CC].
Outcomes: Experiences from initial projects in com­
bination with the large investments to rebuild
Commerzbank’s digital core started to create
a significant demand for EAM in the organisation. This
is a major shift in the mode of operation of the EAM
team, as previously IT project teams often perceived
architecturalinvolvementtobeeitheranannoyingexter­
nal restriction of design freedom or, during the merger
with Dresdner Bank, a management-mandated impera­
tive. Overall, EAM was perceived to be a major contri­
butor to the successful completion of several major
transformation projects that helped to modernise the
core IT infrastructure of Commerzbank during phase II.
Episode III (2016–2018). Antecedents: While the
efforts to modernise the core IT infrastructure of
Commerzbank showed positive results after several
major transformation projects were concluded, manage­
ment was not convinced that the organisation was
adequately set up to make full use of the newly acquired
technological capabilities. Therefore, in September 2016,
Commerzbank publicly announced its new
“Commerzbank 4.0” strategy (Commerzbank, 2016),
focussingongrowth,digitaltransformation,andincreased
efficiency to address comparatively low revenue margins.
Building on this new strategy, Commerzbank set out to
“transform from a financial service provider into a digital
technology company”, with the aim to automate all the
relevant core processes and focus on the creation of new
innovative financial service offerings.
Resultant EAM control mechanism portfolio:
Building on the successes of the previous periods, the
EAM function was given a priority to support the corre­
sponding technological transformation in all application
domains [OC] and a major extension of the EAM head­
countwasapproved[IC],toalsocounteracttheobserved
capacity shortcomings during the previous period. The
new strategy, which also highlighted the importance of
architecture for the overall organisation [SC], resulted in
non-architectscriticallyreflectingontheirrolewithinthe
bank and on how the overall strategic goal to become
a technology company can best be achieved [SC]. Many
stakeholders looked for guidance from the EAM team to
close this “abstraction gap” [CC]. As part of this process,
architects as well as representatives from top manage­
ment and business experts from several domains were
brought together to jointly discuss architectural concepts
[CC]. At the same time, architects continued to be
involved in major strategic design decisions during the
early stages of new IT projects with the responsibility to
ensure the fit of the individual solutions with the overall
enterprisearchitecture[BC].However,despitetheoverall
increased capacity of the architecture team, architects
were still lacking time to align and plan among them­
selves due to the increased demand for general guidance
as well as their concrete contributions in projects.
Consequently, standardised roles [IC] and formal pro­
cesses handling, for example, escalations of architectural
agreements, were reintroduced over time [IC].
Outcomes: In the wake of rebuilding the core IT
infrastructure during the previous years, the wider
organisation now showed increased appreciation for
IT, which was perceived more as a business enabler
and core capability of a financial services provider at
the end of episode III, rather than a mere cost factor.
This allowed EAM to not only support infrastructure
projects, but also to engage with bottom-up innova­
tion initiatives, which aimed to find creative ways to
use new technologies within Commerzbank.
Outlook (since 2018): During 2018 it became clear
that delivery of new IT functionality in the current orga­
nisational model of Commerzbank was not able to keep
up with customer demand for digital services. As
a reaction, Commerzbank decided to transform the pre­
vious IT department into an agile product-centric orga­
nisation with joint business and technical expertise. As
EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF INFORMATION SYSTEMS 99

--- PAGE 10 ---
a part of this strategic reorganisation, the EAM depart­
ment was restructured to be part of a new executive area
responsible for digital transformation. Consequently, the
mode of operation of EAM in Commerzbank is again
expected to change considerably, moving architects out
of the individual development projects to focus less on
direct engagement and more on strategic topics.
Summary: On a high level, the changes in the EAM
control mechanism portfolio over time indicate a shift
from mostly formal control mechanisms in episode I –
when resources are scarce as the overall organisation is
navigating through a financial crisis – towards increas­
ingly emphasising informal control during the later
episodes, when renewal and innovation considered
key outcomes. In the following, we discuss this devel­
opment on a more general level, arguing first that the
specific EAM control mechanism portfolios with differ­
ent emphases are appropriate for the given circum­
stances in each episode and that organisations in
general must adapt their portfolios to newly emerging
circumstances. Second, we highlight the importance to
have an overall balanced portfolio that, despite allowing
for certain emphases, makes use of a variety of formal
and informal control mechanisms in the long run.
5. Discussion
This article reports on the development of the EAM
function at Commerzbank over more than a decade
with the aim to explain the dynamic reconfigurations of
the employed EAM control mechanism portfolios.
Following the journey of EAM at Commerzbank
through the 2008 financial crisis and the takeover of
Dresdner Bank (episode I, 2008–2011), the development
ofanewtechnologicalcore(episodeII,2012−2016)and
the strategic reorientation towards the Commerzbank
4.0 strategy (episode III, 2016–2018), we find the EAM
control mechanism portfolio to comprise very different
controlmechanismsatdifferentpointsintime,reflecting
a situated response to major strategic shifts (Choudhury
& Sabherwal, 2003; Gregory et al., 2013). The employed
modes of control thereby result from considerations of
theinvolvedstakeholdersonwhatis mosteffectiveinthe
given context (Wiener et al., 2016). Over time, this con­
textisexpectedtoevolve,mostnotablyduringinfrequent
periodsofdiscontinuousandintentionalepisodicchange
(Farjoun, 2010; Weick & Quinn, 1999). Accordingly, we
argue that EAM should not be conceptualised as a linear
process with clearly defined steps and constant goals.
Instead, more attention should be devoted to developing
a situated EAM that considers a broad range of control
mechanisms to effectively reach a large part of the
organisation.
SuchasituatedapproachtoEAMessentiallyconsiders
EAM tobearoutinised practice (Feldman& Orlikowski,
2011), i.e., a constantly ongoing re-evaluation of EAM
structures and activities, which contribute to both stabi­
lity and change, in line with evolving opportunities and
constraints within the organisation and in the overall
environment (Feldman et al., 2016). The proposed
EAM control mechanism portfolio perspective thereby
offers a broader understanding of control and its under­
lying mechanisms, which goes beyond the formal, top-
down driven mechanisms predominantly discussed in
EAM literature. It allows to deconstruct EAM activities
and structures, which typically constitute complex over­
arching organisational arrangements, into specific
instances of general modes of control. This additional
level of abstraction then allows to trace the overall devel­
opment of EAM in the organisation over time through
a process approach. Such process-based theory develop­
ment can provide additional detail (compared to var­
iance-based approaches) on the antecedents and
underlying mechanisms of complex change processes,
as made evident by our detailed explanations of the
observed shifts in Commerzbank’s EAM control
mechanism portfolio between two episodes.
We draw from our analysis that major shifts in the
approach to EAM, captured through the overall port­
folio of EAM control mechanisms, often follow new
opportunities or major changes in the surrounding
constraints within which an organisation operates.
Consequently, the transition between two episodes in
our case was generally preceded by the realisation that
certain assumptions no longer hold true or by unco­
vering entirely new paths of action, for example, in the
form of previously not envisioned types of technology.
The EAM control mechanism portfolio perspective
provided an effective means for Commerzbank to
continuously readjust their EAM in reaction to such
changing circumstances, allowing to match the EAM
control mechanism portfolio with the overall situa­
tion, strategy, and top-level management priorities.
Episode I provides a good example of a scarcity and
crisis situation that is well-suited for emphasising for­
mal modes of control. Limited resources enable
a strict, top-down driven focus on integration and
cost reduction, which is facilitated by a clear relation
between input control mechanisms and the targeted
goals. Furthermore, there was a clear need for the
control mechanisms to become effective almost imme­
diately. This contrasts with the episode III, in which
the severe financial constraints were lessened, and the
focus shifted to fostering innovation in new technolo­
gies. In this situation, without clear a priori outcomes,
various informal modes of control that allow for slack
and support employee empowerment as well as social
exchange proved to be more effective.
In general, we found that behavioural and output
control work best when there are clear goals and pro­
cedurestoestablishadequatecontrolstructures.Incon­
trast, informal modes of control are well-suited for
handling turbulent situations with a large degree of
100 J. BEESE ET AL.

--- PAGE 11 ---
uncertainty regarding targeted outcomes as well as how
to get there, since they can be implemented even in the
absence of clear targets and roadmaps.
Despite these situational considerations, our findings
suggest that EAM, similar to, for example, business pro­
cess management (BPM; Mendling et al., 2020), needs to
balance several critical aspects in the long run. These
include, for example, balancing short-term and long
term goals as well as local project needs and global
organisational targets (Brosius et al., 2018), which in
turn requires to establish structures and practices that
(re-)enforce compliance while still allowing for positive
devianceinunforeseensituations(Mendlingetal.,2020).
Essentially, we argue that enterprise architects need to
findabalancebetweenactivelyenforcingclearstructures,
architectural blueprints, roadmaps, and principles on the
one hand, and purposefully allowing an open exchange
of ideas, values, and beliefs on the other hand (K. Haki
et al., 2020).
This notion of “balance” is clearly visible in our
analysis of Commerzbank’s EAM journey. We found
that formal control is often quicker to take effect
compared to informal control, which may take
a long time to achieve noticeable impacts in the overall
organisation. However, even though it may be advisa­
ble to emphasise formal control in scarcity and crisis
situations (such as the beginning of episode I), it is still
important to adequately position EAM in the overall
organisation in terms ofinformal control, forexample,
by highlighting its potential to provide some degree of
safety and stability. While not as immediately effective
as direct formal control, taking on conscious efforts to
establish such informal modes of control in the orga­
nisation has led to an increased appreciation of EAM
over time, even during challenging times. Similarly,
even in situations that are well-suited for informal
control, resource use and allocation should still be
monitored and controlled. For example, in the begin­
ning of episode II, when the development of the new
target architecture was just starting, progress could
already be tracked by considering intermediate arte­
facts, such as documentation (output control) or
adherence to best practices (behavioural control).
Table 2 summarises the practical insights that we
draw from our case with regard to specific situational
considerations while still aiming for an overall
balanced EAM control mechanism portfolio.
Within Commerzbank, the EAM team employed this
perspective to reflect on and continuously readjust how
EAM should operate in the organisation. The concept of
control mechanism portfolios allowed to derive thor­
ough explanations for the effectiveness (or inefficacy) of
specific structures and activities in a given organisational
setting, which enabled the involved stakeholders to con­
tinuouslyadapttheirEAMapproachtomatchconstantly
evolving constraints and opportunities.
In this paper, we traced the development EAM at
Commerzbank for more than a decade and through
three distinct episodes. Even though our analysis is
limited to a single organisation, over time we have
demonstrated the applicability of this approach to
three very different situations. Regarding projectability
of our findings, we want to highlight two aspects: First,
we expect there to be a critical threshold regarding the
Table 2. Key practical insights and related observations.
Theme Practical insight Explanation
Portfolio must match the situation,
strategy, and top-level priorities
In scarcity and crisis situations, input
control is highly effective
● Limited and desirable resources enable input control
● Clear relation between control mechanisms and goals
● Can be quickly established with impact
Innovation can effectively be supported
through informal control
● Supported by allowing for slack
● Employees must feel empowered to think on their own
● Further strengthened through social exchanges and knowl­
edge sharing
Behavioural and output control
requires clear goals and procedures
● Goals must be clear and measurable
● Procedures must be suitable to reach goals
● Supervision must be possible and socially accepted
Uncertainties can effectively be
managed through informal control
● In case of unclear uncertainties and turbulences, social
exchange facilitates alignment
● Social pressures to perform well are independent of external
objective goal formulations
Portfolio must be balanced in the long
term
Formal control is often faster to
implement than informal control
● Formal control can be established with a direct and immedi­
ate impact
● Informal control takes time to function effectively
● Long-term benefits of informal control are crucial
In scarcity and crisis situations, safety
and stability is valued
● Even in crisis situations, informal control can be effective by
positioning the controller as a stabilising element
● In contrast, emphasise freedom and opportunity to support
innovation
Uncertain goals can be tracked by
formal intermediate artefacts
● In the absence of clear goals, intermediate artefacts (docu­
mentation, best practices) can be tracked
● Allows for a high-level management perspective in uncertain
times
Support informal control through
formal roles and allocation processes
● Effectively exerting informal control can be very time
consuming
● Counteract excessive use of resources through complemen­
tary formal roles and allocation processes
EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF INFORMATION SYSTEMS 101

--- PAGE 12 ---
size and overall complexity of an organisation for cer­
tain issues with EAM to arise. For example, the discus­
sion of balancing local and global perspectives in EAM
only arises in large organisations (Brosius et al., 2018).
Second, Commerzbank, as any other large international
bank, is operating within an environment that forced
fundamental strategic shifts in the organisation, leading
to multiple distinct episodes of EAM between 2008–
2018. Consequently, we believe our findings to apply to
otherlargeorganisationsinindustriesthatwereaffected
by major strategic disruptions (e.g., energy and utili­
ties), but not in other industries (e.g., logistics).
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the
author(s).
Funding
This work was supported by the Schweizerischer
Nationalfonds zur Förderung der Wissenschaftlichen
Forschung [247310].
ORCID
Kazem Haki http://orcid.org/0000-0002-8807-0147
References
Aier, S., Labusch, N., & Pähler, P. (2015). Implementing archi­
tectural thinking: A case study at commerzbank Ag.
Proceedings of the CAiSE 2015 Workshops, Stockholm,
Sweden, Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing,
215, Cham: Springer.
Beese, J., Aier, S., Haki, K., & Aleatrati Khosroshahi, P.
(2016). Drivers and effects of information systems
architecture complexity: A mixed-methods study.
24th European Conference on Information Systems
(ECIS), Istanbul, Turkey, Association for Information
Systems.
Boh, W. F., & Yellin, D. (2006). Using enterprise archi­
tecture standards in managing information
technology. Journal of Management Information
Systems, 23(3), 163–207. https://doi.org/10.2753/
MIS0742-1222230307
Brosius, M., & Aier, S. (2016). The impact of enterprise
architecture management on design decisions in is change
projects. In V. Nissen, D. Stelzer, S. Straßburger, &
D. Fischer (Eds.), Multikonferenz Wirtschaftsinformatik
(Vol. 2016, pp. 1405–1416). Univ.-Verl.
Brosius, M., Aier, S., Haki, K., & Winter, R. (2018). Enterprise
architecture assimilation: An institutional perspective.
Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on
Information Systems (ICIS 2018), San Francisco, USA,
Association for Information Systems.
Brown,A.E.,&Grant,G.G.(2005).Framingtheframeworks:
A review of it governance research. Communications of the
Association for Information Systems, 15(1), 696–712.
https://doi.org/10.17705/1CAIS.01538
Busby, J. S., & Collins, A. M. (2014). Organizational sense­
making about risk controls: The case of offshore hydro­
carbons production. Risk Analysis, 34(9), 1738–1752.
https://doi.org/10.1111/risa.12198
Cardinal, L. B., Sitkin, S. B., & Long, C. P. (2004). Balancing
and rebalancing in the creation and evolution of organi­
zational control. Organization Science, 15(4), 411–431.
https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1040.0084
Choudhury, V., & Sabherwal, R. (2003). Portfolios of con­
trol in outsourced software development projects.
Information System Research, 14(3), 291–314. https://
doi.org/10.1287/isre.14.3.291.16563
Ciborra, C. U., Braa, K., Cordella, A., Dahlom, B., Failla, A.,
Hanseth, O., Hepso, V., Ljungberg, J., Monteiro, E., &
Simon, K. (2000). From control to drift: the dynamics of
corporate information infastructures. Oxford University
Press.
Commerzbank. (2009a). Annual report 2008.
Commerzbank. (2009b). Commerzbank Roadmap 2012.
Commerzbank. (2009c). Press release: Dresdner bank
merged into commerzbank.
Commerzbank. (2012a). Annual Report 2011
Commerzbank. (2012b). Group services: From integration
to operational excellence. Investors’ Day 2012
Commerzbank. (2016). Commerzbank to increase profit­
ability through focus and digitalisation.
Commerzbank. (2020). Annual Report 2019.
Cram, W. A., Brohman, M. K., & Gallupe, R. B. (2016a).
Hitting a moving target: A process model of information
systems control change. Information Systems Journal, 26
(3), 195–226. https://doi.org/10.1111/isj.12059
Cram, W. A., Brohman, M. K., & Gallupe, R. B. (2016b).
Information systems control: A review and framework
for emerging information systems processes. Journal of
the Association for Information Systems, 17(4), 216–266.
https://doi.org/10.17705/1jais.00427
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1985). Control: organizational and eco­
nomic approaches. Management Science, 31(2), 134–149.
https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.31.2.134
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989). Building theories from case-study
research. Academy of Management Review, 14(4),
532–550. https://doi.org/10.2307/258557
Farjoun, M. (2010). beyond dualism: stability and change as
a duality. Academy of Management Review, 35(2) , 202–
225. https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.35.2.zok202
Feldman, M. S., & Orlikowski, W. J. (2011). Theorizing
practice and practicing theory. Organization Science, 22
(5), 1240–1253. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1100.0612
Feldman, M. S., Pentland, B. T., D’Adderio, L., & Lazaric, N.
(2016). Beyond routines as things: Introduction to the
special issue on routine dynamics. Informs, 3 ,505–513.
https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.2016.1070
Gregory, R. W., Beck, R., & Keil, M. (2013). Control balan­
cing in information systems development offshoring
projects. MIS Quarterly, 37(4), 1211–1232. https://doi.
org/10.25300/MISQ/2013/37.4.10
Haki, M. K., Aier, S., & Winter, R. (2016). A stakeholder per­
spective to study enterprisewide is initiatives. 24thEuropean
ConferenceonInformationSystems(ECIS),Istanbul,Turkey,
Association for Information Systems.
Haki, K., Beese, J., Aier, S., & Winter, R. (2020). The evolu­
tion of information systems architecture: An agent-based
simulation model. MIS Quarterly, 44(1), 155–184. https://
doi.org/10.25300/MISQ/2020/14494
ISO/IEC/IEEE. (2011). Systems and software engineering—
architecture description (ISO/IEC/IEEE Std 42010:2011).
ISO/IEC and IEEE Computer Society.
102 J. BEESE ET AL.

--- PAGE 13 ---
Jonkers, H., Lankhorst, M., ter Doest, H., Arbab, F.,
Bosma, H., & Wieringa, R. (2006). Enterprise architec­
ture: Management tool and blueprint for the
organisation. Information Systems Frontiers, 8(2), 63–66.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10796-006-7970-2
Kirsch, L. J. (1997). Portfolios of control modes and is
project management. Information Systems Research, 8
(3), 215–239. https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.8.3.215
Lagerström, R., MacCormack, A., Dreyfus, D., &
Baldwin, C. (2019). A methodology for operationalizing
enterprise it architecture and evaluating its modifiability.
Complex Systems Informatics and Modeling Quarterly, 19
,75–98. doi:10.7250/csimq.2019-19.05.
Lankhorst, M., van Buuren, R., van Leeuwen, D.,
Jonkers, H., & ter Doest, H. (2004). Enterprise architec­
ture modelling - the issue of integration. Advanced
Engineering Informatics, 18(4), 205–216. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.aei.2005.01.005
Löhe, J., & Legner, C. (2014). Overcoming Implementation
challenges in enterprise architecture management: A design
theory for architecture-driven it management (Adrima).
Information Systems and E-Business Management, 12(1),
101–137. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10257-012-0211-y
Malaurent, J., & Avison, D. (2016). Reconciling global and
local needs: A canonical action research project to deal
with workarounds. Information Systems Journal, 26(3),
227–257. https://doi.org/10.1111/isj.12074
Markus, M. L., & Robey, D. (1988). Information technology
and organizational change - causal structure in theory
and research. Management Science, 34(5), 583–598.
https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.34.5.583
Mendling, J., Pentland, B. T., & Recker, J. (2020). Building
a complementary agenda for business process management
and digital innovation (pp. 208–219). Taylor & Francis.
Mocker, M. (2009). What Is complex about 273 applications?
Untangling application architecture complexity in a case of
European investment banking,” 42nd Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences (HICSS 2009), Big Island,
USA. IEEE Computer Society.
Mohr, L. B. (ed.). (1982). Explaining organizational beha­
vior. Jossey-Bass.
Nye, F. I. (1958). Family relationships and delinquent beha­
vior. John Wiley.
Ouchi, W. G. (1979). A conceptual framework for the design
of organizational control mechanisms. Management
Science, 25(9), 833–848. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.
25.9.833
Pettigrew, A. M. (1992). The character and significance
of strategy process research. Strategic Management
Journal, 13(S2), 5–16. https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.
4250130903
Pettigrew, A. M. (1997). What is a processual analysis?
Scandinavian Journal of Management, 13(4), 337–348.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0956-5221(97)00020-1
Pettigrew, A. M., Woodman, R. W., & Cameron, K. S.
(2001). studying organizational change and development:
challenges for future research. The Academy of
Management Journal, 44(4), 697–713. https://doi.org/10.
5465/3069411
Rahimi, F., Gøtze, J., & Møller, C. (2017). Enterprise archi­
tecture management: toward a taxonomy of applications.
Communications of the Association for Information
Systems, 40(1), 120–166. https://doi.org/10.17705/
1CAIS.04007
Richardson, G. L., Jackson, B. M., & Dickson, G. W. (1990).
A principles-based enterprise architecture: Lessons from
texaco and star enterprise. MIS Quarterly, 14(4), 385–403.
https://doi.org/10.2307/249787
Ross, J. W., Weill, P., & Robertson, D. C. (2006). enterprise
architecture as strategy. creating a foundation for business
execution. Harvard Business School Press.
Ross, J. W. (2006). Maturity matters: how firms generate
value from enterprise architecture. Center for
Information Systems Research Sloan School of
Management Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Ross, J. W., & Quaadgras, A. (2012). enterprise architecture is
not just for architects. Center for Information Systems
Research Sloan School of Management Massachusetts
Institute of Technology.
Scheer, A.-W., & Schneider, K. (2005). Aris - architec­
ture of integrated information systems. In P. Bernus,
K. Mertins, & G. Schmidt (Eds.), Handbook on archi­
tectures of information systems (pp. 605–623).
Springer.
Schilling, R. D., Aier, S., & Winter, R. (2019). “Designing an
artifact for informal control in enterprise architecture
management. Proceedings of the 40th International
Conference on Information Systems (ICIS 2019). Munich,
Germany. Association for Information Systems.
Simon, D., Fischbach, K., & Schoder, D. (2013). An explora­
tion of enterprise architecture research. Communications
of the Association for Information Systems, 32(1), 1–72.
https://doi.org/10.17705/1CAIS.03201
Tannenbaum, A. S. (1962). Control in organizations:
Individual adjustment and organizational performance.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 7(2), 236–257. https://
doi.org/10.2307/2390857
The Open Group, The Open Group (2017). Archimate®
3.0.1 specification.
The Open Group. (2018). the open group architecture frame­
work (Togaf) Version 9.2. Van Haren Publishing.
Van de Ven, A. H., & Huber, G. P. (1990). Longitudinal field
research methods for studying processes of organiza­
tional change. Organization Science, 1(3), 213–219.
https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1.3.213
Vessey, I.,& Ward,K. (2013).The dynamicsofsustainableis
alignment: The case for is adaptivity. Journal of the
Association for Information Systems, 14(6), 283–311.
https://doi.org/10.17705/1jais.00336
Vom Brocke, J., van der Aalst, W., Grisold, T., Kremser, W.,
Mendling, J., Pentland, B., Recker, J., Roeglinger, M.,
Rosemann, M., & Weber, B. (2021 (Elsevier)). Process
science: The interdisciplinary study of continuous change.
Available at SSRN 3916817.
Weick, K. E., & Quinn, R. E. (1999). Organizational change
and development. Annual Review of Psychology, 50(1),
361–386. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.50.1.
361
Wiener, M., Mähring, M., Remus, U., & Saunders, C.
(2016). Control configuration and control enactment
in information systems projects - review and expanded
theoretical framework. MIS Quarterly, 40(3), 741–774.
https://doi.org/10.25300/MISQ/2016/40.3.11
Winter, R. (2014). Architectural thinking. Business &
Information Systems Engineering, 6(6), 361–364. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s12599-014-0352-2
Zachman, J. A. (1987). A framework for information sys­
tems architecture. IBM Systems Journal, 26(3), 276–292.
https://doi.org/10.1147/sj.263.0276
EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF INFORMATION SYSTEMS 103

--- PAGE 14 ---
Appendix A: Details of the cooperation with
Commerzbank
This research project originates from a long-term col­
laboration between corporate enterprise architects of
Commerzbank AG and the University of St.Gallen, dat­
ing back to first discussions in 2008. Regular meetings
between Commerzbank’s senior enterprise architects
and university researchers consequently led to the
founding of two different competence centres (the
Competence Centre Corporate Intelligence – CC CI, and
the Competence Centre on Business Intelligence in the
Banking Community – BI BC) in 2011, focussing on
enterprise architecture and data management and ana­
lytics respectively. Each competence centre organised
three two-day workshops each year, in which the cur­
rent topics from practice and new academic insights
were discussed. Over time, several focus areas emerged
(i.e., work and research streams that spanned multiple
workshops with additional engagements in between),
including joint efforts to increase the impact of enter­
prise architecture management (EAM) within
Commerzbank. See, Table 3 for an overview of these
engagements.
Martin Kraus, the fourth author of this paper, played
a key role in this engagement. From 2009 to 2019 Martin
Kraus was leading the enterprise architecture team for the
corporate centre functions, i.e., the risk, finance, and com­
pliance areas of Commerzbank. During our prolonged col­
laboration, he not only ensured that we could directly
observe critical developments and that the relevant collea­
gues from Commerzbank engaged with our team during
joint workshops and discussions, but also that the generated
ideas and results would find their way back into the EAM
community within Commerzbank. He also actively contrib­
uted to writing this paper.
Initial discussions and solution approaches in 2012
were sparked by the, at that time, novel report by Ross
and Quaadgras (2012), highlighting that overly forma­
lised EAM often fails to achieve the desired results.
Consequently, we were looking for different ways to
broaden our perspective on how to best institutionalise
EAM in an organisation, going beyond the formal, top-
down driven mechanisms predominantly discussed both
within Commerzbank and in EAM literature. Over time,
driven by both academic research and feedback from
practice, the idea of the “EAM control mechanism port­
folios” emerged and found its way into discussions,
slides, and strategic plans. Having noticed that this idea
had become ingrained in the EAM department, we
decided in 2017 to conduct a series of interviews and
to review old documents, with the aim to formalise the
EAM control mechanism portfolio concept by recon­
structing how it had been historically applied within
Commerzbank. Again, this was a joint effort, in which
we relied on the existing collaboration structures (e.g.,
the two competence centres and our direct contacts) to
identify suitable interviewees and relevant documents
and to analyse, organise, and review our results. See
Appendix B for the methodological details.
Table 3. Overview of related engagements between Commerzbank and the author team.
Competence centre workshops Other events and engagements
Expert communities, in which senior subject matter experts, management,
and academics jointly discuss current challenges and opportunities.
Competence Centre Corporate Intelligence (CC CI):
Focus on architectural coordination and enterprise-wide perspectives on
IS
6. CC CI WS, 02./03.12.2013
7. CC CI WS, 31.03./01.04.2014
8. CC CI WS, 16./17.06.2014
9. CC CI WS, 13./14.10.2014
10. CC CI WS, 11./12.02.2015
11. CC CI WS, 11./12.05.2015
12. CC CI WS, 19./20.10.2015
13. CC CI WS, 29.02./01.03.2016
Business Intelligence Banking Community (BI BC) – later renamed to
Data Management and Analytics Community in Banking (DMAC):
Focus on architectural thinking and enterprise-wide perspectives on
data
01. Workshop BI BC, 28./29.03.2012
02. Workshop BI BC, 14./15.01.2013
03. Workshop BI BC, 07./08.07.2014
04. Workshop BI BC, 01./02.12.2014
05. Workshop BI BC, 27./28.04.2015
06. Workshop BI BC, 03./04.09.2015
07. Workshop BI BC, 05./06.11.2015
08. Workshop BI BC, 11./12.04.2016
09. Workshop BI BC, 29./30.06.2016
10. Workshop BI BC, 10./11.10.2016
11. Workshop BI BC, 23./24.02.2017
12. Workshop BI BC, 26./27.06.2017
13. Workshop BI BC, 06./07.11.2017
14. Workshop BI BC, 26./27.02.2018
15. Workshop BI BC, 18./19.06.2018
16. Workshop BI BC, 03./04.12.2018
17. Workshop BI BC, 18./19.03.2019
19. Workshop DMAC, 04./05.11.2019
Joint conference paper:
Implementing Architectural Thinking: A Case Study at Commerzbank AG
(Aier et al., 2015)
Public events
08.06.2015: The authors hosted the 42. St. Galler Anwenderforum (an EA
practitioner conference), where Commerzbank reported on their current
EAM approach.
29.10.2018: Martin Kraus, head of Commerzbank’s Architecture
Corporate Centre (the fourth author), presented Commerzbank’s
approach to Data Architecture Management.
Other workshops
11.09.2014: The authors held an EAM workshop at Commerzbank in
Frankfurt
28.11.2014: The authors held a presentation and a workshop on EAM at
Commerzbank’s Architecture Day
03.04.2019: The fifth author held an EAM workshop at Commerzbank in
Frankfurt
104 J. BEESE ET AL.

--- PAGE 15 ---
Appendix B: Methodological details
This appendix provides the details of our methodological
approach, including the overall procedure, the interviews
(primary data),othersecondary data, andour codingprocess.
Interview procedure and document acquisition
Regarding interviewee selection, while working closely
with the core EAM team, we also ensured to interview other
stakeholders inside Commerzbank to understand the outside
perceptionofEAMactivitieswithinthebankovertime.Thus,
we specifically focussed on employees with long tenure from
both businessand ITfunctions ondifferent hierarchicallevels
(top management and operational levels), enabling us to
reconstruct how and why adjustments to the EAM control
mechanism portfolio were made during each episode and
how these changes were perceived in the overall organisation.
The final ten interview candidates were chosen from four
distinct areas (see, Table 4): Business global (strategic per­
spective on the operations of the organisation), business local
(local operations), IT global (strategic perspective on the
overall IT function), and IT local (local business support).
All interviews were conducted by two researchers who led
through the interview with the help of a previously devel­
oped interview guideline (covering the different types of
control mechanisms and the development and perception
of EAM activities over time). All ten interviews lasted
between 51 and 79 minutes (see, Table 4), and were
recorded, transcribed, and subsequently coded.
In addition to the interviews, we also collected internal
presentations of past joint workshops from the two compe­
tence centres (totalling 218 PowerPoint presentations from
2011–2018) and publicly available reports, including strategy
documents released to shareholders and all annual reports
between 2008 and 2018. These documents were not fully
coded, but only skimmed through after the interview coding
to provide additional context to the findings and to comple­
ment the overall story with documentation that can be refer­
enced and publicly accessed.
Coding procedure
We employed a coding scheme based on the different
control mechanisms shown in Table B1, following the
recommendation of Eisenhardt (1989). Additionally, we
also coded perceived major environmental jolts and misa­
lignments, as well as corresponding interpretations of stra­
tegic consequences and reactions in terms of EAM portfolio
adjustments, focussing on why these adjustments were
deemed to be effective and appropriate. The final coding
guideline included specific definitions and examples for
each code to guide the coding process.
We then coded the documents in a partially top-down
(i.e., starting with codes for the different control mechan­
isms) and partially bottom-up fashion (i.e., allowing for
new codes to capture a control mechanism’s effectiveness
or major turning points). In this process, we first high­
lighted all relevant occurrences of a code in the transcripts
and added a short descriptive summary for each occur­
rence. After this initial round of coding, results were
discussed among the authors to achieve a sufficiently
high level of reliability and agreement on the categorisa­
tion of data. Then we proceeded to structure and group
the resulting codes (leading to the identification of the
different episodes), and finally went back to the tran­
scripts as well as the additional presentation slides and
public documents to gather further contextual informa­
tion and to position the codes along the timeline from
2008 to 2018. This allowed us to analyse how the envir­
onmental jolts and strategic shifts were interpreted by the
involved stakeholders and how these interpretations
resulted in changes to the EAM control mechanism port­
folio over time for each episode.
Table B1. Overview of codes for the control mechanisms.
Control
mechanism Code
Input control Allocation of human resources [IC-1]
Allocation of financial resources [IC-2]
Allocation of material resources [IC-3]
Organizational arrangements for allocating
resources [IC-4]
Behaviour
control
Processes to govern individual actions [BC-1]
Rules to guide individual actions [BC-2]
Mechanisms to observe compliance [BC-3]
Systems to reward compliance with rules/processes
[BC-4]
Outcome control Specific desired outcomes [OC-1]
Processes to measure and promote outcomes [OC-2]
Clan control Shared norms, values, and beliefs [CC-1]
Reflective activities [CC-2]
Interpersonal social ties [CC-3]
Self-control Intrinsic motivation [SC-1]
Personal and professional standards [SC-2]
Table 4. Profiles of interviewees.
Organisational level # Role Tenure (years working at Commerzbank) Duration of the interview in minutes
Business Global 1 Divisional board member 5 57
2 Division manager 12 54
Local 3 Programme manager 13 55
4 Department head 18 52
IT Global 5 Enterprise architect 23 79
6 Enterprise architect 15 58
Local 7 Representative of «agile community» 17 59
8 Head of development resources 7 76
9 Delivery manager 17 51
10 Project lead 7 64
EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF INFORMATION SYSTEMS 105