--- PAGE 1 ---
SPECIAL ISSUE:  DIGITAL BUSINESS STRATEGY
DIGITAL BUSINESS STRATEGY:  TOWARD A NEXT
GENERATION OF INSIGHTS
Anandhi Bharadwaj
Goizueta Business School, Emory University,
Atlanta, GA  30332  U.S.A.  {abharad@emory.edu}
Omar A. El Sawy
Marshall School of Business, University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA  90089-1421  U.S.A.  {elsawy@marshall.usc.edu}
Paul A. Pavlou
Fox School of Business, Temple University,
Philadelphia, PA  19122-6083  U.S.A.  {pavlou@temple.edu}
N. Venkatraman
School of Management, Boston University
Boston, MA  02215  U.S.A.  {venkat@bu.edu}
Over the last three decades, the prevailing view of information technology strategy has been that it is a
functional-level strategy that must be aligned with the firm’s chosen business strategy.  Even within this so-
called alignment view, business strategy directed IT strategy.  During the last decade, the business infra-
structure has become digital with increased interconnections among products, processes, and services.  Across
many firms spanning different industries and sectors, digital technologies (viewed as combinations of infor-
mation, computing, communication, and connectivity technologies) are fundamentally transforming business
strategies, business processes, firm capabilities, pr oducts and services, and key interfirm relationships in
extended business networks.  Accordingly, we argue that the time is right to rethink the role of IT strategy, from
that of a functional-level strategy—aligned but essentially always subordinate to business strategy—to one that
reflects a fusion between IT strategy and business strate gy.  This fusion is herein termed digital business
strategy.
We identify four key themes to guide our thinking on digital business strategy and help provide a framework
to define the next generation of insights.  The four themes are (1) the scope of digital business strategy, (2) the
scale of digital business strategy, (3) the speed of di gital business strategy, and (4) the sources of business
value creation and capture in digital business strategy.  After elaborating on each of these four themes, we
discuss the success metrics and potential performance implications from pursuing a digital business strategy.
We also show how the papers in the special issue shed light on digital strategies and offer directions to advance
insights and shape future research.
Keywords:  Digital business strategy, scope of digital business strategy, scale of digital business strategy, speed
of digital business strategy, digital business strategy value creation and capture
MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2, pp. 471-482/June 2013 471

--- PAGE 2 ---
Bharadwaj et al./Introduction:  Digital Business Strategy
Emergence of Digital
Business Strategy
Over the last three decades, the prevailing view of IT strategy
has been that of a functional-level strategy that must be
aligned with the firm’s chosen business strategy.  Even within
this so-called alignment view (Henderson and Venkatraman
1993), business strategy directed IT strategy despite calls for
recognizing the importance of IT strategy shaping business
strategy and transforming business processes and business
scope (Venkatraman 1994).  This “alignment” thinking of IT
strategy as a functional-level strategy—aligned but essentially
subordinate to business strategy—has been predominantly
reflected in a multitude of research studies, including studies
on business process redesign, intrafirm and interfirm systems,
business value of IT, and IT outsourcing, among others (e.g.,
Chan and Reich 2007; Hirschheim and Sabherwal 2001;
Hussin et al. 2002; Luftman and Brier 1999;  Reich and
Benbasat 2000; Sabherwal and Chan 2001; Sabherwal and
Kirs 1994; Sledgianowski et al. 2006).
However, during the last decade, impressive improvements in
information, communication, and connectivity technologies
have unleashed new functionalities.  Thus, the post-dotcom
decade has seen firms—both established and startups—taking
advantage of lower price/performance levels of computing
(hardware and software) as well as global connectivity
through standard protocols (e.g., Internet and mobile web) to
adapt their business infrastructure to the new digital era.
These digital technologies are fundamentally reshaping
traditional business strategy as modular, distributed, cross-
functional, and global business processes that enable work to
be carried out across boundaries of time, distance, and func-
tion (e.g., Banker et al. 2006; Ettlie and Pavlou 2006; Kohli
and Grover 2008; Rai et al. 2012; Sambamurthy et al. 2003;
Straub and Watson 2001; Subramaniam and Venkatraman
2001; Tanriverdi and Venkatraman 2005; Wheeler 2002).
Digital technologies also enable different forms of dynamic
capabilities suitable for turbulent environments (Pavlou and
El Sawy 2006, 2010).  Digital technologies are also trans-
forming the structure of social relationships in both the
consumer and the enterprise space with social media and
social networking (e.g., Susarla and Tan 2012).
Furthermore, products and services increasingly have embed-
ded digital technologies, and it is becoming increasingly more
difficult to disentangle digital products and services from their
underlying IT infrastructures (e.g., El Sawy 2003; Orlikowski
2009).  Digital platforms are enabling cross-boundary
industry disruptions, and thus inducing new forms of business
strategies (e.g., Burgelman and Grove 2007).  In addition,
theoretical structures for strategy making in nonlinear
dynamic and turbulent environments are also emerging (e.g.,
Davis et al. 2009; Meyer et al. 2005; Pavlou and El Sawy
2010).  Finally, exponential advancements in the price/
performance capability of computing, storage, bandwidth, and
software applications are driving the next generation of digital
technologies to be delivered through cloud computing.  It is
clearly time to rethink the role of IT strategy, from that of a
functional-level strategy—aligned but essentially always
subordinate to business strategy—to a fusion between IT stra-
tegy and business strategy into an overarching phenomenon
we herein term digital business strategy.
Our working definition of digital business strategy is simply
that of organizational strategy formulated and executed by
leveraging digital resources to create differential value.  This
working definition highlights (1) going beyond the traditional
view, thinking of IT strategy as a function within firms and
recognizing the pervasiveness of digital resources in other
functional areas such as operations, purchasing, supply chain,
and marketing; (2) going beyond systems and technologies,
which might have narrowed the traditional views of IT
strategy to recognize digital resources, thereby being in line
with the resource-based view of strategy (e.g., Barney 1991;
Conner and Prahalad 1996; Wernerfelt 1984, 1995); (3) expli-
citly linking digital business strategy to creating differential
business value, thereby elevating the performance implica-
tions of IT strategy beyond efficiency and productivity
metrics to those that drive competitive advantage and strategic
differentiation.
Digital Business Strategy Themes
We have identified four key themes to guide our future
thinking on digital business strategy and provide a framework
to help define the next generation of insights.  The four
themes are (1) the scope of digital business strategy, (2) the 
scale of digital business strategy, (3) the speed of digital busi-
ness strategy, and (4) the sources of business value creation
and capture in digital business strategy.  We believe that the
proposed four key themes capture the key attributes of digital
business strategy and help us to articulate its main nuances.
We synthesize these four key themes with a discussion of
success metrics (see Figure 1) that could serve as the starting
point for developing a rich set of research questions to guide
the debate and discussion within the broader academic
community and for guiding practicing managers and execu-
tives.
1  Toward seeking to better understand the nature, role,
and emergence of digital business strategy, these four themes
have been generated from our own deliberations, inspiration
1 Please note that the key external di gital trends and organizational shifts
identified in Figure 1 are merely illustrative rather than exhaustive.
472 MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2/June 2013

--- PAGE 3 ---
Bharadwaj et al./Introduction:  Digital Business Strategy
Key External Digital Trends
• Pervasive Connectivity
• Information Abundance
• Global Supply Chains
• Improved Price/Performance of IT
• Growth of Cloud Computing
• Emergence of Big Data
• Limitations of Traditional 
Business Models
• Trans-functional Role for IT
• New Mandate for IT and the CIO
• Increased Familiarity with IT
Key Organizational Shifts
• Scope of Digital Business 
Strategy
• Scale of Digital Business 
Strategy
• Speed of Decision Making
• Sources of Value Creation and 
Capture
Performance
Figure 1.  Drivers of the Four Key Themes of Digital Business Strategy
from the paper submissions to this special issue, “Digital 
Business Strategy:  Toward a Next Generation of Insights,”
and informal conversations with academic and industry
thought leaders.
Scope of Digital Business Strategy
One of the fundamental questions in strategic management
relates to corporate scope, which defines the portfolio of
products and businesses as well as activities that are carried
out within a company’s direct control and ownership.  Pat-
terns of corporate scope and the logic of diversification have
been shown to impact firm performance (e.g., Berger and
Ofek 1995; Lang and Stulz 1994; Wade and Hulland 2004),
and strategy research has been concerned with how firms
optimally use their core competencies and key assets and
resources to extend their product and market reach (e.g., Amit
and Schoemaker 1993; Barney 1991; Conner and Prahalad
1996; Wernerfelt 1984, 1995).
How can we draw the boundaries of digital business strategy
and how can we best characterize its scope?  Understanding
the scope of digital business strategy helps to conceive its
relationship to firms, industries, IT infrastructures, the
external environment, and how digital business strategy can
be more effective in a variety of settings.  Conceptualizing
competitive strategy under digital conditions raises the ques-
tion of how business scope is impacted by digital tech-
nologies.  We believe that researchers should pay particular
attention to how, when, and why the scope of digital business
strategy is impacted by digital technologies.
Digital Business Strategy Transcends Traditional
Functional and Process Silos
Digital business strategy is different from traditional IT stra-
tegy in the sense that it is much more than a cross-functional
strategy, and it transcends traditional functional areas (such
as marketing, procurement, l ogistics, operations, or others)
and various IT-enabled business processes (such as order
management, customer service, and others).  Therefore, digi-
tal business strategy can be viewed as being inherently trans-
functional.  All of the functional and process strategies are
encompassed under the umbrella of digital business strategy
with digital resources serving as the connective tissue.  Digital
business strategy relies on rich information exchanges through
digital platforms inside and outside organizations that allow
multifunctional strategies and processes to be tightly intercon-
nected with the aid of interfirm IT capabilities (e.g., Rai et al.
2012).  Discussion of how IT strategy shapes and influences
business strategy originally articulated by Henderson and
Venkatraman (1993) now emerges to the core through digital
business strategy.  Accordingly, digital business strategy is
broader, more prominent, more embedded, and more encom-
passing than other functional strategies.  Consequently, while
IT strategy may be positioned as  a functional-level strategy
(under the province of the chief information officer),  digital
business strategy should not be positioned below business
strategy but treated as business strategy itself for the digital
era.  Over time, as firms and industries become more digital
and rely on information, communication, and connectivity
functionality, we envision that digital business strategy will
be the business strategy.  At that juncture, there would be no
separation between business strategy and digital business
strategy.
MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2/June 2013 473

--- PAGE 4 ---
Bharadwaj et al./Introduction:  Digital Business Strategy
Digital Business Strategy Includes Digitization
of Products and Services and the Information
Around Them
The formulation of digital business strategy includes the
design of products and services and their interoperability with
other complementary platforms, and their deployment as pro-
ducts and services by taking advantage of digital resources. 
Many firms are beginning to see the power of digital
resources to create new IT capabilities and craft new stra-
tegies around new products and services (e.g., Rai et al. 2012;
Ray et al. 2005; Sambamurthy et al. 2003).
Visible examples include Amazon’s Web Services on the
cloud that substantially expand the strategy of a typical online
retailer by encompassing cloud computing services as a key
digital resource.  Amazon’s corporate scope of e-retailing and
web services may be considered an unrelated portfolio under
traditional strategy conceptualization because of the distance
between these two business lines within Amazon.  Recog-
nizing and mapping the underl ying connections among e-
retailing, the role of hardware (Kindle) and web services
(AWS) requires a more nuanced understanding of the effect
of digital technologies than simply computing distances based
on SIC-codes and industry classifications.  Therefore,
Amazon’s corporate portfolio may be wrongly characterized
as unrelated while we can easily see the related linkages
between the constituent parts.
The same logic can be extended to firms such as Google,
Netflix, Microsoft, and others as they continue to adjust and
fine-tune their corporate scope to take advantage of the
developments in hardware, software, and Internet connec-
tivity.  Other examples of using novel digital resources to
expand the scope of business strategy include Sony’s digitized
product architecture in game consoles and televisions,
Honeywell’s and Nest’s next-generation thermostats with
remote real-time Internet capabilities, GE’s healthcare devices
that are connected to the Internet to provide remote real-time
patient monitoring, and Nike’s digitized product development
supported by Apple’s iOS.
Digital resources around digital business strategy should be
viewed relatively broadly.  This is because digital resources
are “more than just bits and bytes, the digital infrastructure
consists of institutions, practices, and protocols that together
organize and deliver the increasing power of digital tech-
nology to business and society” (Deloitte 2009, p. 2).  They
include traditional data and information, but they also include
the significant explosion of data.  The proliferation of social
media, cloud computing, and mobile phones has enhanced the
quality and quantity of data generated every day.  While in the
past we have operated under conditions of data (information)
scarcity with decisions made with incomplete and often poor
quality (even time-lapsed) data, big data create conditions of
data (information) abundance due to the massive amount of
detailed (and often ready to analyze) data made available.
This opens up a whole new portfolio of digital business
strategy approaches around the digitization of information for
products and services.
The importance of scope for products and services under
digital conditions is relevant even beyond technology com-
panies such as Microsoft, Google, and others.  It also applies
to GE as it seeks to find technology-based extensions in areas
such as GE aircraft engines, medical devices, and services as
well as transportation systems.  It also applies equally well to
Nike as it seeks to develop connectivity and information-
based metrics (Nike Fuel) to calibrate the use of its new pro-
ducts.  What we need is an updated way to classify and cate-
gorize a firm’s foray into digital frontiers involving hardware,
software, and services rather than treating the distance
between physical and digital domains as large and uncon-
nected.  Simply put, we need a reconceptualization of the role
of digital connections within a firm’s corporate portfolio of
products and services (its scope) to better prescribe its digital
business strategy under increased digital conditions.  
Digital Business Strategy Extends the Scope
Beyond Firm Boundaries and Supply Chains
to Dynamic Ecosystems That Cross
Traditional Industry Boundaries
In a digitally intensive world, firms operate in business
ecosystems that are intricately intertwined such that digital
business strategy cannot be conceived independently of the
business ecosystem, alliances, partnerships, and competitors.
Furthermore, the use of digital platforms enables firms to
break traditional industry boundaries and to operate in new
spaces and niches that were earlier only defined through those
digital resources (e.g., D’Adherio 2001; Klein and Rai 2009;
Rai et al. 2012; Saraf et al. 2007).  Take, for example, how
Apple has redefined the mobile entertainment ecosystem, or
how Amazon has redefined the book-selling ecosystem.  In
these two cases, there is no meaningful distinction between
business strategy and IT strategy, another example of digital
business strategy.
Extending the range and reach of digital business strategy
beyond tight supply chains with partners in traditional indus-
tries to loosely coupled dynamic ecosystems that are still in
emergence is a far more complex undertaking.  This requires
rethinking how to standardize IT infrastructures and the
business processes around them, and it also requires a digital
agility to respond to rapidly changing ecosystem conditions.
It requires also an orchestration of digital resources that is
more multifaceted, data rich, and dynamic.  The digital depen-
474 MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2/June 2013

--- PAGE 5 ---
Bharadwaj et al./Introduction:  Digital Business Strategy
dency may require a mindset that may require pooling and
sharing digital business strategy with other players in the
business ecosystem, whether they are partners or competitors.
Scale of Digital Business Strategy
How should we think about the scale of digital business stra-
tegy under digital conditions?  Scale has been a primary
driver of profitability in the industrial age.  Scale confers
benefits of lower unit cost of products and helps enhance
profitability.  When infrastructure becomes increasingly digi-
tal, rather than thinking of scale only in terms of physical
factors of production, supply chains, or geographic coverage,
we need to think of scale in both physical and digital terms.
We have identified at least four ways that scale of digital
business strategy is distinct and qualitatively different.
Rapid Digital Scale Up/Down as Strategic
Dynamic Capability
Increased availability and reliance on cloud computing
services provides a strategic dynamic capability for firms to
scale up or down its infrastructure.  A cloud computing
infrastructure enables on-demand network access to a shared
pool of configurable computing resources.  This cloud model
is based on on-demand self-service, virtualized resources,
rapid and elastic resource utilization, broad network access,
and measured quality of service (see http://www.nist.gov/
itl/cloud/).  Historically, cloud computing has been seen as
the prerogative of the IT function (the CIOs) but increasingly
it serves to support supply chains, marketing and service
operations, and other functional areas as well (e.g., Buyya et
al. 2007).  When the digital infrastructure and business stra-
tegy are fused, this rapid scaling ability becomes a strategic
dynamic capability for the firm to adapt to the dynamic
requirements of the digital marketplace.  Major cloud service
providers such as Amazon Web Services, SalesForce.com,
Rackspace, Joyent, Citrix, and VMware tout their pay-as-you-
go elastic resources for software, infrastructure, and platforms
that allow their customers to dynamically adjust their digital
resources as competitive pressures may demand.  
Network Effects Within Multisided Platforms
Create Rapid Scale Potential 
Network effects exist when the value of a good or a service
increases as more consumers use them (examples are e-mail,
social media, and buy–sell exchanges) or as more supply-side
partners augment the service.  As more products and services
become digital and connected, network effects become the
key differentiator and driver of value creation.  While we
have seen this theme played out over the last decade in soft-
ware (Microsoft) and videogames (Sony and Xbox), network
effects are becoming key in areas such as mobile hardware
and services through the existence of app stores (Apple iOS
and Google Android), chipsets, subsidies to handset manu-
facturers, etc.  
As business strategy becomes digital, firms in a wide variety
of industries and markets should consider the role of network
effects and multisided business models.  This can be instan-
tiated on the supply side with digitally interconnected partner-
ships (such as Google and its partnerships for Android-
powered devices) and on the demand side with interconnec-
tions among web pages (such as Facebook with its Open
Graph).
We have made significant progress over the last decade
focused on network effects and multisided business models
focused on software and related areas (e.g., Evans et al.
2008).  We believe that these ideas can be extended broadly
as digital connections extend to other areas such as auto-
mobiles (telematics), retailing through mobile apps, pub-
lishing and advertising on tablets, and healthcare.
Scale with Digital Business Strategy Will
Increasingly Take Place under Conditions
of Information Abundance
We are not only in a world of ubiquitous digital platforms
with broadband networks, cloud computing, and billions of
smart end-user devices; we are also in a world of amplified
networks with an abundance of data, information, and knowl-
edge.  This combination of digital intensity, connectivity, and
big data provides a context of networked abundance.  This is
being further amplified by the growth of what has been called
the “Internet of Things” (OECD 2012), which includes not
only an interconnection of things, but also an exploding
digital network of people and data.  Thus scaling with digital
business strategy will require understanding how to develop
the organizational capabilities to harness the huge quantities
of heterogeneous data, information, and knowledge that is
generated on a continuous basis.  This “big data” includes the
explosive chatter on social networks, crowdsourcing of ideas
from the edges of networks, and the proliferation of billions
of continuous machine-to-machine sensors in areas as diverse
as energy, environment, transportation, shipping, and health-
care, to name a few.
Scale Through Alliances and Partnerships
When digital intensity increases and digital business strategy
takes hold, scaling options are more likely to be based on
MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2/June 2013 475

--- PAGE 6 ---
Bharadwaj et al./Introduction:  Digital Business Strategy
alliances and partnerships through shared digital assets with
other firms in the business ecosystem across different tradi-
tional industry boundaries.  While we already see such scaling
strategies in settings such as travel and hospitality as they
share reservation systems, loyalty programs, and online cross-
selling (e.g., Star Alliance, OneWorld), we will increasingly
see companies rely on different firms to pull together the
requisite scale in areas where they do not see competitive
advantage.  We expect that as firms continue to assess their
unique drivers of advantage in digital settings, they would
modularize their business processes and rely on plug-and-play
capabilities for richly linking digital assets.  We already see
this with many new startups relying on linkages through
application programming interfaces (APIs) and web services.
Speed of Digital Business Strategy
Although time has been recognized as an important driver of
competitive advantage for firms in the strategic management
literature for quite some time (e.g., Stalk and Hout 1990), it
takes on a more central role in digital business settings.  Per-
vasive connectivity challenges companies to think about time
(or more specifically, speed) in important ways.  We suggest
that speed be thought of through the four dimensions pre-
sented below.
Speed of Product Launches
Digital business strategy accelerates the speed of product
launches.  Pure-play digital companies such as Facebook,
Google, and Amazon appreciate the importance of developing
and launching a timed series of products that take advantage
of improvements in computer hardware, software, and con-
nectivity.  The speed of product launches set by these com-
panies now compels companies that are in the hybrid (digital
+ physical) space to also accelerate their product introduc-
tions.  For example, Barnes & Noble’s Nook initiative now
has to be aligned with the product launch speed not of the
traditional booksellers but of Amazon and Apple.  Thus, when
traditional firms add digital dimensions to their business
strategy, the clock speed of product launches is recalibrated
by the speed set by the pure-play companies.  Under such
conditions, managers across a variety of industries find them-
selves with capabilities that are misaligned with those of their
new competitors.
Steady, predictable improvements in computer hardware
functionality (defined by Moore’s Law for example) compel
firms to develop a multiyear, sequenced product roadmap to
remain competitive.  We saw this in the case of Apple’s
multiyear sequenced launch of its iPod over the last decade.
More recently, we saw it in the case of iPhone and iPad.  And
as we combine Moore’s Law with steady increases in band-
width speed and mobile technologies, speed of product
launches with connectivity to cloud becomes critical and
important.
The speed of product launches in a digital business context
also highlights the importance of planned obsolescence.
Apple’s iPod gives way to the iPod Touch and the iPhone
(and even the iPad).  The organizational ability to recognize
and respond to the fast-paced nature of innovation and imple-
mentation with planned obsolescence is fundamental to a
firm’s competitive success and survival under digital business
conditions.
The digital business context, however, brings an added
dimension of coordination of product launches across firms in
business networks.  In traditional business strategy, the speed
of launches is largely under the control of a single firm that
launches standalone, autonomous products.  In recent years,
with increased digitization, product launches need to be coor-
dinated in networks with complementary products and
services.  Amazon’s launch of the Kindle Tablet needs to be
coordinated with the development of Android OS just as its
original Kindle (e-book reader) needed to be timed with an
adequate availability of e-books.
Speed of Decision Making
There is general consensus that technology has allowed firms
to speed up decisions that otherwise might be slowed due to
information flows up and down the hierarchy through multiple
layers of management.  Leading companies such as P&G, GE,
and Cisco have invested significantly to provide management
with the capability to access diverse streams of information
from within the focal firm and extend it to key partners and
allies.
Speed as a dimension becomes important in the context of
responding to customer service requests in real-time through
Twitter, Facebook and other social media platforms.  Slow-
ness in response could mean customers moving away from
companies perceived as being out of tune with the new
reality.  Thus, companies across a variety of organizations are
experimenting with multifunctional, integrative command
centers (e.g., Pepsi’s Mission Control for Gatorade and Dell’s
Social Media Center) to organize information flows from
within the company and outside to increase organizational
ability to sense and respond faster than ever before.
As noted earlier, big data sets pose enormous challenges to
access, process, and analyze the massive amounts of data that
accumulate as a natural by-product of routine transactions in
a digitally connected world.  In simple terms, big data refers
476 MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2/June 2013

--- PAGE 7 ---
Bharadwaj et al./Introduction:  Digital Business Strategy
to data sets with sizes beyond the ability of common software
tools to capture, curate, manage, and process the data within
a specified elapsed time.  As companies make investments to
process increased amounts of data, we find that few have
made corresponding investments in the organizational pro-
cesses to drive business value from data and information.  Just
as in the 1990s with the wave of business process redesign
efforts, the value lies not in investing in technology but in
how increased access to information drives faster and more
effective decisions.
The Speed of Supply Chain Orchestration
End-to-end visibility and ERP deployments have allowed
companies to be more efficient than before thanks to
developments in software from companies such as SAP and
Oracle.  This, coupled with outsourcing of non-core activities
to a network of partners, has allowed companies to optimize
their supply chains in extended interfirm networks and
enhance efficiency (e.g., Klein and Rai 2009; Rai et al. 2012;
Saraf et al. 2007).  The best in class in consumer electronics
today are not traditional electronics companies such as Sony
or Panasonic but Apple, which has achieved 74 inventory-
turns in a year (average of 5 days of inventory in the supply
chain)—supposedly at least twice faster than the industry
average.  Therefore, in industries marked by fast changes in
technology functionality, competitive advantage lies not in
just announcing new products (first-mover advantage) but in
ensuring the availability of new products on a global basis to
capture the fast-mover advantage.
The speed of supply chain orchestration on a global basis is
now becoming an important driver of competitive advantage.
This is more than outsourcing of non-value activities, it is
truly working in a collaborative fashion from conceptual
design to recycling of the products.  Orchestration of supply
chain is not about managing today’s product portfolio but also
innovating tomorrow’s product portfolio, which necessitates
the need for dynamic realignment of partners and suppliers.
This brings us to the final dimension of speed about the pace
of network formation and adaptation.  
Speed of Network Formation and Adaptation
The pace of network formation is rapidly accelerating in every
firm, industry sector, and industry (e.g., Easley and Kleinberg
2010; Venkatraman and Lee 2004; Viswanathan 2005).  One
of the key requirements of digital business strategy is new
organizational capability to design, structure, and manage
networks that provide complementary capabilities to what
firms have inside their own hierarchies.  Digital business eco-
systems in areas such as mobile apps provide useful insights
into the new strategic capability of orchestrating networks.
The speed of network formation is faster than traditional
supply chains in areas such as automotive, chemicals, or
textiles where trust built up over long periods of time acts as
the glue.  In contrast, app developers align and realign their
affinity to the different platforms based on technical func-
tionality and attractiveness.  The dynamics of network forma-
tion and reformation in such areas raise implications for us to
rethink the drivers of network structure in digital settings.
Sources of Value Creation and Capture
Value creation and capture in traditional business models are
relatively well understood and strategic management theories
and practice have developed robust rules focused on lever-
aging physical, tangible resources.  Digital business strategy
brings in additional dimensions that alter the nature of value
creation and capture.  We discuss them below.
Increased Value from Information
While information-based businesses have existed for a long
time (e.g., newspapers and magazines) in physical forms, the
digital business context brings new opportunities to create
value from information.  As magazines abandon their physical
formats (e.g., Newsweek), they need to fundamentally rethink
their unique source of value through curating content and
assess the balance between subscription and advertising. 
Google, Facebook, and eBay are just few examples of new
value created from information that go beyond niche areas
such as financial services whose business models rely on
accurate, timely information.  Moreover, many firms are able
to fine-tune their actions and personalize their offerings based
on information about customer preferences through Facebook,
Twitter, and others.  In addition, many business models based
in information have emerged in areas such as healthcare and
energy.
Digital business strategy has also made possible the democ-
ratization of content as well as the subsequent sharing,
remixing, redistribution, and resyndication of content in
newer and more useful forms.  These transformations have
caused dramatic power shifts in market channels and dis-
intermediations that disrupt traditional sources of economic
profits while creating fundamentally new sources of value.
Value Creation from Multisided Business Models
Digital business strategy brings into sharp focus the impor-
tance of multisided revenue models not just in software.
Going beyond software pricing such as Adobe Reader and
MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2/June 2013 477

--- PAGE 8 ---
Bharadwaj et al./Introduction:  Digital Business Strategy
browsers, we now find that a wide range of companies are
examining multisided business models.  Indeed, new leaders
in the digital space (e.g., G oogle, Facebook, Twitter, and
others) base their raison d’être on such models.  These multi-
sided business models are also multilayered where a company
gives away certain products or services in one layer to capture
value at a different layer.  For example, Google’s entry into
mobile phones is based on giving away the software
(Android) free and monetizing it through its ability to influ-
ence and control advertising.  Digital business strategy intro-
duces more nuanced ways to conceptualize the drivers of
value creation and capture by thinking about the multisided
nature of interactions.
Value Capture through Coordinated Business
Models in Networks
The logical extension of multisided business models is a
recognition that value creation and capture in digital settings
often involve complex and dynamic coordination across mul-
tiple companies.  In the case of videogames, console manufac-
turers, game developers, publishing, and other content owners
coordinate and time their respective offerings to be able to
cocreate value in networks and share their respective pieces
of value.
Specifically, in the case of mobile ecosystems, the value cap-
ture involves complex coordination between app developers,
the mobile OS (Apple, Android, Windows, or Blackberry),
hardware manufacturers, telecom operators, and service
providers such as Facebook, YouTube, and others.  The com-
plicating factor is that the business models are not inde-
pendent but intersect and interoperate across these different
players.  So, we need richer models that delineate inter-
dependent ecosystems that evolve more rapidly than what we
have seen in traditional settings.  
Value Appropriation through Control
of Digital Industry Architecture
Apple has a smaller market share but leads in profit share in
the mobile industry because it earns its profits not only
through its product (iPhone and iOS) but receives a share of
the follow-on revenue that the telecom carriers earn from the
end users.  Unlike other handset manufacturers, such as
Samsung and HTC, Apple’s appeal to the end consumer is
arguably higher.  This control of the industry architecture
allows Apple to extract a higher premium.  Is Apple’s place
in the telecom industry an outlier or an early indication of
how we could see more companies that redefine industry
architecture with digital control points and extract a dispro-
portionate share of profit?   We need to think more about the
role of digital technologies in influencing not only the busi-
ness strategies of individual firms but also the nature of the
industry and the sources of value creation and location of
value capture.  In doing so, we will be in a better position to
identify the key metrics that should be tracked and followed
in different industries.
Table 1 summarizes the description of these key themes of
digital business strategy with an eye toward performance by
introducing some important questions on each of the four
themes to help formulate and execute organizational strategy
by leveraging digital resources to create differential value.
Papers in the Special Issue on
Digital Business Strategy
The papers in this special issue on digital business strategy
offer some valuable insights on the key themes we have
developed in this paper.  Collectively, the papers speak to the
expanded scope and scale of digital business strategy as well
as to the novel use of digital resources to rapidly formulate
and execute digital business strategy to create differential
business value.  The papers in this issue include six stand-
alone research papers and a collection of “Issues and Opin-
ions” pieces, grouped under the title “Visions and Voices on 
Emerging Challenges in Digital Business Strategy.”  The
opinion pieces are written by thought leaders who, in addition
to their scholarship, have a keen sense of practice.
The six research papers collectively examine the convergence
of the information systems and strategy domains under the
umbrella of digital business strategy.  The papers focus on
digital business strategy within and outside the enterprise,
including the firm’s competitive industry environment and its
customer connections as determinants of digital business
strategy.  The papers also examine how to formulate and
execute digital business strategy as well as examining
business models for digital products.
First, echoing the core theme of this special issue, and
focusing on the rapid convergence of the information systems
and strategy domains, the article by Paul Drnevich and David
Croson, titled “Information Technology and Business-Level
Strategy:  Toward an Integrated Theoretical Perspective,”
makes a persuasive case for why digital business strategy
matters to business success.  In developing an integrated theo-
retical perspective, the authors use a framework of potential
profit mechanisms to show how investments in digital
resources and capabilities enable dynamic capabilities, such
as the flexibility to focus on rapidly changing opportunities or
to quickly abandon losing initiatives.
478 MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2/June 2013

--- PAGE 9 ---
Bharadwaj et al./Introduction:  Digital Business Strategy
Table 1.  Key Questions on Digital Business Strategy Themes
Scope of Digital Business Strategy
• What is the extent of fusi on and integration between IT strategy and business strategy?
• How encompassing is digital business strategy, and how effe ctively does digital business strategy transcend traditional
functional and process silos?
• How well does digital business strategy exploit the digiti zation of products and services, and the information around them?
• How well does digital business strategy  exploit the extended business ecosystem?
Scale of Digital Business Strategy
• How rapidly and cost effectively can the IT infrastructure  scale up and down to enable a firm’s digital business strategy to
bolster a strategic dynamic capability?
• How well does digital business strategy leve rage network effects and multisided platforms?
• How well does digital business strategy take  advantage of data, information, and knowledge abundance?
• How effective is digital business strategy in  scaling volume through alliances and partnerships?
Speed of Digital Business Strategy
• How effective is digital business stra tegy in accelerating new product launches?
• How effective is digital business strategy in speeding up learning for improving strategic and operational decision making?
• How effectively does digital business strategy bolst er the speed of dynamic supply chain orchestration?
• How quickly does digital business strategy enable the formati on of new business networks that provide complementary
capabilities?
• How effectively does the digital business strategy speed up the sense and respond cycle?
Sources of Value Creation and Capture
• How effective is digital business strat egy in leveraging value from information?
• How effective is digital business strategy in  leveraging value from multisided business models?
• How effective is digital business strategy in capt uring value through coordinated business models in networks?
• How effective is digital business strategy in appropriating value through the control of the firm’s digital architecture?
Next, the article by Sunil Mithas, Ali Tafti, and Will Mitchell,
titled “How a Firm’s Competitive Environment and Digital
Strategic Posture Influence Digital Business Strategy,” exa-
mines the competitive industry environment as a fundamental
component of digital business strategy that must be accounted
for when formulating the firm’s strategic posture.  The paper
examines how the industry’s competitive environment shapes
the way that a firm’s digital strategic posture (the degree of
engagement in a particular class of digital business practices
relative to the industry norm) affects the firm’s realized digital
business strategy.  The results imply that digital business stra-
tegy is not only a matter of internally optimizing the firm’s
operations or of externally responding to competitors, but that
it also arises from a deep awareness and dynamic respon-
siveness to the competitive environment.  
Similarly, Jason Woodard, Narayan Ramasubbu, Ted
Tschang, and Vallabh Sambam urthy in their paper, titled
“Design Capital and Design Moves:  The Logic of Digital
Business Strategy,” study digital options and design moves as
digital resources that help the formulation and execution of
digital business strategy.  They conceptualize the logic of
digital business strategy in terms of design capital (the cumu-
lative stock of designs of digital artifacts that are owned or
controlled by a firm), and design moves (the discrete strategic
actions that enlarge, reduce, or modify a firm’s design stock)
and highlight the interplay between these constructs to show
how the design of digital artifacts contributes to firm-level
business value creation and capture.  They show how enter-
prises that hold positions of strategic value (i.e., hold many
control points) in these digitally enabled networks exercise
control as technology triggers new dynamic cycles of value
creation opportunities.
Panjak Setia, Viswanath Venkatesh, and Supreet Joglekar
take a customer-centric view of digital business strategy in
their article, “Leveraging Digital Technologies:  How Infor-
mation Quality Leads to Localized Capabilities and Customer
Service Performance.”  Through survey data from a large
bank, they show how information quality acts as a key digital
resource and a critical antecedent to customer-side dynamic
capabilities that enable a rapid sense-and-respond to customer
needs.  This study provides insights for how local business
processes and digital design can influence an enterprise’s
customer-side response capabilities and digital business
strategy.
Focusing on the specific context of online music, the paper by
Gal Oestreicher-Singer and Lior Zalmanson, titled “Content
or Community?  A Digital Business Strategy for Content Pro-
viders in the Social Age,” views the digital community
formed by music websites through network effects to act as
MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2/June 2013 479

--- PAGE 10 ---
Bharadwaj et al./Introduction:  Digital Business Strategy
the driving force for consumers to pay a premium for music.
Essentially, the digitally connected “prosumer” acts as a
resource for the firm to create value for other consumers.  In
doing so, they address the changes wrought by social com-
puting and the fusion between content and community in
digital spaces.  The paper shows how digital business models
can remain viable in a world of “freemium” and provides
direct and compelling evidence of the importance of fusing
social computing with content delivery to create and capture
new sources of business value in today’s digital environments
within the domain of digital business strategy.
Finally, the article by Margherita Pagani, titled “Digital Busi-
ness Strategy and Value Creation:  Framing the Dynamic
Cycle of Control Points,” uses a novel view of digitally
enabled value networks as configurations of control points
through which enterprises in digital business ecosystems
create and capture value.  Through empirical evidence from
the European and U.S. broadcasting industries, the study
shows how these control point constellations shift as tech-
nological innovation and cross-boundary disruptions trigger
new dynamic cycles of value creation opportunities.  The
enterprises that hold many control points have a strategic
advantage in terms of how the value network operates and
how value is appropriated—and how the shift in those control
points influences the dynamic execution of digital business
strategy.
The “Issues and Opinions” pieces take bolder and more avant-
garde positions on various issues  related to digital business
strategy.  These pieces are presented as a collection in an
article titled “Visions and Voices on Emerging Challenges in
Digital Business Strategy” and we have provided a separate
integrative commentary by way of introducing these pieces
and their contribution to thought leadership as well as
practice.  The five pieces are “Leadership in a Digital World: 
Embracing Transparency and Adaptive Capacity” authored by
Warren Bennis, “Transparenc y Strategy:  Competing with
Information in a Digital World” authored by Nelson Granados
and Alok Gupta, “Revealing Your Hand:  Caveats in Imple-
menting Digital Business Strategy” authored by Varun Grover
and Rajiv Kohli, “Value Architectures for Digital Business: 
Beyond the Business Model” authored by Peter Keen and
Ronald Williams, and “Commoditized Digital Processes and
Business Community Platforms:  New Opportunities and
Challenges for Digital Business Strategy” authored by Lynne
Markus and Claudia Loebbecke.
The Platform Forward
Ideas regarding digital business strategy are still in the early
stages of development.  Many firms continue to treat different
facets of digital shifts within traditional domains, such as
marketing, operations, information systems, and Internet
technologies.  Such disjointed views of digital shifts have
provided limited benefits to firms as they are still straddling
the continuum between the physical to the digital.  Some
firms have embarked on social media as part of their mar-
keting operations, but without necessarily linking them back
to their core IT infrastructure.  Other firms have focused on
streamlining supply chains without necessarily taking an end-
to-end look at the coordination challenges and rapid scale-up
necessary to buffer against uncertainties in the environment.
The main thesis of both our paper and the overall special issue
on “Digital Business Strategy:  Toward a New Generation of
Insights” is that the time is right to shift our thinking about IT,
not as a functional-level response, but as a fundamental driver
of business value creation and capture.  Digital technologies
shape the new business infrastructure and influence the new
organizational logic and patterns of coordination within and
across firms.
Nonetheless, we believe that the four themes we have outlined
lend themselves to specific intermediate metrics to be tracked
and assessed.  We are not at a stage of either theoretical
development or management practice to offer generic metrics
of firm performance from an effective digital business
strategy.  However, we urge researchers examining the
impacts of digital business strategy to theorize and develop
metrics reflecting the four themes introduced here.
For example, what metrics could suitably describe the role of
digital technologies on changing business scope both inside
a company (corporate scope) and in an ecosystem (a com-
pany’s network scope)?  The distinguishing characteristic of
the scope of various digital business strategies is that it is not
about a single firm’s corporate scope but that it also extends
to the interconnections within a network of firms.  How
should we conceptualize and measure such ideas in rich theo-
retical terms?   Similarly, constructs and measures of the scale
of digital business strategy should reflect the nature of scale
through alliances and partnerships as well as in dynamically
adjusting the requisite scale as a management capability.
What are the drivers of virtual scale, and under what condi-
tions are they more effective than scale through ownership?
In terms of the speed of decision making, we caution that this
is not to be conceptualized in absolute terms but relative to
the speed of the market and the competitive environment.
What characterizes digital bus iness strategies whose clock-
speed of decisions and actions are aligned with the clock-
speed of market conditions from those firms that have mis-
matched speeds?  What technology characteristics create the
conditions for enhanced clock-speed of decisions?  In line
with other two themes, speed also recognizes the importance
480 MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2/June 2013

--- PAGE 11 ---
Bharadwaj et al./Introduction:  Digital Business Strategy
of network:  speed of coordination of product launches with
others in the ecosystem that complement the value of products
as well as dynamic adjustment to the number and diversity of
partners.
Finally, we believe that advances in our thinking about digital
business strategy would occur as we articulate the shifts in
sources of value creation through digital resources and the
location of value capture in digital business networks and
ecosystems.  In this paper, we have adopted a general view of
digital business strategy arising from the resource-based view
and the dynamic capabilities perspective.  Just as strategic
management researchers have refined the general ideas of the
resource-based view and dynamic capabilities over the last
two decades, we expect that we would have a more refined
and detailed understanding of digital resources and their role
in impacting value creation, capture, and distribution of
business value among partner firms in emerging industry
ecosystems.  
We hope that this collection of papers will provoke IS
researchers and strategic management researchers to step up
their collaborative efforts and will provide an energizing
platform to help produce the next generation of insights
around digital business strategy.  It is a very exciting area
whose time has come.  The future of digital business strategy
is already here, it is just unevenly distributed!
References
Amit, R., and Schoemaker, P.  1993.  “Strategic Assets and Organi-
zational Rent,” Strategic Management Journal (14:1), pp. 33-46.
Banker, R. D., Bardhan, I. R., Chang, H., and Lin, S.  2006.  “Plant
Information Systems, Manufact uring Capabilities, and Plant
Performance,” MIS Quarterly (30:2), pp. 315-337.
Banker, R., Hu, N., Pavlou, P. A., and Luftman, J.  2011.  “Strategic
Positioning, CIO Reporting Struct ure, and Firm Performance,”
MIS Quarterly (35:2), pp. 487-504.
Barney J. B.  1991.  “Firm Resources and Sustained Competitive
Advantage,” Journal of Management (17:1), pp. 99-120.
Berger, P., and Ofek, E.  1995.  “Diversification’s Effect on Firm
Value,” Journal of Financial Economics (37:1), pp. 39-65.
Bharadwaj, A., El Sawy, O. A., Pavlou, P. A., and Venkatraman, V.
2013.  “Visions and Voices on Emerging Challenges in Digital
Business Strategy,” MIS Quarterly (37:2), pp. 633-661.
Burgelman, R. A., and Grove, A.  2007.  “Cross-Boundary Disrup-
tors:  Powerful Inter-Industry Entrepreneurial Change Agents,”
Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal (1:3-4), pp. 315-327.
Buyya, R., Broberg, J., and Goscinski, A. (eds.).  2011.  Cloud
Computing:  Principles and Paradigms, New York:  Wiley Press.
Chan, Y. E., and Reich, B. H.  2007.  “IT Alignment:  What Have
We Learned?,” Journal of Information Technology  (22), pp.
297-315.
Conner, K. R., and Prahalad, C. K.  1996.  “A Resource-Based
Theory of the Firm:  Knowledge Versus Opportunism,” Organi-
zation Science (7:5), pp. 477-501.
D’Adderio, L.  2001.  “Crafting the Virtual Prototype:  How Firms
Integrate Knowledge and Capa bilities Across Organisational
Boundaries,”  Research Policy (30:9), pp. 1409-1424.
Davis, J. P., Eisenhardt, K. M., and Bingham, C. B.  2009.  “Optimal
Structure, Market Dynamism, and the Structure of Simple
Rules,” Administrative Science Quarterly (54:3), pp. 413-452.
Deloitte.  2009.  “Measuring the Forces of Long Term Change:  The
2009 Shift Index,” (http://www.deloitte.com/assets/Dcom-
UnitedStates/Local%20Assets/Documents/us_tmt_ce_Shift
Index_072109ecm.pdf).
Drnevich, P. L., and Croson, D. C.  2013.  “Information Technology
and Business-Level Strategy:  Toward an Integrated Theoretical
Perspective,” MIS Quarterly (37:2), pp. 483-509.
Easley, D., and Kleinberg, J.  2010.  Networks, Crowds, and Mar-
kets:  Reasoning About a Highly Connected World, Cambridge,
UK:  Cambridge University Press.
El Sawy, O. A.  2003.  “The IS Core IX:  The 3 Faces of Informa-
tion Systems Identity:  Connection, Immersion, and Fusion,”
Communications of the AIS (12), Article 39, pp. 588-598.
Ettlie, J., and Pavlou, P. A.  2006.  “Technology-Based New Product
Development Partnerships,” Decision Sciences  (37:2), pp.
117-148.
Evans, D. S., Hagiu, A., and Schmalensee, R.  2008.  Invisible
Engines:  How Software Platforms Drive Innovation and Trans-
form Industries, Cambridge, MA:  MIT Press.
Henderson, J. C., and Venkatraman , N.  1993.  “Strategic Align-
ment:  Leveraging Information Technology for Transforming
Organizations,” IBM Systems Journal (32:1), pp. 4-16.
Hirschheim, R., and Sabherwal, R.  2001.  “Detours in the Path
toward Strategic Information Systems Alignment,” California
Management Review
 (44:1), pp. 87-108.
Hussin, H., King, M., and Cragg, P.  2002.  “IT Alignment in Small 
Firms,” European Journal of Information Systems  (11:2), pp.
108-127.
Klein, R., and Rai, A.  2009.  “Interfirm Strategic Information Flows
in Logistics Supply Chain Relationships,” MIS Quarterly (33:4),
pp. 735-762.
Kohli, R., and Grover, V.  2008.  “Business Value of IT:  An Essay
on Expanding Research Directions to Keep up with the Times,”
Journal of the Association for Information Systems  (9:1), pp.
23-39.
Lang, L. H. P., and Stulz, R. M.  1994.  “Tobin’s q, Diversification
and Firm Performance.” Journal of Political Economy (102), pp.
1248-1280.
Luftman, J., and Brier, T.  1999.  “Achieving and Sustaining
Business–IT Alignment,” California Management Review (42:1),
pp. 109-112.
Meyer, A. D., Gaba, V., and Calwell, K. A.  2005.  “Organizing Far
from Equilibrium:  Nonlinear Change in Organizational Fields,”
Organization Science (16:5), pp. 456-473.
Mithas, S., Tafti, A.  and Mitchell, W.  2013.  “How a Firm’s Com-
petitive Environment and Digital Strategic Posture Influence
Digital Business Strategy,” MIS Quarterly (37:2), pp. 511-536.
MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2/June 2013 481

--- PAGE 12 ---
Bharadwaj et al./Introduction:  Digital Business Strategy
OECD.  2012.  “Machine-to-Machine Communications:  Connecting
Billions of Devices,” OECD Digital Economy Papers, No. 192, 
OECD Publishing (http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/science-and-
technology/machine-to-machine-communications_5k9gsh2gp0
43-en).
Orlikowski, W.  2009.  “The So ciomateriality of Organisational
Life:  Considering Technology in Management Research,”
Cambridge Journal of Economics (34), pp. 125-141.
Oestreicher-Singer, G., and Zalmanson, L.  2013.  “Content or Com-
munity?  A Digital Business Strategy for Content Providers in the
Social Age,” MIS Quarterly (37:2), pp. 591-616.
Pagani, M.  2013.  
“Digital Business Strategy and Value Crea-
tion:  Framing the Dynamic Cycle of Control Points,” MIS
Quarterly (37:2), pp. 617-632.
Pavlou, P. A., and El Sawy, O. A.  2006.  “From IT Leveraging
Competence to Competitive Advantage in Turbulent Environ-
ments,” Information Systems Research (17:3), pp. 198-227.
Pavlou, P. A., and El Sawy, O. A.  2010.  “The ‘Third Hand’: 
IT-Enabled Competitive Advantage in Turbulence through
Improvisational Capabilities,” Information Systems Research
(21:3), pp. 443-471.
Rai, A., Pavlou, P. A., Im, G., and Du, S.  2012.  “Interfirm IT
Capability Profiles and Communi cations for Cocreating Rela-
tional Value:  Evidence from the Logistics Industry,” MIS
Quarterly (36:1), pp. 233-262.
Ray, G., Muhana, W. A., and Barney, J. B.  2005.  “Information
Technology and the Performance of the Customer Service
Process:  A Resource-Based Analysis,” MIS Quarterly (29:4), pp.
625-642.
Reich, B. H., and Benbasat, I.  2000.  “Factors That Influence the
Social Dimensions of Alignment Between Business and Informa-
tion Technology Objectives,” MIS Quarterly (24:1), pp. 81-114.
Sabherwal, R., and Chan, Y.  2001.  “Alignment Between Business
and IS Strategies:  A Study of  Prospectors, Analyzers, and
Defenders,” Information Systems Research (12:1), pp. 11-33.
Sabherwal, R., and Kirs, P.  1994.  “The Alignment Between
Organizational Critical Success Factors and Information Tech-
nology Capability in Academic Institutions,” Decision Sciences
(25), pp. 301-301.
Sambamurthy, V., Bharadwaj, A., and Grover, V.  2003.  “Shaping
Agility Through Digital Options:  Reconceptualizing the Role of
Information Technology in Contemporary Firms,” MIS Quarterly
(27:2), pp. 237-263.
Saraf, N., Langdon, C., and Gosain, S.  2007.  “IS Application Capa-
bilities and Relational Value in Interfirm Partnerships,”
Information Systems Research (18:3), pp. 320-339.
Setia, P., Venkatesh, V., and Joglekar, S.  2013.  “Leveraging Digi-
tal Technologies:  How Information Quality Leads to Localized
Capabilities and Customer Service Performance,” MIS Quarterly
(37:2), pp. 565-590.
Sledgianowski, D., Luftman,  J., and Reilly,  R. R.  2006. “Devel-
opment and Validation of an Instrument to Measure Maturity of
IT Business Strategic Alignment Mechanisms,” Information
Resources Management (19:3), pp. 18-33.
Stalk, G., and Hout, T. M.  1990.  Competing Against Time:  How
Time-Based Competition Is Reshaping Global Markets , New
York:  Free Press.
Straub, D., and Watson, R.  2001.   “Transformational Issues in
Researching IS and Net-Enabled Organizations,” Information
Systems Research (12:4), pp. 337-345.
Subramaniam, M., and Venkatraman, N.  2001.  “Determinants of
Transnational New Product Development Capability:  Testing the
Influence of Transferring and Deploying Tacit Overseas
Knowledge,” Strategic Management Journal (22:4), pp. 359-378.
Susarla, A., Oh, J-H., and Tan, Y.  2012.  “Social Networks and the
Diffusion of User-Generated Content:  Evidence from YouTube,”
Information Systems Research (23:1), pp. 123-141.
Tanriverdi, H., and Venkatraman N.  2005.  “Knowledge Related-
ness and the Performance of Multibusiness Firms,” Strategic
Management Journal (26:2), pp. 97-11.
Venkatraman, N.  1994.  “IT-Enabled Business Transformation:
From Automation to Busi ness Scope Redefinition,” Sloan
Management Review (35:2), pp. 73-87.
Venkatraman, N., and Lee, C-H.  2004.  “Preferential Linkage and
Network Evolution:  A Conceptual Model and Empirical Test in
the U.S. Video Game Sector,” Academy of Management Journal,
(47:6), pp. 876-892.
Viswanathan, S.  2005.  “Competing Across Technology-
Differentiated Channels:  The Impact of Network Externalities
and Switching Costs,” Management Science  (51:3), 2005, pp.
483-496.
Wade, M., and Hulland, J.  2004.  “ Review:  The Resource-Based
View and Information Systems Research:  Review, Extension,
and Suggestions for Future Research,” MIS Quarterly (28:1), pp.
107-142.
Wernerfelt, B.  1984.  “A Resource-Based View of the Firm,”
Strategic Management Journal (52), pp. 171-180.
Wernerfelt, B.  1995.  “The Resource-Based View of the Firm:  Ten
Years After,” Strategic Management Journal (16:3), pp. 171-174.
Wheeler, B. C.  2002.  “NEBIC:  A Dynamic Capabilities Theory
for Assessing Net-Enablement,” Information Systems Research
(13:2), pp. 125-146.
Woodard, C. J., Ramasubbu, N., Tschang, F. T., and Sambamurthy,
V.  2013.  “Design Capital and Design Moves:  The Logic of
Digital Business Strategy,” MIS Quarterly (37:2), pp. 537-564.
482 MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2/June 2013