--- PAGE 1 ---
sustainability
Article
Key Barriers of Digital Transformation of the High-Technology
Manufacturing: An Evaluation Method
Alexey Borovkov 1, Oleg Rozhdestvenskiy 1, Elizaveta Pavlova 1,*, Alexey Glazunov 2 and Konstantin Savichev 3


Citation: Borovkov, A.;
Rozhdestvenskiy, O.; Pavlova, E.;
Glazunov, A.; Savichev, K. Key
Barriers of Digital Transformation of
the High-Technology Manufacturing:
An Evaluation Method. Sustainability
2021, 13, 11153. https://doi.org/
10.3390/su132011153
Academic Editor: Yury Klochkov
Received: 11 August 2021
Accepted: 24 September 2021
Published: 9 October 2021
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affil-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
1 The World-Class Research Center “Advanced Digital Technologies”, Peter the Great St. Petersburg
Polytechnic University, 195251 Saint Petersburg, Russia; borovkov@spbstu.ru (A.B.);
olegrojd@spbstu.ru (O.R.)
2 Research and Production Association “Centrotech”, 624130 Novouralsk, Russia; AIgGlazunov@rosatom.ru
3 Joint Stock Company “Power Machines–ZTL, LMZ, Electrosila, Energomachexport” (JSC “Power Machines”),
195009 Saint Petersburg, Russia; Savichev_KD@power-m.ru
* Correspondence: pavlova_ei@spbstu.ru; Tel.: +7-812-775-05-20
Abstract: It is acknowledged that quality of life is related to economic development in a country or
region. The impact of the ongoing transfer to the digital economy on economic growth, sustainable
development, and quality of life has been a recent academic focus, finding that the development
of digitalisation of the economy and society is happening at a comparable pace. Yet, despite the
availability of governmental support and overall strategic orientation of top managers, there is
evidence of low digital/advanced manufacturing technologies adoption readiness across economic
sectors. Therefore, the object of the research is the digital/advanced manufacturing technologies
adoption readiness, which can be assessed on both industrial and organisational levels. The authors
carried out an expert poll that has shown low digital/advanced manufacturing technologies adoption
readiness on the industrial level (average readiness of 2.18 across estimated industries). For this
reason, the focus subject of the research is the evaluation method for determining barriers of digital
transformation on organisational level. The review of the academic literature and available digital
maturity assessment models has shown the lack of metrics for barrier evaluation. The objective
of the research is to develop a method for digital-transformation barrier evaluation. An analytical
research method is used to develop a ready-to-use method in a form of a questionnaire that can be
applied to measure an overall digital-transformation barrier level and identify problem areas for a
manufacturing enterprise. The developed method is approbated in two large industrial companies.
The overall barrier equals 39.3% for a power engineering company, which is a deterrent barrier.
The overall barrier equals 75.0% for a machine-building company, which is a limiting barrier. The
results of approbation correspond with results of the expert poll: the power engineering company
has a lower barrier level, which is in line with the engine building and turbine engineering industry
showing higher levels of readiness to adopt digital technologies. This finding supports the hypothesis
about the rationality of the author’s method.
Keywords: quality of life; digitization; digital transformation; business strategy; processes operations;
digital maturity assessment
1. Introduction
1.1. Research Background
It is acknowledged that quality of life is related to economic development in a country,
region, etc. Various studies measure the quality of life using Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
or introduce new indicators [1]. The influence of economic development on the standard
of living of citizens was considered in [2]. The relations between the GDP energy intensity
and the quality of life were studied in [3].
The impact of the ongoing transfer to the digital economy on economic growth and
quality of life has been a recent academic focus. The specific features of the digital and cyber
Sustainability 2021, 13, 11153. https://doi.org/10.3390/su132011153 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability

--- PAGE 2 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 11153 2 of 13
economy influence human living standards, evaluate the current changes in human living
standards under the influence of technological transformation, and outline the conditions
under which the changes will have the most positive outcomes for quality of life [4].
Digital transformation of the manufacturing sector and services, healthcare and education,
and financial sector and other economic sectors is followed by positive developments
in quality of life [5]. Mobile applications help the population solve issues of sharing
knowledge and experience and information, purchasing and selling goods, facilitating
communication between people regardless of their location, providing an opportunity to
pay for housing and communal services as well as fines and taxes with minimum time, and
speeding up the process of solving the population’s transportation problems [6]. In [7], the
authors offered a schematic diagram of data collecting and processing in the start-to-finish
automated production-and-marketing chain of activity within the agricultural sector. The
achievement of these goals will allow increasing the agricultural sector contribution into
Russian economy to boost export revenue and to schedule and aggregate data streams for
creation of start-to-finish chains and technologies from the agricultural production stage to
consumption, with a deep integration into allied industries of the digital economy. The
positive impact of digitalisation is identified for economically developed and rich regions.
In contrast, for less developed regions, this impact could entail digital risks [8]. All in all,
the authors conclude that the development of digitalisation of the economy and society is
happening at a comparable pace [9].
Digital technologies are one of the key trends of sustainable and innovative develop-
ment [10], having a strong and often disruptive impact on business strategies and business
models [11]. The essence of a business model is in defining how the enterprise delivers
value to customers, entices customers to pay for value, and converts those payments to
profit [12]. Digital technologies tend to be a key element that ensures the global compet-
itiveness of modern products and services [13]. The importance of digital technologies
development and diffusion is stated in national strategic plans for innovative and sus-
tainable development [14]. Key administrative and legislative barriers that exist on the
governmental level are also recognized. Roadmaps for overcoming such barriers are being
developed and implemented. However, despite the availability of governmental support
and overall strategic orientation of top managers, there is evidence of low digital/advanced
manufacturing technologies adoption readiness across economic sectors, which is further
looked into in the present research.
1.2. Literature Review
On the organizational level, the introduction of digital technologies is divided into
three stages: digitization, digitalisation, and digital transformation [15]. Various strategies
and business models that manufacturing enterprises pursue in digital transformation
were discussed in [16]. Reaching each stage successfully requires specific organizational
structure, growth and transformation strategy formulation, certain assets, and human
resources in SMEs and large corporations [17,18].
It is acknowledged that an important part of digital transformation lies in tackling
the barriers [19,20]. In order to tackle the barriers, which arise when adopting digital
technologies, the first step is to identify them within the firm. In [21], the study aimed
at identifying the general barriers on the basis of 46 expert interviews. Key identified
barriers include missing skills, technical barriers, individual barriers, organizational and
cultural barriers, and environmental barriers. Yet, the authors did not touch the subject of
barrier measurement while developing agenda for further research. In [22], such barrier
groups were identified as systems and technologies, processes, people and competence,
culture, and strategy. In the article [23], corresponding barrier groups were discussed
(technological, financial, organizational, governmental, psychological, and process barriers)
while adding a new barrier, which is a financial barrier. The importance of this barrier
was highlighted in [19] since it is proved that greater perceived economic and financial
barriers do not induce firms to adopt more incentives. In [24], the authors focused on the

--- PAGE 3 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 11153 3 of 13
discussion of the barriers to digital transformation before, during, and what may continue
after the COVID-19 pandemic. Both [24,25] offered a new strategy discipline to overcome
barriers but left the barrier assessment task out-of-loop.
The transformation journey and its status are generally measured using specific
metrics aggregated into the digital maturity assessment model. Many maturity models
have been developed over the last years, both by practitioners and research [26]. A vast
review of existing models is available in which 18 models were identified and evaluated
concerning theirvalidity of measurement [27]. Theauthors focused onreviewing assessable
digitalmaturity modelsfrompriorresearchas wellasidentifying modelsthathave notbeen
studied previously. The authors’ review is structured into the source, scope, and barrier
evaluation metrics analysis (whether the tools to elicit barriers (1) are represented, (2) allow
direct or indirect evaluation, (3) or are not represented). The review took a qualitative
approach to available models. In Table 1, the available digital maturity assessment models
are listed. The authors identified 18 models with different scopes and authorship. The
models were reviewed in terms of barrier evaluation metrics availability.
Table 1. Authors’ review of the available digital maturity assessment models.
№ Model Source Scope Barrier Evaluation Metrics
1
The Industry
4.0/Digital Operations
Self-Assessment [28]
PWC Industrial products companies Not represented
2
Digital Maturity
Model [29]
InfoCert.
5 business capability dimensions for industrial
products companies
Not represented
3
Digital Maturity
Assessment [30]
Avanade Customer experience Not represented
4
BCG’s Digital Acceleration
Index [31]
BCG
Digital maturity in 36 categories, such as
customer journeys, digital supply chain,
marketing personalization
Not represented
5
Digital Maturity
Assessment Tool [32]
Government of
South Australia
Governance and leadership, People and culture,
Capacity and capability, Innovation, Technology
Not represented
6
Digital Maturity
Model [33]
Deloitte
Evaluation for organization across dimensions:
customer, strategy, technology, operations,
organization, culture
Not represented
7
Digital Maturity
Assessment [34]
Protiviti Inc.
Framework: vision mission strategy,
management employees culture, organization
structure process, communication marketing
sales, technology innovation development, big
data analytics automation.
Indirect evaluation
8
Digital Maturity
Assessment [35]
NHS
Measures how well secondary care providers in
England are making use of digital technology to
achieve a health and care system that is
paper-free at the point of care
Indirect evaluation
9
Digital Maturity
Assessment Tool
(DMAT) [36]
Digital business
development
Digital maturity is assessed on six dimensions:
Strategy, Culture, Organisation, Processes,
Technology, and finally Customers and Partners
Not represented
10
Digital Maturity
Assessment [37]
Axway
Digital maturity is assessed on six dimensions:
Vision, Culture, Adoption, Execution, Growth
Not represented
11 Digital Maturity tool [38] Digital Leadership Ltd.
Digital maturity by area: Attitudes and
foundations, People, skills and processes,
Systems and information, Outputs
and experiences.
Not represented
12
Maturity Models for
Hospital Information
Systems [39]
HISMM: Hospital
Information System
Maturity Model
Hospital Information Systems Indirect evaluation
13
Maturity Diagnostic
Questionnaire [40]
Autodesk
Design and technological preparation of
production, Production, Management
and logistics
Indirect evaluation
14
Methodological
Recommendations for
Digital Transformation of
Public Corporations and
Companies with State
Participation [41]
Ministry of
Digital Development,
Communications and
Mass Media of the
Russian Federation
Overall strategic parameters for of public
corporations and companies with
state participation
Not represented

--- PAGE 4 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 11153 4 of 13
Table 1. Cont.
№ Model Source Scope Barrier Evaluation Metrics
15
Information Technology
Maturity Evaluation in
Cosmetics Industry [42]
Federal University of
Paraná, Brazil
Scope: people, processes, technology,
business management
Not represented
16
Business Intelligence
Maturity [43]
Institute of
Information Management
Business intelligence (BI) scope Not represented
17
Assessing the Impact
of Digital
Transformation of Health
Services [44]
Expert panel on effective
ways of investing in
Health (EXPH)
Health services Not represented
18
Digital Service Units—
Maturity Model [45]
Digital HKS
Political Environment,
Institutional Capacity,
Delivery Capability,
Skills and Hiring,
User-centred Design,
Cross-government Platforms
Indirect evaluation
The authors’ review of the available digital maturity assessment models showed that
only five models (of the identified 18) have indirect barrier evaluation metrics. These
five models (Digital Maturity Assessment by Protiviti Inc., Digital Maturity Assessment
by NHS, Maturity Models for Hospital Information Systems, Maturity diagnostic ques-
tionnaire by Autodesk, and Digital Service Units—Maturity Model) allow identifying
particular barriers within the scope of the model. However, they do not contain questions
aimed directly to identify barriers. The rest of the identified models do not contain tools
to reveal and evaluate barriers, making the development of the method for determining
barriers in digital transformation a relevant task.
1.3. Reaserch Objective
The object of the research is the digital/advanced manufacturing technologies adop-
tion readiness, which can be assessed on both industrial and organisational levels. The
authors carried out an expert poll that showed low digital/advanced manufacturing
technologies adoption readiness on the industrial level (average readiness of 2.18 across
estimated industries). For this reason, the focus subject of the research is the evaluation
method for determining barriers of digital transformation on organisational level. The
experts’ review of the available digital maturity assessment models (see Section 1.3 of the
article) showed that only five models (of the identified by the authors 18) have indirect
barrier evaluation metrics. The reviewed models do not contain a method to identify
barriers to digital transformation.
The article is aimed at developing the method for determining barriers hindering
digital transformation. The tasks of the research include:
1. To assess digital/advanced manufacturing technologies adoption readiness (see
Section 3.1); obtained results are to be compared to the results of the method for
determining barriers approbation in task 2;
2. To develop the method for determining barriers in digital transformation (see Section 3.2).
The authors put forward the hypothesis about the rationality of the authors’ method.
Themethodwastestedonhigh-techmachine-buildingenterprises; thedirectionsforfurther
research were formulated.
The review of the academic literature and available digital maturity assessment mod-
els has shown the lack of metrics for barrier evaluation, revealing significant research gap.
Therefore, the objective of the research was to develop a method for digital transforma-
tion barrier evaluation. The authors put forward the hypothesis about rationality of the
authors’ method.
The novel method suggested by the authors is approbated in two large industrial
companies. The overall barrier equals 39.3% for a power engineering company, which is a
deterrent barrier. The overall barrier equals 75.0% for a machine-building company, which
is a limiting barrier. The results of approbation correspond with results of the expert poll:

--- PAGE 5 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 11153 5 of 13
the power engineering company has a lower barrier level, which is in line with the engine
building and turbine engineering industry showing higher levels of readiness to adopt
digital technologies. The identified limiting barrier for the machine-building company is in
line with the lower levels of readiness to adopt digital technologies in other the machine-
building industries, as derived from the expert poll. These findings support the hypothesis
about the rationality of the authors’ method.
The paper aims to present the research to academics and practitioners and is divided
into the following Section 2: Materials and methods, offering a description of the methods
used to perform the digital/advanced manufacturing technologies adoption readiness
assessment on industry level and methods for the development of the method for de-
termining barriers in digital transformation; Section 3: Results and Discussion, offering
results representation and analysis; Section 4: Conclusions, offering the implications of the
research, limitations, and suggestions for further research.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Digital/Advanced Manufacturing Technologies Adoption Readiness Assessment
To measure the level of digital/advanced manufacturing technologies adoption readi-
ness across economic sectors, the expert poll on advanced digital technologies was carried
out. [46]. The results regarding digital/advanced manufacturing technologies adoption
readiness were processed for the first time for purposes of the present research. A total of
135 experts from both academic and business fields participated in the poll. Three condi-
tions were considered during the sample design:
The first condition was the need to integrate the efforts of the main participants in the
digital economy: scientific communities (35% of the sample), business communities (62%
of the sample), and governmental structures (3% of the sample).
The second condition was high requirements for the professional competencies of
experts: more than half of the participants (53% of the sample) have an academic degree
(Ph.D.). A total of 70% of the respondents belong to representatives of the managerial level
of organizations, 14% are engineering and technical specialists, 9% are research scientists
(non-manager), and 7% are analytic specialists.
The third condition was the representativeness of various areas of industrial produc-
tion: the sample includes representatives of more than 12 industries.
The experts were to evaluate the digital/advanced manufacturing technologies adop-
tion readiness across manufacturing industries:
• Automotive;
• Aerospace;
• Engine building;
• Shipbuilding;
• Railway machine building;
• Other vehicles;
• Machine tool building;
• Other machine building;
• Agricultural engineering;
• Other specialized machine building;
• Metallurgical production; and
• Other manufacturing industries.
The poll was designed in the form of a questionnaire. Each expert evaluated each
industry on a scale from 1 to 5, where 1 indicates low readiness and 5 high readiness to
adopt digital technologies. The mean value across expert evaluations was calculated to
determine the average result for each industry.

--- PAGE 6 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 11153 6 of 13
2.2. Development of the Method for Determining Barriers in Digital Transformation
The method development for determining barriers in digital transformation was
conducted by formulation of the most common key areas within the enterprise, which
might comprise digitalisation barriers. For this purpose, an analytical method was used.
• IT infrastructure;
• Existing IT systems;
• Special software requirements;
• Financial resources;
• Qualified specialists and IT personnel;
• Digital manufacturing policy;
• Limited-access information use;
• Regulatory framework; and
• Diverse IT maturity of production cooperation participants.
Manufacturing industry representatives validated the ten formulated areas in manu-
facturing technologies. These ten areas were translated into 14 questions and presented
in a questionnaire that can supplement and add diagnostic value to any available digital
maturity assessment model. The number of questions attributed to the area depended on
the intended level of accuracy of evaluation achieved by one or more evaluation questions.
The authors concluded that such areas as financial resources, qualified specialists and IT
personnel, and regulatory framework can constitute various relevant barriers. Therefore,
more than one question was formulated for each area.
3. Results and Discussion
3.1. Digital/Advanced Manufacturing Technologies Adoption Readiness Assessment
Digital/advanced manufacturing technologies adoption readiness assessment (see
Figure 1) showed average readiness of 2.18 across estimated industries, which is a low-level
readiness. The most advanced and knowledge-intensive industries, such as aerospace,
engine building, and turbine engineering, show higher readiness to adopt digital technolo-
gies (3.22 and 2.58, respectively). However, all the values received in the expert poll are
below the 4.00 mark, which indicates significant barriers the enterprises face in their digital
transformation journey.
Sustainability 2021, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 15
• Limited-access information use;
• Regulatory framework; and
• Diverse IT maturity of production cooperation participants.
Manufacturing industry representatives validated the ten formulated areas in man-
ufacturing technologies. These ten areas were translated into 14 questions and presented
in a questionnaire that can supplement and add diagnostic value to any available digital
maturity assessment model. The number of questions attributed to the area depended on
the intended level of accuracy of evaluation achieved by one or more evaluation ques-
tions. The authors concluded that such areas as financial resources, qualified specialists
and IT personnel, and regulatory framework can constitute various relevant barriers.
Therefore, more than one question was formulated for each area.
3. Results and Discussion
3.1. Digital/Advanced Manufacturing Technologies Adoption Readiness Assessment
Digital/advanced manufacturing technologies adoption readiness assessment (see
Figure 1) showed average readiness of 2.18 across estimated industries, which is a low-
level readiness. The most advanced and knowledge-intensive industries, such as aero-
space, engine building, and turbine engineering, show higher readiness to adopt digital
technologies (3.22 and 2.58, respectively). However, all the values received in the expert
poll are below the 4.00 mark, which indicates significant barriers the enterprises face in
their digital transformation journey.
Figure 1. Digital/advanced manufacturing technologies adoption readiness assessment.
3.2. Development of the Method for Determining Barriers in Digital Transformation
A combined quantitative and qualitative approach to assessment is offered: a quan-
titative evaluation of barrier has a qualitative interpretation for each question (see Table
2). An overall quantitative evaluation can be calculated using formula (1).
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
2.50
3.00
3.50
4.00
4.50
5.00
Automotive
Other vehicles
Shipbuilding
Railway machine
building
Aerospace
Metallurgical
production
Other machine
building
Engine building and
turbine engineering
Agricultural
engineering
Machine tool building
Other specialized
machine building
Other manufacturing
industries
Figure 1. Digital/advanced manufacturing technologies adoption readiness assessment.

--- PAGE 7 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 11153 7 of 13
3.2. Development of the Method for Determining Barriers in Digital Transformation
A combined quantitative and qualitative approach to assessment is offered: a quanti-
tative evaluation of barrier has a qualitative interpretation for each question (see Table 2).
An overall quantitative evaluation can be calculated using Formula (1).
Table 2. The method for determining barriers in digital transformation approbation.
№ Barrier
Results in Engine Building
and Turbine Engineering
Sector (Power
Engineering Company)
Results in Other Specialized
Machine-Building (Machine-
Building Company)
Interpretation
1
Outdated manufacturing
technologies with low
levels of automation
1 2
There is a barrier (a significant part of production
processes is not automated): 2
The barrier is of a local nature (processes are automated at
the level of production services and departments): 1
No barrier (most of the production processes are
automated): 0
2
Limited capabilities of the
enterprise IT infrastructure
0 1
There is a barrier (a radical modernization or complete
replacement of the IT infrastructure is required for
digitalisation): 2
The barrier is local in nature (the IT infrastructure of the
enterprise allows digitalisation of the main processes at
the level of individual services and departments): 1
No barrier (enterprise IT infrastructure allows for
enterprise-wide digitalisation): 0
3
The complexity of
integrating digital
technologies with existing
IT systems in the enterprise
1 2
There is a barrier (a transition to new IT solutions or
software products is required): 2
The barrier is of a local nature (partial modernization is
required, replacement of subsystems/equipment for
integration with the implemented digital technologies): 1
There is no barrier (integration of digital technologies is
possible without significant changes to the IT systems of
the enterprise): 0
4
Availability of special
software requirements
1 2
There is a barrier (the presence of critical
restrictions/special requirements for software (related to
the terms of licensing agreements/requirements for
ensuring the protection of information constituting a state
secret/selection of developers of IT products (using
imported software products)/requirements for
compatibility within a single information space, etc.)),
hindering the implementation of measures for the
digitalisation of the enterprise: 2
The barrier is local in nature (the presence of
restrictions/special requirements for software within the
framework of individual services and departments
impede the implementation of measures for the
digitalisation of the enterprise): 1
There is no barrier (no restrictions/special requirements
for software (related to the terms of licensing
agreements/requirements for ensuring the protection of
information constituting a state secret/selection of
developers of IT products (using imported software
products)/requirements for compatibility within a single
information space, etc.) that hinder the implementation of
measures for the digitalisation of the enterprise): 0
5
Limited/lack of financial
resources for
enterprise digitalisation
1 1
There is a barrier (lack of financial resources to carry out
large-scale/complex digitalisation activities): 2
The barrier is of a local nature (financial resources are
sufficient to carry out activities for the digitalisation of
processes at the level of individual services and
departments): 1
No barrier (financial resources are sufficient to carry out
enterprise-wide digitalisation activities): 0
6
Limited/lack of financial
resources to support digital
production technologies
1 1
There is a barrier (lack of funds to support digital
production technologies): 2
The barrier is local in nature (financial resources are
sufficient to support digital production technologies at the
level of individual services and departments): 1
No barrier (financial resources are sufficient to support
enterprise-wide digital manufacturing technologies): 0

--- PAGE 8 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 11153 8 of 13
Table 2. Cont.
№ Barrier
Results in Engine Building
and Turbine Engineering
Sector (Power
Engineering Company)
Results in Other Specialized
Machine-Building (Machine-
Building Company)
Interpretation
7
Lack of qualified specialists
for the implementation and
use of digital
production technologies
1 2
There is a barrier (the company does not have specialists
with the necessary qualifications for the implementation
and use of digital production technologies): 2
The barrier is local in nature (the enterprise is provided
with specialists with the necessary qualifications for the
implementation and use of digital production
technologies at the level of individual services and
departments): 1
There is no barrier (the enterprise is provided with
specialists with the necessary qualifications for the
implementation and use of digital production
technologies throughout the enterprise): 0
8
Lack/insufficiency of
training, retraining, and
advanced training
programs for the personnel
of the enterprise in the
current areas of
digitalisation of
the enterprise
0 1
There is a barrier (the company is not able to carry out
training, retraining, and advanced training of personnel
in the current areas of digitalisation of the enterprise): 2
The barrier is local in nature (programs for training,
retraining, and advanced training of personnel are
implemented in certain areas of digitalisation of the
enterprise): 1
There is no barrier (programs for training, retraining, and
advanced training of personnel are implemented in
relevant areas of digitalisation on the basis of the training
centre of the enterprise/corporate training centre/with
the involvement of consulting firms/under contracts with
educational institutions, etc.): 0
9
Unreadiness (lack of
interest) of the enterprise
personnel to
implement digital
production technologies
1 1
There is a barrier (representatives of top
management/managers and employees of the main
divisions of the enterprise do not show interest in the
implementation of digital technologies): 2
The barrier is local in nature (employees of individual
services and departments are interested in the
implementation of digital production technologies): 1
There is no barrier (representatives
top management and employees of all services and
departments are interested in the implementation of
digital production technologies): 0
10
Unreadiness of IT
departments to implement
and support modern digital
production technologies
0 1
There is a barrier (unavailability of IT departments to
implement and support modern digital production
technologies throughout the enterprise): 2
The barrier is local in nature (IT departments are ready to
implement and support modern digital production
technologies in certain areas/services and departments): 1
No barrier (IT departments are mostly ready to
implement and support modern digital manufacturing
technologies throughout the enterprise): 0
11
Lack of a coherent digital
manufacturing policy
1 2
There is a barrier (the introduction of digital technologies
within the framework of individual services and divisions
is carried out without taking into account the
development strategy of the enterprise in the field of
digital production): 2
The barrier is local in nature (decisions on the course of
action (strategy) in the field of creating digital production
are developed and agreed upon at the level of individual
services and departments): 1
There is no barrier (decisions on the course of action
(strategy) in the field of creating digital production are
developed by the top management of the enterprise
together with representatives of various services and
departments throughout the enterprise): 0
12
Insufficient elaboration of
the issue of transferring
limited-access
information through
secure-access channels
1 2
The barrier is present (the transfer of information of
limited access is carried out through “air” channels (on
electronic media)): 2
The barrier is of a local nature (there are channels of
secure access to information bases in individual services
and departments;
the regulations for the transfer of information of limited
access within the framework of individual services and
divisions were approved): 1
There is no barrier (there are channels of secure access to
information bases for all participants of information
exchange; regulations for the transfer of information of
limited access throughout the enterprise are approved): 0

--- PAGE 9 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 11153 9 of 13
Table 2. Cont.
№ Barrier
Results in Engine Building
and Turbine Engineering
Sector (Power
Engineering Company)
Results in Other Specialized
Machine-Building (Machine-
Building Company)
Interpretation
13
Insufficient elaboration of
the regulatory framework
in the field of
information interaction
1 2
There is a barrier (development/updating of regulatory
documents in the field of information interaction at the
enterprise is required): 2
The barrier is of a local nature (the enterprise has separate
regulatory documents in the field of information
interaction): 1
There is no barrier (normative documents (standards,
instructions, regulations) in the field of information
interaction at the enterprise scale have been developed): 0
14
Diverse IT maturity
of production
cooperation participants
1 1
There is a barrier (the main/key participants in industrial
cooperation cannot carry out information exchange in the
required digital format): 2
The barrier is local in nature (information exchange in the
required digital format can be carried out by less than half
of the main/key participants in industrial cooperation): 1
There is no barrier (most of the main/key participants in
industrial cooperation can carry out information
exchange in the required digital format): 0
The questionnaire consists of 14 questions. The respondents are supposed to assign
values: 0, 1, or 2, following interpretation. The interpretation allows to identify key barriers
and to calculate the average barrier using Formula (1).
P = 100
28 •
14
∑
i=1
ai,%
ai—assessment of the i-th form indicator.
(1)
The average barrier is interpreted:
• Insignificant if the relative generalized barrier is less than 35%;
• Deterrent if the relative generalized barrier is in the range from 35% to 70%; and
• Limiting if the relative generalized barrier is more than 70%.
A test of the method was conducted with participation of two large industrial compa-
nies: a power engineering company and a machine-building company. In both cases, the
representatives of the IT division of the company filled in the suggested forms.
Theoverallbarrierequals39.3%forapowerengineeringcompany, whichisadeterrent
barrier. The overall barrier equals 75.0% for a machine-building company, which is a
limiting barrier.
The key areas, which constitute barriers for each company, can be derived from the
questions with evaluation (2) and (1).
3.3. Assesment’s Results
Conducted research identified low digital/advanced manufacturing technologies
adoption readiness assessment. Since the digital transformation of the manufacturing
sector and services and other economic sectors is followed by positive developments in
quality of life, it should be a priority to enhance the readiness of the enterprises to adopt
digital technologies.
Such enhancement starts with the identification of barriers that hinder digital transfor-
mation on the enterprise level. The enterprise level is so crucial to assess because many
governmentalincentivesareaimedatbarriers, whichexistonregulatoryandadministrative
levels, and help enterprises adopt new technologies by offering grants, consulting services,
etc. However, each case of transformation starts with a particular enterprise. Moreover,
each enterprise suffers from individual barriers that should be identified and eliminated in
order to succeed. The experts’ review of the available digital maturity assessment models
showed that most of them do not imply barrier-identification tools and metrics.
Thenovelmethodsuggestedbytheauthorsisapprobatedintwolargeindustrialcompanies.

--- PAGE 10 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 11153 10 of 13
Theoverallbarrierequals39.3%forapowerengineeringcompany, whichisadeterrent
barrier. Eleven areas have a local-in-nature barrier.
The overall barrier equals 75.0% for a machine-building company, which is a limiting
barrier. Key problem areas include:
• Outdated manufacturing technologies with low levels of automation.
• ThecomplexityofintegratingdigitaltechnologieswithexistingITsystemsintheenterprise.
• Availability of special software requirements.
• Lackofqualifiedspecialistsfortheimplementationanduseofdigitalproduction technologies.
• Lack of a coherent digital manufacturing policy.
• Insufficient elaboration of the issue of transferring limited-access information through
secure-access channels.
• Insufficient elaboration of the regulatory framework in the field of information interaction.
The results of approbation correspond with results of the expert poll: the power
engineering company has a lower barrier level, which is in line with the engine building
and turbine engineering industry showing higher levels of readiness to adopt digital
technologies. The identified limiting barrier for the machine-building company is in line
with the lower levels of readiness to adopt digital technologies in other machine-building
industry derived from the expert poll (see Figure 2).
Sustainability 2021, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 15
• The complexity of integrating digital technologies with existing IT systems in the en-
terprise.
• Availability of special software requirements.
• Lack of qualified specialists for the implementation and use of digital production
technologies.
• Lack of a coherent digital manufacturing policy.
• Insufficient elaboration of the issue of transferring limited-access information
through secure-access channels.
• Insufficient elaboration of the regulatory framework in the field of information inter-
action.
The results of approbation correspond with results of the expert poll: the power en-
gineering company has a lower barrier level, which is in line with the engine building and
turbine engineering industry showing higher levels of readiness to adopt digital technol-
ogies. The identified limiting barrier for the machine-building company is in line with the
lower levels of readiness to adopt digital technologies in other machine-building industry
derived from the expert poll (see Figure 2).
Figure 2. Digital/advanced manufacturing technologies adoption readiness assessment.
These findings support the hypothesis about the rationality of the authors’ method.
The article’s offered method for determining digital transformation barriers can be used
incombinationwithidentifieddigitalmaturityassessmentmodels.Suchcombinationwill
strengthen the starting point for digital transformation strategy formulation and imple-
mentation and is aimed to enhance digital/advanced manufacturing technologies adop-
tion readiness of enterprises.
The authors recognize the limited approbation scope of the method.
4. Conclusions
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
2.50
3.00
3.50
4.00
4.50
5.00
Automotive
Other vehicles
Shipbuilding
Railway machine
building
Aerospace
Metallurgical
production
Other machine
building
Engine building and
turbine engineering
Agricultural
engineering
Machine tool building
Other specialized
machine building
Other manufacturing
industries
Figure 2. Digital/advanced manufacturing technologies adoption readiness assessment.
These findings support the hypothesis about the rationality of the authors’ method.
The article’s offered method for determining digital transformation barriers can be used
in combination with identified digital maturity assessment models. Such combination
will strengthen the starting point for digital transformation strategy formulation and
implementation and is aimed to enhance digital/advanced manufacturing technologies
adoption readiness of enterprises.
The authors recognize the limited approbation scope of the method.
4. Conclusions
The article is aimed at developing the method for determining barriers hindering
digital transformation. The authors put forward a hypothesis about rationality of the
authors’ method. The method is tested on high-tech machine-building enterprises; the
directions for further research are formulated.
Scientific results obtained and discussed in the article include:

--- PAGE 11 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 11153 11 of 13
1. Digital/advanced manufacturing technologies adoption readiness assessment re-
sults showed low digital/advanced manufacturing technologies adoption readiness
(average readiness of 2.18 across estimated industries).
2. The method for determining barriers in digital transformation was developed and
approbated in two large industrial companies. The overall barrier equals 39.3% for a
power engineering company, which is a deterrent barrier. The overall barrier equals
75.0% for a machine-building company, which is a limiting barrier.
The results are relevant for both academics studying new technologies adoption
and practitioners in manufacturing industries. In the academic field, the research gap
concerning barrier assessment has been identified and articulated. Theoretical results can
be used to further build on and propose more elaborate or industry-specific methods for
digital maturity assessment and barrier evaluation. The developed method can be used to
gather more empirical data from various industries to study in detail the level of barriers.
Practitioners are offered a ready-to-use barrier-evaluation method. For the most complete
assessment, the method can be supplemented with digital maturity assessment models pro-
posed by PWC (1 Embankment Pl, London WC2N 6RH, UK), Avanade (1191 Second Avenue,
Suite 100 Seattle, WA 98101, USA), BCG (200 Pier 4 Blvd Boston, MA 02210, United States),
Deloitte (30 Rockefeller Plaza, New York, NY 10112-0015, United States), Protiviti Inc. (1290
Avenue of the Americas New York, NY 10104, United States), etc., and, when combined, can be
the starting point of digital transformation strategy formulation for manufacturing enterprises.
Limitations of the research include narrowing the focus to manufacturing industries
and the limited approbation scope of the method. Further research can be focused on
gathering more data through suggested questionnaires in combination with any available
digital maturity assessment model to rest and revise the method. Another important direc-
tion is a theoretical basis for decision-making and strategy formulation steps concerning
identified barriers.
Author Contributions: A.B.: Research problem formulation; research goal formulation; academic
supervision; funding acquisition; writing—review. O.R.: digital/advanced manufacturing technolo-
gies adoption readiness assessment conceptualization—data acquisition; the method for determining
barriers in digital transformation, supervision, and project administration. E.P.: digital/advanced
manufacturing technologies adoption readiness assessment—data processing and interpretation;
formal analysis of the available digital maturity assessment models interpretation; writing—original
draft preparation; visualization. A.G.: the method for determining barriers in digital transformation
approbation—data processing and interpretation; writing—review and editing. K.S.: the method
for determining barriers in digital transformation approbation—data processing and interpreta-
tion; writing—review and editing. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of
the manuscript.
Funding: The research is partially funded by the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the
Russian Federation as part of World-class Research Centre program: Advanced Digital Technologies
(contract No. 075-15-2020-934 dated 17 November 2020).
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1. Ciani Scarnicci, M.; Laino, A.; Belcaro, M.; Vita, C. Economic Growth, Quality of Life, Life Styles and Sustainability: Corre-
lations and New Variables to Be Considered as Indicators in Recent Literature. In Italian Studies on Quality of Life; Springer:
Cham, Switzerland, 2019; pp. 309–319, ISBN 978-3-658-26418-5.
2. Shumilina, V.; Lermontova, A. Level and quality of life in the context of the world economy. In Directions for Improving the
Economic Security of the Russian Federation in the Context of Economic Recession and Pandemic; AUS PUBLISHERS: Ultimo, Australia,
2021; pp. 106–113, ISBN 978-0-645-10240-6.
3. Caвичев, К.Д.; Глухoв, B.B. Bлияние энергoемкoстиBBΠ нa кaчествo жизни: пoкaзaтелиoценки и метoды гoсудaрственнoй
пoддержки. Нaучнo-ТехническиеBедoмoстиCaнкт-Πетербургскoгo Гoсудaрственнoгo Πoлитехническoгo Университетa.
Экoнoмические Нaуки 2018, 11. [CrossRef]
4. Mytareva, L.; Gorshkova, N.; Shkarupa, E.; Yalmaev, R. The Cyber Economy and Digitization: Impacts on the Quality of Life. In
The Cyber Economy; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2019; pp. 19–30, ISBN 978-3-030-31565-8.

--- PAGE 12 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 11153 12 of 13
5. Katz, R.L.; Koutroumpis, P. Measuring digitization: A growth and welfare multiplier. Technovation 2013, 33, 314–319. [CrossRef]
6. Razumovsky, V.; Sultanova, A.; Chechina, O.; Nikonorova, S. The Impact of the Digital Economy on the Quality of Life. In
Institute of Scientific Communications Conference; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2020; pp. 417–423, ISBN 978-3-030-29585-1.
7. Vaganova, O.V.; Solovjeva, N.E.; Lesovik, R.V.; Leonidovna, L.S. Digital Transformation of Russia’s Agricultural Sector. Utop. Lat.
Am. Prax. 2020, 12, 397–406.
8. Litvintseva, G.; Karelin, I. Effects of digital transformation of the economy and quality of life in Russia. Terra Econ. 2020, 18, 53–71.
[CrossRef]
9. Dmitrieva, E. Assessment of the Level of Digitalization of the Economy and Society in Russia. In Proceedings of the Russian
Conference on Digital Economy and Knowledge Management (RuDEcK 2020), Voronezh, Russia, 27–29 February 2020.
10. Gartner Top Strategic Technology Trends for 2021. Available online: https://www.gartner.com/smarterwithgartner/gartner-top-
strategic-technology-trends-for-2021/ (accessed on 4 June 2021).
11. The Impact of Digitalization on Strategy. Available online: https://www.mbdconsulting.ch/publications/digitalization-
corporate-strategy (accessed on 4 June 2021).
12. Teece, D.J. Business Models, Business Strategy and Innovation. Long Range Plan. 2010, 43, 172–194. [CrossRef]
13. Бoрoвкoв, A.И.; Рябoв, Ю.A.; Мaрусевa, B.М. Нoвaя пaрaдигмa цифрoвoгo прoектирoвaния и мoделирoвaния глoбaльнo
кoнкурентoспoсoбнoй прoдукции нoвoгo пoкoления. In Цифрoвoе прoизвoдствo: метoды, экoсистемы, технoлoгии;
МШУCкoлкoвo: Moscow, Russia, 2017; pp. 28–31.
14. OECD. Measuring the Digital Transformation a Roadmap for the Future; OECD: Paris, France, 2019.
15. Verhoef, P.C.; Broekhuizen, T.; Bart, Y.; Bhattacharya, A.; Qi Dong, J.; Fabian, N.; Haenlein, M. Digital transformation: A
multidisciplinary reflection and research agenda. J. Bus. Res. 2021, 122, 889–901. [CrossRef]
16. Li, H.; Yang, C. Digital Transformation of Manufacturing Enterprises. Procedia Comput. Sci. 2021, 187, 24–29. [CrossRef]
17. Sklyar, A.; Kowalkowski, C.; Tronvoll, B.; Sörhammar, D. Organizing for digital servitization: A service ecosystem perspective.
J. Bus. Res. 2019, 104, 450–460. [CrossRef]
18. Li, L.; Su, F.; Zhang, W.; Mao, J.-Y. Digital transformation by SME entrepreneurs: A capability perspective. Inform. Syst. J. 2018, 28,
1129–1157. [CrossRef]
19. Cugno, M.; Castagnoli, R.; Büchi, G. Openness to Industry 4.0 and performance: The impact of barriers and incentives. Technol.
Forecast. Soc. Chang. 2021, 168, 120756. [CrossRef]
20. Chauhan, C.; Singh, A.; Luthra, S. Barriers to industry 4.0 adoption and its performance implications: An empirical investigation
of emerging economy. J. Clean. Prod. 2021, 285, 124809. [CrossRef]
21. Vogelsang, K.; Liere-Netheler, K.; Packmohr, S.; Hoppe, U. Barriers to Digital Transformation in Manufacturing: Development of
a Research Agenda. In Proceedings of the Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences 2019, Grand Wailea, HI, USA,
1–8 January 2019.
22. Neto, A.A.; Deschamps, F.; da Silva, E.R.; de Lima, E.P. Digital twins in manufacturing: An assessment of drivers, enablers and
barriers to implementation. Procedia CIRP 2020, 93, 210–215. [CrossRef]
23. Ramilo, R.; Embi, M.R.B. Critical analysis of key determinants and barriers to digital innovation adoption among architectural
organizations. Front. Archit. Res. 2014, 3, 431–451. [CrossRef]
24. Jones, M.D.; Hutcheson, S.; Camba, J.D. Past, present, and future barriers to digital transformation in manufacturing: A review.
J. Manuf. Syst. 2021, 60, 936–948. [CrossRef]
25. Volberda, H.W.; Khanagha, S.; Baden-Fuller, C.; Mihalache, O.R.; Birkinshaw, J. Strategizing in a digital world: Overcoming
cognitive barriers, reconfiguring routines and introducing new organizational forms. Long Range Plan. 2021, 102110, in press.
[CrossRef]
26. Becker, J.; Niehaves, B.; Poeppelbuss, J.; Simons, A. Maturity Models in IS Research. In Proceedings of the ECIS 2010 Proceedings,
Pretoria, South Africa, 7–9 June 2010.
27. How to Measure Digitalization? A Critical Evaluation of Digital Maturity Models|SpringerLink. Available online: https:
//link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-44999-5_30 (accessed on 4 June 2021).
28. Industry 4.0—Self Assessment. Available online: https://i40-self-assessment.pwc.de/i40/landing/ (accessed on 4 June 2021).
29. Digital Maturity Model. InfoCert. Available online: https://infocert.digital/digital-maturity-model/ (accessed on 4 June 2021).
30. Digital Maturity Assessment|Avanade. Available online: https://www.avanade.com/en/thinking/rethink/digital-maturity-
assessment (accessed on 4 June 2021).
31. Digital Maturity. Available online: https://www.bcg.com/capabilities/digital-technology-data/digital-maturity (accessed on
4 June 2021).
32. Government of South Australia. Digital Maturity Assessment Tool—Governance and Leadership. Available online: https://
www.dpc.sa.gov.au/responsibilities/ict-digital-cyber-security/toolkits/digital-transformation-toolkit (accessed on 4 June 2021).
33. Deloitte. Digital Maturity Model Achieving Digital Maturity to Drive Growth. 2018. Available online: https://www2.deloitte.
com/be/en/pages/strategy-operations/strategy-analytics-mergers-acquisitions/articles/so-deloitte-digital-maturity-survey.
html (accessed on 4 June 2021).
34. Protiviti|Digital Transformation Assessment|Resilience & Performance in a Digital World. Available online: http://landing.
protiviti.com/digital (accessed on 4 June 2021).

--- PAGE 13 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 11153 13 of 13
35. NHSEnglandDigitalMaturityAssessment. Availableonline: https://www.england.nhs.uk/digitaltechnology/connecteddigitalsystems/
maturity-index/ (accessed on 4 June 2021).
36. Digital Maturity Assessment Tool (DMAT)—Digital Business Development. Available online: https://dbd.au.dk/dmat/
(accessed on 4 June 2021).
37. Digital Maturity Assessment 1. Available online: https://www.axway.com/en/maturity-assessment (accessed on 4 June 2021).
38. Digital Maturity|An Invaluable Tool to Measure and Improve the Digital Maturity of Your Organisation. Available online:
https://digitalmaturity.org/ (accessed on 4 June 2021).
39. Carvalho, J.; Rocha, Á.; Braga de Vasconcelos, J. Maturity Models for Hospital Information Systems Management: Are They Ma-
ture? In Innovation in Medicine and Healthcare; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2015; Volume 45, pp. 541–552, ISBN 978-3-319-23023-8.
40. Рукoвoдствo пo цифрoвoй трaнсфoрмaции прoизвoдственных предприятий|Πoиск|Autodesk Knowledge Network. Avail-
able online: https://knowledge.autodesk.com/ru/search-result/caas/simplecontent/content/-D1-80-D1-83-D0-BA-D0-BE-
D0-B2-D0-BE-D0-B4-D1-81-D1-82-D0-B2-D0-BE--D0-BF-D0-BE--D1-86-D0-B8.html (accessed on 4 June 2021).
41. Метoдические рекoмендaции пo цифрoвoй трaнсфoрмaции гoсудaрственных кoрпoрaций и кoмпaний с гoсудaрственным
учaстием. Available online: /ru/documents/7342/ (accessed on 4 June 2021).
42. Pedrini, C.; Frederico, G. Information Technology Maturity Evaluation in a Large Brazilian Cosmetics Industry. Int. J. Bus. Admin.
2018, 9, 15. [CrossRef]
43. Lahrmann, G.; Marx, F.; Winter, R.; Wortmann, F. Business Intelligence Maturity: Development and Evaluation of a Theoretical
Model. In Proceedings of the 2011 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, Kauai, HI, USA, 4–7 January 2011;
pp. 1–10.
44. EXPH; Barry, M. EXPH Assessing the Impact of Digital Transformation of Health Services; Publications Office of the European Union:
Luxembourg, 2018.
45. Eaves, D. Digital Maturity Self Assessment Exercise. Available online: https://medium.com/digitalhks/digital-maturity-self-
assessment-exercise-735647b2ba23 (accessed on 4 June 2021).
46. Roadmap for the Development of Cross-Cutting Digital Technology “New Manufacturing Technologies”: Findings and Prospects.
Available online: https://maginnov.ru/en/magazine/archive/2019/innovations-n11-2019/roadmap-for-the-development-
of-cross-cutting-digital-technology-new-manufacturing-technologies-findings-and-prospects (accessed on 8 June 2021).