--- PAGE 1 ---
ScienceDirect
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Procedia Computer Science 181 (2021) 119–126
1877-0509 © 2021 TheAuthors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the CENTERIS - International Conference on ENTERprise
Information Systems / ProjMAN - International Conference on Project MANagement / HCist - International Conference on
Health and Social Care Information Systems and Technologies 2020
10.1016/j.procs.2021.01.111
© 2021 TheAuthors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the CENTERIS - International Conference on ENTERprise
Information Systems / ProjMAN - International Conference on Project MANagement / HCist - International Conference on Health
and Social Care Information Systems and Technologies 2020
ScienceDirect
Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia
1877-0509 © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the CENTERIS - International Conference on ENTERprise Information Systems /
ProjMAN – International Conference on Project MANagement / HCist - International Conference on Health and Social Care Information
Systems and Technologies
CENTERIS - International Conference on ENTERprise Information Systems / ProjMAN -
International Conference on Project MANagement / HCist - International Conference on Health
and Social Care Information Systems and Technologies 2020
Managing two-speed innovation for digital transformation
Bendik Bygstad*, Egil Øvrelid
Dept. Of Informatics, University of Oslo, N-0176 Norway
Abstract
In this study, we propose that the concept of two-speed innovation is a fruitful approach to understand and manage digital
innovation and transformation. The main argument is that two-speed innovation leverages the new organisational forms of the
digital age, such as infrastructures and platform ecosystems. Our research questions are, (i) howdoes two-speed innovation support
digital transformation, and (ii) how can managers leverage two-speed configurations?
We developed an analytical framework to understand the managerial options of two-speed innovation. To assess it we investigated
the digital transformation of four large organisations. We identified four two-speed configurations, describe how the two-speed
dynamics unfold and discuss managerial options for managing them.
© 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the CENTERIS - International Conference on ENTERprise
Information Systems / ProjMAN – International Conference on Project MANagement / HCist - International Conference on Health
and Social Care Information Systems and Technologies
Keywords: Two-speed innovation, dynamic capabilities, digital transformation
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: bendikby@ifi.uio.no
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia
1877-0509 © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the CENTERIS - International Conference on ENTERprise Information Systems /
ProjMAN – International Conference on Project MANagement / HCist - International Conference on Health and Social Care Information
Systems and Technologies
CENTERIS - International Conference on ENTERprise Information Systems / ProjMAN -
International Conference on Project MANagement / HCist - International Conference on Health
and Social Care Information Systems and Technologies 2020
Managing two-speed innovation for digital transformation
Bendik Bygstad*, Egil Øvrelid
Dept. Of Informatics, University of Oslo, N-0176 Norway
Abstract
In this study, we propose that the concept of two-speed innovation is a fruitful approach to understand and manage digital
innovation and transformation. The main argument is that two-speed innovation leverages the new organisational forms of the
digital age, such as infrastructures and platform ecosystems. Our research questions are, (i) howdoes two-speed innovation support
digital transformation, and (ii) how can managers leverage two-speed configurations?
We developed an analytical framework to understand the managerial options of two-speed innovation. To assess it we investigated
the digital transformation of four large organisations. We identified four two-speed configurations, describe how the two-speed
dynamics unfold and discuss managerial options for managing them.
© 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the CENTERIS - International Conference on ENTERprise
Information Systems / ProjMAN – International Conference on Project MANagement / HCist - International Conference on Health
and Social Care Information Systems and Technologies
Keywords: Two-speed innovation, dynamic capabilities, digital transformation
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: bendikby@ifi.uio.no

--- PAGE 2 ---
120 Bendik Bygstad et al. / Procedia Computer Science 181 (2021) 119–126
2 Bendik Bygstad & Egil Øvrelid / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000
1. Introduction
Digital transformation is a challenging task, involving reconfiguration of technologies, organisations, and people.
Itiscommonwisdomthatchangemanagementmaybemoreimportantthantechnology,buttherearemanyunresolved
issues in how to manage the transformation [1]. In this study, we propose that the concept of two-speed innovation is
fruitful for understanding and managing digital innovation and transformation.
Two-speed innovation expresses the idea that (i) digitalisation requires that an organisation must both exploit
existing resources and explore new ones [2], and (ii) digital infrastructures and ecosystems support this by having
some stable core elements with slow innovation, and some user-oriented elements with fast innovation [3]. Examples
are banking systems with web interfaces, airline booking systems with customer apps, and medical systems with
clinicians’ devices in front. Previous research has suggested naming the first heavyweight IT and the second
lightweight IT, denoting two different knowledge regimes [4]. In developing the term, we build on two assumptions:
First, digitalisation is about technology [5]. Of course, it is the goal-directed organisational use of technology that
enables the capture ofvalue [6], but it is misleading to argue that digitalization is primarilyabout organisational issues.
A modern car factory is about robots and logistics; a digital ecosystem is about platform, apps, and transactions - and
the governance of them [7].
Second, the organisation and architecture of technology are essential, and the layered and combinable structure of
digital technologies offers a set of previously unknown options for innovation [8]. However, even digital technology
is not endlessly flexible, and some forms of technical organisation are betterthan others. Two such forms areplatform-
oriented infrastructures [9] and platform ecosystems [10], and both of them are supported by two-speed innovation.
McKinsey coined the term two-speed IT architecture for the digital enterprise [11], defining it as a fast-speed,
customer-centric front end interacting with a slow-speed, transaction-focused legacy back end. Several authors have
used the term two-speed innovation (see for instance Kessler and Buch [12]), but the term has not yet been developed
theoretically. The ambition of this paper is to do so and to explore the managerial options in leveraging two-speed
innovation for digitalisation.
Our research questions are:
• How does two-speed innovation support digital innovation in infrastructures and platform ecosystems?
• How can managers leverage two-speed configurations?
We proceed by reviewing the literature on two-speed innovation, related to digital transformation and the
exploitation/explorationdivide. Buildingonthis weproposea frameworkto analyse theorganisational andmanagerial
options of two-speed innovation. We use the framework to describe and assess two-speed innovation in four large
organizations, identified four two-speed configurations, and discuss managerial options for managing them.
2. Relevant literature
The idea of two-speed innovation has two main sources; the research on exploitation and exploration (and other
related concepts) and the technical architecture of platform ecosystems.
2.1. Exploitation and exploration
Itisacknowledged inmanagementresearchthatinordertocompeteandsustain,organisationsneedtobothproduce
effectively and to innovate [13]. A car producer must produce a large number of identical cars at low cost, but also
develop new models with electric motors and self-driving software. A hospital must treat a large number of patients
professionally and efficiently, but also conduct research for new treatments and take new technology into use.
Research has dealt with this issue in various ways, for instance by March’s influential concepts of exploiting and
exploring [2]. Exploitation means to use your current resources efficiently, while exploration is to increase the search
scope, aiming for discovering and leveraging new resources. Because the two approaches require different structures
and capabilities, March argued that there is a trade-off between the two; i.e. an organisation must decide its focus and
balance. Exploitation implies to reduce variability to optimise production, while exploration implies to increase it to
stimulate innovation.

--- PAGE 3 ---
Bendik Bygstad et al. / Procedia Computer Science 181 (2021) 119–126 121
Bendik Bygstad & Egil Øvrelid / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000 3
A suggested approach to resolve this challenge is ambidextrous organisations, which separate their exploratory
units from their traditional, exploitative ones, allowing them to have different processes, structures, and cultures; co-
ordinating them at the senior executive level [14]. A related idea is the concept of dynamic capabilities [13], which
differentiates between the capabilities an organisation needs to produce its current products and services, and the
dynamic capabilities needed to sense and respond to changing environments. How are such capabilities acquired?
Augier and Teece suggested that, although firms are products of their own history, managers can play a significant
role in shaping new capabilities [15].
These insights have highlighted that organisations need to combine productivity and innovation and that these
capabilities require different structures and mindsets. What they contribute less to, is how the new digital
organizational forms support this aim.
2.2. Digital infrastructures and platforms
With the rapid growth of the Internet in the 1990s, there was a transition from single IT systems in organisations
to interconnected digital infrastructures [16] and later to platform ecosystems [10]. Digital infrastructures are defined
as shared, open (and unbounded), heterogeneous, and evolving socio- technical system (the installed base) consisting
of a set of IT capabilities and their user, operations, and design communities [16]. The main difference is that digital
infrastructures are more heterogeneous than platform ecosystems, which have a clear structure of platform core and
complements [3].
Digital infrastructures and platform ecosystems have some shared characteristics. They are large socio-technical
structures, consisting of systems, networks, and users, transcending organisational and national borders, and have
become key actors in modern economies. Examples of digital infrastructures are airline systems and health systems.
Examples of platform ecosystems are Uber and Airbnb. They grow through innovation, adoption, and scaling [9], and
it is their organisation of technology (their IT architecture) that provides their ability to support two-speed innovation
[17].
The explanation is that platform structures allow for two loosely connected innovation processes; the core is
characterized by a long-term perspective, standardized interoperability, and planned change, while the compliments
(apps) allow for short-term innovation, local adaptation and emergent change. An illustrative example is how the car
industry has approached modern media. A decade ago, car manufacturers developed (or bought) their own navigation
and audio systems, at the same speed as they did new car development. Then, observing the rapid innovation at firms
such as Apple and Samsung, they decoupled the innovation processes and integrated the quickly evolving media
products into the (still) slowly developing car models [18]; [12].
2.3. Summing-up
The principles of two-speed innovation can be summarised this way:
• It is a process which combines exploitation and exploration, by a loosely coupled interplay.
• It is supported by the IT architecture of infrastructures and platform ecosystems, which differentiate between
stable heavyweight IT and fast and agile lightweight IT, connected by boundary resources (APIs).
• Two-speed innovation allows organisations to leverage their existing resources to enable fast innovation.
Building on this, we will now suggest a simple framework allowing us to study the phenomenon empirically in
digitalisation innovation processes.
3. Framework
Our framework is built on the premise that digital transformation is built on two key aspects; access to digital
resources and the dynamic capabilities to leverage them for business purposes. Digital resources are identified as the
primary component in digital innovation [19], because of their re-combinability, and the contingent relationship they
have to other resources. In digital platforms and infrastructures, these resources are organized in four value spaces,
i.e. devices, networks, services, and content, where various combinations create value [8].

--- PAGE 4 ---
122 Bendik Bygstad et al. / Procedia Computer Science 181 (2021) 119–126
4 Bendik Bygstad & Egil Øvrelid / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000
Dynamic capabilities are needed to leveragedigital resources forinnovation.Capabilities refer toa “firm’s capacity
to deploy resources, usually in combination, using organizational processes, to effect a desired end” [20] p.35. The
dynamic capability perspective [13] has been extensively used in the strategic and change management literature to
investigate how companies can create, extend, or modify their resources in response to a rapidly changing
environment. The perspective specifies organizational processes, routines, and competencies that allow a firm to
generate a new strategy in response to emerging requirements. Dynamic capabilities enable firms to transform trough
three capacities; sensing, seizing, and reconfiguring [21].
We combine these two dimensions – dynamic capabilities and digital resources - into a four-field matrix, as shown
in Figure 1. We differentiate between dynamic capabilities for business, i.e. achieving competitive advantage, and
professional dynamic capabilities, the last characterising non-commercial sectors. We also differ between digital
infrastructures and platforms.
Fig. 1. Two-speed configurations
As shown in the framework, we identify and define four configurations. We will use the framework as an analytic
lens for analysing the cases.
4. Method
To exploreand validatetheconcept of two-speed innovationwe chose acase study approach. Inordertoinvestigate
the four configurations in our framework, we carefully selected four example cases, from our portfolio of on-going
longitudinal studies of innovation in large interconnected structures. The selection criteria were as follows. Following
Gerring [22] they should be relatively typical cases, in order to work as illustrative examples of two-speed innovation.
The four cases were chosen toillustrate the four configurations in ourframework; they were reasonably successful,
they were competently managed, and the solutions were taken into use. And most importantly, they offered the
opportunity to analyse in-depth data over time, allowing us to understand the dynamics.
Data was collected over the period 2013-2019, consisting of interviews with key stakeholders, archival data and
observations. Data analysis was conducted first for each case; we analysed the development of dynamic capabilities,
then the depoyment of digital resources, and finally the resulting two-speed configuration. Second, we conducted a
comparative analysis, focusing on the shared characteristics, and the differences between them.
5. Illustrative cases
We selected four illustrative cases, to describe the process of two-speed innovation. Each case description is
structured as follows, using the framework introduced in section 2; first, we describe how the dynamic capabilities
Digital resources
Infrastructure Platform
Business
Dynamic
Capabilities
Profes-
sional
Business
infrastructure
Business
platform
Professional
infrastructure
Professional
platform
Business infrastructure: A two-speed
configuration leveraging a structure of heavy and
light IT for business purposes
Business platform: A two-speed configuration with
a central platform, leveraging network effects
Professional infrastructure: A two-speed
configuration, leveraging a structure of heavy and
light IT for professional purposes
Professional platform: A two speed configuration
with a central platform, connecting different groups

--- PAGE 5 ---
Bendik Bygstad et al. / Procedia Computer Science 181 (2021) 119–126 123
Bendik Bygstad & Egil Øvrelid / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000 5
were developed and mobilized, then we describe the critical digital resources taken into use, and finally assess how
the two-speed innovation process unfolded.
Table 1. Cases
CASE Description Configuration
Østfold Hospital General hospital Professional infrastructure
TSD – by USIT Research platform for University of Oslo Professional platform
Nordic Choice Large Scandinavian Hotel chain Business infrastructure
ViPPS Mobile payment service Business platform
5.1. Østfold hospital – professional infrastructure
In 1999, the Norwegian Parliament decided to build a new hospital in Østfold County, which is part of the South-
East Regional Health Authority. The hospital opened in November 2015, with both somatic and psychiatric services
and 4800 employees. It quickly became well-known as one of the most digitally advanced hospitals in Scandinavia.
Dynamic capabilities
Hospitals have historically been organized according to professional disciplines and been less concerned with the
coordination of activities across these disciplines [17]. The CEO at Østfold hospital, Just Ebbesen, was a doctor and
a pioneer in using IT to innovate and support clinical processes: “I had been engaged with the relationship of process
innovation and IT the past 15 years, both theoretically and practically, and I knew what I wanted to achieve: hospital
processes should be well defined and supported by information.” Ebbesen hired a CIO with experience from
production and retail, a process director and a research director, and established a top management team. The
management team decided to acquire process technology and contacted a new supplier. This process technology was
not part of the regional portfolio of clinical systems.
Digital resources
The hospital management established an innovation project with around 25 clinicians working on redesigning the
clinical processes, and a separate group that worked with the process technology. The IT systems had to relate to the
process design, and since much of the information was stored in the existing digital infrastructure (consisting of over
300 applications, and managed by the central IT units), an interface that the process technology could use was created.
The process technology consisted of check-in, mobile devices, and electronic whiteboards, i.e. user services that
enabled clinical personnel to configure the information to fit with the process flow.
Two-speed configuration
The endeavors to implement lightweight process IT, and establish interaction with the digital infrastructure, has made
Østfold a two-speed organization. A new analytics unit was established to monitor the performance, and new digital
services were created. This digital competence gave Østfold a level 6 certification in HIMSS.
5.2. TSD – a research platform
The second case is taking place at the University of Oslo, which is the highest rated university in Norway, with
28.000 students and 6.000 employees. The unit of analyses is USIT, the University of Oslo's central IT organization
with around 220 employees, and thus one of the largest state in-house IT organizations in Norway. USIT delivers a
range of services including specialist services, both locally, nationally, and internationally.
Dynamic capabilities
USIT was originally an operational-oriented organization with a high level of expertise in local or national
administrative solutions. Increasingly, there was a demand for a research platform where data could be stored and
shared. A TSD group was established to work on the development of the research platform, and a competent project
manager was appointed. The group was initially quite small but grew larger as TSD gained popularity. Stronger ties

--- PAGE 6 ---
124 Bendik Bygstad et al. / Procedia Computer Science 181 (2021) 119–126
6 Bendik Bygstad & Egil Øvrelid / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000
were also established with important research groups. TSD eventually became central to USIT's innovation strategy
and is now competing with other solutions in the higher education and healthcare sector.
Digital resources
Initially, the TSD group had to use the existing integration engine when developing new solutions. As the TSD
research platform gained in popularity, the need to develop services faster was strengthened. Consequently, a new
architecture was developed and implemented. The architecture consists of platform core, boundary resources, and
loosely coupled app modules, and TSD offers a variety of application resources that allow services to be developed
by the researchers themselves. For instance, the TSD group responded early to the corona crisis in March 2020, and
quickly provided corona researcher with a secure service.
Two-speed configuration
With the TSD, USIT has established a two-speed organizational structure that enables USIT to have the capacity to
both manage stable operations and resilient innovation. From a strategic perspective, TSD can be developed further
into a general research platform, where the central resources enable (a very scalable number of) researchers to develop
their research instruments quickly.
5.3. Nordic Choice – a business infrastructure
Nordic Choice is a hotel chain based in Scandinavia. It includes 193 hotels and 33,500 rooms and had a turnover
of 13,360 billion NOK (around 1.384 billion euros) in 2018. There are 16,500 employees in Norway, Sweden,
Denmark, Finland, and the Baltics.
Dynamic capabilities
In 2015, as a response to the increasing competition from the online travel agencies Booking.com and Expedia, and
the fear of losing control with their distribution channels and the customer relationship, Nordic Choice initiated a
digital business strategy. The hotel chain realised it lacked the resources to implement the strategy, and established a
separate company, eBerry in 2016. The mandate of eBerry was to maintain the main share of the bookings of Nordic
Choice in the distribution chain. A Chief Digital Officer (CDO) was hired with a background from one of the OTAs,
and quickly established several teams to compete in the digital ecosystem.
Digital resources
eBerry immediately started to implement the strategy short-term by entering the digital competition arena (negotiating
with OTAs, search optimization, continuous surveillance of digital traffic, etc.) and long-term by investing in new
digital solutions. These included a technical platform to build new solutions on, but integrated with the legacy booking
systems, a new website, and a loyalty app. These measures stabilized the Nordic share of bookings.
Two-speed configuration
The strategy established a fast-moving unit, eBerry, with specialised competence and a different culture. It innovated
quickly a set of digital services, which were integrated relatively loosely with the legacy heavyweight solutions at the
mother company. In managerial terms, there was also loose coupling, as the co-operation between the two units was
mainly done at top management level.
5.4. ViPPS - a business platform
ViPPS is a Norwegian mobile payment application designed for smartphones developed by DNB, the largest bank
in the country. Mobile payment is a highly competitive digital ecosystem, with many global players, such as Apple
Pay and PayPal.
Dynamic capabilities
In 2014 Apple Pay was launched, creating a race on mobile payment around the world. In Norway, a service
(mCash) was already launched, and a Danish service (MobilePay), was entering the market, but DNB decided to

--- PAGE 7 ---
Bendik Bygstad et al. / Procedia Computer Science 181 (2021) 119–126 125
Bendik Bygstad & Egil Øvrelid / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000 7
launch a competing service. The ViPPS was developed in six months by Tata Consultancy Services, an Indian firm,
and launched in June 2015. To quickly build a large customer base, DNB ran an aggressive marketing campaign
during 2016. In February 2017 ViPPS had 2 million customers and invited the other banks to co-partner a new
company, ViPPS Corp. The mCash competitor was merged into ViPPS, and MobilePay was withdrawn from the
Norwegian market.
Digital resources
Tata developed the first version of ViPPS very quickly, with rudimentary integration with the central bank systems
of DNB. The first version included only mobile payment between friends, conveniently based on mobile phone
number and credit card account. This service was free, and to make more money DNB developed more services for
business, such as payment on Internet and in shopping. These services followed the same principle as the first, namely
to solve a concrete need and be very easy to use. The first version was technically very simple, and the basic
architecture had to be redesigned later, to support further development and security.
Two-speed configuration
DNB succeeded in establishing a dominating position in the Norwegian mobile payment market, by fast
development of dynamic capabilities and a two-speed approach to digital innovation. The two-speed innovation
eventually led to the establishment of a new company, and an international strategy for the ViPPS product.
6. Discussion
In this section, we return to the research questions. Building on our framework and cases, we suggest that two-
speed innovation can be defined as an innovation process that leverages the interplay between digital platforms/
infrastructures and lightweight IT to enable agile user-oriented innovation.
6.1. How does two-speed innovation support digital innovation in infrastructures and platform ecosystems?
Our cases show that two-speed innovation supports innovation, explained by the key principles proposed in section
2. As illustrated by the four cases there are some shared characteristics of successful two-speed initiatives.
First, two-speed innovation requires that top managers understand and leverage the idea. Developing the necessary
dynamic capabilities implies risk developing resources that the organization currently lacks [13]. Taking the example
of Østfold Hospital the CEO initiated a process view of the new hospital and implemented a completely new solution.
In the case of USIT, the CIO decided to allocate key resources from operations, and start building a research platform.
Second, to allow for fast innovation with lightweight IT, it is beneficial to establish a new organization, loosely
coupled to the mother organization. The reason is that tight integration between the two will slow innovation speed,
reducing it to the speed of heavyweight IT (Bygstad, 2017). In the case of Nordic Choice, the new unit, eBerry,
established agile processes and culture very different from the hotel chain, enabling fast development of new digital
resources.
Third, the power of two-speed innovation lies in the combination of dynamic capabilities and digital architectures,
i.e. they reinforce each other. This is illustrated in the case of Østfold Hospital, where the process reengineering was
supported by the new layer of lightweight IT, and the interplay with the large systems.
However, we also observed that two-speed innovation works differently in the four configurations. The business
platform configurations, such as ViPPS, are easier to scale, because of network effects [10], while business
infrastructures, such as Nordic Choice and eBerry, require more integration [9], and therefore take longer time to
work. The professional platform configuration, as exemplified in TSD, uses a similar IT architecture as business
platforms, but the network effect is more limited, while the professional infrastructure configuration, such as Østfold
Hospital, is the most complex, and requires much more integration.
6.2. How can managers leverage two-speed configurations?
March [2] perceived that managing exploiting and exploring is a trade-off, with a potential risk of misjudging the
balance between them. Our cases highlight that two-speed innovation is a challenging process, with several risks, both

--- PAGE 8 ---
126 Bendik Bygstad et al. / Procedia Computer Science 181 (2021) 119–126
8 Bendik Bygstad & Egil Øvrelid / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000
managerial, technical, and public. Taking the example of Østfold Hospital the CEO envisioned and implemented a
costly solution, not at all approved by the central health care authorities. A failure, which was clearly a possibility,
would have been a disaster. In the case of DNB, launching an immature and technically shaky product such as ViPPS
could have ruined the public confidence of the large bank, if it had failed.
Our analysis shows that leaders can manage two-speed innovation by leveraging the interplay of exploitation and
exploration made possible by digital architectures. This implies to establish dynamic capabilities [15] and to develop
the needed digital resources. For instance, in the case of Nordic Choice, the top managers lacked the needed insights
in the OTA ecosystems and decided to recruit the CEO from eBookers, i.e. a platform company. She managed the
establishment of eBerry and also became a member of the top management group of Nordic Choice.
It is clear that digital transformation is not an endpoint, but will be a continuous process. We have not dealt with
how two-speed innovation will evolve over time, and further research should aim to shed light on this.
7. Conclusion
This paper introduced and discussed the term two-speed innovation, and used four illustrative cases to explore the
forces in the process. We show that digital transformation is made possible by a particular interplay, where dynamic
capabilities operate with new organizational forms, such as digital infrastructures and platform ecosystems.
References
[1] G. Vial, ‘Understanding digital transformation: A review and a research agenda’, The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 2019.
[2] J. G. March, ‘Exploration and exploitation in organizational learning’, Organization science, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 71–87, 1991.
[3] C. Y. Baldwin and C. J. Woodard, ‘The architecture of platforms: A unified view’, Platforms, markets and innovation, vol. 32, 2009.
[4] B. Bygstad, ‘Generative innovation: a comparison of lightweight and heavyweight IT’, Journal of Information Technology, vol. 32, no. 2,
pp. 180–193, 2017.
[5] Y. Yoo, ‘The tables have turned: How can the information systems field contribute to technology and innovation management research?’,
Journal of the association for information systems, vol. 14, no. 5, p. 4, 2012.
[6] B. Tabrizi, E. Lam, K. Girard, and V. Irvin, ‘Digital transformation is not about technology’, Harvard Business Review, vol. 13, 2019.
[7] A. Tiwana, Platform ecosystems: Aligning architecture, governance, and strategy. Newnes, 2013.
[8] O. Henfridsson, J. Nandhakumar, H. Scarbrough, and N. Panourgias, ‘Recombination in the open-ended value landscape of digital
innovation’, Information and Organization, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 89–100, 2018.
[9] O. Henfridsson and B. Bygstad, ‘The generative mechanisms of digital infrastructure evolution’, MIS Quarterly, pp. 907–931, 2013.
[10] G. G. Parker, M. W. Van Alstyne, and S. P. Choudary, Platform Revolution: How Networked Markets Are Transforming the Economy? and
How to Make Them Work for You. WW Norton & Company, 2016.
[11] O. Bossert, ‘A two-speed architecture for the digital enterprise’, in Emerging Trends in the Evolution of Service-Oriented and Enterprise
Architectures, Springer, 2016, pp. 139–150.
[12] T. Kessler and C.Buck, ‘How digitization affects mobility andthe businessmodelsof automotive OEMs’, in Phantom ExMachina, Springer,
2017, pp. 107–118.
[13] D. J. Teece, ‘Dynamic capabilities: Routines versus entrepreneurial action’, Journal of management studies, vol. 49, no. 8, pp. 1395–1401,
2012.
[14] C. A. O’Reilly and M. L. Tushman, ‘The ambidextrous organization.’, Harvard Business Review, vol. 82, no. 4, pp. 74–81, 2004.
[15] M. Augier and D. J. Teece, ‘Dynamic capabilities and the role of managers in business strategy and economic performance’, Organization
science, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 410–421, 2009.
[16] O. Hanseth and K. Lyytinen, ‘Design theory for dynamic complexity in information infrastructures: the case of building internet’, Journal of
information technology, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 1–19, 2010.
[17] E. Øvrelid and A. M. Kempton, ‘From Recombination To Reconfiguration: Affording Process Innovation In Digital Infrastructures’, in
Proceedings of the 27th European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS), Stockholm & Uppsala, Sweden, June, 2019, pp. 8–14.
[18] F. Svahn, L. Mathiassen, and R. Lindgren, ‘Embracing Digital Innovation in Incumbent Firms: How Volvo Cars Managed Competing
Concerns.’, Mis Quarterly, vol. 41, no. 1, 2017.
[19] S. Nambisan, ‘Architecture vs. ecosystem perspectives: Reflections on digital innovation.’, Information and Organization, vol. 28, no. 2, pp.
104–106, 2018.
[20] R. Amit and P. J. Schoemaker, ‘Strategic assets and organizational rent’, Strategic management journal, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 33–46, 1993.
[21] A. Yeow,C. Soh,and R.Hansen,‘Aligning with new digital strategy: Adynamiccapabilitiesapproach’, TheJournalofStrategic Information
Systems, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 43–58, 2018.
[22] J. Gerring, Case study research: Principles and practices. Cambridge university press, 2006.