--- PAGE 1 ---
Digital Transformation: A Foundational Capability Building Block
Perspective on Maturing the IT Capability
Marian Carcary 1 and Eileen Doherty 2
1Mary Immaculate College, Ireland
2Ulster University, Northern Ireland
marian.carcary@mic.ul.ie
e.doherty@ulster.ac.uk
Abstract: Theenterprise-widescopeof anorganisation’sIT capability insustainably leveragingtechnology forbusinessvalue
is well-researched, and the level of maturity of this capability is a key determinant of an organisation’s success. IT capability
maturity has become more critical as technological developments continue at an accelerated pace and as whole industries
are being disrupted by digital developments. Maturity in terms of IT leadership, IT processes, IT infrastructure, and a myriad
of other supporting organisation-wide capabilities is required. Since the 1980s, maturity models in the literature have
focusedonspecialistnicheareas,withfewadoptingaholisticperspective.Acrossthesemodels,alackofconsensusisevident
on the key capabilities that should be matured and on what the important sub elements or building blocks of these
capabilitiesare. How doestheorganisationachieveanadequate levelof maturity if therequiredcapabilitiesareunclear? As
one of the most holistic IT capability maturity models identified, this paper undertakes a systematic analysis of the 36 IT
capabilities within IT Capability Maturity Framework (IT-CMF) and the 315 sub elements (Capability Building Blocks (CBBs))
that comprise these capabilities. This research aims to identify the common sub elements or building blocks inherent across
the 36 capabilities, which we will refer to as Foundational Capability Building Blocks (FCBBs), and a high-level definition of
these FCBBs abstracted from the relevant sub elements and discussed in terms of their recognised importance to effecting
successful digital transformations. From an academic perspective, the research provides deeper insight on common themes
that are pertinent to IT capability improvement. From an industry practitioner perspective, it breaks down the complexities
of IT capability maturity with a focus on a manageable number of considerations.
Keywords: IT/digital capability, maturity model, IT/digital maturity, digital transformation, foundational capability building
blocks
1. Introduction
Research indicates that IT capability maturity is a key determinant of an organisation’s success and a key
consideration in digital transformation. Developing IT capability necessitates, firstly, understanding the broad
spectrum of capabilities that require organisational focus, and secondly, determining how mature these
capabilities should be. Across the literature, a lack of consensus is evident on the key capabilities that should be
matured (Carcary et al, 2016). Throughout the course of this research, only one model was identified that
presentsacomprehensiveviewofthebroadrange ofITcapabilities(ITCapabilityMaturityFramework(IT-CMF))
(Curley et al, 2016); this model identifies 36 distinct IT capabilities and 315 sub elements or building blocks.
Singularly, this demonstrates the expansive scope of an organisation’s IT capability and the potential challenges
organisations may face in planning a capability improvement programme.
This paper seeks to increase clarity on the process of maturing the overall IT capability through investigating
whether there are recurring themes across the different capabilities’ sub elements or building blocks.
Identification of recurring themes would help simplify ITcapability development throughenabling organisations
focusonamanageable numberofareasthataregenerically applicabletooverallITcapabilityimprovement.The
research question is as follows: To what extent do common sub elements or building blocks exist across the
broad spectrum of ITcapabilities?To answer this question, this study undertakes a concept-centric examination
of IT-CMF in order to distil and conceptualise any recurring building blocks and their focus areas. It outlines core
learnings on the identified areas, enabling practitioners to break down the complexities of beginning to design
an overall IT capability improvement programme.
The paper is organised as follows. Section 2 discusses the pertinent literature around capability and maturity
model research. Section 3 details the research methodology while section 4 presents results of the research
analysis, outlining a concept matrix of what we term ‘Foundational Capability Building Blocks’ (FCBBs) and their
associated definitions and areas of focus. Sections 5 presents a discussion of the research findings in light of the
existing literature on digital transformation, while section 6 highlights avenues for future research and draws
the paper to a conclusion.
80
Proceedings of the 18th European Conference on Management Leadership and Governance, ECMLG 2022

--- PAGE 2 ---
Marian Carcary and Eileen Doherty
2. Literature review
2.1 Capabilities and IT capabilities
Organisational capabilities reflect an organisation’s capacity to ‘perform a set of co-ordinated tasks, utilising
organisational resources, for the purposes of achieving a particular end result’ (Helfat and Peteraf, 2003).
According to Curley et al (2016), ‘collectively, capabilities coordinate the activities of individuals and groups –
linking individual actions into seamless chains of actions, leading to repeatable patterns of interaction that
become more efficient and effective as they are practised and internalised’. To stay competitive, organisations
must not only develop these capabilities, but must innovatively manipulate and re-configure them to respond
to environmental changes. This makes them difficult to replicate by other organisations. Termed ‘dynamic
capabilities’ (Eisenhardt and Martin, 2000; Yeow et al, 2017), difficult to replicate capabilities support the
continuous creation, extension, upgrading, protection, and relevance of the organisation’s asset base (Teece,
2007) and are associated with improved capacity for organisational learning (Curley et al, 2016).
Within the context of IT, the importance of developing an effective capability cannot be understated. Without a
(dynamic) capability to react to the accelerated development of innovative technologies, any advantage held by
an organisation can be quickly eroded. The work of Peppard and Ward (2004) was foundational in re-orienting
organisations towards a capability centric view of how to optimise value from their IT investments. Such value
realisation is contingent on the creation and deployment of unique IT capabilities and the related IT-enabled
businesschangesthataresupported(PavlouandElSawy,2011).DrnevichandCroson(2013)defineITcapability
as the organisation’s ‘ability to mobilise and deploy its IT-based resources, creating value in combination with
otherresources and capabilities, and thefirm-specific IT-enabled knowledgeand routinesthat improve the value
of non-IT resources’. Li and Chan (2019) expand current research to define the concept of dynamic IT capability
and highlight its constituent components.
However, developing an organisation’s (dynamic) IT capability is a multifaceted challenge. An organisation must
understand the enterprise-wide scope of IT and its impact on every aspect of the business ecosystem in value
co-creation activities, identify new strategic opportunities that are enabled by technological innovations, and
manage the significant complexities associated with IT-enabled business change (Carcary et al, 2016; Li and
Chan, 2019). In the era of digital transformations, technology is at the forefront of how a business operates and
how it seizes advantage; hence technology must be considered in tandem with the broader organisational
capabilities needed to leverage the technologies successfully.
Two of the most pertinent challenges organisations face include:
• Understanding what IT capabilities are required: The overall IT capability reflects a plethora of different
capabilities and those required to deliver business value may differ depending on the industry sector,
the business context, and theorganisation’sspecific requirements (Carcary et al, 2016). While hundreds
of IT frameworks/management tools exist, a lack of consensus is evident on the key capabilities that
should be matured and on their inherent sub elements or building blocks.
• Adequately developing the required capabilities: Research indicates that when organisations possess
superiorITcapabilities,theyperformaboveaverage(SanthanamandHartono,2003;Mithasetal,2011).
However, the maturity of different IT capabilities may differ greatly within the organisation and from
that of industry benchmarks. The use of maturity models to assess capability maturity and develop
improvement plans has received expansive treatment in the literature, however, many maturity models
focus on niche areas as opposed to holistically focusing on the overall IT capability.
In section 2.2, we discuss the importance of the maturity model concept as a mechanism to support
organisationsin maturing theITcapability, andhone in onone maturity model that adopts aholistic perspective
on the overall IT capability.
2.2 Maturity models
Maturity models are ‘conceptual models that outline anticipated, typical, logical and desired evolution paths
towards maturity’ (Becker et al, 2010), where maturity denotes ‘an evolutionary progress in the demonstration
of a specific ability’ (Mettler, 2010). Maturity models detail the criteria associated with different maturity levels;
they provide the basis for an organisation to determine their ‘as is’ and desired ‘to be’ maturity state (Carcary,
2011)andserveasatooltodefineanimprovementpathinalignmentwithbestknownpractices(Proença,2016;
81
Proceedings of the 18th European Conference on Management Leadership and Governance, ECMLG 2022

--- PAGE 3 ---
Marian Carcary and Eileen Doherty
Aguiar et al, 2018). Since the 1980s, maturity models have attracted considerable interest from the research
community (Achi et al, 2016; Pereira and Serrano, 2020). Many models reported in the literature are applicable
to IT but they adopt a narrow focus, concentrating on specialist niches or specific aspects of IT management
(Table 1).
Table 1: Maturity model examples in specialist IT niches
Onlysomeofthosematuritymodelsadoptacapabilityperspective,withmanyfocusingonthenarrowerprocess
view. From an industry practitioner’s perspective there are inefficiencies and complexities from using so many
toolstoadvancetheITcapability(Curleyetal,2012).Onematuritymodelthatprovidescomprehensivecoverage
of IT management domains from a capability perspective is the IT Capability Maturity Framework (IT-CMF). This
framework provides a ‘single integrated enterprise IT approach’ and is designed ‘to cover the range of IT
capabilities needed in an IT function to deliver agility, innovation, and value for the organisation’ (Curley et al,
2016).
IT-CMF is developed by the Innovation Value Institute (IVI), leveraging the principles of open innovation
(Chesbrough,2003)anddesignscienceresearch(HelfertandCurley,2012).Acomprehensivebodyofknowledge
guide to this framework was published in 2016 (Curley et al, 2016) and this serves as the basis for analysis
undertaken in this paper. IT-CMF comprises a modular library of 36 IT Critical Capabilities (CCs). In line with
research by Savaneviciene et al (2021), each IT-CMF CC is broken into a number of sub elements which are
termed ‘Capability Building Blocks (CBBs)’ (315 in total). For each CBB IT-CMF defines what maturity looks like
across five incremental levels and provides a series of assessment questions to determine the maturity state. To
enable improvement, IT-CMF provides a set of ‘practices, outcomes, and metrics (POMs)’ – practices to drive
maturity progression, business outcomes anticipated from implementing those practices, and metrics to
measure progress.
2.3 Breaking down the complexities? In search of common building blocks…
Given the breadth of IT capability domains (as detailed in IT-CMF), it is evident the extensive effort required by
organisations to ensure an adequate IT capability maturity. The challenge is amplified by the need to not just
develop those capabilities but to reconfigure those capabilities to adapt to changing business circumstances.
Given the challenges organisations face in digitally transforming (Carcary et al, 2016; Sousa-Zomer et al, 2020),
can the process of IT capability development be streamlined in some way? The authors assert it is worth
considering the extent to which common building blocks exist across the full spectrum of IT capabilities.
Identification of recurring themes would help break down the complexities for practitioners by providing
visibility of common focus areas that are pertinent to advancing the overall IT capability. In other words, even if
an organisation is focused on improving a specific IT capability domain such as risk management, there may be
building blocks of this capability that are generically applicable to improving the overall IT capability. Hence,
identification of recurring building blocks would provide practitioners with a manageable number of
considerations, around which they can begin to design an overall IT capability improvement programme.
3. Research Methodology
Thisstudyinvolvedaconcept-centricexaminationofIT-CMF toidentifyrecurringbuildingblocksacrossdifferent
IT capabilities. The IT-CMF body of knowledge (Curley et al, 2016) was analysed with the aid of Computer Aided
Qualitative Data Analysis Software (CAQDAS), specifically N-vivo. CAQDAS supported data coding of concepts,
hierarchical structuring of concepts into higher order categories, memo creation, model development, and the
ongoing exploration of relationships between concepts (Jackson and Bazeley, 2019; O’Kane, 2020). Relevant
material associated with each IT-CMF capability was initially imported into N-vivo as textual documents. This
Maturity Model Source
Data analytics/management Carvalho et al (2018), Grossman (2018).
Information governance Proença et al (2017).
Knowledge management Serna (2015).
Business process management Cleven et al (2014).
Risk management Carcary (2011), Rae et al (2014).
Information security management Proença and Borbinha (2018).
Incident management Aguiar et al (2018).
Supply chain management Mendes et al (2016).
IT service management Nord et al (2016), Mazzarolo et al (2015).
Virtual/augmented reality Hammerschmid (2018).
82
Proceedings of the 18th European Conference on Management Leadership and Governance, ECMLG 2022

--- PAGE 4 ---
Marian Carcary and Eileen Doherty
includeddetailsonthecontextualbackgroundofeachcapability;thecapabilityscopeincludingitsdefinitionand
CBBs; maturity at the CC and CBB level; capability evaluation assessment questions; improvement POMs; and
management artefacts to support capability improvement. Each of the 36 capability documents was examined
intwostages.Instageone,analysisfocusedontheCCandCBBdefinitionstoidentifyallinherentbuildingblocks.
The concepts identified were coded using N-vivo’s free node structure as in vivo codes orin vitro codes (Strauss,
1987). In stage two, analysis was extended to the remaining artefacts in order to expand on the building blocks
identified in stage one. As coding progressed the concepts were categorised into a taxonomy of higher order
categories. Memos were created to clarify the emerging categories and record the authors’ reflections on this
categorisation.
Seven higher order categories were extracted from the data. These represent recurring building blocks across
the majority of capabilities; we refer to these as Foundational Capability Building Blocks (FCBBs). N-vivo’s
visualisationtoolsenabledqualitativecrosstabulationoftheseFCBBswitheachIT-CMFcapability,providingthe
foundation for development of a concept matrix (Webster and Watson, 2002) (see Table 2). Closer analysis of
the FCBB nodes in N-Vivo facilitated greater understanding of the scope of each FCBB and enabled abstraction
of the key focus areas applicable to each FCBB, expressed in generic terms (Table 3).
4. Foundational capability building blocks (FCBBs)
Table 2 presents the FCBB concept matrix, detailing the IT-CMF capabilities from which they derive. In Table 3,
a high-level definition of each is abstracted, detailing in generic terms the focus areas an organisation needs to
invest in to improve FCBB maturity.
Table 2: Concept matrix of FCBBs identified across IT-CMF capabilities
IT-CMF capabilities
Accounting and Allocation (AA) X X X
Benefits Assessment and Realisation (BAR) X X X X X X
Budget Management (BGM) X X X X
Budget Oversight and Performance Analysis (BOP) X X
Business Planning (BP) X X X X X
Business Process Management (BPM) X X X X X X
Capability Assessment Management (CAM) X X X X
Capacity Forecasting and Planning (CFP) X
Demand and Supply Management (DSM) X
Enterprise Architecture Management (EAM) X X X X X X
Enterprise Information Management (EIM) X X X
Funding and Financing (FF) X X X X
Green IT (GIT) X
Information Security Management (ISM) X X X
Innovation Management (IM) X X X X X X
IT Leadership and Governance (ITG) X X X X X
Knowledge Asset Management (KAM) X X X X
Organisation Design and Planning (ODP) X X X X
People Asset Management (PAM) X X X X X
Personal Data Protection (PDP) X X X X
Portfolio Management (PM) X X X
Portfolio Planning and Prioritisation (PPP) X X
Programme and Project Management (PPM) X X X X
Relationship Management (REM) X X X X X X
Research, Development and Engineering (RDE) X X X
Risk Management (RM) X X X X X X
Service Analytics and Intelligence (SAI) X X
Service Provisioning (SRP)
Solutions Delivery (SD)
Sourcing (SRC) X X X X
Strategic Planning (SP) X X X X
Supplier Management (SUM)) X X X
Technical Infrastructure Management (TIM) X X
Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) X X
User Experience Design (UED) X
User Training Management (UTM) X X
83
Proceedings of the 18th European Conference on Management Leadership and Governance, ECMLG 2022

--- PAGE 5 ---
Marian Carcary and Eileen Doherty
Table 3: Definition of FCBBs
5. Discussion
The importance of the seven FCBBs for overall IT capability improvement is firmly grounded in the literature. In
this section, we discuss key insights pertaining to those FCBBs, with a particular emphasis on their importance
to organisational digital transformation.
Governance: Research indicates a correlation between effective IT governance and enhanced organisational
performance (Wu et al, 2015). In the digital context, temporal, structural, and procedural dimensions of IT
governance require consideration. To promote accelerated decisions, the locus of decision-making lies at lower
hierarchicallevels(Vaiaetal,2022).Decision-makingrulesandatransparentrecordofdecisionrights,delegated
authority, and decision boundaries are required, as well as mechanisms to hold individuals to account. The
process of IT governance centres on evaluating how IT currently supports and enables the organisation’s
objectives; directing development and implementation of strategies to realise the desired future state use of IT;
and monitoring IT performance and progress against plans. Appropriate reporting, exception handling,
escalation and audit practices are required to track the impact of the transformation programme and oversee
compliance with internal and external obligations (ISO 2015).
FCBB Definition
Governance
Establish governance structures (e.g. matrixed, line of business). Outline the
composition and scope of governance bodies, decision rights, and authorisation.
Identify and establish reporting arrangements, issue escalation protocols, roles in
complying with obligations and overseeing governance activities, and rules to
govern (e.g. evaluate, direct, monitor) and control the application of authority
within the organisation.
Resourcing Establish the human, financial, and technical resource requirements to achieve
objectives. Consider resource availability and suitability for deployment to new
activities. Coordinate the allocation of resources accordingly and monitor resource
utilisation.
Roles, responsibilities,
and accountabilities
Complete job and business process designs to identify the required roles for the
identified tasks. Assign employees with the requisite knowledge and experience to
the identified roles. Define and allocate the associated responsibilities/obligations,
and assign accountabilities to those who will be answerable for the achievement of
objectives.
Skills and competence
development
Identify the enabling knowledge base, and define the requisite employee skills and
competences to complete task assignments and achieve objectives. Establish and
make available a training curriculum and other employee developmental
mechanisms (e.g. education programmes, developmental job assignments,
mentoring,coaching).Recordemployeeparticipationintraininganddevelopmental
initiatives, and recognise and acknowledge their achievements (e.g. courses
completed, certifications, skills and competence levels acquired).
Culture Establish a culture that enables the organisation to pursue its strategic objectives
and business operations (e.g. foster a work environment that instils principles of
mutual respect and trust, positivity, accountability, collaboration, and teamwork
into how employees think and work). Embed and sustain the customs and social
behaviours required to support achievement of objectives.
Stakeholder
management
Identify relevant stakeholders and through engagement, determine a path to
achieving desired objectives. Establish and apply approaches that are effective in
motivating and securing stakeholder support, buy-in, commitment, and ownership
of key initiatives (e.g. by providing visible sponsorship, empowering stakeholder
interactions, collaborations and involvement in decisions, managing expectations,
providing incentives, responding to stakeholder feedback).
Communication Establish a communication plan, and agree the communication channels (e.g.
emails, reports, briefing papers, and forums) based on the target stakeholders and
message criticality and sensitivity. Inform stakeholders of key developments (e.g.
strategic decisions,goalsand objectives,plans,policiesand principles,activitiesand
progress, outcomes, key lessons, and opportunities) to build, foster, and maintain a
shared understanding and awareness of how they can contribute to the realisation
of key objectives. Manage any bi-directional information exchange and respond
to/action stakeholder feedback.
84
Proceedings of the 18th European Conference on Management Leadership and Governance, ECMLG 2022

--- PAGE 6 ---
Marian Carcary and Eileen Doherty
Resourcing: Digital transformations are resource intensive. From a finance perspective, traditional funding
models do not effectively support digital service delivery (Bender-Samuel, 2018; Clanton and Waters, 2019); a
shiftisevidenttowardsdynamicfinancial managementpracticesleveragingpay-forusemodelsorservice-based
cost models (Sebastian et al, 2017). From a technical perspective, investment is required in a stable operational
backbone to enable efficiency, scalability, and operational excellence, and a digital services platform to foster
businessagilityandrapidinnovation(Sebastianetal,2017).Intermsofhumanresources,theorganisationneeds
to consider how to attract, recruit, develop, and retain individuals in a landscape where there is a digital talent
shortage(Carcaryetal,2016).Theorganisationrequiresongoingvisibilityofresourceavailability,suitability,and
utilisation, and capability to adjust resource allocation to optimise resource usage (Curley et al, 2016).
Roles, responsibilities, and accountabilities: New or expanded job roles are characteristic of digital
transformation; these include, for example, chief digital officers, data analysts, data scientists, security and risk
managers, compliance specialists, and so on. As demand for digital talent is rapidly outpacing its supply (Feijao
et al, 2021), organisations are adopting more inventive approaches to finding such talent. These include
leveraging external communities of expertise, social network referrals, expertise location software, internal
venture funds, and crowdsourcing new digital business ideas (Carcary et al, 2016). Clear role responsibilities
need to be defined and accountabilities assigned to those who will be answerable for IT-related decisions and
performance. Such individuals need to be empowered to act with autonomy and responsiveness to changing
environmental circumstances (ISO, 2015).
Skills and competence development: This importance of employee digital skills was amplified during the Covid-
19 pandemic with the expansive transition to virtual work and commerce (Feijao et al, 2021). For digital
transformations, skills are required in areas such as artificial intelligence, augmented/virtual reality, analytics
and data science, cloud, internet of things, blockchain, cybersecurity, customer experience, and agile
development (RedHat, 2021). In a recent survey of IT decision-makers, skillset gaps were the top barrier to
successful digital transformation (RedHat, 2021), highlighting the importance of training curriculums and
employee development mechanisms. Technology skills training was the top non-technology funding priority for
2022, followed by people and process skills training (RedHat, 2021). Upskilling and reskilling initiatives, industry
experience opportunities, lifelong learning programmes, and cross-cutting stakeholder partnerships are
suggested approaches to building a resilient, digitally saavy workforce (Feijao et al, 2021).
Culture: In a study of 40 digital transformations, 80% of organisations that addressed cultural change realised
sustained improved performance (Hemerling et al, 2018). Cultural change, particularly in the context of digital
transformation, requires a ‘tectonic change’ from long standing practices, as a more traditional culture based
on hierarchical power structures, decision-making authority, and resource competition between functions is
antithetical to a digital culture that emphasises delegation and collaboration (Hemerling et al, 2018). Digital
organisations require a capability to sense and respond, embrace ambiguity and uncertainty, take risks,
experiment, and continuously innovate without fear of failure (Hemerling et al, 2018). Employee autonomy,
teamwork, and collaboration require greater emphasis, as facilitated through engagement and community
sharing in learning networks and co-developing with business ecosystem partners (Catlin et al, 2015). The
requiredcustomsandsocialbehavioursneedtobescaledatallorganisationallevels,forexample,byembedding
the practice of disruptive idea generation into strategic planning or incorporating DevOps/agile continuous
iteration approaches at a tactical level.
Stakeholder management: Research indicates that capability to work with stakeholders is an indicator of
organisational performance (Johnson and Filippini, 2013). Stakeholder theory emphasises the criticality of
considering stakeholder interests in key organisation decisions (Barrane et al, 2021), cognisant that stakeholder
importance is a function of their degree of power, legitimacy, and urgency (Mitchell et al, 1997). Critical to
securing stakeholder support and ‘psychological ownership’ of digital initiatives is trust-building (Barrane et al,
2021), as it enhances multi-stakeholder co-operation and buy-in, and helps alleviate problems caused by
stakeholders with alternative agendas (Zafari et al, 2020). Co-operation of and collaboration with stakeholders
become more critical in the digital landscape to promote effective responses to technological change. Attention
is increasingly focused on synchronised internal and external collaboration (Jagtap and Kamble, 2019) to
promote innovation and value co-creation through the sharing of complementary knowledge, resources, and
capabilities (Ndubisi et al, 2019).
85
Proceedings of the 18th European Conference on Management Leadership and Governance, ECMLG 2022

--- PAGE 7 ---
Marian Carcary and Eileen Doherty
Communication: Establishing and executing a communication plan provides transparency of digital
transformation initiatives. Open and frequent communication keeps stakeholders abreast of ‘the big picture’
and the goals, objectives, and anticipated business impact of digital initiatives, builds mutual stakeholder
understanding of what change is expected, and promotes trust to foster proactive, collaborative partnerships.
Informal conversations between those leading a digital transformation and other stakeholders are also
important, promoting ‘collegiality, bonding, rapport building and a spirit of camaraderie’ (Barrane et al, 2021).
Bi-directional information exchange needs to be effectively managed – one instance is listening and responding
to stakeholder feedback, thereby demonstrating respect and increasing trust; a further instance is validating all
stakeholders share a similar understanding of the project vision and aims (Barrane et al, 2021).
6. Conclusion and further research
This paper has highlighted the expansive scope of an organisation’s overall IT capability – it is reflective of the
maturity of several distinct capabilities each of which can be decomposed into building blocks and described in
terms of a particular maturity state. Considering the scope of the IT capability can be overwhelming when
planning a capability improvement programme or considering digital transformation. This paper has distilled
seven FCBBs that recur across the spectrum of IT capabilities. It takes a step towards simplifying IT capability
development through enabling organisations focus on a manageable number of areas that are generically
applicable to maturing the overall IT capability. The importance of the FCBBs distilled is firmly grounded in the
literature and it can be argued, perhaps, that they should be afforded a heightened importance in the current
era of digital transformation and disruption.
The authors assert that maturity in these FCBBs is critical to enabling continuous improvement of the overall IT
capabilityinthedigitalcontext.MatureFCBBswouldhelptoinstitutionalisetherequiredimprovementpractices
and provide greater visibility to organisations of their capacity to drive improvement. As a useful avenue of
furtherresearch,theauthorsrecommendthedevelopment ofagenericmaturityframeworkpertainingtothose
FCBBs. For each FCBB, the framework should includeaset of maturity assessment questions andresponses,and
a set of improvement practices, outcomes, and metrics to support capability improvement planning and
monitoring. Testing and refinement of this framework in the organisational context, including firms that are
undertaking digital transformations, would enhance its utility and credibility.
References
Achi, A., Salinesi, C., and Viscusi, G. (2016). “Information systems for innovation: a comparative analysis of maturity
models’ characteristics”, Proceedings of the conference on advanced information systems engineering, 13–14 June,
Ljubljana.
Aguiar, J., Pereira, R., and Vasconcelos, J. (2018). “An overlapless incident management maturity model for multi-
framework assessment”, Interdisciplinary Journal of Information, Vol 13, pp.137–163.
Barrane, F., Ndubisi, N., Kamble, S., Karuranga, G., and Poulin, D. (2021). “Building trust in multi-stakeholder collaborations
for new product development in the digital transformation era”, Benchmarking: An International Journal, Vol 28, No 1,
pp.205-228.
Becker, J., Niehaves, B., Poppelbus, J., and Simons, A. (2010). “Maturity models in IS research”. Proceedings of the 18th
European Conference on Information Systems, 7-9 June, Pretoria.
Bender-Samuel, P. (2018). “Digital transformation: How to beat the funding challenges”, EnterpriseProject.com.
Carcary, M. (2011). “IT risk management: a capability maturity model”, Electronic Journal Information Systems Evaluation,
Vol 16, No 1, pp3-13.
Carcary, M., Doherty, E., and Conway, G. (2016). “A dynamic capability approach to digital transformation”. Proceedings of
the 10th European Conference on Information Systems Management, 8-9 September, Evora.
Carvalho, J., Rocha, A., Vasconcelos, J., and Abreu, A. (2018). “A health data analytics maturity model for hospitals
information systems”, International Journal of Information Management, Vol 46, pp278–285.
Catlin, T., Scanlan, H., and Willmott, P. (2015). “Raising your digital quotient”. McKinsey Quarterly.
Chesbrough, H. (2003). “The era of open innovation”, Sloan Management Review, Vol 44, No 3, pp35-41.
Clanton, R. and Waters, A. (2019). “The project to product transformation – practical guidance from fourteen enterprise
journeys”. IT Revolution DevOps Enterprise Forum.
Cleven, A., Winter, R., Wortmann, F., and Mettler, T. (2014). “Process management in hospitals: an empirically grounded
maturity model”, Business Research, Vol 7, No 2, pp.191–216.
Curley, M., Kenneally, J., and Dreischmeier, R. (2012). “Creating a new IT management framework using design science: a
rationale for action and for using design science”, In: Practical aspects of design science, Springer: Berlin.
Curley, M., Kenneally, J., and Carcary, M. (eds) (2016). IT Capability Maturity Framework – body of knowledge guide, 2nd
edition, VanHaren: Netherlands.
86
Proceedings of the 18th European Conference on Management Leadership and Governance, ECMLG 2022

--- PAGE 8 ---
Marian Carcary and Eileen Doherty
Drnevich, P. and Croson, D. (2013). “Information technology and business-level strategy: toward an integrated theoretical
perspective”, MIS Quarterly, Vol 37, No 2, pp.483–509.
Eisenhardt, K. and Martin, J. (2000). “Dynamic capabilities: what are they?”, Strategic Management Journal, Vol 21, No
10/11, pp.1105–1121.
Feijao, C., Flanagan, I., Van Stolk, C., and Gunashekar, S. (2021). “The global digital skills gap – current trends and future
directions”. Rand Corporation.
Grossman, R. (2018). “A framework for evaluating the analytic maturity of an organisation”, International Journal of
Information Management, Vol 38, No 1, pp.45–51.
Hammerschmid, S. (2018). “Developing and testing of a virtual and augmented reality maturity model”. Proceedings of the
European Conference on Software Process Improvement, 5–7 September, Bilbao.
Helfat, C. and Peteraf, M. (2003). “The dynamic resource-based view: capability lifecycles”. Strategic Management Journal,
Vol 24, No 10, pp.997-1010.
Helfert, M. and Curley, M. (2012). “Design science in action: researching and developing the IT-CMF”. In: Practical aspects
of design science, Springer: Berlin.
Hemerling, J., Kilmann, J., Danoesastro, M., Stutts, L., and Ahern. C. (2018). “Its not a digital transformation wthout a digital
culture”, Boston Colsulting Group.
International Organisation for Standardisation (2015). “Information technology – governance of IT for the organisation
(ISO/IEC 38500: 2015)”, ISO.
Jackson, K. and Bazeley, P. (2019). Qualitative data analysis with NVivo, 3rd edition, Sage Publications: CA.
Jagtap, M. and Kamble, S. (2019). “The effect of the client–contractor relationship on project performance”, International
Journal of Productivity and Performance Management, Vol 69, No 3, pp.541-558.
Johnson, W. and Filippini, R. (2013). “Integration capabilities as mediator of product development practices-
performance”, Journal of Engineering and Technology Management, Vol 30, pp.95-111.
Li, T. and Chan, Y. (2019). “Dynamic information technology capability: concept definition and framework development”,
Journal of Strategic Information Systems, Vol 28, pp.1-20.
Mazzarolo, C., Martins, V., Toffanello, A., and Puttini, R. (2015). “A method for SOA maturity assessment and
improvement”, IEEE Latin America Transactions, Vol 13, No 1, pp204–213.
Mendes, P., Leal, J, and Thomé, A. (2016). “A maturity model for demand-driven supply chains in the consumer product
goods industry”, International Journal of Production Economics, Vol 179, pp.153–165.
Mettler, T. (2010). “Thinking in terms of design decisions when developing maturity models”, International Journal of
Strategic Decision Sciences, Vol 1, No 4, pp.76–87.
Mitchell, R., Agle, B., and Wood, D. (1997). “Toward a theory of stakeholder identification and salience: defining the
principle of who and what really counts”, Academy of Management Review, Vol 22, No 4, pp.853-886.
Mithas, S., Ramasubbu, N., and Sambamurthy, V. (2011). “How information management capability influences firm
performance”, MIS Quarterly, Vol 35, No 1, pp.237–256.
Ndubisi, N., Dayan, M., Yeniaras, V., and Al-hawari, M. (2019), “The effects of complementarity of knowledge and
capabilities on joint innovation capabilities and service innovation: the role of competitive intensity and demand
uncertainty”, Industrial Marketing Management, Vol 89, pp-196-208.
Nord, F., Dorbecker, R., and Bohmann, T. (2016). “Structure, content and use of IT service catalogs: empirical analysis and
development of a maturity model”. Proceedings of the 49th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences
(HICSS), 5-8 January, Koloa, HI.
O’Kane, P. (2020). Demystifying CAQDAS: a series of dilemmas. In Crook et al. (eds) Advancing methodological thought and
practice, 1st edition, Emerald Publishing Limited, UK.
Pavlou, P. and El Sawy, O. (2011). “Understanding the elusive black box of dynamic capabilities”, Decision Sciences, Vol 42,
No 1, pp.239–273.
Peppard, J. and Ward, J. (2004). “Beyond strategic information systems: towards an IS capability”, Journal of Strategic
Information Systems, Vol 13, pp.167–194.
Pereira, R. and Serrano, J. (2020). “A review of methods used on IT maturity models development: A systematic literature
review and a critical analysis”, Journal of Information Technology, Vol 35, No 2, pp.161-178.
Proença, D. (2016). “Methods and techniques for maturity assessment”. Proceedings of the Iberian Conference on
Information Systems and Technologies, 15–18 June, Las Palmas.
Proença, D., Vieira, R., and Borbinha, J. (2017). “Information governance maturity model final development iteration”.
Proceedings of the Conference on Theory and Practice of Digital Libraries, 17–21 September, Thessaloniki.
Proença, D. and Borbinha, J. (2018). “Information security management systems: a maturity model based on ISO/IEC
27001”. Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Business Information Systems, 18–20 July, Berlin.
Rae, A., Alexander, R., and McDermid, J. (2014) “Fixing the cracks in the crystal ball: A maturity model for quantitative risk
assessment”. Reliability Engineering and System Safety, Vol 125, pp.67–81.
RedHat, (2021). 2022 Global tech outlook. RedHat. Available: https://www.redhat.com/rhdc/managed-files/rh-2022-
global-tech-outlook-overview-F30633-202110-en.pdf
Santhanam, R. and Hartono, E. (2003). “Issues in linking information technology capability to firm performance”, MIS
Quarterly, Vol 27, No 1, pp.125-153.
Savaneviciene, A., Radvila, G., and Šilingiene, V. (2021). “Structural changes of organisational maturity during the COVID-19
pandemic: the case of Lithuania”, Sustainability, Vol 13, No 13978, pp.1-31.
87
Proceedings of the 18th European Conference on Management Leadership and Governance, ECMLG 2022

--- PAGE 9 ---
Marian Carcary and Eileen Doherty
Sebastian, I., Ross, J., Beath, C., Mockler, M., Moloney, K., and Fonstad, N. (2017). “How big old companies navigate digital
transformation”, MIS Quarterly Executive, Vol 16, No 3, pp.197-213.
Serna, E. (2015). “Maturity model of transdisciplinary knowledge management”. International Journal of Information
Management, Vol 35, No 6, pp.647–654.
Sousa-Zomer, T., Neely, A., and Martinez, V. (2020). “Digital transforming capability and performance: a microfoundational
perspective”. International Journal of Operations and Production Management, Vol 40, No 7/8, pp.1095-1128.
Strauss, A. (1987). Qualitative analysis for social scientists, Cambridge University Press, New York.
Teece, D. (2007). “Managers, markets, and dynamic capabilities”, In Helfat et al (eds). Dynamic capabilities: understanding
strategic change in organisations. Blackwell: Oxford, U.K. pp.19-29.
Vaia, G., Arkhipova, D., and DeLone, W. (2022). “Digital governance mechanisms and principles that enable agile responses
in dynamic competitive environments”, European Journal of Information Systems, May, pp.1-19.
Webster, J. and Watson, R. (2002). “Analysing the past to prepare for the future: writing a literature review”, MIS
Quarterly, Vol 26, No 2, pp.13-23.
Wu, S., Straub, D., and Liang, T. (2015). “How information technology governance mechanisms and strategic alignment
influence organisational performance: insights from a matched survey of business and IT managers”, MIS Quarterly, Vol
39, No 2, pp.497-510.
Yeow, A., Soh, C., and Rina, H. (2017). “Aligning with new digital strategy: a dynamic capabilities approach”. Journal of
Strategic Information Systems, Vol 27, No 1, pp.43–58.
Zafari, K., Biggemann, S., and Garry, T. (2020), “Mindful management of relationships during periods of crises: a model of
trust, doubt and relational adjustments”, Industrial Marketing Management, Vol 88, pp.278-286.
88
Proceedings of the 18th European Conference on Management Leadership and Governance, ECMLG 2022