--- PAGE 1 ---
Стр. 1 из 6
Design and design thinking role in a digital
transformation
Vitalii Cherepanov1,2,*
, and Evgeny Popov1
1Ural Institute of Management, branch of Russian Presidential Academy of National
Economy&Public Administration (RANEPA), Ekaterinburg, Russia
2Technical University of UMMC, Verkhnyaya Pyshma, Russia
Abstract. This article embraces a design and design thinking role in a
digital transformation based on an author’s concept ofdigital transformation
of industrial enterprise. Design is usually considered as a process of making
something attractive or convenient, but in this research it’s role is displayed
in a management context of processes, those should be changed with digital
transforming solutions. Authors of this research found out that design
practice in a digital transformation becomes a core competency, that allows
to gain real practical efficient changes, those couldn’t be reached only by
digital transformation cases implementation. Authors also found out that
design as managerial practice allows to shorten digital transformation
roadmaps, which are usually constructed with the same “bricks” of proof-
of-concept, MVP and final projects, those shape the way as an IT project,
but not as a project of process change based on digital solutions. The new
suggested approach makes the way of digital maturity development more
efficient and allows to get better results in a digital transformation project.
1 Introduction
Actual management practice contains hundreds of creative tools and analytical patterns,
those support problem-solving and new solutions development process. But one of the main
problems is that modern managers are focused on analytical, but not on creative practice [1].
This management characteristic could be easily noticed in any organization, when a new
important decision or solution is being prepared. A manager asks subordinates to prepare a
number of alternatives and, as usual, one of those points should be picked as preferable. This
practice is very efficient, when a business environment is stable and changes slowly, but as
we live in BANI-world†
or stay on the way of creating new transforming solution unknown
before, this practice could ruin any promising project. It is very important to remark that in a
modern world we, actually, have no chance to get an experience from previous generations
[2], because our social and technological environment is absolutely different and brand-new,
because we use technologies unknown to previous generations. More experienced managers
and engineers just have no experience to conduct in a modern environment, but we steel can
use well-known fundamental concepts in a current context.

Ύ
Corresponding author: v.cherepanov@outlook.com
© The Authors, published by EDP Sciences. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
E3S Web of Conferences 474, 01028 (2024) https://doi.org/10.1051/e3sconf/202447401028
ICITE 2023

--- PAGE 2 ---
Стр. 2 из 6
One of the most popular practices of a new solutions and decisions development is design
thinking [3]. It allows to provide new ways of actions in changing business context, based in
empathy and potential users or customers needs analysis.
Design thinking as a tool could not be such efficient in a context of a digital
transformation as in context of business problem solving [4], because in a classical design
thinking paradigm design actors and non-design actors interact to create a new solution, but
digital transformation doesn’t usually considers acting with people at all. In a authors’
concept of digital transformation [5] developed an idea that people are substituted by digital
technologies in a digital transformation process, hence digital transformation creates a new
vision of the same process, but not just makes some local changes for certain actors in it.
Ideas of productive thinking became popular in 1940s [6] and got new ways of creative
engineering 1950s [7] those are still actual today. There are a lot of tools today, but the main
vector is the same, they create extra alternatives for responsible for key decisions managers.
In this research authors not only review main approaches of design thinking, but also
show, that industrial design and design concepts in general could be the core tool of creating
digital transformative solutions and could allow to bring new applications of the same digital
tools as for human-agent and machine-agents.
Despite common idea that design is just a process of making thing convenient World
Design Organization supports the following industrial design term meaning:
“Industrial Design is a strategic problem-solving process that drives innovation, builds
business success, and leads to a better quality of life through innovative products, systems,
services, and experiences.”
World Design Organization also emphasizes that industrial design is a trans-disciplinary
profession that harnesses creativity to resolve problems and co-create solutions with the
intent of making a product, system, service, experience or a business, better. Keeping this
meaning in mind, authors of the research found that design could be implicated in digital
transformation process of industrial enterprise and deliver new value that was not in previous
digital transformation process concepts clear.
2 Materials and methods
This research was developed basing on the following methods:
1. Discovering of scientific, analytical and information publications on a topic of the
research.
2. Practical analysis and analytical reconstruction of a digital transformation cases.
3. Real digital transformation projects experimenting and experience with a number of
industrial enterprises.
4. Scientific reconstruction of a number of design and digital transformation concept.
Before starting this research authors already published their own concept of digital
transformation for industrial enterprise [1], that shaped the first steppingstone on these
research. But authors also made deep analysis of other researches and practical points of
view, before developing the first hypothesis and conclusions.
In this research authors also analysed a number of practical digital transformations cases
and even run their own digital transformation projects, those gain extra arguments and facts,
considered before coming to any conclusions.
Analytical base of the research was developed using web search, analytical system
Teqviser, online library Wiley, Elsevier ScienceDirect, Springer Open, Informs, arXiv of
Cornell University, insights of McKinsey, Boston Consulting Group, Board of Innovation,
Bain&Co. and Strategy Partners were used.
Main search criteria were the following:
2
E3S Web of Conferences 474, 01028 (2024) https://doi.org/10.1051/e3sconf/202447401028
ICITE 2023

--- PAGE 3 ---
Стр. 3 из 6
Table 2. Keywords used in literature review.
Direction «design» + «digital
transformation»
Related topics
Design, design thinking, design solutions,
design management, digital transformation,
digital transforming tools, digital
transformation context
Design, design in management practice, digital
transformation, digitalization, digital
technologies, digital maturity, digital
transformation competencies
Digital transformation context and role of design and design thinking in it was modelled
in scientific discussions and real digital transformation projects environment.
Thecurrentresearch wasalsobasedonscientificpublicationsondesignandrelatedfields.
The first stage of the research was an analysis of the most popular views on design role
in management.
3 The most popular views of a design role in management and in
digital transformation process
Do we really know what design is? Are we quite aware of its role in management? How to
find radically new digital transforming solutions, when project team has no previous
experience of digital transformation?
These questions are very sharp for modern strategists, who aimed at real changes in their
organizations.
An authors’ concept of digital maturity levels [8] delivered and idea that final point of
digital transformation process is fully autonomous system as a block in transformed process
or even as a system driving the whole process. This concept demands rather complicated
approach of creating brand-new ideas of process management. Could design process be
useful? Authors consider that design is the very practice to create such new digitally
supported processes, because design value is rather wide and embraces almost every aspect
of organizations and could deliver entire design transformation solutions.
Since it’s first appearance in 1950s the term “design thinking” became not only popular
practice [9], but also considered as a new competitive advantage. But we should also keep in
mind, that humans always focus on their convenience and emotional choice [10], that steers
their creativity process.
On the contrary, industrial design is considered as a process of optimization functions,
value and appearance of products and systems. It is usual to see a designer as a person with
mock-ups, models and drawings, but we suggest the bigger role for designer, the new
managers’ role that is aimed at creating absolutely new process technologies visions, those
run towards digital mature processes and systems.
It is also usual to consider that industrial design is user-centered and allows to meet
humans needs in a certain process. But there is also a point of view, that design could be a
tool, that drives innovations in a whole organization [11], because of its nature to create
absolutely new unknown solutions.
Some researchers consider that in a modern design and innovation process data is one of
the most valuable components [12] allowing to find new interconnections and could be very
useful in solving ill-defined problems requiring creativity to be solved. This point of view
drives us to an idea that design is very close to digital transformation, because data is the key
“ingredient” of a digitally supported processes.
It is also clear that digital transformation is closely connected with competencies of its
participants [13], but authors published an idea [5], that lack of competencies in digital
transformation could be shortened with a clear way of digital transformation and a bunch of
3
E3S Web of Conferences 474, 01028 (2024) https://doi.org/10.1051/e3sconf/202447401028
ICITE 2023

--- PAGE 4 ---
Стр. 4 из 6
tools, allowing to make the certain digital transformation process a clear “practice”, but not
just an “art”.
Nowadays we cannot find chief design officer in boards, if only we have no deal with a
company, producing attractive products for mass markets. May be this tendency will appear,
because design becomes day-to-day management practice and we now see, that absolutely
new solutions and approaches demanded in everyday practice, but they should be somehow
created.
Digital transformation today is usually based on a practice of implementing digital cases,
thoseareconsidered asefficientpractices,testedinoneorganizationanddelivered toanother.
Problems and limitations of this approach were already analyzed [5], but it should be
remarked, that stable design practice in organization could be a way to stop “copying” and
start “creating” digital transformative solutions, tailored to a certain organization. As an
additional argument to it is a popular examples of “digital by design” organizations such as
Google, Yandex, Amazon and so one. But this example couldn’t be delivered and used in a
metals and mining companies because of the nature of those products and customers of these
companies. So, we should provide not only way of copying some cases, but a way to create
solutions of complicated vague problems, those could be designed for a certain enterprise.
4 Authors vision of design role in digital transformation process
The main digital transformation aim is to eliminate information asymmetry [5], that is very
important in a context of incapsulating digital agents (machine-agents) in transformed
processes. This asymmetry could be eliminated with the following ways:
• data or information become clear, structured and available to any granted agent
human or machine;
• human is substituted by digital solution in process;
• digital twin allows to check process run statuses and key metrics.
Digital transformation process considers delivering transformative solutions, those allow to
develop digital maturity of a transforming process. But in practice finding this solution is the
most complicated task of a digital transformation in common becomes new activity for
managers. Stepping this way, they use other digital cases as we remarked earlier, trying to
adopt those cases to their organization’s practice. Speaking in general, managers even in
digital transformation process just find and pick alternative, being focused on their analytical
way of practice.
This approach could be slightly easy in large corporations, where corporate competency and
R&D centers deliver inner digital solutions catalogue, where transformative solutions could
be found. It is clear, that first try of this solution before including it into corporate digital
catalogue was maybe just an experiment, but the late usage becomes just another “alternative
pick”. Successful digital transformation could be stable practice of creating new way of
transforming process arrangement, that allows to substitute humans or analog machines with
new digital technologies, but also allows to create new paradigm of interactions and fields of
responsibilityand frames of solutions making process for any agent in a transformed process.
Common digital transformation process is very similar to IT project, because starts with
hypothesis, then goes to proof-of-concept, new digital product MVP and after that, to a real
digital product development. This way is used in hundreds of organizations, but we should
remark, that it is not digital transformationinits core, because nothingis usuallytransformed.
Authors suggest implementing design practices in digital transformation process. It is quite
common to use design thinking in software development [14], but we before showed that
designthinkingis not quite good practice for digital transformation. It could be more efficient
to use design and industrial design practices in digital transformation.
4
E3S Web of Conferences 474, 01028 (2024) https://doi.org/10.1051/e3sconf/202447401028
ICITE 2023

--- PAGE 5 ---
Стр. 5 из 6
Digital transformation concept [5] could be widened with a new process design stage, where
digital transformation manager is supposed to make the following steps:
• mock-up new transforming process scenario, where human and analog machines could
be substituted with digital solutions;
• design new humans and machines agents roles, responsibilities, decision making frames
and criteria of stop acting or interacting;
• develop new criteria of compensations for human-agents and humans substituted by
digital solutions;
• design a new product and entire process vision and detailed scenarios;
• specify functional and technical requirements to new digital solutions based on the
actions and/or decision those solutions should make in a process after running stage of
its digital transformation;
• organize a development process of a new digital solution already connected with other
process agents and actors, those will participate in it;
• arrange test runs of the new process scenario, maybe, with new human and machine-
agents and interactions.
Main difference of this approach from common “case-based” practice of digital
transformation is that it will be new design process with tailored digital solutions and clear
interactions landscape for every participant instead of just one more try to implement not
adequate by design to a certain process “alien” digital solution.
This new digital transformation approach demands design competencies from process
managers and design transformation managers, but it also brings new results and effects as
following:
• well specified from functional and technical point of view digital solution could be
developed without proof-of-concept and event without MPV, because its development
could be arranged not by agile approach, but by waterfall development approach;
• speed of this approach is much higher and process design is always cheaper, then
physical experiment in a real environment.
• Managers will get tailored solution, but not just another “alternative”.
This steps will be design an a digital transformation framework and supported by process
mock-ups templates in order to arrange design process and make it stable and more efficient.
Authors suppose that this approach in their own concept of digital transformation context
[5] will deliver organizational and economical efficiency to digital transformation practice.
5 Conclusion
Main results of the research contain the following conclusions:
1. Not only design thinking as a creativity tool, but mainly design practice should drive
digital transformation in organization.
2. Management in a vague environment and with complicated solutions should be based on
design.
3. Digital transformations doesn’t mean implementing digital solutions, it means changing
processes and their actors roles with digital solutions support that leads to a digital
maturity development.
4. Design as a managerial practice becomes a core competency in a digital transformation
context, because in a new process there are no well-known and well-tested alternative,
there are only new solutions and roles, based in digital technologies.
5
E3S Web of Conferences 474, 01028 (2024) https://doi.org/10.1051/e3sconf/202447401028
ICITE 2023

--- PAGE 6 ---
Стр. 6 из 6
5. The main design focus in a digital transformation context is a substitution of a human
and analog machines with digital technologies or changing process in the way, leading
to keeping it active without humans at all, but entirely for humans needs.
6. Digital transformation could be more efficient, when its design brings new meanings in
a business context, that made the changing process conscious for its participants.
7. Design should be focused on creating new processes and interactions between human-
agents and machine-agents, but not just on picking any alternative, because every
solution should be tailored to a specific organization.
8. If digital transformative solution is designed the way allowing to construct roles,
responsibilities and frames of decision-making process of human-agents and machine-
agents in a new process running scenario, in most cases proof-of-concept and even MVP
phase for digital transformative solutions could be skipped.
Authorsconsiderthatdesignpractice canberealgamechangerinadigitaltransformation.
They also suggest that design thinking is very important practice to use, when transforming
solutions catalogue is already created and digital transformation is close to be based on
Digital LEAN practice. But design thinking is not useful, when radically new solutions or
process should be developed and empathy with needs analysis are not enough to change the
situation. In this business environment core design practice is probably more efficient.
Authors will continue their research on design role in digital transformation context,
because this field allows to get radically new answers on sharp questions concerned with
digital transformation practice of a modern organization.
References
1. R. J. Boland, Jr. F. Collopy, Managing as Designing (2004)
2. S. Lem, Summa Technologiae (1964)
3. L. R. Martin, Design of Business: Why design thinking is the next competitive advantage
(Harvard Business Review Press, 2009)
4. K. Lee, The Journal of Design, Economics, and Innovation 7(4) (2021)
5. V. V. Cherepanov, E. V. Popov, Economics and Management 28(10), 1021-1036 (2022)
6. Productive thinking (Wertheimer, M., New York, NY: Harper, 1945)
7. J E. Arnold, Creative Engineering: Promoting Innovation by Thinking Differently
(1959a) Edited with an introduction and biographical essay by William J. Clancey.
Stanford Digital Repository. Retrieved 13 December 2016.
8. E. V. Popov, V. L. Simonova, V. V. Cherepanov, Journal of New Economy 22(2), pp.
88–109 (2021)
9. N. Cross, Viewpoint. Design thinking: What just happened?, School of Engineering and
Innovation (The Open University, Milton Keynes, UK)
10. B. J. Pine, J. H. Gilmore, The Experience Economy (Harvard Business Press, 2011)
11. Design Driven Innovation: Changing the Rules of Competition by Radically Innovating
What Things Mean Hardcover (2009)
12. M. Mortati, S. Magistretti, C. Cautela, C. Dell’Era, Technovation 122, 102688 (2022)
13. C. Blanka, B. Krumay, D. Rueckel (2022), Technological Forecasting & Social Change
178, 121575 (2022)
14. J. C. Pereira, R. de F. S. Russo, Procedia Computer Science 138, 775–782 (2018)
6
E3S Web of Conferences 474, 01028 (2024) https://doi.org/10.1051/e3sconf/202447401028
ICITE 2023