--- PAGE 1 ---
Vol:.(1234567890)
JournaloftheKnowledgeEconomy(2024)15:9576–9596
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13132-023-01479-3
1 3
HowtoDevelopOrganizationalFormsforaSuccessful
DigitalTransformation?FindingsfromTwoCaseStudies
Jure Erjavec1
· Mojca Indihar Štemberger1
· Jurij Jaklič1
Received:6April2022/Accepted:14August2023/Publishedonline:23August2023
©TheAuthor(s)2023
Abstract
Previous research has increased our understanding of individual digital transforma-
tion (DT) activities, roles, responsibilities, and related dilemmas, yet a comprehensive
insight is missing with respect to the organizational forms that are most appropriate
for developing the capabilities needed for successful DT. The purpose of this paper
is to identify the main organizational characteristics and organizational forms for a
successful DT and to identify influential factors that impact decisions about suitable
organizational forms. Drawing on two case studies, we look at how companies can
develop digital capabilities through different configurations of organizational forms.
Findings show that decisions on organizational forms have to be influenced by digi-
tal culture, IT department’s role, and the goals of DT. Moreover, top management
leadership is more important than a formal digital strategy, and DT projects must
be executed by coordinated interdisciplinary teams. The presented research offers a
comprehensive insight on how companies can develop digital capabilities that enable
a successful DT by developing their organizational forms, i.e., by combining the dif-
ferent DT actions, actors, their roles and responsibilities, their interplay, implement-
ing DT strategies, and combining the design of digital software solutions with the
design of organizational routines and practices.
Keywords Digital transformation · Organizational form · Digital transformation
actions · Influence factors · Dynamic capabilities · Case study
This article is part of the Topical Collection on Digital Transformation and Disruption
* Jure Erjavec
jure.erjavec@ef.uni-lj.si
Mojca Indihar Štemberger
mojca.stemberger@ef.uni-lj.si
Jurij Jaklič
jurij.jaklic@ef.uni-lj.si
1
School of Economics and Business, University of Ljubljana, Kardeljeva ploščad 17,
1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia

--- PAGE 2 ---
9577
1 3
JournaloftheKnowledgeEconomy(2024)15:9576–9596
Introduction
Although digital transformation (DT) has been around for a while, it is now a
priority for practitioners and researchers in the management field (Hinings et al.,
2018; Vial, 2019). However, incumbent companies cannot simply leverage their
digital-enablement but first need to provide an environment in which DT can be
successful. This can be achieved through different means such as developing a
DT strategy (Matt et al., 2015) or incorporating one within the current business
strategy (Yeow et al., 2018), introducing new Chief Digital Officer (CDO) posi-
tion (Hess et al., 2016; Singh & Hess, 2017) while also actively involving other
member of top management (Tumbas et al., 2017; Turel & Bart, 2014; Whitler
et al., 2017), adopting pervasive ways of organizing IT (Peppard, 2018), and
facilitating DT through organizational culture (Alos-Simo et al., 2017).
Therefore, more research is needed about the organizational forms that lead to
a successful DT, i.e., the combination of various DT actions, actors, their roles,
responsibilities (Matt et al., 2015) and interplay (Hinings et al., 2018), how com-
panies develop and implement their DT strategies (Ismail et al., 2017), what is the
role of information system practitioners within companies in preparing a com-
pany’s business strategy in the context of DT (Whittington, 2014), and how to
combine the design of digital software solutions with the design of organizational
routines and practices (Kohli & Melville, 2019). This is also in line with previous
research that suggests more focus on internal digital transformation stakeholders
(Cetindamar Kozanoglu & Abedin, 2020). Moreover, the impact of other factors
like the role of organizational culture in DT (Jahanmir & Cavadas, 2018), how to
develop the capabilities needed for DT (Svahn et al., 2017; Vial, 2019), and how
DT unfolds in practice (Vial, 2019) are also in need of further research.
Previous research (Indihar Štemberger et al., 2019) reveals six patterns of
approaches to DT that are successful in different ways, among which the most
successful is the “business-IT partnership” approach in which top management
and the IT department are responsible for the DT and the CIO is an orchestrator
and member of top management. Since contingency theory (Fiedler, 1964; Weill
& Olson, 1989) shows there is no universal or single best way to manage, we
expect that various implementations are possible also within this pattern. There-
fore, further and more detailed research of these patterns is needed to identify the
key organizational elements and how they shape organizational forms leading to
a successful DT, which is also in line with previous call for further research for
identifying the optimal forms of organizational structures that allow firms to suc-
ceed in executing their digital transformation strategies (Verhoef et al., 2021).
The aim of this paper is to identify the main organizational characteristics and
the ways they should be developed into organizational forms and capacities which
enable a successful DT. In order to analyze which different configurations of
organizational characteristics may cause certain outcomes, those characteristics
must first be identified (Fiss, 2007). The presented research investigates possi-
ble actors, structures, and their interplay suitable for the DT actions needed to

--- PAGE 3 ---
9578 JournaloftheKnowledgeEconomy(2024)15:9576–9596
1 3
develop DT capabilities. We also explore factors that influence the making of
particular decisions about organizational forms.
Based on existing literature, we firstly developed a conceptual framework for
defining organizational forms for a successful DT. Given that a configurational
approach assumes complex causality and nonlinear relationships where variables
found to be causally related in one configuration may be unrelated or even inversely
related in another (Meyer et al., 1993), we opted for the case study methodology.
Using case study methodology, we analyzed two large companies from production
and service sector as both sectors have been affected by DT (Caliskan et al., 2021).
Both companies have been successful with their DT, both with a business-IT part-
nership pattern. In the third stage, we conceptualized the findings.
In the next section, we provide a literature review and develop a conceptual
research model, which is followed by a description of the methodology. This is fol-
lowed by a section where empirical evidence is presented, discussed, and compared
with findings from previous research. Finally, we conclude by setting out the impli-
cations, limitations, and suggestions for future research.
Literature Review and Research Model Development
Based on an extensive literature review, Vial (2019) constructed a working defini-
tion of DT as “a process that aims to improve an entity by triggering significant
changes to its properties through combinations of information, computing, commu-
nication, and connectivity technologies.” Like other IT-enabled organizational trans-
formations (vom Brocke et al., 2021), DT may require great changes in strategy,
business models, processes, or organizational structures (Westerman et al., 2011),
and require a reassessment of a company’s norms and values (Liu et al., 2011),
organizational culture, leadership, and employee roles and skills (Vial, 2019).
DT presents a challenge for most companies as changing business models, pro-
cesses, people, or organizational culture is far more difficult than just selecting and
implementing the right technology. This requires organizations to develop flexible
organization forms that allow for resilience and nimbleness to coexist (Faro et al.,
2021). To cope with these challenges, several steps are required during a DT, e.g.,
DT strategic planning (Matt et al., 2015; Yeow et al., 2018), coordination and lead-
ership (Seijts & Gandz, 2018), culture transformation (Alos-Simo et al., 2017), and
the development of digital platforms, the operational backbone, and other digital
applications which must be integrated with legacy systems (Sebastian et al., 2017).
Moreover, DT is typically not implemented solely by the IT department (Indihar
Štemberger et al., 2019), with the coordinated actions of the entire top management
team and other employees also being needed (Krotov, 2015).
Previous research (Nadeem et al., 2018) also shows that a certain set of organiza-
tional capabilities and unique dimensions of the digital business strategy, including
the structural change elements, drive an organization towards a successful DT. The
structural changes encompass changes in the organizational structure, organizational
culture, and the roles and skills of both the leadership and employees (Vial, 2019).

--- PAGE 4 ---
9579
1 3
JournaloftheKnowledgeEconomy(2024)15:9576–9596
This raises the question of which different DT steps organizations must take to
develop the appropriate organizational capabilities (Nadeem et al., 2018), both ordi-
nary and dynamic (Inan & Bititci, 2015). The resource-based view of the firm and
the dynamic capabilities theory focus on two broad categories of organizational
capabilities that are essential for firm performance (Qaiyum & Wang, 2018): the
ordinary capabilities needed to exploit a firm’s current strategic assets through its
day-to-day operations and the higher-order dynamic capabilities required to alter a
firm’s resource base by integrating, building, and reconfiguring its competencies.
Previous research in the area of IT business value attempted to connect IT with
superior firm performance. Bharadwaj (2000) developed the concept of IT as an
organizational capability and showed that IT capability positively affects organiza-
tional performance. Other studies, e.g. (Liu et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2012), included
some mediators in models which connect IT capability and firm performance. How-
ever, all of these studies were concentrated on the resources and capabilities inside
IT departments. Since DT is much broader and builds on pervasive IT organization
(Peppard, 2018), the current understanding of IT capability is too narrow for DT and
hence more research is needed.
Digital capabilities are the capabilities required for a successful DT (Kane et al.,
2016). Since DT entails a process of fast and radical change, dynamic capabilities
are particularly important for its success (Vial, 2019). The right digital capabili-
ties enable a successful DT and are expected to lead to better organizational perfor-
mance (Nadeem et al., 2018). Although some research has looked at digital capabili-
ties, e.g. (Warner & Wäger, 2019), very little is known about suitable approaches to
developing them (Svahn et al., 2017) and more research is called for (Vial, 2019).
The findings concerning a recently developed process model for dynamic capa-
bilities for the DT of incumbent firms in traditional industries (Warner & Wäger,
2019) suggest that each dynamic capability (digital sensing, digital seizing, digital
transforming) possesses what they call sub-capabilities which are either enhanced
by internal enablers or inhibited by internal barriers. Identified internal enablers are
cross-functional teams, fast decision-making, and executive support, while internal
barriers are rigid strategic planning, resistance to change, and a considerable hier-
archy. This raises the question of what organizations must do to nurture the internal
enablers and counteract the inhibitors. Furthermore, some ordinary capabilities have
also been found very important for DT, like a collection of high-level routines that
give management a set of decision options for output production such as strategy
development (Inan & Bititci, 2015).
We define DT actions as actions that an organization has to perform in order to
develop DT capabilities. We performed a literature review to identify and better
understand different actions and roles within an organization when dealing with DT.
We searched for publications in Web of Science, using “digital transformation” or
“digitalization” as the main keywords and selected pairing keywords. The search
was performed for SSCI- and SCI-E indexed publications for the period from 2010
on. This resulted in identified DT actions which are presented in Table 1.
With this study, we explore organizational forms needed for DT actions, which
support the development of digital capabilities. In a configurational approach,
organizations are understood as clusters of interconnected structures and practices,

--- PAGE 5 ---
9580 JournaloftheKnowledgeEconomy(2024)15:9576–9596
1 3
rather than modular or loosely coupled entities whose components can be under-
stood in isolation (Fiss, 2007). The organizational form can therefore be defined
as the composition of elements of the organizational structure (Dischner, 2015). In
general, “there is not only one optimal type of organizational form” (Hoogervorst,
2018) and we expect similar with DT. Therefore, we also focus on understanding the
effect of influential factors on the formation of appropriate organizational form. The
research conceptual framework can be seen in Fig. 1.
Methodology
After an initial literature review and building a conceptual research framework, we
performed two case studies to further examine the literature findings, followed by
conceptualization of the findings.
Case study methodology offers one of the best bridges between rich qualitative
evidence and mainstream deductive research, making it an inductive prerequisite
for subsequent deductive testing (Eisenhardt & Graebner, 2007). The methodology
Table1  Digital transformation actions
DT actions Reference(s)
Strategic planning
Developing a DT strategy
Linking the business and DT strategies
Ensuring alignment with the organization’s objectives
Developing an action plan
(Vial, 2019)
(Schumacher et al., 2016)
(Nadeem et al., 2018)
(Chanias et al., 2019)
(Sebastian et al., 2017)
(Ismail et al., 2017)
(Tekic & Koroteev, 2019)
(Matt et al., 2015)
Developing technology-enabled assets
Developing the operational backbone
Developing the digital solution and platform
(Nadeem et al., 2018)
(Chanias et al., 2019)
(Sebastian et al., 2017)
Digital leadership
New leadership roles for rapid DT facilitation
Rethinking the role of corporate IT and the CIO
Developing change management capabilities
Ensuring the collaboration of the business and IT functions
Creating an environment for generating proposals and ideas
(Schumacher et al., 2016)
(Nadeem et al., 2018)
(Gerth & Peppard, 2016)
(Vial, 2019)
(Singh & Hess, 2017)
(Hansen & Sia, 2015)
Digital transformation project management
Ensuring diverse and targeted team compositions
(Guinan et al., 2019)
(Govindarajan & Immelt, 2019)
Developing digital skills and competencies
Continuous learning
Talent management
Developing openness to new technology and autonomy
Promoting employee initiatives
(Chanias et al., 2019)
(Vial, 2019)
(Schumacher et al., 2016)
(Nadeem et al., 2018)
(Urbach et al., 2019)
Digital culture development
Developing ability for culture transformation
(Alos-Simo et al., 2017)
(Westerman et al., 2019)
(Schumacher et al., 2016)

--- PAGE 6 ---
9581
1 3
JournaloftheKnowledgeEconomy(2024)15:9576–9596
is used in research areas still in the process of being understood, discovered, and
described (Stuart et al., 2002), as is the case with questions concerning how DT is
being dealt with in different organizational settings. As a research strategy, a case
study is appropriate for events not influenced by the researcher and needing to be
answered by asking questions like “how” and “why” (Yin, 2017). The methodol-
ogy has often been successfully applied while researching various aspects of DT
(Henriette et al., 2015). We applied a multiple-case design since that is consid-
ered more robust than a single-case study design, while it also offers the possibil-
ity of direct replication in different, independent cases (Yin, 2017). Furthermore,
context differentiation among the cases can allow greater generalizability of the
shared findings in multiple cases (Yin, 2017).
Purposive sampling (Yin, 2017) was employed while selecting the case study
units, where the companies selected were arranged so that business and IT form a
partnership (Indihar Štemberger et al., 2019). We approached five organizations that
passed the initial pre-screening process. Two of these organizations (case study unit
A and case study unit B) agreed to participate.
In order to achieve data triangulation (Yin, 2017) in case studies, a researcher
obtains information in various ways like through interviews, questionnaires, and
observation (Eisenhardt, 1989). Therefore, primary data were collected via semi-
structured, in-depth interviews of key employees responsible for DT and also by
a questionnaire which was completed by middle management and higher-ranking
employees. Secondary data about the two case-study companies included internal
documentation, annual reports, publications in various media, and public presenta-
tions at conferences and other events.
While preparing the interview and conducting the interviews, we followed the
guidelines of Myers and Newman (2007) and Schultze and Avital (2011). Each
Strategic Planning
Organizaonal Forms for DT DT Acons
Roles and
Responsibilies
Develop
Digital Leadership
Digital Skills and
Competencies
Development
Developing
Technology-
Enabled Assets
DT Project
Management
s e v i t a n r e t l A
Influenal Factors
Digital Culture
Development
Digital Transformaon
Capabilies
Fig.1  Conceptual framework for defining organizational forms for a successful DT

--- PAGE 7 ---
9582 JournaloftheKnowledgeEconomy(2024)15:9576–9596
1 3
interview was conducted by two researchers, one of whom acted as the principal
interviewer. It started with a brief introduction to the research, followed by a set
of general questions about the interviewee. The core part of the interview included
questions about the interviewee’s understanding of DT, the state of DT in the organ-
ization, and value co-creation with the DT. The interview questions were based on
actions identified in Table 1. The interviews were concluded with general remarks
and an opportunity was given for the interviewee to add anything else not covered in
the discussion.
In both companies, we first interviewed the highest-ranking employee responsi-
ble for the DT and the highest-ranking employee responsible for information tech-
nology. Based on those interviews, we conducted more interviews according to the
specifics of each company. A list of interviewees is shown in Table 2.
The second part of the primary data collection entailed online questionnaires
being sent to middle management and higher-ranking employees to be completed
anonymously. The questionnaire’s chief aim was to assess the company’s organiza-
tional digital culture and digital maturity. In addition, the questionnaire contained
questions about the effects of the DT on the company, the company’s goals with the
DT, the relationship between the business strategy and the digitalization strategy,
the company’s internal capabilities for the DT, and barriers within the company with
respect to the DT. The questionnaire was adapted from Kane et al. (2016).
All the interviews were recorded, transcribed, and coded. The coding was done in
three stages. In the first stage, we used open coding, which refers to breaking down,
examining, comparing, conceptualizing, and categorizing data (Corbin & Strauss,
2014), in order to identify first order concepts (Gioia et al., 2013). During our exam-
ination of the interview transcripts, we noticed certain codes that either signified
repetitions or had similar meanings, which we merged accordingly. Additionally,
we came across themes that were not directly related to our research question, and
therefore, we disregarded them. In the second stage, we used axial coding to discern
patterns, similarities, and distinctions within the remaining codes (Corbin & Strauss,
2014), enabling us to organize them into second order themes (Gioia et al., 2013). In
the third stage, our aim was to condense these second order themes into aggregate
dimensions (Gioia et al., 2013). The second order themes and aggregate dimensions
are listed in the Table 3 in the Appendix.
Throughout all the three stages of the process, all three authors of the paper were
interpreting the codes. We paid special attention if there was a lack of consensus on
Table2  Basic information about
the interviewees
Unit Position in the organization Label
A Chief Information Officer A-CIO
A Head of IT Department A-IT
A Head of Digital Solutions A-DIG
B Head of IT Department B-IT
B Head of Digital Product Development B-DPD
B Head of Logistics B-LOG

--- PAGE 8 ---
9583
1 3
JournaloftheKnowledgeEconomy(2024)15:9576–9596
certain codes. In those cases, we revisited the data, engaged in collaborative discus-
sions, and worked towards reaching a consensual interpretation (Gioia et al., 2013).
We analyzed the survey data using different statistical methods.
Empirical Evidence
In this section, we first describe both case study units. Based on the coding of inter-
views in both companies, we have identified three aggregate dimensions that evolve
around defining different organizational forms and the interplay between involved
actors: (1) digital leadership, strategic planning, and strategy implementation; (2)
pervasiveness of digital transformation; (3) digital transformation projects. There-
fore, we focus on each of identified aggregate dimensions later in the section sepa-
rately and emphasize how the findings within each identified aggregate dimension
relate to DT actions presented in literature review.
DescriptionofCaseStudyUnitA
The first case study (unit A) is an insurance company with around 1000 employees
and some 1400 independent insurance agents with an annual revenue of EUR 310
million. The company has started on its DT with isolated projects and activities.
The general attitude in top management’s support for DT changed in 2011 when a
new board member joined the company who was inclined to a DT. Since then, the
isolated DT projects have evolved into activities coordinated by the company’s CIO
and supported by a specialized unit for coordinating the DT-related efforts.
According to the interview with the A-DIG, management largely understands DT
as a business model and process change with a focus on changing employee mind-
sets, while employees on the operational level see DT more as simply technological
changes. Management tries to “make employees aware that by the DT they can sim-
plify processes for themselves and customers” and thus sees “leadership and change
management as the biggest tools for DT.” There was no significant difference in per-
ception between those employees directly involved in the DT and those who are not,
whether DT will disrupt their industry more than other industries. Only group that
stood out were IT employees who are less inclined to believe the DT will disrupt
their industry.
According to A-CIO, the key goals are digitalizing its own products and customer
experience through digital value-added services, while also changing its business
model. A-DIG noted that “improving customer engagement” is the main goal, while
also expecting a “shift to digital solutions” as being key future goals. The survey
results singled out increasing process efficiency and improving customer experience
and engagement as two essential goals, while business process and model transfor-
mation scored the lowest.
Interviewees in the company identified the company culture and the employees
as the key success factors for a successful DT. According to the survey the company

--- PAGE 9 ---
9584 JournaloftheKnowledgeEconomy(2024)15:9576–9596
1 3
scored as bolder, more exploratory and having a more distributed leadership structure,
while being less agile as the world average (Kane et al., 2016).
DescriptionofCaseStudyUnitB
The second case study (unit B) is a manufacturing company operating in the automotive,
construction, and power engineering industries, each with its own business division. The
company has around 5500 employees and an annual revenue of EUR 800 million. The
company has long maintained an innovation system to strengthen its digital innovation
capabilities (55,000 ideas collected in the last few years). The company also sees DT as
an opportunity to develop new markets and products. Therefore, it established a fourth
business division 3 years ago that primarily focuses on new digital product development,
drawing heavily on industrial process knowledge from the three other business divisions,
and secondarily on digitally transforming those three business divisions. Development
in the digital division occurs mainly in cooperation with start-up companies and is hence
completely separated from the three other main business units.
In the interviews with B-IT and B-DPD, the DT was seen as a cycle that will lead
to the development of new business models and products and therefore their separate
digital business division is focusing on DT projects and product development due to the
lack of resources in the other divisions. According to B-LOG, DT is a “change driver
for business users and a platform for business model change.” The management and the
employees who are involved in the DT efforts think it will disrupt their industry more
than other employees.
According to B-DPD, the primary goal is to achieve more efficient and optimized
internal processes in the main three business divisions, while also offering buyers
insights into its production process by using advanced analytics. This enables its digital
division to focus more on digitalized product development able to generate new rev-
enue. B-LOG sees a vital goal of the DT as “relieving the employees so they can do
more important things” by increasing the efficiency of their business processes, “by
process digitalization in order to provide relevant data on time to improve business
decision-making.” The survey results singled out increasing process efficiency and
improving decision-making as two essential goals, while improving customer experi-
ence and engagement scored the lowest.
Interviewees in the company identified the company culture and the employees as
the key success factors for a successful DT. This may be summarized by B-DPD when
describing “DT as mainly a change in the organizational culture, an employee trans-
formation and a readiness to change.” According to the survey, the company scored as
having a more collaborative work style, while being a less agile as the world average
(Kane et al., 2016), with risk appetite and leadership structure not deviating from it.
DigitalLeadership,StrategicPlanning,andStrategyImplementation
Awareness of the importance of the DT among top management developed differ-
ently. According to A-DIG, company A had the greatest awareness of changes hap-
pening practically overnight “by introducing a new external member of the board

--- PAGE 10 ---
9585
1 3
JournaloftheKnowledgeEconomy(2024)15:9576–9596
who was strongly inclined to the DT and responsible for the top-down push,” fol-
lowed by a single DT project that gradually evolved into the current situation.
Company B saw the change happen gradually, by having the IT department give
DT initiatives over past decade, increasing internal awareness of the strategic impor-
tance of the DT, and ultimately by having the head of IT becoming a board member.
Therefore, the two companies have CIOs in the top management, with the head of IT
directly responsible to them.
While a decision to appoint the CDO seems reasonable because it signals the DT’s
strategic nature for the entire organization (Vial, 2019), experience described from
the two cases shows that other solutions also lead to a successful DT. Neither com-
pany has a dedicated CDO position. Company B has B-DPD who is mainly respon-
sible for promoting internal innovativeness and developing new digital products and
services, while the tasks that form part of the CDO role are performed by B-CIO.
Both analyzed cases demonstrate that a DT can be successfully led by CIO who pos-
sesses the appropriate personality traits, mindset, and skills, as required by the nature of
the DT, along with an appropriate digital culture and understanding of top management.
Such a role and operation of the CIO is often related to the fact the IT department plays
the role of a strategic contributor (Gerth & Peppard, 2016), which is definitely a better
starting point for DT. However, when the IT department merely plays a supporting role,
i.e., a solution or service provider (Gerth & Peppard, 2016), it is important that it is not an
inhibitorofDTprojectsbutthatitadaptstheexecutionofitsoriginaltasksaccordingly.
The next dilemma concerns a more or less centralized leadership structure,
whereby different combinations are possible with a less centralized one, with more
positions being taken over by some leadership roles. The cases suggest that more cen-
tralized leadership and the explicit appointment of a CDO makes sense when the dig-
italization is expected to be more disruptive for the industry, resulting in more radical
changes and greater risks, or when the DT culture is not yet at the appropriate level
and awareness of the strategic importance of the DT must still be developed.
With company A, a centralized approach for the purpose of a top-down push was
used in early stages of the DT, when a new external board member was appointed.
Later, the DT became “business as usual” and the whole company’s organizational
culture changed in the direction of digital culture and the leadership thus also became
more decentralized. In company B, due to the diverse nature of the changes, a combi-
nation of approaches is in use where for more disruptive changes entailing new digi-
talized products and services and consequently also business models being developed,
they established a new division whose head B-DPD is mainly responsible for promot-
ing internal innovativeness while other DT leadership roles were taken over by the CIO.
Company A includes the DT in its 5-year business strategy and as one of
its top two priorities. A-CIO states that DT was a serious consideration while
building their business strategy, while A-IT does not see the lack of a separate
DT strategy as a problem provided the strategic business goals encompass it.
Two interviewees outside of the company’s top management (A-DIG and A-IT)
claimed they lack operationalization of the DT in the business strategy, as a
more detailed version would help them prioritize projects.
According to B-DPD, a formal DT strategy is still being developed. Instead,
the company relies on guidance and orchestration from the board management

--- PAGE 11 ---
9586 JournaloftheKnowledgeEconomy(2024)15:9576–9596
1 3
member responsible for IT and DT (B-CIO), or as B-LOG and B-IT both color-
fully described it: “The DT strategy is in the head of our B-CIO, with a view
that everyone in the company follows.”
It seems surprising that at first glance in each case, both the strategy and espe-
cially the action plan are not very formalized. Company B has a strong individual
agent (B-CIO), skilfully manipulating potential strategy discourse (Whittington,
2014), such that most employees have internalized these strategic objectives. The
explicitly formulated DT strategy primarily makes sense for pre-digital and less
digitally mature organizations across traditional industries (Chanias et al., 2019),
where the key purpose of its development is to check the fit of the DT’s goals
and new product development with the organization’s resources and capabilities
(Liu et al., 2011), to communicate goals at all organizational levels he encourage
changes in the organizational culture in the digital direction.
DT as an innovation has a high level of heterogeneity within operant resources
that need to be identified and mobilized and requires a wide body of discipline or
domain-based knowledge (Lyytinen et al., 2016). It is therefore unsurprising that
company A highlighted the inability to work across silos as a key barrier to the DT,
indicating the need for some sort of strategic coordination among actors (Chanias
et al., 2019; Schumacher et al., 2016), especially where there is a lower level of DT
culture and a lack of a collaborative work style. Only genuine collaboration ensures
the acceptance of the most complex organizational changes (Seijts & Gandz, 2018).
At one end of the continuum, we find examples of the creation of a separate unit
that maintains a degree of independence from the rest of the organization (Vial, 2019),
as happened in company B because the organizational digital culture with an average
level of risk appetite in the other organizational units did not allow for experimenting
with radical ideas and managing the riskiest initiatives. In a certain way, it is a spin-off
strategy type (Ismail et al., 2017) where a separate organizational unit ensures appro-
priate resources to identify and realize potentially disruptive innovations.
Alternatively, in the case of a distributed DT organization, a federated innovation
network (Lyytinen et al., 2016) must be assured, where at least a certain level of cen-
tralized coordination and control of an otherwise distributed structure is necessary,
which can be realized through organizational units that connect individual areas,
actors, and roles, like in company A where the purpose of a special organizational
unit is to connect the process management (business side) and IT. This structure also
requires the development of a digital culture with a propensity for risk throughout
the company, where experimentation is acceptable and desirable.
PervasivenessofDigitalTransformation
As a result of realizing that DT should be understood as an organizational change
holding the potential to improve organizational performance, it is clear that the
entire organization must “live” the DT and pervasiveness must thus be ensured at
least to some extent (Peppard, 2018). This should be achieved by the interplay of
different actors in interdisciplinary fields, while ensuring integrity and stability at
the same time (Westerman et al., 2019).

--- PAGE 12 ---
9587
1 3
JournaloftheKnowledgeEconomy(2024)15:9576–9596
In both companies, the strategic goals of digitalization are adjusted to the nature of
the organization (industry, culture, capabilities, resources), while for these reasons, the
goals in company B are divided into the more disruptive ones pursued mainly by the
digital division, and changes to the existing business processes pursued by all divisions.
In both companies, strategic DT initiatives come from the top management. Both
companies are also trying to encourage DT initiatives from the employees. Com-
pany A does this very successfully by having most operational DT initiatives (i.e.,
those that result in increased efficiency and improved business decision-making)
emerge from a wide range of employees, mainly product owners. Company B also
receives some DT initiatives from employees, which then need to be orchestrated,
yet B-IT states there are “hardly any” from the production department. Lately, ever
more initiatives are also coming from the separate digital business division, as also
acknowledged by their project managers (i.e., B-LOG).
Both cases show the close connection between pervasiveness and digital culture.
If employees on all levels understand that DT is primarily an organizational change
and needs to be in the business domain, they will then not only implement and adopt
changes more effectively, but we can also expect more digitalization initiatives
(Chanias et al., 2019) coming from a wide range of employees.
Accordingly, at lower levels of digital culture, the establishment of separate busi-
ness units or divisions may be needed to generate ideas and implement DT projects,
while such a unit can also serve as a promoter of the DT efforts.
The task of managers is to create an environment conducive to digital innovations
and a learning culture that promotes DT opportunities (Kohli & Melville, 2019). If the
CIO is business-savvy and the IT department is a strategic contributor, the latter can also
be a promoter of DT awareness, as the example of company B shows where several DT
activities came from the IT department in the previous decade. Still, decentralized DT
coordination, like in the case of company A, is a more favorable environment for provid-
ing a broader consensus on the importance of the DT, even among those not directly
involved in such projects, which again seems related to the baseline digital culture which
is lower in the organizational units of company B, except for the digital division.
Interviewees at both companies agreed that they are trying to strengthen their
employees’ digital innovation capabilities. A-CIO vividly stated: “DT is about peo-
ple, it is not a mathematical formula. This is the gist of it.”
Company A does this with frequent employee trainings and by employing new
employees with DT knowledge, while company B does this with a system of incre-
mental innovations to encourage innovation and with its separate business division
for DT. Furthermore, company A seeks to strengthen the acceptance of the DT
among its employees by leading by example, while company B tries to identify early
adopters and use them as promotors of new DT projects.
Change management capabilities were recognized as one of the top three barriers
to the DT among the survey respondents in both companies. Survey respondents in
company B also identified the lack of the talent/skills required as the leading bar-
rier to the DT. This is in line with interviewee B-IT who emphasized the employees
are sometimes “afraid of the DT” because they lack knowledge. One of the tools
company B employs in the early stages of DT projects is introducing proof of the
concept into the production environment for all to see.

--- PAGE 13 ---
9588 JournaloftheKnowledgeEconomy(2024)15:9576–9596
1 3
The pervasiveness of the DT can also be reflected in situations where employees
not from the IT department take on the role of managing DT projects (Vial, 2019),
even if they are technology-intensive projects but essentially based on business
change. This is typical for both companies under study, where projects are managed
by the business side but the IT department plays an important role in these projects
and the IT manager understands the business needs.
Yet, pervasiveness can also have side-effects. In each company, too many competing
priorities were ranked among the first five barriers to the DT, with some differences in
the rank, being at the very top in company A and in 4th place in company B, which also
reflects differences in pervasiveness and centralized/decentralized coordination, and thus
the number of initiatives. The coordination of initiatives and prioritization, as well as the
formulationofactionplans,becomeimportantcoordinationtasks(Chaniasetal.,2019).
DigitalTransformationProjects
Interviewees in both companies agree their companies handle DT efforts from a project
perspective with a strong focus on the project groups’ interdisciplinary composition and
the IT department playing a supportive role. Survey respondents in each company iden-
tified the inability to work across silos as a key barrier to the DT. Both companies give
great emphasis to including passionate employees in the DT project teams.
DT project groups in company A contain domain experts (business side), IT
department employees, process experts, and occasionally external members. The
main reason for including domain experts (business side) is because they are the
initiators of the DT. According to A-IT, they are also project leaders if the projects
are not strictly IT-oriented because they will be more driven by the project’s suc-
cess. A-DIG stated the IT department is often included solely for the business users
to understand the complexity of the DT efforts when a need arises to connect a new
solution to the existing operational backbone. Process experts are included to ensure
the coherence and transparency of processes, which may prove very challenging in
some areas. These DT project teams are formed ad-hoc and all projects are coordi-
nated by the digital solutions business unit. The digital solutions business unit led
by A-CIO and coordinated by A-DIG serves as integrational support between the
different employee groups that form the DT project teams. According to A-CIO, this
unit’s main role is not to deal with the DT but to coordinate and support it.
Company B uses similar employee profiles as company A while forming its DT pro-
ject groups. The projects are usually led by domain experts (business side) who “should
have the last word, because they know what they need” (B-IT). Both B-IT and B-LOG
agree the IT department’s role in these project groups should be and actually is mostly
supportive, supporting the technical aspects. One of the main differences, as emphasized
by B-LOG, is the inclusion of future users in DT projects in order for them to be involved
in the DT projects from the start. When in-house expertise for successful DT projects is
lacking, they seek outsourcing partners. The coordination of DT activities at the highest
level (B-CIO, B-IT, the board member responsible for production) happens every day or
week,whiletheDTgroupmadeupofDTprojectleadersmeetsmonthly.

--- PAGE 14 ---
9589
1 3
JournaloftheKnowledgeEconomy(2024)15:9576–9596
One interesting observation is that the IT department in company B saw the
insufficient technical skills of the technology staff as a major barrier, while the non-
IT respondents did not. Another observation of interest is that in company A, non-
management respondents pointed out the poor collaboration between IT and lines of
business as one of the biggest barriers.
Due to the characteristics of DT as business change projects, it is very common
that DT projects are led by domain experts (business side) (Peppard, 2018), which
proved to be the case in both companies, However, when DT projects follow more
disruptive goals and especially in circumstances where the digital culture is risk-
averse, they need to be either led by top management or by a specialized business
division. From the viewpoint of project management, company B thus also follows
the model of the dual nature of DT projects being on one hand more radical and
riskier, and on the other, the less radical digitalization of existing processes.
Appropriate digital culture, particularly a collaborative work style, is a prerequisite
for the success of mixed DT project groups. In company A, the inability to work across
silos identified as a barrier to the DT could also be reflected at the level of individual
DT project management. Therefore, the need to coordinate interdisciplinary teams with
an organizational unit that ensures the coordination of information technology deploy-
ment and business process changes was recognized. Although these groups can also be
formed as ad-hoc coordination teams, permanent coordination units can be useful for
maintaining know-how and coordination skills. In the case of distributed leadership,
coordination groups must be properly empowered, otherwise coordination must be sup-
ported and directed by a project manager who is at a sufficiently high hierarchical level.
A well-developed operational backbone is the foundation of a successful DT (Sebastian
et al., 2017). Maintaining the existing IT ecosystem and ensuring the possibility of
integrating new solutions into it is the minimum role of the IT department, while it
must understand the characteristics and requirements of the DT or otherwise it could
become its inhibitor. At the same time, the IT department’s task in this role is to be a
kind of mediator between business users’ expectations and the IT operational backbone
capabilities. As noted in company A, the business side that initiates changes and manages
projects is often unaware of which interventions are needed in the existing IT environment
to seamlessly integrate the new solutions into it. If at the same time the IT department is
able to fully support the DT activities and lead the development of digital solutions, it may
be considered as a bi-modal IT where digital IT and traditional IT, sometimes referred
to as “two-speed IT,” coexist (Horlach et al., 2016). If the IT department is unable to
provide a bimodal IT operation, there is the option that the digital solution development
can be separated into a standalone business division in order to mitigate the risk or the
developmentmightbeoutsourcedandledbythebusinessside.
The key influencing factors of the IT department’s characteristics and role in DT
projects are whether (1) the IT department is merely a service provider or a strategic
contributor (Gerth & Peppard, 2016); and (2) the IT department has the knowledge and
skills needed for the continuous, fast, and flexible development of new digital solutions
andflexibleandscalabledigitalplatforms,i.e.,whetheritiscapableofensuringincreased
flexibility of the IT infrastructure (Chanias et al., 2019; Nadeem et al., 2018; Sebastian
et al., 2017). Namely, new digital technologies require different skills and mindsets
than previous waves of transformative technologies. Given these starting points, the

--- PAGE 15 ---
9590 JournaloftheKnowledgeEconomy(2024)15:9576–9596
1 3
IT department can then merely have a supportive role within DT projects when they
maintain the existing operational backbone and support digital solutions’ integration into
the existing IT ecosystem, they can develop digital solutions, it can have more business-
orientedrolessuchastheroleofprocessmanagementexpertsoranintegratorofproducts,
processes, and IT, but it can even be that projects are led by the IT department instead of
domainexperts(businessside)whentheITdepartmentisastrategiccontributor.
SummaryofFindings
An important starting point for decisions on the definition of the roles, tasks, and
organization of the DT are the goals which the organization is pursuing with the DT.
Although previous research (Denner et al., 2018; Martinez, 2019; Tekic & Koroteev,
2019) suggests that some organizations see DT as an opportunity to improve existing
processes and reduce costs, while others see it as an opportunity to create new busi-
ness models, products, and services, the two cases point to the pursuit of both goals —
continuous improvement and disruptive innovations — within the same organization.
Both paradigms require a different culture, approaches, knowledge, roles, and hence
different approaches to the formation of organizational forms for DT. This can make it
challenging for organizations to combine these approaches while avoiding a paradigm
clash. A typical example of this is company B where a dedicated organizational unit
has been introduced to design new products and business models and the DT is there-
fore more centralized for these needs, while the DT of existing processes is much more
pervasive and organizationally centralized.
The results show that not only do variations between the two companies exist in
coping with organizational forms for the DT, but those different approaches can also
be combined within each company. However, when analyzing the goals organiza-
tions must pursue while designing organizational forms in order to achieve success
in their DT, the main messages from each company were similar.
This analysis led to confirmation of the basic hypothesis that several different
organizational forms may be used for a successful DT, but some key foundations
must be in place:
• More important than the formal strategic planning of the DT is the leadership
of top management (C-level), whereby it must internalize the DT as a business
initiative that is integrated into all company processes.
• The pervasiveness of the DT must be ensured at least to some extent, taking
account of the level of disruptive nature of the DT, the level of risk appetite,
the absorption capacity, and others. On the other hand, DT initiatives need to
be screened, selected, and coordinated. Organizational forms must enable the
breaking down of organizational silos and the interconnection of business areas.
• DT projects must be executed by interdisciplinary teams, where the IT depart-
ment’s role may vary in different circumstances, but in all cases, it must provide
appropriate operational backbone capabilities.

--- PAGE 16 ---
9591
1 3
JournaloftheKnowledgeEconomy(2024)15:9576–9596
Moreover, the results of case studies allowed us to extract the influences of indi-
vidual influential factors, namely digital culture, the IT department’s role, and the goals
of the DT, on the adequacy of various organizational forms. The main findings of the
analysis on the factors and their impact on the appropriate organizational forms for DT,
the related roles, and their relationships are summarized in Table 3 in the Appendix.
Conclusion
The presented research sheds light on how companies provide an environment for a
successful DT by developing their organizational forms, i.e., by combining the dif-
ferent DT actions, actors, their roles and responsibilities, their interplay, implement-
ing DT strategies, and combining the design of digital software solutions with the
design of organizational routines and practices.
The main theoretical implication of our study is showing how companies can
develop digital capabilities that enable a successful DT by leveraging their dynamic
capabilities through different configurational approaches of organizational forms.
Through this approach, we combine theoretical foundations from dynamic capabili-
ties theory, organizational forms, and the concept of DT. Moreover, key DT actions
and influential factors that can lead to successful DT have been identified.
Our research results also offer some managerial guidelines as managers should be
aware of interconnectedness between different aspects of dynamic capabilities develop-
ment and organizational adaptation (Wójcik, 2020). First, if companies do not have a for-
mal CDO appointed, it is useful to adopt an informal one, even if it not consolidated in a
single person. Second, the IT department as a solution provider can be a potential inhibi-
tor of the DT if the DT is perceived as an organizational change. Yet, if the DT is seen as
atechnologicalchange,evenastrategicroleofITwillbeunabletosuccessfullyaccelerate
the DT. Third, if a company has a clearly technology-led DT, it can work towards a dis-
ruptive DT by detaching a DT unit to form an internal start-up environment not directly
linked with the main operations. Lastly, DT pervasiveness can have a tipping point after
which it needs to be actively managed in order not to negatively affect DT projects. Sev-
eral managerial implications proposed by previous research were also confirmed by our
research, such as the seamless integration of the digitalization strategy into the business
strategy is crucial, digital transformation being about employee transformation and not
simply introducing and managing new technologies, and the change-management capa-
bilities of leadership are the key to success as is the need to promote digitalization across
theentireorganization.
The main limitation of our approach arises from using a case study meth-
odology with only two purposively sampled units. Therefore, generalization of
our findings is only partly possible. Further research is needed to identify other
possible organizational characteristics that are key to a successful DT and how
they should be developed into organizational forms and capacities which enable
a successful DT. It is also necessary to validate organizational characteristics
and organizational forms currently identified through surveys of a broader sam-
ple of organizations.

--- PAGE 17 ---
9592 JournaloftheKnowledgeEconomy(2024)15:9576–9596
1 3
Appendix
Table 3  Findings on influencing factors
Aggregate dimensions Second order themes Digital culture Role of IT department Goals of the DT
Strategic planning and
implementation
Strategic leadership High levels of employee trust in
management can be achieved by a
distributed leadership structure
When the DT culture is not yet at the
adequate level a more centralized
leadership is appropriate
If the IT department is a strategic
contributor, the CIO can also act in
the role of the CDO
Goals of the DT of a disruptive
nature (e.g., increasing innovation,
transforming business models) with
more radical changes and greater
risks require greater leadership
engagement and more centralized
leadership
DT strategy The explicitly formulated DT
strategy primarily makes sense for
organizations with lower level of
the DT culture
* *
Strategic DT coordination A distributed leadership structure
requires higher levels of
operationalization through
coordination and development of
an action plan
* *
Pervasiveness of DT Initiatives for DT Culture leaning towards DT will
result in more initiatives from all
levels of employees
At lower levels of digital culture the
establishment of separate business
units or divisions may be needed
to generate ideas and implement
DT projects
Due to the nature of the DT most
initiatives will not come from
the IT department, regardless of
its role
The goals that focus more on
increasing efficiency and improving
business decision-making result
in more initiatives coming from
employees who execute business
processes
Initiatives will more likely come from
top management and experts only if
the goals of the DT are disruptive in
nature (e.g. increasing innovation,
transforming business models)
How is DT perceived by employees How employees understand DT
affects the organizational digital
culture and vice versa
* *

--- PAGE 18 ---
9593
1 3
JournaloftheKnowledgeEconomy(2024)15:9576–9596
Table 3  (continued)
Aggregate dimensions Second order themes Digital culture Role of IT department Goals of the DT
DT projects Interdisciplinary teams An appropriate digital culture,
particularly a collaborative work
style, is a prerequisite for the
success of heterogeneous DT
project groups
Employees who are passionate
about work related to the DT (e.g.,
innovative, passion for technology)
must be included in DT project
teams, regardless of their current
work position
Regardless of the IT department’s
role, the IT personnel serves
a supportive role with DT
projects when they overlap the
IT operational backbone and as a
mediator between business user
expectations and IT operational
backbone capabilities
However, if the IT department is
a strategic contributor, it also
undertakes more business-oriented
roles like the role of process
management experts
When the goals of the DT are
disruptive in nature (e.g., increasing
innovation, transforming business
models/processes), heterogenous
project teams are essential
DT projects management With a distributed leadership
structure, a permanent
coordination unit is more likely to
succeed
Projects can be led by the IT
department instead of domain
experts (business side) if the
IT department is a strategic
contributor
When the DT projects follow more
disruptive goals, they must be led
by either top management or a
specialized business division
Digital solution development If the digital culture is risk-averse,
DT projects should be led by a
separate business unit/division
The more the IT department is in the
DT role, the more involved it will
be in developing digital solutions
In the case of a more traditional
IT department, it will be unable
to cope with requirements
for a fast and agile digital
solution development. In this
case development might be
outsourced or performed by other
organizational units
*
* … no findings emerged from the cases

--- PAGE 19 ---
9594 JournaloftheKnowledgeEconomy(2024)15:9576–9596
1 3
DataAvailability The dataset associated to this research is available to readers upon reasonable request.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.
References
Alos-Simo, L., Verdu-Jover, A. J., & Gomez-Gras, J. M. (2017). How transformational leadership facili-
tates e-business adoption. Industrial Management and Data Systems, 117(2), 382–397. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1108/​IMDS-​01-​2016-​0038
Bharadwaj, A. S. (2000). A resource-based perspective on information technology capability and firm
performance: An empirical investigation. MIS Quarterly, 24(1), 169–196. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2307/​
32509​83
Caliskan, A., Özkan Özen, Y. D., & Ozturkoglu, Y. (2021). Digital transformation of traditional mar-
keting business model in new industry era. Journal of Enterprise Information Management, 34(4),
1252–1273. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1108/​JEIM-​02-​2020-​0084
Cetindamar Kozanoglu, D., & Abedin, B. (2020). Understanding the role of employees in digital trans-
formation: Conceptualization of digital literacy of employees as a multi-dimensional organi-
zational affordance. Journal of Enterprise Information Management. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1108/​
JEIM-​01-​2020-​0010
Chanias, S., Myers, M. D., & Hess, T. (2019). Digital transformation strategy making in pre-digital
organizations: The case of a financial services provider. Journal of Strategic Information Systems,
28(1), 17–33. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jsis.​2018.​11.​003
Corbin, J. M., & Strauss, A. (2014). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for devel-
oping grounded theory (4th ed.). SAGE Publications.
Denner, M. S., Püschel, L. C., & Röglinger, M. (2018). How to exploit the digitalization potential of busi-
ness processes. Business and Information Systems Engineering, 60(4), 331–349. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1007/​s12599-​017-​0509-x
Dischner, S. (2015). Organizational structure, organizational form, and counterproductive work behavior:
A competitive test of the bureaucratic and post-bureaucratic views. Scandinavian Journal of Man-
agement, 31(4), 501–514. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​scaman.​2015.​10.​002
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989). Building theories from case study research. The Academy of Management
Review, 14(4), 532–550. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2307/​258557
Eisenhardt, K. M., & Graebner, M. E. (2007). Theory building from cases: Opportunities and challenges.
Academy of Management Journal, 50(1), 25–32. https://​doi.​org/​10.​5465/​amj.​2007.​24160​888
Faro, B., Abedin, B., & Cetindamar, D. (2021). Hybrid organizational forms in public sector’s digital
transformation: A technology enactment approach. Journal of Enterprise Information Management
(ahead-of-print). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1108/​jeim-​03-​2021-​0126
Fiedler, F. E. (1964). A contingency model of leadership effectiveness. In L. B. T.-A. in E. S. P. Berkowitz
(Ed.), Advances in Experimental Social Psychology (Vol. 1, pp. 149–190). Academic Press. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1016/​S0065-​2601(08)​60051-9
Fiss, P. C. (2007). A set-theoretic approach to organizational configurations. Academy of Management
Review, 32(4), 1190–1198. https://​doi.​org/​10.​5465/​amr.​2007.​26586​092
Gerth, A. B., & Peppard, J. (2016). The dynamics of CIO derailment: How CIOs come undone and how
to avoid it. Business Horizons, 59(1), 61–70. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​bushor.​2015.​09.​001
Gioia, D. A., Corley, K. G., & Hamilton, A. L. (2013). Seeking qualitative rigor in inductive research:
Notes on the Gioia methodology. Organizational Research Methods, 16(1), 15–31. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1177/​10944​28112​452151
Govindarajan, V., & Immelt, J. R. (2019). The only way manufacturers can survive. MIT Sloan Manage-
ment Review, 60(3), 24–33.

--- PAGE 20 ---
9595
1 3
JournaloftheKnowledgeEconomy(2024)15:9576–9596
Guinan, P. J., Parise, S., & Langowitz, N. (2019). Creating an innovative digital project team: Levers to
enable digital transformation. Business Horizons, 62(6), 717–727. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​bushor.​
2019.​07.​005
Hansen, R., & Sia, S. K. (2015). Hummel’s digital transformation toward omnichannel retailing: Key les-
sons learned. MIS Quarterly Executive, 14(2), 51–66.
Henriette, E., Feki, M., & Boughzala, I. (2015). The shape of digital transformation: A systematic litera-
ture review. MCIS 2015 Proceedings, 431–443.
Hess, T., Matt, C., Benlian, A., & Wiesböck, F. (2016). Options for formulating a digital transformation
strategy. MIS Quarterly Executive, 15(2), 123–139. https://​doi.​org/​10.​7892/​boris.​105447
Hinings, B., Gegenhuber, T., & Greenwood, R. (2018). Digital innovation and transformation: An
institutional perspective. Information and Organization, 28(1), 52–61. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​
infoa​ndorg.​2018.​02.​004
Hoogervorst, J. A. (2018). Practicing enterprise governance and enterprise engineering: Applying the
employee-centric theory of organization. Springer.
Horlach, B., Drews, P., & Schirmer, I. (2016). Bimodal IT: Business-IT alignment in the age of digital
transformation. Multikonferenz Wirtschaftsinformatik (MKWI), 1417–1428.
Inan, G. G., & Bititci, U. S. (2015). Understanding organizational capabilities and dynamic capabilities
in the context of micro enterprises: A research agenda. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences,
210, 310–319. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​sbspro.​2015.​11.​371
Indihar Štemberger, M., Erjavec, J., Manfreda, A., & Jaklič, J. (2019). Patterns of approaches to digi-
tal transformation: An institutional arrangements perspective. In Economic and Business Review.
FELU - Faculty of Economics University of Ljubljana. https://​doi.​org/​10.​15458/​EBR.​93
Ismail, M. H., Khater, M., & Zaki, M. (2017). Digital business transformation and strategy: What do we
know so far? Manufacturer Article, November 2017, 36. https://​doi.​org/​10.​13140/​RG.2.​2.​36492.​62086
Jahanmir, S. F., & Cavadas, J. (2018). Factors affecting late adoption of digital innovations. Journal of
Business Research, 88(June 2017), 337–343. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jbusr​es.​2018.​01.​058
Kane, G. C., Palmer, D., Phillips, A. N., Kiron, D., & Buckley, N. (2016). Aligning the organization for
its digital future. MIT Sloan Management Review, 58(1).
Kohli, R., & Melville, N. P. (2019). Digital innovation: A review and synthesis. Information Systems
Journal, 29(1), 200–223. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​isj.​12193
Krotov, V. (2015). Bridging the CIO-CEO gap: It takes two to tango. Business Horizons, 58(3), 275–283.
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​bushor.​2015.​01.​001
Liu, D. Y., Chen, S. W., & Chou, T. C. (2011). Resource fit in digital transformation: Lessons learned
from the CBC Bank global e-banking project. Management Decision, 49(10), 1728–1742. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1108/​00251​74111​11838​52
Liu, H., Ke, W., Wei, K. K., & Hua, Z. (2013). The impact of IT capabilities on firm performance: The
mediating roles of absorptive capacity and supply chain agility. Decision Support Systems, 54(3),
1452–1462. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​dss.​2012.​12.​016
Lyytinen, K., Yoo, Y., & Boland, R. J. (2016). Digital product innovation within four classes of innova-
tion networks. Information Systems Journal, 26(1), 47–75. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​isj.​12093
Martinez, F. (2019). Process excellence the key for digitalisation. Business Process Management Journal,
25(7), 1716–1733. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1108/​BPMJ-​08-​2018-​0237
Matt, C., Hess, T., & Benlian, A. (2015). Digital transformation strategies. Business & Information Sys-
tems Engineering, 57(5), 339–343. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s12599-​015-​0401-5
Meyer, A. D., Tsui, A. S., & Hinings, C. R. (1993). Configurational approaches to organizational analy-
sis. Academy of Management Journal, 36(6), 1175–1195. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2307/​256809
Myers, M. D., & Newman, M. (2007). The qualitative interview in IS research: Examining the craft.
Information and Organization, 17(1), 2–26. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​infoa​ndorg.​2006.​11.​001
Nadeem, A., Abedin, B., Cerpa, N., & Chew, E. (2018). Editorial: Digital transformation & digital business
strategy in electronic commerce - The role of organizational capabilities. Journal of Theoretical and
AppliedElectronicCommerceResearch,13(2),i–viii.https://​doi.​org/​10.​4067/​S0718-​18762​01800​02001​01
Peppard, J. (2018). Rethinking the concept of the IS organization. Information Systems Journal, 28(1),
76–103. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​isj.​12122
Qaiyum, S., & Wang, C. (2018). Understanding internal conditions driving ordinary and dynamic capabilities
inIndianhigh-techfirms. Journal of Business Research, 90.https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jbusr​es.​2018.​05.​014
Schultze, U., & Avital, M. (2011). Designing interviews to generate rich data for information systems
research. Information and Organization, 21(1), 1–16. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​infoa​ndorg.​2010.​11.​001

--- PAGE 21 ---
9596 JournaloftheKnowledgeEconomy(2024)15:9576–9596
1 3
Schumacher, A., Erol, S., & Sihn, W. (2016). A maturity model for assessing Industry 4. 0 readiness
and maturity of manufacturing enterprises. Procedia CIRP, 52, 161–166. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​
procir.​2016.​07.​040
Sebastian, I. M., Ross, J. W., Beath, C., Mocker, M., Moloney, K. G., & Fonstad, N. O. (2017). How big
old companies navigate digital transformation. MIS Quarterly Executive, 16(3), 197–213.
Seijts, G. H., & Gandz, J. (2018). Transformational change and leader character. Business Horizons,
61(2), 239–249. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​bushor.​2017.​11.​005
Singh, A., & Hess, T. (2017). How chief digital officers promote the digital transformation of their com-
panies. MIS Quarterly Executive, 16(1), 1–17.
Stuart, I., McCutcheon, D., Handfield, R., McLachlin, R., & Samson, D. (2002). Effective case research
in operations management: A process perspective. Journal of Operations Management, 20(5), 419–
433. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​S0272-​6963(02)​00022-0
Svahn, F., Mathiassen, L., & Lindgren, R. (2017). Embracing digital innovation in incumbent firms: How
volvo cars managed competing concerns. MIS Quarterly, 41(1), 239–253. https://​doi.​org/​10.​25300/​
MISQ/​2017/​41.1.​12
Tekic,Z.,&Koroteev,D.(2019).Fromdisruptivelydigitaltoproudlyanalog:Aholistictypologyofdigitaltrans-
formationstrategies.BusinessHorizons,62(6),683–693.https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​bushor.​2019.​07.​002
Tumbas, S., Berente, N., & vom Brocke, J. (2017). Three types of chief digital officers and the reasons
organizations adopt the role. MIS Quarterly Executive, 16(2), 121–134. https://​doi.​org/​10.​4324/​
97804​29286​797-​14
Turel, O., & Bart, C. (2014). Board-level IT governance and organizational performance. European Jour-
nal of Information Systems, 23(2), 223–239. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1057/​ejis.​2012.​61
Urbach, N., Ahlemann, F., Böhmann, T., Drews, P., Brenner, W., Schaudel, F., & Schütte, R. (2019).
The impact of digitalization on the IT department. Business and Information Systems Engineering,
61(1), 123–131. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s12599-​018-​0570-0
Verhoef, P. C., Broekhuizen, T., Bart, Y., Bhattacharya, A., Qi Dong, J., Fabian, N., & Haenlein, M.
(2021). Digital transformation: A multidisciplinary reflection and research agenda. Journal of Busi-
ness Research, 122(November 2019), 889–901. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jbusr​es.​2019.​09.​022
Vial, G. (2019). Understanding digital transformation: A review and a research agenda. Journal of Strate-
gic Information Systems, 28(2), 118–144. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jsis.​2019.​01.​003
vom Brocke, J., Schmid, A. M., Simons, A., & Safrudin, N. (2021). IT-enabled organizational transfor-
mation: A structured literature review. Business Process Management Journal, 27(1), 204–229.
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1108/​BPMJ-​10-​2019-​0423
Wang, N., Liang, H., Zhong, W., Xue, Y., & Xiao, J. (2012). Resource structuring or capability building?
An empirical study of the business value of information technology. Journal of Management Infor-
mation Systems, 29(2), 325–367. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2753/​MIS07​42-​12222​90211
Warner, K. S. R., & Wäger, M. (2019). Building dynamic capabilities for digital transformation: An
ongoing process of strategic renewal. Long Range Planning, 52(3), 326–349. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1016/j.​lrp.​2018.​12.​001
Weill, P., & Olson, M. H. (1989). An assessment of the contingency theory of management information systems.
JournalofManagementInformationSystems,6(1),59–86.https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​07421​222.​1989.​11517​849
Westerman, G., Calméjane, C., Bonnet, D., Ferraris, P., & McAfee, A. (2011). Digital transformation: A
road-map for billion-dollar organizations.
Westerman, G., Soule, D. L., & Eswaran, A. (2019). Building digital-ready culture in traditional organi-
zations. MIT Sloan Management Review, 60(4), 59–68.
Whitler, K. A., Boyd, D. E., & Morgan, N. A. (2017). The criticality of CMO-CIO alignment. Business
Horizons, 60(3), 313–324. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​bushor.​2017.​01.​005
Whittington, R. (2014). Information systems strategy and strategy-as-practice: A joint agenda. Journal of
Strategic Information Systems, 23(1), 87–91. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jsis.​2014.​01.​003
Wójcik, P. (2020). Paradoxical nature of dynamic capabilities research: A content analysis of literature.
Baltic Journal of Management, 15(5), 727–755. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1108/​BJM-​08-​2019-​0289
Yeow, A., Soh, C., & Hansen, R. (2018). Aligning with new digital strategy: A dynamic capabilities approach.
The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 27(1), 43–58. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jsis.​2017.​09.​001
Yin, R. K. (2017). Case study research and applications: Design and methods. Sage publications.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional affiliations.