--- PAGE 1 ---
On Enterprise Architecture Patterns:
A Tool for Sustainable Transformation
Roberto Garcı́a-Escallón(B)
, Adina Aldea, and Marten van Sinderen
University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands
Abstract. Organizations across the world today face similar problems,
thus, solutions to these problems could also be re-used across many orga-
nizations. Climate change is one such common problem to organizations,
where any solution implemented by one could be re-used by many others.
These re-usable solutions could be Enterprise Architecture Patterns, but
there is a lack of guidance on how to use them in practice. This study
proposes an extension to the commonly used TOGAF, to better lever-
age these reusable solutions. Thus, this enables organizations using this
framework to enhance it with Enterprise Architecture Patterns. As part
of the proposed methodology, re-usable patterns supporting sustainable
characteristics are built. The resulting methodology is validated with an
expert panel, gathering positive comments.
Keywords: Enterprise Architecture · Enterprise Architecture
Patterns · Sustainability
1 Introduction
Today, climate change calls for a widespread transformation. A transformation
for a sustainable society that is being demanded by millions around the globe
[20]. Many projects are underway to make said change a reality, but time is
running out, as the looming deadline of 2030 for reducing carbon emissions by
45% worldwide, to avoid warming higher than 1.5◦
C, nears [2]. Although, the
kind of changes required is similar for all organizations. For example, all organi-
zations can reduce their CO2 footprint by avoiding using paper in their internal
processes, something that can be solved in a reusable manner with technology.
Because some of the changes needed to diminish emissions are common through-
out organizations, solutions developed for one organization may apply to others.
For these common challenges and repeatable solutions, the concept of patterns
is of great value [1].
As Enterprise Architecture (EA) practitioners aim to steer changes in organi-
zations, they are pushed to do so at an increasing pace. Besides climate change,
the pace of technological change and the threat of being disrupted is driving
organizations to change faster. To enable EA practitioners to bring about these
transformations in organizations, this study proposes a methodology for the
speciﬁcation of EA for sustainable organizations using patterns. This study is a
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
J. Filipe et al. (Eds.): ICEIS 2020, LNBIP 417, pp. 858–882, 2021.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-75418-1_39

--- PAGE 2 ---
On Enterprise Architecture Patterns: A Tool for Sustainable Transformation 859
followup of [7], and [6], and is organized as follows: First, a description of the
background is provided; second, the research methodology is described; third, the
results of a systematic literature review are reported; fourth, the methodology
is proposed; ﬁfth, a validation of the methodology is shown; ﬁnally, conclusions
are drawn.
2 Background
Enterprise Architecture (EA) is a relatively new ﬁeld of research that aims to
steer the change in an organization [13]. For example, by aligning the goals of
diﬀerent layers of an organization. As a ﬁeld, it has developed multiple tools to
help practitioners in their activities, and as a result, there are many frameworks
and methods. Such methods include the Zachman framework and The Open
Group Framework (TOGAF), among others [21,27]. Most methods and frame-
works depend on descriptions of the organization, both of how it is working at
the moment and how it should be working in the future [12]. The methods and
frameworks deﬁne the tools to design the desired future version of the organiza-
tion, as a result, EA has been applied to drive change in organizations.
2.1 Patterns
The organizations’ EA is applied in, as well as all other organizations, have
similarities in their structure and behaviour with other organizations, similarities
that could be also called patterns. In the words of Alexander [1], the authors of
the book A Pattern Language, “Each pattern describes a problem which occurs
over and over again in our environment, and then describes the core of the
solution to that problem, in such a way that you can use this solution a million
times over, without ever doing it the same way twice” [1]. From this deﬁnition
we can extract four key attributes, ﬁrst, patterns are a solution to a recurring
problem. Second, the pattern is the core of the solution, meaning the solution
has a scope and does not aim to describe anything that is not needed to solve
the problem. Third, the pattern should be usable as many times as needed. And
fourth, each speciﬁc use of the pattern might look diﬀerent than the last. Thus,
patterns provide reusable solutions to problems that occur repeatedly.
Patterns have been used in other ﬁelds, most famously in Computer Science,
where patterns describe solutions to common problems when developing soft-
ware [5]. These patterns helped to hasten the development of software, as they
oﬀered ready to use solutions to some common problems. Thus, similar eﬀects
are expected in EA by applying the concept of patterns, helping drive change
faster.
2.2 Sustainability
In the global context, Sustainability has become the goal to many, ranging from
individuals to the United Nations as a response to climate change and other

--- PAGE 3 ---
860 R. Garcı́a-Escallón et al.
obstacles [23]. The eﬀects of climate change are clear: climate change, impacts
to human health, mass extinction of species, among others [3,4,19].
Climate change calls for a transformation, one that is widespread and towards
sustainability, which is being demanded by millions around the globe [20]. The
rate at which needs to increase, as the looming deadline of 2030 for reducing car-
bon emissions by 45% worldwide, to avoid a warming higher than 1.5◦
C, draws
closer [2]. Although, the kind of changes required are similar for all organizations.
For example, all organizations can reduce their CO2 footprint by avoiding using
paper in their internal processes, something that can be solved in a reusable
manner with technology.
3 Research Methodology
The approach followed throughout this study is Design Science Methodology
[25]. As a methodology, Design Science describes the designing and investigating
of an artifact and its interaction with its context. These activities correspond
with the research problems in design science, they are either Design Problems or
Knowledge Questions. The former focuses on designing a solution that will act
within a problem context, the latter focuses on knowledge without the inﬂuence
of the context [25].
The implementation of this methodology is based on a cycle, the engineering
cycle. It is composed of four steps, the investigation of the problem, the design
of the solution, its validation and ﬁnally its implementation. Within the scope
of this study, the solution in question was not implemented [25].
To achieve the study’s goal, these steps are followed, starting with the deﬁni-
tion of the design problem: the need for an increased pace of EA change projects,
and the diﬃculty practitioners face when treating sustainability concerns in orga-
nizations. To solve the problem, an artifact designed to enable practitioners
to prepare an EA speciﬁcation for sustainable organizations using patterns is
prepared.
In order to design this artifact, ﬁrst, an investigation on the problem is per-
formed, to which two knowledge questions were identiﬁed, what EAPs are there
in literature? and what characterizes a sustainable organization?. These two
questions are answered using the Systematic Literature Review (SLR) method-
ology shown below, and their results are shown in Sect.4.
After gathering the required knowledge during the problem investigation step
the artifact is designed. This design is described in Sect.5. Finally, The artifact
is then validated, using a case study and interviews with experts as shown in
Sect.6. A more detailed description of this step can be found in [7].
3.1 Systematic Literature Review
In order to answer the knowledge questions, two separate SLR are performed.
The SLRs follow the methodology of Rouhani et al. [18], as it is a very thorough
work in the EA ﬁeld. This method outlines three stages to a SLR: a planning

--- PAGE 4 ---
On Enterprise Architecture Patterns: A Tool for Sustainable Transformation 861
phase, an execution phase and a result analysis phase. In order to enhance this
method and arrive at a richer set of literature, the backwards and forwards cita-
tion techniques will be included, to include additional articles that might be
relevant but were not present in the results of the initial query [26]. In order
to execute this last step, Google Scholar was used, which shows both, backward
and forward citations, easily. For all other steps leverage Scopus, ACM Digital
Library, IEEE Xplore, Science Direct - Elsevier, Springer Link, Taylor and Fran-
cis and Web of Science. The process is shown in Fig.1. For the ﬁrst knowledge
question, the keywords used “enterprise architecture” AND “Pattern”. While
for the second knowledge question the steps were more relaxed as the time con-
straints on the study drew nearer. As such, the backward and forward citation
techniques were not performed. Finally, the keywords used for the second review
were “characteristics of sustainability” or “characteristics of circular economy”
or “characteristics of sustainable business” or “sustainability characteristics” or
“circular economy characteristics” or “sustainable business characteristics”.
Fig.1. Overall process of the SLR - adapted from [6].
4 Systematic Literature Reviews
In this section, the two SLR executed are described, ﬁrst on EAPs in literature,
second on Characteristics of sustainable organizations. The results of the former
SLR was ﬁrst published in [6], but the main ﬁndings are included here. The
results of the latter SLR can be found in [7], but the results are included below.
4.1 EAPs in Literature
During the overall execution of the SLR, it was noticed that the concept of
patterns has been used by all ﬁelds in the sample with diﬀerent periods. The
latest one being the studies on BMI, particularly in the Sustainable Business
Development ﬁeld. The recent surge of the BMI ﬁeld’s eﬀort on documenting
the patterns has been welcomed with open arms by the academic community, as
seen by the citation count mentioned in earlier sections. Such interest extends
to the sub-ﬁeld of SBMs, that expands the Business Model Patterns. P2 which
expands upon the Repository and adds more Business Model Patterns. Contrary
to all other studies in this sample, all the studies related to BMI, SBM and Cir-
cular Economy are based around the framework proposed by [16]. Although the

--- PAGE 5 ---
862 R. Garcı́a-Escallón et al.
representation of the patterns may diﬀer, their basic constructs are the same,
which would make it possible to translate these patterns into an EA represen-
tation of them, based on the work of [10]. This method would pave the way to
take these Business Model Patterns repositories into EAPs.
Being able to relate the patterns extracted from SBMs, and translating them
to EA, is aligned with the overall interest of society to a more sustainable world.
With the call for sustainability, as seen by the Sustainable Development Goals
of the UN [23], it means that organizations will need to develop new functions
or transform their current ones. This change could be supported by EA, and,
being a generalized need, would beneﬁt from having a repository of patterns to
draw from.
State of the Literature on Enterprise Architecture Patterns. Each of
the 24 studies reviewed in this SLR have described patterns, however, not all
of them seem to be written in a way that can be used by future works. For
example in the conference proceedings and journal articles, where the authors
report mostly on how they arrived at the patterns (P3, P17), or describes how
one could extract and write patterns (P16, P22), but do very little in actually
documenting them. This lack of information may be related to space limitations
when submitting studies for publication in conferences or journals. Which is
aligned with our ﬁndings that the most detailed and complete patterns are found
in books, technical reports and online databases.
With space being such a valuable resource in journal articles and conference
papers it raises the question of what is the best way to gather patterns in a
way that is usable for future research as well as practitioners. Within this SLR,
books and technical reports focused more on the patterns themselves, while jour-
nal articles and conference proceedings focused more on methods or presented
sample patterns. Although P24 fused the two, by publishing each new kind of
pattern in journal articles while at the same time keeping the online repository
updated they were able to present a high amount of information on their work
while avoiding the space limitations scientiﬁc publishing implies.
Based on the initial deﬁnition, patterns solve a repeating problem. In the
case of EAPs then, the problem is a deﬁcit in the organization as perceived by
the stakeholders. Thus, EA practitioners would be in the best position to detect
both the problems that repeat themselves, as well as the solutions that could be
reused to meet them. This line of thinking means that researchers must be in
contact with practitioners far and wide to expand patterns, or that researchers
must be practitioners as well. This poses a limitation, or it could be taken as an
opportunity to include practitioners in future works on patterns.
Fields Researching Patterns. On Fig.2 we have classiﬁed the four main
types of patterns found through the SLR in terms of the four main layers of
the Archimate Language [13]. Based on [10] and the Archimate constructs they
use to describe a Business Model [16] it can be concluded that Business Model
Patterns are conﬁned to the Strategy and Business layers. While the Business

--- PAGE 6 ---
On Enterprise Architecture Patterns: A Tool for Sustainable Transformation 863
Process Patterns was mapped to the Business Layer due to its’ scope, Business
Processes, which is enclosed in this layer.
Fig.2. Classiﬁcation of ﬁelds - adapted from [6].
Enterprise Architecture Management Patterns are omitted from this graph.
This is due to their focus on the practice of EA itself, the methods enterprise
architects use to gather information, as well as how they present it to stakehold-
ers. As such these patterns are more akin to an EA framework and methodology.
Thus, although the focus of the EAM patterns is the EA practice itself, this is
diﬀerent to the EAPs, which is the enterprise.
Methodologies for Pattern Extraction. A Challenge faced by all the ﬁelds
in this SLR was the gathering of the patterns. While the Business Model Patterns
can be extracted from an organization through literature reviews and research-
ing real-world organizations. On the other hand, the patterns presented by the
EA ﬁeld are based on the authors’ experience. For example P14 mentioning that
the source of these patterns is the day to day experience of the practitioner
and detecting a repeating problem. This mention of a repeating problem is also
present in other works on patterns [1]. Another avenue seen is presenting a frame-
work that is built with discreet choices of concepts and then building patterns
exhausting all possible combinations. This method is used by P2, P11, P12, and
in a more limited way P24 which strives for an exhaustive work but do not
explicitly show all possible combinations. Finally, P22 took current standards
and made them into patterns.
The 50% of studies in the sample-based the patterns from the author’s expe-
rience. When reviewing the deﬁnitions by [1] the source of patterns is an experi-
enced professional experiencing the same problem again and again, so this would
explain this method’s commonality. What is missing, however, is the argumen-
tation on the existence of the problem, one that fosters the need for a pattern in
the ﬁrst place. With most of the studies in the sample were missing a framing
of the problem they’re set to solve.
The second most common method of extracting patterns is the literature
review (25%), which extracts patterns from current literature. Determining what
method is used in the sources of these literature reviews is outside the scope of
this SLR. These sources apply their own methods.

--- PAGE 7 ---
864 R. Garcı́a-Escallón et al.
The studies that deviate from the literature review and author’s experience
are P5 and P17 which base their patterns on standard practices. In the case of P5,
it’s the ITIL library, which dictates practices on how to operate the IT function
of an enterprise. With P17 it’s a framework of their own which extends upon
ITIL, Cobit, CMMI and other standards, that models the entire IT function
as an enterprise by its’ own worth. This approach could be expanded upon to
include other standards that detail how organizations should act.
In order to give the patterns validity, their deﬁnition must come accompanied
by some kind of argument supporting that using the pattern indeed solves the
problem [1]. In the sample, this came from identifying organizations that worked
under patterns in question (P20, P1, P9, P11, P14, P16, P21), from personally
applying the patterns (P18), from having practitioners apply the pattern (P8),
from building business cases (P5), or from having other researchers validate the
patterns found (P1, P24). However, the majority of the works in the sample
describe no manner of validation (P2, P3, P4, P6, P7, P8, P10, P12, P13, P15,
P17, P19, P22, P23), a majority of the sample.
4.2 Characteristics of Sustainable Organizations
In this section, the results of an SLR performed to ﬁnd the characteristics of
sustainability is described. First, a classiﬁcation of the characteristics found is
oﬀered. The resulting classes are then compared to concepts of the Archimate
language, in order to identify how feasible it is for an architect to express the
characteristics of sustainability. From this comparison, the ﬁnal set of classes, as
well as their descriptions and constraints, is produced.
Classification of Characteristics. To better analyze, and apply, the set of
characteristics shown above, they are classiﬁed. To do so, the classiﬁcation used
by S2 is taken as a basis, which uses an extended version of the BMC. The
changes introduced in S2 are two new components: Take-back systems and
Adoption factors. Where the former describes the mechanisms needed for some
sustainable organizations that need to recall products, e.g. for maintenance or
replacement. The latter describes factors that can not be attributed to any of the
other components, mostly related to the capabilities of the organization. These,
and all other classes, are explained in further detail below. In Tables1 and 2 this
classiﬁcation is shown.
The new building block, take-back systems, is in it is core a combination
of Customer Channels and Customer Relations but in a reverse direction. It
describes, for example, how an organization manages the end of life of their
products. In order to maintain the BMC succinct, the take-back building block
will be fused together with Customer Channel and Customer Relations.
4.3 Description
In Fig.3 each class and the total amount of characteristics found to belong to
it are shown. Also shown is whether the classiﬁcation comes from the source

--- PAGE 8 ---
On Enterprise Architecture Patterns: A Tool for Sustainable Transformation 865
or the author. It must be mentioned that the ratio of characteristics classiﬁed
under the classes mentioned above by the source, when compared to the ones
classiﬁed by the author, are 58:151. Where the classiﬁcation of adoption factors
Fig.3. Characteristics classiﬁed.
Table 1. Classiﬁcation of characteristics.
Building block Description of characteristics classiﬁed to this block
Customer segments In this SLR there are few characteristics found that are attributed to this
class, one is environmentally aware customers for example. It could be argued
that environmentally aware customers is a segment made of innovators and
early adopter, the ﬁrst two segments to adopt new services [17]
Customer relationships Co-creation of the value proposition, community relationships
Channels In this SLR the characteristics found to belong to this class all focus on the
relationship between the organization and their customer. Among them some
are focusing on the co-creation of the value proposition, this could be
including customers in the product design phases for example (C31, C32,
C77). Some others focus on broadening the concept to include relationships
with the community (C8, C110, C111, C112), which reﬂects one of the pillars
of sustainability, the society the organization embeds itself in (P21) [9]. Also
in this block are the characteristics related to take-back systems (C27,C49)
Value proposition Those that focus mainly on digital communications (C3, C28, C29, C30).
And, as mentioned before the building block focusing on how the organization
manages the reverse channels (C47, C48)
Key activities Varied, those focusing on the implementation of agile practices, process
re-engineering (C194, C41, C65, C124, C147, among others). Another example
is the automation of tasks using Information Systems (C117, C104, C105,
C42). Many others describe activities related directly to sustainability, e.g.
harvesting rainwater, conserving natural resources, and avoiding using slave
labour (C126, C128, C131, C204, C152, C151)
Key Resources Varied, some refer to the IT systems for communication, Business Process
Management, multimedia, among other uses (C120, C121, C122, C199...).
Others refer to the sustainability of the inputs of the organization, using
bio-materials and waste (C200, C15). In a similar vein, some characteristics
refer to the use of better-insulated spaces, using natural light, using
water-eﬃcient appliances, using solar panels, among others; all to diminish
energy consumption (C55, C127, C206, C207, C205, C208, C209)
(continued)

--- PAGE 9 ---
866 R. Garcı́a-Escallón et al.
Table 1. (continued)
Building block Description of characteristics classiﬁed to this block
Key partnerships Characteristics that focus on coordination along the supply chain and
adopting Supply Chain Management practices (C72, C114, C116, C119, C130,
C192, C138, C85, C16). Others focus on the selection of these partners,
describing that organizations must choose suppliers and partners that are
eﬃcient, that would reduce waste in the entire chain, that ensure digniﬁed
working conditions for their employees (C133, C134, C54, C58, C66, C72)
Revenue stream Those that deﬁne new ways of generating revenue stream, or that aﬀect the
stream in some way. For the former, examples include the revenue generated
from providing a product as if it were a service, engaging in the circular
economy, and achieving funding from other actors (C33, C34, C35, C67). The
latter includes characteristics describing reducing time to market, avoiding
waste, optimizing the supply chain, etc. (C18, C20, C17, C19)
and cost structures have 33% of all characteristics, most assigned by the author.
This is due to many of the other studies referring to some of the following
ideas: management participating in activities, or having capabilities, that would
catalyze the adoption of sustainable practices; management including the needs
of stakeholders beyond the customer; business ﬂexibility, or the ability to change.
On the cost class, many sources describe the organizations wastewater, physical
waste, emissions, and end of life of products of organizations.
Table 2. Classiﬁcation of characteristics cont’d.
Building block Description of characteristics classiﬁed to this block
Cost structure Divided into two. The ﬁrst are those that focus on the costs of
production and sourcing green materials (C21, C22, C46, C86,
C87, C88). The second are those that focus on the wastes of the
organization, e.g. the emissions it generates and physical wastes,
like paper or (C95, C155, C156, C53, C68, C69). The latter also
includes characteristics describing the use of triple bottom line
practices, where the accounting of the organization also includes
environmental and social costs (C196, C175, C178)
Adoption factors An example are the characteristics focusing on learning at an
organizational level, as well as educating the community it is
embedded in (C52, C74, C75, C107, C136, C189). Another
example are the characteristics describing the awareness of the
organization, the knowledge the organization already has on
sustainability (C144, C76, C71, C50). Lastly, there are
characteristics describing the organization’s management and
how they conduct business, e.g. the ﬂexibility of the organization
to change how they operate and implement any of the
characteristics; and explicitly including sustainability in business
models (C193, C188, C189, C190, C146, C149, C153, C154,
C123, C125, C84, C106, C70, C62, C63, C64)

--- PAGE 10 ---
On Enterprise Architecture Patterns: A Tool for Sustainable Transformation 867
4.4 Applicable Characteristics
The following section relates the characteristics with Archimate concepts, mainly
through the use of their assigned classes. Previous research is identiﬁed and
expanded.
Previous research has analyzed the BMC meta-model and mapped it into
Archimate concepts [10]. They found that, as the BMC represents an entire
organization in the most abstract terms, that the Archimate concepts each
building block relates to are concentrated in the Strategy and Business layers.
Although, thanks to the ﬂexibility of the language, one can specify the Strategy
layer’s resource into the lower layer’s concepts, e.g. an application component.
In Table3 the BMC building blocks, including the two extensions mentioned
above, are shown. With an X the relationship studied by [10] is shown and with
a C the relationship proposed after reviewing the Sustainability Characteristics.
The reasoning behind each assignment is explored below.
Table 3. Relation between extended BMC and Archimate. X means relationship is
deﬁned by [10], C means it is proposed by this study.
Class/Layer Motivation Strategy Business Application
Adoption factors C
Cost structure X
Customer channels X X C
Customer relations C X X
Customer segment X
Key activities C X C
Key partners C X C
Key resources C X X X
Revenue stream X
Value proposition C X X C
The adoption factors building block, as it’s a new concept being introduced in
S2, is not present in the previous studies [10]. As such these characteristics have
not been related to Archimate concepts before and had to be analyzed to ﬁnd
which layer’s concepts relate. As most of these relate to intangible things, e.g.
leadership creating strategies for reducing waste (C62, C63, C64), that describe
how the organization should act then it is closely to with the Motivation layer
concepts. In this layer, the architect can represent the drivers of multiple stake-
holders, as well as deﬁne constraints, goals, and value. With these concepts the
characteristics found in this class can be built. However, it calls for a wide imple-
mentation of the motivation concepts to the more traditional layers (Business,
Application and Technology).

--- PAGE 11 ---
868 R. Garcı́a-Escallón et al.
The cost structure is found to be problematic within the concepts of Archi-
mate, as no concept ties directly to it. The language speciﬁcation mentions that
object attributes could be used for costs [22]. [10] also faced diﬃculties when
deﬁning cost, they decided on using negative value. These obstacles are main-
tained in this study, as the concept is expanded to include environmental and
social costs as part of the triple bottom line approach described by some char-
acteristics (C175, C177, C178). A solution
As the Key Partnerships building block refers to the actors, organizations,
and other parties the business has to partner with; then it had to be extended
beyond previous studies [10]. For this study, in order to avoid overloading the
other building blocks, the characteristics assigned to Key partnerships goes
beyond external parties. This extension is seen in the addition of the motivation
and application layers.
Along the verticals, it can be seen that two layers are added to multiple
building blocks: Motivation and Application. The former reﬂects the character-
istics that call for activities, or resources, to be included with a sustainability
goal or constraint in mind, e.g. avoid using slave labour in the business processes
(C152). The latter reﬂects the characteristics that call for virtualization (C28,
C42, C37, C25), digitalization or the implementation of IT in some way (C29,
C3, C30, C6, C7, C117, C104, C105, C120, C121, C122, C199, C90).
The need to include motivation concepts is interesting in its own right, as
it shows the limitation of the Archimate language to show the impacts or con-
sequences of the objects. This may be simple to assume under normal circum-
stances, the basic goals and constraints of what an organization does is to gener-
ate revenue and will generate a cost. While in sustainability the costs go beyond
monetary and have to include every impact the organization produces on the
environment and society. This change may call for an extension of the language,
or for EAPs to be written in a way that they include sustainability characteristics
explicitly.
5 Methodology for the Specification of EA Using
Patterns
Although the ﬁrst two knowledge questions posed above were answered, there
were still a few building blocks missing before a methodology could be designed.
First, from the sample of EAPs gathered, a small subset of them were described
using a common language. Second, besides the BMI patterns, no EAPs were
focusing on sustainability. Third, any methodology would depend on the com-
bination of multiple EAPs, alas no studies in the sample mentioned ways to
do so. Thus, the following subsection focuses on these design problems and the
solutions proposed.

--- PAGE 12 ---
On Enterprise Architecture Patterns: A Tool for Sustainable Transformation 869
5.1 Designing the Building Blocks
Translating the Subset of Patterns to Archimate. The EAPs found in
the SLR were described in multiple ways, written and with diagrams, some
were described using Archimate, while some others were already described using
other modeling languages. A subset of the latter were translated by the author
concentrating on being as aligned with the source as possible. All other patterns
translated had to be drawn based on their description, this was done by the
author at the best of his abilities. The resulting diagrams can be accessed in the
Appendix. There, both the source ﬁle and extracted images are present.
Proposing New Patterns. After performing the translation, some gaps were
identiﬁed and in some of the EAPs, i.e. the applications are deployed to nodes
in the internal facilities of the organization. However, as is found in the Charac-
teristics found in the second knowledge question, sharing and virtualization is a
characteristic of sustainable businesses, and currently, a popular representation
of this are Cloud Services.
With this gap in mind, three new EAPs are proposed: NewPattern001, New-
Pattern002, and NewPattern003. Representing the use of a SaaS, PaaS, and IaaS
service respectively. These were built using the guidelines established by [15]. In
Fig.4 the NewPattern001 is shown, the other two follow the same structure.
Under the Appendix, the diagrams and source ﬁles of these EAPs can be found.
Fig.4. NewPattern001.
Proposing Sustainable Patterns. Following this gap, the need arises for
another set of patterns. Patterns that describe the characteristics of sustainabil-
ity that an organization wants to implement.
In order to be applicable in a large range of settings, an approach similar
to P12 is taken. Here the diﬀerent characteristics, as they were compared to
Archimate concepts in Table3 are used as a basis. In terms of Archimate, the
scope of these patterns is limited to the Business and Application layers of the

--- PAGE 13 ---
870 R. Garcı́a-Escallón et al.
organization for this exercise. In terms of sustainability, the scope is deﬁned
by the characteristics that can apply to the layers mentioned: Customer chan-
nels, Customer relations, Key activities, Key resources, Key partners, and value
proposition. From these building blocks, and within the scope, some sustainable
patterns are proposed. These were cataloged in the Appendix.
The resulting patterns use Archimate concepts, except for Key partners which
does not include application layer concepts. Instead, the characteristics describe
business concepts with certain requirements, however, it’s arguably impossible to
fulﬁl the requirements and constraints of the characteristics without application
support.
After developing the patterns it was clear that within the scope of some of
the building blocks there were separate groups of objects. The building blocks
where this is seen are Customer channels, Key activities, and Key resources. All
other blocks were able to be described as one coherent pattern. These groupings
are explained as follows.
The patterns describing customer channels may be divided into two: one
focusing on the customer as the buyer of the value proposition; and another
focusing on the relationship with other stakeholders like government.
The patterns describing Key activities may be split into six groups. First,
a group detailing the requirements the waste management process must fol-
low. Second, the requirements related to the implementation of new capabilities.
Third, activities and requirements related to product design and production
activities. Fourth, a group that applies to any activity. Fifth, the goal of being a
sustainable organization and the principles that go with it. Sixth, requirements
related to IT systems.
The patterns describing Key resources can be split into three. First, a group
describing service centres. Second, a group describing IT resources. Third, a
group describing production processes and buildings.
Beyond divisions within each building block, there were commonalities
observed across the diﬀerent building blocks. There were mainly two found, the
product, its design and production; and IT aspects of the organization.
One of these sustainable patterns can be seen in Fig.5, where the character-
istics for key activities focusing on products are implemented. These patterns
can be reduced, i.e. some of the requirements and goals can be removed, when
needed by architects. They serve organizations as they need to explicitly present
their sustainability requirements for the future.
Fig.5. Key activities - product.

--- PAGE 14 ---
On Enterprise Architecture Patterns: A Tool for Sustainable Transformation 871
Requirements. As part of the preliminary phases the requirements of the
guiding pattern and the patterns added to the subset have to be found. This
can be achieved using Archimate diagrams, as shown in Fig.6. By describing
the patterns that are derived from pattern X and the patterns Y that fulﬁl it.
It is possible to document all the requirements that each pattern introduces,
which would make the creation of the subset a matter of choosing the guiding
pattern. The guiding pattern would have its’ requirements previously deﬁned,
as well as those of all other patterns. Thus, creating the subset based on the
relationships between patterns documented previously would be automated.
Fig.6. Requirements and patterns & patterns combined.
Combining Patterns. As previously stated in the speciﬁcation phases, pat-
terns have to be combined to form a ﬁnal EA speciﬁcation. During this study,
ﬁve ways of combining patterns were found. The ﬁrst is a parallel combination,
in which there is no relationship between the patterns.
The second way of combining patterns is shown between pattern X and Y in
Fig.6. Here, a description of two patterns that are related to an association is
shown. This is the most complex form of combination as it revolves around the
contents in common between the patterns. These commonalities may be present
in one or many objects, where the higher the overlap the more complex it is to
combine them. An example would be combining patterns of supply chain and
production, as they are closely related concepts.
The third way of combining patterns is shown in Fig.6 between pattern I
and J. This combination happens mainly when pattern J is focused on a lower
layer than pattern I. For example, a pattern showing how a business process is
supported by applications. In this form of combination, P12 deﬁnes exhaustively
the ways concepts of the Business and Application layers can be combined with
each other. However, such patterns do not exist between the application and
technology layers. Between the business and the motivation and strategy layers,
there is also a noticeable lack of patterns describing how one layer may serve the
next.

--- PAGE 15 ---
872 R. Garcı́a-Escallón et al.
The fourth way of combining patterns is through the aggregation relationship.
This case is shown in Fig.6, between pattern A and pattern B. Here pattern B
provides a narrower focus and higher level of detail to the ideas presented in
pattern A. An example would be adding individual Business Functions to a
more abstract pattern like a Business Model Pattern.
A ﬁnal aspect of the combination of patterns is their decomposition. As
shown in Fig.6. In some cases, EAPs describe multiple layers of EA, Business,
Application, and even Technology. However, due to the ways patterns can be
combined with each other, and especially the way this happens between layers,
an architect may decompose a pattern in its’ layers. This would then give the
architect freedom of building the lower layers as they please. This is shown in
Fig.6, where Pattern Q is decomposed in its layers, and its sub-patterns for
application and technology layers are exchanged for Pattern R. An example of
this is Pattern173, which describes concepts from the Business, Application and
Technology layers. In this pattern, an architect may take only the concepts of
the business layer and the application needs, and replace the two lower layers
(Fig.7).
Fig.7. Patterns decomposed.
Following the ways of representing patterns, and their relationships, one may
model the speciﬁcation in terms of the patterns and their relationships. This
would oﬀer a high abstraction view of the organization as deﬁned by the solutions
being re-used.
To avoid falling into the Yet Another Model trap, the proposed methodology
is based on the ADM. Focusing on the ﬁrst phases: Preliminary phase, Phase
A Architecture Vision, Phase B Business Architecture, Phase C Application
Architecture, and Phase B Technology Architecture. During an EA speciﬁcation
project, each of these phases will be executed in sequence by a team of architects,
where phases B, C and D focus on the description of the organization’s future
(or old) state. It is during these phases, that the use of the Archimate language
is concentrated.

--- PAGE 16 ---
On Enterprise Architecture Patterns: A Tool for Sustainable Transformation 873
5.2 Preparatory Phases
The proposed methodology assumes that the architect wishes to describe a future
state of the organization that is sustainable. As such, the method starts with the
preliminary Phase and Architecture Vision phases. During these phases the focus
will be on deﬁning the main constraints of the EA. With the most important
one being that the resulting organization must be sustainable. This constraint
will frame all other tasks in the methodology.
In the same preliminary phase, a second constraint will be added, a guiding
Pattern. In this method, the guiding pattern will serve as a general abstraction
of the target’s organization. Within the ﬁndings of this thesis, the authors ﬁnd
that an acceptable guiding pattern is a Business Model pattern in combination
with an operational model pattern (as deﬁned by P11).
Next is Phase A Architecture Vision, in which a subset of EAPs is selected.
The constraints resulting from the previous phase introduce problems and ques-
tions as is natural from their level of abstraction. E.g. a Business Model Pattern
that calls for interactions with customers will introduce questions like How will
the customers be contacted? Who will do it? And so on. These questions and
problems will feed a search for EAPs that may solve them. At this phase, the
search is performed only to form a subset of EAPs with all possible solutions to
problems, the constraint, and guiding pattern pose. This is similar to the Palette
artists have at hand while they’re developing their works.
The detailed process of ﬁnding the problems and questions is similar to that
of requirement elicitation. The precise nature of how these should be is outside
the scope of this study and is left to the experience of each architect when fol-
lowing the proposed method. However, it is an iterative process in two aspects.
First, as the selection of EAPs introduce problems and questions of their own
solutions for these, in turn, have to be included. Second, by nature of the layered
approach of ADM, the architect must add patterns that solve the problems in
the lower layers of each solution, i.e. in a manner of supporting pillars, Business
Layer patterns will need Application Layer patterns to stand upon.
In Fig.8 a view into such a phase is given. This was taken from a case
study performed using the methodology. In the ﬁgure, the guiding pattern can
be found at the top left, from which a series of business layer requirements are
detected and listed using the before mentioned notation. On the right side of the
ﬁgure, the patterns found to fulﬁl the requirements are gathered. These patterns
are linked using the Realization relationship as proposed in the notation above.
Similar diagrams are prepared for each layer, Application and Technology.

--- PAGE 17 ---
874 R. Garcı́a-Escallón et al.
Fig.8. Preliminary phase example.
5.3 Specification Phases
Following on comes the speciﬁcation of the EA, through phases B, C, and D.
These phases each focus on a diﬀerent layer, on the Business Layer, the Appli-
cation Layer, and ﬁnally, the Technology Layer. These layers will be built using
the patterns in the selected subset, by selecting and combining them, thus pro-
ducing the EA speciﬁcation. The selection of each pattern will be based on its’
compliance to the constraints deﬁned in the previous Phase and each other,
e.g. when presented with diﬀerent EAPs in the subset that can solve a speciﬁc
requirement, the one that can arguably support a more sustainable organization
will be chosen. Multiple patterns can be selected to solve the same problem, in
the same way that organizations may have their own retail stores and sell their
goods in other stores at the same time.
In Fig.9 the result of these phases can be seen. Using the proposed nota-
tion and methodology in a case study, a speciﬁcation of EA was built [7]. With
this single view, practitioners could have a simple way to communicate how
an entire organization functions, by leveraging a shared understanding of the
solutions being reused.

--- PAGE 18 ---
On Enterprise Architecture Patterns: A Tool for Sustainable Transformation 875
Fig.9. EA speciﬁcation using patterns.
6 Validation of the Methodology
Following the Design Science methodology, after developing a solution it must
then be validated, prior to its implementation [25]. In order to do so, a panel of
experts is assembled and shown the method. These same experts are then asked
to partake in a questionnaire based on the Uniﬁed Theory of Acceptance and
Use of Technology (UTAUT). This theory is selected as it has been proven to be
eﬀective in predicting the adoption of Information Systems, with an r-squared of
0.5 [24]. However, the sample size of this study means that the results are valid
for qualitative analysis only. This questionnaire is present in the Appendix.
6.1 Expert Panel
The ﬁve experts that agreed to take part in the validation process are ﬁve:
1. A professor for EA in a dutch technical university, with more than 10years
experience (expert A)
2. An architect from an important bank in the UK, with 8years experience as
an architect (expert B)

--- PAGE 19 ---
876 R. Garcı́a-Escallón et al.
3. An architect from a major cloud provider, with 2years experience as an archi-
tect (expert C)
4. An architect working with a large consulting ﬁrm, mainly dealing with ﬁnan-
cial sector customers, with 8years of experience as an architect (expert D)
5. An architect working with a large consulting ﬁrm, mainly dealing with ﬁnan-
cial sector customers, with 6years of experience as an architect (expert E)
For each expert, the methodology was explained using a set of powerpoint slides.
The overall developing process was explained as well as the methodology itself.
Afterwards, an unstructured discussion session took place. Finally, they were
asked to complete the questionnaire. It is important to note that expert D and
E were interviewed together.
6.2 Experts Opinion
Overall the experts’ opinions were positive. A commonality across the experts
was their re-use of solutions in their day-to-day practice. This was a positive
ﬁnding as it shows that today the application of patterns happen informally.
Aligned with previously mentioned limitations, the patterns and solutions the
experts mentioned they have applied are not present in the sample. This means
that in the gathering of the solutions present in the ﬁeld could be a valuable
future project.
The patterns themselves generated diﬀerent reactions among the experts. For
expert B, standardizing all solutions to problems could arguably stiﬂe innovation.
As all organizations would be simply a combination of publicly known solutions.
However, they also mention that what would make them diﬀerent is how they
implement them. For expert C, patterns should easily communicate their value
and applicability, otherwise any architect would rather use either a diﬀerent
pattern or design their own solution. For expert A, translating patterns from
diﬀerent ﬁelds was of interest, mainly the method chosen to do so.
As for the sustainability focus of the methodology, experts C, D, and E made
mention of it. For experts D and E, this could be due to their own experiences,
where they have seen sustainability being used as a criterion in one of their
customers. As for expert C, this could be their relation to commercial teams
made them think of a pattern-based approach to present a highly customized
sustainable transformation project to an organization. By using publicly avail-
able reports of a speciﬁc organization as a starting point and then applying the
pattern-based methodology for a hastened EA speciﬁcation of a future sustain-
able state.
The focus on implementation was something common for experts B and
C. Both thought of it as a central diﬀerentiating aspect of organizations, as
assuming that all organizations use patterns then what makes them diﬀerent
is how they implement them. Expert B even went as far as proposing that a
possible next step to this study is the identiﬁcation of implementation patterns
that organizations could use depending on their own capabilities.
However, exceptions were experts D and E that mentioned their worry on

--- PAGE 20 ---
On Enterprise Architecture Patterns: A Tool for Sustainable Transformation 877
the sustainability concepts were introduced to EA. This is reﬂected in earlier
chapters of this study, where the concepts of sustainability are hard to relate
but are ﬁnally described using Motivation layer concepts. Experts D and E also
mentioned that they have not seen such concepts used in their practice. They
also commented on their confusion regarding the relationship between ADM and
the proposed methodology. This speciﬁc question was also asked by expert C,
which means that further improvements to the methodology’s description are
necessary to make this relationship more clear.
6.3 Questionnaire Results
Table 4. Questionnaire results - constructs.
Construct Average St. dev. Min. Max.
Performance expectancy (PE) 3.9375 2.205107707 1 7
Eﬀort expectancy (EE) 5 1.673320053 1 7
Attitude toward using technology (ATUT) 4.125 1.821171784 1 6
Social inﬂuence (SI) 2.875 1.962141687 1 5
Facilitating conditions (FC) 3.5 2.033060091 1 7
Self eﬃcacy (SE) 4.4375 1.412739655 2 7
Anxiety (ANX) 1.375 0.6191391874 1 3
Behavioral intention (BI) 3.75 2.050498831 1 7
Overall the results of the questionnaire are positive. With the highest score being
EE, which is aligned with the contribution goal of this study, helping architects
drive change faster. There is an exception to be made for Experts D and E, as
their evaluation of the method was negative (Table4).
As can be seen in the main results, the EE and SE constructs are the highest
ones at and also have a low standard deviation. With this result for EE, the
experts evaluated that the methodology would be clear or easy to use and that
they perceive that mastery at using the methodology is easy to obtain. This
corresponds with their comments on the methodology, that they re-use previous
solutions in their day-to-day activities. And, with this result in SE, the experts
evaluated that they were capable of using the methodology. Inversely, the ANX
construct has the lowest score and the lowest deviation. This means that experts
evaluated that using the methodology produces no fear or intimidation. This
reﬂects the high degree of experience all the experts approached have, they have
conﬁdence in their capabilities.
The results in the PE construct are positive, except for the evaluation of
expert D and E. This means that experts evaluated the methodology as being
useful and increasing their productivity. The ATUT construct had a similarly

--- PAGE 21 ---
878 R. Garcı́a-Escallón et al.
positive result meaning that experts perceive the methodology interesting, fun,
or a good idea.
The BI and SI constructs had a split score, half of the experts evaluated
them positively and half as negative. For the former, representing that they are
not certain they will use the methodology in the future. For the latter, it may be
because this method was not shown to any of their superiors, as all items relate
to external social inﬂuences.
7 Conclusions
The result of this study is a methodology for the speciﬁcation of EA for sus-
tainable organizations using patterns. In preparation for its design, there was
a need for the characteristics of sustainability to be described explicitly in the
Archimate language. This was due to the lack of sustainability concerns in the
EAPs found, beyond the sustainability business model patterns. The methodol-
ogy was designed extending the ADM, building upon its same phases to make
its adoption simpler to organizations already using the TOGAF. As part of the
methodology, a notation is proposed for describing the relationships between
patterns implemented in an organization. This speciﬁc artifact could also be
of use in organizations that are implementing recommendations from multiple
standards, e.g. ISO certiﬁcation-related aspects.
First, an SLR was performed to gather the state of the literature for EAPs.
The patterns found were heterogeneous in multiple ways, like the ﬁeld of research
they originated from, their scope, the way they’re represented, and how they’re
extracted. However, the sources used were scientiﬁc literature, which meant prac-
titioner sources were excluded. For example, industry standards and best prac-
tices were not included in the set of patterns. This meant that for some of the
studies in the sample the space limitations of journals and conferences were an
obstacle. As these are usually limited to a relatively short number of pages, it
is diﬃcult to present all the information that may be necessary when describing
patterns. This obstacle is missing in the books in the sample, where the authors
could elaborate on the details of the patterns, making them more valuable.
Second, an SLR was performed to gather a set of characteristics of sustain-
able organizations present in literature, classiﬁed based on the BMC building
blocks. All of the characteristics were relevant, but by using the Archimate lan-
guage components a way was found to include them into EA artifacts for each
building block. This set is likely incomplete, as the literature on sustainability
is increasingly wide and complex. For example, there are more than 100 diﬀer-
ent deﬁnitions on Circular Economy alone [8,11]. This makes the selection of
characteristics diﬃcult, as just the choice of the word “characteristic” already
ﬁlters concepts and requirements from this study. A more comprehensive and
exhaustive study may result in a more valuable set of characteristics.
Among the characteristics of sustainability found there were commonalities
in the concepts. E.g. a common concept across many characteristics was the use
of digital tools. Applying text mining techniques might produce clusters of char-
acteristics, which could then be used to propose more abstract characteristics.

--- PAGE 22 ---
On Enterprise Architecture Patterns: A Tool for Sustainable Transformation 879
In the ﬁeld of EA, the use of sustainability concepts is not common, and
including them in the practice was not straightforward. This diﬃculty to express
sustainability concepts using EA artifacts may be because of, or causes, the
absence of sustainability aspects in EA practice. In this study, the obstacle of
expressing these concepts was surmounted by using the motivation layer con-
cepts of Archimate. With them, it was possible to describe the requirements
sustainability imposes on the operation of an organization, e.g. select suppliers
that are not using slave labour. However, a step further would be to design struc-
tural and behavioural components in an organization that implicitly implements
the requirements used in this study. These newly designed components could
then become patterns to be adopted widely.
7.1 Contributions
The contributions to academia are multiple. First, a systematic literature review
producing an extensive set of EAPs. By applying an exhaustive approach, the
resulting review has expanded the existing deﬁnitions of EAP beyond just the
ﬁeld of EA, including ﬁelds like BMI and BPM. Second, a systematic literature
review producing a set of characteristics of sustainability and circular economy.
Extending the knowledge of the aspects organizations need to be sustainable, as
today there are many deﬁnitions of sustainability, having an aggregated list of
such characteristics is needed. Third, extending the EA ﬁeld, a novel notation
based on the Archimate language is proposed to describe the ways architects may
combine patterns, as well as a categorization of the ways they may be combined
with each other.
As for practitioners, the methodology proposed can be applied together with
the patterns found in scientiﬁc literature and industry standards, simplifying EA
projects by using it as a common language describing solutions proven to work
in other organizations. Second, the set of sustainability characteristics classiﬁed
in terms of the building blocks of the BMC oﬀer organizations today a classiﬁed
list, based on scientiﬁc literature, of characteristics they can implement to be
more sustainable. Third, a notation was proposed to describe the relationships
of patterns used in an organization. This allows for organizations to describe
the patterns (best practices, standards, and other re-usable solutions) they are
implementing in their current and future states, resulting in a clear abstraction
useful.
7.2 Limitations
The main limitation is the language used, where the concept of the pattern may
not be used commonly, especially in other ﬁelds of research. An example is the
Human Resource (HR) Architectures proposed by [14], which show patterns in
HR management. This is present also with the sustainability keywords, where
a more in-depth exploration of the terms used in the ﬁeld may have gleaned
more characteristics. However, the main limitation of the methodology, which is
conﬁrmed by the panel of experts, is the lack of a real-world case study. Until this

--- PAGE 23 ---
880 R. Garcı́a-Escallón et al.
methodology is applied, in a real organization looking into changing towards a
more sustainable future version, then its’ true weaknesses will not be perceived.
7.3 Future Work
For the academic community possible future work continuing with this study
could be its’ application in a real-world organization that is looking for a sus-
tainable transformation. This would reveal the weaknesses of the methodology
if any.
Another avenue of research is to deﬁne a way in which patterns can be
extracted from organizations, either through literature or with the help of its
members. This is similarly to the approach taken by P20, which compiled a
classiﬁcation of Business Models, and oﬀered a base by which both academics
and practitioners can study and compare organizations. Another way to extract
them would be to focus on architects. How they re-use their previous solutions,
including those found in literature or those their peers propose. This would oﬀer
more understanding of how to better serve these architects with more patterns
than those they can already access.
Finally, the implementation of this methodology into a traditional EA project
using TOGAF is needed. Through its real-world usage, a more thorough valida-
tion would be achieved, allowing its improvement into a more valuable tool for
the ﬁeld.
Appendix
Under the git repository https://github.com/robertorgarcia/EAPatterns the
appendices to this study can be found. Speciﬁcally the following:
– The study samples used in the SLRs
– The results of the SLRs (EAPs and Characteristics)
– The intermediary classiﬁcations of the results
– A subset of EAPs translated to Archimate
– A set of proposed EAPs
– A case study built using EAPs
References
1. Alexander, C., Ishikawa, S., Silverstein, M.: A Pattern Language: Towns, Buildings,
Construction. Oxford University Press, New York (1977)
2. Allen, M., et al.: Technical summary: global warming of 1.5 c. An IPCC Special
Report on the impacts of global warming of 1 (2019)
3. Braungart, M., McDonough, W., Bollinger, A.: Cradle-to-cradle design: creat-
ing healthy emissions - a strategy for eco-eﬀective product and system design.
J. Cleaner Prod. 15(13–14), 1337–1348 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.
2006.08.003

--- PAGE 24 ---
On Enterprise Architecture Patterns: A Tool for Sustainable Transformation 881
4. Ceballos, G., Ehrlich, P.R., Dirzo, R.: Biological annihilation via the ongoing
sixth mass extinction signaled by vertebrate population losses and declines. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. 114(30), E6089–E6096 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.
1704949114
5. Gamma, E., et al.: Design Patterns - Elements of Object Oriented Software Archi-
tecture (1995)
6. Garcı́a-Escallón, R., Aldea, A.: On enterprise architecture patterns: a systematic
literature review. In: Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Enter-
prise Information Systems, pp. 666–678. SCITEPRESS - Science and Technology
Publications (2020). https://doi.org/10.5220/0009392306660678
7. Garcia-Escallon, R.: Enterprise architecture patterns: Supporting sustainable
development. Ph.D. thesis, University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands
(2020)
8. Geissdoerfer, M., Savaget, P., Bocken, N.M., Hultink, E.J.: The circular economy
- a new sustainability paradigm? J. Cleaner Prod. 143, 757–768 (2017). https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.12.048
9. Geissdoerfer, M., Vladimirova, D., Evans, S.: Sustainable business model innova-
tion: a review. J. Cleaner Prod. 198, 401–416 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jclepro.2018.06.240
10. Iacob, M.E., Meertens, L.O., Jonkers, H., Quartel, D.A.C., Nieuwenhuis, L.J.M.,
van Sinderen, M.J.: From enterprise architecture to business models and back.
Softw. Syst. Model. 13(3), 1059–1083 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10270-012-
0304-6
11. Kirchherr, J., Reike, D., Hekkert, M.: Conceptualizing the circular economy: an
analysis of 114 deﬁnitions. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 127(September), 221–232
(2017). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2017.09.005
12. Lankhorst, M.M., Proper, H.A., Jonkers, H.: The architecture of the archimate
language. In: Halpin, T., Krogstie, J., Nurcan, S., Proper, E., Schmidt, R., Sof-
fer, P., Ukor, R. (eds.) BPMDS/EMMSAD -2009. LNBIP, vol. 29, pp. 367–380.
Springer, Heidelberg (2009). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-01862-6 30
13. Lankhorst, M.: Enterprise Architecture at Work. The Enterprise Engineering
Series, 3rd edn. Springer, Heidelberg (2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-
53933-0
14. Lepak, D.P., Snell, S.A.: Examining the human resource architecture: the relation-
ships among human capital, employment, and human resource conﬁgurations. J.
Manag. 28(4), 517–543 (2002). https://doi.org/10.1177/014920630202800403
15. Nardi, J.C., et al.: Service commitments and capabilities across the archimate archi-
tectural layers. In: 2016 IEEE 20th International Enterprise Distributed Object
Computing Workshop (EDOCW), vol. 2016-Septe, pp. 1–10. IEEE (2016). https://
doi.org/10.1109/EDOCW.2016.7584386
16. Osterwalder, A., Pigneur, Y.: Business Model Generation: A Handbook for Vision-
aries, Game Changers, and Challengers. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken (2010)
17. Rogers, E.M.: Diﬀusion of Innovations, 5th edn. Free Press, New York (2003)
18. Rouhani, B.D., Mahrin, M.N., Nikpay, F., Ahmad, R.B., Nikfard, P.: A system-
atic literature review on enterprise architecture implementation methodologies. Inf.
Softw. Technol 62, 1–20 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2015.01.012
19. Stahel, W.R.: Circular economy. Nature 531, 435–438 (2016)
20. Taylor, M., Watts, J., Bartlett, J.: Climate crisis: 6 million people join latest wave
of global protests (2019). https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2019/sep/
27/climate-crisis-6-million-people-join-latest-wave-of-worldwide-protests

--- PAGE 25 ---
882 R. Garcı́a-Escallón et al.
21. The Open Group: The TOGAF R  Standard, Version 9.2 (2018). https://www.
vanharen.net/the-togaf-standard-version-9-2/
22. The Open Group: ArchiMate R  3.1 Speciﬁcation: Chapter 3 Language Structure
(2019). https://pubs.opengroup.org/architecture/archimate3-doc/chap03.html
23. United Nations: Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Devel-
opment. Technical report, United Nations Publishing, New York, New York, USA
(2015). https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/?menu=1300
24. Venkatesh, V., Morris, M.G., Davis, G.B., Davis, F.D.: User acceptance of informa-
tion technology: toward a uniﬁed view. MIS Q. Manag. Inf. Syst. (2003). https://
doi.org/10.2307/30036540
25. Wieringa, R.J.: Design Science Methodology: For Information Systems and Soft-
ware engineering. Springer, Heidelberg (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-
43839-8
26. Wolfswinkel, J.F., Furtmueller, E., Wilderom, C.P.M.: Using grounded theory as a
method for rigorously reviewing literature. Eur. J. Inf. Syst. 22(1), 45–55 (2013).
https://doi.org/10.1057/ejis.2011.51
27. Zachman, J.A.: A framework for information systems architecture. IBM Syst. J.
26(3), 276–292 (1987)