--- PAGE 1 ---
ScienceDirect
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Procedia Computer Science 200 (2022) 1705–1714
1877-0509 © 2022 TheAuthors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 3rd International Conference on Industry 4.0 and Smart Manufacturing
10.1016/j.procs.2022.01.371
© 2022 TheAuthors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 3rd International Conference on Industry 4.0 and Smart
Manufacturing
3rd International Conference on Industry 4.0 and Smart Manufacturing
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia
1877-0509 © 2022 The Authors. Published by ELSEVIER B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 3rd International Conference on Industry 4.0 and Smart Manufacturing
International Conference on Industry 4.0 and Smart Manufacturing
Implementation of I4.0 technologies in production systems:
opportunities and limits in the digital transformation
Francesco Facchinia
*, Salvatore Digiesia
, Luiz Fernando Rodrigues Pintob
a
Politechnic University of Bari, Via E. Orabona 4, Bari 70126, Italy
b
Universidade Nove de Julho, Sao Paulo 01504-001, Brazil
Abstract
According to Industry 4.0 (I4.0) paradigms, the smart factory can be considered as a factory ‘connected’ adopting
digital technologies to share information between people, machines, and sensors. Therefore, digital transformation
represents one of the key strategies to integrate digital technology into all business areas, favouring the increase of
profit, productivity, and agility of the company. This is not only a technological change but a cultural change requiring
organizational, process and economic improvement. Scientific research proved that 84% of digital transformations fail
or achieve targets below expectations. Consistent with this issue, companies should address the need to implement a
digital process, self-evaluating the readiness level for digital transformation. In this regard, the paper aims to develop
a model that evaluates the organisations' readiness to implement digital transformation according to I4.0 targets. For
this purpose, the model adopts an online survey of 38 questions to identify the readiness degree according to a five-
level scale. The survey was submitted to a sample of companies operating in different sectors. The works' results show
the model's reliability to provide the readiness level for digital transformation and allows a preliminary evaluation of
the companies’ aspects most impactful on digital transformation implementation.
© 2022 The Authors. Published by ELSEVIER B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 3rd International Conference on Industry 4.0 and Smart
Manufacturing
Keywords: Industry 4.0; Digital Transformation; Readiness degree; Maturity Model; Digital process
1. Introduction
Industry 4.0 (I4.0), defined by many as the fourth industrial revolution for its disruptive scope, needs a digital
transformation (DT) affecting how people act and live. I4.0 represents a real cultural change that requires a rethink in
the way of doing business, in the company's organization, in the production and management processes, and in the
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia
1877-0509 © 2022 The Authors. Published by ELSEVIER B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 3rd International Conference on Industry 4.0 and Smart Manufacturing
International Conference on Industry 4.0 and Smart Manufacturing
Implementation of I4.0 technologies in production systems:
opportunities and limits in the digital transformation
Francesco Facchinia
*, Salvatore Digiesia
, Luiz Fernando Rodrigues Pintob
a
Politechnic University of Bari, Via E. Orabona 4, Bari 70126, Italy
b
Universidade Nove de Julho, Sao Paulo 01504-001, Brazil
Abstract
According to Industry 4.0 (I4.0) paradigms, the smart factory can be considered as a factory ‘connected’ adopting
digital technologies to share information between people, machines, and sensors. Therefore, digital transformation
represents one of the key strategies to integrate digital technology into all business areas, favouring the increase of
profit, productivity, and agility of the company. This is not only a technological change but a cultural change requiring
organizational, process and economic improvement. Scientific research proved that 84% of digital transformations fail
or achieve targets below expectations. Consistent with this issue, companies should address the need to implement a
digital process, self-evaluating the readiness level for digital transformation. In this regard, the paper aims to develop
a model that evaluates the organisations' readiness to implement digital transformation according to I4.0 targets. For
this purpose, the model adopts an online survey of 38 questions to identify the readiness degree according to a five-
level scale. The survey was submitted to a sample of companies operating in different sectors. The works' results show
the model's reliability to provide the readiness level for digital transformation and allows a preliminary evaluation of
the companies’ aspects most impactful on digital transformation implementation.
© 2022 The Authors. Published by ELSEVIER B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 3rd International Conference on Industry 4.0 and Smart
Manufacturing
Keywords: Industry 4.0; Digital Transformation; Readiness degree; Maturity Model; Digital process
1. Introduction
Industry 4.0 (I4.0), defined by many as the fourth industrial revolution for its disruptive scope, needs a digital
transformation (DT) affecting how people act and live. I4.0 represents a real cultural change that requires a rethink in
the way of doing business, in the company's organization, in the production and management processes, and in the

--- PAGE 2 ---
1706 Francesco Facchini et al. / Procedia Computer Science 200 (2022) 1705–1714
2 Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000
roles and responsibilities of the workers involved. The strategy to implement the fourth industrial revolution is based
on a complex approach aiming to develop an intelligent (or smart) factory, where industrial automation systems are
connected, new types of human-machine interactions, and new working methods are introduced [1]. In this context,
the data sharing from production systems to decision-makers (and vice versa) represents an enormous potential for
further development of the company's resource planning system.
New technological solutions make possible to exchange data in real-time between interconnected companies,
identifying new partners, reducing costs and response times. Therefore, the digital technologies and the
interconnection between the various company’s devices can be considered the key strategy to improve the
manufacturing processes under an economic and environmental perspective. In other words, digitalization, i.e., the use
of digital technologies to change a business model and provide new revenue and value-producing opportunities [2], is
themainapproachtofostertheI4.0implementation.Thecompanydigitalizationconsistsofadoptingnewtechnologies
to promote an industrial change affecting the company management, pursuing flexibility, speed, productivity, quality,
and greater competitiveness of its products. In this perspective, I4.0 introduced new and more advanced technological
equipment in companies combining the different technologies already present in an interconnected system.
For the next two years, Lepore et al. (2021) predict a strong acceleration of the digitization in Italian companies
(already observed in the second part of 2020) due to new companies’ organization needs, affected by the crisis
following the Covid-19 pandemic [3]. Like all crises, the one triggered by the deployment of Covid-19 is an
opportunity to accelerate plans for digitization and cultural transformation.
Although, the DT represents a forced path to increase the company’s productivity and competitiveness, even to the
point of being considered ‘one of the threads from which the fabric of organization is now woven’[4]. According to
recent studies, It is a very complex process requiring changes at various levels within the organization, including an
adaptation of the core business [5], an exchange of resources and capabilities [6], a reconfiguration of processes and
structures [7], systematic scalability [8], an adjustment in leadership [9], and an implementation of a vivid digital
culture [10]. Therefore, the DT includes all aspects of a company and explores how to upgrade them to continue to
evolve alongside technology. Scientific research proved that 84% of the DT fail or achieve targets below expectations
[11].
The challenge to be faced by the companies to promote and accelerate the DT in I4.0 cannot be considered a ‘spot’
process; rather, the result of a continuous improvement process involving different company’ sectors that leads to
achieving the success of DT. This is probably one reason why around 84% of the DT fail or achieve targets below
expectations [11].
Consistent to issues raised, companies should address the need to implement a DT process, self-evaluating the
readiness level to DT and exploring their options openly and in a timely manner [12]. Therefore, to fully investigate
the research problem, the following subsidiary research questions are raised:
RQ1: There are existing models to identify the DT readiness degree?
RQ2: What are the main company’ aspects that allow to favour/limit the DT implementation?
RQ3: How do the different company’s aspects impact on DT readiness degree?
In this regard, the paper aims to fill the highlighted gaps, developing a model that evaluates the organisations'
readiness to implement DT according to I4.0 targets. For this purpose, the model adopts an online survey of 38
questions to identify the readiness degree according to a five-level scale. The survey was submitted to a sample of
companies operating in different sectors to evaluate the readiness degree to DT implementation in the I4.0 of each
company. The research allowed to identify companies with different DT readiness degrees, the study of each of them
allowed a preliminary evaluation of the aspects most impactful on DT implementation.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The second section presents a literature review on the existing
readiness and maturity model. The analytical model is introduced in section 3, and the results of the surveys conducted
are discussed in section 4. Finally, section 5 concludes the paper.
2. Literature review
Through the I4.0 path, smart factories are facing great challenges, ranging from the one of production processes
optimization, related to the mass customization paradigm, to the one of work sustainability [13]. National plans
devised and prepared by governments worldwide aim to guide and facilitate the transition of companies to I4.0,

--- PAGE 3 ---
Francesco Facchini et al. / Procedia Computer Science 200 (2022) 1705–1714 1707 Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000 3
collecting the necessary information and creating standards for new technologies led to feasible DT implementation.
A maturity model is a tool used to measure, compare, describe, or determine a path or roadmap. A maturity model is
a structured set of elements describing a path of improvement from immature processes to qualitatively better
processes. Maturity can be captured qualitatively or quantitatively, discretely or continuously [14]. According to
Lucato et al., maturity and readiness are two different concepts, i.e., readiness shows if an organization is ready to
start a development process. Maturity, in contrast, shows a level of the organization concerning the analyzed process
[15]. Assessment tools to evaluate a company's suitability for the I4.0 paradigm are widespread nowadays. This shows
the strong interest of companies in identifying their strengths and weaknesses and, in some cases, the investments
needed to fill the gaps. A Digital REadiness Assessment MaturitY (DREAMY) to identify the digital readiness of the
manufacturing companies was introduced in 2017 [16]. DREAMY pursues the digitization of manufacturing firms.
The model architecture consists of five maturity levels (i.e., initial; managed; defined; integrated and interoperability;
digital-oriented) and four dimensions (process; monitoring and controlling; technology; organization). The model’s
application supports manufacturing companies in assessing their processes and planning their transformation roadmap
[16]. The rapid development of the global economy leads many companies to identify a diversification in areas within
I4.0 as a strategic choice. However, in most SMEs, the preconditions needed for a systematic diversification process
do not exist (awareness, knowledge, process, techniques, tools, etc.). Therefore, a three Stages Maturity Model in
SME were developed to describes a strategic path for the digitization of SMEs. The model comprises five maturity
stages(i.e.,initial;managed;defined;transform;detailedbusinessmodel)andthreedimensions(i.e.,envision;enable;
enact). The model's output is a timely ordered and multi-perspective map of the overall strategy towards the I4.0 [17].
The IoT Technological Maturity Model is a mono-dimensional model that identifies a scorecard related to the level
of IoT implementation for manufacturing companies, considering eight maturity stages (i.e., 3.0 maturity; initial to
4.0 maturity; connected; enhanced; innovating; integrated; extensive; 4.0 maturity). It can be a reference frame to
assess,improve,andcompareone’sIoTtechnologylevelagainstothermanufacturingcompanies [18].Asimilartarget
can be achieved by adopting System Integration Maturity Model Industry 4.0 (SIMMI 4.0), enabling a company to
classify its IT system landscape focusing on Industry 4.0 requirements. It consists of five stages (i.e., basic
digitalization level; cross-departmental digitalization; horizontal and vertical digitalization; full digitalization;
optimized full digitalization) with four dimensions (i.e., vertical integration; horizontal integration; digital product
development; cross-sectional technology) [19]. Maturity Model for Data-Driven Manufacturing (M2DDM)
investigates the IT architecture of manufacturing companies to provide a development path towards servitization. The
model focuses entirely on IT systems; it suggests five stages (i.e., non-existent IT integration; data and system
integration; integration of cross-life-cycle data; service-orientation; digital twin up to a self-optimizing factory). The
authors claim that three reference architectures for I4.0 (i.e., the Industrial Internet Reference Architecture, the
Reference Architecture Model Industrie 4.0) were investigated to define the maturity levels for data-driven
manufacturing leading companies in adopting I4.0 criteria [20]. Westermann and Dumitrescu developed a maturity
model for cyber-physical systems (CPS) to objectively evaluate the performance of existing technical systems, to
determine a company-specific target position and to plan an incremental performance improvement. To this purpose,
two layers were identified; the first one provides a general model with five stages (i.e., monitoring; communication
and analysis; interpretation and services; adaption and optimization; cooperation) on a single overall CPS dimension.
The second one provides different stages for each CPS component identified as sensor (i.e., signal characteristics,
signalsource),communicationsystem(i.e.,verticalcommunication,horizontalcommunication,connectivity,network
connection), human-machine interface (i.e., functionality, adaptability, location), and data (i.e., data storage, location
of storage, use of external data) [21].
An increasing number of maturity models developed by big international companies has been introduced in the last
years. Accenture developed the Digital Capability Assessment (DCA), a tool analyzing the digital capabilities needed
to compete in today's and tomorrow’s markets, considering five main dimensions (i.e., strategy and leadership; people
and culture; product and service; customer experience; enterprise enablement). The tool, not freely available, is a
tried-and-tested software used to assess organizations’ current digital capabilities and provides a framework for a
baseline diagnostic of 7 capabilities and 41 sub-capabilities considered critical to digital maturity. Similarly, Ernst &
Young (EY) proposed the so-called “Digital Readiness Assessment” adopted to check the organization’s strategy and
provides an improvement plan towards a fully digital organization. The evaluation is based on seven focus areas (i.e.,
strategy, customer experience, supply chain, technology, cybersecurity, finance, people, and organization) assessed

--- PAGE 4 ---
1708 Francesco Facchini et al. / Procedia Computer Science 200 (2022) 1705–1714
4 Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000
on three stages (i.e., developing; established; leading). According to EY Advisory Service, the assessment tool can be
adopted to structure, analyze, and measure the innovation potential of a company, identifying the areas of
improvement, and design and implement recommendations tailored. Many other consulting and IT firms operating in
the global market (e.g., Deloitte, Boston Consulting Group, McKinsey & Company IBM, etc.) introduced models to
test the readiness of a company to implement I4.0 paradigms. Below are summarized the models introduced with the
corresponding main characteristics (Tab. 1)
Table 1. Maturity Models in the I4.0 area, developed by academics and companies in the last years
Year Model Levels (dimensions) Developer Reference
2018 Maturity Model for CPS 5 (1) – from 2 to 4 (4) Academics [21]
2017 DREAMY 5 (4) Academics [16]
2017 IoT Technological Maturity Model 8 (1) Academics [18]
2017 M2DDM 5 (3) Academics [20]
2016 Maturity Model in SME 5 (3) Academics [17]
2016 SIMMI 4.0 5 (4) Academics [19]
2016 DRA 3 (7) Company [22]
2015 DCA 7 (5) Company [23]
Inmostcases,themodelsareincludedinsoftwareapplicationsnotfree,requiringamedium-highlevelofexpertise.
These are common limits of the existing readiness models; in many cases, results are hard to apply and require high
computing power (e.g., based on Monte Carlo simulation). If, on the one hand, they provide a detailed view of the
company under innovation and performance profile, on the other hand, the aspects strictly related to DT are difficult
to identify. Some of these limits are overcome by models proposed by academic studies. While being more
straightforward to use, suffer from the lack of proper test campaign; many of the readiness models introduced in the
scientific literature are looking forward to identifying a sample of companies to test and set up the models developed.
The analytical model proposed in this study tries to overcome the limits of the existing models, aiming to develop a
tool easy to use (about forty questions will be submitted to the user), focused on DT issues, and validated on a sample
of different companies.
3. Analytical model
The model is structured on thirty-eight questions, including ten questions adopted to identify the company’s profile
(closed-ended questions). All questions offer a range of answer options from either end of the spectrum for the
respondents to choose from (i.e., Likert Scale). The level is included from 1 to 5, where each reply (𝑟𝑟!") identifies a
different implementation degree or technological level of the equipment/devices already available in the company
investigated. In all cases, the lower value of 𝑟𝑟!" represents a poor performance level; on the contrary, a higher level
corresponds to a good performance level in terms of DT. Each question includes more aspects to be analyzed related
to the same technology. The response matrix given for each question (eq. 1) allows identifying a 𝑥𝑥#-value per question
(eq. 3), considering 𝑅𝑅! values estimated in accordance with equation 2. All response matrix lines are consistent with
the Likert scale provided by the survey; therefore, only one element (𝑟𝑟!") for each line will be nonzero. The values
assumed from elements in the first column can be 1, in the second column can be 2, in the third column can be 3, up
to the fifth column where elements cab be equal to 5.
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎡
𝑟𝑟$$
𝑟𝑟&$
⋮
⋮
𝑟𝑟!$
𝑟𝑟$&
𝑟𝑟&&
⋮
⋮
𝑟𝑟!&
𝑟𝑟$'
𝑟𝑟&'
⋮
⋮
𝑟𝑟!'
𝑟𝑟$(
𝑟𝑟&(
⋮
⋮
𝑟𝑟!(
𝑟𝑟$)
𝑟𝑟&)
⋮
⋮
𝑟𝑟!) ⎦
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎤
(1)

--- PAGE 5 ---
Francesco Facchini et al. / Procedia Computer Science 200 (2022) 1705–1714 1709
Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000 5
𝑟𝑟$$ ;
𝑟𝑟$& ;
𝑟𝑟$';
𝑟𝑟$(;
𝑟𝑟$);
𝑟𝑟&$;
𝑟𝑟&& ;
𝑟𝑟&' ;
𝑟𝑟&(;
𝑟𝑟&);
… 𝑟𝑟!$ = 1
… 𝑟𝑟!& = 2
… 𝑟𝑟!' = 3
… 𝑟𝑟!( = 4
… 𝑟𝑟!) = 5
such that
𝑅𝑅$ = ∑ 𝑟𝑟$"
)
"+$
𝑅𝑅& = ∑ 𝑟𝑟&"
)
"+$
…
…
𝑅𝑅! = ∑ 𝑟𝑟!"
)
"+$
(2)
𝑥𝑥# =
$
!
∑ 𝑅𝑅#
!
#+$ (3)
Four dimensions have been identified (Tab.2): people, process, technology, and innovation. The first one refers to
the human resources at the firm’s disposal, considering the available expertise and the skill of the employments to
manage new emerging technologies. The second one includes aspects related to ‘how’ the peoples' actions and the
technologies are combined to achieve a particular goal. In this regard, aspects of the repeatability of the process were
involved. Indeed, it is very interesting to evaluate the capability of the process to ensure the same result independent
of who performs it. The dimension ‘technology’ investigates the performance of the available tools to implement the
process. Ideally, the latest and fastest technology creates the most impact ensuring a high level of automation and
effectiveness. The last dimension (i.e., innovation) evaluates the company's propensity to adopt inward technology
licensing in new product development, aiming to improve productivity and incomes in the context of a globally
competitive economy.
Table 2. Dimensions considered by the analytical model, score, and readiness degree evaluation
Dimension ID questions (𝑖𝑖) Score (𝑆𝑆!) Weight (𝑤𝑤!) Readiness degree (𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅)
People 𝑖𝑖 ∈ 𝑁𝑁;[1;7] 𝑆𝑆1 = ∑ 𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑖
7
𝑗𝑗=1
𝑤𝑤'
𝑅𝑅( = /𝑆𝑆!𝑤𝑤!
)
!*'
Process 𝑖𝑖 ∈ 𝑁𝑁;[8;14] 𝑆𝑆2 = ∑ 𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑖
14
𝑗𝑗=8
𝑤𝑤.
Technology 𝑖𝑖 ∈ 𝑁𝑁;[15;21] 𝑆𝑆3 = ∑ 𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑖
21
𝑗𝑗=15
𝑤𝑤1
Innovation 𝑖𝑖 ∈ 𝑁𝑁;[22;28] 𝑆𝑆4 = ∑ 𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑖
28
𝑗𝑗=22
𝑤𝑤)
𝑠𝑠# = −1 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 𝑥𝑥# 𝜖𝜖 [1,1.5[, 𝑠𝑠# = 0 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 𝑥𝑥# 𝜖𝜖 [1.5,2.5[ (4)
𝑠𝑠# = 1 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 𝑥𝑥# 𝜖𝜖 [2.5,3[; 𝑠𝑠# = 2 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 𝑥𝑥# 𝜖𝜖 [3,3.5[; 𝑠𝑠# = 3 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 𝑥𝑥# 𝜖𝜖 [3.5,4.5[; 𝑠𝑠# = 4 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 𝑥𝑥# 𝜖𝜖 [4.5,5[ (5)
𝑠𝑠# = 5 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 𝑥𝑥# = 5 (6)
s.t. ∑ 𝑤𝑤, = 1 (
,+$ with 𝑤𝑤, ≥ 0 (7)
Most of the questions are objective-oriented; they leave no room for opinion to avoid receiving replies affected by
perception due to narrow-mindedness of the company or distorted vision of the available potentiality. The dimensions
include a subset of questions, each 𝑥𝑥#-value collected allows to identify a score (𝑠𝑠#) included between -1 and 5, in
accordance with equations 4-6, subject to constraint shown in eq. 7. The Readiness degree (𝑅𝑅-) will be given by the
weighted sum of the total scores (𝑆𝑆,) assigned to single dimensions. Setting a weight (𝑤𝑤,) to each dimension allows
identifyingitsimportanceforthereadinessdegreeevaluation. The 𝑤𝑤,-valueisidentifiedbydistributing1pointamong
four dimensions, consistent to eq. 7. In scientific literature, different methods are available to determine the dimension
weights (e.g., Multiple-Attribute Utility Theory, Analytic Hierarchy Process, Simple Multi-Attribute Rating
Technique, etc.). Any methods adopted for weights allocation will not compromise the effectiveness of the proposed
model. In table 3, are summarized the five-readiness status to DT identified by varying to values assumed by 𝑅𝑅-.
Table 3. Threshold values to identifies the readiness status introduced by the model.
Readiness status Level 𝑅𝑅(-values
Not existent 1 ]-∞, 25]
Basic digital operation 2 ]25, 65]
Advanced digital operation 3 ]65, 90]

--- PAGE 6 ---
1710 Francesco Facchini et al. / Procedia Computer Science 200 (2022) 1705–1714
6 Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000
Digital integration 4 ]90, 110]
Digital transformation 5 ]110, 140]
In the next section, the model was applied to a sample of 36 companies to evaluate their readiness degree to DT
and test the model's reliability to assess different industrial scenarios.
4. Results
The survey was submitted to a sample of 36 companies; the survey was designed on Microsoft Forms®
. An average
time of 28 minutes was required to complete the questionary. All replies have been registered in the period included
between February and May 2021. All participant companies are in Italy; most of them (about 85%) are in the south-
central Italian region. None of the companies interviewed is placed in the areas of the industrial districts. The
categories of the respondents were Manager (41%), Technician (21%), Administrative (21%), and Consultants (17%)
(fig. 1b). All are contacted via mail, received a brief guide (around 300 words) to fill the questionaries. Although a
helpline has been ensured to support the respondents for completing the questionnaire. In no case, the service was
called to clarify the meaning of the questions. In some cases, only technical issues have been raised from respondents.
In this case, the same weight (𝑤𝑤,) has been attributed to all dimensions to estimate the 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 value.
Around fifty per cent of the firms included in the sample can be considered large companies (i.e., 250 or more
employees) operating on the international market with an annual turnover greater than 25 M€/year (figs. 1,2). 57% of
the companies stated investments in digital technologies, IT, and innovation lower than 5% of their annual turnover.
Four industrial sectors have been identified: Health and Safety (i.e., pharmaceutical companies, personal protective
equipment & safety supplies, safety services company, etc.), Manufacturing (i.e., automotive industries, steelworks,
oil and gas exploration and production, etc.), Agricultural and food (i.e., farms, pasta factory, food industries, etc.),
and IT, Service, Utilities (i.e., logistics companies, software houses, business consulting, etc.). The study doesn’t
include any public companies.
Figure 1. Profile of companies and participants included in the survey, classified for industrial sector (a), work category of the respondents (b),
and business market (c).
b.
16%
19%
46%
19%
Health and Safety Agricultural and food
Manufacturing IT, Service, and Utilities
a.
46%
33%
21%
International National Local
c.
46%
12%
42%
Large company Medium company Small company
a.
43%
57%
Investments exceeding 5% of turnover
Investments of less than 5% of turnover
b.
23%
16%
38%
23%
Turnover <2.5 M€/year
2.5 M€/year <Turnover <25 M€/year
25 M€/year <Turnover <50 M€/year
Turnover >50 M€/year
c.

--- PAGE 7 ---
Francesco Facchini et al. / Procedia Computer Science 200 (2022) 1705–1714 1711
Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000 7
Figure 2. The companies' profiles were classified for companies’ size (a), annual investments in digital technologies, IT, and innovation (b), and
yearly turnover (c).
According to the survey results, around 55% of the companies selected achieve a readiness status higher than
‘Advanced digital operation’ (i.e., third level). In no company, the DT can be considered complete; as shown in table
4, the percentage of companies assessed with the fifth level (i.e., digital transformation) is zero. This evaluation is
consistent with other scientific research that considered the fulfilment of DT as a tough target to be achieved in a short
period[24]. Theyclaimthat thistarget canbemanagedinstrategicplanningand requires economicandorganizational
efforts in the long period.
Table 4. Readiness status assessment for the companies’ sample selected.
Readiness status Level Percentage of companies analyzed
Not existent 1 24.6 %
Basic digital operation 2 21.5%
Advanced digital operation 3 30.7%
Digital integration 4 23.2%
Digital transformation 5 0
Consistent with the existing scientific studies, the large companies investing more than 5% of their annual turnover in
digital technologies, IT, and innovation are better prepared for DT. The average 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 evaluated considering the
companies size and the percentage of turnover invested in innovations showed that the readiness degree increases with
the investments in innovation and employment (Tab. 5-6). This data highlights a problem already raised by many
authors related to the difficult implementation of DT for small and medium enterprises (SME). According to Matt et
al., most SMEs are currently not yet ready for DT, and they are not prepared to implement Industry 4.0 concepts [25].
If in the future, ad-hoc strategies, SME-adapted concepts, and suitable technological solutions will not be adopted, the
actual effort for sensitizationandawareness buildingamongSMEs for Industry4.0 will not showtheexpectedsuccess
and results.
Table 5. Average readiness degree is estimated as the average of 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅-values assessed to small, medium, and large companies.
Company size
Average Score (𝑆𝑆!)
Average (𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅)
People Process Technology Innovation
Small 4.16 -3.91 4.33 1.16 5.74
Medium 8.00 -2.00 7.33 4.69 18.02
Large 12.27 0.81 19.63 8.27 40.98
Similar considerations can be highlighted by analysing the annual turnover of the company interview; also, in this
case, the average readiness increase with the increase of the companies' annual turnover. Although, in this case,
emerges an incoherence considering the companies with turnover included between 2.5 M€/year and 25 M€/year
comparedtocompanieswithturnoverincludedbetween25M€/yearand50M€/year(Tab.7).Thecompaniesincluded
in the last category shown an average readiness degree lower than the first category. In particular, the dimension
‘technology’ of the companies with turnover included between 2.5 M€/year and 25 M€/year it is significantly higher
than other categories. Detailing the companies' data included in this subset emerges that one firm was assessed with a
score (𝑆𝑆,) very high than the average score of the other companies. No error occurs in this evaluation; probably, the
limited number of companies included in this subset (i.e., 16% of the total sample) affect the average evaluation
leading to considerations not consistent with scientific research.

--- PAGE 8 ---
1712 Francesco Facchini et al. / Procedia Computer Science 200 (2022) 1705–1714
8 Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000
Table 6. Average readiness degree is estimated as the average of 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅-values assessed by companies considering the turnover percentage invested
in digital technologies, IT, and innovation.
Turnover invested in
innovations
Average Score (𝑆𝑆!)
Average (𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅)
People Process Technology Innovation
Investments exceeding 5%
of turnover
14.00 1.00 19.60 5.60 40.20
Investments of less than
5% of turnover
5.81 -2.10 7.43 1.81 12.95
Table 7. Average readiness degree is estimated as the average of 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅-values assessed by companies considering the annual turnover.
Annual turnover
Average Score (𝑆𝑆!)
Average (𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅)
People Process Technology Innovation
Turnover <2.5 M€/year 4.65 0.12 6.11 8.23 19.11
2.5 M€/year <Turnover
<25 M€/year
13.66 1.66 15.00 1.25 31.57
25 M€/year <Turnover <50
M€/year
14.00 1.95 8.50 4.20 28.65
Turnover >50 M€/year 14.23 2.83 21.65 9.41 48.12
Finally, the average readiness was evaluated considering the four industrial sectors of the companies interviewed
(Tab. 8); it is possible to observe two very interesting aspects. The first aspect shows that the manufacturing sector is
more competitive and performing in terms of DT. In particular, the automotive industries included in this sector led
the fourth industrial revolution, and they were among the first to invest in DT. The companies included in the
agriculture and food sector are less mature in DT implementation; the tradition and the methods adopted in this sector
are considered more tied to the past. The stakeholder involved in this sector continue giving preference to the
conventional process; the investments in DT are few and, in many cases, misdirected. Concerning the IT, Service and
Utilities, sector a good level of maturity was observed, if compared with expectative. Scientific literature raised strong
limits and issues in this sector, probably the crisis following the Covid-19 pandemic affected the DT of the companies
operating in this business sector [26]. According to respondents, the work environments of the services companies
have been most affected by the change in technological, organizational, operability and social terms. Consistent to
this view, the good level of maturity observed than in the past can be justified.
Table 8. Average readiness degree is estimated as the average of 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅-values assessed by companies considering their industrial sector.
Industrial Sector
Average Score (𝑆𝑆!)
Average (𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅)
People Process Technology Innovation
Health and Safety 6.00 -2.50 1.75 1.00 6.25
Agriculture and food 3.40 -3.20 1.20 -0.40 1.00
Manufacturing 11.41 0.16 18.00 5.67 35.24
IT, Services, and Utilities 11.00 -0.20 12.40 3.00 26.20
The average 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 of the Health and Safety companies is very hard to compare with available data since they aren’t
very common in literature; the companies included in this sector are very different and present a highly variable
structure. Indeed, the highest standard deviation was estimated for this category. Probably a further clusterization of
this sector led to more clear results.
The second aspect shows that the average 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 assessed for dimension assumes great interest. Indeed, it emerges
that the people and the technology are the dimensions more performing; on the contrary, the process is the dimension
where the DT it's harder to implement to causes related to replicability and rigidity of the production systems. The

--- PAGE 9 ---
Francesco Facchini et al. / Procedia Computer Science 200 (2022) 1705–1714 1713
Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000 9
innovations represent the big challenge to be faced where the investment costs and the pay-back period are the great
unknowns limiting the improvement.
Conclusion
In order to face the issue of effective implementation of I4.0 technologies in production systems, in this paper, a
model allowing identifying the readiness degree of an organization to implement digital transformation (DT)
accordingly to I4.0 targets has been developed. To this end, the model adopts an online survey of 38 questions to
identify the readiness degree according to a five-level scale. The survey was submitted to a sample of companies
operating in different sectors to evaluate the readiness degree to DT implementation in the I4.0 of each company.
The results achieved by the model provides a clear profile of the companies investigated and allow to identify the
aspects that favour and limit the DT implementation. More in detail, it emerged that the companies with a higher DT
readiness degree, are characterized by common aspects. According to research conducted, a company “ready” to DT
implementation invests over 5% of its turnover in digital technologies, it is a large company with yearly turnover
higher than 50 M€/year, and it operates in sectors such as manufacturing, services, or IT. They are high
competitiveness sectors, where companies to meet the customers' needs and attain high standards, are committed to
enhancing the effectiveness of the production processes, adopting new technologies, innovating, and frequently
adjusting the work organization. These outcomes witness the model's capability to evaluate the DT readiness degree
and provide results consistent with evidence from existing scientific works. Although it is possible to get a perception
of the model’s reliability to provide a rational DT readiness, it is much more difficult to directly compare the results
provided by the developed model with other existing models. Indeed, the 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 value estimated is strongly related to
numerical parameters of the adopted model, survey’s structure as well as dimensions/levels identified. Therefore, one
of the main limits of the conducted research is the different perspectives on the DT readiness, given by different
adopted models, that significantly complicate the comparison between their results. Further limits of the proposed
model concern the number of companies investigated (not allowing to generalize results achieved) and the lack of
more complex evaluation actionable through interviews or direct contact with companies. The model will be applied
to a more significant sample in the future, and only one category of workers (i.e., manager) as respondents will be
considered.
Acknowledgements
This research was funded by ATTRACTION AND INTERNATIONAL MOBILITY , Project AIM– AIM1888385
funded by the Italian Ministry of Education, Universities and Research MIUR. All authors have read and agreed to
the published version of the manuscript.
Appendix A.
List of notations used in the manuscript
𝑟𝑟!" Set of z-values available for each n-aspect referred to the same question
𝑅𝑅! Value assumed for each n-aspect of the same question
𝑥𝑥# Average value estimated for each i-question
𝑠𝑠# Score assigned for each i-question
𝑆𝑆, Score estimated for each j-dimension (i.e., People, Process, Technology, and Innovation)
𝑤𝑤, Weight of each criterion assumed for every dimension
𝑅𝑅- The Readiness degree

--- PAGE 10 ---
1714 Francesco Facchini et al. / Procedia Computer Science 200 (2022) 1705–1714
10 Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000
References
[1] S. Proia, R. Carli, G. Cavone, and M. Dotoli, “Literature Review on Control Techniques for Collaborative Robotics in Industrial
Applications,” in IEEE 17th International Conference on Automation Science and Engineering, 2021.
[2] Gartner, “IT Glossary: Digitalization,” 2018. .
[3] D. Lepore, A. Micozzi, and F. Spigarelli, “Industry 4.0 accelerating sustainable manufacturing in the covid-19 era: Assessing the
readiness and responsiveness of italian regions,” Sustain., 2021.
[4] R. F. Zammuto, T. L. Griffith, A. Majchrzak, D. J. Dougherty, and S. Faraj, “Information technology and the changing fabric of
organization,” Organ. Sci., 2007.
[5] J. Karimi and Z. Walter, “The role of dynamic capabilities in responding to digital disruption: A factor-based study of the newspaper
industry,” J. Manag. Inf. Syst., 2015.
[6] K. J. Cha, T. Hwang, and S. Gregor, “An integrative model of IT-enabled organizational transformation: A multiple case study,”
Manag. Decis., 2015.
[7] A. Resca, S. Za, and P. Spagnoletti, “Digital platforms as sources for organizational and strategic transformation: A case study of the
midblue project,” J. Theor. Appl. Electron. Commer. Res., 2013.
[8] G. Piccinni, G. Avitabile, G. Coviello, and C. Talarico, “Real-Time Distance Evaluation System for Wireless Localization,” IEEE
Trans. Circuits Syst. I Regul. Pap., vol. 67, no. 10, 2020.
[9] G. Vial, “Understanding digital transformation: A review and a research agenda,” Journal of Strategic Information Systems. 2019.
[10] J. Llopis, M. R. Gonzalez, and J. L. Gasco, “Transforming the firm for the digital era: An organizational effort towards an E-culture,”
Hum. Syst. Manag., 2004.
[11] A. Issa, B. Hatiboglu, A. Bildstein, and T. Bauernhansl, “Industrie 4.0 roadmap: Framework for digital transformation based on the
concepts of capability maturity and alignment,” in Procedia CIRP, 2018.
[12] A. Bharadwaj, O. A. El Sawy, P. A. Pavlou, and N. Venkatraman, “Digital business strategy: Toward a next generation of insights,”
MIS Q. Manag. Inf. Syst., 2013.
[13] V. M. Manghisi, A. E. Uva, M. Fiorentino, M. Gattullo, A. Boccaccio, and A. Evangelista, “Automatic Ergonomic Postural Risk
Monitoring on the factory shopfloor ‒The ErgoSentinel Tool,” in Procedia Manufacturing, proceedings of the International
Conference on Industry 4.0 and Smart Manufacturing, 2019.
[14] A. Schumacher, S. Erol, and W. Sihn, “A Maturity Model for Assessing Industry 4.0 Readiness and Maturity of Manufacturing
Enterprises,” in Procedia CIRP, 2016.
[15] W. C. Lucato, A. P. T. Pacchini, F. Facchini, and G. Mummolo, “Model to evaluate the Industry 4.0 readiness degree in Industrial
Companies,” IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 52, no. 13, pp. 1808–1813, 2019.
[16] A. De Carolis, M. Macchi, E. Negri, and S. Terzi, “A maturity model for assessing the digital readiness of manufacturing companies,”
in IFIP Advances in Information and Communication Technology, 2017.
[17] J. Ganzarain and N. Errasti, “Three stage maturity model in SME’s towards industry 4.0,” J. Ind. Eng. Manag., vol. 9, no. 5, 2016.
[18] B. Jæger and L. L. Halse, “The IoT technological maturity assessment scorecard: A case study of norwegian manufacturing
companies,” in IFIP Advances in Information and Communication Technology, 2017, vol. 513.
[19] C. Leyh, K. Bley, T. Schaffer, and S. Forstenhausler, “SIMMI 4.0-a maturity model for classifying the enterprise-wide it and software
landscape focusing on Industry 4.0,” in Proceedings of the 2016 Federated Conference on Computer Science and Information Systems,
FedCSIS 2016, 2016.
[20] C. Weber, J. Königsberger, L. Kassner, and B. Mitschang, “M2DDM - A Maturity Model for Data-Driven Manufacturing,” in Procedia
CIRP, 2017, vol. 63.
[21] T. Westermann and R. Dumitrescu, “Maturity model-based planning of cyber-physical systems in the machinery and plant engineering
industry,” in Proceedings of International Design Conference, DESIGN, 2018, vol. 6.
[22] Ernst & Young, “Digital Readiness Assessment.” [Online]. Available: https://digitalreadiness.ey.com/.
[23] Accenture, “5200: Maturity Questionnaire - Accenture.” [Online]. Available: https://www.accenture.com/t20170601t203531__w__/cr-
en/_acnmedia/pdf-53/accenture-transforming-and-digitizing-maturity-quest.pdf.
[24] I. Mergel, N. Edelmann, and N. Haug, “Defining digital transformation: Results from expert interviews,” Gov. Inf. Q., vol. 36, no. 4,
2019.
[25] D. T. Matt, V. Modrák, and H. Zsifkovits, Industry 4.0 for smes: Challenges, opportunities and requirements. 2020.
[26] S. Gunay and B. E. Kurtulmuş, “COVID-19 social distancing and the US service sector: What do we learn?,” Res. Int. Bus. Financ.,
vol. 56, 2021.