--- PAGE 1 ---
Embracing
Digital
Technology
ANewStrategicImperative
By Michael Fitzgerald, Nina Kruschwitz, Didier Bonnet and Michael Welch
Findings from the 2013 Digital Transformation
global executive study and research project
Incollaborationwith
Research
Report
2013

--- PAGE 2 ---
Copyright © 2013. Massachusetts Institute of Technology. All rights reserved.
For more information on permission to distribute or post articles, visit our website FAQ page
http://sloanreview.mit.edu/faq/
Customer service
Email: smr-help@mit.edu
Phone: 617-253-7170
Authors
Michael Fitzgerald
istheDigitalTransfor-
mationcontributing
editoratMITSloan
ManagementRe-
view,coveringthe
challengesthattradi-
tionalcompaniesface
astheyadoptemerging
technologies.Hecanbe
reachedatmichael@
mffitzgerald.com
Nina Kruschwitz is
themanagingeditor
andspecialprojects
manageratMITSloan
ManagementReview,
whichbringsideas
fromtheworldof
thinkerstotheexecu-
tivesandmanagers
whousethem.She
canbereachedat
smrfeedback@mit.edu
Didier Bonnet isa
seniorvicepresident
andglobalpractice
leaderatCapgemini
Consulting.Hecan
bereachedat
didier.bonnet@
capgemini.com
Michael Welch isa
managingconsultantat
CapgeminiConsulting
andvisitingscientist
atMIT’sCenterfor
DigitalBusiness.
Hecanbereached
atmichael.welch@
capgemini.com
LoriBeers,Wellpoint;JonBidwell,ChubbInsurance;AdamBrotman,Starbucks;CurtGarner,Starbucks;
DavidKiron,MITSloanManagementReview;AndrewMcAfee,MITCenterforDigitalBusiness;
MarkNorman,Zipcar;WilliamRuh,GeneralElectric;KimberlyStevenson,Intel;GeorgeWesterman,
MITCenterforDigitalBusiness.
Acknowledgments

--- PAGE 3 ---
sloanreview.mit.edu Embracing Digital Technology • MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW 1
Contents
RESEARCH
REPORT
2013
2/Executive
Summary
3/Introduction
• Brewing Up Change
at Starbucks
•About the Research
3/Digital
Immaturity:AWide-
spreadProblem
•The Digital Imperative
•Technology Everywhere
5/TheBenefits
ofDigital
Transformation
6/TheTrouble
withDigital
Transformation
•Leadership: Defining
the Agenda
Lack of urgency
The vision thing
 Picking a direction
8/Institutional
Challenges
 Attitudes of older
workers
Legacy technology
Innovation fatigue
Politics
Sidebar: Intel Gets Urgent
10/Executing
theChange
•Making a Case for Digital
Transformation
•Incentives
12 / Conclusion

--- PAGE 4 ---
ExecutiveSummary
Companiesroutinelyinvestintechnology,andtoooftenfeeltheygetroutineresults.Technology’spromiseis
notsimplytoautomateprocesses,buttoopenroutestonewwaysof doingbusiness.
To better understand how businesses succeed or fail in using digital technology to improve business per-
formance, MIT Sloan Management Review and Capgemini Consulting conducted a survey in 2013 that
garneredresponsesfrom1,559executivesandmanagersinawiderangeofindustries.Theirresponsesclearly
showthatmanagersbelievein theabilityof technologytobringtransformativechangetobusiness.But they
alsofeelfrustratedwithhowharditistogetgreatresultsfromnewtechnology.
Thisreport(aswellasthesurvey)focusesondigitaltransformation,whichwedefineastheuseofnewdigital
technologies (social media,mobile,analytics or embedded devices) to enable major business improvements
(suchasenhancingcustomerexperience,streamliningoperationsorcreatingnewbusinessmodels).
Thekeyfindingsfromthesurveyare:
According to 78% of respondents,achieving digital transformation will become critical to their organiza-
tionswithinthenexttwoyears.
However,63%saidthepaceof technologychangeintheirorganizationistooslow.
Themostfrequentlycitedobstacletodigitaltransformationwas“lackof urgency.”
Only38%of respondentssaidthatdigitaltransformationwasapermanentfixtureontheirCEO’sagenda.
Where CEOs have shared their vision for digital transformation,93% of employees feel that it is the right
thingfortheorganization.But,amere36%of CEOshavesharedsuchavision.
Previous research with executives by the MIT Center for Digital Business and Capgemini Consulting
showed that many companies struggle to gain transformational effects from new digital technologies,but
also that a significant minority of companies have developed the management and technology skills to real-
ize the potential of new technologies. Our current survey deepens this research by getting frontline
perspectives as well as high-level ones,from staff to board member.(SeeAbout the Research,p.3.) It shows
that frontline corporate employees believe they face a strategic imperative to successfully adopt emerging
new technologies.Almost no organization is sheltered from the competitive disruption wrought by of the
widespreadadoptionof digitaltechnologies.
But the survey also shows that organizations are finding ways forward by taking steps such as developing
business cases for technology adoption,creating cross-department authority for digital initiatives and re-
aligning incentives to include metrics relevant to digital transformation. This report will delve into the
challengesofdigitaltransformationandhowcompaniesaremeetingthemtoachievecompetitiveadvantage.
2 MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW • Capgemini Consulting  sloanreview.mit.edu
Research Report Embracing Digital Technology

--- PAGE 5 ---
sloanreview.mit.edu Embracing Digital Technology • MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW 3
Introduction
E
very company wants the technology it uses to transform its business.Executives see the
potentialforusingdigitaltechnologiestoachievetransformation,butthey’reunclearon
how to get the results.They look at high-profile examples of companies using technol-
ogytogalvanizetheirbusiness,andwonderwhattheyneedtodotofollowsuit.
BrewingUpChangeatStarbucks
OnecompanythathassucceededisStarbucks.In2009,afterdismalperformancecutthecompany’s
stock price in half,Starbucks looked to digital to help re-engage with customers.It created a vice
president of digital ventures,hiringAdam Brotman to fill the post.His first move was to offer free
Wi-Fi in Starbucks stores,along with a digital landing page with a variety of digital media choices,
includingfreecontentfrompublicationslikeTheEconomist.Itsoundssimple,butasBrotmansays,
“we were not just doing something smart aroundWi-Fi,but we were doing something innovative
aroundhowwewereconnectingwithcustomers.”
Brotmanisnowchief digitalofficeratStarbucks,whereheandCurtGarner,Starbucks’chief in-
formation officer,have formed a close working relationship,restructuring their teams so that they
collaborate from the very start of projects.Last year,they cut 10 seconds from every card or mobile
phone transaction,reducing time-in-line by 900,000 hours.Starbucks is adding mobile payment
processingtoitsstores,andisprocessing3millionmobilepaymentsperweek.Soon,customerswill
orderdirectlyfromtheirmobilephones.
Usingsocialmedia,mobileandothertechnologiestochangecustomerrelationships,operations
andthebusinessmodelhashelpedStarbucksre-engagewithcustomersandboostedoverallperfor-
mance.Itsstockpricehasalsobouncedbackupfromroughly$8in2009tonearly$73inJuly2013.
DigitalImmaturity:AWidespreadProblem
ManycompanieswantStarbucks-likeresults,butmostarefarfromachievingthem,accordingto
our survey (seeAbout the Research).At the end of the survey,respondents answered a set of
questionsabouttheircompanies’digitalmaturity.Usinganindexofdigitalmaturitydevelopedbythe
Embracing
Digital
Technology
Aboutthe
Research
Thesurveyusesadefinitionof
digitaltransformationthat
camefromresearchdoneby
MIT’sCenterforDigitalBusi-
ness(CDB)andCapgemini
Consulting,whichfocusedon
howdigitaltransformation
playsoutattraditionallarge
companies,thosehavingmore
than$1billioninrevenues.To
complementthatresearch,
whichinvolvedinterviewswith
executivesat450largecompa-
nies,MITSloanManagement
ReviewandCapgemini
Consultingconductedabroad-
basedonlinesurvey.Itwas
completedby1,559peoplein
106countries(thefivewiththe
mostrespondentswere:
UnitedStates,37%;India,11%;
Canada,5%;UnitedKingdom,
4%;Australia,BrazilandMex-
ico,3%each).Theyrepresent
companiesandorganizations
acrossthebusinessspectrum
—nearlyhalf(47%)workat
companieswithlessthan$250
millioninrevenues,10%work
atmid-sizedcompanieswith
between$250millionand$500
millioninrevenues,9%atcom-
panieswith$500millionto$1
billioninsales,and33%work
atorganizationswithmore
than$1billioninrevenues,in-
cluding11%atcompanieswith
morethan$20billioninsales.
Respondentsspanthegamut
offunctions,fromCEOtostaff.
Thesurveyaskedthe
respondents’viewsona
numberoftopicsrelatedto
achievingdigitaltransforma-
tion.Respondentsalsotook
aseparatedigitalmaturity
assessment,basedonprior
CDBresearch,todetermine
theirdigitalmaturity.Organi-
zationswerecategorized
eitherasDigirati(matureat
bothtechnologyadoptionand
management),Fashionistas
(earlyadoptersoftechnology
butwithouteffectivemanage-
mentskills),Conservatives
(slowtoadopttechnologies
buteffectiveatmanaging
them)orBeginners(possess-
ingneitheradvanced
technologyortheabilityto
manageit).

--- PAGE 6 ---
4 MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW • Capgemini Consulting  sloanreview.mit.edu
Research Report Embracing Digital Technology
MIT Center for Digital Business and Capgemini
Consulting,wefoundthatonly15%of respondents
were in the most mature category alongside Star-
bucks. Sixty-five percent of respondents are in
organizations that rank as least mature — the cate-
gorytheindexreferstoasBeginners(seeFigure1).
Theworldisgoingthroughakindof digitaltrans-
formationaseverything—customersandequipment
alike — becomes connected. The connected world
createsadigitalimperativeforcompanies.Theymust
succeedincreatingtransformationthroughtechnol-
ogy,or they’ll face destruction at the hands of their
competitorsthatdo.
TheDigitalImperative
Even in a connected world,it takes time,effort and
willpower to get major transformative effects from
new technology.Executives need to lead the process
and make sure they’re managing and coordinating
acrossthecompany.Employeesknowthattechnology
matters:afull78%ofrespondentssaidachievingdigi-
tal transformation will become critical to their
organizationswithinthenexttwoyears.Lessthan5%
of respondents say digital transformation will never
become important for their organizations. Mean-
while, 81% said their organizations were already
tryingtoachievedigitaltransformation(seeFigure2).
“The big thing is,technology change is happen-
ing so rapidly that every industry is being affected
by this,”said George Westerman,research scientist
at MIT’s Center for Digital Business,and one of the
investigators leading the Center’s Digital Transfor-
mationResearch.
Previous research by Capgemini Consulting and
MIT’sCenterforDigitalBusinessfoundthatcompa-
nies that invest in important new technologies and
managethemwellaremoreprofitablethantheirin-
dustrypeers.Respondentstooursurveycorroborate
thisview—theyoverwhelminglybelievethatfailure
to effectively conduct digital transformation will
harmtheircompany’sabilitytocompete.
Of those working at organizations where digital
transformationisapermanentfixtureontheexecu-
tiveagenda,andacorestrategicconsideration,81%
believe their companies will be somewhat or much
more competitive in two years. That’s a stark con-
trast from those at organizations where leadership
is not focused on digital transformation — only
18% believe their companies will increase their
competitiveness, and nearly half (46%) project a
grim,lesscompetitivefuture.
Despite growing acknowledgment of a digital
imperative, few companies are responding. Only
38%of respondentssaidthatdigitaltransformation
was a permanent fixture on their CEO’s agenda.Of
therest,65%of respondentsthoughtitneededtobe
moreimportantthanitcurrentlyis.
TechnologyEverywhere
The pervasive nature of technology in consumers’
lives is causing rapid change in the business land-
scape. Lori Beer, executive vice president of
information technology and specialty business at
WellPoint,thenation’slargestBlueCross/BlueShield
licensee, said that“[i]t’s not like we’re a consumer
Rated D for digital
Most companies lack experience with
emerging digital technologies.
Figure1
Beginners
Conservatives
Fashionistas
Digirati
Digital
Maturity
15%
6%
14%
65%
01
Beginner companies probably use email, Inter-
net and various kinds of enterprise software. But
they have been slow to adopt, or are skeptical of,
more advanced digital technologies like social
media and analytics.
Conservativecompaniesdeliberatelyhangback
whenitcomestonewtechnologies,although
theirmanagementhasavisionandeffective
structuresinplacetogoverntechnologyadoption.
Fashionista companies are very aggressive in
adopting new technologies, but do not coordinate
well across departments or have an effective vi-
sion in place for dealing with digital business.
Digirati companies have executives that share a
strong vision for what new technologies bring, in-
vest in and manage digital technologies quickly
and effectively, and gain the most value from digi-
tal transformation.

--- PAGE 7 ---
sloanreview.mit.edu Embracing Digital Technology • MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW 5
products company,where you can put that product
on the shelf. Our products and services really are
supportingconsumers,providingcapabilitiesforem-
ployers,information,data,muchmorelikeafinancial
servicestypeof scenario.Technologyhasalwaysbeen
important to our business,but it really is becoming
much more strategic, especially today, when you’re
seeingtheemergenceof newtechnologies.You’resee-
ingatransformationof howconsumersareengaging
withtechnologies.”
The rise of the tech-savvy,connected consumer
across all facets of society changes the expectations
consumers have of companies, regardless of their
business, said Curt Garner, the chief information
officer at Starbucks.“IT and digital is pervasive in
people’s lives now.So the advice I would give some-
body starting it now is, think of yourself like a
consumertechnologycompany.”
How do consumer technology companies act?
One key point is,they update frequently.For non-
tech companies, this translates into adapting by
streamliningproductcycles.Quickerproductcycles
oftenleadtoaddingsomefeatureslater.Addingfea-
tures into new versions of products can become a
strategicmovefornon-techcompanies,aswell.
Respondingeffectivelyandquicklytonewtechnol-
ogiesaffectsthebottomline,andultimatelybusiness
survival.Effectivemanagementofnewtechnologiesis
already creating winners and losers in measurable
ways,likemarketshareandprofits—bothareaswhere
Digiratioutperformtheirrivals.Businessleaderswho
embracethedigitalimperativewillseeboostsintheir
operations,customerrelationsandbusinessmodels,
asdescribedinthenextsection(seeFigure3).
TheBenefitsofDigital
Transformation
Companies that effectively manage digital tech-
nology can expect to gain in one or more of
threeareas:bettercustomerexperiencesandengage-
ment, streamlined operations and new lines of
businessorbusinessmodels.Thoughinnovativenew
business models are what every CEO dreams of,
companies more often see digital technologies help
transform their customer experience or operations.
Business model transformation is difficult, and far
lessprevalent,accordingtosurveyrespondents.
Customer experiences reflect the clearest impact
of digital transformation. The survey found that
A current affair
Almost half of employees think digital transfor-
mation is upon us, and a third say it looms.
Figure2
Within the next 2 years
That time has passed —
it is already a matter of
survival
27%
This year 18%
33%
3 years or more 13%
It’s never going to
become important
across the entire
organization
5%
When will it
become critical to
implement Digital
Transformation
across your
organization?
02
Digital cash register
Digirati — the best companies at managing digital
technology — get the best financial results.
Figure3
Beginners Conservatives Fashionistas Digirati
Revenue
creation
Profitability
Market
Valuation
+9%
+6%
-11%
-12%
+7%
+9%
-10% -4%
-24%
-7%
+26%
+12%
07
Percentages don’t add to 100% due to exclusion of those
responding “don’t know.”
Source: MIT’s Center for Digital Business and Capgemini re-
port “The Digital Advantage: how digital leaders outperform their
peers in every industry (http://ebooks.capgemini-consulting.com/
The-Digital-Advantage/index.html)”

--- PAGE 8 ---
6 MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW • Capgemini Consulting  sloanreview.mit.edu
Research Report Embracing Digital Technology
improvingcustomerrelationshipswastheareawhere
companieswerehavingthemostsuccesswithdigital
technology.Mostprominentwas improvingtheover-
allcustomerexperience,followedcloselybyenhancing
productsandservicesincustomer-friendlyways.
Survey respondents said their organizations also
areseeingimprovementsinoperations,inpartinau-
tomatingoperations.Anumberorrespondentssaid
internalcommunicationsaresharplyimproved,espe-
cially through using social media.For example,Jon
Bidwell, chief innovation officer at Chubb, a large
specialtyinsurer,toldusthatsocialbusinesstoolsand
processeshadtransformedthecompany’sinnovation
culture,helpingitdevelopproductsandunderstand
risksasrapidlyasnewmarketsemerged.
Theopportunityfordigitaltechnologiestocreate
new businesses is real,and a quarter of respondents
expect digital transformation to launch new prod-
ucts and services. General Electric is pushing an
InternetofThingsservicestrategythatwillhelpittell
customers how to schedule maintenance and avoid
part failures, improving operations. The company
expects it will sell services related to maintaining its
products.
Ofcourse,moreefficientproductsmaywellreduce
demandfornewGEgoods.ButWilliamRuh,vicepres-
identofsoftwareatGeneralElectric,notesthat“there’s
upside for us in the services. We can grow on the
servicesside,andthey’rewinningandwe’rewinning.”
Butbusinessmodeltransformationisalsoelusive.
Amere7%of respondentssaidthattheircompany’s
digital initiatives were helping to launch new busi-
nesses,andonly15%saidnewbusinessmodelswere
emergingthankstodigitaltechnology(seeFigure4).
Itcouldbethatthesetechnologiesaresonewthat
they simply haven’t had time to be turned into new
business opportunities.One respondent noted that
inhiscompany,“thebeliefisthatdigitaltechnologies
arenotthateffectiveyetinourmarketplace.”Another
said customers weren’t ready for new models yet,
becausetheyare“highlyconservativeandresistantto
change.”
TheTroublewithDigital
Transformation
Despite growing acknowledgment of the need
for digital transformation, most companies
struggle to get clear business benefits from new
digital technologies. They lack both the manage-
menttemperamentandrelevantexperiencetoknow
how to effectively drive transformation through
technology.
Even companies where leadership has demon-
strated it can effectively leverage technology can
run into challenges with new digital technologies.
Today’s emerging technologies, like social media,
mobile, analytics and embedded devices, demand
differentmindsetsandskillsetsthanpreviouswaves
of transformativetechnology.
Thereisnoonefactorthatimpedesdigitaltrans-
formation.Lackofvisionorsenseofurgencyplagued
many companies, culture at others, and organiza-
tional constraints problems at still others. Our
Enhance our existing products and services
08
Enhance our
existing
products and
services
Improve the
customer
experience
Launch new
products and
services
Ensure
cross-channel
consistency
Automate our
operational
processes
Enhance the
productivity of
our workers
Improve
internal
communication
Expand our
reach to new
customers
and markets
Launch new
businesses
Develop new
business models
Transition
physical products
/ services to
digital products /
services
Customer
experience
Operational
improvements
Business model
change
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
Number of responses
1876
1255
1087
Our digital initiatives
are helping us to:
(Select up to three.)
What has digital done for us lately?
Companies are using technology to create real, transformative effects across
customer experiences, internal operations and new business model.
Figure4

--- PAGE 9 ---
sloanreview.mit.edu Embracing Digital Technology • MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW 7
research highlighted nine specific hurdles in the
broadareasof leadership,institutionalobstaclesand
execution that companies need to overcome to
achievedigitaltransformation.
Leadership:DefiningtheAgenda
Manymanagersfeelnourgencytoachievedigitaltrans-
formation.Thismaybebecausesofewleadersoffera
vision and a road map for digital transformation,
leavingmanagerswithnomotivationforachievingit.
Lack of urgency Complacency affects more com-
panies than any other organizational barrier cited
in our survey,with almost 40% of respondents say-
ing that lack of urgency/no sense of burning
platform is the biggest single obstacle to digital
transformation.One survey respondent working in
higher education said“The organization has a long
(70 years) history of success ...the need to change is
not clear to some members of the old guard”(see
Figure5).
The survey shows a clear split in perception of
urgency between the top managers at companies
and those below them.In fact,the further down the
organizational ladder one goes, the less satisfied
workers are with the pace of digital transformation
at their organizations.A third of C-level executives
and board members think the pace of change is
aboutright,andanother10%thinkitisfast,oreven
very fast. CEOs are particularly bullish — 53%
think the pace is right,fast,or very fast,the highest
of anycategory(seeFigure6,p.8).
CEOs might know something their colleagues
don’t,of course.Or it could be that as one gets into
the trenches of transformation,conditions change.
Only25%of managersthinkthepaceisright,anda
mere 22% of staff agree.Of these,product develop-
mentstaffarethemostpositive—justover40%say
the pace is very fast,fast or just right.Management
was guilty of “complacency, ignorance of modern
technology,”said one respondent.“Clueless man-
agement,”commentedanother.
Butemployeeskepticismcanalsoimpedepace—
evenwhenleadershipisonboardtopromotedigital
transformation.“There is too much hype,”said one
CEO.“Ican’tpushharderbecauseof allthehypeand
theoversellingfromsuppliers.Ilosemycredibilityif
I push it too hard.So we take a slower approach just
tomakesurewedon’tgivethenaysayerstheirway.”
The vision thing Digital transformation starts
with a vision from top leadership. Where senior
leaders had shared their vision,it had huge buy-in
—fully93%of employeesagreedthatdigitaltrans-
formation was the right thing right now for their
companiestodo,and73%stronglyagreed.
“Thisideathatathousandflowerswillbloomand
wewillallbeokayisagreatwaytogetsomeideas,but
we have not seen any transformations that happen
bottom up,” said George Westerman.“They’re all
being driven top down.The big difference between
the companies that are just doing technology initia-
tives and the companies that are leading a
technology-basedtransformationishowthey’reput-
tingtheleadershipframeworksinplace.”
30%
27%
28%
33%
39%
28%
24%
9%
16%
19%
No “burning platform” / no sense of urgency
Not enough funding
Limitations of IT systems
Roles and responsibilities are not clear
Lack of vision
Unclear business case
Business units implementing independently in silos
Culture not amenable to change
Lack of leadership skills
Regulatory concerns
What are the most
significant
organizational
barriers to Digital
Transformation in
your organization
as a whole?
Select up to 3.
ppt15 (09)
The biggest transformation traps
Desire, money and tools are the three big reasons organizations fail to use
technology to make their business better.
Figure5
Percentages refer to respondents who clicked this option versus total number of respondents who
answered this question.

--- PAGE 10 ---
8 MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW • Capgemini Consulting  sloanreview.mit.edu
Research Report Embracing Digital Technology
But only 36% of respondents said that senior
leaders had shared a vision for digital transforma-
tion across their organization. Why would
two-thirdsof executivesfailtoarticulateavisionfor
digital transformation? At least part of the reason
comesfromchoosingtherightwayforward.
Picking a direction Creating a road map towards
digital transformation is challenging. The survey
showed impressive alignment around the idea that
digital transformation is important — more than
80% of leaders at companies categorized as Digirati
and Fashionistas,and more than 90% at Conserva-
tive-level companies,say leadership is“completely”
or“somewhat”aligned.
There is much less alignment when it comes to
the road map. Fewer than 25% of respondents at
Conservative,Fashionista and Beginner companies
thought leadership was completely aligned on a
road map (it was less than 5% at Beginners),com-
pared to a bit over 40% at Digirati companies.
DigiratiandConservativefirmswerenotablybetter
overall at alignment,but such firms represent only
29%of allcompaniesinthesample.
Developing a road map for digital transforma-
tion presents hard challenges because digital
transformation takes many forms. For instance,
executivesmustdecidewhattotransformfirst:Cus-
tomer relationships? Internal operations? The
business model? Any individual step requires mul-
tiple, coordinated actions. It can also require
executives to reframe what they think about their
business.
WellPoint’s Lori Beer recalled that when she ran
operations for the company,it could only begin to
transform customer service when it stopped look-
ing at traditional service metrics like average speed
of answer, and started asking questions like why
customers who had talked to customer service
would then call back. Reframing questions about
the business is a real challenge,because doing so re-
quires a company to challenge its own assumptions
aboutitself.
InstitutionalChallenges
Corporate behavior among line staff reflects a
company’s history, its people, its leaders and
the ideals they hold. Some of these reflect broader
societal ideas about gender, age, education and
other factors,which can be unspoken issues that af-
fect every aspect of a company, including digital
transformation.We will look at four major institu-
tionalbarrierstochange.
Attitudes of older workers Responses to the sur-
vey suggest a deep-rooted perception that older
people will have trouble reframing.Bill Gates may
be 58, and Gordon Moore of Moore’s Law fame is
84,butthere’sstillaperceptionthatolderpeopleare
technophobic, and older managers don’t want to
deal with technologic change.“I sincerely doubt
that managers who are over 50 share the same
enthusiasm and excitement when it comes to digi-
tizing business segments when compared to a
younger person,”wrote a survey respondent in the
constructionindustry.
Another respondent complained that“Manage-
ment is composed of old people from 55 years and
above, they know nothing about technology and
its benefits and also don’t want to learn.”Another
called management, “Dinosaurs [who] don’t
Off the pace
The pace of digital transformation is too slow — unless you’re the CEO.
Figure6
ppt11
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
C-level
executives and
board members
CEO/
President/
Managing
Director
Managers Staff
Very fast
Fast
About right
Slow
Very slow
From your perspective,
how would you rate the
pace of implementation of
digital transformation in
your organization?

--- PAGE 11 ---
sloanreview.mit.edu Embracing Digital Technology • MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW 9
understand the opportunity and are reluctant [to
change]oldways.”
Perhaps younger people haven’t seen the pile of
bones built up from myriad obsolete technologies.
Older colleagues know that technology projects
often fail to deliver what they promise.“Is thisY2K
alloveragain?”onesurveyrespondentaskedof dig-
ital transformation.Older executives and managers
need to understand that their age can undermine
faith in their ability and interest in leading digital
transformation,anddevelopapproachestomakeit
clearthattheywanttoseetransformationoccur.
Legacy technology Thatolderpeoplearetechnol-
ogy-averse could be, at least in part, stereotyping.
Butproblemsarisingfromoldersystemsarealegiti-
mateissue.Forone,suchsystemscanbecomplexto
update,especially when connecting to new kinds of
technology.Limitations of IT systems ranked third
on the list of significant organizational barriers to
DigitalTransformation,citedby459people.
As one respondent said,“senior leaders seem to
understand the importance/relevance — they’re
not dummies — but they seem to be paralyzed by
business systems and business processes that will
takeagooddealof effortandcashtochange/adapt.”
Said another of an issue with a digital project,
“Our implementation has vastly outpaced prob-
lems that it’s trying to solve and has turned into
numerous headaches and distractions for basically
everyteam;doublybecausewehaven’treplacedany
of the existing systems,so everything is now being
duplicated(ortriplicated).”
Even companies in which the entire business is
digital may not use technology very effectively.One
executive responded to the survey by saying“Our
serviceofferingisdigitalcollaborationsolutions,so
we know how to talk about it and how our clients
should use it. Internally, we have not kept up the
pace.”Saidanother,“Weareanonline(SaaS)org,so
we built our infrastructure and tools on hosted
tools, embraced social media, etc. all on day one.
That said, we used a lot of disjointed, free or low
cost offerings. To get to the next level, we need to
migrate many of our digital operations/infrastruc-
tureitemstomoreintegratedsolutions.”
Innovation fatigue For people of any age,there is
also the possibility of technology fatigue.“I get the
impressionsometimesthatalotof themanagement
teams at companies say,‘would you please stop the
technology innovation? We can take a break from
thisandjustdigestwhatwe’vebeendoingforthepast
few years,’” said Andrew McAfee.“Unfortunately,
that’snotgoingtohappen,soacriticalskillatthetop
of acompanyistohavesomeonewhocankeepscan-
At Intel, there is no lack of a sense of ur-
gency; the company knows mobile
technology is upending its market. The com-
pany has failed multiple times to become an
important provider of mobile processors, in-
cluding turning down the opportunity to
provide chips for the original iPhone. Intel’s
culture has long been built around maintain-
ing market dominance through intense
internal competition, said Kim Stevenson, its
chief information officer. Now, Intel believes
it needs a more collaborative culture to help it
gain an edge in mobile processors.
To start this cultural change, Intel’s top 25
executives gathered for a strategy discussion
led by Stevenson and the head of human re-
sources. First, the group had to agree on the
overall vision, the need for cultural change in
order for Intel to compete effectively in the
emerging mobile market. Then it had to cre-
ate ways to bring people together. That
would mean breaking down barriers to com-
munication that existed in the company’s
culture of rivalry.
Among steps Intel took to improve com-
munications were adding 220 video
conferencing rooms, electronic white board-
ing, and adding search functions to its
SharePoint implementation. All company em-
ployees are now on an internal social
network. Intel has also set up teams based
on accounts, not internal departments.
Intelistakingsmall,concretestepsto-
wardschangingitsculture,ratherthan
massive,riskyleaps.Thesmall-stepstrategy
isonemanycompaniescouldadoptwhentry-
ingtotransform.Asonesurveyrespondent
said,“Thekindoftransformationbeingad-
opteddoesnotgivemuchleewayforfailure
andthecosttotheorganization’sreputation
andbrandisgreat.Athoughtfulandpiloted
approachneedstobeadopted.”Smallsteps
donotmeancompanieslackurgency.
According to Stevenson, “We had the top
25 executives in the company buy in to the
strategy. You have to admit that your compet-
itive culture needs to change to be
successful in the future, and we want to
change before it’s evident on the outside that
we need to change, right? And I think that’s a
really key premise.”
Intel gets urgent

--- PAGE 12 ---
10 MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW • Capgemini Consulting  sloanreview.mit.edu
Research Report Embracing Digital Technology
ning the technology landscape and explaining it to
the rest of the management team to say,gang,this is
thecloud;it’sactuallyabigdeal.Inertiaandcompla-
cencyaredeadlyintheworldthatweliveintoday.”
It’s hard not to get complacent, said Stevenson,
Intel’s CIO. “They’ve gone through ERP, they’ve
gonethroughBYO,andthey’vegonethroughcloud,
and they think they’ve done it all.But the reality is,
we’re only at the very, very beginning of this next
generation of computing,and I think that every in-
dustry leader will be the ones that transform first.I
don’tcarewhatindustryyou’retalkingabout.”
Similar attitudes came up in the survey, where
barriers like “information overload,”“the human
capacity for implementation”and the need to“bal-
ancebetweenconveniences,speedandsuperficiality
of digital tools and human-brain thinking pro-
cesses”werecited.
AndrewMcAfee,principalresearcherattheCen-
ter for Digital Business,told us in an interview that
“[the] vexing thing about innovation and disrup-
tion is,they don’t stop once you do it.”Neither will
competitors.Companieshavetodevelopacontinu-
ousprocessfordigitalinnovation.
Politics Internal power centers, controlled by de-
partments or individuals, can inhibit changes that
dictate less power or different ways of working.
More than 20% of respondents said that internal
politics,including fear of losing power in the orga-
nization, impeded adoption of digital technology
(seeFigure7).
Many companies work to limit the power of a
single individual or department — 60% of compa-
nies,in fact,report using one of several governance
mechanisms to manage and foster their digital in-
vestments. Cross-functional steering committees
are the most popular,the choice at 19% of respon-
dents’ organizations. Other approaches include
specific digital leadership in individual business
units (15%) and cross-functional innovation
groups (14%). Only 13% have adopted the much-
hypedpositionof chief digitalofficer(CDO).
This diverse set of approaches shows that com-
panies can follow many paths to structuring their
digital transformation efforts. But it also creates
problemsforcompanies.Thereisenoughresistance
from organizational and cultural factors that not
havingclearstructuresmakesitriskyforworkersto
pushfordigitaltransformation.
ExecutingtheChange
Among the obvious obstacles to digital trans-
formation is lack of clarity about the pay-off.
Companies want to know that they are getting
something beneficial from investment in new tech-
nologies.Corporateleadersneedtoleveragemetrics
tohelpmakedigitaltransformationhappen.
MakingaCaseforDigitalTransformation
Onlyhalf of thecompaniessurveyedsaidtheycreate
business cases for their digital initiatives. It can be
hard to gauge a return on investment for emerging
technologies.“It is still difficult to compute ROI
on many social media activities (at least to the satis-
faction of the executive board)” said one survey
respondent.
Many organizations struggle to compute ROI.
Merely one-fourth report having established key
performance indicators to help them measure the
impact of their digital transformation. The three
biggestreasonswhy:companieshavetroubledefin-
Figure7
Culture clash
Entrenched attitudes of fear and ignorance beat down digital transformation
within many corporate cultures.
40%
18%
21%
52%
53%
23%
Competing priorities – “we don’t have time for this right now”
Lack of familiarity with digital – “we don’t know how to do that”
Resistance to new approaches – “this is the way we’ve always done it”
Digital Transformation threatens current power structures – “I will lose influence in my organization”
Internal politics – “it doesn’t have the right political support”
Risk aversion – “it’s not worth the risk”
What are the most
significant cultural
barriers to Digital
Transformation in
your organization?
Select up to 3.
ppt19 (10)
Percentages refer to respondents who clicked this option versus total number of respondents who
answered this question.

--- PAGE 13 ---
sloanreview.mit.edu Embracing Digital Technology • MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW 11
ing how to successfully define key performance
indicators (KPIs), lack of management skills to
carry through on KPIs, and needing cultural
changestomakeKPIswork(seeFigure8).
Those that do measure can be guilty of using
fuzzy math. “We are not honest with ourselves
about where our capabilities really lie, nor about
how we are going to ensure there is accountability
for instituting real,competitive change,”wrote one
survey respondent.“We want to make it seem like
we‘getdigital’butourDigitalTransformationisnot
holistic,andtendstooccurinisolatedincidentsthat
are always positioned as‘successful’even when they
reallyaren’t.”
Digital transformation is successful when the
entire company aligns around a vision, but only a
slight majority of companies have given cross-
functional committees (37%) or a shared digital
units (17%) enterprise-level authority on
digital investments. Digirati do much bet-
ter,at66%.
Incentives Oneobviouswayforexecutives
to clear a path for digital transformation is
to give employees incentives.Bonuses,raise
structures, promotions and performance
reviews are some of the tools that compa-
nies could use, but don’t. For Beginners,
61% of companies do not tie rewards to
digital transformation efforts.The compa-
nies that do best at digital transformation
also do the best job of aligning incentives with digi-
tal transformation efforts: 68% of respondents at
Digirati companies do connect digital transforma-
tion to incentives. Interestingly, these incentives
tend to be based on“soft”factors (recognition,per-
sonal advancement) rather than “hard” financial
factors(seeFigure9).
Better incentives might help ease employee
concerns about digital transformation. One sur-
veyrespondentnotedthat“attheoperationallevel,
there are some benefits (to digital transforma-
tion),butmuchof theday-to-dayexperienceisthe
feeling of being reduced to being a Victorian
machine minder: instead of the software servicing
the people, it is the other way around.” Another
said that the pace of digital transformation de-
manded such speed that it is “at risk of diluting
employee morale.”
Metric systems
More than half of companies fail to set key performance
indicators to gauge digital transformation …
… even though they know they matter.
Figure8
Defining the
right KPIs
Changing the
culture
Limitations of
IT systems
Concerns with the
integrity of the data
Lack of
management skills
Too much
data
Not enough
data
Very
significant
Somewhat
significant
Neither Not
at all
significant
Don’t
know
Don’t
know
Not
very
significant
How significant are each of the following in managing Key
Performance Indicators (KPIs) around Digital Transformation?
Have Key Performance Indicators
(KPIs) been established to track the
progress of Digital Transformation?
Yes No
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%
26%
17%
57%
Market rewards
Most companies fail to tie incentives to digital transformation
Figure9
new 9
68%
48%
65%
39%
35% 39%
22%
4%
Reward structures are aligned in
some way to digital transformation
goals in my organization.
Beginners
Reward structures
among the Digirati
Personal
advancement
Awards and
recognition
Financial
incentives
Other
Conservatives Fashionistas Digirati
Defining the
right KPIs
Changing the
culture
Limitations of
IT systems
Concerns with the
integrity of the data
Lack of
management skills
Too much
data
Not enough
data
Very
significant
Somewhat
significant
Neither Not
at all
significant
Don’t
know
Don’t
know
Not
very
significant
How significant are each of the following in managing Key
Performance Indicators (KPIs) around Digital Transformation?
Have Key Performance Indicators
(KPIs) been established to track the
progress of Digital Transformation?
Yes No
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%
26%
17%
57%

--- PAGE 14 ---
12 MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW • Capgemini Consulting  sloanreview.mit.edu
Research Report Embracing Digital Technology
Conclusion
If companiescouldgivetheirrelationshiptodigital
transformationaFacebookstatus,itwouldbe“it’s
complicated.”It is complicated, but it can be man-
aged.Thestakesmakedigitaltransformationadigital
imperativeforcompanies.Digitaltransformationisa
wide-openarea,onethatgivesCEOsbroadleewayto
act.ButtheCEOandseniorleadershipmustdevelop
a vision to articulate to the staff,create a road map
and commit to it, and then rally the organization
withmeasurablegoalsandincentivestoreachthem.
Digital transformation needs to come from the
top,and companies should designate a specific ex-
ecutiveorexecutivecommitteetospearheadefforts.
Companies should take small steps, via pilots and
skunkworks,and invest in the ones that work.Cor-
porateleadershipneedstotweakitsroadmapbased
on these smaller projects, and update its digital
visionasthesesmallerprojectsrefinethevision.Ex-
ecutives and employees need clear rewards for
makingdigitaltransformationapriority.
“There are two wrong ways to approach (digital
transformation),”MIT’sGeorgeWestermantoldus.
“Oneistosay,‘justgooffanddosomething.Andwe
don’tneedtoworryaboutcoordination.’Anotheris
tohireabunchof peopleandsay‘makethishappen.
Idon’tneedtobeinvolved.’”
“If you’reanexecutiveleadingacompanylooking
atthesetechnologies,youneedtoleadthetechnology
—don’tletitleadyou,”Westermanadded.“Youwant
tothinkabout,howisyourcompanygoingtobedif-
ferent because this is here? And then, put in a
framework, so you’re not just buying technology,
you’re actually pushing your company forward in a
differentway,becausethetechnologyisthere.”
Theonlywrongmoveforexecutives,then,would
benotmakinganymove.
MITSloanManagementReview
MITSloanManagementReviewleadsthediscourseamongacademicresearchers,businessexecutivesand
otherinfluentialthoughtleadersaboutadvancesinmanagementpracticethataretransforminghowpeople
leadandinnovate.MITSMRdisseminatesnewmanagementresearchandinnovativeideassothatthought-
fulexecutivescancapitalizeontheopportunitiesgeneratedbyrapidorganizational,technologicaland
societalchange.
CapgeminiConsulting
CapgeminiConsultingisaglobalstrategyandtransformationconsultingorganizationof theCapgemini
Group,specializinginadvisingandsupportingenterprisesinsignificanttransformation,frominnovative
strategytoexecutionandwithanunstintingfocusonresults.Withthenewdigitaleconomycreatingsignifi-
cantdisruptionsandopportunities,ourglobalteamof over3,600talentedindividualsworkwithleading
companiesandgovernmentstomasterDigitalTransformation,drawingonourunderstandingof thedigital
economyandourleadershipinbusinesstransformationandorganizationchange.

--- PAGE 15 ---
PDFs ■ Reprints ■ Permission to Copy ■ Back Issues
Articles published in MIT Sloan Management Review are
copyrighted by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
unless otherwise specified at the end of an article.
MIT Sloan Management Review articles, permissions,
and back issues can be purchased on our Web site:
sloanreview.mit.edu or you may order through our
Business Service Center (9 a.m.-5 p.m. ET) at the
phone numbers listed below. Paper reprints are
available in quantities of 250 or more.
To reproduce or transmit one or more MIT Sloan
Management Review articles by electronic or
mechanical means (including photocopying or archiving
in any information storage or retrieval system) requires
written permission.
To request permission, use our Web site:
sloanreview.mit.edu),
or
E-mail: smr-help@mit.edu
Call (US and International):617-253-7170
Fax: 617-258-9739
Posting of full-text SMR articles on publicly accessible
Internet sites is prohibited. To obtain permission to post
articles on secure and/or password-protected intranet sites,
e-mail your request to smr-help@mit.edu.

--- PAGE 16 ---
