--- PAGE 1 ---
Transitioning Towards Enterprise Architecture
Management in a Software and Service Mobility
Company: A Case Study
Simon Flaisch1(B) , Dominic Lang2 , Sedat Kilic2 , Stefan Trieflinger1 ,
and Jürgen Münch1
1 Reutlingen University, Alteburgstraße 150, 72762 Reutlingen, Germany
Simon.Flaisch@Student.Reutlingen-University.DE
2 ETAS GmbH, Borsigstraße 24, 70469 Stuttgart, Germany
Abstract. Inthefaceofdisruptions,increasingcomplexityandintensifyingcom-
petitive pressure, organizations must adapt their structures and operations. In this
context, Enterprise Architecture Management (EAM) is considered a promising
approachtoaddressthesechallengesbyenablingholisticorganizationaloverview,
breakingdownsilos,andreducingcomplexity.However,theorganizationalimple-
mentation of EAM remains challenging, with little established methodological
guidance available for context-specific realization. The research presented in this
paper aims to support the organizational introduction of EAM. To this end, we
present a practical evaluation approach to guide the selection of appropriate EAM
implementationstrategies.Throughasingle-casestudyconductedincollaboration
with ETAS GmbH, this research explores a potential implementation of EAM. By
conducting expert workshops and semi-structured interviews, an assessment app-
roachandadecision-supporting“fittingmatrix”weredeveloped.Thematrixeval-
uates twelve EAM implementation variants using seven collaboratively defined
success criteria. The results indicate that a federated EAM model led by the CIO
is considered the most suitable for this case.
Keywords: Enterprise Architecture Management · Enterprise Architecture
Implementation Methodology (EAIM) · Business-IT Alignment · Enterprise
Architecture Frameworks · Change Management
1 Introduction
Organizations across various industries face increasingly volatile economic, technolog-
ical, and regulatory conditions, requiring continuous adaptation [1, 2]. This also affects
theautomotivesector,whichiscurrentlyexperiencingaperiodofunprecedentedchange
driven by electromobility, the software-defined vehicle, and intensified global competi-
tion [3]. As a result, the way how companies operate and create value is fundamentally
changing, yet such transformations come with significant challenges [1]. Moreover, tra-
ditionalmanagementapproachesareprovinginadequatetoaddresstherisingcomplexity
and pace of change. In this context, Enterprise Architecture Management (EAM) has
© The Author(s) 2026
G. Herzwurm et al. (Eds.): ICSOB 2025, LNBIP 574, pp. 267–273, 2026.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-032-14518-5_21

--- PAGE 2 ---
268 S. Flaisch et al.
become a widely recognized approach for addressing these challenges. EAM enables
the development of a holistic understanding of the organization [4], promotes the break-
down of silos, and helps organizations to manage increasing complexity [5]. Moreover,
authorsfromindustryandacademiaemphasizethatthereisnoone-size-fits-allapproach
for organizational EAM implementations, as organizational context strongly influences
individual success [1, 2, 6]. Additionally, Buckl et al. [2] highlight the absence of estab-
lished methodologies or practical guidance for context-specific EAM implementations.
This paper addresses this gap through a single-case study in collaboration with ETAS
GmbH, a company transforming from a hardware-focused to a software- and service-
driven organization. To this end, we contribute a case study, in which we developed
a contextual assessment approach and a corresponding “fitting matrix” to support the
evaluation and selection of suitable EAM implementations.
Several prior studies have investigated the organizational implementation of EAM.
For instance, Haki et al. [7] presented four EAM archetypes intended as organizational
blueprints. Buckl et al. [2] proposed a design theory framework for situational EAM
design. The results are rather abstract and lack elaboration on operational details such
as artefacts and assessment steps. Other publication such as Schmidt and Buxmann [5]
outline general principles, whereas Drews et al. [8] provide detailed insights into an
agile EAM function but without providing a systematic assessment approach. Overall,
the literature reveals an absence of structured evaluation approaches, which this study
aims to address. A comprehensive overview of background and related work can be
found in Flaisch [9]. This paper presents a condensed version of the case study, with a
more comprehensive version available on Figshare1.
2 Research Design
This research follows the case study approach from Yin [10] and adopts the research
design proposed by Runeson et al. [11]. We propose the following research questions:
RQ1: How can different organizational EAM approaches be evaluated to select the
most beneficial option? RQ2: What are suitable options to establish EAM at the case
company, and which is the most promising one?
This case study examined ETAS GmbH, a subsidiary of the Bosch Group that pro-
videsembeddedsoftware,engineeringsolutionsandservicestotheautomotiveindustry.
The company is currently undergoing a strategic transformation into a software and ser-
vice mobility company. In this context, ETAS considers EAM a promising approach to
manage its transformation. Consequently, an explorative single-case study design was
chosen, as it allows to investigate real-world phenomena [11]. The primary objective
was to explore the potential implementation of EAM within the case company.
ToaddressRQ1,twoexpertworkshopswereconductedwithtwoETASpractitioners,
one enterprise architect and one senior manager with experience in organizational trans-
formation and a solid understanding of Enterprise Architecture (EA). The objective was
tovalidatefindingsfromapriorliteraturereview[9]anddevelopanevaluationapproach
for different organizational EAM implementations. For RQ2, the developed approach
1 Figshare Link: https://figshare.com/s/407677525a27d2011ab7.

--- PAGE 3 ---
Transitioning Towards Enterprise Architecture Management 269
was applied and validated in the context of ETAS through 13 semi-structured expert
interviews with experts from four different companies. The expert selection encom-
passed architects from the case company, along with external consultants specialized
in the domain of EAM. Prior, an interview guide was structured according to the fit-
ting matrix and distributed in advance. Their responses were collected via Likert-type
scales and analyzed followed Schuster and Liesen [12], providing a quantitative basis
for comparing different implementations.
3 Results
Assessment Approach. In the workshops to answer RQ1, different EAM options were
scored against success criteria that are considered essential by the experts, resulting in a
scoring matrix, referred to as “fitting matrix”. Overall, the approach and the associated
artefact consist of three main components: (I) Success criteria for EAM introduction;
(II)AdaptedorganizationalEAMapproaches;(III)Organizationalanchoringpoints.
(I) Success Criteria. In the initial phase, potential evaluation dimensions were identi-
fiedbasedontheliteraturereviewbyFlaisch[9]anddiscussedinthefirstworkshop.
Throughout a multi-stage process involving two expert workshops, recurring pat-
terns and thematic overlaps across EAM challenges, best practices and success
factors were synthesized and seven key success criteria were identified, that serve
as the evaluation dimensions for comparing different organizational EAM options:
(1) Organizational Penetration and Effectiveness Reach of EAM, (2) Top Man-
agement Mandate and Governance, (3) Visibility and Lighthouse Character, (4)
Suitability for EAM Work, (5) Ability to Function as an Architecture Guild, (6)
Adaptability and Scalability of EAM, (7) Effort and Risk for Change.
(II) EAM approaches. Based on the literature review by Flaisch [9] and practitioner
workshops, three approaches were identified: Virtual EAM, Central Operative
EAM, Governance EAM, and Supportive EAM. They differ in their degree of
centralization, governance structures, and role of embedded architects, e.g. in the
Virtual EAM model, there is no central EAM organization but architects work
within a virtual community [6, 13]. In contrast, the Central Operative EAM con-
solidates all architects and architectural activities into a single centralized function
[6, 13]. It is typically led by a Chief Enterprise Architect and follows hierarchical
structures to cover all relevant domain regions [14]. The Governance EAM model
combines central structure of a dedicated EAM department supervising EAM by
formulating EA strategy, establishing enterprise-wide standards, while being com-
plemented by a decentralized network of embedded architects operating within
business domains [6, 13]. The Supportive EAM approach similarly integrates cen-
tral and decentralized components, but with primary architectural work conducted
highly autonomous within individual domains and teams, while the EAM function
operates primarily in a supportive and advisory capacity [8].
(III) Organizationalanchoringpoints.Furthermore,accordingtotheworkshopexperts,
selectinganappropriateorganizationalanchoringisessentialtoachievethedefined
success criteria, overcome challenges, and leverage the benefits of EAM, a view
supportedbyauthorsfrombothacademiaandindustry[6,15].However,thereisno

--- PAGE 4 ---
270 S. Flaisch et al.
universalsolution,asappropriatepositioningdependsheavilyontheorganizational
structure, operating model, and culture [6]. Based on these insights, organizational
anchoring was included as an additional dimension to the assessment approach,
considering three generic roles to avoid bias and strengthen the adaptability and
reusability [16]: The Chief Information Officer (CIO), responsible for overseeing
andmanagingallresourceswithinanorganization’sIT;theChiefOperatingOfficer
(COO),responsiblefordailybusinessoperationsandoptimizinginternalefficiency
and staff coordination; and the Chief Executive Officer (CEO), who holds the
highest-ranking position and is responsible for major strategic decisions, overall
leadership, and supervision of the executive team.
Fitting Matrix. Figure 1 shows the final version of the “fitting matrix”, which incor-
porates the pre-defined success criteria, four adapted EAM approaches and three poten-
tial organizational anchoring points among C-suite roles, as well as a transparent evalu-
ation mechanism. The X-axis lists the four EAM approaches, each subdivided into three
variants reflecting its anchoring under one of the three C-Suite roles and Y-axis contains
the seven success criteria, which serve as the evaluation dimensions for assessing each
approach, forming the evaluation logic of the matrix.
Approach Evaluation. To answer RQ2, the “fitting matrix” was applied using semi-
structured interviews. Details can be found in the extended version of this paper. As
previously outlined, the use of consistent Likert-type statements and their systematic
mapping to numerical values enabled a comparable assessment across all variants [12].
Figure 1 illustrates the completed matrix for the case company, ETAS.
Fig. 1. Completed artefact “fitting matrix” for the case company
Overall, the most suitable approach for ETAS based on the evaluation is the feder-
ated “Governance EAM”. However, minimal variance between C-suite roles suggests
that there is no significant difference between them in the case of ETAS. Next in the
ranking is the centralized “Central Operative EAM” approach, where the CEO variant
trailswith339points,relativelyclosetotheEAMGovernancevariant,butstill6%lower
than the top option. The decisive difference lies in the “Organizational Penetration and
Effectiveness Reach of EAM” criterion which was rated lower for a central function due
to the challenge of “ivory tower syndrome,” consistent with prior literature [6]. While

--- PAGE 5 ---
Transitioning Towards Enterprise Architecture Management 271
a central function may be detached from business, the federated approach fosters prox-
imity to stakeholders through its embedded architects in relevant areas (e.g., business
domains). Another interviewee insight is the preference for centralized over decentral-
ized approaches, stating that EAM requires a clear mandate and strong authority to be
implemented effectively, especially to fulfill its governance responsibilities, which is
reflected in higher scores on e.g. “Top Management Mandate and Governance.“ Conse-
quently, decentralized approaches are ranked last, with “virtual EAM” and “supportive
EAM” receiving the lowest scores.
4 Conclusion and Outlook
This paper presents a case study conducted in collaboration with ETAS GmbH, explor-
ing the potential implementation of Enterprise Architecture Management. Based on
insights from the literature and expert workshops, a structured assessment approach and
a supporting artefact, the “fitting matrix,” were developed to evaluate and compare orga-
nizational EAM implementation options. Through semi-structured expert interviews,
the approach was applied and validated in the context of the case company, providing a
methodological foundation and decision-making support for assessing suitable organi-
zational EAM designs. The results indicate that a federated “Governance EAM” model
anchored with the CIO represents the most suitable option for ETAS. To assess the
validity and reliability of the results, the framework proposed by Yin [10] was applied.
Construct validity was strengthened by communicating workshop and interview
objectives in advance, clarifying terminology, and using semi-structured interviews to
mitigate misunderstandings. Internal validity may be affected by the accuracy of partic-
ipants’ knowledge; this was addressed by selecting experienced experts and discussing
differing viewpoints until consensus was reached. Internal validity was not further con-
sidered for the interviews, as no causal relationships were examined. External validity
is limited due to the single-case design, restricting the generalizability of the findings.
While the results may offer indicative insights for organizations in comparable con-
texts, they are not directly transferable without further research. Reliability may be
constrainedbythesubjectiveperceptionsofparticipantsandpotentialcompany-specific
bias, which was mitigated by validating selected findings with a broader expert group.
As the approach has not yet been implemented or longitudinally validated, it represents
a preliminary framework requiring further investigation. Additionally, the results of this
paper can serve as a foundation for further academic research and practical applications.
Furtherresearchshouldvalidatethepreliminaryapproachacrossdifferentorganizational
contexts, e.g. by introducing weighting, and quantitative studies with EAM practition-
ers could further substantiate and enrich the findings. Beyond validation, the identified
success criteria could enrich an EAM maturity model, helping companies assess their
current EAM level. Based on this study’s results, ETAS has decided to establish a dedi-
catedEAMfunctiontosystematicallymanage,developandevolvethecompany’sEA.In
the long term, ETAS aims to further professionalize itsEAM function, and the emerging
initiative is expected to provide various benefits and may also serve as a pilot for other
organizations facing similar environments and challenges.

--- PAGE 6 ---
272 S. Flaisch et al.
References
1. Niemi,E.,Pekkola,S.:Thebenefitsofenterprisearchitectureinorganizationaltransformation.
Bus. Inf. Syst. Eng. 62, 585–597 (2020)
2. Buckl, S., Schweda, C.M., Matthes, F.: A design theory nexus for situational enterprise
architecture management. In: 2010 14th IEEE International Enterprise Distributed Object
Computing Conference Workshops, pp. 3–8. IEEE (2010)
3. Gräf, H., Topuria, S.: The impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on industrial policy in Germany
and the European Union - the case of the automotive industry. Eur. J. Econ. Econ. Policies
22, 118–134 (2025)
4. Lange, M., Mendling, J., Recker, J.: Measuring the realization of benefits from enterprise
architecture management. J. Enterp. Arch. 8, 30–44 (2012)
5. Schmidt, C., Buxmann, P.: Outcomes and success factors of enterprise IT architecture man-
agement: empirical insight from the international financial services industry. Eur. J. Inf. Syst.
20, 168–185 (2011)
6. Mittendorf, F., Thome, A., Zeeb, S., Peters, P.: Digital architecture study 2024. Capgem-
ini Website. https://www.capgemini.com/de-de/wp-content/uploads/sites/8/2024/11/Digital-
Architecture-Study-2024_vF.pdf (2024). Accessed 27 May 2025
7. Haki, M.K., Legner, C., Ahlemann, F.: Beyond EA frameworks: towards an understanding of
theadoptionofenterprisearchitecturemanagement.In:EuropeanConferenceonInformation
Systems (ECIS) 2012 Proceedings (2012)
8. Drews, P., Schirmer, I., Horlach, B., Tekaat, C.: Bimodal enterprise architecture manage-
ment: the emergence of a new EAM function for a BizDevOps-based fast IT. In: 2017 IEEE
21st International Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Workshop (EDOCW), pp. 57–64
(2017)
9. SimonFlaisch:Relevanceandrealizationofenterprisearchitecturemanagementinasoftware
and service mobility company: an organizational case study. Bachelor Thesis, Unpublished,
https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.31410.52163 (2025)
10. Yin, R.K.: Case Study Research: Design and Methods, vol. 3. Sage (2003)
11. Runeson,P.,Host,M.,Rainer,A.,Regnell,B.:CaseStudyResearchinSoftwareEngineering:
Guidelines and examples. Wiley & Sons (2012)
12. Schuster, T., Liesen, A.: Einführung - Messniveaus. In: Statistik für Wirtschaftswis-
senschaftler. Springer Gabler Berlin, Heidelber (2017)
13. Thome, A., Feheregyhazy, M.: Enterprise architecture in an Agile World. https://www.pwc.
de/de/strategie-organisation-prozesse-systeme/enterprise-architecture-in-an-agile-world.pdf
(2021). Accessed 06 Feb 2025
14. Bente,S.,Bombosch,U.,Langade,S.:Chapter3-whatenterprisearchitectsdo:coreactivities
of EA. In: Collaborative Enterprise Architecture, pp. 39–104. Morgan Kaufmann (2012)
15. Radeke, F.: Toward understanding enterprise architecture management’s role in strategic
change:antecedents,processes,outcomes.In:10thInternationalConferenceonWirtschaftsin-
formatik Proceedings 2011 (2011)
16. Woollacott, E.: What is the C-suite? Executive roles and responsibilities. Forbes Magazine.
Forbes, https://www.forbes.com/sites/emmawoollacott/article/what-is-c-suite/ (2025)

--- PAGE 7 ---
Transitioning Towards Enterprise Architecture Management 273
Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc-nd/4.0/), which permits any noncommercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in
any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and indicate if you modified the licensed
material. You do not have permission under this license to share adapted material derived from
this chapter or parts of it.
The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter’s Creative
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the chapter’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by
statutoryregulation orexceeds the permitted use,youwill need toobtain permissiondirectly from
the copyright holder.