--- PAGE 1 ---
The Zachman Framework for Enterprise
Architecture: An Explanatory IS Theory
Aurona Gerber1,2(&)
, Pierre le Roux1
, Carike Kearney1
,
and Alta van der Merwe1
1
Department of Informatics, University of Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa
aurona.gerber@up.ac.za, pierre.leroux@moyoafrica.com
2
CAIR, Pretoria, South Africa
Abstract. Enterprise Architecture (EA) has had an interesting and often con-
troversial history since its inception in the late 80’s by pioneers such as John
Zachman. Zachman proposed the Zachman Framework for Enterprise Archi-
tecture (ZFEA), a descriptive, holistic representation of an enterprise for the
purposes of providing insights and understanding. Some scholars claim that EA
is an imperative to ensure successful business structures or business-IT align-
ment, or more recently with Enterprise Architecture Management (EAM), to
manage required organizational transformation. However, EA initiatives within
companies are often costly and the expected return on investment is not realized.
In fact, Gartner recently indicated in their 2018 Enterprise Architecture Hype
Cycle that EA is slowly emerging from the trough of disillusionment after nearly
a decade. In this paper we argue that the role and value of EA is often
misunderstood, and that EA, speciﬁcally the ZFEA for the purpose of this paper,
could be considered as a theory given the view of theory within Information
Systems (IS). The purpose of IS theories is to analyse, predict, explain and/or
prescribe and it could be argued that EA often conform to these purposes. Using
the taxonomy of theories as well as the structural components of theory within
IS as proposed by Gregor, we motivate that the ZFEA could be regarded as an
explanatory theory. Positioning ZFEA as IS explanatory theory provides insight
into the role and purpose of the ZFEA (and by extension EA), and could assist
researchers and practitioners with mediating the challenges experienced when
instituting EA and EAM initiatives within organizations.
Keywords: Zachman Framework for Enterprise Architecture  Enterprise
Architecture  IS theory  Explanatory IS theory
1 Introduction
The initial idea to describe, understand, represent and design different dimensions of
the enterprise was developed simultaneously within different disciplines in the late
eighties. During this time John Zachman, often hailed as the father of EA, deﬁned EA
as a set of descriptive representations relevant to the enterprise where an enterprise is
widely deﬁned as any socio-technical organization [1, 2]. He furthermore proposed the
Zachman Framework for Enterprise Architecture (ZFEA) that he described as a logical,
comprehensive structure “for classifying and organizing the descriptive representations
© IFIP International Federation for Information Processing 2020
Published by Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
M. Hattingh et al. (Eds.): I3E 2020, LNCS 12066, pp. 383–396, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-44999-5_32

--- PAGE 2 ---
of an Enterprise that are signiﬁcant to the management of the Enterprise as well as to
the development of the Enterprise’s systems, manual systems as well as automated
systems” [1].
Since this original establishment of EA in the late 80’s, EA has developed as a
comprehensive discipline receiving interest from researchers and practitioners. Several
frameworks were proposed, reﬁned and implemented in practice [3–9], and scholarly
research investigated the nature and impact of EA [10–16]. Recent developments in the
broad domain of EA include Enterprise Architecture Management (EAM) that elevates
EA as a strategic business function rather than an IT function within organizations, and
recent research indicate that EAM may indeed assist with organizational agility and
transformation [17–21].
EA in strategic context is directed at the current and future purposes of the orga-
nization as well as to assist in reaching organisational goals and objectives, including
ensuring that the business with its technologies and resources are aligned [10, 22].
However, enterprises often experience challenges with the implementation of EA
initiatives and capabilities [23], resulting in sentiments documented mostly in popular
press, for instance stating that EA is dead [24, 25]. EA initiatives are often costly and
without the expected return on investment. Recent blog posts, for instance, claim that
several EA frameworks or tools, speciﬁcally the ZFEA, are fake tools without any real
value [26]. In their recent 2018 Enterprise Architecture Hype Cycle Gartner found that
EA is only now, after more than a decade, emerging from the trough of disillusionment
[27].
The authors acknowledge the criticisms, but in this paper we argue that the role and
value of EA is often misunderstood, and for the purposes of this paper, we argue that
EA, speciﬁcally the ZFEA, should be considered as a theory given the perspectives on
theory adopted within Information Systems (IS). EA is relevant for the IS domain as IS
is the discipline concerned with studying socio-technical systems, and the view of
theory within IS is therefore applicable to EA. Some of the views on IS theory include
“theory as statements that say how something should be done in practice” or “theory as
statements providing a lens for viewing or explaining the world”. The purpose of IS
theories is to analyse, predict, explain and/or prescribe and it could be argued that the
intent of EA often conforms to these purposes.
For this paper we focus on the ZFEA primarily and we support this selection by
analysing the foundational aspects of EA. We subsequently adopt the fundamental
view about the nature of theories within IS by Gregor. We adopted the taxonomy of
theories as well as the structural components of theory within IS as proposed by Gregor
[28] to analyse the ZFEA. The main research question answered by this study can be
stated as follows: Given the nature and structure of theories within IS, could the ZFEA
be considered as a theory? Similar to the method used by Gregor to evaluate ﬁve types
of theory in IS, we evaluate the ZFEA [28]. By establishing whether ZFEA, and by
extension, EA in general, could be regarded as IS theories, we believe that insight on
what function EA should fulﬁl, as well as the use and position of EA and its frame-
works and tools, speciﬁcally given the strategic developments such as EAM, could be
enhanced.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In the next sections on related
work we provide overviews on EA, the ZFEA and IS theories. We then analyse the
384 A. Gerber et al.

--- PAGE 3 ---
foundations of EA and motivate the choice of ZFEA for the purpose of this paper. We
subsequently analyse the ZFEA given the nature of IS theories (taxonomy and struc-
ture) by Gregor, and we ﬁnally conclude.
2 Background
Within this background section we provide a short introduction to EA as well as the
ZFEA, followed by the background necessary for IS theory as is relevant for this paper.
2.1 Enterprise Architecture
EA originally developed from the need to align the business and information tech-
nology aspects of the organisation with one another [12], but has since advanced to be
viewed from more than one perspective and for more than one application [10]. EA
developed from more than one discipline with differing terminology, seeking mostly
similar goals such as organisational alignment, integration, and ability to understand
and manage complexity and change [16, 29]. Several deﬁnitions for EA exist, such as
that EA is the continuous practice of describing the essential elements of a socio‐
technical organization, their relationships to each other and to the environment, in order
to understand complexity and manage change [30]. Urbaczewski and Mrdalj deﬁned
EA as a description or blueprint that deﬁnes the day-to-day operation and structure of
an organization [3], and Zachman himself deﬁned EA as a set of descriptive repre-
sentations relevant to the enterprise [31]. EA is directed at ensuring that the business
with its technologies and resources, as well as the current and future purposes of the
organization are aligned. Since its inception, several different EA frameworks were
developed from different perspectives and disciplines. Due to space limitations, we will
mostly focus on the ZFEA, however, several works on the history, evolution, purpose
of, and recent developments within EA are included as references [3, 12, 13, 16, 17,
32–38]. In Sect. 4 we analyse the grounding of the EA discipline to motivate the choice
of the ZFEA for this paper, and in the next section a short overview of ZFEA is
provided.
2.2 The Zachman Framework for Enterprise Architecture (ZFEA)
John Zachman is widely acknowledged as the father of EA [16, 39]. Borrowing from
the ﬁeld of engineering, Zachman described how insight into different disciplines and
the manufacturing process contributed to the ZFEA [1, 40]. Zachman describes the
breakthrough that led to his now well-known ZFEA as the realisation of the existence
of different perspectives relevant to a product, which he then applied to an enterprise
[39]. The ZFEA was designed after observing that various engineered objects such as
computers, buildings and airplanes (the designed artefacts) can be classiﬁed according
to the fundamental abstractions or interrogatives namely What? How? Where? Who?
When? Why?, in columns (Table 1), as well as speciﬁc audience perspectives and
transformations in rows (Table 2) [1]. The ZFEA (Fig. 1), is therefore a 6  6 two-
dimensional classiﬁcation schema for designing descriptive representations of the
The Zachman Framework for Enterprise Architecture: An Explanatory IS Theory 385

--- PAGE 4 ---
enterprise. The ZFEA is also described as an enterprise ontology with no process or
tooling implications [41], or a meta-model of an enterprise represented in a matrix
comprised of columns and rows. Each intersection of a column and row provides a
unique representation or view of the enterprise [1].
Fig. 1. The Zachman Framework for Enterprise Architecture (ZFEA) (reproduced from [1])
Table 1. Summary of the ZFEA interrogatives (abstractions) [1].
Interrogative
(Columns)
Description
What (Data) What information, business data and objects are involved?
How (Function) How does it work? (process flows)
Where (Network) Where are the components located? (network models/distribution
networks)
Who (People) Who are involved? (workflow models or responsibility assignments)
When (Time) When do things happen? (timing cycles)
Why (Motivation) What is the motivation? (business drivers, motivation intensions)
386 A. Gerber et al.

--- PAGE 5 ---
2.3 Information Systems Theory
In a seminal work on IS theory, Gregor investigated the nature of theory in Information
Systems both with regards to theory types and theory components [28]. Gregor
emphasized the importance of developing good theory and highlighted the limited
discussions regarding the nature of theory as well as the structural components of
different types of theories in IS. Theory allows for different perspectives and aims to
enhance our understanding of the world by providing explanations, descriptions, pre-
dictions and actionable guidance [28]. Gregor’s work is foundational for almost all
discussions about theory in IS [42–46].
Gregor identiﬁed some core aspects for developing and classifying IS theories [28]:
• Causality (cause and effect): Certain circumstances or events will have certain
outcomes. It might be required in some instances to determine the cause of an event
to provide an explanation. The same is true for predictions, insights into the cause
influences the prediction.
• Generalization: An aspect or characteristic can be applied across a range of speciﬁc
scenarios, places, people, etc. The degree of generalization determines different
viewpoints. Generalization applied to a focused area is required for prediction, as
without generalizations about the past or the present, a prediction about the future
state is difﬁcult to make. Gregor did not use generalization for classifying theory
types.
• Prediction: Future occurrences are dependent on preconditions to realise.
• Explanation: Theory aimed at providing understanding on the how, why and when
of an occurrence relating to human reasoning and argumentation.
Gregor furthermore proposed a classiﬁcation scheme or taxonomy of IS theory
types. The primary goal of a theory is directly related to a question or a problem that
need to be solved. Theories are developed for the purposes of analysis and description,
prediction, explanation and prescription, and these goals were used to produce a
Table 2. Summary of the ZFEA perspectives [1].
Perspective (Rows) Description
Executive (Planner) Contextual View. Deﬁnes the limits for all remaining
perspectives
Business Manager or
CEO (Owner)
Conceptual View. This perspective is concerned with the business
itself
Architect (Designer) Physical View. The architect or person responsible for narrowing
the gap between what is required versus what is physically and
technically possible
Engineer (Builder) Represents the perspective of the enterprise engineers interested
in ‘building’ or designing the building blocks identiﬁed by the
architecture
Technician Represents the perspective of the business technicians such as the
database implementers and the workflow system implementers
User (Enterprise) Represents the perspective of the running/functioning enterprise
The Zachman Framework for Enterprise Architecture: An Explanatory IS Theory 387

--- PAGE 6 ---
Table 3. A taxonomy of theory types in information systems research (reproduced from [28])
Theory type Distinguishing attributes
I. Analysis Says what is: Focuses on analysis and description only. An
analysis theory does not include predictions, or indication of
causal relationships among occurrences/events/objects
II. Explanation Says what is, how, why, when and where: The main aim is one of
explanation and to provide understanding. The theory provides
explanations but does not aim to predict with any precision. The
theory is not testable
III. Prediction Says what is and what will be: The theory provides predictions
and has testable propositions but does not have well-developed
justiﬁcatory causal explanations
IV. Explanation and
Prediction (EP)
Says what is, how, why, when, where and what will be: Provides
predictions and has both testable propositions and causal
explanations
V. Design and action Says how to do something: The theory gives explicit
prescriptions (e.g. methods, techniques, principles of form and
function) for constructing an artefact or complex object
Table 4. Structural components of theory (reproduced from [28])
Theory components
(Common to all theory)
Deﬁnition
Means of representation A physical representation of theory. This might include
mathematical terms, symbolic logic, tables, diagrams, graphs,
illustrations, models, prototypes
Constructs The focus point or object of the theory. All primary
constructs in the theory should be well deﬁned. Many
different types of constructs are possible e.g. observational
(real) terms, theoretical (nominal) terms and collective terms
Statements of relationship The nature of the relationship among the constructs depends
on the purpose of the theory. Types of relationships:
associative, conditional, compositional, unidirectional,
bidirectional or causal
Scope The scope is speciﬁed by the degree of generality of the
statements of relationships and statements of boundaries
showing the limits of generalization
Theory components
(Contingent on theory type)
Deﬁnition
Causal explanations The theory gives statements of relationships among
occurrences/events/objects that show causal reasoning (not
covering law or probabilistic reasoning alone)
Testable propositions
(hypotheses)
Relationships between objects/events (constructs) can be
tested by means of observation or experience
Prescriptive statements The theory provides a method or guidance on how to
accomplish something in practice e.g. construct a complex
object or develop a strategy
388 A. Gerber et al.

--- PAGE 7 ---
taxonomy of theory types in IS (Table 3) as well as the components of a IS theory
(Table 4) [28]. Gregor furthermore classiﬁed ﬁve different IS theories according to the
taxonomy and structural components [28], and for this paper, we adopt the method
used by Gregor to evaluate the ZFEA as will be discussed in Sect. 4.
3 Motivation for Using the ZFEA
In this section we motivate the selection to use the ZFEA in this paper as representative
of EA in general. An understanding of the origins and the thinking underpinning EA
has relevance for this paper as it provides the foundation for EA concepts and
frameworks, and provides the motivation for using the ZFEA as representative of the
structural and ontological aspects of EA in general. Le Roux [47] adopted the approach
of Baskerville and Dulipovici [48] to investigate the theoretical grounding of EA, and
indicated that the theoretical base for EA emerged from more than one ﬁeld. The results
of this analysis are summarised in Table 5. These results support the legitimacy of the
discipline and support the use of EA as a theoretical base. If the ZFEA is a repre-
sentative of this theoretical underpinning, we could motivate the use of the ZFEA for
this paper.
Table 5. Summary of works relating to EA origins and their basis of argument
Author Basis from which the underlying business problems of alignment, control,
efﬁciency and management of change are addressed
Taylor [49] The business system would have to be placed before the individual, and that
scientiﬁc management was needed to ensure this is possible. Efﬁciency
through interaction of individuals. Organisation as a holistic entity. Holistic
system before the individual
Shewhart
[50]
From industrial engineering emphasized organizational control to enable
adaption. Past experience and process
Forrester
[51]
Motivate an underlying base to understand the business system as a whole for
organizational management. Discuss the elements of the organisation and
interactions between elements
Drucker [52] Business management motivation that argue for system as a whole broken
into elements, as well as the interactions between elements
Blumenthal
[53]
Holistic systems planning to adapt to change, focus on IT systems within
organisations. Underlying elements and interaction between elements is an
enablement factor. Proposed a framework for planning
Helfert [54] Financial management perspective emphasizes resource flows with a holistic
platform/system from which to understand flows. The organisation is the
complete set of individual resource flows
Anthony
[55]
A business system consists of diverse individual parts that all contribute to or
serve a speciﬁc purpose. Framework to understand organisational concepts
and their contribution
Senge [56] Emphasizes the system as a whole, with 5 elements of technology that are
interdependent, and the interrelationships of system elements. Acknowledged
by Zachman
The Zachman Framework for Enterprise Architecture: An Explanatory IS Theory 389

--- PAGE 8 ---
As indicated in Table 5, systems theory and systems thinking underpin much of the
theoretical base of EA. Systems thinking supports a way of thinking about the
organisation as a whole while also considering system parts with their interactions [56,
57]. Systems theory provides a theoretical base from which to model the complete
organisation as well as elements and interrelationships between elements [16]. The
underpinning of systems thinking is furthermore distinguishable in EA in general as
published by Lapalme [10], Simon et al. [16] and others [3, 38, 39].
As stated, the ZFEA is one of the original EA frameworks developed by Zachman
in the late 80’s [2] with origins in engineering, speciﬁcally systems thinking and
systems theory [10, 16]. Given the theoretical groundings of EA, speciﬁcally the
adoption of systems theory and systems thinking as established by le Roux [47] in
Table 5, we could motivate that the ZFEA, which is fundamentally based on systems
thinking, is in general representative of EA for the purpose of the investigation reported
on in this paper.
4 The ZFEA as IS Theory
For the purposes of this paper, the ZFEA is mapped to Gregor’s theory taxonomy as
well as the structural components of theory to determine if the framework can serve as
an IS theory. The ﬁrst step is to classify the ZFEA as one of the theory types in the
theory taxonomy of Table 3. According to Gregor it is required to look at the primary
goals of the theory in order to classify it [28]. The ZFEA is a structural representation
or an ontology of an organization and all its elements with their relationships that is
descriptive in nature. The ZFEA is directed at providing understanding and insight [58]
with no process or tooling speciﬁcations [41]. It is depicted as a 6  6 two dimensional
schema.
In the descriptions of Gregor’s theory types taxonomy the last theory type (Type V
Theory (design and action)) say ‘how to do something’ and the one thing the ZFEA
does not do, is to specify a process and modelling approach clearly. This is one of the
biggest criticisms against the ZFEA, and the ZFEA is therefore not a Type V Theory.
The descriptions of Gregor’s ﬁrst four theory types all specify that the theory
specify ‘What is’ so in order to be one of the ﬁrst four theory types, the ZFEA need to
conform to this characteristic [28]. Zachman claimed the ZFEA is ‘The Enterprise
Ontology’ or ‘a theory of the existence of a structured set of essential components of an
object for which explicit expressions is necessary and perhaps even mandatory for
creating, operating, and changing the object (the object being an Enterprise, a
department, a value chain, a “sliver,” a solution, a project, an airplane, a building, a
product, a profession or whatever or whatever)’. According to Zachman, the archi-
tecture built using the ZFEA schema would necessarily constitute the total set of
descriptive representations that are relevant for describing the enterprise [1, 31]. From
these descriptions it can be argued that the ZFEA’s intent is clearly one of describing
‘What is’, so it is one of the ﬁrst four theory types. We now need to determine which
one.
The ZFEA does extend beyond ‘analysis and description’ (Type I Theory) by
providing explanations (i.e. ‘say what is, how, why when and where’), but the ZFEA
390 A. Gerber et al.

--- PAGE 9 ---
does not aim to predict with precision, which is typical of a Type II Theory. The ZFEA
furthermore does not say ‘what is and what will be’ and neither does the ZFEA have
testable propositions (characteristics of a Type III Theory). The ZFEA aims to support
causal explanation but does not pose direct quantitative causal explanations (the nature
of Type IV Theories). From the above we could therefore argue that the ZFEA’s goal
and intent matches that of a Type II or Explanatory Theory that ‘says what is, how,
why, when and where’. A Type II Theory furthermore ‘provides explanation, but does
not aim to predict with any precision. There are no testable propositions’.
According to Gregor’s taxonomy descriptions, the ZFEA can be regarded as an
explanatory theory since the primary goals of the ZFEA conforms to those of an
explanatory theory as discussed above. The next step is to analyse whether it is possible
to identify the theory components of an IS theory depicted in Table 4 as is done by
Gregor for the classiﬁcation of theory types [28]. We followed the exact method of
Gregor and this analysis is presented in Table 6.
Table 6. ZFEA and the theory components of Gregor [28].
Theory overview
The ZFEA is an ontology, a 6  6 two-dimensional schema and a structure that is descriptive
in nature. The architecture of a speciﬁc enterprise that was developed using the ZFEA schema
or ontology would necessarily constitute the total set of descriptive representations that are
relevant for describing the enterprise
Theory component Instantiation: ZFEA
Means of representation Conforms: Words, tables, diagrams, the ZFEA is a 6  6 matrix
consisting of a diagram and tables with accompanying
descriptions
Primary constructs Conforms: The complex object is the enterprise with its strategy,
technology, processes, people, roles, etc. A holistic view is
displayed. Objects are viewed from different perspectives and
interrogative abstractions
Statements of
relationship
Conforms: Relationships between the audience perspectives and
interrogative abstractions are speciﬁed as transformations, and
within each cell primitives have predeﬁned relationships.
Relationships in the ZFEA (and EA in general) are very
comprehensive i.e. dependent, associated, linked, bi-directional or
multi-directional, etc.
Scope Conforms: The scope is speciﬁed by the degree of generality of
the statements of relationships. The ZFEA is a general schema
that aims to provide a holistic view of any enterprise or engineered
(complex) object and a very high level of generality is proposed.
Generalization was part of the ZFEA development as the schema
is derived from observing many different objects and industries
Causal explanations Conforms: The ZFEA attempts to give statements of relationships
among phenomena (represented by the rows and columns in the
matrix). The ZFEA aims to support causal explanations
(continued)
The Zachman Framework for Enterprise Architecture: An Explanatory IS Theory 391

--- PAGE 10 ---
Given the results of the analyses, the conclusion can be made that the ZFEA could
be regarded as an explanatory theory. An explanatory theory aims to provide an
understanding on how, when and why an occurrence took place based on causality and
argumentation. The ZFEA is aligned as its intent is to provide insights into the how,
when and why of an enterprise. The ZFEA is represented in the form of a framework in
order to provide a holistic view, but at the same time provides insights given speciﬁc
perspectives. Each row, column and cell in the architecture is impacted by another e.g.
the technology supports the business processes, the business processes the applications
and the applications the strategy. Changes in any model will have an effect on the other
models. Changes in strategy (cause) for example, will have an impact (effect) on the
rest of the enterprise. All components form part of the whole to provide context. The
scope is deﬁned by the subset or component being designed. The ZFEA is described as
an ontology and a structural schema that aims to be a repeatable and testable
description of an enterprise. It can be argued that the main goals of the ZFEA is aligned
to the goals of an explanatory theory since both aim to provide insight, understanding
and causal explanations, as well as indicate relationships among components.
5 Conclusion
In this paper we motivate that the ZFEA could be regarded as an explanatory IS theory
given the nature of theory in IS as proposed by Gregor [28]. The paper ﬁrstly discussed
the need for EA and how the need for a descriptive representation of an enterprise
stems from multiple disciplines. Based on the origins of EA, it is clear that EA was
initially developed for the purpose of fulﬁlling the strategic need for a holistic repre-
sentation of an enterprise that can be used as a common guideline to understand and
compare organizations. The paper addressed certain criticisms pertaining to the origins,
Table 6. (continued)
Theory component Instantiation: ZFEA
Testable propositions
(hypotheses)
Does not conform: Statements of relationships between constructs
that are stated in such a form that they can be tested empirically
are not present. Zachman states that the model should not be
applied deterministically but that it is an ontology that is
repeatable and testable (such as the periodic table), however, there
is not yet evidence of the ZFEA being implemented in such a way.
An explanatory theory typically do not conform to this component
Prescriptive statements Does not conform: Statements in the theory specify how people
can accomplish something in practice (e.g., construct an artefact or
develop a strategy). This is somewhat supported by the ZFEA as
the purpose of the ZFEA is to model an enterprise by using the
interrogatives and perspectives, however, detailed process or
method is not supported. An explanatory theory typically do not
conform to this component
392 A. Gerber et al.

--- PAGE 11 ---
purpose and functionality of EA. EA, speciﬁcally the ZFEA, is often misunderstood, as
it is not a methodology and does not provide steps on the implementation of an
architecture.
Many different Enterprise Architecture Frameworks (EAF) addressing different
business needs are available for use today, but for the purposes of this paper the
framework of choice was the ZFEA. The ZFEA is an ontology and a two-dimensional
schema aimed at providing a descriptive representation of a complex object [31]. As
mentioned, the ZFEA’s primary purpose is to provide a holistic understanding, thus
supporting the argument of ZFEA serving as an explanatory IS theory.
ZFEA as explanatory theory provides a fresh perspective on how EA can be
viewed, not as a methodology, but as a theory providing a lens for viewing or
explaining an enterprise. As stated by Gregor, ‘theory allows for different perspectives
and aims to enhance our understanding of the world by providing explanations,
descriptions, predictions and actionable guidance’. Positioning the ZFEA as IS theory
provides insight into the role and purpose of EA and could assist researchers and
practitioners with addressing challenges experienced when instituting EA and EAM
initiatives within organizations. EA as an explanatory IS theory for organisations also
present a new platform, context and therefore perspective, for focussed strategic
organisational research. Further research would extend the analysis of EA as IS theory
to other frameworks, as well as explore the implications when using EA as theory. We
furthermore want to investigate whether the ZFEA as meta-ontology for enterprises,
may be considered as a meta-theory for organisational research.
References
1. Zachman, J.A.: The framework for enterprise architecture: background, description and utility
(2016). https://www.zachman.com/resources/ea-articles-reference/327-the-framework-for-enterpr
ise-architecture-background-description-and-utility-by-john-a-zachman
2. Zachman, J.: A framework for information systems architecture. IBM Syst. J. 26, 276–292
(1987)
3. Urbaczewski, L., Mrdalj, S.: A comparison of enterprise architecture frameworks. Int.
J. Manag. Rev. 07, 18–23 (2006)
4. The Open Group: TOGAF®, an Open Group Standard. http://www.opengroup.org/
subjectareas/enterprise/togaf. Accessed 05 Jan 2018
5. Adenuga, O.A., Kekwaletswe, R.M.: Towards a framework for a uniﬁed enterprise
architecture. IJCIT 03, 30–33 (2012)
6. OMG: ArchiMate® 3.0.1 Speciﬁcation. The Open Group (2016). http://pubs.opengroup.org/
architecture/archimate3-doc/
7. IFIP-IFAC Task Force: GERAM : Generalised Enterprise Reference Architecture and
Methodology, Version 1.6.3. Integration, IFIP–IFAC Task Force on Architectures for
Enterprise (1999)
8. Federal Enterprise Architecture Framework. https://web.archive.org/web/20141030032759/
http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/ﬁles/omb/assets/egov_docs/fea_v2.pdf. Accessed
30 Oct 2019
The Zachman Framework for Enterprise Architecture: An Explanatory IS Theory 393

--- PAGE 12 ---
9. DODAF - DOD Architecture Framework Version 2.02 - DOD Deputy Chief Information
Ofﬁcer. https://dodcio.defense.gov/library/dod-architecture-framework/. Accessed 30 Oct
2019
10. Lapalme, J.: Three schools of thought on enterprise architecture. IT Prof. 14, 37–43 (2012).
https://doi.org/10.1109/MITP.2011.109
11. Lapalme, J., de Guerre, D.: An open socio-technical systems approach to enterprise
architecture. In: Gøtze, J., Jensen-Waud, A. (eds.) Beyond Alignment: Applying Systems
Thinking to Architecting Enterprises. College Publications, London (2013)
12. Lapalme, J., Gerber, A., van der Merwe, A., de Vries, M., Hinkelmann, K.: Exploring the
future of enterprise architecture: a Zachman perspective. Comput. Ind. 79, 103–113 (2016)
13. de Vries, M., Gerber, A., van der Merwe, A.: The nature of the enterprise engineering
discipline. In: Aveiro, D., Tribolet, J., Gouveia, D. (eds.) EEWC 2014. LNBIP, vol. 174,
pp. 1–15. Springer, Cham (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-06505-2_1
14. Rouhani, B.D., Mahrin, M.N., Nikpay, F., Ahmad, R.B., Nikfard, P.: A systematic literature
review on enterprise architecture implementation methodologies. Inf. Softw. Technol. 62, 1–
20 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2015.01.012
15. Lankhorst, M. (ed.): Enterprise Architecture At Work: Modelling, Communication, and
Analysis. Springer, Heidelberg (2005). https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-27505-3
16. Simon, D., Fischbach, K.: An exploration of enterprise architecture research. CAIS –
Commun. AIS 32 (2013)
17. Aier, S., Gleichauf, B., Winter, R.: Understanding enterprise architecture management
design - an empirical analysis (2011)
18. Rahimi, F., Gotze, J., Moller, C.: Enterprise architecture management: toward a taxonomy of
applications. Commun. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 40, 120–166 (2017)
19. Ernst, A.M.: Enterprise architecture management patterns. Presented at the (2008). https://
doi.org/10.1145/1753196.1753205
20. Wißotzki, M., Koç, H., Weichert, T., Sandkuhl, K.: Development of an enterprise
architecture management capability catalog. In: Kobyliński, A., Sobczak, A. (eds.) BIR
2013. LNBIP, vol. 158, pp. 112–126. Springer, Heidelberg (2013). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-642-40823-6_10
21. Matthes, F., Buckl, S., Leitel, J., Schweda, C.M.: Enterprise architecture management tool
survey 2008 (2008)
22. Hinkelmann, K., Gerber, A., Karagiannis, D., Thoenssen, B., van der Merwe, A., Woitsch,
R.: A new paradigm for the continuous alignment of business and IT: combining enterprise
architecture modelling and enterprise ontology. Comput. Ind. 79, 77–86 (2016). https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.compind.2015.07.009
23. Lange, M., Mendling, J., Recker, J.: An empirical analysis of the factors and measures of
enterprise architecture management success. Eur. J. Inf. Syst. 26, 411 (2016). https://doi.org/
10.1057/s41303-016-0001-6
24. McLeod, J.: Enterprise architecture is dead. https://medium.com/@JonMcLeodEA/
enterprise-architecture-is-dead-33dd0e63cbbf. Accessed 30 Oct 2019
25. Bloomberg, J.: Is enterprise architecture completely broken? https://www.forbes.com/sites/
jasonbloomberg/2014/07/11/is-enterprise-architecture-completely-broken/. Accessed 30 Oct
2019
26. Kotusev, S.: Fake and real tools for enterprise architecture. https://www.iqpc.com/events-
enterprisearchitecture/blog/fake-and-real-tools-for-enterprise-architecture. Accessed 30 Oct
2019
27. Santos, J., Allega, P.: Hype Cycle for Enterprise Architecture, 2018. Gartner (2018)
28. Gregor, S.: The nature of theory in information systems. MIS Q. 30, 611–642 (2006). https://
doi.org/10.2307/25148742
394 A. Gerber et al.

--- PAGE 13 ---
29. Bernus, P., Nemes, L., Schmidt, G.: Handbook on Enterprise Architecture. Springer,
Heidelberg (2003). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-24744-9
30. van der Merwe, A., Gerber, A., Kotze, P., van der Merwe, P., Mentz, J.: EARF - EA
Deﬁnition. http://earf.meraka.org.za/earfhome/our‐projects‐1/completed‐projects
31. Zachman, J.A.: The concise deﬁnition of the zachman framework (2008). https://www.
zachman.com/about-the-zachman-framework
32. Niemi, E., Pekkola, S.: The beneﬁts of enterprise architecture in organizational transfor-
mation. Bus. Inf. Syst. Eng. (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/s12599-019-00605-3
33. Tamm, T., Seddon, P.B., Shanks, G., Reynolds, P.: How does enterprise architecture add
value to organisations? Commun. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 28 (2011). https://doi.org/10.17705/
1CAIS.02810
34. Hafsi, M., Assar, S.: What enterprise architecture can bring for digital transformation. IEEE
(2016)
35. Winter, R., Fischer, R.: Essential layers, artifacts, and dependencies of enterprise
architecture. In: 2006 10th IEEE International Enterprise Distributed Object Computing
Conference Workshops (EDOCW 2006), p. 30. IEEE, Hong Kong (2006). https://doi.org/10.
1109/EDOCW.2006.33
36. Rogers, C.: Proposed enterprise architecture solutions for Industry 4.0 manufacturing
simulation information assets based on TOGAF. University of Denver University College
(2016)
37. Buckl, S., Ernst, A.M., Matthes, F., Ramacher, R., Schweda, C.M.: Using enterprise
architecture management patterns to complement TOGAF. Presented at the September
(2009). https://doi.org/10.1109/EDOC.2009.30
38. Aier, S., Kurpjuweit, S., Saat, J., Winter, R.: Enterprise architecture design as an engineering
discipline. AIS Trans. Enterp. Syst. 1, 8 (2009)
39. Lin, F., Dyck, H.: The value of implementing enterprise architecture in organizations. J. Int.
Technol. Inf. Manag. 19 (2010)
40. Zachman, J.A.: Enterprise Architecture: Notes on The Zachman Framework (2012). www.
zachman.com
41. Kappelman, L.A., Zachman, J.A.: The enterprise and its architecture: ontology and
challenges. J. Comput. Inf. Syst. 1–16 (2012)
42. Gregor, S.: Theory – still king but needing a revolution! J. Inf. Technol. 29, 337–340 (2014).
https://doi.org/10.1057/jit.2014.22
43. Urquhart, C., Lehmann, H., Myers, M.D.: Putting the ‘theory’ back into grounded theory:
guidelines for grounded theory studies in information systems: guidelines for grounded
theory studies in information systems. Inf. Syst. J. 20, 357–381 (2009). https://doi.org/10.
1111/j.1365-2575.2009.00328.x
44. Iivari, J.: Information systems as a design science. In: Vasilecas, O., Wojtkowski, W.,
Zupančič, J., Caplinskas, A., Wojtkowski, W.G., Wrycza, S. (eds.) Information Systems
Development, pp. 15–27. Springer, Boston (2005). https://doi.org/10.1007/0-387-28809-0_2
45. Andrade, A.D.: Interpretive research aiming at theory building: adopting and adapting the
case study design (2009)
46. Dennis, A.: An unhealthy obsession with theory. J. Assoc. Inf. Syst. (2019)
47. le Roux, P.: Enterprise architecture as conceptual support framework for small to medium
enterprise growth: a South African study (2019)
48. Baskerville, R., Dulipovici, A.: The theoretical foundations of knowledge management.
Knowl. Manag. Res. Pract. 4, 83–105 (2006). https://doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.kmrp.
8500090
49. Taylor, F.W.: The Principles of Scientiﬁc Management. Harper, New York (1911)
The Zachman Framework for Enterprise Architecture: An Explanatory IS Theory 395

--- PAGE 14 ---
50. Shewhart, W.A.: Economic Control of Quality of Manufactured Product. Van Nostrand,
New York (1931)
51. Forrester, J.W.: Industrial Dynamics. MIT Press, Cambridge (1961)
52. Drucker, P.F.: The Practice of Management. Pan, London (1968)
53. Blumenthal, S.C.: Management Information Systems: A Framework for Planning and
Development. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs (1969)
54. Helfert, E.A.: Techniques of Financial Analysis. Irwin-Dorsey, Georgetown (1972)
55. Anthony, R.N.: Planning and Control Systems: A Framework for Analysis. Harvard
University Press, Boston (1979)
56. Senge, P.M.: The Fifth Discipline: The Art and Practice of the Learning Organisation.
Random House, London (1990)
57. Checkland, P.: Systems Thinking, Systems Practice. Wiley, Chichester (1981)
58. Zachman, J.: Enterprise architecture: the issue of the century (1996)
396 A. Gerber et al.