--- PAGE 1 ---
HAL Id: hal-03434646
https://inria.hal.science/hal-03434646v1
Submitted on 18 Nov 2021
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive
for the deposit and dissemination of scientific re-
search documents, whether they arepublished or not.
Thedocumentsmaycomefromteachingandresearch
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or pri-
vate research centers.
L’archiveouvertepluridisciplinaireHAL,estdes-
tinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents scien-
tifiquesdeniveaurecherche, publiésounon, émanant
des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche
français ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou
privés.
Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 - Attribution - International License
Integrating Risk Representation at Strategic Level for IT
Service Governance: A Comprehensive Framework
Aghakhani Ghazaleh, Yves Wautelet, Manuel Kolp, Samedi Heng
To cite this version:
AghakhaniGhazaleh, YvesWautelet, ManuelKolp, SamediHeng. IntegratingRiskRepresentationatStrategic
Level for IT Service Governance: A Comprehensive Framework. 13th IFIP WG 8.1 Working Conference on
the Practice of Enterprise Modeling (PoEM 2020), Nov 2020, Riga, Latvia. pp.307-322, ⟨10.1007/978-3-030-
63479-7_21⟩. ⟨hal-03434646⟩

--- PAGE 2 ---
Integrating Risk Representation at Strategic Level for
IT Service Governance: A Comprehensive Framework
Aghakhani Ghazaleh1
, Yves Wautelet2
, Manuel Kolp1
, and Samedi Heng3
1
UCLouvain, Louvain-La-Neuve, Belgium
{ghazaleh.aghakhani, manuel.kolp}@uclouvain.be,
2
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
yves.wautelet@kuleuven.be,
3
HEC Liège, Université de Liège, Liège, Belgium
samedi.heng@uliege.be
Abstract. Organizations tend to set and pursuit objectives against an environ-
ment which faces levels of uncertainty. The effect of these uncertainties on objec-
tives can be positive (opportunity risk) or/and negative (hazard risk). With every
decision made by people within a company, risks are created, modified, updated
or deleted. Therefore, the way these decisions are made in terms of change man-
agement strategy as well as the information they are based on, influence how
objectives are achieved and requirements fulfilled. Despite the importance of risk
definition and risk taking at all organizational levels, organizations mostly con-
sider risk at the management and operational levels. Risks nevertheless also need
to be considered at the strategic (governance) level because they constitute what
hampers an organization to achieve its strategy. This paper focuses on risk at the
strategic level and for this purpose it enriches the Model Driven IT Governance
(MoDrIGo) framework; the enriched framework allows to evaluate the alignment
of business IT services with strategic objectives while balancing this alignmen-
t/support with the potential risk at governance level. All in all, the framework is
applicable in broader governance scenarios. The relevance of MoDrIGo as start-
ing point to build a risk-aware governance framework (compared to other sim-
ilar methods) is mainly because of its service-orientation and its focus on soft-
ware development issues. The enhanced framework thus provides a high-level
risk overview that helps organizations to successfully perceive, detect and treat
risks when pursuing their objectives.
Keywords: Strategic Risk; Risk Governance; Risk Appetite; Strategic Risk Modelling
1 Introduction
Organizations face an uncertain, increasingly complex and challenging environment.
This has brought the concept of risk to a higher profile [22]. In an organizational con-
text, risk is usually referred to as anything that can influence the fulfilment of corporate
objectives [22]. Such risk may impede what the organization is seeking to achieve (haz-
ard risk), cause uncertainty about the outcomes (control risk) or enhance their goal
(opportunity risk) [22]. Being ultimately responsible for the organization’s business
performance, value creation and decision making (all associated with risk), the Board
of Directors (BoD) is responsible for managing such risk by governing risk through
overseeing, directing, as well as setting policies and monitoring performance [12].
On the other hand, every business decision involves risk [12]. Organizations deliber-
ately take risks in order to gain a positive return in the context of gaining competitive

--- PAGE 3 ---
2 Aghakhani Ghazaleh et al.
advantage. These risks can be considered as speculative risks or opportunities, and an
organization has a specific appetite to invest in such risks [22]. Balancing risk with
acceptable reward for creating value without jeopardizing the organization has been a
challenge for boards and senior management [12]. Therefore, it is crucial to understand
the corporate exposure to risk and govern it properly [12]. According to [14], “a sound
risk governance allows for the articulation of how, in the context of its risks, a com-
pany is able to achieve its business objectives, formulate its value proposition, assess
its risk tolerance, and design its processes with respect to the reasonable expectations
of stakeholders”
Traditional risk management approaches do not necessarily detect future strategic
risks or anticipate future performance. Hence, rather than creating value, they are more
focused on its protection [33]. In previous approaches risk has been addressed rather
at the operational and management levels; risk is often tackled well at the operational
level by taking appropriate precautions and insurance against events such as fire, theft,
vehicle damage, and employee accidents. More precisely, risks that are internal to the
organization are usually identified from experience, brainstorming sessions or risk lists,
registers and taxonomies. At the managerial level, risks tend to be less well-handled
because they are not so obvious to recognize. Loss of profits following an incident,
product liability, reputational loss, and failure of management information systems are
examples of such risks. Risks at the strategic level, however, may not be identified at
all, even by top management, which can lead to negative impacts on the achievement
of the long term objectives leading to the failure of the overall strategy [12]. In order to
address this gap, this paper aims to address different aspects of risk treatment at the gov-
ernance level. For that, we will enhance the Model-Driven IT Governance (MoDrIGo)
framework of Wautelet [37], an existing model driven strategic framework, with risk
concepts in order to better identify what are the different aspects of risk at the strategic
level and better taking this into account for decision making.
2 Research Positioning and Objectives
2.1 Research Questions
The complex and fast evolution of the business environment has led to the emergence
of a growing focus on risk management [17]. The focus is expanded to the broader,
enterprise-wide risks faced by companies [17]. This especially includes strategic risks
as their identification is important for the successful achievement of a business strategy
[12]. Being in the paradigm of Design Science Research, we aim to bring a solution/en-
hancement to the identified problem of strategic-level risk identification, representation
and treatment. Subsequently, we will use the identified risks to balance business-IT
service adaptation based on Business IT Alignment (BITA). For that, this paper aims
to answer the following question: How can we use the identified risk concepts at the
strategic level to balance business IT service adoption decisions based on BITA?
2.2 The Choice of MoDrIGo
The relevance of MoDrIGo for this research results from its internal qualities when
compared to three other similar frameworks on the basis of five important criteria. We
used google scholar to find these frameworks and narrowed the research by selecting
frameworks that focus on BITA and that are goal-oriented or/and industry-adopted. We

--- PAGE 4 ---
Security and Risk as Governance Concerns: A Meta-Model 3
Table 1. A comparative analysis of MoDrIGo and other competing methods
Criteria
Model or
Framework
Stakeholder-oriented
Support
for BITA
(Strategy and goal)-oriented Service-driven
Focus of software
development issues
MoDrIGo [37] X X X X X
B-SCP [7] X X X - X
ArchiMate [32] X X X - -
SOARE [6] - - X - -
compared these frameworks based on five criteria that we assume crucial for a frame-
work to embrace the strategic risk aspects:
Stakeholder-oriented refers to the consideration of all parties that are impacted by the
future success or failure of an organization. This is especially important for us as we
should identify the stakeholders who are affected by risk (i.e. who are responsible to
take risk, perceive risk, mitigate risk, treat risk, etc.).
(Strategy and goal)-oriented refers to the focus on the strategies pursued by an orga-
nization. It allows to model strategic goals desired by some stakeholders and aimed to
lead the organization to an enhanced competitive position. Having such characteristic
is crucial for a risk aware framework as it allows to capture the impact of risks on a
strategic goal as well as the amount of risk that the organization is willing to take in
order to achieve such goal.
Service-driven refers to the delimitation of a software system entities into coarse-
grained elements called services. The latter do have a seamless and tightly integrated
interaction [11]. Services are well suited elements for software governance on one side
[37] but also for forward engineering (i.e. transformation) and traceability on the other
side [39]. Being service-oriented, a framework thus allows to (i) use identified risk el-
ements for (strategic) decision (acquisition of services in the infrastructure) and/or (ii)
to take actions to mitigate risk within the service adoption/development [19].
Support for BITA refers to the correspondence between business and IT objectives.
This is especially important here because we are interested in how to trace the strategic
risk at the tactical and operational levels.
Focus on Software Development Issues refers to the fact that rather than addressing
problems at the enterprise architecture level, as mentioned earlier, we are focusing on
services and functions with respect to the defined strategies and risk criteria.
Table 1 shows a comparative analysis of MoDrIGo with other frameworks. We can
see that MoDrIGo outperforms the competing frameworks because it supports all the
aforementioned criteria. For example, MoDrIGo supports BITA by making an explicit
link between strategic and tactical levels. Therefore, enriching MoDrIGo helps under-
stand the involvement of strategic risks in governance decisions of the BoD and the way
the c-suite perceives and handles these risks.
3 Research Background
Mostly organizations develop a vision statement, or mission statement where they iden-
tify their functional goals and targets. This identification must be coupled by determin-
ing the minimum required risk that needs to be taken in order to achieve such goals and

--- PAGE 5 ---
4 Aghakhani Ghazaleh et al.
targets. In case of unrealistic required risk (i.e., too high), the goals should be adjusted
or the company will automatically undergo an exceeding level of risk [16].
3.1 Risk Is A Strategic Issue
Business risks are uncertainties that negatively (failing to achieve or delayed objectives)
or positively (leading to exceed or early achievement of objectives) influence the ability
of an organization to achieve its objectives and goals. They relate to business objectives
as risk-taking is a prerequisite to success. For that, it is necessary to exploit some risks
to take advantage of strategic opportunities and mitigate the ones that threaten success.
The threatening risks include threats of problems occurring (e.g., misappropriation of
assets) or opportunities not occurring (e.g., failure to achieve strategic goals) [34].
Different sources provide different definitions of risk. The key definitions are:
– ISO Guide 73 [35]: “Effect of uncertainty on objectives. Note that an effect may be
positive, negative, or a deviation from the expected. Also, risk is often described by
an event, a change in circumstances or a consequence.”
– Institute of Risk Management (IRM) [24]: “Risk is the combination of an event and
its consequences. Consequences can range from positive to negative.”
– Orange Book from HM Technology [8]: “Uncertainty of outcome, within a range of
exposure, arising from a combination of the impact and the probability of potential
events.”
– Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA) [23]: “The uncertainty of an event occurring that
could have an impact on the objectives. Risk is measured in terms of consequences
and likelihood.”
More risk definitions are provided in other studies such as [22], [17], [30] and [15].
Given the large number of available definitions, organizations should be able to choose
the definition that is most appropriate for their purposes [22]. We essentially refer to
the definition provided by ISO Guide 73 as the most relevant to our research because
we believe that other than being positive or negative, risk can also refer to the deviation
from the expected objectives.
3.2 Enterprise Risk Governance and Management
To study risk at the governance level, it is important to distinguish classical risk man-
agement activities from risk treatment undertaken at the governance level. According
to the ISACA COBIT 5 framework [26], there is indeed a clear distinction between
governance and management:
“Governance ensures that enterprise objectives are achieved by evaluating stakeholder
needs, conditions and opinions; setting direction through prioritisation and decision
making; and monitoring performance, compliance and progress against agreed-on di-
rection and objectives (EDM)”
“Management plans, builds, runs and monitors activities in alignment with the direc-
tion set by the governance body to achieve the enterprise objectives (PBRM)”
Organizations are more and more interested in risk and risk management [22]. At
the board level, Strategic Risk treatment is a necessary core competency [17]. Accord-
ing to Charan [10], the BoD need to concentrate on the inherent risk that lies in the

--- PAGE 6 ---
Security and Risk as Governance Concerns: A Meta-Model 5
strategy and strategy execution: “Risk is an integral part of every company’s strategy;
when boards review strategy, they have to be forceful in asking the CEO what risks
are inherent in the strategy. They need to explore [what ifs] with management in or-
der to stress-test against external conditions such as recession or currency exchange
movements”. Business decisions and strategy both carry risk. Managing risk is thus an
integral part of board’s corporate governance [12] but BoD is not directly in charge of
risk management. However, its governance activities make a significant contribution to
effective Enterprise Risk Management. This includes defining and communicating risk
tolerance thresholds to senior management, which will guide them in their decisions,
and making sure that the management’s performance indicators together with the asso-
ciated key risks are properly aligned with the organization’s strategy and appropriately
linked to stakeholder value [34]. More precisely, the attitude of an organization towards
risk can be implied from the leadership which can be determined by its BoD as well as
from its corporate objectives and strategies. This allows the organization to set out the
objectives it is trying to achieve, and the strategies it is adopting to achieve these ob-
jectives. The harder to attain the objectives and ambitions of a company are, the greater
the risks it should take to achieve them [15].
3.3 Modelling Risk and Risk Related Concepts: Related Work
Risk and security models help companies develop guidance and take action in order to
embrace opportunity and manage risk [3]. Prior researches have discussed risk mod-
elling. Asnar and Giorgini [2] model risk at the organizational level by extending the
Tropos goal model. Likewise, Band et al. [3] make use of the ArchiMate standard to
incorporate risk and security concepts at all levels. Mayer and Feltus [28] also analyse
security and risk overlay of the ArchiMate language. Other studies rather propose a set
of guidelines to model risk concepts. For example, Giannoulis [21] propose a set of
guidelines that help refine i* models based on risk. However, despite the importance of
considering risk at the governance level, all the aforementioned models only focus on
risk at the management level. We believe that, to the best of our knowledge, Wautelet
(2020) [38] is the only framework that also considers governance level aspects (in a
meta-model) but it does not represent it graphically nor illustrate it.
4 Running Example: Risk Governance in Healthcare
In recent years, biomedical, normative, and technological changes have led healthcare
organizations to implement clinical governance as a way to make sure that they can
provide the best quality of care and thus increase efficiency in an increasingly complex
environment. One of the most relevant aspects of clinical governance is risk manage-
ment [9]. The latter is particularly crucial in the healthcare industry as mismanaging
risks may result in dire consequences such as fatalities [36]. The aim is to decrease
the probabilities and impacts of adverse events while increasing the probabilities and
impacts of positive events [9].
The recent evolution in healthcare systems regarding the digitization of patient med-
ical records, healthcare provider collaborative workflows, improved regulation require-
ments, along with increasing healthcare data records, has motivated the healthcare in-
dustry to adopt innovative technologies [20]. Technology contributes greatly to enhance
safety in healthcare processes. However, without a well-structured organization, it may
add more complication to the existing working practices, resulting in fewer benefits

--- PAGE 7 ---
6 Aghakhani Ghazaleh et al.
than expected [9]. Adopting new technologies in the healthcare industry is usually a
slow process. This is because medical informatics take-off involve uncertainties and
risks. For that, it is necessary to first identify and make a realistic evaluation of business
risk and then develop strategies to manage these risks [36].
Asaninnovativetechnology,cloudcomputingprovidesopportunitiestoboosthealth-
care services from the perspective of legality, management, technology, and security.
However, it is crucial to assess the risks that arise from cloud computing before its adop-
tion in healthcare projects [20]. When a health organization decides to move its services
into the cloud, it should develop strategic planning to evaluate the new model’s bene-
fits and risks. Moreover, the organization should assess the capabilities of the model to
achieve the objective and identify strategies designed for the implementation [27].
To illustrate risk and risk taking within the healthcare industry, we consider an evo-
lution of the Saint-Romain hospital previously presented in [40]. Let’s now consider
that its governance board is interested in adopting a new strategy, which is moving
its services into the cloud. Besides presenting significant opportunities, use of cloud
also involves uncertainties. As such, the more educated Saint-Romain executives and
boards become about the benefits and risks of adopting cloud, the more effectively they
can prepare their organization for the future.
The utmost goal of Saint-Romain is to remain timely, efficient, and cost effective,
and to provide high-quality services. For that, Saint-Romain requires to invest in con-
tinuous and systematic innovation. The aim of adopting cloud computing is to improve
healthcare services within Saint-Romain. Some of these improvements are listed below:
– putting in place an on-demand, self-service Internet infrastructure that provides
Saint-Romain users with seven-days-a-week, real-time data collecting and access
to computing resources anytime from anywhere;
– reducing the setup expenses of the electronic health record, such as software, hard-
ware, networking, licensing fees, and personnel;
– possessing a cost-effective and on-premise IT solution without the need to purchase
or examine software or hardware, or to employ internal IT staff to service and
maintain in-house infrastructure;
– overcoming major issues and difficulties in biomedical research data management
such as data-handling problems, and unavailable or expensive computational solu-
tions to research problems;
– automating the process of collecting patients’ sensitive data through a network of
sensors that are connected to legacy medical devices, and then storing, processing
and distributing the data in a medical center’s cloud;
– eliminating manual collection work as well as the possibility of typing errors.
Despite the aforementioned benefits associated with adopting cloud computing,
Saint-Romain encounters three key areas of risks: misalignment of cloud initiatives with
business strategies, over-reliance on cloud service providers, and loss of control over
high-value information. For Saint-Romain, avoiding such clinical risk is of high impor-
tance since if something goes wrong, this may lead to patient harm or possibly even
death. Therefore, with respect to challenges and opportunities, the clinical governance
of Saint-Romain should decide on how much clinical risk it is willing to accept so
that the adopted cloud projects stay aligned with their strategies. In other words, the

--- PAGE 8 ---
Security and Risk as Governance Concerns: A Meta-Model 7
-Service_Provider : Actor
-Service_Consumer : Actor
-Service_Level : Vector
Business_IT_Service Strategic_Objective
Business_Objective IT_Objective
Management_Goal
Business_Strategy IT_Strategy Actor Resource Task Hardgoal Softgoal
Strategic_Risk
Digital_Context
Impact Likelihood
-risk_tolerance
Risk_appetite
Risk
Operational_R
isk
Risk_Response
Tactical_Risk
Risk_Treatment
Hazard_Risk
Opportunity_
Risk
Key_Risk_Indicator
0..* 0..*
0..* 0..*
0..*
0..*
0..* 0..*
1..*
1
0..*
0..*
1
1
1..*
1..*
*
0..*
1..*
1..*
1..*
1..*
*
0..*
0..*
1..*
1
1
0..*
0..*
1..*
1..*
creates/changes
/removes
is aligned
with
is used to
define
influences
controls
implements
treats
contributes
requires
uses
is operationalized by
implements
contributes requires
sustains
refines
Fig.1. Risk-aware MoDrIGo Meta-Model.
board of Saint-Romain should determine the cloud services that are appropriate to their
healthcare based on their goals, risk appetite and tolerance.
The first step towards determining the risk appetite is to identify the assets that can
incur risk such as healthcare reputation, patient trust, staff loyalty and personal ex-
perience, service delivery, cloud service management interface, network (connections,
etc.), personal data, etc. The second step involves identifying likelihood and impact
of events that could happen in case these assets are exposed to risk. Obviously, Saint-
Romain does not consider to accept risks that exceed a certain level (i.e., risk tolerance).
5 The Risk-Aware MoDrIGo Framework
5.1 Risk-Aware MoDrIGo Meta-Model
Based on the literature study, some of the important concepts with regards to strategic
risk modelling are identified and listed below. Each concept is illustrated on the case
described in Section 4:
1. Strategic risk
Description: According to Frigo and Anderson [18], strategic risks refer to both
externalandinternaleventsandscenariosthatpreventorganizationstoachievetheir
strategic objectives. Moreover, it is generally accepted that the best risk definition

--- PAGE 9 ---
8 Aghakhani Ghazaleh et al.
is the one that concentrates on risks as events (see definitions provided by ISO
31000 and IIA). Upon the occurrence of an event, the risk is materialized. Thus,
a risk can be referred to as “an unplanned event with unexpected consequences”.
Based on the type of consequence, it is common to classify risks into two types:
opportunity (or speculative) risks, and hazard (or pure) risks. Organizations seek to
embrace opportunity risks and mitigate hazard risks [22]. Risks are often taken by
organization to achieve a reward. In order to launch a new product, an organization
decides to accept a certain level of risk by putting some of its resources at risk
[22]. ISACA [25] emphasises that “taking on more risk means grabbing potential
opportunities”.
Illustration:InFigure1,thestrategicriskisdemonstratedasclassStrategic Risk,
a subclass of class Risk, and based on inheritance, it is either a Hazard Risk or
anOpportunity Risk.Othertypesofriskssuchasoperational(i.e.,Operational Risk)
and tactical (i.e., Tactical Risk) are also demonstrated in the meta-model but
their detailed representation stays out of the scope of this paper.
Example: For Saint-Romain, misinformation, losing patient data, developing an
undesirable reputation, not being able to offer high patient care, etc. are all strate-
gichazardrisksthatwillnegativelyimpactthestrategicobjectivesofSaint-Romain.
On the other hand, personalised and responsive service, keeping wait time to min-
imum, real time information sharing between doctors and patients are examples of
opportunity risks that could have a positive impact on the strategic objectives of
Saint-Romain.
2. Digital context
Description: Today organizations are facing a fast paced, ever-changing world
where digitization has been considerably changing individual, organizational and
societal behaviour. The BoD plays a key role within the company to adapt to the
changing strategic context. The growing momentum of digital transformation con-
tinues to influence society and organizations and thus continuously changes the
strategic context of organizations. This shows the need for organizations to react
to opportunities and threats of the changing context in order to strengthen or main-
tain their sustained competitive advantage [4]. Therefore, it is necessary to include
digital context within the meta-model to address this issue. Here, digital context
refers to different technological enablers such as big data, machine learning, IoT,
algorithm-driven data analytical and processing capabilities, blockchain, artificial
intelligence, crowd/sensor approaches, cloud, etc. through which information flows
increase.
Illustration:Inthemeta-model,digitalcontextisdemonstratedasDigital Context
class in grey color.
Example: In the case of Saint-Romain, adoption of cloud computing and integrat-
ing it with the healthcare activities, objectives, etc. not only impacts strategic objec-
tives (formulating new objectives, modifying and eliminate some), it also creates,
eliminates, or changes risks and opportunities. In case of other emerging digital
contexts, such as mobile technologies and big data analytics, Saint-Romain would
have different risks, opportunities, and strategic objectives.
3. Key Risk Indicators (KRI)
It is hard to measure the effectiveness of risk policy without considering KRIs and

--- PAGE 10 ---
Security and Risk as Governance Concerns: A Meta-Model 9
comparing them over time [29]. According to Coleman [13], KRIs are measure-
ments or statistics that can yield a perspective of an organization’s risk position.
The effective development of these KRIs has the goal to identify the relevant met-
rics that result in useful insights regarding potential risks that may influence the
organization’s objectives [5].
Illustration:Inthemeta-model,KRIisdemonstratedasKey Risk Indicator
class in blue color.
Example By considering the impact and likelihood of a risk (as two examples of
KRI), Saint-Romain is able to oversee possible risk.
4. Risk impact and the consequence
Description: One of the important KRIs considered by risk managers, is the impact
or the consequence that a risk can incur if materialized. The impact is considered as
the way a risk affects the organization and its objectives. It represents the residual,
net or current level of the risk. The impact of an event is reduced via the controls
that are in place [22].
Illustration: In the meta-model, the risk impact and the consequence is demon-
strated as Impact class in blue color.
Example: In Saint-Romain, losing patient’s vital data (i.e., risk) may result in los-
ing patient’s confidence in health service (i.e. impact of the risk).
5. Likelihood
Description: Another important KRI, is the likelihood or the probability of risk oc-
currence. According to Hopkin [22] likelihood is a broader word than, but includes
frequency. It refers to the possibilities of an unlikely event happening.
Illustration: In the meta-model, the likelihood is demonstrated as Likelihood
class in blue color.
Example: In Saint-Romain, losing patient’s vital data (i.e., risk) may result in los-
ing patient’s confidence in health service (i.e. impact of the risk). The likelihood of
losing patient data will be low (high) if the staff are (not) well trained with in using
new systems in place.
6. Risk response and treatment
Description: For each identified risk within the risk profile, a decision must be
made – within risk tolerance limit – on the way this risk needs to be treated [1].
Treating a risk changes the likelihood, impact and the magnitude of consequences,
both negative and positive, to achieve a net increase in profit [31]. There are several
treatment options or more precisely risk responses: risk avoidance, risk acceptance,
risk transfer/sharing and risk mitigation [1,25]. ISO 31000 also defines other op-
tions to deal with both risks that have upside and/or downside consequences. It
includes: “removing risk source”, “taking or increasing the risk in order to pursue
an opportunity”, “changing the likelihood”, “changing the consequences” [31]. The
treatment plans are then based on these treatment options [1,25] (i.e., link between
risk response and risk treatment and risk). Defining risk response has the goal of
aligning risk with the defined risk appetite [25].
Illustration:Inthemeta-model,theriskresponseisdemonstratedasRisk Response
class in blue color. The realization of this response is done through risk treatment
illustrated as Risk Treatment class in green color.

--- PAGE 11 ---
10 Aghakhani Ghazaleh et al.
Example: In the case of Saint-Romain, when the healthcare realizes that there
are cyber-attack risks involved with cloud adoption, as possible responses, it can
only host the non sensitive and nonessential data of its patients on Cloud Service
Provider, or deploy encryption over these data.
7. Risk appetite
Description: Risk appetite refers to the amount and type of risk that a company
is willing to take or more precisely managers are willing to ‘bet’ to meet their
strategic goals [16,15]. The tolerable deviation from the level determined by the
risk appetite and business objectives is referred to as risk tolerance [25]. The more
severe the business impact of an event – resulting from an asset being exposed to
risk - the less the risk appetite.
Illustration:Inthemeta-model,theriskappetiteisdemonstratedasRisk Appetite
class in grey color. Its main attribute is risk tolerance.
Example: For Saint-Romain, patient safety is a top priority. As such, it is not will-
ingtoacceptanyriskthatcomprisesthesafetyofpatientsinthepursuitofitsstrate-
gic objectives (eg. when patient experience indicators show a decrease in quality or
when poor bed management or poor clinical records management impact patient
safety). Onthe other hand, thehospital has agreater appetite whenit comes to risks
that may have impact on organizational issues (eg. failure to maintain the develop-
ment of the organizational culture). Finally, Saint-Romain will accept highest risk
level when it comes to pursuing innovation and challenging current working prac-
tices. Likewise, Saint-Romain has greatest appetite for reputational risks in terms
of its desire to take opportunities where positive gains are anticipated (eg. failure
to acquire share of new market). Risks that score outside of risk appetite (based on
risk type, likelihood, impact, etc.) will be registered and reported to be reviewed at
the clinical board.
Within Figure 1, the MoDrIGo meta-model is enriched with the constituting elements
described above. Note that different colors are applied on this meta-model to better dis-
tinguish different levels (of decision-making, goals, plans, etc.) within an organization.
The elements that are associated with the governance/strategic level are colored in grey
while the ones that are at the tactical level are colored in orange. To show the activities
that are considered at the operational level, the green color is chosen. Finally, the color
blue indicates the elements that can be associated to all three levels.
5.2 Model-based Representation of Risk at the Strategic and Management
Levels of MoDrIGo
Figure 2 shows an enhanced governance model of MoDrIGo’s strategic level represen-
tation with (strategic) risk elements. The aim of modelling such representation is that
first, it represents the elements that play a key role at the strategic level of an organiza-
tion (here the Saint-Romain healthcare) and second, it represents the impact of the risk
identification at the management level representation (here the Bed Management ser-
vice) onto the business strategies. The blue arrow going from the service to the strategic
objective represents the generation of an opportunity risk and the red arrow represents
the generation of a hazard risk. Following is the explanation of each of the constructs in
the Figure: hazard risk refers to the risks that negatively affect Saint-Romain’s strate-
gic objectives and is represented by an hexagon with letter “H”. On the other hand,

--- PAGE 12 ---
Security and Risk as Governance Concerns: A Meta-Model 11
Provide high
quality care
services
Increase overall
safety of
patients
Cloud
Computing
Make
Personalised
and responsive
service
Losing
patient data
make
break
Help Break
Real-time
information
sharing between
patient and
doctor
Untrained
Workforce
Strategic Objective
Risk Appetite
Hazard Risk
Digital Context
Association Link
Contribution Link
help/hurt/
make/break
Make
Break
Keep wait times
to minimum
Data
leakage
H
H
Opportunity Risk O
Impact
Hurt
Help
Fast patient
recovery
O
H
O
Consequence link
Cloud
Computing
Patient
death
Develop
undesirable
reputation
Patient
satisfaction
Loss of
patient trust
H
Cloud
Computing
O
Gain in
reputation
Enhance
patient
experience
help
hurt
Help
Legend
Very low
Low
Low
low/high/
very low/
very high
Bed
Reservation
generate
generate
generate
generate
Business/IT Service
Fig.2. Risk-aware Business Strategic-level Representation
opportunity risk refers to risks that positively affect the strategic objectives of Saint-
Romain and is represented by an hexagon with letter “O”. The interconnecting link
between these risks and the strategic objective is shown by the contribution link, taken
from i*, that can either represent a positive (opportunity risk) or a negative (hazard
risk) influence. Digital context, represented by a rectangle, demonstrates new emerg-
ing technologies such as cloud computing, mobile technology, etc. The link between
this construct and the risks is represented by the i* contribution link. The “help” link
demonstrates how an opportunity risk or a hazard risk can be improved by adopting the
digital context, while the “hurt” link shows how adopting the digital context aggravates
the risk. This is especially important as today, organizations are more and more striving
for digital transformation. The consequence of the hazard or opportunity risks, illus-
trated by a diagonal snip rectangle, represents the consequence that a particular hazard
risk or opportunity can have if materialized. The relation between the risks and the con-
sequence is illustrated by an open arrow. Risk appetite, represented by an eight point
star or octagram, is one of the key concepts when it comes to board risk-taking and risk
oversight. The association link from the risk appetite to the strategic objective shows the
amount of risk that an organization is willing to take in the pursuit of such a strategic
objective. Finally, the blue cloud in bold represents the bed management service (Figure
3) as an operationalization.
With the new added constructs at the governance level, we are able to model, first,
the elements that affect the strategy such as risks and opportunities, and second, the

--- PAGE 13 ---
12 Aghakhani Ghazaleh et al.
risk acceptance level of BoD regarding the achievement of a particular strategic objec-
tive. This is important as it helps organizations avoid taking too much risk with regards
to the achievement of their objectives and thus to prioritise significant risks. Taking
into account the strategic objective “provide high quality care service”, with the new
constructs, it is now possible to first show the negative and positive risks that affect
this strategic objective. “A personalized and responsive service” has a strong contri-
bution (i.e. make) to satisfice this strategic objective while “loss of patient data” has
a negative contribution sufficient enough to deny it. Moreover, providing high quality,
effective and safe services with the aim to improve the well-being, health, and indepen-
dence of the population served by Saint-Romain is its main strategy. We can discuss that
the hospital is not willing to accept risks that limit its ability to fulfill such objective.
Being the top priority, patient safety is associated with the lowest level of risk appetite.
Regarding patient experience and quality care, Saint-Romain will accept a higher, yet
low, level of risk (as long as it maintains patient safety as well as service improvements
and quality care). Hence, the overall risk appetite of the hospital is quite low. As soon as
these risks exceed a certain level that can result in jeopardising patient safety, poor qual-
ity care or non-compliance with standards, they are reported. Finally, considering cloud
computing as digital context is important as it shows how this technology can aggravate
or improve the existing risks and indirectly influence the strategy. In other words it can
either put in place facilities that can help in achieving this strategic objective or hin-
dering it by aggravating the existing risks or creating new ones. Here, cloud computing
can aggravate data loss. This is because sensitive patient data might be stolen for fraud-
ulent purposes. On the other hand, using cloud improves personalised and responsive
services by providing real-time information sharing.
Figure 3 illustrates the management level representation of MoDrIGo (the bed man-
agement service) enhanced by relevant risk elements. The aim is to study the impact
of the enhancement at the management level on the fulfillment of organizational strate-
gies. At this level, we take into account the opportunity risk (represented with a blue
hexagon) and the hazard risk (represented with a red hexagon) that are associated with
each of the management level elements and can influence (represented by the threat-
ening link) the strategic objectives. Following such representation, it is possible to see
how risk can be escalated to the strategic layer and jeopardize the involved strategy. For
example, the task “stay planning” is associated with the opportunity risk keep waiting
time to minimum, which helps to the achievement of the strategic objective “Enhance
patient experience”. On the other hand, the goal record planning is associated with haz-
ard risk data breach which, has a negative influence on the fulfillment of both strategic
objectives increase overall safety of patients and enhance patient experience. The abil-
ity to treat risks is another important enhancement brought to MoDrIGo’s management-
level representation. This is represented by a green hexagon as a risk treatment and is
connected to the hazard risk via the treatment link.
6 Discussion and Conclusion
In this paper we enriched the MoDrIGo framework with risk related concepts. The en-
hanced MoDrIGo framework sheds light on two important factors. The first one refers
to the importance of considering risk at the strategic level of an organization and its
influence on the strategic objectives. This allows the BoD to first perceive and iden-

--- PAGE 14 ---
Security and Risk as Governance Concerns: A Meta-Model 13
Bed Reservation
Department
Patient
Support
Welcome
Patient
Patient
User Agenda
Stay Planning
Good
Organization
Stay Organization
Exams
Appointment
Scheduled
Complementary
Help
Quality
Organization
Adequate
Welcome
Fast Service
Trusty
Patient
Increase Overall Safety
of Patients
Enhance Patient
Experience
Appointments
Organized
Record
Planning
Determine
Dates
Update the Integrated
Database
Let Administration take
Appointments
Scheduled Stay
Organization
Let Patient
Take Appointment
Furnish an Integrated
Software Solution for
Patient Management
Ensure the availability of and
access to information
Legend:
Threatening
link
Help
Help
Data
Breach
Min
Waiting
Time
Help
H e l p
D
D
Help
Help
D
D
D
D
D
Restore data
from clean
backup
Share
information
through
private cloud
Real-time
information
sharing
between
patient &
doctor
Hazard
Risk
Opportunity
Risk
Treatment Treatment
link
Association
Link
Help
Help
Untrained
Workforce
D
Fig.3. The Bed Management Service’s Impact on Strategy: Risk-Aware Management Level Ra-
tionale.
tify the negative and positive aspects of risks that could impact the achievement of
objectives and second to determine the amount of risk they are willing to accept in
order to achieve their strategic objectives. The second factor refers to the significance
of recognizing risks at the managerial level and their impact on the fulfillment of their
strategic objectives. The extension was first applied to the meta-model of MoDrIGo,
then to its governance level representation and finally for the sake of traceability to
the management-level representation. Based on the Saint-Romain example, we can dis-
cuss the main contributions provided by the resulting enhanced risk-aware governance
framework:
– Risks are involved every time the BoD seeks to achieve its objectives. When instan-
tiated, the risk-aware MoDrIGo framework allows C-level executives to understand
the risk concerns of every decision in relation to strategic objectives.
– It is crucial that the BoD takes an adequate amount of risk that it assumes neces-
sary to achieve a particular strategic objective. This is done by defining risk-taking
elements such as risk-appetite and risk tolerance that control and mitigate risks.
The higher the priority of an objective for an organization, the greater the risk it is
willing to take for such objective.
– By enhancing the management level representation of MoDrIGo with the relevant
risk concepts, we ensure the traceability between the governance and the manage-
ment levels. This is done by studying the impact of the enhancement at the man-
agerial level on the fulfillment of organizational strategies.

--- PAGE 15 ---
14 Aghakhani Ghazaleh et al.
Despite the advantages of the resulting risk aware framework in recognizing risk
at strategic and management level, the framework has the limitation to rapidly grow
within large cases. Future work includes enhancing the framework to deal with scal-
ability issues. This way we can fine-tune the framework and tackle the issues it faces
such as scalability. The latter is one of the important issues that we consider to work
on for the future improvement of the framework. We plan to overcome such problem
by making use of modularity and separation of concerns (e.g. having different views).
More precisely having a case tool that allows to roll up and drill down on the basis of
strategic objectives.
References
1. Al-Ahmad, W., Mohammed, B.: A code of practice for effective information security risk
management using cobit 5. In: 2015 Second International Conference on Information Secu-
rity and Cyber Forensics (InfoSec). pp. 145–151. IEEE (2015)
2. Asnar, Y., Giorgini, P.: Modelling risk and identifying countermeasure in organizations. In:
Intl. Workshop on Critical Information Infrastructures Security. pp. 55–66. Springer (2006)
3. Band, I., Engelsman, W., Feltus, C., Paredes, S.G., Diligens, D.: Modeling enterprise risk
management and security with the archimate R . Language, The Open Group (2015)
4. Bankewitz, M., Aberg, C., Teuchert, C.: Digitalization and boards of directors: A new era of
corporate governance? Business and Management Research 5(2), 58–69 (2016)
5. Beasley, M.S., Branson, B.C., Hancock, B.V.: Developing key risk indicators to strengthen
enterprise risk management-how key risk indicators can sharpen focus on emerging risks.
Research commissioned by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway
Commission (COSO) (2010)
6. Bleistein, S.J., Aurum, A., Cox, K., Ray, P.K., et al.: Strategy-oriented alignment in require-
ments engineering: linking business strategy to requirements of e-business systems using
the soare approach. Journal of Research and Practice in Information Technology 36(4), 259
(2004)
7. Bleistein, S.J., Cox, K., Verner, J., Phalp, K.T.: B-scp: A requirements analysis framework
for validating strategic alignment of organizational it based on strategy, context, and process.
Information and software technology 48(9), 846–868 (2006)
8. Book, U.T.O.: Management of risk principles and concepts. HM Treasury, Crown, London
(2004)
9. Cagliano, A.C., Grimaldi, S., Rafele, C.: A systemic methodology for risk management in
healthcare sector. Safety Science 49(5), 695–708 (2011)
10. Charan, R.: Owning up: The 14 questions every board member needs to ask. John Wiley &
Sons (2009)
11. Cherbakov, L., Galambos, G., Harishankar, R., Kalyana, S., Rackham, G.: Impact of service
orientation at the business level. IBM Systems Journal 44(4), 653–668 (2005)
12. Choi, I.: When do companies need a board-level risk management committee? (2013)
13. Coleman, L.: Risk strategies: dialling up optimum firm risk. Routledge (2009)
14. Council, C.G.: Risk governance guidance for listed boards (2012)
15. Coyle, B.: Risk awareness and corporate governance. Global Professional Publishi (2004)
16. Duncan, B., Zhao, Y., Whittington, M.: Corporate governance, risk appetite and cloud se-
curity risk: A little known paradox. how do we square the circle? In: 8th International Con-
ference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization (CLOUD COMPUTING 2017).
IARIA (2017)
17. Frigo, M.L., Anderson, R.J.: Strategic risk management: A foundation for improving erm
and governance. Journal of Corporate Accounting & Finance 22(3), 81–88 (2011)

--- PAGE 16 ---
Security and Risk as Governance Concerns: A Meta-Model 15
18. Frigo, M.L., Anderson, R.J.: What is strategic risk management? Strategic Finance 92(10),
21 (2011)
19. Fugini, M., Ramoni, F., Raibulet, C.: Service-oriented architecture for risk management. In:
2011 11th Annual International Conference on New Technologies of Distributed Systems.
pp. 1–8. IEEE (2011)
20. Gbadeyan, A., Butakov, S., Aghili, S.: It governance and risk mitigation approach for private
cloud adoption: case study of provincial healthcare provider. Annals of Telecommunications
72(5-6), 347–357 (2017)
21. Giannoulis, C., Zdravkovic, J.: Exploring risk-awareness in i* models. In: iStar 2010–
Proceedings of the 4 th International i* Workshop. p. 103 (2010)
22. Hopkin, P.: Fundamentals of risk management: understanding, evaluating and implementing
effective risk management. Kogan Page Publishers (2018)
23. IIA, T.: The role of internal auditing in enterprise-wide risk management (2009)
24. IRM, A.: Risk management standard. The Institute of Risk Management, London (2002)
25. Isaca: The Risk IT Framework. ISACA (2009)
26. ISACA: Cobit 5: for Information Security. ISACA (2012)
27. Kuo, M.H.: Opportunities and challenges of cloud computing to improve health care ser-
vices. Journal of medical Internet research 13(3), e67 (2011)
28. Mayer, N., Feltus, C.: Evaluation of the risk and security overlay of archimate to model
information system security risks. In: 2017 IEEE 21st International Enterprise Distributed
Object Computing Workshop (EDOCW). pp. 106–116. IEEE (2017)
29. Peček, B., Kovačič, A.: Methodology of monitoring key risk indicators. Economic Research-
Ekonomska Istraživanja 32(1), 3485–3501 (2019)
30. Porter, M.E., Advantage, C.: Creating and sustaining superior performance. Competitive ad-
vantage 167 (1985)
31. Purdy, G.: Iso 31000: 2009—setting a new standard for risk management. Risk Analysis: An
International Journal 30(6), 881–886 (2010)
32. Sales, T.P., Almeida, J.P.A., Santini, S., Baião, F., Guizzardi, G.: Ontological analysis and
redesign of risk modeling in archimate. In: 2018 IEEE 22nd International Enterprise Dis-
tributed Object Computing Conference (EDOC). pp. 154–163. IEEE (2018)
33. Serafin, T.: Exploring strategic risk: 300 executives around the world say their view of strate-
gic risk is changing (2013)
34. Sobel, P.J., Reding, K.F.: Aligning corporate governance with enterprise risk management.
Management Accounting Quarterly 5(2), 29 (2004)
35. for Standardization, I.O.: Risk Management: Principles and Guidelines. ISO (2009)
36. Teoh, S.Y., Cheong, C.: Implicit enterprise risk management: an it healthcare adoption case
study. ACIS 2008 Proceedings p. 8 (2008)
37. Wautelet, Y.: A model-driven it governance process based on the strategic impact evaluation
of services. Journal of Systems and Software 149, 462–475 (2019)
38. Wautelet, Y.: Using the rup/uml business use case model for service development gover-
nance: A business and it alignment based approach. In: 2020 IEEE 22nd Conference on
Business Informatics (CBI). vol. 2, pp. 121–130. IEEE (2020)
39. Wautelet, Y., Kolp, M.: Business and model-driven development of bdi multi-agent systems.
Neurocomputing 182, 304–321 (2016)
40. Wautelet, Y., Kolp, M., Heng, S., Poelmans, S.: Developing a multi-agent platform support-
ing patient hospital stays following a socio-technical approach: Management and governance
benefits. Telematics and Informatics 35(4), 854–882 (2018)