--- PAGE 1 ---
Technovation 113 (2022) 102414
Available online 10 November 2021
0166-4972/© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Digital transformation of industrial businesses: A dynamic
capability approach
Swapan Ghosha,*
, Mat Hughesb
, Ian Hodgkinsonb
, Paul Hughesc
a
Menlo College, CA, USA
b
Loughborough University, UK
c
De Montfort University, UK
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Digital transformation
Dynamic capability
IIoT
Emerging technologies
A B S T R A C T
Industrial firms are under severe pressure to undertake digital transformation and leverage the Industrial Internet
of Things (IIoT) and emerging technologies for the integration of industrial machines to share information on a
real-time or near real-time basis. Though in recent years researchers have focused their attention on digital
transformation, there is limited scholarly guidance for developing capabilities for such transformation. Drawing
on dynamic capability theory and exploratory qualitative interviews with senior ‘elite’ executives from five of the
world’s largest multinational firms, the study outlines a new conceptual framework for digital transformative
capability development. The integrative framework demonstrates how the three core capabilities of digital
sensing, digital seizing, and digital reconfiguring manifest through associated capabilities of Strategic Sensing,
Rapid Prototyping, Organization Structure, Business Model Transformation, and Cultural/Mindset Trans­
formation. Internal and external contingencies are proposed as moderators of the relationship between IIoT and
emerging technologies, and digital transformative capability development. Collectively, the article makes the
case for Digital Transformation Capability and sheds new light on the digital transformation process. Implica­
tions for theory and practice are highlighted, and limitations are discussed.
1. Introduction
Emerging technologies such as Big Data, Cloud technology, Artificial
Intelligence and Machine Learning (AI/ML), enhanced robotics, Data
Analytics, 3D Printing, Cryptocurrency, and Blockchain are disrupting
industrial businesses on a vast scale (Lee et al., 2019; Ibarra et al., 2017;
Morkunas et al., 2019; Ustundag and Cevican, 2018). These techno­
logical disruptions place senior managers under significant pressure to
transform their industrial businesses. An especially acute source of
pressure is the Industrial Internet and Industry 4.0, or the Industrial
Internet of Things (IIoT), compelling digital change initiatives among
industrial businesses (Gilchrist, 2016; Sestino et al., 2020). In consumer
markets, billions of everyday devices are equipped with smart sensors
and internet and computing functionality (Sestino et al., 2020). How­
ever, for industrial businesses, the problem lies not in making such de­
vices, but in digitizing the business to be at the forefront of controlling
digital platforms and digital industrial equipment, and in transforming
from a product-based business model to one that incorporates live
services within their machines. For example, in healthcare, traditional
software focused on medical records and document management is
being replaced by cloud computing with instantaneous access to pa­
tients’ data; in supply chain management (Ben-Daya et al., 2019; Cala­
tayud et al.,2018), “self-thinking supply chains” based onIoT and AI-ML
enable firms to receive supply chain events from different partners and
suppliers, analyzing those events, and take proactive business decisions;
in shipping, IBM and Maersk have a blockchain-based system to trace
container shipping (Lal and Johnson, 2018); in airlines, the automated
cockpit grows increasingly complex and substitutes for traditional
piloting (Casner et al., 2014). Yet, the danger, let alone opportunity,
posed by IIoT for industrial businesses is especially sharp. As appropri­
ately surmised by Bill Ruh, former CEO of GE Digital, “if you cannot
master the idea of digital inside your business, you are opening the door
for commoditization” (Lopez, 2018).
However, to date, industrial businesses are struggling with digital
transformation. Tabrizi et al. (2019) note that digital transformation risk
was the #1 concern of the C-Suite in 2019 into 2020, and despite the
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: swapan.ghosh@menlo.edu (S. Ghosh), m.Hughes2@lboro.ac.uk (M. Hughes), I.R.Hodgkinson@lboro.ac.uk (I. Hodgkinson), paul.hughes@dmu.
ac.uk (P. Hughes).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Technovation
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/technovation
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.technovation.2021.102414
Received 26 March 2020; Received in revised form 28 September 2021; Accepted 3 November 2021

--- PAGE 2 ---
Technovation 113 (2022) 102414
2
level of attention devoted by C-Suites to digital transformation, 70% of
all digital transformation initiatives failed to achieve their goals. The
problem is one of complexity in the range of concurrent activities in­
dustrial businesses must master. For instance, businesses must anticipate
and address digitization in business and corporate strategies (Mithas
et al., 2013; Kohli and Grover, 2008), revise organizational design (Sund
et al., 2016), and implement new digital technologies (Setia et al., 2013)
and generate new capabilities (Tripsas and Gavetti, 2000) to innovate
new value propositions (Krotov, 2017), or else be left behind. Conse­
quently, industrial managers are not confident of how to initiate or
achieve strategic digital transformation initiatives within their organi­
zations. Tellingly, studies pin the success rate of digital transformations
among industrial businesses as little as 4 to 11 percent (McKinsey and
Company, 2018), despite the growing body of extant scholarly research
on digital transformation.
To address this pressing business problem, the study draws on Teece
(2007) framework of dynamic capability, to examine in depth the
development of ‘Digital Transformative Capabilities’ (DTCs) as an
unfolding process of sensing, seizing, and reconfiguring firm resources.
The theoretical lens of ‘dynamic capability’ is particularly relevant in
contexts of rapid change (Teece et al., 1997). Dynamic capabilities are
enablers of change allowing “management to develop conjectures about
the evolution of consumer preferences, business problems, and tech­
nology; validate and fine-tune them, and then act on them” (Teece,
2014: 332), but the dominant focus in research into capabilities and
dynamic capabilities has been on those that drive firm performance. We
depart from this and focus specifically on the development of digital
transformation capabilities. While a transformation process has been
examined previously (Karna et al., 2016; Pavlou and El Sawy, 2011;
Teece, 2014), we extend this investigation to digital transformation and
IIoT contexts since industrial businesses are inherently different from
traditional businesses and digitalization itself affects virtually every part
of the business. IIoT requires connecting industrial assets (such as ma­
chines, people, control systems, etc.) with information systems and
business processes, such that a large amount of data can be collected
from these combinations and analyzed on a real-time basis for proactive
business decision-making (Sisinni et al., 2018). By leveraging Industrial
IoT, we project that senior industrial manager can accelerate digital
transformation. For example, industrial IoT and its associated technol­
ogies can accelerate digital transformation when interdependencies
among industrial businesses are embraced within a digital ecosystem
(Subramaniam et al., 2019). Notwithstanding the extant literature
related to IoT and digital transformation (e.g., see reviews by Li, 2020;
Sestino et al., 2020), industrial managers still require answers to two key
questions: (i) What are the core capabilities for digital transformation in an
industrial business? And (ii) how are emerging technologies affecting these
core capabilities?
To address these two research questions, the study draws on twenty-
five interviews with senior, elite leaders from five of the world’s largest
industrial businesses that are actively engaged in digital transformation
initiatives. In the high-velocity environments in which these organiza­
tions operate, the development of DTCs to readjust their business pro­
cesses both internally within the organization and externally with
ecosystem partners is essential for favorable digital transformation. We
define “DTC as the ability of a firm, to systematically identify and develop
core capabilities for digital transformation”. The DTC is a special form of
dynamic capability and does not fit cleanly into the existing theoretical
apparatus. Specifically, DTC is not simply about the renewal of existing
capabilities or about making existing capabilities malleable; developing
new digital capabilities takes priority, and digital transformation in­
volves the replacement of long-standing business norms and views of
products and digital trading.
In response to criticisms that extant research has addressed the
materialization of digital transformation in a limited fashion (Warner
and Wäger, 2019), we provide two contributions to the digital trans­
formation field. First, we present a new conceptualization of DTC
informed by a qualitative exploration of a set of world-leading tech­
nology companies currently affected by the IIoT/Industry 4.0 and its
emerging technologies. Second, consistent with the view that dynamic
capabilities and competitive advantage are jointly affected by organi­
zational and environmental factors (Fainshmidt et al., 2019), we derive
a set of research propositions relating to DTC development. In the form
of an integrative conceptual framework, the exploratory findings pro­
vide new insights into the managerial actions necessary for competing in
the new normal digital landscape through digital transformation.
2. Theoretical overview
Digital transformation leveraging Industrial Internet and emerging
technologies is a relatively new initiative for industrial organizations.
However, in recent years, much research has emerged around this
phenomenon and Appendix 1 summarizes relevant studies from 2016 to
2020. For instance, Sousa-Zomer et al. (2020) suggest three
micro-foundation capabilities related to organizational cultures, such as
digital-savvy skills, digital intensity, and conditions for actions and in­
teractions, as constituting a digital transformative capability. Similarly,
Carcary et al. (2016) suggest core foundation capabilities related to the
culture of an organization for digital transformation. Li et al. (2018)
studied small and medium enterprises (SMEs) with inadequate capa­
bilities and resources and suggest that managerial capabilities are the
main driving force for digital transformation. Some researchers such as
Nwankpa and Roumani (2016) and Vial (2019) emphasize the role of
information technology (IT) capabilities and argue that IT capabilities
drive firm performance with digital transformation initiatives acting as a
mediator. While Nwankpa and Roumani (2016) were not clear on what
constitutes digital transformation initiatives, Warner and Wäger (2019)
identified a set of digital sensing, digital seizing, and digital trans­
forming capabilities for digital transformation in the traditional in­
dustry. A review of these studies reveals that there is a gap among
existing literature as to the definition and conceptualization of DTC,
with existing studies placing a premium on the culturalaspects of DTC as
opposed to DTC itself.
Emerging technologies are influencing digital transformation. Men­
donça and Andrade (2018) identified the relationship between emerging
technologies and dynamic capabilities and suggest that AI-ML, Big,
Data, and IoT influence the seizing capability of an organization as a
component of a traditional dynamic capability. Based on an empirical
study, Rossmann (2018) concluded that IoT influences digital trans­
formation, but the underlying mechanisms are once again missing. In
contrast, Li (2020) argues that business model innovation influences
digital transformation, and emerging technologies have a direct impact
on business model innovation. Industrial IoT and emerging technologies
can stimulate new value propositions based on new products and ser­
vices and new value delivery models, but oftentimes have less influence
on customers and revenue models (Kiel et al., 2017). The disruptive
effects of industrial IoT also extend beyond the boundaries of the firm
and into its supply chain (Ben-Daya et al., 2019), which requires further
integration (Calatayud et al., 2018).
The problems of implementing digital transformation initiatives are
compounded by historical tendencies among large, established indus­
trial organizations. For instance, while Industry 4.0 has a profound
impact on digital transformation, the need to shift business models to
achieve digital transformation is concurrently tied to the need to radi­
cally overhaul the historical investments of the firm. The first three in­
dustrial revolutions took place due to mechanization, electricity, and
computerization, for example, whereas in the fourth industrial revolu­
tion, industrial businesses must develop cyber-physical systems (CPS)
consisting of smart machines, automated production facilities, and
storage systems which can improve product design, manufacturing,
distribution and supply chain processes (Kagermann et al., 2013). We
are also moving from the fourth industrial revolution to the fifth in­
dustrial revolution (Industry 5.0), a pace of change that only exacerbates
S. Ghosh et al.

--- PAGE 3 ---
Technovation 113 (2022) 102414
3
the need to establish the properties of a DTC. In the fifth industrial
revolution, man and machine will become integrated seamlessly to
deliver business outcomes by utilizing AI and other emerging technol­
ogies (Nahavandi, 2019). Though researchers have highlighted the
impact of emerging technologies on business processes and digital
transformation initiatives, the influence of emerging technologies on
DTCs needs further exploration by understanding specifically what
constitutes DTC and its materialization.
Drawing on Teece (2007) framework of dynamic capability, we
examine the development of DTC as an unfolding process of sensing,
seizing, and reconfiguring firm resources. As Teece (2009) suggests,
such a process requires top management teams to possess entrepre­
neurial capabilities to adapt to and influence a rapidly changing envi­
ronment (Arndt and Bach, 2015). Though dynamic capabilities are
frequently associated with competitive advantages (Efrat et al., 2018),
in isolation, dynamic capabilities do not assure the success nor conti­
nuity of firms (Ambrosini et al., 2009; Woldesenbet et al., 2012).
Instead, the firm must enable the conditions for transformation. While
transformation processes have been examined previously (Karna et al.,
2016; Pavlou and El Sawy, 2011; Teece, 2014), we extend this investi­
gation to digital transformation and IIoT contexts since industrial busi­
nesses are inherently different.
Different schools of thought exist about the applicability and use of a
dynamic capability framework. For example, Teece et al. (1997) and
Teece (2007) assert, dynamic capabilities are necessary for sustaining
competitive advantages under the specific boundary condition of
‘high-velocity environment’. However, Eisenhardt and Martin (2000)
suggest that dynamic capabilities are best practices, and such a specific
boundary condition is not necessary as these capabilities should work in
either moderate velocity or high-velocity environments. Winter (2003),
by comparison, ranks capabilities on a hierarchy, where zero-order ca­
pabilities are required for day-to-day activities of the firm and
higher-order capabilities are needed for dynamic capabilities.
Despite these differing interpretations of the dynamic capability
framework, our view of a DTC (as defined in the Introduction section)
aligns with the Teecian perspective since Industrial IoT and emerging
technologies create a high-velocity environment that heavily de­
stabilizes firms’ existing activities and capabilities. It is this instability
that disrupts the status quo of industrial businesses in ways that tradi­
tional change solutions are no longer solutions to the changes they face.
Consequently, a DTC is a higher-order capability, and its development is
expected to be possible only when organizational conditions support
digital transformation in the face of high-velocity change. For example,
Siemens and Atos are developing a digital replica of the pharmaceutical
production process (digital twins) to improve production and innovative
solutions (Atos, 2020). Digital Twin is a higher-order capability for
digital transformation (DTC). Zahra et al. (2006) theorize dynamic ca­
pabilities are context-dependent, proposing that a capability that is
operational or ordinary in one firm may be a dynamic capability for
another firm in a different context. For example, a product development
capability might be an operational capability for a software firm like
Oracle that uses product development as a standard routine; for GE
Digital, a new product development capability is essential for faster
time-to-market software solutions more akin to renewing the business
and renewing, renovating or replacing outdated and outmoded prod­
ucts, services, business models, or capabilities. A further consideration is
that an organizational intent to transform may not necessarily cause
actual improvement and holds the potential for degradation as well (i.e.,
transformation does not assure a positive outcome because means-ends
relationships are ambiguous and uncertain in high-velocity environ­
ments). This is especially indicative of industrial businesses, which, in
the space of a few short years have experienced several forms of the
industrial revolution. For example, GE started an ambitious digital
transformation initiative throughout the GE businesses, invested
multi-billion dollars, started a new business GE Digital, and finally
decided to scale it down (Cimilluca et al., 2018). In adopting the
dynamic capability view, then, the firm ought to develop sensing, seizing,
and reconfiguring capabilities fordigital transformation (e.g., Warnerand
Wäger, 2019).
The crux of the problem lies in not just developing DTCs but un­
derstanding the conditions and factors for transformation surrounding
it. To date, there is inadequate theoretical and conceptual development
in the dynamic capability literature related to capabilities for digital
transformation (aDTC) and a framework for DTC developmentis absent.
New knowledge inductively generated from industry and, specifically,
the practices of strategic managers leading digital transformation is
needed and forms the focus of our research. This focus will shed light on
the digital transformation process and identify factors responsible for
transformation.
3. Research methodology
3.1. Research design and context
Since the phenomenon of digital transformation by leveraging IIoT is
still emerging among industrial businesses, a qualitative investigation
enables the intricacies of digital transformation to be uncovered (Denzin
and Lincoln, 2000). Specifically, by adopting a case-study methodology,
the phenomenon of digital transformation can be explored in great
depth enabling an exploratory approach to addressing the study’s two
research questions. A case study methodology is particularly apt given
the focus of the research is on a contemporary phenomenon within
real-life contexts (Yin, 2003).
The case study method is employed with multiple semi-structured
interviews with the leaders of the leading industrial companies that
form the case organizations, and how they are developing dynamic ca­
pabilities for digital transformation (DTC) and leveraging IIoT and
emerging technologies to this end (Eisenhardt and Graebner, 2007). The
study focused on five cases of the world’s largest technology companies
(revenue exceeding US$1B) operating in computing networks, semi­
conductors, aviation, and healthcare markets, among others, and are
executing significant digital transformation in their companies on a
scale never previously experienced. All five case organizations are
founding members of different digital transformation consortiums such
as the Industrial Internet Consortium, Digital Twin Consortium, Open
Fog, Object Management Group, etc. Further detail about the five case
organizations is provided in Appendix 2. The scope of data collection is
given in Table 1.
3.2. Data collection
From February 2016 to August 2020, we collected a wide range of
data, including semi-structured interviews, industry documents, annual
reports, and company announcements related to digital transformation.
Before conducting any interviews, we analyzed the annual reports for
the previous five years (2012 through 2016) of all focal companies
which were available at their respective company websites. We specif­
ically analyzed digital transformation initiatives from the annual re­
ports. We also analyzed event notifications of these companies to
understand some of the key digital initiatives. As a novel approach, we
noted down our observations and later used them during the face-to-face
interview.
We adopted face-to-face semi-structured interviews to collect data
for our case study and to enable personal contact with the interviewers
(Alvesson, 2003). We followed a semi-structured interview approach
and interviewed one respondent at a time with a mixture of open and
close-ended questions and followed by ‘why’ or ‘how’ questions
(Newcomer et al., 2015) to probe responses further. We conducted in­
terviews in three phases: in phase one we mapped out the IIoT and
digital transformation landscape; in phase two we examined the actio­
n/execution of digital transformation in the case companies; and in
phase three, we evaluated the success of the digital transformations and
S. Ghosh et al.

--- PAGE 4 ---
Technovation 113 (2022) 102414
4
lessons learned.
In phase one, we interviewed five key executives (one from each case
organization) from April 2016 to June 2016. These executives were all
Senior Vice Presidents/Chief Technical Officers of the company and
were responsible for digital transformation initiatives in their respective
companies. Given the degree of confusion about digital transformation
in industrial businesses, phase one interviews sought to capture the
current digital transformation landscape from the perceptions of those
experiencing this in practice. Specifically, phase one interview questions
(Appendix 3) were related to Industrial IoT (IIoT) business within the
organization and their core lines of businesses; how the digital trans­
formation process was being executed; and the implications for the
existing business model and necessary operational and strategic changes
needed to support digital transformation. The phase one interviews
enabled us to understand the strategic importance of digital trans­
formation in industrial businesses. Since one of the authors was an ex­
ecutive in one of these companies and was responsible for organization-
wide digital transformation initiatives and had two decades of senior-
level experience in companies across Silicon Valley, we had a head
start in our interview process in terms of access to senior executives and
the C-Suite of the focal companies. The insights garnered from phase one
were then used to inform phase two of the data collection process which
comprised fifteen semi-structured interviews with senior executives
from the same technology companies to delve deeper into the critical
themes for digital transformation in practice (Appendix 3). Phase two
interviews were conducted from September 2016 to September 2017. In
phase two interviews we asked the participants to discuss their digital
transformation initiatives leveraging IIoT, internal communications,
and operations within the company, interactions with external partners,
capability development, and measurement of success for digital trans­
formation initiatives. The purpose of these interviews was to get some
clarity related to the influence of IIoT and advanced technologies for
digital transformation and what are the core capabilities needed for
digital transformation. As these interviews progressed, we started to
develop an idea for a process model of DTC and asked our participants to
clarify with examples their digital transformation journeys, core capa­
bilities, and factors that could influence these capabilities. As phase two
was approaching its conclusion, we collected data from annual reports
and other company documents along with a further two face-to-face
interviews. Based on these interviews, we analyzed our findings and
developed a conceptual model for DTC.
To triangulate our findings, we conducted an additional five in­
terviews (Appendix 3) with the elite informants of the same companies
between June 2020 and August 2020 as phase three of our data
collection efforts. These participants have similar or extended
responsibilities from the participants in our first interview. Due to
pandemic restrictions, these interviews were conducted using Zoom
videoconferencing and were recorded. These additional interviews
allowed us to triangulate our observations and lesson learned from our
previous observations. These interviews also highlight the changing
nature of the IIoT landscape and how some of our findings have changed
between 2017 and 2020. We also supplemented this with gathering
annual reports up to the end of the 2019 financial year and probed these
for further insights. All our interviews across phases one, two, and three
ranged from 45 min to 60 min and, consistent with the accepted good
practice were recorded (with explicit permission), transcribed with
triangulation among the research team, and subsequently subjected to
analysis.
3.3. Data analysis
The study followed the qualitative data analysis prescriptions of
Miles et al. (1994), Tracy (2013), and Yin (1994), which involved coding
the interviews and classifying the codes into themes and patterns. While
the process of creating codes can be pre-set or open, we adopt a hybrid
model as described by Gibbs (2018). A list of pre-set codes was devel­
oped from the literature and a preliminary exploratory study. For
example, ‘alliances’, ‘partnerships’, and ‘external collaboration’ were
initially coded as individual codes, but as data emerged, they were later
collapsed into a category labeled ‘ecosystem partnerships’. The
approach is consistent with recent adoptions of soft positivism in qual­
itative investigations. As (Hodgkinson et al., 2017: 999) observe, this
“allows the analysis to be conducted with certain expectations based on
prior theory, while also allowing for unexpected themes and explana­
tions to emerge, as is more typical of interpretivist approaches”. Con­
siderations in this process included: What are participant sayings? Is it
consistent among all participants? Or it is an outlier? What is this an
example of? What kind of events are associated with it? What is
happening? Can I make some meaning out of it?
To further refine the codes, different iterations were created (e.g.,
Lofland and Lofland, 2006) and supported by using nVivo 12, a quali­
tative data analysis application, to identify in-case conceptual patterns
from primary and secondary data by coding, and classifying data in
fragments (Miles et al., 1994). In-case similarities were aggregated into
border categories through data reduction (Miles et al., 1994). In the next
step, we conducted a cross-case analysis to find out the similarities and
differences across the cases (Eisenhardt and Graebner, 2007). We
derived first-order concepts from the observations of our interview
participants and combined similar concepts from different cases into
second-order themes (Gioia et al., 2013) (Table 2). Finally, from the
Table 1
Purposeful sample and scope of data collection.
Software Inc. Health Inc. Semicon Inc. Industrial Inc. Network Inc.
Case Overview
Industry Software Healthcare Semiconductor Industrial Networking
Size
(Employee)
100,000+ 50,000–100,000 100,000+ 100,000+ 50,000–100,000
Revenues
(2019)
$25B - $50B $1B - $25B $75B - $100B $75B - $100B $50B - $75B
Founded Late 1970s Late 1990s Late 1960s Late 1880s Late 1980s
Firm type Parent Subsidiary Parent Subsidiary Parent
Market focus Global Global Global Global Global
Scope of case study data
Interviews 6 3 6 7 3
Position Sr. Vice President,
Sr. Directors,
Directors
Sr. Vice President,
Sr. Director,
Directors
CTO,
Sr. Directors,
Directors
Sr. Vice President,
Sr. Directors,
Directors
Sr. Vice President, Sr. Director,
Directors
Education MS, BS MS, BS MS, BS Ph.D., MS, BS MS, BS
Experience 20+ years 20+ years 20+ years 20+ years 20+ years
Annual Reports 2015–2019 2015–2019 2015–2019 2015–2019 2015–2019
Totals/
Summary
25 in-depth
interviews
400 years of leadership
experience
BS - Ph.D. education
levels
Experience across 8
industrial contexts
25 Annual Reports and 60 published
reports examined
S. Ghosh et al.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Technovation 113 (2022) 102414
5
Table 2
Second-order theme development.
Concepts Software
Inc.
Health
Inc.
Semicon
Inc.
Industrial
Inc.
Network
Inc.
Ecosystem Partnership (31)
Delivering total
IIoT solution
with partners
for DT (12)
3 1 3 4 1
Partners fulfill
IIoT solutions
gap for DT
initiatives (9)
2 2 3 1 1
Engaged with
limited partners
for DT
opportunities
(10)
3 2 2 2 1
Technology Disruption (28)
Constant
technology
changes are
affecting our
operations (12)
3 1 3 3 2
We are adopting
emerging
technologies for
changing our
business models
(8)
2 1 2 2 1
We need to retrain
our employees
for technology
disruptions (8)
2 2 3 1
Business Model Changes (33)
Developing
capabilities to
move from
product-centric
business model
to service-
centric business
model (15)
3 2 3 5 2
Capability to
develop a pay-
per-use business
model (10)
2 2 2 3 1
Developing an
outcome-based
business model
using IIoT (8)
1 1 2 3 1
Strategic Sensing (30)
We are sensing
external and
internal
environments
continuously for
new digital
initiatives (12)
2 1 3 4 2
We are scouting
external
environments
with our
partners for new
digital business
opportunities
(10)
1 2 4 3
Internal
collaboration
capability has
increased as we
are entering
unchartered
territories of
IIoT and DT (8)
2 3 2 1
Rapid Prototyping (31)
2 3 3 2
Table 2 (continued)
Concepts Software
Inc.
Health
Inc.
Semicon
Inc.
Industrial
Inc.
Network
Inc.
We develop
product
prototypes
rapidly (10)
We have
implemented a
lean product
development
methodology
(12)
1 2 3 4 2
Modular
operations
capability in the
factory are new
norms
influenced by
IIOT and DT (9)
1 4 4
Organization Structure (31)
Created specific
business groups
for IIoT and DT
(12)
1 2 4 4 1
Established
solution-centric
groups for IIoT
projects (11)
2 4 5
Chief Digital
Officer (CDO) is
coordinating
IIoT projects (8)
1 4 2 1
Concepts Software
Inc.
Health
Inc.
Semicon
Inc.
Industrial
Inc.
Network
Inc.
Culture/Mindset Changes (32)
Managers need to
have data-
driven
decision-
making
capability for
DT (14)
3 2 3 4 1
Managers must
have a digital
mindset for DT
(10)
2 1 2 3 2
We should have a
solution-
centric mindset
for IIoT
initiatives (8)
3 3 2
Strategic Focus and Intent (30)
Top-down
strategic focus
is critical for
DT (12)
2 2 4 3 1
Strategic focus
and intent is
necessary for
IIoT projects
(11)
1 2 4 4
Seniors managers
are driving DT
initiatives (7)
1 3 3
Path Dependency (28)
We are still
skeptical about
developing
new business
models (13)
2 2 3 4 2
Service centric
business model
is difficult and
uncertain (8)
1 3 4
1 3 2 1
(continued on next page)
S. Ghosh et al.

--- PAGE 6 ---
Technovation 113 (2022) 102414
6
second-order themes and our first-order concepts we developed a con­
ceptual data structure as presented in Fig. 1, which illustrates graphi­
cally how we developed our model from first-order concepts to
second-order themes (Gioia et al., 2013). It also depicts the in­
terrelationships between first-order concepts, second-order themes, and
aggregate dimensions of the model.
4. Findings and discussion
We were guided by our research questions during data analysis and
interpretation. Specifically: (i) what are the core capabilities for digital
transformation in an industrial business? and (ii) how are emerging tech­
nologies affecting these core capabilities? We present our findings next
concerning the literature and develop a series of propositions, which
Table 2 (continued)
Concepts Software
Inc.
Health
Inc.
Semicon
Inc.
Industrial
Inc.
Network
Inc.
There is
sluggishness in
our businesses
to change our
operations (7)
Note.
- The number in parenthesis indicates the number of occurrences during the
interviews.
- The number in the table indicates the number of occurrences from each
company.
Fig. 1. Data Structure Note:
The number in parenthesis indicates the number of occurrences during the interviews.
S. Ghosh et al.

--- PAGE 7 ---
Technovation 113 (2022) 102414
7
form an integrative framework for DTC, as presented in Fig. 2.
4.1. Findings and discussion
4.1.1. Building digital transformative capabilities
To explore the identified knowledge gaps from the literature review
regarding DTC definition and conceptualization, we asked the partici­
pants to discuss the core capabilities needed for an industrial firm to
successfully implement digital transformation. Based on our discussion,
several core capabilities emerged based around the Teecian conceptu­
alization of sensing, seizing, and transforming. For Digital Sensing and
Digital Seizing, we identify ‘Strategic Sensing’, ‘Rapid Prototyping’, and
‘Organization Structure’ as the core capabilities. For Digital Reconfi­
guring, we identify ‘Business Model Transformation’ and ‘Cultural
Transformation’ as core capabilities. All participants in the study agreed
with these findings in the follow-up interview phase post-analysis.
4.1.2. Digital Sensing and Digital Seizing
4.1.2.1. Strategic sensing. Most interviewees (16 out of 20) discussed
strategic sensing as a core capability for digital transformation, as
influenced by IIoT and emerging technologies (Fig. 1). Put simply, the
march of technology and digitization is pushing industrial firms towards
digital transformation, and sensing is a key and necessary aspect of this.
As technology-led businesses are growing, and companies have started
the enterprise-wide digital transformation, scanning internal and
external environments and scouting digital opportunities are essential to
a sensing capability for digital transformation, and our participants
expressed similar views:
As industrial lines are getting blurred, we must scan the external
environments continuously and we should develop a systematic way to
understand our opportunities and competitions. Scanning and scouting
environments are critical factors for successful digital transformation
(Network Inc.).
Another theme that emerged from our interviews is the solution-
centric approach and the importance of internal and external collabo­
ration (Intra-firm and inter-firm collaboration) in strategic sensing
capability to identify opportunities in the digital space. Customers
expect a complete solution for their problem using IIoT and emerging
technologies, and partners should work together to provide that. This
quote from one of our interviews illustrates that point:
To develop multi-faced businesses, we need managers who could
deal with different industries and different solution partners at the same
time. It is not domain-specific knowledge, but ‘solution-centric knowl­
edge influenced by IIoT and emerging technologies. This is a new way of
looking at business. So, the new product development, product distri­
bution, serviceability, after-sales support, and others need to converge
towards the solution. Inter-firm collaboration becomes critical, and
companies need to develop this new capability or add a solution mindset
to their existing collaboration capability (Industrial Inc.).
In our third interview phase, four out of five participants emphasized
the need for strategic sensing capability within the organization as a
core capability:
We are stepping into unchartered territories, and sometimes, we are
not comfortable with the business opportunities. We are selling
healthcare equipment to our customers for decades, and now the
healthcare market is changing rapidly. We need to sense new opportu­
nities in the market and adjust our offerings accordingly (Healthcare,
Inc.).
Our study suggests that as companies adopt digital technologies and
adopt service-led business growth, strategic sensing capability is a key
capability for transforming operating models in an organization. Indeed,
these businesses are seemingly developing comprehensive sensing ca­
pabilities within their organizations as part of their digital trans­
formative capability (DTC). Concurrently, among those we interviewed,
firms with the weakest sensing capabilities were drifting and struggling
to form coherentdigital transformationstrategiesor execute theirdigital
strategies in significant ways. Our findings echo and extend Blumensaat
et al. (2019) who argue that ubiquitous sensing is a key capability for
digital transformation for the utility industry.
The World Economic Forum (2016) identified key operating model
capabilities such as sense and interpret disruption, experiment and
launch products faster, understand and organize data, build and main­
tain a digital team, partner and invest for all non-core activities, orga­
nize for speed and develop a delightful user experience. Industrial
businesses are utilizing emerging technologies to enhance their external
Fig. 2. An integrative framework for Digital Transformative Capability (DTC).
S. Ghosh et al.

--- PAGE 8 ---
Technovation 113 (2022) 102414
8
and internal environment scanning and sensing capabilities. A quote
from one of our respondents illustrates this point.
“Sensing the current and future business, from the core market seg­
ments and adjacent market segments, are very crucial. We also need
to sense competition from the IoT market segment which is the
combination of different industry segments. Digital managers need
to have a comprehensive sensing process in place and need to
develop core sensing capabilities for the IoT business. Emerging
technologies are strongly influencing both the core sensing processes
and capabilities”. Semicon Inc.
Businesses are utilizing artificial intelligence to develop knowledge-
based marketing by analyzing customers, users, and external marketing
environments (Paschen, et al., 2019). Warner and Wäger (2019)
emphasized the capabilities for digital scouting and digital scenario
planning and long-term digital visions. As digital transformation is
blurring organization boundaries (Ilvonen et al., 2018), competitors are
emerging from different industries. For example, Apple has introduced
new features in the Apple Watch, which can monitor health conditions
at home (Bryant and Morrell, 2020) and competing with traditional
healthcare companies such as GE Healthcare and Siemens Healthcare. A
firm should understand the digital transformation needs of its current
and prospective customers and the overall Industry 4.0 trends for the
industry. This can be achieved by developing sensing capabilities, as per
the Teecian tradition of dynamic capability, by an effective inter-firm
and intra-firm collaboration strategy, and by scouting the external en­
vironments continuously. Digital transformation is a multi-year initia­
tive, for example, GE started the digital transformation journey in 2010
and is continuing (GE Digital Industrial Playbook). So, a firm needs to
develop a long-term digital vision for digital transformation and needs
to scan and scout the environment continuously. Thus, strategic sensing
is a key sensing capability for a new digital operating model.
We also observed that IIoT and Industry 4.0 initiatives were forcing
industrial companies to redesign internal processes and internal oper­
ating models to seek favorable business outcomes. Extending Savastano
and Guida (2018), for instance, several of our interviewees emphasized
the centrality of sensing external environments and designing
solution-centric business teams for better collaboration with partners.
Warner and Wäger (2019) argue that the digital sensing capability using
disruptive technologies such as artificial intelligence, analytics, and IoT
capabilities helps an organization in its digital transformation journey.
In our interviews, most of the respondents suggested that strategic
sensing capability is important for digital transformation, but, and
somewhat differently to Warner and Wäger (2019), IIoT and emerging
technologies influence this sensing. To this end, sensing is the beginning
of the journey and a point at which IIoT and emerging technologies are
essential, not merely later in the journey or process of digital trans­
formation Based on this discussion, we propose:
Proposition 1. Strategic sensing capability is a key DTC, and it is influ­
enced by IIoT and emerging technologies.
Consistent with the Teecian view of dynamic capabilities, though, the
interview data suggests that while strategic sensing is critical for Digital
Sensing, it is not enough to trigger the seizing aspect of dynamic capability.
Seizing capabilities are another key capability for digital operating models.
According to Warner and Wäger (2019), an entrepreneurial mindset, rapid
prototyping, establishing innovation laboratories, and developing lean prod­
uct development capabilities are important seizing capabilities for digital
transformation. A firm needs to develop a Silicon Value startup culture
known for rapid prototyping, agile decision-making, and flat organization
structure (Tabrizi et al., 2019). Digital transformation initiatives are highly
influenced by software technology and the agile software development pro­
cesses including minimum viable products (MVPs) are key components for
digital transformation (Ebert and Duarte, 2018). Rapid prototyping capa­
bility is a key capability for a new digital operating model. Digital trans­
formation challenges existing organizational structures and generates new
business champions, and it can facilitate new organization design (Lanzolla
et al., 2020). For example, organizations may introduce Chief Digital Offi­
cers to coordinate digital initiatives (Singh et al., 2020). The results indicate
Digital Seizing is enabled by capabilities in rapid prototyping and organiza­
tion structure. We discuss these next.
4.1.2.2. Rapid prototyping. Most interviewees (16 out of 20) acknowl­
edged innovation and rapid prototyping capability as a core capability
for digital transformation (Fig. 1) and seizing sensed opportunities. It
would appear from our data that such rapid prototyping is a prerequisite
capability for Digital Seizing. The IIoT industry is changing rapidly, and
emerging technologies are impacting the business. Customers are
demanding customized products tailor-made for their businesses;
competition forces a firm to be efficient in its business operations and
provide the highest quality products at a lower cost within a reasonable
response time, and IIoT products are complex wherein the company
must absorb these complexities in a changing environment. Companies
need to innovate faster and develop rapid prototyping capabilities. Lean
product development, including minimum viable product (MVP) based
agile development methodology, are common in the software industry,
but it is increasingly becoming a norm in industrial businesses as a so­
lution to having to absorb these complexities. In enabling firms to seize
on opportunities and push for digital transformation, rapid prototyping
leveraging IIoT, and advanced technologies is a competitive advantage
as expressed by our respondents:
We have implemented rapid prototyping and MVP based product
developments for our products. This allows us to develop our prod­
ucts rapidly and get feedback from our customers. This has reduced
our new product development time significantly (Health, Inc.).
Inour third interviewphase,most respondents suggestedthe benefits
of rapid prototyping and modular product development initiatives. They
also expressed the trend towards joint product development initiatives
with partners. The following quote elaborates on their points:
As more and more customers are asking for unique fulfillments, we
need to develop rapid prototyping capabilities to meet those challenges.
We have adopted 3D printing services for some of our components, and
we are collaborating with our partners for joint product development
using agile product development methodology such that we can meet
our customer demands (Industrial, Inc.).
Based on these observations, rapid prototyping capability appears to
be an essential capability for DT influenced by IIoT and emerging
technologies. As customers are moving more and more towards the
experience economy, industrial businesses should modify their oper­
ating models and develop rapid prototyping capability for DT. One of
our respondents quoted a similar theme.
We have adopted rapid prototyping models to develop new products
and processes for our business. Emerging technologies such as IoT, Big
Data Analytics, and Cloud-based deployment are influencing rapid
prototyping models. This is a core strategy for our digital transformation
initiatives (Industrial Inc).
Based on our findings, we can suggest that Industry 4.0 and IIoT are
driving automation and related digitization of operational technologies
within the factory floor. However, most of the solutions are vendor-
specific and lack interoperability. Rapid prototyping will help a firm
to understand customer-specific requirements most economically. For
the successful implementation of these initiatives, firms need to develop
capabilities for multi-vendor modular production systems (Weyer et al.,
2015). Our interviewers suggest that model-based prototypes enable a
firm to develop a “Smart Manufacturing” ecosystem quickly that relates
to ecosystem partners, suppliers, and customers, and through which
they can test a solution with customers (Suri et al., 2017). Our re­
spondents expressed that rapid prototyping capabilities, influenced by
emerging technologies, are important for seizing the initiative for digital
transformation, and this can be advantageous for a firm. Thus, we
S. Ghosh et al.

--- PAGE 9 ---
Technovation 113 (2022) 102414
9
propose:
Proposition 2. Rapid prototyping capability is a key DTC, and it is
influenced by IIoT and emerging technologies.
4.1.2.3. An organization structure suitable for the digital age. Developing
an organizational structure suitable for digital transformation was
indicated by 15 out of 20 respondents as a core capability for digital
transformation (Fig. 1). They insisted that an organizational structure
can help or hinder such initiatives, as can an incapacity to adapt struc­
ture, and companies should develop proper internal operational struc­
tures with adequate roles and responsibilities for successfully
implementing digital transformation initiatives. As such, Digital Seizing
requires firms to be capable of adapting the structure to best suit digi­
tization. For example, a firm developing a horizontal IIoT platform (a
common platform for multiple businesses) for its customers might have
one type of organizational structure, whereas another firm might have a
different structure as it might be developing a specific IIoT solution for
the healthcare industry (vertical platform). This difference was noted by
an executive at Industrial Inc.
The traditional business/domain-based organization structure is
changing. Earlier, our company has businesses in an industry vertical
like Aviation, Oil & Gas, Healthcare, etc., but now the structure is
changing more towards a solution-based organization structure, and
multiple businesses are participating. So, the IIoT managers need to
develop new collaborative capabilities or expand current capabilities to
accommodate these changes (Industrial, Inc.).
Moving from a product-centric approach to a solution-centric
approach was echoed by other participants. Instead of assigning peo­
ple to particular business segments, the best companies are developing
solution-based teams to develop and market IIoT solutions faster and
secure early customer adoption.
Solution-centric organization structures are key for DT. If you look at
our organization, we have groups such as IIoT – Solutions and Services,
Core processors business groups, and all of them are struggling to
develop a comprehensive DT strategy as the groups have different
charters. I have seen the same problems as other companies. Unless they
have a solution-centric organization structure, they cannot develop and
execute the DT strategy (Semicon, Inc.).
In our third interview phase, all respondents agreed with the need for
a proper organizational structure for successful digital transformation.
There was also a discussion about the role of a Chief Digital Officer
(CDO) in the organization. Some (3 out of 5) suggested that the role of
CDOs is still vital as they manage the digital transformation initiatives in
the organization. However, two participants cautioned that as the or­
ganization matures, the role of the CDO may not be necessary, and
current organizational structure solutions such as chief technology of­
ficer (CTO) can manage the digital transformation initiatives:
We have changed our organization structure for DT projects, and we
have a CDO who coordinates across all business segments and develop
the overall strategy for the organization. Earlier, each group was
running their initiatives and CDO has helped us to consolidate all these
initiatives and we have developed an economy of scale (Health, Inc.).
Based on these observations, the capability to develop and adapt
organization structure is a core capability for digital transformation and
seizing upon opportunities to do so and is parallel with Warner and
Wäger (2019) indication of the need to redesign internal structures and
having capabilities to do this. The organization structure has a strong
impact on firms developing DTC and launching digital transformation
initiatives across the organization and this theme is echoed in our in­
terviews. IIoT and emerging technologies have created a new and dy­
namic environment for organizations. Developing new capabilities or
reconfiguring existing capabilities depend on the organization’s struc­
ture, culture, people, and processes such that the organization can
continue to develop and maintain existing products and develop new
products and competencies in a changing environment (Verona and
Ravasi, 2003). Our findings enrich Verhoef et al. (2019), who argued
that digital transformation necessitates proper organization structure
and performance metrics. But we see this as a capability, not a property,
as do our elite interviewees. Most of our participants in our interviews
argue that as companies are moving from a product-centric model to a
service-centric model, the organization structure is a key factor for such
changes. Researchers such as Bustinza et al. (2015) have similar views
whereby selecting a proper organizational structure is important for
servitization efforts. Based on our discussion, we propose:
Proposition 3. A capability to develop and adapt organization structure is
a key DTC influenced by IIoT and emerging technologies.
4.1.3. Digital reconfiguring
Reconfiguration capabilities are another key capability for digital
transformation under dynamic capability theory. There are two distinct
ways digital transformation influences business models. In a new firm,
managers can experiment with a new business model, whereas, in an
established firm digital transformation influences business model
reconfiguration (Lanzolla et al., 2020). Digitalization has influenced
new value creation, value delivery, and value capture capabilities
including servitization (Visnjic et al., 2016), platform business models
(Constantinides et al., 2018), digital customer experience (Weill and
Woerner, 2013), and smart contracts (Dutra et al., 2018). Culture is
another key element of digital transforming capability. Digital trans­
formation initiatives are frequently unsuccessful due to rigidities in an
organizational culture that prevent change (Hartl and Hess, 2017).
Tabrizi et al. (2019) suggest that one of the key lessons about digital
transformation is that it is not about technology but adapting a digital
culture that can foster innovation.
4.1.3.1. Building business model transformation capabilities. Teece
(2018) suggests that a business model is an architecture for how a
company creates and delivers values to its customers and the very
mechanism for how it captures the value. Ritter and Lettl (2018)
describe the business model as a concept for a company to explain “what
it does”, “what it offers” and “how the offer is made”. IIoT and emerging
technologies have disrupted industrial businesses and created new op­
portunities and customers. IIoT and emerging technologies have influ­
enced three basic components of business models: value creation, value
delivery, and value capture (Teece, 2010). During our interviews, some
participants (e.g., from Industrial Inc., Health Inc., and Network Inc.)
suggested that they were demonstrating a newer way to create and
deliver business value by developing Industrial Internet platforms and
expected their customers and partners to develop IIoT applications
leveraging their platforms. This is a significant assumption but is also
indicative of a race to establish a dominant platform. Among some of our
other respondents, the race to establish a dominant platform was fueled
by fears over late-mover disadvantage, whether their platform is
exceptional or not.
Most of the interviewers (17 out of 20) mentioned business model
changes as a core capability for digital transformation (Fig. 1). Most of
these industrial businesses are involved in product-centric value de­
livery models, and they have ongoing relationships with their customers
for additional products and services. However, the participants
expressedthat the market was evolvingintoan outcome-centricbusiness
model influenced by emerging technologies.
The industry is moving from an equipment-centric to an outcome/
service-centric business model by leveraging IIoT and emerging tech­
nologies. So, the managers need to develop usage patterns, peak loads,
performance indices, etc. to develop the new service models for the
business. And service-based, pay-per-use models will be the norm of the
future (Industrial Inc.).
Though all participantsexpressed theneed to develop capabilitiesfor
business model changes for DT, some of them were skeptical about the
pace of this change. They suggested an incremental approach for such a
S. Ghosh et al.

--- PAGE 10 ---
Technovation 113 (2022) 102414
10
drastic change. For example:
My personal view is that business model changes are evolutionary,
and the companies will develop these capabilities gradually. The
businesses are not sure how to monetize the IIoT business. The
businesses are thinking IIoT businesses either horizontally or verti­
cally. However, the managers need to adopt a different business
model than they are used to now (Software, Inc.).
Having available and effective routines and processes for business
model changes appear to be a core capability for Digital Reconfigura­
tion, and thus, DTC. In the third interview phase, all participants agreed
on the importance of such capability for business model changes.
However, all our respondents are still trying to implement new business
models across the organization and in an effort to developing new value
creation and delivery models for competitive advantage. This suggests
such a capability is rare and a significant bottleneck. The following
quotation highlights this point:
We are still trying to figure out the business models and how IIoT and
emerging technologies could influence the business models. However,
we are utilizing emerging technologies and defining the value creation
and delivery mechanisms differently. We have developed a pay-per-use
model for our aircraft engines and customers only pay for the hours
utilized and we maintain those engines (Industrial, Inc.).
During our third interview phase, respondents expressed some con­
cerns related to the adoption of IIoT platforms. Ten respondents sup­
ported the pay-per-use business model (Xu, 2012) theme, but the
interviewees in phase 3 agreed that IIoT was only helping them to
implement such a model gradually. The respondents also indicated that
emerging technologies are influencing business model transformation.
IoT and advanced technologies are influencing businesses in devel­
oping new business models and it is an important capability for growth
as this capability is helping the digital transformation of the entire
business. (Healthcare Inc).
Implementation is a problem in most interviewed organizations.
Such transformation is complex, and this view is also supported by Kiel
et al., (2017). The outcome/service-centric business model (Baines and
Lightfoot, 2014) became a recurring theme in our interviews, but digital
servitization initiated by digitization influences the business model of
the firm and the business models of ecosystem partners (Kohtamäki
et al., 2020). Thus, while business model transformation is critical for
digitally reconfiguring the firm, it is fraught with difficulty. In conclu­
sion, Digital Reconfiguring requires business model transformation ca­
pabilities and a shift from traditional models towards outcome-centric
digital servitization (Frank et al., 2019, Paiola and Gebauer, 2020), as
expressed by executives from Industrial Inc. and Network Inc., for
instance. Based on these observations, we propose:
Proposition 4. Business model transformation is a key DTC capability
influenced by IIoT and emerging technologies.
4.1.3.2. Building cultural transformation capabilities. All respondents (20
out of 20) in our interviews unanimously expressed that a change in
mindset is an important factor for DTC (Fig. 1). As businesses are
changing and the companies are concentrating on a solution-centric
approach for digital transformation, the industrial managers need to
change their mindset for a favorable outcome to materialize and ease the
implementation of change:
To develop multi-faced businesses, we need managers who could
deal with different industries at the same time. It is not domain-specific
knowledge but ‘solution-centric knowledge. This is a new way of looking
at business. So, the new product development, product distribution,
serviceability, after-sales support, and others need to converge towards
the solution. Though we can learn from existing capabilities we need to
add a digital mindset and modify these capabilities (Semicon, Inc.).
Some of the respondents also indicated that the emerging technolo­
gies are influencing a data-driven cultural transformation, describing
this as “key for digital transformation” (Semicon Inc). The interviewees
also emphasized a data-driven decision-making capability for digital
transformation. Since product and service innovation are key differ­
entiators for a company, managers need to adapt to these changes:
The Industrial IoT business is a different business and the managers
must have a digital mindset for the business. One of the characteristics of
the digital business is that the pace of innovation is very high, so man­
agers should adopt an agile methodology for product development,
alliance, marketing, sales, customer support, and all related businesses
(Industrial, Inc.).
In our third interview round, all respondents recognized the chang­
ing of collective mindset as culture change and highlighted the impor­
tance of cultural transformation (a mindset change) capability for DT
influenced by IIoT and emerging technologies. The elite informants also
described the difficulty in changing the mindsets of managers and em­
ployees (company culture) and emphasized the process to be a gradual
one:
Cultural transformation is a key for DTC and the emerging technol­
ogy is influencing cultural transformation within an organization. You
cannot develop new business models and change your current operating
model unless you have digital mindsets in the organization. The mindset
of the managers and the employees must change to accept the new so­
lutions driven by emerging technologies (Health, Inc.).
Based on these findings, culture change capability, as reflected by
such aspects as a mindset change, appears to be a key capability for
digital transformation. As companies are executing digital trans­
formation initiatives, the industrial managers and employees need to
develop digital mindsets for successful digital transformation and the
emerging technologies, including IIoT motivate this transformation. A
similar view is expressed by McKinsey and Company (2018): “digital is
not merely an add-on; it’s a way to think differently about business
models, customer journeys and organizational agility”. The interviewees
also discussed the ability of managers to make business decisions based
on real-time digital information available from IIoT and emerging
technology solutions and this type of mindset refer to as managerial
cognitive capability (or dynamic managerial capability), essential for
strategic changes in uncertain times (Helfat and Peteraf, 2015). Our
interviewees also suggest that digitization offers a new way of looking at
the business environment. Businesses with a digital mindset (e.g., CDOs,
Digital Managers) should be able to sense the opportunities from phys­
ical and digital information (strategic sensing) and then seize upon and
reconfigure the firm towards digitization. To do so demands the right
culture and mindset to be in place in the firm. A similar observation is
made by Tabrizi et al. (2019) and they suggest that digital trans­
formation initiatives can be successfully implemented if the managers
focus on changing the mindset of its members, and thereby, organization
cultures and processes. Based on our discussion, we propose:
Proposition 5. Cultural transformation capability is a key DTC respon­
sible for digital transformation.
To conclude our discussion concerning DTC, an important point related to
the IIoT business was raised by an interviewee from Semicon Inc.
Capabilities are like concentric circles which help in product innovation.
We have some core capability and then we have multiple concentric circles,
consisting of extended capabilities. In this modular capability approach, each
organization needs to protect and enhance the core capabilities and add
extended capabilities to expand the business and develop new products and
services (Semicon, Inc.).
We draw from this that the capabilities identified within each sphere of
Digital Sensing, Digital Seizing, and Digital Reconfiguring capabilities are
complementors and extended capabilities that enable the three facets of DTC
for digital transformation to be successfully undertaken. Such a conclusion is
consistent with the Teecian perspective of dynamic capabilities being sup­
ported by other capabilities. The themes and capabilities identified in the
results from interviews with elite executives at world-leading technology
companies provide useful evidence in support of prior research (e.g., Warner
S. Ghosh et al.

--- PAGE 11 ---
Technovation 113 (2022) 102414
11
and Wäger, 2019) and simultaneously extends that research for a more
nuanced understanding of what is entailed within DTC and to succeed at
digital transformation. We now move forward to discuss the external and
internal contingencies of DTC that arise from our analysis.
4.1.4. External and internal contingencies for DTC
(Heine and Rindfleisch, 2013: 14) note that contingency theories
remain “Pollyannaish, emphasizing appropriate managerial adaptation
… [but] … contain no explanation of the mechanisms”. We draw upon
the interviewees’ experiences to identify critical external and internal
factors that could influence DTC development and have special signifi­
cance for digital transformation initiatives in a changing environment.
4.1.4.1. Ecosystem partnership. Most interviewees (18 out of 20)
mentioned ecosystem partnership as an enabler for digital trans­
formation influenced by IIoT and emerging technologies (Fig. 1). They
highlighted the importance of strategic partnerships in developing and
deploying business solutions leveraging IIoT and emerging technologies.
Ecosystem partners play an important role in developing total IIoT
solutions. For example, for Smart Airport, our three internal businesses
and partners are involved. We are contributing 30%–40% of the offer­
ings, and the rest 60%–70% are offered by the partners (Industrial Inc.).
One theme that emerged from the interviews is that partners help
develop a complete IIoT solution for the customer. Interviewers indi­
cated that one company could not deliver all components, and partners
are critical for solution delivery. During our discussion, the participants
noted they had entered strategic partnerships to fill the gaps in their
existing IIoT solution(s). Since Industrial IoT/Industry 4.0 was still
evolving, onecompany could notprovideallcomponents for a particular
solution. Health Inc. participant expressed her views as follows:
We have developed a Healthcare cloud, but it won’t be successful
unless other third-party solution providers are using our Healthcare
Cloud and develop applications on top of that. Unless we fulfill the
product gaps, customers may not use our solution (Health Inc.).
Ecosystem partnerships can be difficult to manage, and the partners
may have competing interests. So, companies are forming a limited key
strategic partnership and exploring opportunities with early adopters.
Some of the participants expressed this view:
Our strategy early on was good to have a limited number of partners
like GE, AT&T, Cisco, etc. So, for IIoT based solutions, the companies
need to have a limited set of partners otherwise partner management
will be difficult. We should not make ourselves too thin. Get some early
adaptors and go with them, develop solutions, and go with a set of
partners (Semicon Inc.).
All interviewees (5 out of 5) in the third phase expressed the
importance of ecosystem partnership for digital transformation through
IIoT and emerging technologies. However, it has become evident from
the interviews that ecosystem partners are frequently intra-industry
competitors, as in the case of Semicon Inc above, or complementors
(e.g., Health Inc., Software Inc.). Ultimately, ecosystem partnerships are
crucial as the company alone cannot succeed at digital transformation
by doing everything itself:
In the caseof IIoT, a company can offer one piece of the puzzle, but to
solve the whole puzzle (Data collection by the sensors, transport to the
cloud, analysis, sending information back to the field, etc.), companies
are relying very heavily on strategic partnership, and this could be a key
differentiator (Software Inc.).
Although ecosystem partnership is important for any business, it has
special significance for IIoT initiatives responsible for DT. Since IIoT/
Industry 4.0 initiatives are relatively new, managers do not have sig­
nificant track records working with their partners, and they are very
selective in their partner choices (not least as the potential risks escalate
in such high-velocity environmental conditions). Our findings align with
Papert and Pflaum (2017) and Eisenhardt and Martin (2000), who
suggest that in a high-velocity market with significant uncertainty, firms
tend to form strategic alliances to serve the market and try to hedge risks
in the business the development of dynamic capabilities. Our in­
terviewees suggest that for digital transformation, ecosystem partner­
ship is not only about sharing resources, but it is more strategic to the
organization, and the partners jointly decide on new product de­
velopments and innovations. A similar view is articulated by He et al.
(2020) as they suggest that strategic alliance is shifting from skill/re­
source substitution to jointly developing new products and services by
capitalizing on emerging technologies. Another important finding is that
the managers consider digital transformation initiatives as digital busi­
ness, whereby ecosystems and strategic partnerships are critical factors
for developing and deploying digital businesses (Subramaniam et al.,
2019). Based on these observations, we propose:
Proposition 6. Ecosystem partnerships are a key contingency for DTC
development, where (a) greater ecosystem embeddedness through partner­
ships is associated with faster and more sophisticated DTC development but
where (b) the realized development depends on the industrial business’ ability
to strategically manage these ecosystem relationships.
4.1.4.2. Technology disruption. Most participants (16 out of 20) high­
lighted technology disruption as an important factor in DTC (Fig. 1).
Emerging technologies and IIoT are accelerating digital transformation
by changing the markets, customers, partners, and products of these
firms, and doing so quite dramatically. In our case, industrial organi­
zations are trying to transform their businesses from a traditional
product/machine-centric business into a digital business. This new
business depends on new emerging technologies. For example, an in­
dustrial conglomerate like General Electric (GE) is rebranding itself as a
‘digital industrial company’. Technology disruptions are, somewhat
ironically given the serious challenges they pose, in fact helping com­
panies to transform their businesses.
IIoT business is different from our core businesses as IIoT is about
connecting machines with intelligent information or, in other words,
‘Software Defined Machines’. It has game-changing effects across the
industry, and we are at the forefront of this revolution. This will improve
the productivity of industrial businesses and improve the lives of the
people. It will have significant effects across the industrial world. The
current technology disruption is influencing this change (Network Inc.).
Indeed, most participants (4 out of 5) in the third interview phase
indicated that technology disruption and usage of new and emerging
technologies are helping them in their DT journey:
IIoT and emerging technological disruptions are impacting busi­
nesses mostly in a positive way. The IIoT and other technologies are not
only helping businesses to transform their business models, but it is also
significantly impacting operational efficiencies and it is also impacting
the people (cultural) side of the businesses. Companies can build quality
products faster, cheaper and it is helping a company to be more
competitive (Industrial Inc.).
All interviewees agree that technology disruption (or a high-velocity
market) accelerates the digital transformation process because it creates
a high state of urgency, consistent with (Teece, 2007, 2014) arguments.
However, what is problematic is that while recognition of the need to
change and digitally transform exists, the severity of the disruption
creates problems. The organizations studied struggled to understand
‘what’ was needed for such a transformation. This problem was exac­
erbated by trying to ensure short-to-medium term competitiveness in
their markets without knowing what the future markets will look like or
need them. GE seems to have particularly struggled with this issue. Kane
(2019) suggests successful digital transformation demands attending to
and navigating through, technological disruption. Accordingly, we
propose:
Proposition 7. The rate of technology disruption is a key contingency for
DTC development, where (a) greater rates of change are associated with more
aggressive and sophisticated DTC development but where (b) the realized
S. Ghosh et al.

--- PAGE 12 ---
Technovation 113 (2022) 102414
12
development depends on the industrial business’ ability to manage the
complexity of technology disruption in its business.
4.1.4.3. Strategic focus and intent. 75% of respondents (Fig. 1) implied
an influence by strategic focus and intent on senior managers in devel­
oping digital transformation capabilities as new technologies emerge.
Since the scope of DT is widespread and enterprise-wide, senior man­
agers and the executive team should pay special attention to such
initiatives:
Digital transformation is a resource-intensive initiative, and without
board-level approvals, it is difficult for us to initiate large DT projects.
When we decided to develop a health cloud where we could integrate
patient’s imaging and monitoring data, we have a total blessing from the
top, and it was one of their top business priorities (Health Inc.).
Without proper strategic focus, a company may not be able to take
advantage of IIoT and Industry 4.0, as expressed by one respondent at
Software Inc.
We do not have strategic plans for the IIoT business. The managers
are not clear how IIoT and Cloud could change their businesses. They
still think IIoT products are an extension of their existing software
products, and they do not have a comprehensive strategy.
In our third interview phase, all respondents expressed the impor­
tance of strategic focus and intent and its influence on DTC. All of them
emphasized that DT initiatives cannot be successful without the focus
and attention of senior managers. We revisited this issue with the elite
informant of Software Inc., and they specified that the company has
changed its strategy and now the company has a strong IIoT-based
product strategy leveraging emerging products.
In conclusion, strategic intent and realization are a pre-requisite for
successfully realizing DTC. Intentions to change, and actual realized
change, are two very different things. The firm may have an intention to
change but lack the resources to do so (Covin et al., 1997) or seek to
make changes but scale these back to minor, second-order, strategic
changes consistent with pre-existing strategic archetypes (Fox-Wolf­
gramm et al., 1998). Consequently, many aspects of the strategic intent
toward digital transformation become unrealized and our findings
support this view. Based on this discussion, we propose:
Proposition 8. Strategic intent and focus by senior management is a key
contingency for DTC development, where (a) greater strategic intent and
focus are associated with successful DTC development as new technologies
emerge but (b) a misalignment between strategic intent and the realized
strategy is an inhibitor of DTC development in the IIoT industry.
4.1.4.4. Path dependency. 16 out of 20 interviewees mentioned that
path dependency impedes developing DTC (Fig. 1). This is the ‘lock-in’
problem as expressed by Heine and Rindfleisch (2013). Respondents
agreed that developing capabilities for digital transformation is difficult
if a firm is successful in a particular path and in a particular way of doing
business. Path dependence paralyzes the ability of the company and its
senior managers to change away when faced with technology disruption
and as other business conditions change:
We are very successful in a license-based business model, and due to
severe market pressure, we are slowly moving towards a cloud-based
business model. Still, most of our customers are in traditional business
models and we will try to extend it as much as we can (Software Inc.).
Though managers agree to the changes they needed to make for
digital transformation, they remained skeptical across the first two
interview phases regarding changing their business value creation and
delivery models at that time. They were, however, cautiously optimistic.
As one participant expressed:
Our medical devices business is high dollar value and low volume,
and our manufacturing, sales, marketing, and other people are experi­
enced in this business. This business (of selling machines to hospitals)
still exists and is very profitable. It is difficult for us to switch to a cloud-
based business, which is high volume and low margin, and we need to
transform our existing capabilities or acquire new capabilities for such
transformation (Health Inc.).
In the third interview phase, the elite informants were less skeptical
about the prospect of digital transformation. All of them expressed the
importance of digitaltransformation and howit couldinfluence business
growth.
No, it is not hype, people are realizing that digitization is a
competitive advantage. You have seen that in e-commerce. Many cus­
tomers have adopted digital transformation technologies and digitiza­
tion as part of their e-commerce strategy, and they are growing faster
and outwitting their competition (Network Inc.).
Although managers are seemingly embracing digital transformation
initiatives in their organization, path dependency and the historical
tendencies of these organizations appear to impede the successful
implementation of IIoT projects in the organizations studied here.
Indeed, some of the elite informants are still skeptical about the success
of IIoT and related technologies because they feel comfortable with
existing paths. This can hinder capability development, as suggested by
Madhok and Osegowitsch (2000) based on their research with phar­
maceutical companies. We find that industrial managers are interested
in engaging in digital transformation initiatives by leveraging IIoT and
emerging technologies. However, they are still influenced by their past
successes, which exacerbates the lock-in problem (Heine and Rind­
fleisch, 2013). Wang and Ahmed (2007) observed similar patterns and
concluded that capability development is path-dependent, and a firm’s
future direction is determined by the path it has traveled. However,
Teece (2014) suggests that although path dependency may pose a
constraint, firms should pivot and take a new path when they face
technology disruption and other external factors that force them to
change strategy through business model innovation, thus, develop DTC.
This is easier said than done. Accordingly:
Proposition 9. Path dependency is a key contingency for DTC develop­
ment, where (a) path dependency is an inhibitor of DTC development despite
the urgency created by technological disruption and the need for flexibility in
the IIoT industry, and (b) requires careful strategic management by senior
management to overcome the inertial tendencies created by path
dependencies.
4.1.4.5. The recurring consequence of digital transformation. We recog­
nize a recurring system feedback loop between digital transformation
and IIoT and emerging technologies to complete our analysis. Vial
(2019) specified in his building blocks of the digital transformation
process that digital technologies (such as IoT) fuel disruptions in
customer and consumer behaviors and expectations and in the
competitive landscape that trigger strategic responses, including a dig­
ital transformation strategy among industry players. This digital trans­
formation relies on innovating technologies that replenish and grow the
number of digital technologies in the market, fueling further disruption
(see Vial, 2019, p.122, Fig. 1). Thus, implementing digital trans­
formation begets new emerging IIoT and technologies that exacerbate
external environment disruption and suggest looped or circular re­
lationships. Digital transformation generates innovations that disrupt
firms and call for further change. We suggest that this continuous iter­
ation of the technology is one reason why industrial organizations find
digital transformation so challenging. For example, as industrial orga­
nizations compete to create platforms that will form the basis for new
standards, innovations, and changes in the form and use of technologies
call for a continuous digital change process. A static view of digital
transformation misunderstands the intertwined and looped nature of
digital transformation within one industrial organization and among
other industrial organizations. Digital transformation fuels more tech­
nologies that cause additional disruptions that then require further
digitalization. Our interview organizations bore out this challenge, with
each struggling to manage digital transformation content against a
backdrop of continual change in IIoT and emerging technologies.
S. Ghosh et al.

--- PAGE 13 ---
Technovation 113 (2022) 102414
13
Proposition 10. Digital transformation among industrial organiza­
tions fuels new IIoT and technologies to emerge, fueling further dis­
ruptions that trigger further digital transformation.
4.1.5. An integrative DTC framework: implications and directions
Despite advances in digital transformation research, how digital
transformation materializes has been addressed in a limited fashion
(Warner and Wäger, 2019). In responding to this issue, this study con­
ceptualizes DTC and extends the boundary conditions of dynamic
capability theory (Teece et al., 1997, 2007). Based on dynamic capa­
bility theory, our interviews with senior executives in some of the
world’s leading technology companies, data structures (Fig. 1), and
propositions, we present anintegrative frameworkin Fig. 2 that captures
the core capabilities required for digital transformation and the critical
aspects that need to be in place for success in developing DTC. Since it is
difficult to measure the degree of digital transformation in a company,
the study has identified key drivers and inhibitors of DTC development.
Thus, the study advances the body of knowledge on the application of
digital transformation in the IIoT industry.
Through this integrative framework for DTC development, we offer
several contributions to theory development and understanding of dig­
ital transformation and dynamic capability. First, we add much-needed
new knowledge and understanding of the mechanisms for sensing,
seizing, and reconfiguring in the Teecian dynamic capability tradition.
Second, we extend past revelations by authors such as Tabrizi et al.
(2019) of the importance of rapid prototyping, structural reorganiza­
tion, mindset, and culture change and then extend this by understanding
wherein the dynamic capability spectrum these key aspects feature. For
instance, in Digital Seizing and Digital Reconfiguring. Third, we extend
the digital transformation framework developed by Warner and Wäger
(2019), by incorporating additional factors for Digital Sensing, Digital
Seizing, and Digital Reconfiguring capabilities. In addition, we
contribute fresh insights into the boundary conditions of DTC and digital
transformation, expanding on critical contingencies that act in favor of,
or against, the development of DTC in industrial businesses. External to
the firm, ecosystem partnerships with competitors and complementors,
and technology disruption motivate digital transformation in DTC
development. However, evidence also indicates that technology
disruption, by its very nature, causes confusion in how to transform and
what is needed for digital transformation. While it is straightforward for
scholars such as (Correani et al., 2020: 37) to argue for managers to
“assimilate the disruption ensuing from the introduction of digital
technologies”, this is very much easier said than done. This is the case, in
part, dueto theinternal contingenciesrevealed inour dataas, internally,
both voids in strategic intent (and misalignment with strategy) and path
dependencies inhibit the development of DTC and digital transformation
itself. By revealing these contingencies, more nuance is given to our
understanding of digital transformation. For instance, as ecosystem
partnerships develop and as disruption occurs, the centrality of Digital
Sensing and Digital Seizing for transformation becomes important.
Simultaneously, historical tendencies can block meaningful reconfigu­
rations and adaptations required for digital transformation.
A system is generally seen as a complex set of integrated, interde­
pendent, interconnected, and interactional elements such that firms may
be thought of as systems of interdependent choices (e.g., O’Connor,
2008; Siggelkow, 2011; Von Bertalanffy, 1968). Some of the elements
discovered concerning DTC, such as identifiable organization structure
in Digital Seizing and culture concerning Digital Reconfiguring are also
elements reflective of major innovation dynamic capabilities as dis­
cussed by O’Connor (2008) within a system’s context. A systems theory
lens would enable researchers to make finer-grained advice for man­
agers on organizational design and configurations for digital trans­
formation, while enriching its theoretical underpinnings, not least as the
focus of systems thinking is to understand the ‘whole’ (and not the parts)
and map relationships and configurations (Capra and Luisi, 2014). As
the application of systems theory in digital transformation research is
scant, we advocate advancing theoretical developments into digital
transformation through the merging of systems theory with dynamic
capability theory (O’Connor, 2008). Doing so can increase our collective
understanding of how firms can develop digital transformative capa­
bilities and enable major strategic changes, such as those created by
digital transformation initiatives.
The study holds important managerial contributions. Industrial
managers can use the integrative framework and concentrate on three
core DTCs of Digital Sensing, Digital Seizing, and Digital Reconfiguring
and associated capabilities of Strategic Sensing, Rapid Prototyping,
Organization Structure, Business Model Transformation, and Cultural/
Mindset Transformation to set a platform for success at digital trans­
formation. Managers should investigate the cultural aspects of the or­
ganization and a data-driven decision-making culture should be
encouraged. Industrial managers are developing new business models,
but operating models should also be changed to align with the business
model changes. Special attention needs to be paid to the inhibitors of
DTC development and digital transformation. Historical path de­
pendencies are not easily overcome but a focused strategic intent and
embracement of disruption can ease this transition. In the absence of
such an approach, managers engaged in digital transformation projects
may have done this largely by intuition without fully appreciating the
internal and external factors which could affect DTC development.
Managers in industrial businesses should pay special attention to the
cultural aspects of digital transformation initiatives. Since most of these
industrial businesses are operating for decades, the managers and em­
ployees may not be trained with data-driven decision-making processes,
and they may still follow manual checks and balances. For successful
implementation of DT initiatives, employees need to have basic
knowledge about statistics, analytics, key performance indicators, social
networking, etc., and the organization should organize skill develop­
ment programs for them. The industrial company that can change the
collective managerial mindset quickly will have a competitive advan­
tage against others.
The study has several limitations. First, the study has been designed
to understand how industrial businesses are developing DTCs by
leveraging IIoT and emerging technologies for digital transformation.
We interviewed elite informants from five different high technology
companies, allof which are engagedin large-scale digital transformation
initiatives. However, a large sample of companies from different in­
dustries should be considered for validating the propositions arising
from our results. For instance, there may be segment-specific features
and relationships that are not accounted for. Second, our respondents
are managing high-value digital transformation initiatives. However, a
larger number of interviews and multiple informants within either (a)
the same industrial businesses, or (b) across firms with lower-value
digitization initiatives could have added further insights and nuance
to those presented. Third, the purpose of the study was to offer explor­
atory knowledge on an important and limited research area, but we
recognize that causal evidence of the drivers of DTC would be highly
beneficial for practitioners in the field. Fourth, other capabilities such as
strategic agility, change management, balancing digital portfolios, and
execution have been identified in current research as capabilities to
digital transformation. Though we do not find these in our results, it is
possible that additional elements, or dynamic capabilities, could be
required in different industries and contexts. Further investigation
would be valuable. Finally, digital transformation is a potentially larger
construct that we can parsimoniously depict here and may extend to
value chain transformation towards platform ecosystems. By implica­
tion, an organization’s digital transformation may rely on current digital
transformation by others in its ecosystem and the extent to which these
align. A networked view of digital transformation among ecosystem
partners is likely to prove insightful to theory and practice.
S. Ghosh et al.

--- PAGE 14 ---
Technovation 113 (2022) 102414
14
5. Conclusion
Digital transformation is changing business paradigms. It is rede­
fining existing businesses and creating new business ventures and IIoT
and emerging technologies are acting as catalysts, but how can indus­
trial businesses succeed at digital transformation? Despite increased
academic attention, industrial businesses are failing more than suc­
ceeding at digital transformation (Tabrizi et al., 2019). We addressed
this question through an exploratory qualitative study of five of the
world’s largest technology companies undertaking digital trans­
formation, drawing attention to the DTC development process which is
identified as a potential gap in the current DT literature. We went direct
to the source and gathered interview data over time to derive an inte­
grative framework for DTC. Based on our qualitative data, we identify a
series of themes that are largely integrated into depicting the challenges
and conditions underpinning the DTC development process. We have
also addressed how IIoT and emerging technologies are influencing DTC
development, which is another gap in the current literature. Despite our
efforts, however, the optimal model for DTC development is not
well-defined based on the practitioner realities depicted in this study.
Thus, it remains a gap, and filling this gap will help managers assess the
success of their DT initiatives.
Appendix 1. Representative studies on Digital Transformation
Author(s)
Year
Method Data Type Objective Key Findings
Carcary et al.
(2016)
Literature Survey Secondary Core learning concerning key foundational
capabilities for digital transformation
Four foundational capabilities:
- Agile digital culture
- Digital leadership skills
- Building digital talent
- Developing and implementing a digital business
strategy
Sousa-Zomer
et al. (2020)
SEM Survey Conceptualization and investigation of
antecedents for digital transforming
capabilities
Three main micro foundations when combined, built
digital transforming capability:
Digital savvy skills (digital savvy officers, directors,
workforce), digital intensity (external partnership,
technology-based acquisitions, and digital
investments),and conditionsfor actionand interaction
(risk-taking culture, agile structure, and multi-
divisional structure)
Verhoef et al.
(2019)
Literature Survey Secondary Identify different stages of digital
transformation
Three stages of digital transformation: digitization
(analog to digital format), digitalization (IT or digital
technology to alter existing business processes) and
digital transformation (company-wide change for
better efficiency)
Sebastian et al.
(2017)
Case Study Secondary (25 sample
companies)
How big old companies navigate digital
transformation?
Two digital strategies (customer engagements and
digital solutions) that provide direction for digital
transformation. Two technology assets such as an
operational backbone and a digital service platform
are required for such strategies.
Nwankpa and
Roumani
(2016)
SEM Survey (100
participants),
Secondary company
data
How digital transformationmediatese the
relationship between IT capability and firm
performance?
IT capabilities positively influence firm performance
and digital transformation mediate the relationship
between IT capabilities and firm performance.
Vial. G. (2019) Literature Survey 282 studies referencing
digital transformation
Inductively build a framework of digital
transformation.
8 building block of the digital transformation process:
Use of digital technology, Disruptions, Strategic
Responses, Change in value creation path,
Organization barriers, Structural changes, Negative
impacts (security) and Positive impacts
(organizational efficiencies)
Warner and
Wäger (2019)
Case Study 18 interviews and (1
case study) and
Secondary data
How a firm in traditional industries build
dynamic capabilities for digital
transformation?
9 micro-foundations (sub capabilities for DT): digital
sensing (scouting, scenario planning, and mindset
crafting, digital seizing (strategic agility, rapid
prototyping and balancing digital portfolio), and
digital transforming (innovation ecosystems,
redesigning internal structure,s and improving digital
maturity).
Li et al. (2018) Case Study Semi-structured
interview of 7 SMEs
How SME’s with inadequate capability and
resources drive digital transformation
SME entrepreneurs drive digital transformation
through managerial cognition, renewal, and
managerial social cognition development.
Mendonça and
Andrade
(2018)
Quantitative, Non-
parametric Chi-square,
Spearman Correlation)
Quantitative, Survey To identify the relationship between IoT, Big
Data, and AI and the micro-foundationsions
of dynamic capability.
Big Data has a very strong correlation with Seizing
capability, IoT and Big data have a strong correlation
with Seizing capability. Big Data and AI has a
moderate correlation with Seizing capability
Rossmann A.
(2018)
Empirical study,
literature survey
Secondary Influence of IoT in digital transformation Addition of strategy-driven approach (complementary
technology and innovations, barriers to
transformation and develop countermeasures) into
technology implementation.
Lee et al. (2017) Focus Group Qualitative survey 10
participants
The implication of digital transformation in
industry 4.0
Six critical issues were suggested (digital maturity,
pilot projects, capabilities needed for new business
models, right data, ecosystem approach).
Li (2020) Literature survey Secondary The study suggested four different variants of portfolio
business models influenced by digitaltechnologies and
(continued on next page)
S. Ghosh et al.

--- PAGE 15 ---
Technovation 113 (2022) 102414
15
(continued)
Author(s)
Year
Method Data Type Objective Key Findings
A holistic framework of business model
innovation influenced by the digital
transformation for the creative industry
these are, market portfolio, product portfolio, multi-
sided, and different business models sequentially over
time.
Frank et al.
(2019)
Literature survey Secondary A conceptual framework that connects
servitization and industry 4/0.
The study looked into three servitization levels
(smoothing, adapting, and substituting) and three
digitalization levels (low, moderate, and high) and
developed manual, digital, and industry 4.0 related
smoothing, adapting, and substitution services.
Kiel, Arn, old and
Voigt (2017)
Qualitative study Case study and
Secondary company
information
The influence of the industrial internet of
things on business models for manufacturing
companies
The study analyzes the impact of IIoT on business
models for manufacturing company and the study
identified the changes in the business model elements
such as new value propositions based on new products
and/or services, changes in value configurations but
no changes in customers or revenue models.
Appendix 2. Case Organizations
Software Inc.: A leading software company with a diverse portfolio of products in databases, cloud infrastructure, and cloud-based enterprise
business applications. Traditionally, the software products are on premise-based software (where software is installed and operated from a company’s
servers and computing infrastructure, and the company purchases licenses for the solution provider, in this case, from Software Inc.) and the company
is transforming all software products in the cloud. The digital transformation processes are in phases and the persons interviewed were responsible for
business application delivery and sales in the cloudas their business models are changing from a license-based modelto a subscription-based Software-
as-a-Service (SaaS) model.
Health Inc.: A healthcare diagnostics equipment and software solutions provider that offers healthcare imaging and patient monitoring solutions.
Like Software Inc., most of the software components are on-premises solutions and the company has started multi-year digital transformation ini­
tiatives. One such initiative is to develop a cloud-based healthcare management solution, where hospitals could store and analyze patient diagnostic
data and imaging data to get a 360-degree view of a patient. The persons interviewed were responsible to develop and market cloud-based solutions to
their customers.
Semicon Inc.: A leading semiconductor manufacturing company that offers computing, networking, data storage, and communication solutions. It
has different business groups including the Internet of Things (IoT) group. The respondents were developing an IIoT platform such that developers can
build IoT solutions leveraging Semicon’s IIoT platform. This is a critical multi-year transformation initiative and the company is also working with its
partner’s ecosystem to promote the platform.
Industrial Inc.: An industrial company with multiple business interests in aviation, power, oil & gas, healthcare, utility, and energy. Industrial Inc.
pioneered the development of an IIoT platform for industrial customers. The company has undertaken multi-year digital transformation initiatives
across all businesses leveraging the company’s IIoT platform. The person interviewed was responsible for platform development, strategic alliance,
and marketing the platform within the company businesses.
Network Inc.: A leading network equipment and solution provider that is developing an IIoT operations platform to manage thousands of devices
and sensors, which are collecting data from different locations. The team from which study participants were drawn is responsible for developing and
marketing the IIoT operations platform and working with ecosystem partners to deploy the innovative solutions in the field.
Appendix 3. Indicative Interview Questions
First Interview Phase (Relevant questions only).
1. How is your IIoT business different from other core businesses in your organization?
2. Do you think the definition of the customer has changed for the IIoT business?
3. What new challenges are facing in the IIoT business? How are you overcoming these challenges?
4. How do you sense/figure out business opportunities in the IIoT business? Are they like your traditional business?
5. Is there a change in the organization structure for the IIoT business? Is it centralized or de-centralized?
6. How are your IIoT business models different from other business models?
7. According to you, what are the key success factors for the IIoT business? Do you have the capabilities to meet those success factors?
Second Interview Phase (Relevant questions only).
1. IIoT Business Overview for digital transformation (DT)
A. What are your DT initiatives?
B. Are you developing your IIoT platform using emerging technologies, or do you plan to use IoT platform(s) from others? How is that impacting
your DT initiatives?
C. Do you have a separate business group (with profit and loss, P&L responsibility) for IIoT? If so, why? Do you have a separate sales/business
development organization for product/service sales?
D. Do you have a proper organization structure and skillsets for adopting IIoT and emerging technologies?
E. Whether your DT initiatives are organization-wide? If so, what are your plans to implement it?
2. Intra-firm collaboration for DT
S. Ghosh et al.

--- PAGE 16 ---
Technovation 113 (2022) 102414
16
A. Why do you collaborate within the organization for your IIoT business? Do you collaborate for technology knowledge?
B. Do you have a formal process for collaboration? (For example, you may like to create a task force or working group from different businesses to
work on specific IIoT initiatives for a while)
C. Could you list some of the significant intra-firm collaboration initiatives for DT?
3. Inter-firm collaboration for DT
A. Do you think collaboration among eco-system partners is a key success factor for DT initiatives? If yes, please explain your answers.
B. How do you decide on your collaboration partners? (For example, when you are collaborating in developing an IIOT platform leveraging
emerging technologies, or developing a new product/service, or selling your products through Independent Software Vendors (ISVs) or System
Integrators.
C. Do you think inter-firm collaboration is helping you to create a specific intellectual property (for example, a reference architecture for IoT, or an
IoT development platform), which you could leverage in the future?
D. What are some of the impediments of inter-firm collaboration?
4. Organizational change and DT
A. Are you changing your business models? Are you moving towards an outcome-centric pay per use model?
B. How internal operations are changing for implementing IIoT business models for DT?
C. Do you have buy-ins from the senior management team? Are they committed to DT initiatives?
D. Do you think cultural changes are required for a successful DT?
E. What are the internal and external factors are affecting your DT?
Third Interview Phase (Relevant questions only).
1) Do you think businesses are actively engaged in digital transformation by leveraging IIoT?
2) Companies are developing new businesses by implementing IIoT. Is this an essential capability for future growth? Can you give me some examples
of that?
3) What is the impact of IIoT in the internal operation (businessoperations, infrastructure, organization structure, customer-centricity) of a company?
How are these operational changes affecting digital transformation?
4) What is the role of culture in this transformation journey? How is this influenced by IIoT?
5) How IIoT and other technology disruption are influencing businesses and their internal operations? How is technology disruption influencing
digital transformation?
6) How IIoT is influencing ecosystem partnership? Do you think ecosystem partnership is critical for developing new businesses? How can it impact
the internal operations of a company?
7) Do you think the executive management team has a strong focus to utilize IIoT and change their businesses? Do you think they are committed to
digital transformation?
8) Is there skepticism about the success of IIoT and digital transformation? Are there any success stories?
References
Alvesson, M., 2003. Methodology for close-up studies–struggling with closeness and
closure. High Educ. 46 (2), 167–193.
Ambrosini, V., Bowman, C., Collier, N., 2009. Dynamic capabilities: an exploration of
how firms renew their resource base. Br. J. Manag. 20 (s1), S9–S24.
Arndt, F., Bach, N., 2015. Evolutionary and Ecological conceptualization of dynamic
capabilities: identifying elements of the Teece and Eisenhardt schools. J. Manag.
Organ. 21 (5), 701–704. https://doi.org/10.1017/jmo.2015.22.
Atos, 2020. Targeting business outcomes through digital twin. https://atos.net/en/soluti
ons/industry-4-0-the-industrial-internet-of-things/targeting-business-outcomes-th
rough-digital-twin.
Baines, T., Lightfoot, H.W., 2014. Servitization of the manufacturing firm: exploring the
operations practices and technologies that deliver advanced services. Int. J. Oper.
Prod. Manag. 34 (1), 2–35.
Ben-Daya, M., Hassini, E., Bahroun, Z., 2019. Internet of things and supply chain
management: a literature review. Int. J. Prod. Res. 57 (15–16), 4719–4742.
Blumensaat, F., Leitao, J.P., Ort, C., Rieckermann, J., Scheidegger, A., Vanrolleghem, P.
A., Villez, K., 2019. How urban storm-and wastewater management prepares for
emerging opportunities and threats: digital transformation, ubiquitous sensing, new
data sources, and beyond-a horizon scan. Environ. Sci. Technol. 53 (15), 8488–8498.
Bryant, J., Morrell, J., 2020. Comparison of fitness trackers in predicting daily step
counts in a college population. Current Developments in Nutrition 4 (Suppl. 2),
1747-1747.
Bustinza, O.F., Bigdeli, A.Z., Baines, T., Elliot, C., 2015. Servitization and competitive
advantage: the importance of organizational structure and value chain position. Res.
Technol. Manag. 58 (5), 53–60.
Calatayud, A., Mangan, J., Christopher, M., 2018. The self-thinking supply chain. Supply
Cain Management: Int. J. https://doi.org/10.1108/SCM-03-2018-0136.
Capra, F., Luisi, P.L., 2014. The Systems View of Life: A Unifying Vision. Cambridge
University Press, New York.
Carcary, M., Doherty, E., Conway, G., 2016. A dynamic capability approach to digital
transformation: a focus on key foundational themes. In: The European Conference on
Information Systems Management. Academic Conferences International Limited,
p. 20. September.
Casner, S.M., Geven, R.W., Pecker, M.P., Schooler, J.W., 2014. The retention of manual
flying skills in the automated cockpit. Hum. Factors: The Journal of the Human
Factors and Ergonomics Society 56 (8), 1506–1516.
Cimilluca, D., Mattioli, D., Gryta, T., 2018. GE Puts Digital Assets on the Block. wsj. com,
July, p. 30.
Constantinides, P., Henfridsson, O., Parker, G.G., 2018. Introduction—platforms and
infrastructures in the digital age. Inf. Syst. Res. 29 (2), 381–400.
Correani, A., De Massis, A., Frattini, F., Petruzzelli, A.M., Natalicchio, A., 2020.
Implementing a digital strategy: Learning from the experience of three digital
transformation projects. Calif. Manag. Rev. 62 (4), 37–56.
Covin, J.G., Slevin, D.P., Schultz, R.L., 1997. Top management decision sharing and
adherence to plans. J. Bus. Res. 40 (1), 21–36.
Denzin, N.K., Lincoln, Y.S., 2000. Part III: strategies of inquiry. In: Denzin, N.K.,
Lincoln, Y.S. (Eds.), Handbook of Qualitative Research. Sage, Thousand Oaks,
pp. 366–378.
Dutra, A., Tumasjan, A., Welpe, I.M., 2018. Blockchain is changing how media and
entertainment companies compete. MIT Sloan Manag. Rev. 60 (1), 39–45.
Ebert, C., Duarte, C.H.C., 2018. Digital transformation. IEEE Softw 35 (4), 16–21.
Efrat, K., Hughes, P., Nemkova, E., Souchon, A.L., Sy-Chango, J., 2018. Leveraging of
dynamic export capabilities for competitive advantage and performance
consequences: evidence from China. J. Bus. Res. 84, 114–124.
Eisenhardt, K.M., Graebner, M.E., 2007. Theory building from cases: opportunities and
challenges. Acad. Manag. J. 50 (1), 25–32.
Eisenhardt, K.M., Martin, J., 2000. Dynamic capabilities: what are they? Strategic.
Fainshmidt, S., Wenger, L., Pezeshkan, A., Mallon, M.R., 2019. When do dynamic
capabilities lead to competitive advantage? The importance of strategic fit. J. Manag.
Stud. https://doi.org/10.1111/joms.12415.
Fox-Wolfgramm, S.J., Boal, K.B., Hunt, J.G., 1998. Organizational adaptation to
institutional change: a comparative study of first-order change in prospector and
defender banks. Adm. Sci. Q. 43, 87–126.
Frank, A.G., Mendes, G.H., Ayala, N.F., Ghezzi, A., 2019. Servitization and Industry 4.0
convergence in the digital transformation of product firms: a business model
innovation perspective. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 141, 341–351.
Gibbs, G.R., 2018. Analyzing Qualitative Data, vol. 6. Sage.
Gilchrist, A., 2016. Introducing industry 4.0. In: Industry 4.0. Apress, Berkeley, CA,
pp. 195–215.
S. Ghosh et al.

--- PAGE 17 ---
Technovation 113 (2022) 102414
17
Gioia, D.A., Corley, K.G., Hamilton, A.L., 2013. Seeking qualitative rigor in inductive
research: notes on the Gioia methodology. Organ. Res. Methods 16 (1), 15–31.
Hartl, E., Hess, T., 2017. The role of cultural values for digital transformation: insights
from a Delphi study. URL: https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/301371796.pdf.
He, Q., Meadows, M., Angwin, D., Gomes, E., Child, J., 2020. Strategic alliance research
in the era of digital transformation: perspectives on future research. Br. J. Manag.
URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/1467-8551.12406.
Heine, K., Rindfleisch, H., 2013. Organizational decline: a synthesis of insights from
organizational ecology, path dependence and the resource-based view. J. Organ.
Change Manag. 26 (1), 8–28.
Helfat, C.E., Peteraf, M.A., 2015. Managerial cognitive capabilities and the micro
foundations of dynamic capabilities. Strat. Manag. J. 36, 831–850.
Hodgkinson, I.R., Hannibal, C., Keating, B., Chester Buxton, R., Bateman, N., 2017.
Toward a public service management: past, present, and future directions. Journal of
Service Management 28 (5), 998–1023.
Ibarra, D., Igartua, J.I., Ganzarain, J., 2017. Business model innovation in industry 4.0:
the case of a university-industry experience in SMEs. INTED2017 Proceedings.
Ilvonen, I., Thalmann, S., Manhart, M., Sillaber, C., 2018. Reconciling digital
transformation and knowledge protection: a research agenda. Knowl. Manag. Res.
Pract. 16 (2), 235–244.
Kagermann, H., Helbig, J., Hellinger, A., Wahlster, W., 2013. Recommendations for
Implementing the Strategic Initiative INDUSTRIE 4.0: Securing the Future of German
Manufacturing Industry; Final Report of the Industrie 4.0 Working Group.
Forschungsunion.
Kane, G., 2019. The technology fallacy: people are the real key to digital transformation.
Res. Technol. Manag. 62 (6), 44–49.
Karna, A., Richter, A., Riesenkampff, E., 2016. Revisiting the role of the environment in
the capabilities–financial performance relationship: a meta-analysis. Strat. Manag. J.
37, 1154–1173.
Kiel, D., Arnold, C., Voigt, K.I., 2017. The influence of the Industrial Internet of Things on
business models of established manufacturing companies–A business level
perspective. Technovation 68, 4–19.
Kohli, R., Grover, V., 2008. Business value of IT: an essay on expanding research
directions to keep up with the times. J. Assoc. Inf. Syst. Online 9 (1), 1.
Kohtamäki, M., Parida, V., Patel, P.C., Gebauer, H., 2020. The relationship between
digitalization and servitization: the role of servitization in capturing the financial
potential of digitalization. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 151, 119804.
Krotov, V., 2017. The Internet of Things and new business opportunities. Bus. Horiz. 60
(6), 831–841.
Lal, R., Johnson, S., 2018. Maersk: Betting on Blockchain, 518–089. Harvard Business
School Case. April 2018.
Lanzolla, G., Lorenz, A., Miron-Spektor, E., Schilling, M., Solinas, G., Tucci, C.L., 2020.
Digital Transformation: what Is New if Anything? Emerging Patterns and
Management Research.
Lee, M.X., Lee, Y.C., Chou, C.J., 2017. Essential implications of the digital transformation
in industry 4.0. J. Sci. Ind. Res. (India) 76, 465–467. August 2017.
Lee, J., Suh, T., Roy, D., Baucus, M., 2019. Emerging technology and business model
innovation: the case of artificial intelligence. Journal of Open Innovation:
Technology, Market, and Complexity 5 (3), 44.
Li, F., 2020. The digital transformation of business models in the creative industries: a
holistic framework and emerging trends. Technovation 92–93, 102012. April-May.
Li, L., Su, F., Zhang, W., Mao, J.Y., 2018. Digital transformation by SME entrepreneurs: a
capability perspective. Inf. Syst. J. 28 (6), 1129–1157.
Lofland, J., Lofland, L.H., 2006. Developing analysis. Analyzing social setting, 195-203.
In: Lofland, J., Snow, D., Anderson, L., Lofland, L.H. (Eds.), A Guide to Qualitative
Observation and Analysis”, fourth ed. Wadsworth Thomson, Belmont, CA.
Lopez, M., 2018. GE Digital CEO shares insights in digital transformation in industrial
markets. Forbes, 2018, URL: https://www.forbes.com/sites/ma
ribellopez/2018/01/24/ge-digital-ceo-shares-insights-on-digital-transforma
tion-in-industrial-markets/#14ad807c3385.
Madhok, A., Osegowitsch, T., 2000. The international biotechnology industry: a dynamic
capabilities perspective. J. Int. Bus. Stud. 31 (2), 325–335.
McKinsey, Company, 2018. Unlocking success in digital transformations. Available at.
https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/organization/our-insights/unlocki
ng-success-in-digital-transformations. (Accessed 19 August 2020). Accessed.
Mendonça, C.M.C.D., Andrade, A.M.V.D., 2018. Dynamic capabilities and their relations
with elements of digital transformation in Portugal. Journal of Information Systems
Engineering & Management 3 (3), 23.
Miles, M.B., Huberman, M.A., Saldana, J., 1994. Qualitative Data Analysis: A Methods
Sourcebook. Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Mithas, S., Tafti, A., Mitchell, W., 2013. How a firm’s competitive environment and
digital strategic posture influence digital business strategy. MIS Q. 511–536.
Morkunas, V.J., Paschen, J., Boon, E., 2019. How blockchain technologies impact your
business model. Bus. Horiz. 62 (3), 295–306.
Nahavandi, S., 2019. Industry 5.0—a human-centric solution. Sustainability 11 (16),
4371.
Newcomer, K.E., Hatry, H.P., Wholey, J.S., 2015. Conducting Semi-structured
Interviews. Handbook of Practical Program Evaluation, p. 492.
Nwankpa, J.K., Roumani, Y., 2016. IT capability and digital transformation: a firm
performance perspective. https://aisel.aisnet.org/icis2016/ISStrategy/Presentatio
ns/4/.
O’Connor, G.C., 2008. Major innovation as a dynamic capability: a systems approach.
J. Prod. Innovat. Manag. 25 (4), 313–330.
Paiola, M., Gebauer, H., 2020. Internet of things technologies, digital servitization and
business model innovation in BtoB manufacturing firms. Ind. Market. Manag. htt
p://dt-lab.it/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/Paiola-Gebauer-IOT-DS-and-BMI-in-
manufacturing-IMM2020.pdf.
Papert, M., Pflaum, A., 2017. Development of an ecosystem model for the realization of
internet of things (IoT) services in supply chain management. Electron. Mark. 27 (2),
175–189.
Paschen, J., Kietzmann, J., Kietzmann, T.C., 2019. Artificial intelligence (AI) and its
implications for market knowledge in B2B marketing. J. Bus. Ind. Market.
Pavlou, P.A., El Sawy, O.A., 2011. Understanding the elusive black box of Dynamic
Capabilities. Decis. Sci. J. 42 (1), 239–273.
Ritter, T., Lettl, C., 2018. The wider implications of business-model research. Long.
Range Plan. 51 (1), 1–8.
Rossmann, A., 2018. Digital maturity: conceptualization and measurement model. URL:
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Alexander-Rossmann-2/publication/3
45760193_Digital_Maturity_Conceptualization_and_Measurement_Model/links/5fac
e798299bf18c5b6a0a20/Digital-Maturity-Conceptualization-and-Measurement-Mo
del.pdf.
Savastano, S., Guida, R., 2018. July). Uncertainty quantification in synthetic aperture
radar remote sensing data processing. In: IGARSS 2018-2018 IEEE International
Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium. IEEE, pp. 9193–9196.
Sebastian, I., Ross, J., Beath, C., Mocker, M., Moloney, K., Fonstad, N., 2017. How Big
Old Companies Navigate Digital Transformation.
Sestino, A., Prete, M.I., Piper, L., Giudo, G., 2020. Internet of Things and Big Data as
enablers for business digitalization strategies. Technovation 98, 102173. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.technovation.2020.102173.
Setia, P., Setia, P., Venkatesh, V., Joglekar, S., 2013. Leveraging digital technologies:
how information quality leads to localized capabilities and customer service
performance. MIS Q. 565–590.
Siggelkow, N., 2011. Firms as systems of interdependent choices. J. Manag. Stud. 48 (5),
1126–1140.
Singh, A., Klarner, P., Hess, T., 2020. How do chief digital officers pursue digital
transformation activities? The role of organization design parameters. Long. Range
Plan. 53 (3), 101890.
Sisinni, E., Saifullah, A., Han, S., Jennehag, U., Gidlund, M., 2018. Industrial internet of
things: challenges, opportunities, and directions. IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Informatics 14 (11), 4724–4734.
Sousa-Zomer, T.T., Neely, A., Martinez, V., 2020. Digital transforming capability and
performance: a microfoundational perspective. Int. J. Oper. Prod. Manag.
Subramaniam, M., Iyer, B., Venkatraman, V., 2019. Competing in digital ecosystems.
Bus. Horiz. 62 (1), 83–94.
Sund, K.J., Bogers, M., Villarroel, J.A., Foss, N., 2016. Managing tensions between new
and existing business models. MIT Sloan Manag. Rev. 57 (4), 8.
Suri, K., Cadavid, J., Alferez, M., Dhouib, S., Tucci-Piergiovanni, S., 2017. Modeling
business motivation and underlying processes for RAMI 4.0-aligned cyber-physical
production systems. In: 2017 22nd IEEE International Conference on Emerging
Technologies and Factory Automation (ETFA). IEEE, pp. 1–6. September.
Tabrizi, B., Lam, E., Girard, K., Irvin, V., 2019. Digital transformation is not about
technology. Harv. Bus. Rev. https://hbr.org/2019/03/digital-transformation-is-not
-about-technology.
Teece, D.J., 2007. Explicating dynamic capabilities: the nature and micro-foundations of
(sustainable) enterprise performance. Strat. Manag. J. 28 (13), 1319–1350.
Teece, D.J., 2009. Dynamic Capabilities and Strategic Management: Organizing for
Innovation and Growth. Oxford University Press on Demand.
Teece, D.J., 2010. Business Models, Business Strategy and Innovation. Long Range.
Teece, D.J., 2014. The foundations of enterprise performance: dynamic and ordinary
capabilities in an (economic) theory of firms. Acad. Manag. Perspect. 28 (4),
328–352.
Teece, D.J., 2018. Business models and dynamic capabilities. Long. Range Plan. 51 (1),
40–49.
Teece, D.J., Pisano, G., Shuen, A., 1997. Dynamic capabilities and strategic management.
Strat. Manag. J. 18 (7), 509–533.
Tracy, S.J., 2013. Qualitative Research Methods: Collecting Evidence, Crafting Analysis,
Communicating Impact. Wiley-Blackwell, Hoboken, NJ.
Tripsas, M., Gavetti, G., 2000. Capabilities, cognition, and inertia: evidence from digital
imaging. Strat. Manag. J. 21 (10-11), 1147–1161.
Ustundag, A., Cevican, E., 2018. Industry 4.0: Managing the Digital Transformation.
Switzerland Springer Nature Switzerland AG, Cham.
Verhoef, P.C., Broekhuizen, T., Bart, Y., Bhattacharya, A., Dong, J.Q., Fabian, N.,
Haenlein, M., 2019. Digital transformation: a multidisciplinary reflection and
research agenda. J. Bus. Res.
Verona, G., Ravasi, D., 2003. Unbundling dynamic capabilities: an exploratory study of
continuous product innovation. Ind. Corp. Change 12 (3), 577–606.
Vial, G., 2019. Understanding digital transformation: a review and a research agenda.
J. Strat. Inf. Syst. 28 (2), 118–144.
Visnjic, I., Wiengarten, F., Neely, A., 2016. Only the brave: product innovation, service
business model innovation, and their impact on performance. J. Prod. Innovat.
Manag. 33 (1), 36–52.
Von Bertalanffy, L., 1968. General Systems Theory. Braziller, New York.
Wang, C.L., Ahmed, P.K., 2007. Dynamic capabilities: a review and research agenda. Int.
J. Manag. Rev. 9 (1), 31–51.
Warner, K.S., Wäger, M., 2019. Building dynamic capabilities for digital transformation:
an ongoing process of strategic renewal. Long. Range Plan. 52 (3), 326–349.
Weill, P., Woerner, S.L., 2013. Optimizing your digital business model. MIT Sloan
Manag. Rev. 54 (3), 71.
Weyer, S., Schmitt, M., Ohmer, M., Gorecky, D., 2015. Towards Industry 4.0-Standard­
ization as the crucial challenge for highly modular, multi-vendor production
systems. Ifac-Papersonline 48 (3), 579–584.
S. Ghosh et al.

--- PAGE 18 ---
Technovation 113 (2022) 102414
18
Winter, S., 2003. Understanding dynamic capabilities. Strat. Manag. J. 24, 991–995.
Woldesenbet, K., Ram, M., Jones, T., 2012. Supplying large firms: the role of
entrepreneurial and dynamic capabilities in small businesses. Int. Small Bus. J. 30
(5), 493–512.
World Economic Forum, 2016. World economic Forum white paper, digital
transformation of industries: digital enterprise. URL: http://reports.weforum.org/
digital-transformation/wp-content/blogs.dir/94/mp/files/pages/files/dti-digital-
enterprise-white-paper.pdf.
Xu, X., 2012. From cloud computing to cloud manufacturing. Robot. Comput. Integrated
Manuf. 28 (1), 75–86.
Yin, R.K., 1994. Case Study Research: Design and Methods. Sage, Beverly Hills.
Yin, R.K., 2003. Applications of Case Study Research. Sage Publications, London.
Zahra, S.A., Sapienza, H.J., Davidsson, P., 2006. Entrepreneurship and dynamic
capabilities: a review, model and research agenda. J. Manag. Stud. 43 (4), 917–955.
S. Ghosh et al.