--- PAGE 1 ---
Carson Woo · Jiaheng Lu
Zhanhuai Li · Tok Wang Ling
Guoliang Li · Mong Li Lee (Eds.)
123
LNCS 11158
ER2018WorkshopsEmp-ER,MoBiD,
MREBA,QMMQ,SCME
Xi’an,China,October22–25,2018,Proceedings
Advancesin
ConceptualModeling

--- PAGE 2 ---
Lecture Notes in Computer Science 11158
Commenced Publication in 1973
Founding and Former Series Editors:
Gerhard Goos, Juris Hartmanis, and Jan van Leeuwen
Editorial Board
David Hutchison
Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK
Takeo Kanade
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Josef Kittler
University of Surrey, Guildford, UK
Jon M. Kleinberg
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA
Friedemann Mattern
ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
John C. Mitchell
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
Moni Naor
Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel
C. Pandu Rangan
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, India
Bernhard Steffen
TU Dortmund University, Dortmund, Germany
Demetri Terzopoulos
University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
Doug Tygar
University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA
Gerhard Weikum
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany

--- PAGE 3 ---
More information about this series at http://www.springer.com/series/7409

--- PAGE 4 ---
Carson Woo • Jiaheng Lu
Zhanhuai Li • Tok Wang Ling
Guoliang Li • Mong Li Lee (Eds.)
Advances in
Conceptual Modeling
ER 2018 Workshops Emp-ER, MoBiD,
MREBA, QMMQ, SCME
Xi’an, China, October 22–25, 2018
Proceedings
123

--- PAGE 5 ---
Editors
Carson Woo
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC, Canada
Jiaheng Lu
University of Helsinki
Helsinki, Finland
Zhanhuai Li
Northwestern Polytechnical University
Xian, China
Tok Wang Ling
Department of Computer Science
National University of Singapore
Singapore, Singapore
Guoliang Li
Department of Computer Science
and Technology
Tsinghua University
Beijing, Beijing, China
Mong Li Lee
National University of Singapore
Singapore, Singapore
ISSN 0302-9743 ISSN 1611-3349 (electronic)
Lecture Notes in Computer Science
ISBN 978-3-030-01390-5 ISBN 978-3-030-01391-2 (eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2
Library of Congress Control Number: Applied for
LNCS Sublibrary: SL3 – Information Systems and Applications, incl. Internet/Web, and HCI
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018, corrected publication 2019
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of the
material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation,
broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information
storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now
known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication
does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book are
believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or the editors
give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any errors or
omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

--- PAGE 6 ---
Preface
The International Conference on Conceptual Modeling provides a leading international
forum for disseminating the latest research on conceptual modeling. It brings together
academic and industrial scientists who conduct research on theories of concepts
underlying conceptual modeling, methods and tools for developing and communicating
conceptual models, techniques for transforming conceptual models into effective
implementations, and the impact of conceptual modeling techniques on databases,
business strategies, and information systems development, etc. The conference’s long
history has established itself as the premier research conference in the conceptual
modeling area.
Traditionally, the conference includes more specialized or focus sessions such as
workshops and prototype demonstrations to create opportunities for a smaller group of
researchers working in the same ﬁeld to meet and exchange ideas. This provides
opportunities to discuss new and promising topics or approaches. The 37th Interna-
tional Conference on Conceptual Modeling (ER 2018) continued this strong tradition,
producing this companion volume to supplement the main conference proceedings.
This year, papers from the following ﬁve workshops are included in this volume:
1. Emp-ER: Empirical Methods in Conceptual Modeling
2. MoBiD: Modeling and Management of Big Data
3. MREBA: Conceptual Modeling in Requirements and Business Analysis
4. QMMQ: Quality of Models and Models of Quality
5. SCME: Conceptual Modeling Education
Each workshop had its own Program Committee and reviewers. We received many
high-quality submissions, of which 14 were accepted. Along with the papers, this
companion volume includes three keynote abstracts by Tok Wang Ling, João Araujo,
and Oscar Pastor from three individual workshops (MoBiD, MREBA, and doctoral
symposium), and two papers recommended by the program chairs of the main con-
ference. In addition to the ﬁve workshops, we had:
6. An invited conference lunch speaker to discuss a topic that is of general interest
and related to conceptual modeling. This year we were honored to have the past
president of Taiwan’s largest IT R&D organization, Dr. Chintay Shih of Industrial
Technology Research Institute (ITRI), who introduced and elaborated on managing
IT talents.
7. An interactive workshop CCM (Characterizing the Field of Conceptual Modeling)
where there was no paper submissions, but the organizers formed groups during the
session to discuss fundamental issues of conceptual modeling.
8. An ER forum for providing a vibrant platform for presenting and discussing novel
research, and especially research-in-progress, that addresses any topic related to
conceptual modeling. All of these ﬁve ER forum papers were recommended by the
main conference program chairs.

--- PAGE 7 ---
9. A doctoral symposium (with three PhD students) where current PhD students had
the opportunity to receive feedback on their research from an international com-
munity of experts and discuss research ideas with them.
10. A prototype demonstration session where participants had the opportunity to
visualize and discuss implementation and utilization of new conceptual models.
We received a number of high-quality submissions, from which we accepted 13
papers.
11. Four diverse tutorials with each tutorial providing a road map about a subject area
related to conceptual modeling. The tutorials covered materials from a variety of
different authors. The objective of a tutorial is to cover a subject that has adequate
past work but still provides many opportunities for future research.
12. DSBC: Data Science and Blockchain workshop. Because this workshop was a late
addition to the program, the papers are not included in this volume.
Each of the ER forum, doctoral symposium, and prototype demonstration presen-
tations have a short version of their corresponding paper, or an extended abstract, in
this volume. Information about the invited luncheon speech, interactive workshop
CCM (Characterizing the Field of Conceptual Modeling), each of the four tutorials, and
the DSBC (Data Science and Blockchain) workshop are also included in this volume.
We wish to thank the chairs of each workshop, the interactive workshop, ER forum,
doctoral symposium, prototype demonstration, and tutorials, their respective Program
Committee members and reviewers, and most importantly, the authors who submitted
their work, all of which contributed to making this part of the conference a success. We
hope you will enjoy reading work from this volume.
October 2018 Carson Woo
Jiaheng Lu
Zhanhuai Li
Tok Wang Ling
VI Preface

--- PAGE 8 ---
ER 2018 Conference Organization
Honorary Chair
Shan Wang Renmin University of China, China
Conference General Co-chairs
Zhanhuai Li Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
Tok Wang Ling National University of Singapore, Singapore
Organization Chair
Xuequn Shang Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
Steering Committee Liaison
Il-Yeol Song Drexel University, USA
Program Committee Co-chairs
Juan-Carlos Trujillo
Mondéjar
University of Alicante, Spain
Karen Davis Miami University, USA
Xiaoyong Du Renmin University of China, China
Workshop Co-chairs
Carson Woo University of British Columbia, Canada
Jiaheng Lu University of Helsinki, Finland
Tutorial Co-chairs
Gillian Dobbie University of Auckland, New Zealand
Matteo Golfarelli University of Bologna, Italy
Demo Co-chairs
Qun Chen Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
Zhifeng Bao RMIT, Australia

--- PAGE 9 ---
Doctoral Symposium Co-chairs
Xavier Franch Polytechnic University of Catalonia, Spain
Chaokun Wang Tsinghua University, China
ER Forum Co-chairs
Heinrich C. Mayr Alpen-Adria-Universität Klagenfurt, Austria
Oscar Pastor Universitat Politècnica de Valencia, Spain
Symposium on Conceptual Modeling Education (SCME) 2018
Co-chairs
Isabelle Comyn-Wattiau ESSEC Business School, France
Hui Ma Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand
Treasurer and Registration Chair
Wenjie Liu Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
Panel Co-chairs
Carlo Batini University of Milano Bicocca, Italy
Ernest Teniente Polytechnic University of Catalonia, Spain
Proceedings Co-chairs
Guoliang Li Tsinghua University, China
Mong Li Lee National University of Singapore, Singapore
Publicity Co-chairs
Bin Cui School of EECS, Peking University, China
Moonkun Lee Chonbuk National University, Republic of Korea
Mengchi Liu Carleton University, Canada
Selmin Nurcan University of Paris 1, France
Conference Webmaster
Jialu Hu Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
VIII ER 2018 Conference Organization

--- PAGE 10 ---
ER 2018 Workshop Organization
Characterizing the Field of Conceptual Modeling (CCM) 2018
Co-chairs
Lois M. L. Delcambre Portland State University, USA
Stephen W. Liddle Brigham Young University, USA
Oscar Pastor Universitat Politècnica de Valencia, Spain
Veda C. Storey Georgia State University, USA
Conceptual Modeling in Requirements and Business Analysis
(MREBA) 2018 Co-chairs
Jennifer Horkoff Chalmers and the University of Gothenburg, Sweden
Renata Guizzardi Universidade Federal do Espirito Santo, Brazil
Jelena Zdravkovic Stockholm University, Sweden
Data Science and Blockchain (DSBC) 2018 Co-chairs
Peter Chen Carnegie Mellon University, USA
Carson Woo University of British Columbia, Canada
Empirical Methods in Conceptual Modeling (Emp-ER) 2018
Co-chairs
Jennifer Horkoff Chalmers and the University of Gothenburg, Sweden
Sotirios Liaskos York University, Canada
Modeling and Management of Big Data (MoBiD) 2018 Co-chairs
Il-Yeol Song Drexel University, USA
Jesús Peral University of Alicante, Spain
Alejandro Maté University of Alicante, Spain
Quality of Models and Models of Quality (QMMQ) 2018 Co-chairs
Samira Si-said Cherﬁ Conservatoire National des Arts et Metiers, France
Beatriz Marin Universidad Diego Portales, Chile
Oscar Pastor Universitat Politècnica de Valencia, Spain

--- PAGE 11 ---
ER 2018 Workshop Program Committee
DSBC 2018 Program Committee
Arne Solvberg NTNU, Norway
Rong Chang IBM Research, USA
Oscar Pastor Universitat Politècnica de Valencia, Spain
Hasan Yasar Software Engineering Institute, CMU, USA
Heinrich C. Mayr Alpen-Adria-Universität Klagenfurt, Austria
Demo 2018 Program Committee
Muhammad Cheema Monash University, Australia
Farhana Choudhury RMIT University, Australia
Henning Koehler Massey University, New Zealand
Yuchen Li Singapore Management University, Singapore
Wei Lu Renmin University, China
Ruiming Tang Huawei, China
Sheng Wang RMIT University, Australia
Manuel Wimmer Vienna University of Technology, Austria
Qing Xie Wuhan University of Technology, China
Jianqiu Xu NUAA, China
Yi Yu National Institute of Informatics, Japan
Jelena Zdravkovic Stockholm University, Sweden
Ping Zhang Wuhan University, China
Jingbo Zhou Baidu Inc., China
Doctoral Symposium 2018 Program Committee
Eric Yu University of Toronto, Canada
Heinrich C. Mayr Alpen-Adria-Universität Klagenfurt, Austria
Hongzhi Wang Harbin Institute of Technology, China
Jianliang Xu Hong Kong Baptist University, SAR China
Peiquan Jin University of Science and Technology of China, China
Roel Wieringa University of Twente, The Netherlands
Emp-ER 2018 Program Committee
Silvia Abrahao Universität Politecnica de Valencia, Spain
Jordi Cabot Open University of Catalonia, Spain
Marian Daun Universität Duisburg-Essen, Germany
Marcela Fabiana University of Castillia, La Mancha, Spain
Miguel Goulao Universidade NOVA de Lisboa, Portugal

--- PAGE 12 ---
Alicia Grubb University of Toronto, Canada
Katsiaryna Labunets Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands
Tong Li Beijing University of Technology, China
Grischa Liebel University of Gothenburg, Sweden
Dirk van der Linden University of Bristol, UK
Feng-Lin Li Alibaba Inc., China
Lin Liu Tsinghua University, China
Jan Mendling Vienna University of Economics and Business, Austria
Alexander Nolte University of Tartu, Estonia
Xavier Le Pallec University of Lille 1, France
Oscar Pastor Universitat Politècnica de Valencia, Spain
Geert Poels Ghent University, Belgium
Helen Purchase University of Glasgow, UK
Jan Recker University of Cologne, Germany
Iris Reinhartz-Berger University of Haifa, Israel
MoBiD 2018 Program Committee
Yuan An Drexel University, Philadelphia, USA
Marie-Aude Aufaure Ecole Centrale Paris, France
Rafael Berlanga Universität Jaume I, Spain
Sandro Bimonte Irstea, France
Gennaro Cordasco University of Salerno, Italy
Dickson Chiu University of Hong Kong, SAR China
Alfredo Cuzzocrea University of Calabria, Italy
Stuart Dillon The University of Waikato, New Zealand
Gill Dobbie University of Auckland, New Zealand
Jose Luis
Fernandez-Aleman
University of Murcia, Spain
John R. Johnson Paciﬁc Northwest National Lab, USA
Magnus Johnsson University of Lund, Sweden
Nicholas Multari Paciﬁc Northest National Laboratory, Richland, USA
Antoni Olive Polytechnic University of Catalonia, Spain
Jeff Parsons Memorial University of Newfoundland, Canada
Oscar Pastor Universitat Politècnica de Valencia, Spain
Nicolas Prat ESSEC Business School, France
Carlos Rivero University of Idaho, USA
Pablo Sanchez University of Cantabria, Spain
MREBA 2018 Program Committee
Okhaide Akhigbe University of Ottawa, Canada
Claudia Cappelli Universidade Federal do Estado do Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil
Lawrence Chang University of Texas, USA
Fabiano Dalpiaz Utrecht University, The Netherlands
XII ER 2018 Workshop Program Committee

--- PAGE 13 ---
Marcela Ruiz Utrecht University, The Netherlands
Aditya Ghose University of Wollongong, Australia
Paul Johannesson Stockholm University, Sweden
Tong Li Beijing University of Technology, China
Sotirios Liaskos York University, Canada
Grischa Liebel Chalmers, Sweden
Lin Liu Tsinghua University, China
Lidia Lopez Polytechnic University of Catalonia, Spain
Pericles Loucopoulos University of Manchester, UK
Joshua Nwokeji Gannon University, USA
Andreas Opdahl University of Bergen, Norway
Anna Perini Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Italy
Jolita Ralyte University of Geneva, Switzerland
Iris Reinhartz-Berger University of Haifa, USA
Junko Shirogane Tokyo Woman’s Christian University, Japan
Motoshi Saeki Tokyo Institute of Technology, Japan
Samira Si-Said Cherﬁ Conservatoire National des Arts et Metiers, France
Vitor Souza Universidade Federal do Esprito Santo, Brazil
Sam Supakkul Sabre Travel Network, USA
Angelo Susi Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Italy
Lucineia Thom Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil
QMMQ 2018 Program Committee
Pnina Soffer University of Haifa, Israel
Asma Sellami University of Sfax - ISIMS, Tunisia
Jolita Ralyte University of Geneva, Switzerland
Geert Poels Ghent University, Belgium
Jeffrey Parsons Memorial University of Newfoundland, Canada
Jose Ignacio Panach
Navarrete
University of Valencia, Spain
Nan Niu University of Cincinnati, USA
Raimundas Matulevicius University of Tartu, Estonia
Xuelin Li University of Texas at Dallas, USA
Julio Cesar Leite PUC-Rio, Brazil
Zhi Jin Peking University, China
Cesar Gonzalez-Perez
Incipit
Incipit, CSIC, Spain
Sepideh Ghanavati Texas Tech University, USA
Maya Daneva University of Twente, The Netherlands
Jose Antonio Cruz-Lemus University of Castilla-La Mancha, Spain
Cristina Cachero University of Alicante, Spain
Ladjel Bellatreche LIAS/ENSMA, France
Faten Atigui CNAM, France
ER 2018 Workshop Program Committee XIII

--- PAGE 14 ---
SCME 2018 Program Committee
Jacky Akoka CEDRIC-CNAM and IMT-TEM, France
Solomon Antony Murray State University, USA
Dickson K. W. Chiu The University of Hong Kong, SAR China
Sebastian Link The University of Auckland, New Zealand
Marcela Ruiz Utrecht University, The Netherlands
Monique Snoeck Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Belgium
ER FORUM 2018 Program Committee
Raian Ali Bournemouth University, UK
Nasser Assem Al Akhawayn University, Ifrane, Morocco
Zhifeng Bao RMIT, Australia
Luca Cernuzzi Univ. Católica de Asunción, Paraguay
S. Chittayasothorn King Mongkut’s Inst. of Techn., Thailand
Karen Davis Miami University, USA
Xiaoyong Du Renmin University of China, China
Aurona Gerber University of Pretoria, South Africa
Giovanni Giachetti Universidad Andres Bello, Chile
Giancarlo Guizzardi UFES Brazil & Free Univ. Bozen, Italy
Tok Wang Ling National University of Singapore, Singapore
Beatriz Marín Universidad Diego Portales, Chile
Heinrich C. Mayr Alpen-Adria-Universität Klagenfurt, Austria
Zoltán Micsei Budapest Univ. of Techn. & Eco., Hungary
Oscar Pastor Universitat Polytécnica de Valencia, Spain
Ricardo Quintero Instituto Tecnológico de Culiacán, Mexiko
Daniel Riesco National University of San Luis, Argentina
Genaina Rodrigues Univ. of Brasilia, Brazil
Marcela Ruiz Utrecht University, The Netherlands
Kurt Sandkuhl University of Rostock, Germany
Flavia Santoro UNIRIO, Brazil
Juan-Carlos Trujillo
Mondéjar
Univ. de Alicante, Spain
Iyad Zikra Stockholm University, Sweden
XIV ER 2018 Workshop Program Committee

--- PAGE 15 ---
Why Mobility of (IT and Other) Talents Matters?
(ER 2018 Conference Lunch Talk)
Chintay Shih
National Tsing Hua Univ. & Past President of ITRI, Taiwan
ER 2018 Conference Lunch Speaker, October 23 (Tuesday), 2018
Abstract. For a company or a developing economy, when considering their long-term
development strategy, talents shortage is always a top priority issue. Even for an
established enterprise or a developed country, how to tap into the resources of human
capital is not easy. This talk is about the speaker’s 40 years’ experience in Taiwan’s
famous Hsinchu Science Park, participating in and witnessing the development of
Taiwan semiconductor industry from nothing to one of the leading centers in the world.
Where do the talents came from? How can a company/country attract, keep, and grow
talents? and why the mobility of talent between institutions, countries matters? This
talk will try to answer some of these questions.

--- PAGE 16 ---
Contents
Demo 2018
Implementation of Bus Value-Added Service Platform
via Crowdsourcing Incentive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Yan-sheng Chai, Huang-lei Ma, Lin-quan Xing, Xu Wang,
and Bo-han Li
SEED V3: Entity-Oriented Exploratory Search in Knowledge
Graphs on Tablets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Jun Chen, Mingrui Shao, Yueguo Chen, and Xiaoyong Du
MobiDis: Relationship Discovery of Mobile Users from
Spatial-Temporal Trajectories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Xiaoou Ding, Hongzhi Wang, Jiaxuan Su, Aoran Xie, Jianzhong Li,
and Hong Gao
Crowd-Type: A Crowdsourcing-Based Tool for Type Completion
in Knowledge Bases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Zhaoan Dong, Jianhong Tu, Ju Fan, Jiaheng Lu, Xiaoyong Du,
and Tok Wang Ling
Attribute Value Matching by Maximizing Benefit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
Fengfeng Fan and Zhanhuai Li
Towards Real-Time Analysis of ID-Associated Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
Guodong Jin, Yixuan Wang, Xiongpai Qin, Yueguo Chen,
and Xiaoyong Du
Phenomenological Ontology Guided Conceptual Modeling for Enterprise
Information Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Tomas Jonsson and Håkan Enquist
Using Clustering Labels to Supervise Mashup Service Classification . . . . . . . 35
Yang Liu, Lin Li, and Jianwen Xiang
A Multi-Constrained Temporal Path Query System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Jiuchao Shi, Guanfeng Liu, Anqi Zhao, An Liu, Zhixu Li, and Kai Zheng
ACCDS: A Criminal Community Detection System Based on Evolving
Social Graphs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
Xiaoli Wang, Meihong Wang, and Jianshan Han

--- PAGE 17 ---
A Prototype for Generating Meaningful Layout of iStar Models . . . . . . . . . . 49
Yunduo Wang, Tong Li, Haoyuan Zhang, Jiayi Sun, Yeming Ni,
and Congkai Geng
MDBF: A Tool for Monitoring Database Files . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
Xiangyu Wei and Jianqiu Xu
CusFinder: An Interactive Customer Ranking Query System. . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
Yanghao Zhou, Xiaolin Qin, Xiaojun Xie, and Xingluo Li
Doctoral Symposium
Multiple Data Quality Evaluation and Data Cleaning on Imprecise
Temporal Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Xiaoou Ding
An Active Workflow Method for Entity-Oriented Data Collection. . . . . . . . . 76
Gaoyang Guo
Visual Non-verbal Social Cues Data Modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
Mahmoud Qodseya
ER FORUM 2018
Dependency-Based Query/View Synchronization upon Schema Evolutions. . . 91
Loredana Caruccio, Giuseppe Polese, and Genoveffa Tortora
Knowledge Graph Embedding via Relation Paths and Dynamic
Mapping Matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
Shengwu Xiong, Weitao Huang, and Pengfei Duan
Expressiveness of Temporal Constraints for Process Models. . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
Johann Eder, Marco Franceschetti, Julius Köpke, and Anja Oberrauner
Thoroughly Modern Accounting: Shifting to a De Re Conceptual Pattern
for Debits and Credits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134
Chris Partridge, Mesbah Khan, Sergio de Cesare, Frederik Gailly,
Michael Verdonck, and Andrew Mitchell
Evaluation of the Cognitive Effectiveness of the CORAS
Modelling Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149
Eloïse Zehnder, Nicolas Mayer, and Guillaume Gronier
Symposium on Conceptual Modeling Education (SCME) 2018
Teaching Physical Database Design. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 165
Karen C. Davis
XVIII Contents

--- PAGE 18 ---
The Simple Enterprise Architecture Framework: Giving Alignment to IT
Decisions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 176
Giovanni Giachetti, Beatriz Marín, and Estefanía Serral
Empirical Methods in Conceptual Modeling (Emp-ER) 2018
Towards an Empirical Evaluation of Imperative and Declarative
Process Mining. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 191
Christoffer Olling Back, Søren Debois, and Tijs Slaats
Artifact Sampling in Experimental Conceptual Modeling Research . . . . . . . . 199
Roman Lukyananko, Jeffrey Parsons, and Binny M. Samuel
Design of an Empirical Study for Evaluating an Automatic Layout Tool . . . . 206
Haoyuan Zhang, Tong Li, and Yunduo Wang
Conceptual Modeling in Requirements and Business
Analysis (MREBA) 2018
Representing and Analyzing Enterprise Capabilities as Specialized
Actors - A BPM Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 217
Mohammad Hossein Danesh and Eric Yu
An Approach Toward the Economic Assessment of Business
Process Compliance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 228
Stephan Kuehnel and Andrea Zasada
Visual Representation of the TOGAF Requirements Management Process . . . 239
Elena Kornyshova and Judith Barrios
Technology-Transfer Requirements Engineering (TTRE) – on the
Value of Conceptualizing Alternatives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 249
Blagovesta Pirelli and Alain Wegmann
Conceptual Modeling to Support Pivoting – An Example from Twitter . . . . . 260
Vik Pant and Eric Yu
Modeling and Management of Big Data (MoBiD) 2018
SQL or NoSQL? Which Is the Best Choice for Storing Big
Spatio-Temporal Climate Data?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 275
Jie Lian, Sheng Miao, Michael McGuire, and Ziying Tang
UDBMS: Road to Unification for Multi-model Data Management. . . . . . . . . 285
Jiaheng Lu, Zhen Hua Liu, Pengfei Xu, and Chao Zhang
Contents XIX

--- PAGE 19 ---
Extracting Conflict Models from Interaction Traces in Virtual
Collaborative Work. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 295
Guangxuan Zhang, Yilu Zhou, Sandeep Purao, and Heng Xu
Quality of Models and Models of Quality (QMMQ) 2018
Data Quality Evaluation in Document Oriented Data Stores . . . . . . . . . . . . . 309
Emilio Cristalli, Flavia Serra, and Adriana Marotta
Genomic Data Management in Big Data Environments: The Colorectal
Cancer Case. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 319
Ana León Palacio, Alicia García Giménez,
Juan Carlos Casamayor Ródenas, and José Fabián Reyes Román
Domain Specific Models as System Links . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 330
Vladimir A. Shekhovtsov, Suneth Ranasinghe, Heinrich C. Mayr,
and Judith Michael
Correction to: An Approach Toward the Economic Assessment
of Business Process Compliance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C1
Stephan Kuehnel and Andrea Zasada
Tutorials 2018
Behavior-Derived Reuse - Conceptual Foundations and Practical Tools for
Increasing Software Reuse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 343
Iris Reinhartz-Berger and Anna Zamansky
Visual Querying on Graphs: Models and Techniques. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 344
Sourav S. Bhowmick and Byron Choi
Conceptualizing Analytics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 345
Christoph G. Schuetz and Michael Schrefl
Abstraction in Conceptual Models, Maps and Graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 346
Carlo Batin and John Mylopoulos
Author Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 347
XX Contents

--- PAGE 20 ---
Demo 2018

--- PAGE 21 ---
Preface to Demonstration Track
Demonstration Track at the 37th International
Conference on Conceptual Modeling (ER 2018)
Xi’an, China
October 22–25, 2018
Organized by
Zhifeng Bao and Qun Chen
The International Conference on Conceptual Modeling provides a leading international
forum for disseminating the latest research on conceptual modeling. It brings together
academic and industrial scientists who conduct research on theories of concepts
underlying conceptual modeling, methods and tools for developing and communicating
conceptual models, techniques for transforming conceptual models into effective
implementations, and the impact of conceptual modeling techniques on databases,
business strategies and information systems development, etc. The conference’s long
history has established itself as the premier research conference in the conceptual
modeling area.
Traditionally, the conference includes a session for system prototype demonstra-
tions to create opportunities for researchers to demonstrate their proof of concept
research ideas. This provides opportunities for participants to visualize and discuss
implementation and utilization of new conceptual models, and ﬁnd further promising
research questions from system building. The 37th International Conference on Con-
ceptual Modeling (ER 2018) continues this strong tradition, producing this companion
volume to supplement the main conference proceedings.
There were a total of 21 papers submitted to the demonstration track, and we
accepted 13 papers, with a 62% acceptance rate, reflecting the high quality of the
submission. The topics include conducting entity search over knowledge bases,
exploiting conceptual modeling in data crowdsourcing, enterprise data management
and data quality control, to name a few.
We wish to thank the seventeen program committee members of the demonstration
track from both industry and academia, and the authors who submitted their work, both
of which contribute to making this part of the conference a success. We hope the
participants will enjoy reading work from this volume.
October 2018 Zhifeng Bao
Qun Chen
Program Co-chairs

--- PAGE 22 ---
Implementation of Bus Value-Added Service
Platform via Crowdsourcing Incentive
Yan-sheng Chai1(&)
, Huang-lei Ma1
, Lin-quan Xing1
, Xu Wang1
,
and Bo-han Li1,2(&)
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University
of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing 211106, China
1574411019@qq.com, bhli@nuaa.edu.cn
2
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology
and Industrialization, Nanjing 210016, China
Abstract. Sharing economy is prevailing. The network of cars and shared
bicycles is convenient for people to travel. We investigate the issue of value-
added service based on crowdsourcing for campus shuttles. We can provide
diverse services between users by solving matching problems. The service
concludes positioning and location services, requesting designating. The efﬁ-
cient incentive mechanisms make the shuttle bus transportation parcel conve-
nient. We use KNN algorithm to establish KD tree to index different parcels
nodes. In our app demo, we show how the application execute and how to
improve the user experience who involve the orders.
Keywords: Spatio-temporal  KD-tree  Crowdsourcing  Incentive
1 Instruction
The concept of crowdsourcing has entered the public’s ﬁeld of vision starting with the
article “The Rise of Crowdsourcing” published by Jeff Howe, a journalist of Wired
Magazine in the United States, but no speciﬁc deﬁnition of crowdsourcing was given at
that time. Jeff Howe did a full deﬁnition of crowdsourcing in 2008: Crowdsourcing is
the process of outsourcing traditional tasks performed by internal employees to an
unknown, usually large number of groups of an open manner [1]. However, from the
point of view of time, crowdsourcing proposed by the Americans was one year later
than the Witchy who was born in China in 2005. In July 2005, Liu Feng ﬁrst proposed
the concepts of “Wisconsin” and “Witchy” in the article “The Predicament and
Countermeasures of Search Engines” [2]. Witchy phenomenon and crowdsourcing are
similar to the same place, and it refers to an ordinary business model that relies on
common mass resources to complete tasks for the enterprise. We apply crowdsourcing
theory to study the parcel transportation problem of campus shuttle in two campuses.
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 3–6, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_1

--- PAGE 23 ---
2 Related Work
The idea of crowdsourcing is the idea of solving problems of group wisdom. Its
concrete model is that after the providers of crowdsourcing tasks release their tasks on
the Internet, the non-speciﬁc groups in the network will undertake and solve them in a
voluntary manner, thus it can complete the solution of the distributed problem. Driven
by the development of the Internet, this idea of using cluster intelligence to solve
distributed problems is realistic in the era of big data [3].
Mavridis et al. studied assignment problems of crowdsourcing. [4] In accordance
with the need of crowdsourcing platform of some speciﬁc skills to complete tasks, they
build ﬁne models of tasks and participants through skills tree, and study efﬁcient
models for assigning tasks to participants with similar skills.
As for the incentive mechanism of crowdsourcing, Yang D studied the incentive
mechanism to conduct group perception. The two mentioned system models: the
supplier award crowdsourcing to share the user mode, and user-centered mode. [5] Our
incentive mechanism is user-centered and has certain reference signiﬁcance.
3 Crowd-Sourced Incentive Value-Added Service Platform
3.1 Deﬁnition
Spatio-temporal crowdsourcing task: a spatio-temporal crowd task issued by the
requester of the task, usually is deﬁned as the following ﬁve-tuple form, denoted as
t = <l, t, r, s, d> . ‘l’ denotes the location of the task. ‘t’ is the release time of the task.
‘d’ is the deadline for the task. ‘s’ is the space scope released by the task, that is, the
crowd-sourced participants in this scope have the opportunity to receive the task. ‘r’ is
the reward for completing this task, usually expressed as the price or bonus of the task.
[6] Spatio-temporal crowdsourcing: time and space through crowdsourcing, often
referred to as mobile Internet devices in real time on spatio-temporal crowdsourcing
platform gathering crowdsourcing tasks and crowdsourcing participants, and through
the platform of crowdsourcing task scheduling for the distribution and quality control,
which makes crowdsourcing participants in the physical world crowdsourcing task and
satisfy the process of task constraints. With the framework of our project, we develop
the task allocation mechanism based on continuous KNN query (CQ-KNN) algorithm
and SEA-CNN algorithm applicable to mobile terminals [7, 8].
3.2 Task Allocation Mechanism
We refer some methods which adopt incentive mechanisms for large-scale participation
and task assignment in mobile crowd sensing environment [9, 10].
We Present a Search Algorithm to Ensure a Large Number of Users to Efﬁciently
Query the Nearby Parcel When Accessing the Database:
(1) Take a ﬁxed point as the center, convert the latitude and longitude coordinates of
the geode map into the plane artesian coordinates (x, y).
4 Y. Chai et al.

--- PAGE 24 ---
(2) According to the screening conditions, the database task parcel coordinates (x, y)
are read, and there are two dimensions (x and y). The KD-tree (k-dimension tree) is
established with points as the center:
A. Calculate the variances in each dimension, choose the one with the larger
variances, and treat this dimension as a split dimension.
B. On the split dimension, sort the split dimension from small to large, select a
coordinate in the middle as the split node.
C. The left and right subtrees is constructed recursively according to the left and
right data onto the split node.
(3) Given a participant coordinates a, start from the root node in the KD-tree and
search depth ﬁrst. Calculation of the current node with a Euclidean distance d, use
every space node on the characteristics of the space division, decide whether to
enter the left sub tree or the right sub tree to ﬁnd the nearest point and look for the
sub tree.
(4) Calculate the distance between the current node and a d’. If d’ < d, update the most
adjacent points a1 and d, otherwise not updated. Repeat (4), (5) until reach the leaf
node. Backtracking, with sample point as the center and d as the radius, draws a
circle to check whether there is delivery of the parent node meeting demands. If
yes, enter another subtree to search for the nearest point, otherwise this point is the
closest.
Query K adjacent parcel, keep with a K node in the linked list, and the maximum
distance participants lists nodes, if found nodes in the search process is less than the
maximum, the nodes to join the header, delete table node, update the maximum. In
order to motivate participants to help each other, we set up a score system to evaluate
each task. If having serviced one user, and the value of score is increased by one.
4 Implementation of the Platform
The following screen shots show some achievements of our project:
As shown in Fig. 1, users nearby can take the tasks. As shown in Fig. 2, it indicates
releasing a task which needs users to add detailed information. When a user’s parcel
pass through our bus platform and asks others to help him transport the parcel to a
designated place, he can publish the task by issuing task information. When allocating
tasks, we can see other people’s tasks through our platform and assign tasks to nearby
people efﬁciently based on our task assignment algorithm.
Figure 3 is the process of the delivery, and Fig. 4 is the trajectory of our campus
bus taking transport parcels. Users can view their own trajectory at any time to ensure
the security of the parcel, and also record data as a necessary reference for our analysis.
Implementation of Bus Value-Added Service Platform 5

--- PAGE 25 ---
5 Conclusion and Future Work
Crowdsourcing has a very wide application prospect. Our project is to develop an APP
combining the crowdsourcing of shuttle bus to deliver parcels so as to improve the
added value. If our application works well on the school buses and is widely supported
by our staffs and students, we will further promote it at the social vehicle level,
including private cars, buses, subways, etc.
References
1. Howe, J.: Crowdsourcing: Why the Power of the Crowd is Driving the Future of Business.
www.crowdsourcing.com. Accessed 15 Jan 2014
2. Ye, T., Yu, B.: Analysis of witchy business model. Libr. Inf. Sci. 20(22), 121–123 (2010)
3. Kleemann, F., Voß, G., Rieder, K.: Un(der)paid innovators: the commercial utilization of
consumer work through crowdsourcing. Sci. Technol. Innov. Stud. 4(2), 5–26 (2008)
4. Mavridis, P., Gross-Amblard, D.: Using hierarchical skills for optimized task assignment in
knowledge-intensive crowdsourcing. In: ACM International Conference on World Wide
Web, Montreal, pp. 843–853 (2016)
5. Yang, D., Xue, G., Fang, X., et al.: Incentive mechanisms for crowdsensing: crowdsourcing
with smartphones. IEEE Trans. Network. 24(3), 1732–1744 (2016)
6. Tong, Y.X., Yuan, Y., Cheng, Y.R., Chen, L., Wang, G.R.: Survey on spatiotemporal
crowdsourced data management techniques. J. Softw. 28(1), 35–58 (2017)
7. Rubing, L., Qiong, L.: KNN query technology of mobile terminals in highway networks.
J. South China Univ. Technol. 40(1), 138–145 (2012)
8. Xiong, X., Mokbel, M.F., Aref, W.G.: SEA-CNN: scalable processing of continuous k-
nearest neighbor queries in spatio-temporal databases. In: International Conference on Data
Engineering, Tokyo, pp. 643–654. IEEE (2005)
9. Ogie, R.I.: Adopting incentive mechanisms for large-scale participation in mobile
crowdsensing: from literature review to a conceptual framework. Hum. Cent. Comput.
Inf. Sci. 6(1), 24 (2016)
10. Pournajaf, L., Xiong, L., Sunderam, V.: Dynamic data driven crowd sensing task
assignment. Procedia Comput. Sci. 29, 1314–1323 (2014)
Fig. 4. Trajectory of
parcels
Fig. 3. Status
of parcels
Fig. 2. Task
allocation
Fig. 1. Users nearby
6 Y. Chai et al.

--- PAGE 26 ---
SEED V3: Entity-Oriented Exploratory
Search in Knowledge Graphs on Tablets
Jun Chen1,2
, Mingrui Shao1,2
, Yueguo Chen1,2(B)
, and Xiaoyong Du1,2
1
School of Information, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
chenyueguo@ruc.edu.cn
2
Key Laboratory of Data Engineering and Knowledge Engineering, MOE,
Beijing, China
Abstract. Entity-oriented information access is becoming a key enabler
for next-generation information retrieval and exploration systems. Pre-
viously, researchers have demonstrated that knowledge graphs allow the
exploitation of semantic correlation among entities to improve infor-
mation access. However, less attention is devoted to user interfaces of
tablets for exploring knowledge graphs eﬀectively and eﬃciently. In this
paper, we design and implement a system called SEED to support entity-
oriented exploratory search in knowledge graphs on tablets. It utilizes a
dataset of hundreds of thousands of ﬁlm-related entities extracted from
DBpedia V3.9, and applies the knowledge embedding derived from a
graph embedding model to rank entities and their relevant aspects, as
well as explaining the correlation among entities via their links. More-
over, it supports touch-based interactions for formulating queries rapidly.
Keywords: Knowledge Graph · Knowledge presentation
Graph embedding model · Exploratory search · User interface · Tablet
1 Introduction
Entity-oriented information access is becoming a key enabler for next-generation
information retrieval and exploration systems. The premise of entity-oriented
information access is to better answer users’ information needs by returning
entities instead of documents [7]. Previously, researchers have demonstrated
that knowledge graphs (shorted as KGs) can be applied to improve information
access, because they contain high-quality semantic information, which allows us
to apply the oﬀ-the-shelf semantic correlation for ranking entities and relations,
as well as to explicitly show why entities are relevant to each other [3,4].
As illustrated in Fig.1-c, KGs describe entities in many aspects, each of
which is composed of a relation and an entity. For instance, the aspect com-
posed of Director and Robert Zemeckis describes that Forrest Gump is directed
This work is supported by the National Science Foundation of China under grants
No. 61472426, U1711261, 61432006.
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 7–11, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_2

--- PAGE 27 ---
8 J. Chen et al.
by Robert Zemeckis. A particular set of such aspects fosters methods for the
understanding of these entities. However, KGs often lack important triples, which
aﬀects the eﬀectiveness of methods that simply utilize the explicit links [5]. To
address this issue, some knowledge presentation models have been proposed to
map entities and relations into the embedding space [2], which provides a prin-
cipled way to rank entities beyond the explicit links in the existing KGs.
However, less attention is devoted to the user interfaces of tablets for explor-
ing KGs eﬀectively and eﬃciently. It is faced with two main challenges: (1)
conventional user interfaces of tablets are constrained by the performance of vir-
tual keyboard-based and mouse-based interactions, which confronts users with
challenges in formulating queries rapidly, as well as providing positive or negative
feedbacks with diﬀerent weights to improve the results; (2) millions of entities
are connected by thousands of relations in KGs, which confronts systems with
challenges in eﬀectively recommending and presenting relevant information in
the limited space. Therefore, it becomes crucial to propose a novel solution that
can overcome the limitations of conventional user interfaces of tablets and bring
the potential of touch-based interactions to the forefront.
In this paper, we design and implement a system called SEED for entity-
oriented exploratory search in KGs on tablets. It utilizes the knowledge embed-
ding derived from a graph embedding model to present and recommend entities
and their relevant aspects, as well as explain the correlation among entities
via their links. Moreover, it supports users to manipulate entities and aspects
directly to formulate queries rapidly.
2 The User Interface of SEED
The user interface of SEED is composed of four areas: (1) Query Area (see
Fig.1-a-1 and 1-a-2), (2) Recommendation Area (see Fig.1-a-3 and 1-a-4), (3)
Presentation Area (see Fig.1-c), and (4) Explanation Area (see Fig.1-d).
Query Area: To support users to formulate queries rapidly, users can swipe
entities or aspects to the left as positive feedbacks (see Fig.1-a-1) or the right
as negative feedbacks (see Fig.1-a-2). For the entities and aspects in the query
area, users can manipulate the bars under them to adjust their weights (i.e., the
weight enlarges when moving the bullet on the bar to the right, and vice versa).
Users can scroll up in the query area with two ﬁngers to submit a query.
Recommendation and Presentation Area: After submitting a query, the
relevant entities and aspects with respect to the query are returned (see Fig.1-
a-3 and a-4). Users can scroll the horizontal or vertical axis to browse the rec-
ommended information. When the query is augmented by positive or negative
feedbacks, the results are updated accordingly (see Fig.1-b). When users are
interested in a particular entity, they can look up its detailed information by
clicking it to foster their understanding towards it (see Fig.1-c).
Explanation Area: If the mechanism and reasoning of recommendation can
be communicated to users in the right way, it can improve acceptance of the

--- PAGE 28 ---
SEED V3 9
Fig.1. Figure1-a shows the main workspace of SEED, which is divided as the query
area (a-1 and a-2) and recommendation area (a-3 and a-4). Figure1-b shows the results
augmented by a negative aspect. Figure1-c shows the relevant aspects of a particular
entity by clicking it. Figure1-d shows the correlation among entities by clicking them
together.
prediction and trust towards the system. When users are curious about the
correlation among entities in the recommendation area, users can discover the
links among entities in KGs by clicking them together, as the explanations to
understand why they are recommended (see Fig.1-d).
3 The Search Engine of SEED
SEED utilizes a dataset of hundreds of thousands of ﬁlm-related entities
extracted from DBpedia V3.9. It applies the knowledge embedding derived from
a graph embedding model to rank entities and their relevant aspects. The links
among entities in KGs are utilized to explain their correlation. Indexes for embed-
ding and triples are applied to support fast interactive interactions.
Knowledge Embedding: We use a graph embedding model called TransE
[2] to generate knowledge embedding, which maps the entities and relations of
KGs into a dense, real-valued, and lower-dimensional embedding space, by using
the local or global links in the existing KGs. In KGs, the semantic correlation

--- PAGE 29 ---
10 J. Chen et al.
between a head entity h and a tail entity t corresponds to a translation (i.e., a
directional relation r) between them in the embedding space, i.e., h + r ≈ t (or
h ≈ t−r) when the triple <h,r,t> exists in KGs, which indicates that t should
be the nearest neighbor of (or very close to) h + r in the embedding space.
Ranking Model: When given a query composed of several elements (i.e., enti-
ties and aspects) with diﬀerent weights, entities close to the positive elements but
far away from the negative ones are returned as relevant entities (see Fig.1-a-3).
Besides, we also return the relevant aspects of these entities by evaluating their
average distances in the embedding space (see Fig.1-a-4 and c). For explaining
the correlation among entities, we ﬁrst discover their links in KGs, and then
rank them by evaluating their average distances to these entities based on their
knowledge embedding (see Fig.1-d).
Indexes: The eﬃciency of query-response is critical for interactive interactions,
we therefore apply LSH (Locality Sensitive Hashing) [1] as the index to sup-
port fast retrieval of top-k results in the embedding space. Besides, a relational
database is applied for maintaining triples, and B+
-tree [6] is created on entities
and their relations as the index to support fast retrieval of triples.
4 Demonstration
We provide some use cases to foster users’ understanding towards SEED. For
instance, given an entity Forrest Gump as an initial query, SEED returns the
relevant entities and their aspects (see Fig.1-a-3 and a-4). If users don’t like
a particular aspect, they can augment the query by swiping it to the right as
a negative feedback, and the results are updated accordingly (see Fig.1-b). If
users are interested in the detailed information of a particular entity, they can
click it to browse its relevant aspects (see Fig.1-c). If users are curious about the
correlation among entities, users can discover the links among entities in KGs
as the explanations by clicking them together (see Fig.1-d).
5 Conclusions
We design and implement a system for entity-oriented exploratory search in KGs
on tablets. We demonstrate how KGs can be exposed for users through the user
interface that supports rapid query formulation via touch-based interactions,
allows presentation and recommendation of entities and their relevant aspects,
as well as explains the correlation among entities via their links. We open new
venues for users to turn the tedious typed-query keywords search to entity-
oriented exploration, which exploits KGs for an improved information access.

--- PAGE 30 ---
SEED V3 11
References
1. Andoni, A., Indyk, P.: Near-optimal hashing algorithms for approximate nearest
neighbor in high dimensions. Commun. ACM 51(1), 117–122 (2008)
2. Bordes, A., Usunier, N., Garcı́a-Durán, A., Weston, J., Yakhnenko, O.: Translating
embeddings for modeling multi-relational data. In: NIPS, pp. 2787–2795 (2013)
3. Chen, J., Chen, Y., Du, X., Zhang, X., Zhou, X.: SEED: a system for entity explo-
ration and debugging in large-scale knowledge graphs. In: ICDE, pp. 1350–1353
(2016)
4. Chen, J., Jacucci, G., Chen, Y., Ruotsalo, T.: SEED: entity oriented information
search and exploration. In: IUI, pp. 137–140 (2017)
5. Dong, X., et al.: Knowledge vault: a web-scale approach to probabilistic knowledge
fusion. In: KDD, pp. 601–610 (2014)
6. Garcia-Molina, H., Ullman, J.D., Widom, J.: Database System Implementation.
Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River (2000)
7. Meij, E., Balog, K., Odijk, D.: Entity linking and retrieval for semantic search. In:
WSDM, pp. 683–684 (2014)

--- PAGE 31 ---
MobiDis: Relationship Discovery
of Mobile Users from Spatial-Temporal
Trajectories
Xiaoou Ding, Hongzhi Wang(B)
, Jiaxuan Su, Aoran Xie, Jianzhong Li,
and Hong Gao
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150001, Heilongjiang, China
dingxiaoou@stu.hit.edu.cn
{wangzh,lijzh,honggao}@hit.edu.cn
itx351@gmail.com
admin@xieaoran.com
Abstract. The popularity of smartphones and the advances in location-
acquisition technologies witness the development in the research of
human mobility. This demo shows a relationship-discovery system of
mobile users from their spatio-temporal trajectories. The system ﬁrst
matches all the access device IDs to places of interest (POI) on the map,
and then ﬁnds out the access device IDs visited by more than one phone
frequently or regularly. For these users, a model of historical spatio-
temporal trajectories analysis combined with web browsing behavior is
proposed to discover the relationship among them. A large-scale real-life
mobile data set has been used in constructing the system, the perfor-
mance of which is evaluated to be eﬀective, eﬃcient and user-friendly.
Keywords: Mobile data · Spatial-temporal trajectories
Relationship discovery
1 Introduction
The popularity of mobile devices and the advances in location-acquisition tech-
nologies is a witness to the ﬂowering of mobile-users’ behavior analysis. Mobile
devices enable people to record the geographical location as well as the web pages
they have visited. A sequence of such locations changing over time form a trajec-
tory [7]. Research on the computing and querying trajectories, such as trajectory
pattern mining [2], modelling human mobility trajectories [4] has attracted a
wide-spread attention both in academia and industry. Moreover, with the rapid
development of mobile social applications, it is convenient, and sometimes nec-
essary for individuals to do their daily activities via their phones.
The study on individuals which has appeared in the same point in time
and space in a certain regularity or even occasionally is an important basis
for modelling the network structure and behavior regulation. Furthermore, it
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 12–16, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_3

--- PAGE 32 ---
MobiDis 13
may also contribute to energy saving and traﬃc management. Unfortunately,
to the best of our knowledge, little existing work has been done to discover
user relationships from spatio-temporal trajectory combined with web browsing
behavior.
Though challenged, not impossible, the colorful question can be solved by
mining coarse trajectories matched with POIs on map as well as web access
logs, which motivated the achievement of the system. The contributions of the
paper are (1) a system named MobiDis is designed and implemented to discover
reasonable relationships between mobile phone users, (2) a model of relationship
mining is established. We apply the method on large-scale real data from mobile
operator. It illustrates that the system is eﬀective, eﬃcient and user-friendly.
Fig.1. System architecture
2 System Overview
System Architecture. The system architecture is shown in Fig.1, consisting
of 5 modules, namely data preprocessing, database connection and querying,
location module, POI recognition and relationship mining. Original data from
mobile operators will be preprocessed both in format and content before comput-
ing and querying. All mobile users’ behaviour data is anonymized, mobile users
are identiﬁed by a string (PhoneID) encrypted from their own phone number for
protecting privacy.
Database connection and querying module provide stable and eﬀective access
to internal database and external map information. In location module, it enables
transformation among several usual longitude and latitude coordinates. That
improves the scalability of the system on diﬀerent map system by valid access
to corresponding APIs. In POI recognition module, all access devices (AD for
short) can be located to accurate points in the map, after which they will be
matched with POIs. In this way, the area represented by an AD can be obtained
deﬁnitely with category labels describing its location characteristic.

--- PAGE 33 ---
14 X. Ding et al.
In relationship mining module, uncertainty trajectories patterns mining and
temporal browsing behaviour are taken into account. Several relationships are
classiﬁed which aims at maximizing the coverage of mobile users. After the inﬂu-
ence factors in classiﬁcation are quantiﬁed with diﬀerent thresholds, the relation-
ship pattern between each pair of users can be found out and determined by the
system. Certainly, to make it user-friendly, spatial trajectories are visualized on
the map, with the behaviours along the time axis. The relationship discovery
result will also shown in the list, correspondingly.
Relationships Discovery. Coarse trajectories generated by mobile users and
their historical temporal visit in web pages are two main elements for determin-
ing relationships with others. Eﬀective methods and algorithms in trajectory
data mining [1,7] are used in frequent trajectories mining among certain POIs,
weighting the POI label as a variable. Besides, relationship computing based
on trajectories patterns mining [5,6] contributes for clustering similar individu-
als under diﬀerent relationships. Furthermore, temporal behaviors are evaluated
with the methods in [3] to draw a reasonable portrait of users’ daily activities.
In the proposed method, ﬁve types of deﬁnite relationship are taken into
deep account, namely Relatives (including family members and distant rela-
tives), Located-based (including Neighbors and Community residents), Profes-
sional (including colleagues and schoolmate), Interest-based relationship (includ-
ing friends and social connections), and strangers. These ﬁve types are easy to
be quantiﬁed and can cover a majority of relationships among individuals.
(a) Partial locations of ADs (b) Log of users under one AD
Fig.2. Distributions of AD and mobile users
3 Demonstration Scenario
Totally, more than 0.6 million mobile users in a big city in China moving among
1.03 million ADs (shown in Fig.2(a)) for two months are studied in the system.
More than 14 thousand users have trajectories between two or more ADs, which
can generate over 0.23 million records half a month on average. Figure2(b) shows

--- PAGE 34 ---
MobiDis 15
(a) Trajectories and Temporal Reords (b) Relationship discovery
Fig.3. System interfaces
logarithmic distributions of users under diﬀerent ADs. In general, over 6 thou-
sand users have visited more than two ADs frequently, and the largest users
number under a certain AD is 2371.
Mobility of Mobile Users. Each spatio-temporal records of mobile users can
be shown in the system. We focus on the users appearing in two or more ADs,
whose movement among several certain ADs is shown as uncertain trajectories.
In addition, the time axis of user’ behavior is visualized in the left column, indi-
cating the regulation from the behaviors. Under the scenario, the characteristics
in mobility is preliminarily visualized as shown in Fig.3(a).
Relationship Discovery Under Certain AD. The relationship discovery
methods mentioned above is implemented as an important and typical function
in the system. For a certain AD, each trajectory connecting with it is shown
in the map, various trajectories of diﬀerent individuals are marked in diﬀerent
colors. The relationship category label of each pair of users under the same AD
(at the same time or not) is listed in the right column as shown in Fig.3(b)
after computing in relationship mining module. In the occasional cases that
relationship cannot be determined by the system, the pair of mobile-users will
be highlighted on the page, system users enable to insert the relationship result
to their knowledge into the system.
References
1. Chen, Z., Shen, H.T., Zhou, X.: Discovering popular routes from trajectories. In:
IEEE International Conference on Data Engineering, pp. 900–911 (2011)
2. Wu, G., Ding, Y., Li, Y., et al.: Mining spatio-temporal reachable regions over mas-
sive trajectory data. In: 33rd IEEE International Conference on Data Engineering,
ICDE 2017, San Diego, CA, USA, 19–22 April 2017, pp. 1283–1294 (2017)
3. Jiang, S., Ferreira, J., Gonzalez, M.C.: Discovering urban spatial-temporal structure
from human activity patterns. In: ACM SIGKDD International Workshop on Urban
Computing, pp. 95–102 (2012)
4. Nguyen, M.N.B., Hasnain, Z., Li, M., et al.: Mining human mobility to quantify
performance status. In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining Work-
shops, ICDM Workshops 2017, New Orleans, LA, USA, 18–21 November 2017, pp.
1172–1177 (2017)

--- PAGE 35 ---
16 X. Ding et al.
5. Pham, H., Shahabi, C., Liu, Y.: EBM: an entropy-based model to infer social
strength from spatiotemporal data. In: ACM SIGMOD International Conference
on Management of Data, pp. 265–276 (2013)
6. Shahabi, C., Pham, H.: Inferring real-world relationships from spatiotemporal data.
IEEE Data Eng. Bull. 38(2), 14–26 (2015)
7. Zheng, Y., Zhou, X.: Computing with Spatial Trajectories. Springer, New York
(2011). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-1629-6

--- PAGE 36 ---
Crowd-Type: A Crowdsourcing-Based
Tool for Type
Completion in Knowledge Bases
Zhaoan Dong2
, Jianhong Tu2
, Ju Fan2(B)
, Jiaheng Lu1,2
, Xiaoyong Du2
,
and Tok Wang Ling3
1
Department of Computer Science,
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
fanj@ruc.edu.cn
2
DEKE, MOE and School of Information,
Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
3
School of Computing, National University of Singapore,
Singapore, Singapore
Abstract. Entity type completion in Knowledge Bases (KBs) is an
important and challenging problem. In our recent work, we have pro-
posed a hybrid framework which combines the human intelligence of
crowdsourcing with automatic algorithms to address the problem. In
this demo, we have implemented the framework in a crowdsourcing-based
system, named Crowd-Type, for fine-grained type completion in KBs. In
particular, Crowd-Type firstly employs automatic algorithms to select
the most representative entities and assigns them to human workers, who
will verify the types for assigned entities. Then, the system infers and
determines the correct types for all entities utilizing both the results of
crowdsourcing and machine-based algorithms. Our system gives a vivid
demonstration to show how crowdsourcing significantly improves the per-
formance of automatic type completion algorithms.
1 Introduction
In most KBs, e.g., DBPedia, entities are usually assigned with multiple types,
which are organized in a hierarchical ontology [1] for representing semantic con-
cepts of diﬀerent levels. For example, in DBPedia, Lionel Messi has types includ-
ing “Thing” (Level=0), “Person”, “Athlete” and “SoccerPlayer”. Obviously,
ﬁne-grained types (e.g., “SoccerPlayer”) are more useful than general ones
(e.g., “Person”). However, ﬁne-grained types are more diﬃcult to obtain. Hence,
they are more likely to be missing. Existing automatic algorithms have lim-
itations when inferring ﬁne-grained types, while crowdsourcing is better even
This work is supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.
61602488, No. 61632016 and No. 61472427), the Research Funds of Renmin Uni-
versity of China (No. 18XNLG18) and Academy of Finland (No. 310321).
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 17–21, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_4

--- PAGE 37 ---
18 Z. Dong et al.
Fig.1. System architecture Fig.2. Type Inference method
though some data is missing. Recently, inspired by the studies of machine-
crowdsourcing hybrid approaches [5], e.g., web table matching [6] and knowl-
edge extraction [4], we proposed a hybrid framework [3], which combines the
human intelligence of crowdsourcing with machine algorithms when to complete
missing ﬁne-grained types for entities. We have implemented the hybrid frame-
work in Crowd-Type, a crowdsourcing-based system. This demo paper aims to
help the audience better understand the hybrid framework, and to show how
crowdsourcing improves the performance of type completion.
2 System Design and Implementation
As shown in Fig.1, the system architecture of Crowd-Type consists of four parts.
We give a brief introduction to the four parts respectively.
2.1 User Interfaces
In this demo, User Interfaces mainly contain three pages: Task Creation page,
Task View page and the Micro-Task page. We will introduce them in Sect.3.
2.2 Task Selection and Type Inference
In this part, we have implemented three fundamental algorithms:
Automatic Prediction: Given a set of entities whose types need to be completed,
the Automatic Prediction algorithm is responsible for predicting possible types
for each entity. The target entities together with their candidate types make
up a Candidate Types Graph (CTG). For example, in Fig.2(a), there are 7
entity-type pairs of 3 entities where π1,i denotes the entity-type pair of entity

--- PAGE 38 ---
Crowd-Type: A Crowdsourcing-Based Tool for Type Completion 19
Fig.3. Micro-task page Fig.4. Task-view page
e1 and its possible type Ci (1 ≤ i ≤ 3). Currently, we use SDType, which is
reported as the state-of-the-art method [7], to compute a conﬁdence score for
each possible entity-type pair. An entity-type pair will be considered as true if
its score is greater than the given threshold. However, SDType has limitations
as the evidences may be insuﬃcient when inferring ﬁne-grained types, while
crowdsourcing is better even though some data is missing.
Entity Selection: Obviously, it would be extremely expensive if all the entity-type
pairs are crowdsourced. Therefore, we use an Entity Selection algorithm to select
the most “representative” entities to be veriﬁed by human workers. The main
idea is, on the one hand, to select those entities which are the most uncertain for
machine algorithms to determine their types. On the other hand, those entities
that are most helpful to infer others’ types, if conﬁrmed by human workers, are
easy to be selected.
Type Inference: Based on the CTG and crowdsourcing results of selected entities,
Type Inference algorithm ﬁnally determines the score of each entity-type pair.
To compute the inﬂuences from crowdsourced entities to unselected entities, we
have proposed an Embedding-Based Influence Model in [3]. The basic idea is that
if the entity types are embedded into the same embedding space, entities of the
same type are usually not only close to each other, but also to their common
types. In Fig.2b, for example, we use L2-Norm to compute the distance between
embeddings. If a is of type T, then b is more likely to be the same type than x,
since b is closer to a than x. However, it can not be inferred that the type of a
is T, if b is veriﬁed by human.

--- PAGE 39 ---
20 Z. Dong et al.
2.3 Crowdsourcing Task Management
The selected entities with their candidate types need to be veriﬁed by human
workers. Firstly, Task Generation algorithm is employed to generate micro-task
for each entity. Next, micro-tasks are assigned to human workers by Task Allo-
cation algorithm. At last, Answer Aggregation algorithm aggregates the answers
from multiple workers of each entity.
2.4 Knowledge Base
Currently, we have sampled 2,283,173 entities, 9,970,687 predicate instances
about 629 predicates and 7,727,665 type assertions from DBPedia 3.8 [2], and
have stored them in the Knowledge Base. Additionally, the statistics of entities,
predicates and types are computed and stored in advance.
3 Demonstration Scenarios
The audience can interact with the system in two roles: Requester and Worker.
We will demonstrate three scenarios as follows.
Scenario 1: Task Creation. A requester can create a new type completion
task for a set of entities through Task Creation page. Because of the limited
space, we give the main parameters below instead of a screenshot:
– η: a threshold used by SDType to prune impossible types.
– n: for each micro-task, the number of worker assignments.
– influence method: the method used by Entity Selection algorithm to com-
pute the inﬂuences between entities. Two options are available here:
similarity-based and embedding-based [3].
– agg method: Currently, we have two options for aggregating the answers
from human workers: Majority vote and EM algorithm.
Scenario 2: Micro-Task. As shown in Fig.3, it is very easy for human work-
ers to select the correct types for entity Harlon Barnett with the help of
the short description. If necessary, the workers can also click the “Deﬁni-
tion” to see the deﬁnition of each type and click “Class Hierarchy” for the
details of the class structure. However, because the relevant predicates of
these types are almost the same, the conﬁdence scores computed by the
automatic algorithm are almost the same too. As a result, it is hard for the
machine algorithm to determine the correct types solely.
Scenario 3: Task State. The requester can view the state of the tasks through
Task View page, including not only the progress of the whole type completion
task, e.g., how many entities have been completed by human, but also the
details of each micro-task. As mentioned above, the Type Inference algorithm
updates the scores for each entity-type pair after the crowdsourcing resulted
is aggregated. If the conﬁdence score of a type increases, it will be marked
with “⇑”, otherwise, “⇓”, and “−” for no change. Figure4 shows the score
changes of the candidate types of the entity Harlon Barnett. Intuitively, it
reﬂects the eﬀects of crowdsourcing results on the scores.

--- PAGE 40 ---
Crowd-Type: A Crowdsourcing-Based Tool for Type Completion 21
References
1. DBpedia: Dbpedia ontology. http://wiki.dbpedia.org/services-resources/ontology
2. DBpedia: Dbpedia3.8. https://wiki.dbpedia.org/data-set-38
3. Dong, Z., Fan, J., Lu, J., Du, X., Ling, T.W.: Using crowdsourcing for fine-grained
entity type completion in knowledge bases. In: APWeb-WAIM 2018 (Accepted)
4. Dong, Z., Lu, J., Ling, T.W., Fan, J., Chen, Y.: Using hybrid algorithmic-
crowdsourcing methods for academic knowledge acquisition. Cluster Comput. 20(4),
3629–3641 (2017)
5. Fan, J., Li, G., Ooi, B.C., Tan, K., Feng, J.: icrowd: an adaptive crowdsourcing
framework. In: SIGMOD, pp. 1015–1030 (2015)
6. Fan, J., Lu, M., Ooi, B.C., Tan, W.C., Zhang, M.: A hybrid machine-crowdsourcing
system for matching web tables. In: ICDE, pp. 976–987 (2014)
7. Paulheim, H., Bizer, C.: Type inference on noisy RDF data. In: Alani, H., et al. (eds.)
ISWC 2013. LNCS, vol. 8218, pp. 510–525. Springer, Heidelberg (2013). https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-41335-3 32

--- PAGE 41 ---
Attribute Value Matching
by Maximizing Benefit
Fengfeng Fan1,2(B)
and Zhanhuai Li1,2
1
School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
fanfengfeng@mail.nwpu.edu.cn
2
Key Laboratory of Big Data Storage and Management, Ministry of Industry
and Information Technology, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
Abstract. Attribute value matching (AVM) identifies equivalent values
that refer to the same entities. Traditional approaches ignore the weights
of values in itself. In this demonstration, we present AVM-LB, Attribute
Value Matching with Limited Budget, that preferentially matches the
hot equivalent values such that the maximal benefit to data consistency
can be achieved by limited budget. By defining a rank function and
greedily matching the hot equivalent values, the AVM-LB enables users
to interactively explore the achieved benefit to data consistency.
Keywords: Attribute Value Matching · Entity resolution · Hot data
Data cleaning · Big Data
1 Introduction
Due to typographical errors, aliases and abbreviations [1,4], the same real-world
entities may take several distinct representations across data sources, and such
inconsistencies may severely distort the results of data analysis. Hence it is nec-
essary to match and merge those equivalent values by a process called Attribute
Value Matching or AVM [3]. Due to the large data size and limited budget,
it is a very challenging task to identify all of underlying equivalents, thus it
is preferred to employ a pay-as-you-go approach [5] to identify the equivalent
attribute values. However, existing approaches ignore the fact that inconsisten-
cies between frequently accessed hot attribute values will bring more distortion
to data analysis and matching the hot equivalent values will bring more beneﬁt
to data consistencies. In this paper, we propose a demo, denoted by AVM-LB,
which takes the matching probability and data hotness into consideration, and
interactively explores the achieved beneﬁt by limited budget. To our knowledge,
AVM-LB is the ﬁrst demonstration that incorporates the data hotness into data
cleansing practice. Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
1. AVM-LB provides a rank function, which ranks the candidates of value pairs
for resolving, based on the matching probability and hotness.
Supported by organization x.
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 22–25, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_5

--- PAGE 42 ---
Attribute Value Matching by Maximizing Benefit 23
2. Based on the matching relationship and the data hotness, a benefit metric is
devised to quantify the improvement to data consistency.
3. AVM-LB enables users to interactively explore the achieved beneﬁt to data
consistencies with limited budget.
2 System Overview
AVM-LB is composed of two components: Beneﬁt Maximization and Perfor-
mance Evaluation.
Fig.1. System overview
2.1 Benefit Maximization
As the Fig.1 shows, the rank function takes three matrices as input: ﬁlter matrix
F, matching probability matrix P and hotness matrix H.
Filter Matrix: In AVM-LB, ﬁlter matrix F maintains the current states
between attribute values. A snapshot of F is shown in Eq.1: “1” for matches,
“−1” for non-matches, “0” for unknowns, and “*” for links that can be deduced
by symmetry.
F =
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎣
∗ 1 0 0
∗ ∗ −1 0
∗ ∗ ∗ 1
∗ ∗ ∗ ∗
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎦ (1)
As the matching process goes on, more 0-labeled cells will be replaced by
either “1” or “−1”, depending on the matching results, until no more 0-labels is
available or all the budget run out.
Matching Probability: Matching probability matrix M, maintains the match-
ing probabilities between attribute values, with M[i,j] ← P(yi
∼ = yj). For sim-
plicity, we approximate the matching probability P(yi
∼ = yj) by a similarity
function sim(yi,yj), which can either be a simple string similarity measurement
or some sophisticated metric, e.g., [2].

--- PAGE 43 ---
24 F. Fan and Z. Li
Hotness: Hotness often reveals the attribute value’s importance in data analy-
sis, and it may be a function of the timeliness, occurrences, or access frequencies.
For similarity, we estimate the hotness of attribute values by their frequencies.
We deﬁne the hotness for any attribute value pair yi,yj by Eq.2:
hot(yi,yj) = freq([yi]) · freq([yj]) (2)
where the equivalent class [yi] denotes the set of attribute values co-referring
to the same entity with yi, and freq(·) records the frequencies of attribute val-
ues. Hotness matrix H, maintains the hotnesses for attribute value pairs, i.e.,
H[i,j] ← hot(yi,yj).
Rank: AVM-LB ranks the value pairs by a integrated scores, which is deﬁned
by Eq.3:
rank(yi,yj) = F̄[i,j] · M[i,j] · sigmoid(a · H[i,j] + b) (3)
where F̄, the negation of F, is used to ﬁlter out the resolved value pairs, the
transformation from hotness into weight is provided by sigmoid function, in which
a ≥ 0 and b as two tuning parameters, and the matrix Rank maintains the
integrated scores, i.e., Rank[i,j] ← rank(yi,yj).
Finally with limited budget Ks, AVM-LB greedily matches the equivalents
based on the value of Rank[i,j].
2.2 Performance Evaluation
AVM-LB evaluates the performance by benefit, which is deﬁned by Eq.4:
benefit(yi,yj) = I(yi,yj) · hot(yi,yj) (4)
where the indicator function I(·) will return 1 for yi
∼ = yj, and 0 for otherwise.
Intuitively, high benefit will bring big improvement to the probability of receiving
consistent view of data for random queries.
For demonstrative purpose, we match the Journal values across two public
available datasets, DBLP1
and CiteSeer2
, in which 1,636,497 and 45,783 records
are analyzed, and 1,666 and 3,833 distinct Journal values are extracted respec-
tively. We construct the matching probability matrix P and hotness matrix H
following the method in [2] and the deﬁnition of Eq.2 respectively.
Figure2(a) shows the startup user-interface, in which paths for dump ﬁle of
P and H needs to be speciﬁed. After setting the valid paths for P and H, we can
interactively explore the achieved beneﬁts by tuning parameters of rank function.
For example, Fig.2(b) shows the accumulated benefit with diﬀerent budget by
diﬀerent rank function, in which the dashed curve ignores the hotness by setting
parameter a0 = 0, while the solid curve ﬁne-tunes the weight of attribute value
pairs by setting parameter a1 = 0.0001 and b1 = 0. It can be observed that by
tuning parameters, AVM-LB allow us to interactively explore and visualize the
benefit to data consistency with limited budget.
1
http://dblp.uni-trier.de/.
2
https://www.cs.purdue.edu/commugrate/data/citeseer/.

--- PAGE 44 ---
Attribute Value Matching by Maximizing Benefit 25
(a) Before Update (b) After Update
Fig.2. GUI for AVM-LB
Acknowledgments. The work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Tech-
nology of China, National Key Research and Development Program (Project Num-
ber 2016YFB1000703), the National Natural Science Foundation of China under No.
61732014 No. 61332006, No. 61472321, No. 61502390 and No. 61672432.
References
1. Batini, C., Scannapieco, M.: Data Quality: Concepts. Methodologies and Tech-
niques. Springer Publishing Company, Incorporated (2010)
2. Fan, F., Li, Z., Wang, Y.: Cohesion based attribute value matching. In: 2017 10th
International Congress on Image and Signal Processing, BioMedical Engineering
and Informatics (CISP-BMEI), pp. 1–5, October 2017
3. Fan, F., Li, Z., Chen, Q., Chen, L.: Reasoning about attribute value equivalence in
relational data. Inf. Syst. 75, 1–12 (2018)
4. Naumann, F., Herschel, M.: An introduction to duplicate detection. Synth. Lect.
Data Manag. 2(1), 1–87 (2010)
5. Whang, S.E., Marmaros, D., Garcia-Molina, H.: Pay-as-you-go entity resolution.
IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 25(5), 1111–1124 (2013)

--- PAGE 45 ---
Towards Real-Time Analysis
of ID-Associated Data
Guodong Jin1,2
, Yixuan Wang1,2
, Xiongpai Qin1,2(B)
, Yueguo Chen1,2
,
and Xiaoyong Du1,2
1
School of Information, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
qxp1990@ruc.edu.cn
2
DEKE Key Laboratory, Renmin University of China, MOE, Beijing, China
Abstract. ID-associated data are sequences of entries, and each entry is
semantically associated with a unique ID. Examples are user IDs in user
behaviour logs of mobile applications and device IDs in sensor records
of self-driving cars. Nowadays, many big data applications generate such
types of ID-associated data at high speed, and most queries over them
are ID-centric (on speciﬁc IDs and ranges of time). To generate valuable
insights from such data timely, the system needs to ingest high volumes
of them with low latency, and support real-time analysis over them eﬃ-
ciently. In this paper, we introduce a system prototype designed for this
goal. The system designed a parallel ingestion pipeline and a lightweight
indexing scheme for the fast ingestion and eﬃcient analysis. Besides, a
ﬁber partitioning method is utilized to achieve dynamic scalability. For
better integration with Hadoop ecosystem, the prototype is implemented
based on open source projects, including Kafka and Presto.
Keywords: Real-time analytics · ID-associated data
Real-time ingestion
1 Introduction
ID-associated data are sequences of entries, and each entry is semantically asso-
ciated with a unique ID. Examples are user IDs in user behaviour logs of mobile
applications and device IDs in sensor records of self-driving cars. Nowadays,
ID-associated data are ubiquitous in many big data applications. They are gen-
erated at high speed, and real-time analysis of them is critical to gain valuable
business insights timely. Take user behaviour analysis in mobile applications as
an example, each time a user clicks inside a mobile application, a log entry with
the user ID recording the user’s behaviours is generated automatically and col-
lected by the vendor. The vendor applies real-time analysis over newly collected
This work is supported by Science and Technology Planning Project of Guangdong
under grant No.2015B010131015, 863 key project under grant No.2015AA015307,
and the National Science Foundation of China under grants No.61472426, U1711261,
61432006.
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 26–30, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_6

--- PAGE 46 ---
Towards Real-Time Analysis of ID-Associated Data 27
data to identify abnormal user accesses, and study behaviours of a particular
group of users over the latest days for better content recommendations.
In many such cases, ID-associated data come at high speed. Typically, most
queries over ID-associated data are ID-centric – they retrieve and analyze data
of a speciﬁed group of IDs over a period of time. To gain valuable insights
timely, the system needs to ingest high volumes of data quickly and execute ID-
centric queries eﬃciently. ElasticSearch [5], the distributed search engine, builds
inverted indices over data to support real-time searches. However, due to the
high latency of indexing, it cannot support data ingestion in real time. SQL-on-
Hadoop systems like Spark SQL [2] perform well at batch processing, but they
lack the ability of data ingestion. Hive [1] is proven to be a powerful tool for
ETL(extract, transform and load) on HDFS. It converts the ETL pipeline into
a batch of map reduce jobs, which is slow due to frequent reads and writes of
intermediate ﬁles.
In this paper, we introduce a system prototype tailored for the real-time
analysis of ID-associated data. It integrates ingestion of ID-associated data with
ID-centric relational processing. To support this, we designed a parallel ingestion
pipeline and a lightweight indexing scheme. The pipeline oﬀers data ingestion
with low latency, and a well-designed in-memory columnar store, enabling eﬃ-
cient relational processing over data being loaded. And the indexing scheme
helps the system avoid a full scan of the relational table. Combined with the
ﬁber partitioning mechanism, the system provides dynamic scalability. For bet-
ter integration with Hadoop ecosystem, the prototype is implemented based on
an open source messaging system (Apache Kafka [7]), and a popular SQL-on-
Hadoop engine (Facebook Presto [8]).
2 System Architecture
As shown in Fig.1, our system prototype contains six modules (in gray): Col-
lector, Loader, Indexer, Metadata, Connector and Coordinator.
DATA SOURCES
COLLECTOR
KAFKA
LOADER
CONNECTOR
INDEXER
HDFS
DATA
ANALYTICAL
SYSTEM
(PRESTO)
METADATA
COODINATOR
Fig.1. System architecture

--- PAGE 47 ---
28 G. Jin et al.
Collector. Collector servers as the front-end of the system, which is responsible
for collecting data from various sources. Data collected are applied to our ﬁber
partitioning method (details are discussed in Sect.3), and sent into Kafka with
a one-to-one correspondence between ﬁbers and Kafka partitions. Kafka assigns
each record with a unique oﬀset to allow re-read of data from a speciﬁed oﬀset.
We make checkpoints on oﬀsets of loaded data to guarantee data lossless during
ingestion.
Loader and Indexer. Loader ingests data from ﬁbers assigned by Coordinator.
It pulls data from Kafka and writes them into HDFS after processing. Generally,
data on HDFS are stored in columnar formats such as ORC [3] and Parquet [4] to
speed up queries. Data pulled from Kafka are applied with user-deﬁned ﬁlters and
transformers. Then, data are sorted by their associated IDs and generation time,
and appended into a memory store (details are discussed in Sect.3). Finally,
the memory store ﬂushes data into HDFS as columnar ﬁles. In particular, for
data in the memory store, Indexer maintains bloom ﬁlters to track existing IDs
and records key statistics, such as min and max values of each column (including
generation time). When data are ﬂushed into HDFS, these lightweight indices are
embedded into ﬁles. To eﬃciently load and index data, a parallel data ingestion
pipeline is designed, which is described in Sect.3.
Metadata, Connector and Coordinator. Metadata maintains critical meta-
data for the system, including deﬁnitions of relational tables and columns, user-
deﬁned functions, and ﬁber storage information. When executing queries, reading
tasks are pushed down to Connector to fetch data needed by query engines. Con-
nector is able to fetch data from the memory store and HDFS altogether, and
make use of existing indices to ﬁlter useless ﬁles. Thus, analytical systems can
be boosted to run queries on both of the most recent data in memory and his-
torical ones on disk. Coodinator monitors all running processes in the cluster,
and coordinates executions of Loaders by dynamically assigning ﬁbers to achieve
good scalability and load balance.
3 Key Techniques
Fiber Partitioning. Our ﬁber partitioning scheme is based on the consistent
hashing [6]. In ID-associated data, each entry is associated with a unique ID,
and a hash function is applied to get a hash value of the ID. The range of hash
values is split into k intervals, mapping to k ﬁbers. Due to the possibly uneven
distribution of data, some ﬁbers may contain much data while some may com-
prise few. During data ingestion, Coordinator collects load metrics from Loaders.
When loads are seriously skewed, Coordinator greedily migrates ﬁbers from the
node with the heaviest loads to other ones. Further, ﬁbers can be tuned in ﬁne
granularity to merge and split dynamically. Based on this partitioning scheme,
data are further clustered by their associated IDs and indexed eﬃciently.
Parallel Ingestion Pipeline. Data pulled from Kafka are maintained as ﬁber
streams separately, and in each stream data are processed with user-deﬁned

--- PAGE 48 ---
Towards Real-Time Analysis of ID-Associated Data 29
ﬁlters and transformers inside a thread. After ﬁltering and transformation, data
are inserted into a sorted buﬀer. Inside the buﬀer, entries are ordered by their
associated IDs and generation time. Once the sorted buﬀer reaches its max size
or user-deﬁned lifetime (elapsed time since the last reset), it appends all data
into the memory store and resets. The lifetime represents the latency of data
ingestion. Data inside the memory store is organized as immutable segments
and ready to be queried by analytical systems. When the memory store reaches
its threshold in size, it ﬂushes segments as columnar ﬁles into HDFS. To gain
beneﬁts from sequential disk I/O and avoid I/O competitions, a single writer
thread is utilized to handle all writing requests.
In-Memory Columnar Storage. Memory store organizes data as segments,
inside which data are clustered by their associated IDs, and stored in a columnar
format to be optimized for cache lines. To reduce memory footprints, lightweight
compression schemes such as run length encoding, bit packing, and dictionary
encoding are utilized to compress segments. With little overhead, queries can
run directly on these lightweight compressed segments. Memory store maintains
storage information of each segment, including the storage level (i.e., on-heap,
oﬀ-heap, on-disk) and location (i.e., object reference, memory address, ﬁle path).
In-memory segments can be stored on-heap and oﬀ-heap based on user conﬁgu-
rations. Oﬀ-heap storage is recommended by default to avoid GC overheads.
4 Demonstration
The demonstration is set up on a cluster, in which our Collectors are deployed
along with Kafka, and Loaders are distributed with Hadoop and Presto. We
design a data generator to generate records based on the result of joining lineitem
and orders table from the TPC-H benchmark. Besides, we add an attribute,
called generation time, to identify the generation time of each record. The gen-
erator runs in a streaming manner – records are generated and sent to Collectors
one by one in real time. During the demonstration, a web interface is presented
with detailed information of data ingestion, such as throughput of ingestion and
loads of each node. Also, users can choose queries from our provided query set or
compose some in our web interface. The interface has a query client embedded
to issue queries to the Presto and collect results through JDBC. Our provided
query set consists of ID-centric queries, which are based on TPC-H queries with
time range conditions and designated IDs. The example query1
analyzes quan-
tity, price and discount of orders made by customer k from t1 to t2. Once a
query is submitted, we can track its execution in our web interface. Our system
prototype is open source on the Github2
.
1
select sum(quantity), sum(totalprice), min(discount), max(discount), avg(extended
price), count(*) from test where custkey = k and generation time > t1 and
generation time < t2 order by linestatus.
2
https://github.com/dbiir/paraﬂow.

--- PAGE 49 ---
30 G. Jin et al.
References
1. Apache Hive (2011). http://hive.apache.org
2. Spark SQL: relational data processing in spark (2015). http://spark.apache.org/sql/
3. Apache ORC (2018). https://orc.apache.org
4. Apache Parquet (2018). https://parquet.apache.org
5. Gormley, C., Tong, Z.: ElasticSearch: The Deﬁnitive Guide: A Distributed Real-
Time Search and Analytics Engine. O’Reilly Media Inc, Sebastopol (2015)
6. Karger, D., et al.: Web caching with consistent hashing. Comput. Netw. 31(11–16),
1203–1213 (1999)
7. Kreps, J., Narkhede, N., Rao, J., et al.: Kafka: a distributed messaging system for
log processing. In: Proceedings of the NetDB, pp. 1–7 (2011)
8. Traverso, M.: Presto: interacting with petabytes of data at facebook (2013).
Accessed 4 Feb 2014

--- PAGE 50 ---
Phenomenological Ontology Guided
Conceptual Modeling for Enterprise
Information Systems
Tomas Jonsson1(B)
and Håkan Enquist2
1
Genicore AB, Göteborg, Sweden
tomas@genicore.se
2
Department of Applied IT, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden
hakan.enquist@gu.se
http://www.genicore.se
http://www.gu.se/english
Abstract. In model driven Enterprise Information Systems (EIS) con-
ceptual ER models are fundamental. We demonstrate how a phenomeno-
logical modeling ontology for conceptual models assists in creating mean-
ingful, auto generated EIS. Application of the phenomenological ontol-
ogy on conceptual modeling is shown in a graphical, easy-to-use CASE
tool, CoreWEB, which support both editing of models and generating
user interfaces for consistent manipulation of instance data. A visual and
easy-to-grasp demonstration of conceptual modeling with live generation
of EIS should be a welcome holistic complement to specialized, focused,
in-depth presentations. Audience at all levels find food for thought and
inspiration to continue to explore conceptual modeling in general and
phenomena oriented approaches with systems generation in particular.
Keywords: Semantic modeling · Ontology · Model driven systems
1 Introduction
The phenomenological conceptual modeling approach is the intellectual tool in
focus in this demonstration. It is visualized and explained by using a supporting
implementation in CoreWEB, a graphical modeling and execution tool (available
with some demo videos at www.ameis.se/cml). The phenomenon ontology is
founded on philosophical theory of phenomena as fundamental mind items and
deﬁnes model language components and runtime system interface components
Fig.1 (Left).
This phenomenological ontology approach for conceptual models has been
applied for successful and proven model driven EIS life cycle management, in
large scale information systems (1500+ users) [1] over a period of 20years. Lately,
it has also been applied for successful design and maintenance of EIS for less
formal organizations e.g. the social network enterprise running Project Lazarus
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 31–34, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_7

--- PAGE 51 ---
32 T. Jonsson and H. Enquist
Fig.1. (Left) The ontology defines modeling language components and EIS interface
components. (Right) The ontology guides modeling process in how to map concepts into
a model of fundamental mental items, the phenomena. The EIS runtime including a user
interface is created through model execution, presenting data about the phenomena.
(www.projektlazarus.se) a Live Action Role Play (LARP). For ER 2018 this
demo contributes speciﬁcally to ontological and cognitive foundations for concept
formalization and conceptual modeling.
2 Phenomenon Ontology Guided Conceptual Modeling
Conceptual models play a fundamental role in life cycle management of model
driven EIS. If EIS content is deﬁned completely by the conceptual model, runtime
system can be fully generated from the model and semantic consistency, between
model and runtime system, can be achieved and maintained [2] hence modelware
becomes the software resource to manage throughout EIS life cycle.
The EIS life cycle management procedure includes: conceptual modeling with
Enterprise actors and domain experts that specify the complete EIS, runtime
system generation from model baseline, EIS execution and use by enterprise
actors in operations Fig.1 (Right).
Value and quality of EIS are directly dependent on EIS support for objec-
tives and information tasks of enterprise actors in use situations. Starting in
Fig.2. Ontology foundation with phenomenon kinds, their world awareness contexts,
combined with a coloring scheme used in the demo with CoreWEB tool. (arrows read
as “relates to”)

--- PAGE 52 ---
Phenomenological Ontology Guided Conceptual Modeling 33
the enterprise and use of the EIS, conceptual models are created from domain
experts’ mental models and language as well as from other codiﬁed knowledge
about the enterprise. If resulting EIS apply the conceptual models exactly, a
‘WYSIWYG’ relation between use and implementation is achieved, ensuring
precision, transparency and maintainability.
This high consistency between minds, conceptual models and EIS require
guidance from an ontology of mental models in addition to a modeling language.
The foundation for the phenomenological ontology Fig.2, is a novel ER mod-
eling approach, diﬀerent from most referred-to ontologies [3] Bunge Wand Weber
(BWW) and Uniﬁed Foundation Ontology (UFO) in that modeled entities are
phenomena representing fundamental mind items, based on comprehension of
existence in a metaphysical sense, Life World (Lebens Welt) and its phenomena
categories, as in the philosophical school of phenomenology with philosophers
such as Husserl [4], Heidegger [5] and Schutz [6].
The ontology is based on how the mind, when conceptualizing entities, sepa-
rates diﬀerent kinds of phenomena, which guides creation and comprehensions of
the model. I.e. the concept ‘hotel reservation’ is a compound of two phenomena,
the planned event of staying at a hotel and an agreement between the booker
and the hotel.
Fig.3. Demo Case: Live Action Role Play Enterprise, Projekt Lazarus - 2018, with
approximately 600 participants. (Top) Lazarus Actors, (Bottom-Left) Phenomena
Model, (Bottom-Right) Runtime EIS

--- PAGE 53 ---
34 T. Jonsson and H. Enquist
Distinguishing phenomena from roles is also part of the ontology, which will
reduce deﬁnition and data redundancy. I.e. the concepts ‘student’ and ‘teacher’
are not phenomena, they are two roles that the actor phenomena person can
have.
The color-coding of ontological phenomenon kinds introduced in the ontology
graph Fig.2, is reﬂected in conceptual model graphs Fig.3 (Bottom-Left) and
in generated runtime user interface Fig.3 (Bottom-Right), to support semantic
consistency throughout the EIS lifecycle.
3 Conceptual Modeling Features Addressed in This
Demo
– Understanding the Phenomenological Modeling Ontology Elements, such as
kinds of phenomena, kinds of relationships and roles of phenomena and EIS
user interface in compliance with phenomenological conceptual models.
– Application of a phenomenon oriented ontology along with modeling rules in
interpretation of domain knowledge and conceptual model design choices.
– Graphical editing and organization of model elements in conceptual models
for EIS generation and execution of semantically consistent runtime system
from conceptual models.
The demonstration utilizes Projekt Lazarus model and EIS to cover applica-
tion of phenomenological ontology guided conceptual modeling of domain expert
knowledge, instant generation of run-time system, interfaces and data manage-
ment. Color-coded traceability provides intuitive evaluation and enhancement of
semantic consistency.
References
1. Jonsson, T., Enquist, H.: CoreEAF - a model driven approach to information sys-
tems. In: CAISE 2015 Forum, CEUR Workshop Proceedings, vol. 1367, pp. 137–144
(2015)
2. Jonsson, T., Enquist, H.: Semantic consistency in enterprise models - through seam-
less modelling and execution support. In: ER 2017 Forum and Demos, CEUR Work-
shop Proceedings, vol. 1979, pp. 356–359 (2017)
3. Verdonck, M., Gailly, F.: Insights on the use and application of ontology and con-
ceptualmodeling languages in ontology-driven conceptual modeling. In: Comyn-
Wattiau, I., Tanaka, K., Song, I.Y., Yamamoto, S., Saeki, M. (eds.) Conceptual
Modeling. ER 2016, vol. 9974. Springer, Cham (2016). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-319-46397-1
4. Husserl, E.: The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology.
Northwestern University Press (1970). Trans. D. Carr (Original publ. 1954, written
1934–1937)
5. Heidegger, M.: Being and Time. SCM Press (1962). Trans. J. Macquarrie and E.
Robinson (First published 1927)
6. Schutz, A.: The Phenomenology of the Social World. Northwestern University Press
(1967). Trans. G. Walsh and F. Lehnert (First published 1932)

--- PAGE 54 ---
Using Clustering Labels to Supervise
Mashup Service Classification
Yang Liu(B)
, Lin Li, and Jianwen Xiang
School of Computer and Science, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, China
1716501503@qq.com, cathylilin@whut.edu.cn, xiangjw@gmail.com
Abstract. With the rapid growth of mashup resources, clustering
mashup services according to the functions of the mashup services has
become an eﬀective way to improve the quality of mashup services
management. Clustering is a learning task that classiﬁes individuals or
objects into diﬀerent clusters based on the similarity. The purpose of
clustering is to maximize the homogeneity of elements in the same clus-
ter and maximize the heterogeneity of the elements in diﬀerent clusters.
It is a multivariate statistical method for classiﬁcation. However, com-
pared with the supervised classiﬁcation, the clustering’s ability to cate-
gorize is much weaker. Existing methods for mashup services clustering
mostly focus on utilizing key features from WSDL documents directly.
In this paper, we proposed a method to improve the categorize ability of
clustering. That is, applying supervised thought to cluster mashup ser-
vices. First, taking basic clustering operations on the WSDL documents
of mashups to obtain the clustering result for each element. Then, using
the WSDL documents as training data, and the clustering results from
the ﬁrst step as pseudo-tags to train a classiﬁcation learner. Finally, clas-
sifying mashups with this classiﬁcation learner to get the ﬁnal clustering
results.
Keywords: Semi-supervised clustering · Ensemble clustering
Supervised LDA · Pseudo-tag
1 Introduction
In many practical problems of machine learning, it is possible to obtain lim-
ited prior knowledge. These prior knowledge can be used to guide the cluster-
ing process which will improve the clustering accuracy eﬀectively. Shi [1] et al.
used word2vec to obtain prior knowledge to guide the LDA clustering process
and improve the clustering accuracy eﬀectively. A single clustering algorithm
has the problems of instability, low robustness, poor parallelism, low accuracy,
etc. [2]. Clustering integration can improve these issues. Kang [3] et al. pro-
posed a weight-based similarity clustering integration method based on swarm
intelligence, and the experimental results proved the eﬀectiveness and perfor-
mance advantages of ensemble clustering. The ensemble clustering tool based on
classiﬁcation model we proposed can ameliorate the clustering results.
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 35–38, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_8

--- PAGE 55 ---
36 Y. Liu et al.
In this demonstration, we will present sldaCluster, an ensemble clustering
model based on supervised LDA. Users can set the initial clustering model as
tﬁdf or word2vec [4] according to the speciﬁc situation. The number of clusters
also can be adjusted based on the original data set. Users can also adjust the
parameter alpha of the classiﬁcation model slda [5] to obtain better experimental
results. Finally, we will show the comparison between the clustering results of
a single clustering algorithm and our proposed clustering method. The demon-
stration architecture is shown in Fig.1.
Fig.1. sldaCluster architecture.
Figure1 illustrates the overall architecture of sldaCluster. Two kinds of pro-
cesses will be taken on the source data. The ﬁrst is to make a simple process
to change the source data into the training data which is applicable to the slda
model. The second is to cluster the source data to obtain the clustering results.
And the training results will be taken as the pseudo-tags to supervise the training
of slda model. After the slda learner trained, we can put the processed training
data and the presedo-tags into it to get the ﬁnal clustering results.
2 Demonstration
We will use a mashup data set for experimentation. The data for clustering
experiments is the WSDL document of the Mashup service. The experimen-
tal environment is Unix, the IDE used is pycharm, and the python version is
Python3.5.
2.1 Experimental Procedure
(1) First, download the sldaCluster library from GitHub.
(2) Package and install the library in your environment. The installation details
are shown in the README ﬁle.

--- PAGE 56 ---
Using Clustering Labels to Supervise Mashup Service Classiﬁcation 37
(3) After the installation is complete, the functions in the module can be called
and the methods are also shown in the README ﬁle.
(4) The tool link is https://github.com/liuyangzy/sldaCluster.git.
(5) The screencast link is https://youtu.be/jBrEHsU3798.
2.2 Comparison and Analysis of the Demonstration Results
In the experiment, the ﬁrst thing to do is to preprocess the data. Each mashup
has a main tag which is going to be used as a category reference for evaluating
the clustering results. As categories with less Mashup Services would result in
poor clustering performance, we only choose here the top 20 categories. Hence
the number of cluster is also set to 20.
The sldaCluster model uses two single models as baseline models, namely tﬁdf
model and word2vec model. The tﬁdf model used TF-IDF algorithm to calculate
text features of each document, and uses cosine method to calculate the similarity
between documents. Finally it will use k-means++ algorithm for clustering. The
word2vec model uses the word2vec tool to calculate the word vector of each word
in the text data. It uses the word vectors of all the words in each document to
calculate the document vector. After calculating the similarities between each
two documents with the cosine similarity, it will use the k-means++ algorithm
to cluster.
We’ve compared the clustering results of the sldaCluster model with that
using a single word2vec clustering method. It is easy to ﬁnd that the experimental
results obtained by using our proposed model have increased by 90.84%, 78.28%,
123.61% and 41.68% respectively under the evaluation index of JC, FMI, F5,
Purity. We’ve also compared the clustering results of the sldaCluster model with
that using a single tﬁdf clustering method. It is easy to ﬁnd that the experimental
results obtained by using our proposed model have increased by 8.67%, 8.31%,
13.53% respectively under the evaluation index of JC, FMI, F5. It means the
sldaCluster model can improve the clustering accuracy signiﬁcantly. The value of
entropy has declined, that’s to say the sldaCluster is more stable than the single
one. The comparing results can be seen in Table1. All the evaluation results are
the best results after adjustment of parameters.
Table 1. Evaluation results of two single clustering models and their sldaCluster model.
Model/Evaluation index JC FMI RI F1 F5 Purity Entropy
word2vec 0.0273 0.0557 0.8347 0.0531 0.0415 0.1725 3.8858
w2v sldaCluster(α = 0.2) 0.0521 0.0993 0.8181 0.0991 0.0928 0.2444 3.5705
tfidf 0.0715 0.1335 0.8148 0.1334 0.1367 0.3732 2.9619
tfidf sldaCluster(α = 0.9) 0.0777 0.1446 0.8580 0.1442 0.1552 0.2821 2.1678
We can have some analysis according to Fig.2. Taking the word2vec model
as the initial clustering algorithm of sldaCluster model will get much better

--- PAGE 57 ---
38 Y. Liu et al.
improvement than taking the tﬁdf model. Through the analysis, it can be known
that the diﬀerence between the word2vec model and the LDA model is larger
relatively. Obviously the model obtained by ensembling the clustering algorithm
and the classiﬁcation model with greater diﬀerence is better. This is similar to
the requirement that the basic learners are better to have diversity in ensemble
learning.
Fig.2. Comparison of clustering results of sldaCluster and single clustering methods.
Through the comparisons of the above two experiments, two conclusions
can be drawn: (1) Compared with a single clustering algorithm, sldaCluster
can improve the clustering results signiﬁcantly and the model is more stable.
(2) The smaller the diﬀerence between the initial clustering algorithm and the
classiﬁcation model is, the less improvement the clustering can make.
Acknowledgements. This work is supported by the National Social Science Foun-
dation of China (Grant No. 15BGL048), Hubei Province Science and Technology Sup-
port Project (Grant No. 2015BAA072), Hubei Provincial Natural Science Foundation
of China (Grant No. 2017CFA012). The Fundamental Research Funds for the Central
Universities (WUT: 2017II39GX).
References
1. Shi, M., Liu, J., Zhou, D., Tang, M, Cao, B.: WE-LDA: a word embeddings aug-
mented LDA model for web services clustering. In: 24th International Conference
on Web Services, Honolulu, HI, USA, pp. 9–16. IEEE (2017)
2. Faceli, K., De Carvalho, A.C., De Souto, M.C.: Multi-objective clustering ensemble.
Int. J. Hybrid Intell. Syst. 4(3), 145–156 (2007)
3. Kang, Q., Liu, S., Zhou, M., Li, S.: A weight-incorporated similarity-based clustering
ensemble method based on swarm intelligence. Knowl. Based Syst. 101, 156–164
(2016)
4. Kusner, M., Sun, Y., Kolkin, N., Weinberger, K.: From word embeddings to doc-
ument distances. In: 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning, Lille,
France, pp. 957–966 (2015)
5. Mcauliﬀe, J.D., Blei, D.M.: Supervised topic models. In: 21st Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems Conference, Whistler, British Columbia, Canada,
pp. 121–128 (2008)

--- PAGE 58 ---
A Multi-Constrained Temporal Path
Query System
Jiuchao Shi1
, Guanfeng Liu2(B)
, Anqi Zhao1
, An Liu1
, Zhixu Li1
,
and Kai Zheng3
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University, Soochow, China
2
Department of Computing, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia
guanfeng.liu@mq.edu.au
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering and Big Data Research Center,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
zhengkai@uestc.edu.cn
Abstract. The temporal path problem is signiﬁcant and challenging,
where the connections between the vertices are temporal and there can
be many attributes on the vertices and edges, such as vehicle speed and
the price of a ﬂight. Then in path ﬁnding, in addition to the single
requirement of the length, or the arrival time, people would like to specify
multiple constraints on the attributes to illustrate their requirements in
real applications, such as the total cost, the total travel time and the
stopover interval of a ﬂight between two cities. In this paper, we devise
a system called MCTP to answer the new popular Multi-Constrained
Path Queries (MCPQs) in attributed temporal graphs. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst system that supports MCPQs.
Keywords: Path ﬁnding · Temporal graph · Multiple constraints
1 Introduction
Path query is popular in many real applications, like the road planning in trans-
portation networks and the route planning on the Internet. The existing methods
for the path query in temporal graphs [3] can eﬃciently deliver a result with con-
sidering the path with a single attribute, such as the path with the minimal travel
distance or the minimal cost [1,2]. However, there can be many attributes exist-
ing on the edges in temporal graphs, forming attributed temporal graphs, e.g.,
the travel time, the cost and the travel distance between two cities by ﬂights.
In real applications, people are usually willing to specify the constraints on the
attributes to illustrate their requirements in the path query in temporal graphs.
The challenge is how to develop an eﬀective and eﬃcient method to solve the
Multi-Constrained Path Query (MCPQ) problem that is NP-Complete [4]. We
propose a system called MCTP1
, which adopts our novel approximation algo-
rithm and supports four types of important multi-constrained temporal path
1
http://112.74.36.170:8080/MCTP.
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 39–43, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_9

--- PAGE 59 ---
40 J. Shi et al.
queries, including the earliest arrival path, the last departure path, the shortest
path and the fast path. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst system that
supports the NP-Complete MCPQs in attributed temporal graphs.
2 System Overview
The system architecture of MCTP is shown in Fig.1, which contains two main
layers: the user interface layer and the query processing layer. The whole sketch
of the user interface is shown in Fig.2, which contains parameter setting at the
left side and graph display at the right side. Besides, four datasets are provided
for users to choose from, they are Dblp, Digg, Arxiv and Epinions, each of them
has at least 28,000 vertices and 841,000 edges.
Fig.1. System architecture Fig.2. A whole sketch of the user
interface
2.1 User Interface
Path Query Setting and Graph and Result Display are supported by the web-
based user interfaces. Path Query Setting is on the left of the UI that con-
tains Graph Setting and Constraint Setting. These components are designed to
help users customize temporal graphs and specify multiple constraints on the
attributes respectively. In Graph Setting, two drop-down menus and three slide
boxes are provided. A user can choose a dataset and a type of temporal path
from the ﬁrst two drop-down menus. An attributed temporal graph structure
can be displayed once the setting of the graph is submitted. In Constraint Set-
ting, a drop-down menu is provided for users to set the number of constraints
and MCTP will create the corresponding number of drop-down menus to set the
values of these constraints. After that, users can choose a start vertex, and an
end vertex of a temporal path from the selected attributed temporal graph and
MCTP will answer the query result once the path query is submitted.
Graph and Result Display on the right of UI, contains Graph Display and
Path Display. Once the setting of a data graph is submitted, Graph Display can
display the vertices and edges contained in the graph, where the in-degree and
out-degree of each vertex are equal to or greater than the values set by users,
and the time points of each edge are in the time interval given by users.

--- PAGE 60 ---
A Multi-Constrained Temporal Path Query System 41
In the display of a temporal graph in Graph Display, each vertex is given a
digit as its ID, and each edge contains the temporal information of attributes
between two vertices. For example, given two vertices v1 and v2, supposing there
exist two paths p1, p2 between them at time point t1 and t2 respectively. The
two paths have diﬀerent start time, travel time and attribute values. When users
move the mouse over the edge between v1 and v2, MCTP will generate a table
over it, where the temporal attributes information is displayed. In addition to
displaying initial graph structures, The delivered temporal paths will be dis-
played, and the details of this query process will be presented by Path Display.
2.2 Query Processing
In Query Processing. MCTP adopts a Two-Pass approximation algorithm that
bidirectionally searches the attributed temporal graph with two linear scans from
the end vertex ve to the start vertex vs and from vs to ve respectively to answer
MCPQs. In the algorithm, the ﬁrst Backward Pass procedure calculates the
temporal objective function values of the Backward Temporal Paths (BTPs) from
each vertex vi to ve, denoted as pB
vi,ve
(t), to investigate if the BTP can satisfy
the corresponding multiple constraints. In addition, the aggregated attributes’
values of the BTP are saved at vi to be used to investigate the feasibility of a
temporal path delivered in the next Forward Pass procedure from vs to ve for
the optimisation of objectives (i.e., the earliest arrival, the lastest departure, the
shortest and the fastest optimisation). The details of the temporal path ﬁnding
methods are discussed in the following Sect.3.
3 Demonstration
In this section, we outline our demonstration scenario. The demonstration
focuses on two key functionalities of MCTP: Path Query Setting and Graph
and Result Display.
The ﬁrst functionality we provide to the users is the Path Query Setting
in attributed temporal graphs. This function contains two main sub-functions:
Graph Setting and Constraint Setting. These two functions can help users cus-
tomise the attributed temporal graph and specify the multiple constraints on the
attributes respectively. The Graph Setting component allows users to customise
the graph based their requirements on path query as the initial graph contains
too many vertices and edges. Users may be only interested in the vertices that
exist in a certain time interval. For example, users can choose data graphs and
choose one type of the path for queries. In addition, users can specify the min-
imal in-degree, the minimal out-degree and the time interval of the vertices in
a data graph. The Constraint Setting component is to specify the number and
the values of multiple constraints on the attributes. After that, users can select
two vertices from the data graph as the start vertex and the end vertex for the
path query.

--- PAGE 61 ---
42 J. Shi et al.
Fig.3. The display of an attributed
temporal graph
Fig.4. The display of an MCPQ
result
3.1 Graph and Result Display
Graph and result display is to display the structure and the associated tem-
poral information for attributed temporal graphs and display the ﬁnal query
results. Once the setting of the graph is submitted, the corresponding attributed
temporal graph will be displayed on the right of the UI. Each vertex has a dis-
tinct number, and each edge contains the temporal and attributed information
between two vertices, such as the start time, the travel time and the value of each
attribute. When users move the mouse over the edge, MCTP will generate a table
to display the temporal information on the edge. An example is shown in Fig.3.
Once a path query is submitted, MCTP will perform the Two-Pass approxima-
tion algorithm, and if there is no feasible temporal path, MCTP returns “no
path found” in the middle of the UI. Otherwise, the attributed temporal graph
will be displayed. Moreover, the details of this query process are displayed in the
form of text at the upper right corner of the Path Display. An example is shown
in Fig.4.
4 Conclusion
In this paper, we have proposed an MCTP system to answer MCPQs. Our system
and the corresponding methodologies can be used in many temporal graph based
applications as the backbone. For example, it can be used in road networks or
airline transportation networks for route planning with the constraints of the
travel cost, the travel time and the stopover interval of the trip.
References
1. Shah, N., Koutra, D., Zou, T., Gallagher, B., Faloutsos, C.: Timecrunch: inter-
pretable dynamic graph summarization. In: KDD, pp. 1055–1064 (2015)
2. Wang, S., Lin, W., Yang, Y., Xiao, X., Zhou, S.: Eﬃcient route planning on public
transportation networks: a labelling approach. In: Proceedings of the 2015 ACM
SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia, 31 May–4 June 2015, pp. 967–982. ACM (2015)

--- PAGE 62 ---
A Multi-Constrained Temporal Path Query System 43
3. Wu, H., Cheng, J., Huang, S., Ke, Y., Lu, Y., Xu, Y.: Path problems in temporal
graphs. VLDB 7(9), 721–732 (2014)
4. Zhang, B., Hao, J., Mouftah, H.T.: Bidirectional multi-constrained routing algo-
rithms. IEEE Trans. Comput. 63, 2174–2186 (2014)

--- PAGE 63 ---
ACCDS: A Criminal Community Detection
System Based on Evolving Social Graphs
Xiaoli Wang , Meihong Wang(&)
, and Jianshan Han
Software School of Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
{xlwang,wangmh}@xmu.edu.cn, 919769245@qq.com
Abstract. This paper presents an intelligent criminal community detection
system, called ACCDS, to support various criminal event detection tasks such as
drug abuse behavior discovery and illegal pyramid selling organization detec-
tion, based on evolving social graphs. The system contains four main compo-
nents: data collection, community social graph construction, criminal
community detection and data visualization. First, the system collects a large
amount of e-government data from several real communities. The raw data
consist of demographic data, social relations, house visiting records, and sam-
pled criminal records. To protect the privacy, we desensitize the real data using
some data processing techniques, and extract the important features for proﬁling
the human behaviors. Second, we use a large static social graph to model the
social relations of all residents and a sequence of time-evolving graphs to model
the house visiting data for each house owner. With the graph models, we for-
mulate the criminal community detection tasks as the subgraph mining problem,
and implement a subgraph detection algorithm based on frequent pattern mining.
Finally, the system provides very user-friendly interfaces to visualize the
detected results to the corresponding user.
Keywords: Evolving social graphs  Criminal community detection
Subgraph mining  Data visualization
1 Introduction
Nowadays, the community security management system has been widely used in
China, and massive resident information has been collected, such as resident demo-
graphic data, visiting records, social relationships, criminal records, etc. Many existing
works have focused on analyzing such complex data to detect anomaly events. The
branch of data mining has wide applications in security, ﬁnance, and many others.
These methods can be categorized into two groups based on various data models: high-
dimensional method (e.g., [1, 2]) and graph based method (e.g., [3–5]). As graph is
recently widely used to model real objects, this paper also focuses on the anomaly
detection problem based on graph models. Different from existing work concerned with
general criminal events, this paper focuses on some urgent real problems such as drug
abuse behavior discovery and illegal pyramid selling organization detection. We
develop a community data analysis system containing four main components. The
components and our main contribution can be summarized as follows.
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 44–48, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_10

--- PAGE 64 ---
• We collect massive real community data from some cities in China, and use several
data cleaning techniques to obtain high-quality data. The sensitive proﬁles are
desensitized before we store the data into the database.
• We use evolving social graphs to model the house visiting data, and employ a
subgraph mining algorithm to solve the criminal events detection problem.
• We develop a powerful visualization system to display the evolving social graphs,
the warning messages, and the detected criminal communities.
2 System Architecture and Demonstration
Our system is implemented based on J2EE platform and the system architecture is
shown in Fig. 1. The system has four main components, including data collection,
community social graph construction, data analysis, and result visualization.
2.1 Data Collection
We gather data from several real communities in China. The raw data contain massive
information, such as resident demographic data, house visiting records, social rela-
tionships, and historical criminal records. We do data cleaning ﬁrst to delete all the
noisy data. Then, to protect residents’ privacy, we desensitize the demographic data by
removing explicit properties and randomly generating some synthetic proﬁles. Fur-
thermore, we extract the most important features for proﬁling the human behaviors.
The extracted proﬁles of a resident are shown in our system as in Fig. 2.
2.2 Community Social Graph Construction
We use a large static social graph to model the social relations of all residents, as shown
in Fig. 3. In the social graph, each resident is represented as one node. If two residents
have relationship such as family relation or friendship, there will be one edge being
Data from Real Communities
Data gathering
Data Collection
Subgraph mining
Data Analysis
Social graph
visualization
Result Visualization
Drug abuse behavior
discovery
Illegal pyramid
selling organization
detection
Data cleaning
Feature extraction
Criminal community
visualization
Warning messages
Social graph
modelling
Evolving social graph
modelling
Community Social
Graph Construction
Fig. 1. The system architecture
ACCDS: A Criminal Community Detection System 45

--- PAGE 65 ---
connected between these two nodes. To support efﬁcient criminal community detec-
tion, we use a sequence of time-evolving graphs to model the house visiting data for
each house owner, as shown in Fig. 4. Different from the social graph, the edge in time-
evolving graphs represent the visiting relationship. For example, if one resident of node
A visited a house owner of node B, then there will be one edge connecting node A and
node B.
Fig. 2. The user proﬁle page
Fig. 3. The community social graph example for several selected residents
46 X. Wang et al.

--- PAGE 66 ---
2.3 Data Analysis and Visualization
Based on the graph models, we formulate the criminal community detection tasks as
the subgraph mining problem, and implement a frequent pattern mining algorithm to
solve it [6]. The details of the algorithm can be seen in our summited full research
paper to a conference. We omit the details here as we will publish a technical report
later online. As shown in Fig. 4, the substructures with red nodes and edges are the
detected illegal pyramid selling organization. The system contains other pages to show
other kinds of detected results. We omit them here for the space constraints.
Acknowledgment. This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China under Grant No. 61702432, the Fundamental Research Funds for Central Universities of
China under Grant No. 20720180070, and the International Cooperation Projects of Fujian
Province in China under Grant No. 2018I0016.
References
1. Gupta, M., Gao, J., Aggarwal, C.C., Han, J.: Outlier Detection for Temporal Data. Synthesis
Lectures on Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery. Morgan & Claypool Publishers,
San Rafael (2014)
2. Mannhardt, F., de Leoni, M., Reijers, H.A., van der Aalst, W.M.P.: Data-driven process
discovery - revealing conditional infrequent behavior from event logs. In: Dubois, E., Pohl, K.
(eds.) CAiSE 2017. LNCS, vol. 10253, pp. 545–560. Springer, Cham (2017). https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-319-59536-8_34
Fig. 4. The evolving visiting graphs for a selected address in May, and a highlighting result of
the detected illegal pyramid selling organization (Color ﬁgure online)
ACCDS: A Criminal Community Detection System 47

--- PAGE 67 ---
3. Akoglu, L., Tong, H., Koutra, D.: Graph based anomaly detection and description: a survey.
Data Min. Knowl. Discov. 29(3), 626–688 (2014)
4. Ranshous, S., Shen, S., Koutra, D., et al.: Anomaly detection in dynamic networks: a survey.
Wiley Interdisc. Rev. Comput. Stat. 7(3), 223–247 (2015)
5. Kaur, R., Singh, S.: A survey of data mining and social network analysis based anomaly
detection techniques. Egypt. Inform. J. 17(2), 199–216 (2016)
6. Kuramochi, M., Karypis, G.: Frequent subgraph discovery. In: IEEE International Conference
on Data Mining, pp. 313–320 (2002)
48 X. Wang et al.

--- PAGE 68 ---
A Prototype for Generating Meaningful
Layout of iStar Models
Yunduo Wang, Tong Li(B)
, Haoyuan Zhang, Jiayi Sun, Yeming Ni,
and Congkai Geng
Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, China
{15074518,15071109,bumfod,nym16027221,
gengcongkai789123}@emails.bjut.edu.cn
litong@bjut.edu.cn
Abstract. Being able to model and analyze social dependencies is one
of the most important feature of iStar modeling language. However, typ-
ical layout algorithms (e.g., hierarchical layout and circular layout) are
not suitable for laying out iStar models, especially, strategic dependency
models. As a result, iStar models are typically constructed and laid out
in a manual way, which is time-consuming and tedious, especially when
dealing with large-scale models. In this paper, we present a prototype
tool which can automatically lay out iStar model in a meaningful way
by taking into account the semantics of iStar model elements. In partic-
ular, we have developed and integrated an istarml parser with our tool,
enabling automatic layout of iStar models that are speciﬁed in terms of
istarml. We believe our tool would be particularly interesting for people
who used to deal with large-scale iStar models.
1 Introduction
iStar modeling language has been proposed for more than two decades, which
is an eﬀective approach for social modeling and analysis in the early phase
of requirements engineering. Although hundreds of analysis approaches have
been proposed based on iStar [4], only few of them concern the layout issue of
iStar models. Speciﬁcally, jUCMNav1
has integrated graphviz for layout purpose,
which is thus able to automatically visualize and lay out goal models [6]. How-
ever, as for the layout of actors and their interrelationship, jUCMNav has imple-
mented it in a rather simple manner, i.e., a matrix-like layout, which does not
really contribute to the understandability of iStar models. Similarly, OpenOME
also implements a basic graph layout function, but only focuses on intentional
elements (e.g., goals and tasks).
The challenge of laying out iStar SD models is that typical layout algo-
rithms, e.g., hierarchical and circular layout algorithms, do no ﬁt iStar syntax
well. Consequently, analysts have to manually lay out iStar models, which may
1
http://jucmnav.softwareengineering.ca/jucmnav.
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 49–53, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_11

--- PAGE 69 ---
50 Y. Wang et al.
cost a signiﬁcant amount of time when dealing with large-scale scenarios. More-
over, modiﬁcations on existing complicated iStar models are also nightmares for
iStar modelers, as inserting/deleting particular actors typically requires holistic
adjustment of existing models.
In this paper, we present a prototype tool which can automatically lay out
iStar models in realtime. The tool implements our previously proposed force-
based layout algorithm [1] with some improvements. In particular, our layout
strategy takes into account the semantics of iStar elements, trying to place them
in a way that is easy and intuitive to understand. For example, actors that have
more interdependencies are placed more closed to each other, resulting in actor
clusters. We believe that people who typically deal with large-scale iStar models
can beneﬁt from using our tool.
Moreover, we have been aware that many modelers have accepted that textual
representation of models are more eﬃcient than graphical diagrams in terms of
editing, storing and versioning models [3]. Also in the iStar community, Grau
et al. propose J-PRiM which does not show the i* elements in a graphical way
but in a tree-form hierarchy [2]. In such a way, as models grow, the scalability
issue can be relieved, and modelers are able to ﬁnd particular elements in a
faster way. On the whole, we believe our tool can be a useful complement to the
textual representation of iStar models, dynamically (re-)calculating positions for
model elements when they need to be visualized. As such, we have developed and
integrated an istarml parser with our prototype, and thus all iStar models that
are speciﬁed in istarml can easily leverage the layout capability of the prototype.
2 Prototype Architecture
The prototype is a browser-based tool, which is implemented using Html, CSS,
and JavaScript. The architecture of the tool is shown in Fig.1, where our tool
takes istarml as input, and eventually produces position information for each
model element. Although we have not done yet, we plan to deploy the prototype
online as a public model layout service to help researchers in the iStar community.
iStar visualization
prototype
istarml parser
istarml
model
json
(raw
data)
position
data
Browser
Fig.1. The architecture of the prototype

--- PAGE 70 ---
A Prototype for Generating Meaningful Layout of iStar Models 51
The primary feature is to lay out iStar models in realtime. Speciﬁcally, our
prototype has already implemented the following detailed features:
1. Meaningful actor distance. Distances between actors are calculated based
on their interdependencies. More interdependencies indicate more closed rela-
tions, and thus actors are closed to each other.
2. Regionalization. Based on our experiences in dealing with iStar models,
it is easier to comprehend a large model when it is laid out in a way that
elements are divided in diﬀerent regions of the canvas. Thus, our algorithm
intentionally increase distances among element clusters.
3. Fixed point. According to our force-based layout strategy, an element’s
position will be changed if its connected elements move. Although it is a
reasonable setting, sometimes analysts may can have certain elements ﬁxed
by a single-click on corresponding elements.
Fig.2. An automatic layout example

--- PAGE 71 ---
52 Y. Wang et al.
3 Illustrations
Figure2 shows an automatic layout iStar model, which has not been manually
adjusted at all. In particular, actors have been visually clustered based on their
interrelationship, and thus each time we can easily comprehend this model region
by region. To further adjust the model, analysis can manually ﬁx certain elements
according to their preferences. More detailed operations are recorded and have
been post online. To facilitate watching the video, we have prepared two versions,
a high quality one2
and a low quality one3
.
4 Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper, we present our prototype tool which use a customized force-based
layout algorithm to automatically lay out SD diagram of iStar. Our tool takes
into account the semantics of model elements in order to produce more mean-
ingful layout. We believe that the automation of model layout can positively
contribute to scalability of iStar modeling language, which has been concerned
by more and more modelers [5]. In other words, the tool is suitable for dealing
with large-scale iStar models. In addition, our tool complement the textual rep-
resentation of iStar models, enabling analysts to easily switch between these two
types of models in order to maximumly leverage beneﬁts from both types.
As for future work, we plan to ﬁrst extend our proposal is to deal with
automatic layout of the SR view. In addition, we also plan to deploy and publish
our tool in order to be practically used by domain experts. Finally, we aim to
carry out a series of controlled experiments to evaluate the eﬀectiveness of our
tool.
Acknowledgments. This work is supported by National Key R&D Program of China
(No. 2017YFC08033007), the National Natural Science of Foundation of China (No.
91546111, 91646201) and Basic Research Funding of Beijing University of Technology
(No. 040000546318516).
References
1. Du, X., Li, T., Wang, D.: An automatic layout approach for iStar models (2017)
2. Grau, G., Franch, X., Avila, S.: J-PRiM: A java tool for a process reengineering i*
methodology. In: 14th IEEE International Conference on Requirements Engineering,
pp. 359–360. IEEE (2006)
3. Gregorics, B., Gregorics, T., Kovács, G.F., Dobreﬀ, A., Dévai, G.: Textual diagram
layout language and visualization algorithm. In: 2015 ACM/IEEE 18th International
Conference on Model Driven Engineering Languages and Systems (MODELS), pp.
196–205. IEEE (2015)
2
https://www.dropbox.com/s/ezhtkao5szdm3hf/screencast high quality.mp4?
dl=0.
3
https://www.dropbox.com/s/bjpn5hwpmz7d6hn/screencast low quality.mp4?
dl=0.

--- PAGE 72 ---
A Prototype for Generating Meaningful Layout of iStar Models 53
4. Horkoﬀ, J.: Goal-oriented requirements engineering: an extended systematic map-
ping study. In: Requirements Engineering, pp. 1–28 (2017)
5. Li, T., Grubb, A.M., Horkoﬀ, J.: Understanding challenges and tradeoﬀs in iStar
tool development. In: 9th iStar Workshop, pp. 49–54 (2016)
6. Rashidi-Tabrizi, R., Mussbacher, G., Amyot, D.: Transforming regulations into per-
formance models in the context of reasoning for outcome-based compliance. In: 2013
Sixth International Workshop on Requirements Engineering and Law (RELAW), pp.
34–43. IEEE (2013)

--- PAGE 73 ---
MDBF: A Tool for Monitoring
Database Files
Xiangyu Wei and Jianqiu Xu(B)
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China
{xywei,jianqiu}@nuaa.edu.cn
Abstract. When complex queries are executed in a database system,
several ﬁles will be accessed such as relational tables, indexes and pro-
ﬁles. Monitoring database ﬁles enables us to better understand the query
progress and the storage system. In this demo, we present a tool for mon-
itoring ﬁle operations such as when the ﬁle is accessed and how many
bytes are transferred for read and write. The access information is visu-
ally displayed at running time, and also stored as historical data for
further analysis and optimization. We provide a graphical interface to
report and display the results. MDBF is implemented inside a system
kernel with a low overhead. The demonstration is performed by using
real trajectory datasets and continuous queries employing three diﬀerent
indexes.
Keywords: Monitor · Database ﬁles · Queries · Analysis · Visual
1 Introduction
File monitoring plays an essential role in operating system that constantly
watches folders and ﬁles. Actions are triggered when ﬁles are created or accessed
(read/write). Although some tools have been developed, e.g., notify-tools, there
exists limited work on this topic in the context of a database system. In princi-
ple, a database is a collection of ﬁles in a certain format, e.g., relational tables,
indexes, metadata and log records. Files reside in secondary storage and will be
accessed at query execution time.
Some tools have been developed to monitor a database system [2,5]. A query
monitor aims to observe and predict parameters related to the execution of a
query. Typical parameters include the cardinality and size of the output of query
operators. When execute expensive queries, e.g., joins, the I/O communication
between main memory and disk usually become a bottleneck. The query monitor
should observe database ﬁles during the query execution and record statistics
such as when the ﬁle is accessed and how many bytes are extracted from the
ﬁle or inserted into the ﬁle. The ﬁne-grained information can be further used
for the analysis and tuning of the system. Optimizations can be made based
on monitoring results, e.g., redesigning the data representation and improving
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 54–58, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_12

--- PAGE 74 ---
MDBF: A Tool for Monitoring Database Files 55
the buﬀer manager. Monitoring database ﬁles will be helpful to understand how
queries are executed and the progress of tasks, and ﬁnd the system bottleneck.
In this paper, we develop a tool called MDBF that monitors database ﬁles
during the query execution. There are three components: ﬁle detector, storage
and analysis system, and graphical interface. In the detection phase, a well-
known tool Strace is utilized to monitor the operating system and capture all
ﬁle actions, e.g., read and write blocks of data. We do the ﬁltering by extracting
the data related to database ﬁle operations and store action statistics in rela-
tional tables. The information of accessing ﬁles is displayed when the querying is
running and also recorded as historical data. A thorough analysis is performed on
log data. MDBF is able to monitor all queries incurring database ﬁle operations.
A graphical interface visualizes the access content to aid our understanding of
the query progress. Users can compare the access information of diﬀerent ﬁles
in a convenient way. MDBF is developed in an extensible database system SEC-
ONDO [4] in C/C++ and Java (JavaSwing and JFreeChart). We demonstrate
how to make use of the tool to monitor database ﬁles by using real datasets
and testing queries, including (i) on-line feedback about database ﬁle operations
and (ii) historical data analysis and visualization. MDBF incurs a low system
overhead and beneﬁts both database users and administrators.
2 MDBF
2.1 An Overview
The monitor consists of three modules: ﬁle detector, storage and analysis system
and visual interface, as illustrated in Fig.1. The ﬁle detector, serving as the key
component, makes use of a tool Strace, which is a diagnostic, debugging and
instructional userspace utility. It is used to monitor and tamper with interac-
tions between processes and the Linux kernel, including system calling, signal
delivering, and process state changing.
When a query is executed, the tool detects database ﬁle operations and gen-
erates a monitoring log. The log data is automatically reported to the ﬁlter and
formatted in a relational table in the system. We are able to display the accessing
information at running time and also store them as historical data.
2.2 Data Flow and Log Data
Since Strace captures all system calls in the query evaluation, we are primarily
interested in ﬁle operations. The data ﬂow received from Strace is ﬁltered to be
a certain format and transferred between system modules. A relational table is
deﬁned including the operation id, the execution time, the query, the ﬁle name,
and the number of read/write bytes, as exempliﬁed in Table1.

--- PAGE 75 ---
56 X. Wei and J. Xu
Fig.1. The framework of MDBF
Table 1. Monitoring table.
Id Time Query Database files Read(bytes) Write(bytes)
1 15:39:08 “open database
BERLINTEST”
“/home/nuaa/secondo-
databases/BERLINTEST/d1.sdb”
512 0
2 15:41:22 “let utrips =
Trains feed
projec...”
“/home/nuaa/secondo-
databases/BERLINTEST/d111.sdb”
0 45
3 15:44:28 “query res10
feed count”
“/home/nuaaxu/secondo-
databases/BERLINTEST/d123.sdb”
512 0
3 Demonstration
We demonstrate monitoring databases ﬁles by performing queries over real tra-
jectory datasets including 7,915,088 GPS records (50, 000 trips) [1].
Monitoring at Running Time. A list of operators including select and create
is executed as test workloads, the tool monitors database ﬁles and displays the
read/write information, as illustrated in Fig.2. Note that the data is transferred
in block between main memory and disk, and may be buﬀered before it is ﬂushed
into the disk by the system. Users will receive informative feedback of the query
progress and watch the execution status.
Historical Data Analysis and Visualization. Continuous distance queries
over trajectories are evaluated. The query returns objects within a certain dis-
tance to the target at each time point. We employ three indexes (3D R-tree,
TB-tree [6] and SETI [3]) to run the query in order to compare the I/O cost of
diﬀerent structures, as illustrated in Fig.3(a). The monitored data at running
time is collected and a graphical interface is developed to visualize the result by
histogram and pie chart. The interface displays the number of read and write
bytes for data and index ﬁles, as shown in Fig.3(b).

--- PAGE 76 ---
MDBF: A Tool for Monitoring Database Files 57
Fig.2. Real-time data display
(a) The statistics
(b) Histogram and pie chart
Fig.3. Analysis and display of historical data
MDBF Overhead. We record the query cost when MDBF is running and
closed. The results, reported in Table2, show that a low system overhead is
incurred. In fact, MDBF requires additional CPU time to do the ﬁltering and
data transfer but does not incur any I/O cost.

--- PAGE 77 ---
58 X. Wei and J. Xu
Table 2. Query cost
MDBF Without MDBF
CPU time (sec) 1.86 1.78
I/O accesses 8308 8308
Acknowledgement. The work is supported by National Key Research and Develop-
ment Plan of China (2018YFB1003902) and “the Fundamental Research Funds for the
Central Universities in China”, NO. NS2017073.
References
1. https://outreach.didichuxing.com/app-vue/personal (2017)
2. Beeri, C., Eyal, A., Milo, T., Pilberg, A.: Query-based monitoring of BPEL business
processes. In: ACM SIGMOD, pp. 1122–1124 (2007)
3. Chakka, V.P., Everspaugh, A., Patel, J.M.: Indexing large trajectory data sets with
SETI. In: CIDR (2003)
4. Güting, R.H., Behr, T., Düntgen, C.: SECONDO: a platform for moving objects
database research and for publishing and integrating research implementations.
IEEE Data Eng. Bull. 33(2), 56–63 (2010)
5. Mishra, C., Koudas, N.: The design of a query monitoring system. ACM Trans.
Database Syst. 34(1), 1:1–1:51 (2009)
6. Pfoser, D., Jensen, C.S., Theodoridis, Y.: Novel approaches to the indexing of mov-
ing object trajectories. In: VLDB, pp. 395–406 (2000)

--- PAGE 78 ---
CusFinder: An Interactive Customer
Ranking Query System
Yanghao Zhou, Xiaolin Qin(B)
, Xiaojun Xie, and Xingluo Li
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China
{zyhreadboy,qinxcs,xiexj,lxldblab}@nuaa.edu.cn
Abstract. Finding a certain number of objects with optimum ranking
based on spatial position constraints and given preference of attributes
can be essential in numerous scenarios. In this paper, we demonstrate
CusFinder, an interactive customer ranking query system to retrieve cus-
tomers who favour a speciﬁc seller more than other people from the
perspective of sellers, instead of retrieving sellers for a given customer
similar to existing commercial systems. To make the query processing
more eﬃcient, a novel indexing is proposed to serve for query engine.
Furthermore, we present the result of queries upon multiple visualiza-
tion views with user-friendly interaction designs.
Keywords: Optimum ranking · Spatial constraints · Multiple views
1 Introduction
As an eﬀective means of retrieving a speciﬁed number of objects according to
ranking scores, rank-aware query is widely applied in various real-life scenarios.
Nevertheless, we have noticed that none of existing work takes into account both
sellers’ perspective and customer-oriented ranking with spatial constraint, such
as the following example.
Example 1.1 Given a collection of restaurants and a set of customers, the man-
ager of one of the restaurants, named Tom, is trying to ﬁnd a small number
(denoted by k) of customers who prefer his restaurant compared with other cus-
tomers. As diﬀerent customers have diﬀerent requirements (i.e. taste or price),
and customers would not consider those restaurants far away (denoted by σ)
from them, Tom is supposed to know the rankings of his restaurant for dif-
ferent customers, thereby obtaining those customers who can not only accept
the distance between them and Tom’s restaurant, but also give higher ranking
according to their preference for multi-dimension properties.
Moreover, by reviewing the literature and commercial platforms serving sim-
ilar purpose, we ﬁnd that few eﬀorts are made on visualizing the query results,
which motivates us to develop a visualization-aided system to beneﬁt sellers by
identifying potential target customers.
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 59–63, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_13

--- PAGE 79 ---
60 Y. Zhou et al.
Therefore, we propose an interactive customer ranking query system named
CusFinder. It distinguishes from the literature in three-fold. First, it supports
Reverse Spatial Object k-Ranks Query, a novel query which explores optimal k
customers satisfying spatial constraints from the perspective of sellers. Second,
CusFinder can answer this query eﬃciently owing to a hybrid index structure
and query processing framework. Finally, it is designed to show the result on map
dynamically via an interactive visualization procedure. All these functions are
presented based on user-friendly interactions upon multiple visualization views,
which heuristically guide users to interact with diﬀerent visualization results [2].
2 Data Model and Queries
Data Model. We maintain two kinds of data in our system. One is object data,
and each object p = ρ,φ is a pair of position ρ and a set of associated terms
φ = t1,...,td which describes the general attributes. The other one is user
preference data represented by a triple u = ρ,ψ,σ, where u.ρ is the location
where u is posted, u.ψ = w1,...,wd is the preference weight (normalized in
[0,1] and
d
i=1 wi = 1), and u.σ is the maximum distance the user can tolerate
between him and any eligible object.
Query Model. We deﬁne an object’s rank for a given user, namely rank(u,q),
by the number of objects with a smaller score than q for u, which is same with
the deﬁnition in [3]. In this paper, the geographical position of objects and users
has been considered by calculating Euclidean distance.
Definition 2.1 Reverse Spatial Object k-Ranks (RSO-kR) Query. Given
an object set D = {p1,...,pn}, a user set U = {u1,...,um}, an integer k, a
query point q, the RSO-kR will return a set S of k users such that
(1) ∀ui ∈ S,dist(q,ui) ≤ ui.σ;
(2) ∀ui ∈ S,∀uj ∈ U − S, if dist(q,uj) ≤ uj.σ, then rank(ui,q) ≤ rank(uj,q).
3 System Architecture
As shown in Fig.1, CusFinder includes a front-end of visual interface and a
back-end of query processing. At the front-end, users could issue queries and
view the selected results based on multiple coordinated views. Each new user
interaction over the interface will be sent to the back-end, and a search engine
is employed to answer the query on top of an indexing module. After the query
is processed, results containing target customers will be returned and displayed
at the front-end by map view and multidimensional view.
Indexing Module. Diﬀerent index structures are applied to organize the data.
A novel index named Layer Grid Index composed by a layer dominant graph ID
[5] and a grid index table IT is used for seller data, while a histogram is used
for customer data.

--- PAGE 80 ---
CusFinder: An Interactive Customer Ranking Query System 61
Search Engine. To conduct ﬁltering eﬃciently, we propose a progressive strat-
egy, which scans for candidate points layer by layer. Besides, when we are seeking
for superior customers, it is a wiser method to roughly estimate ranks with lower
and upper bounds of the buckets.
Please refer to our recent research work [4] for more details about indexing
design and query algorithm.
DB
Indexing Module
Layer Grid Index Histogram
Search Engine
Progressive Strategy Ranking Estimation
Visualization Settings
Panel
Map View
Multidimensional
View
Back-End Front-End
Multiple
Coordinated
Views
Target Customers
User
Interaction
Fig.1. System architecture
Fig.2. An overview of the customers
4 Demonstration and Scenarios
We will demonstrate CusFinder based on real-world datasets and scenarios. We
crawled restaurant information in ShangHai from Dianping1
, which is one of
the biggest lifestyle and group buying websites in China. Each restaurant has
descriptive attributes (such as price, taste, surrounding) and location attribute.
Speciﬁcally, our demonstration is based on the scenario that Tom is trying
to ﬁnd customers who favour his restaurant more than other people, which we
have described in Example 1.1.
1
http://www.dianping.com.

--- PAGE 81 ---
62 Y. Zhou et al.
Fig.3. An example of interactive exploration
Exploration Query 1. Interactive Exploration upon Dynamic Win-
dows. Our ﬁrst exploration gives users an overview of customers, and helps
them understand the distribution and requirements of customers, so that users
could retrieve a certain number of customers according to their actual needs.
As shown in Fig.2, when Tom enters the main page of our system, he notices
that there is an enormous quantity of colourful points displayed on the map,
which reﬂect the distribution of customers, and the colour implies the diﬀerent
requirements for distance. Considering that it is overwhelming and meaningless
to display all customer data in a limited screen with coarser granularity [1], only
those customers from current map window and in the RSO-kR Query results will
be displayed. All interactions with the map such as zooming in/out and panning
will triage a new RSO-kR Query within current window range, and all the result
views change simultaneously to keep consistency. As shown in Fig.3, current
exploration is based on a restaurant marked with pin in PuDong district, aiming
to retrieve twenty customers with optimum rankings within current window
range. Finally, 20 results with top-20 rankings have been marked with circles in
diﬀerent sizes and colours.
Fig.4. Detailed comparison: (a) in parallel coordinates; (b) in radar chart.

--- PAGE 82 ---
CusFinder: An Interactive Customer Ranking Query System 63
Exploration Query 2. Detailed Comparison of Selected Customers and
Restaurants. After users obtain the ﬁltering results, they want to compare the
preference of customers, or discover strengths and weaknesses of their restaurants
and competitors. Our second exploration query can help them achieve this goal.
On the basis of interactive exploration, Tom intends to know not only the
detailed comparison of these selected customers, but also the diﬀerences between
his restaurants and rivals. With visual assistance of parallel coordinates, he could
drag boxes on those coordinate axes indicating properties that he cares about
more, thereby observing the corresponding values of these selected customers
from each dimension. As shown in Fig.4(a), although his restaurant is given same
ranks by two customers, there are notable diﬀerences between the preference.
Consequently, he could choose the better one according to his requirements.
Besides, Tom is able to compare his restaurant with his rivals’ restaurants in
the radar chart. As shown in Fig.4(b), he clearly notices that the green coloured
restaurant has more favourable comments and lower price compared with others.
Acknowledgement. This research is supported by NSFC 61373015, 61728204, and
the Project of State Grid Corporation of China (Storage and Processing of Distributed
Parallel Database Based on Big Data Technology).
References
1. Guo, T., Feng, K., Cong, G., Bao, Z.: Eﬃcient selection of geospatial data on maps
for interactive and visualized exploration. In: SIGMOD, pp. 567–582. ACM (2018)
2. Wang, S., Li, M., Zhang, Y., Bao, Z., Tedjopurnomo, D.A., Qin, X.: Trip planning
by an integrated search paradigm. In: SIGMOD, pp. 1673–1676. ACM (2018)
3. Zhang, Z., Jin, C., Kang, Q.: Reverse k-ranks query. PVLDB 7(10), 785–796 (2014)
4. Zhou, Y., Qin, X., Xie, X., Guo, C.: A reverse k-ranks query based on clusters. J.
Chin. Comput. Syst. (2018, in press)
5. Zou, L., Chen, L.: Dominant graph: an eﬃcient indexing structure to answer top-k
queries. In: ICDE, pp. 536–545. IEEE Computer Society (2008)

--- PAGE 83 ---
Doctoral Symposium

--- PAGE 84 ---
Preface to ERDS 2018
Doctoral Symposium (ERDS 2018)
at the 37th International Conference on
Conceptual Modeling (ER 2018)
Xi’an, China
October 22–25, 2018
Organized by
Xavier Franch and Chaokun Wang
The ER 2018 Doctoral Symposium (ERDS 2018) is hold in Xi’an, China. This sym-
posium gathers together PhD students and academics working in conceptual modelling.
ERDS 2018 offers PhD students the opportunity to present and discuss their research
and to interact with other researchers, experts in the ﬁeld of conceptual modeling, who
can provide feedback on their research. The symposium is open to any topic covered by
the main conference and of strong relevance to the ER community.
We have accepted three submissions as research extended abstracts for the sym-
posium. “An Active Workflow Method for Entity-oriented Data Collection” addresses
a practical problem in web search or information retrieval, involving multiple sources,
information integration, and entity resolution. “Visual Non-verbal Social Cues Data
Modeling” proposes a privacy-preserving data model for the visual non-verbal cues.
“Multiple data cleaning on temporal data” proposes a framework for data quality
evaluation on imprecise temporal data. The symposium was opened by a keynote given
by Prof. Oscar Pastor from Universidad Politécnica de Valencia.
We would like to deeply thank all the authors for submitting their contributions to
ERDS 2018 and are pleased to express our appreciation to all Program Committee for
their involvement in the evaluation of submitted papers. Without their expertise and
dedication, the ERDS 2018 program would not be of such high quality. We would like
also thank the co-chairs of the ER conference and the co-chairs of the ER workshops
since they have helped us coordinate ERDS 2018 within the ER 2018 conference.
Finally, we are glad to welcome you to Xi’an. We hope you enjoy this doctoral
symposium and the beneﬁts from the technical program as well as from sharing your
experiences with colleagues from all around the world.
October 2018 Xavier Franch
Chaokun Wang
Doctoral Symposium Co-chairs

--- PAGE 85 ---
Design Science for PhD Research
in the Conceptual Modeling Domain
Oscar Pastor
Universitat Politècnica de València, Spain
opastor@dsic.upv.es
Abstract. A sound PhD research work needs to use a solid research methodology
background. Design Science is an attractive and useful alternative for facing this
problem. Following the last works of Wieringa about this subject, design science is the
design and investigation of artifacts in context. Being design and investigation the two
main parts of design science, it is fundamental for any research work to identify what
kind of research problem is under study: design problems or knowledge questions.
Once this identiﬁcation is done, a design science project iterates over the tasks of a
design and engineering cycle, while to answer scientiﬁc knowledge questions, an
empirical cycle must be used.
This talk will present all these aspects of design science, focusing on what kind of
design, engineering or empirical cycles are more appropriate when dealing with con-
ceptual modeling-oriented research works. The problem will be analyzed in the context
of a PhD research work, to let PhD students be aware of what beneﬁts can be derived
from using it in their works. During the keynote, PhD students will be invited to
characterize their PhD research according the ideas that will be presented.

--- PAGE 86 ---
Multiple Data Quality Evaluation
and Data Cleaning on Imprecise
Temporal Data
Xiaoou Ding(B)
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150001, Heilongjiang, China
dingxiaoou@stu.hit.edu.cn
Abstract. With data currency issues draw the attentions of both
researchers and engineers, temporal data, which describes real world
events with time tags in database, is playing a key role in data ware-
house, data mining, and etc. At the same time, 4V features of big data
give rise to the diﬃculties in comprehensive data quality management
and data cleaning. On one hand, entity resolution methods are faced with
challenges when dealing with temporal data. On another hand, multiple
problems existing in data records are hard to be captured and repaired.
Motivated by this, we address data quality evaluation and data clean-
ing issues in imprecise temporal data. This project aims to solve three
key problems in temporal data quality improvement and cleaning: (1)
Determining currency on imprecise temporal data, (2) Entity resolution
on temporal data with incomplete timestamps, and (3) Data quality
improvement on consistency and completeness with data currency. The
purpose of this paper is to address the problem deﬁnitions and discuss
the procedure framework and the solutions of improving the eﬀectiveness
of temporal data cleaning with multiple errors.
Keywords: Temporal data · Data currency · Multiple data cleaning
Data quality
1 Introduction
Data quality evaluation and data cleaning plays a key role in the whole life circle
of big data management today [23]. With the increasing demand in eﬃciency
and currency, the temporal feature in data has been recognized as an impor-
tant issue in data science. However, the quality problems in temporal data are
often quite serious and trouble data transaction steps (e.g., acquisition, copy,
querying). On one hand, various information systems store data with diﬀerent
formats, which makes entity resolution process necessary. The attribute values
are possible to change with the evolution of time. It adds to the diﬃculties in
entity resolution. In practice, certain attribute of records referring to the same
entity may change over time. All of these records may be valid and proper for
describing a certain entity only at a particular time period. For example, DBLP
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 69–75, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_14

--- PAGE 87 ---
70 X. Ding
collects researchers’ paper information for many years. The information for the
same author about diﬀerent papers may be diﬀerent since the author’s aﬃlia-
tion, partners or even names may change over time. On another hand, currency,
consistency and completeness problems are always costly in multi-source data
integration. These problems result in the low reliability of data, and they also
add to the confusion in data applications.
Researchers have gone a long way in data quality and data cleaning, particu-
larly in accuracy, consistency, completeness and record de-duplication [3,12,14].
It has been found that currency issues in temporal data also seriously impact
data repairing. In addition, these problems are possible to aﬀect each other
during repairing, rather than completely isolated [5,14]. However, existing data
repairing methods fails to pay attention to the temporal feature in data, with-
out which the performance of them is challenged to break through bottleneck.
Motivated by this, we propose multiple data cleaning in temporal data in this
project.
2 Problem
We address two main issues in this project, as summarized below.
Problem 1: We ﬁrst study the entity resolution method on imprecise temporal
data. Due to the fact that reliable timestamps are often not available and com-
plete, or even absent in practice, it is necessary to improve the entity resolution
method to perform well on imprecise temporal data. We propose the problem
deﬁnition in Deﬁnition 1.
Definition 1. R = (A1,...Am) is a relation schema and IR = {r1,...,rn} is a
set of instances of R which contains n records. IR has no precise timestamps.
The Entity Resolution problem on imprecise temporal data is to clus-
ter the records into clusters, such that records in the same clusters refer to the
same entity over time and records in diﬀerent clusters refer to diﬀerent entities.
Problem 2: We study the detecting and repairing approach on incomplete and
inconsistent data with incomplete timestamps, to achieve multiple data quality
improvement on completeness, consistency and currency. The problem deﬁnition
is presented in Deﬁnition 2.
Definition 2. Data cleaning on consistency, completeness and cur-
rency. Given a low-quality data D, data quality rules including a set Φ of
CCs and a set Σ of CFDs, and a conﬁdence σ for each attributes. Data quality
improvement on D with completeness, consistency and currency is to detect the
dirty data in D and repair it into a clean one, denoted by Dr, where
(a) ∀r(r ∈ Dr) has a reliable currency order value satisfying the set Φ of CCs,
denoted by (Dr,D) |= Φ.
(b) Dr is consistent referring to the set Σ of CFDs, i.e., (Dr,D) |= Σ.
(c) The missing values in D are repaired with the clean ones whose conﬁdence
> σ into Dr.
(d) The repair cost cost(Dr,D) is as small as possible.

--- PAGE 88 ---
Multiple Data Quality Evaluation and Data Cleaning 71
3 Proposed Framework and Solution
Solution of Problem 1: The method overview is shown in Fig.1, which has
two main parts: similarity comparison and clustering, respectively. We ﬁrst
deﬁne temporal attributes’ unstableness, which depicts the evolving probability
of attribute values of entities. Accordingly, a dynamic weight scheme is designed
to match these records more precisely than the traditional ﬁxed weight scheme.
Fig.1. System architecture for Problem 1
Then, we combine the data currency constraint and matching dependency
rules eﬀectively and propose a temporal clustering algorithm that takes data
currency into consideration to guarantee result quality.
After that, we develop a rule-conducted uniform framework for resolving tem-
poral records with integration of data quality rules, and design several eﬃcient
algorithms to track the problems in the framework. Speciﬁcally, we propose algo-
rithms to (1) block records into disjoint blocking and exclude false positives in
each block, (2) compute unstableness of attributes and dynamic weight scheme,
(3) generate a cluster of each block, and (4) determine initial clusters in the
clustering results.
Solution of Problem 2: Since that completeness and consistency are met-
rics focusing on measuring the quality with features in values, while currency
describes the temporal order or the volatility of records in the whole data set.
We process consistency and completeness repairing along the currency order,
respectively. We outline the 3C data cleaning method in Fig.2. It includes four
main steps.
Step 1: We ﬁrst construct currency graphs for records with the given CCs, and
make conﬂict resolution in the currency graphs. If conﬂicts exist, the conﬂicted
CCs and the involved records will be returned. They are supposed to be ﬁxed
by domain experts or revised from business process.

--- PAGE 89 ---
72 X. Ding
Fig.2. Framework for Problem 2
Step 2: We then determine the currency order of all the records extracted
from CCs. We update the longest currency order chain in each currency graph
iteratively, and compute currency values to each record. This currency order is
obtained as a direct and unambiguous metric among records on currency.
Step 3: After that, we repair consistency issues with the global currency orders.
We input consistency constraints (CFDs for short) ﬁrst, and then we deﬁne
a distance metric Diﬀcc to measure the distance between dirty data and clean
ones, combining consistency diﬀerence with currency orders. That is, we attempt
to repair the dirty data with proper values which have the closest current time
point.
Step 4: We repair incomplete values with Bayesian strategy because of its obvi-
ous advantages in training both discrete and continuous attributes in relational
database. We treat currency orders as a weighted feature and train the com-
plete records to ﬁll in the missing values if the ﬁlling probability no less than a
conﬁdence measure. Up till now, we achieve high-quality data on 3C.
4 Related Work
Study on data quality is extensive for decades in many ﬁelds. With the demand
for high quality data, many metrics beside accuracy are necessary for quality
improvement [27].
Data Quality Evaluation. [3] provides a systematic introduction of data qual-
ity methodologies, in which completeness, accuracy, consistency and currency
are four important dimensions. As for completeness issues, many kinds of algo-
rithms have been proposed to ﬁll the missing values [10], like statistic-based,
probability-based, and learning oriented and etc. As for consistency, diﬀerent
semantic constraints such as FD, CFD, and CIND, have been deﬁned to guide
data cleaning under speciﬁc circumstance [4,12], where conditional functional

--- PAGE 90 ---
Multiple Data Quality Evaluation and Data Cleaning 73
dependency (CFD) is a general and eﬀective consistency constraints for query-
ing and inconsistency detection in database [9,13]. Also, consistency constraints
as well as data quality rules discovery problem is proposed and studied in works
like [7,17]. Currency describes to which extent a data set is up-to-date [3]. When
various data sources are integrated, timestamps are always neither complete nor
uniform. It promotes the study on currency determination without available
timestamps. [15] is the ﬁrst to propose a constraint-based model for data cur-
rency reasoning. And several fundamental theoretical problems are discussed in
both [12,15].
Furthermore, as the dimensions are not independent issues in data integra-
tion [12], data cleaning approaches have been developed with integrating sev-
eral data quality dimensions. [14] reports advanced study on critical dimensions
and provides a logical framework for a uniform treatment of the issues. [9] pro-
pose a framework for quality improvement on both consistency and accuracy. [5]
discusses time-related measures with accuracy and completeness, and proposes
functions of computing their mutual relationships.
Entity Resolution. (ER) also known as record linkage, duplicate detection, and
duplicate identiﬁcation, aims to take a set of records as input and ﬁnd out the
records referring to the same real-world entities [2,18,26,28]. Researchers have
developed multiple similarity metrics for matching duplicate records, including
character-based [1,24], token-based [8] and numeric similarity metrics [19]. [11]
summarizes several common categories of ER, including probabilistic matching
[25], supervised learning [22], rule-based approaches [19,20], etc.
With temporal data accumulated rapidly in variety information systems,
some methods coped with lexical heterogeneity in ER problem may fail to per-
form well in resolving temporal records directly due to existence of evolving
heterogeneity. [21] studies linking temporal records and propose time decay to
capture the evolution of entity value over time. [16,28] study eﬃcient rule evo-
lution techniques for clustering issues in ER. [6] proposes a fast algorithm to
match temporal records.
While advanced techniques in temporal ER problems achieve high eﬃciency
and accuracy, few methods can be well applied to record matching on datasets
without timestamps. The reason is that existing methods mostly depend on
deﬁnite timestamps and under such circumstance, we can only reason a relative
currency order with currency constraints. It motivates us to propose a rule-
based ER method to address the entity value evolution eﬀectively on imprecise
temporal data.
5 Conclusion and Future Work
Now, we are in the midst of cleaning temporal data with multiple errors. We
have already propose an entity resolution method in imprecise temporal data.
We propose attribute unstableness to capture the entity evolution over time, and
apply dynamic weight schema for improving pairwise similarity computation. We
apply rules to determine the currency order of records from target attributes, and

--- PAGE 91 ---
74 X. Ding
propose a novel clustering algorithm along with a pruning method to improve
the quality of ER.
We have constructed currency order graph with currency constraints, and
determined the currency of each record, accordingly. Based on the currency
orders deduced from currency constraints, we will construct the complete method
of repairing low-quality data with incomplete and inconsistent values, which
lacks for available timestamps. Future works includes (1) seeking for more rules
to model the evolving trend of the temporal data more accurate and learning
eﬃcient methods to ﬁnd the rules, and (2) design the balance strategy of cleaning
cost and eﬀectiveness of the multiple data cleaning.
References
1. UNIMATCH: a record linkage system: users manual. In: Bureau of the Census,
Washington DC (1976)
2. Ananthakrishna, R., Chaudhuri, S., Ganti, V.: Eliminating fuzzy duplicates in data
warehouses. In: International Conference on Very Large Data Bases, pp. 586–597
(2002)
3. Batini, C., Cappiello, C., Francalanci, C., Maurino, A.: Methodologies for data
quality assessment and improvement. ACM Comput. Surv. 41(3), 16 (2009)
4. Bertiequille, L., Sarma, A.D., Dong, Marian, A., Srivastava, D.: Sailing the informa-
tion ocean with awareness of currents: discovery and application of source depen-
dence. Computer. Science 26(8), 1881–3 (2009)
5. Cappiello, C., Francalanci, C., Pernici, B.: Time related factors of data accuracy,
completeness, and currency in multi-channel information systems. In: The Confer-
ence on Advanced Information Systems Engineering, pp. 145–153 (2008)
6. Chiang, Y.H., Doan, A.H., Naughton, J.F.: Tracking entities in the dynamic world:
a fast algorithm for matching temporal records. Proc. VLDB Endow. 7, 469–480
(2014)
7. Chu, X., Ilyas, I.F., Papotti, P., Ye, Y.: Ruleminer: data quality rules discovery.
In: IEEE International Conference on Data Engineering, pp. 1222–1225 (2014)
8. Cohen, W.W.: Integration of heterogeneous databases without common domains
using queries based on textual similarity. In: ACM SIGMOD International Con-
ference on Management of Data, pp. 201–212 (1998)
9. Cong, G., Fan, W., Geerts, F., Jia, X., Ma, S.: Improving data quality: consistency
and accuracy. In: International Conference on Very Large Data Bases, pp. 315–326
(2007)
10. Deng, T., Fan, W., Geerts, F.: Capturing missing tuples and missing values.
In: Twenty-Ninth ACM SIGMOD-SIGACT-SIGART Symposium on Principles of
Database Systems, PODS 2010, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA, 6–11 June 2010, pp.
169–178 (2010)
11. Elmagarmid, A.K., Ipeirotis, P.G., Verykios, V.S.: Duplicate record detection: a
survey. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 19(1), 1–16 (2007)
12. Fan, W., Geerts, F.: Foundations of Data Quality Management (2012)
13. Fan, W., Geerts, F., Jia, X.: Conditional dependencies: a principled approach to
improving data quality. In: Sexton, A.P. (ed.) BNCOD 2009. LNCS, vol. 5588, pp.
8–20. Springer, Heidelberg (2009). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-02843-4 4

--- PAGE 92 ---
Multiple Data Quality Evaluation and Data Cleaning 75
14. Fan, W., Geerts, F., Ma, S., Tang, N., Yu, W.: Data quality problems beyond
consistency and deduplication. In: Tannen, V., Wong, L., Libkin, L., Fan, W., Tan,
W.-C., Fourman, M. (eds.) In Search of Elegance in the Theory and Practice of
Computation. LNCS, vol. 8000, pp. 237–249. Springer, Heidelberg (2013). https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-41660-6 12
15. Fan, W., Geerts, F., Wijsen, J.: Determining the currency of data. ACM Trans.
Database Syst. 37(4), 71–82 (2012)
16. Fan, W., Jia, X., Li, J., Ma, S.: Reasoning about record matching rules. Proc.
VLDB Endow. 2(1), 407–418 (2009)
17. Fei, C., Miller, R.J.: A uniﬁed model for data and constraint repair. In: IEEE
International Conference on Data Engineering, pp. 446–457 (2011)
18. Fellegi, I.P., Sunter, A.B.: A theory for record linkage. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 64(328),
1183–1210 (1969)
19. Koudas, N., Marathe, A., Srivastava, D.: Flexible string matching against large
databases in practice. In: Thirtieth International Conference on Very Large Data
Bases, pp. 1078–1086 (2004)
20. Li, L., Li, J., Gao, H.: Rule-based method for entity resolution. IEEE Trans. Knowl.
Data Eng. 27(1), 250–263 (2015)
21. Pei, L.I., Dong, X.L., Maurino, A., Srivastava, D.: Linking temporal records.
PVLDB 4(11), 956–967 (2011)
22. Richman, J., Richman, J.: Learning to match and cluster large high-dimensional
data sets for data integration. In: Eighth ACM SIGKDD International Conference
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 475–480 (2002)
23. Sidi, F., Panahy, P.H.S., Aﬀendey, L.S., Jabar, M.A., Ibrahim, H., Mustapha, A.:
Data quality: a survey of data quality dimensions. In: International Conference on
Information Retrieval and Knowledge Management, pp. 300–304 (2012)
24. Ullmann, J.R.: A binary n-gram technique for automatic correction of substitution,
deletion, insertion and reversal errors in words. Comput. J. 20(2), 141–147 (1977)
25. Verykios, V.S., Moustakides, G.V., Elfeky, M.G.: A bayesian decision model for
cost optimal record matching. VLDB J. 12(1), 28–40 (2003)
26. Verykios, V.S., Elmagarmid, A.K., Houstis, E.N.: Automating the approximate
record-matching process. Inf. Sci. 126(1–4), 83–98 (2002)
27. Wang, R.Y., Strong, D.M.: Beyond accuracy: what data quality means to data
consumers. J. Manag. Inf. Syst. 12(4), 5–33 (1996)
28. Whang, S.E., Garcia-Molina, H.: Entity resolution with evolving rules. Proc. VLDB
Endow. 3(1–2), 1326–1337 (2010)

--- PAGE 93 ---
An Active Workflow Method for
Entity-Oriented Data Collection
Gaoyang Guo(B)
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
ggy16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract. In the era of big data, people are dealing with data all the
time. Data collection is the ﬁrst step and foundation for many other
downstream applications. Meanwhile, we observe that data collection is
often entity-oriented, i.e., people usually collect data related to a speciﬁc
entity. In most cases, people achieve entity-oriented data collection by
manual query and ﬁltering based on search engines or news applications.
However, these methods are not very eﬃcient and eﬀective. In this paper,
we consider designing reasonable process rules and integrating artiﬁcial
intelligence algorithms to help people eﬃciently and eﬀectively collect
the target data related to the speciﬁc entity. Concretely, we propose
an active workﬂow method to achieve this goal. The whole workﬂow
method is composed of four processes: task modeling for data collection,
Internet data collection, crowdsourcing data collection and multi-source
data aggregation.
Keywords: Data collection · Entity-oriented · Workﬂow
1 Introduction
In our daily life, people are faced with the need to collect data all the time.
For example, football fans may want to get the score data for a current football
match. Political lovers may want to obtain the latest political news related to a
politician. The fans may want to collect the latest news of their favorite stars.
These scenarios can be summed up as a single problem: Given a speciﬁc entity
such as a football match, a politician, or a star, how can we collect valid data
about this entity. We call this problem entity-oriented data collection. In fact,
people mainly rely on search engines such as Google or news applications such
as RSS to solve their own data acquisition requirements by manual query and
ﬁltering nowadays. These methods may be low eﬃciency. Meanwhile, the data
collected by these methods may be scattered. In this paper, we propose an active
workﬂow method to solve this problem.
2 Related Work
Web crawler is a common method for data collection from Internet [8]. A web
crawler, sometimes called a spider, is an Internet bot that systematically browses
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 76–81, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_15

--- PAGE 94 ---
An Active Workﬂow Method for Entity-Oriented Data Collection 77
the World Wide Web, typically for the purpose of Web indexing [10]. Web search
engines and some other sites use web crawling or software to update their web
content or indices of sites’ web content [2]. Web crawlers copy pages for pro-
cessing by a search engine which indexes the downloaded pages so that users
can search more eﬃciently. However, web crawler only returns raw web content,
which needs users to further dig out valid data. In this paper, our method can
perform a series of subsequent data analysis, which outputs the desired data
directly. For example, deep learning models such as LSTM networks can be uti-
lized to extract valuable information from texts [6]. We can also try to integrate
data from web based on their community structures [7].
Crowdsourcing is a sourcing model in which individuals or organizations
obtain goods and services [1,4]. These services include ideas and ﬁnances from
a large, relatively open and often rapidly-evolving group of Internet users. It
divides work between participants to achieve a cumulative result. In this paper,
we also utilize the method of crowdsourcing to collect target data from the real
world.
A workﬂow consists of an orchestrated and repeatable pattern of business
activity enabled by the systematic organization of resources into processes that
transform materials, provide services, or process information [3,5]. It can be
depicted as a sequence of operations, the work of a person or a group, the work
of an organization of staﬀ, or one or more simple or complex mechanisms. Petri
net [9] is a common method of workﬂow. In this paper, we borrow the idea of
workﬂow to design our method for entity-oriented data collection.
3 Problem Definition
Entity-Oriented Data Collection. Given a speciﬁc entity E, sources S and
constraints R, collect and aggregate valid data from S which are related to E
and satisfy R.
E is our target entity, which could be a person, a place, an event, a thing
or an organization. It speciﬁes what information the user wants. S deﬁnes the
sources where we collect, which could be some seed URLs or some places in
the world. R represents the constraints the target entity E should satisfy, which
could be some features expressed in texts, images or videos.
4 Method
In this paper, an active workﬂow method is proposed to solve this problem. The
ﬂow char of this method is shown in Fig.1. As shown in Fig.1, the whole workﬂow
method is composed of four processes: task modeling for data collection, Internet
data collection, crowdsourcing data collection and multi-source data aggregation.
Every process follows some speciﬁc process rules. With the help of this workﬂow
method, we can achieve the automation of data collection for speciﬁc entities.
Given an entity-oriented data collection task deﬁned by the target entity E,
the sources S and the constraints R, we ﬁrst input the task into the process of

--- PAGE 95 ---
78 G. Guo
task modeling for data collection. After that, we obtain an EOSQL statement,
which is fed into the process of Internet data collection and the crowdsourcing
data collection. Then, the scattered valid data from multi sources are aggregated
in the process of multi-source data aggregation. Finally, we collect desired valid
data which are related to E and satisfy R. The detailed discussion of each process
is as follows.
task modeling for
data collection
E
Internet data
collection
multi-source
data aggregation
crowdsourcing
data collection
EOSQL
Fig.1. The active workﬂow method for entity-oriented data collection
4.1 EOSQL
The ﬁrst process is task modeling for data collection. In this process, an entity-
oriented data collection language called EOSQL is designed to model the data
collection task. The design of EOSQL is inspired by SQL. The grammar of
EOSQL is similar with SQL, which consists of diﬀerent types of ﬁelds and
also supports the clause structure. Users can model the task for entity-oriented
data collection by simply using an EOSQL statement following the grammar of
EOSQL. The grammatical rules of EOSQL are designed as follows:
COLLECT [E] FROM [S] WHERE [R], (1)
where E, S, and R are three ﬁelds to model the task for entity-oriented data
collection. E indicates the target entity the user is interested in. It speciﬁes
what information the following processes should collect. S deﬁnes the sources
where we collect. For example, S could be some seed URLs which are the entry
points of the crawler. Also, S could be some places in the world where the target
entity exists. R represents the constraints the target entity E should satisfy. For
example, R could be some features expressed in texts, images or videos.
EOSQL plays an important role in the whole workﬂow method. It is the basis
of the following processes since it deﬁnes the overall goal for the entity-oriented
data collection using a uniform language.
4.2 Distributed Data Crawler
The second process is Internet data collection. In this process, we propose an
entity-oriented distributed data crawler, which crawls valid data from Internet

--- PAGE 96 ---
An Active Workﬂow Method for Entity-Oriented Data Collection 79
related to the speciﬁc entity. Based on an EOSQL statement, we can obtain E,
S and R. The distributed data crawler then crawls the valid data from S which
is related to E and satisﬁes R. In most cases, the crawler deals with the data
collection from Internet.
Our crawler mainly consists of two parts: the preliminary crawling and the
further extraction. The preliminary crawling is based on Nutch, which is a highly
extensible and scalable open source web crawler software project. This part can
be divided into 5 stages: distributed URL injection, distributed URL task alloca-
tion, distributed URL queue grabbing, distributed URL web page resolution and
distributed database update. The further extraction extracts valid information
according to E and R. Based on the preliminary crawling, the further extraction
utilizes real-time data processing algorithms to recognize and extract the target
entity. For example, we can use information extraction methods such as entity
recognition and entity relation extraction to collect valid data from texts accord-
ing to E and R. We can use computer vision techniques such as face recognition
and object detection to extract valid data from images or videos according to E
and R.
Based on these two parts, our crawler can achieve the tight coupling of crawl-
ing and extraction, which can reduce storage overhead and improve collection
eﬃciency.
4.3 Crowdsourcing Collection Model
The third process is crowdsourcing data collection. In this process, an entity-
oriented crowdsourcing collection model is proposed to collect raw data from
the real world related to the speciﬁc entity based on a crowdsourcing algorithm.
Based on an EOSQL statement, we can obtain E, S and R. The crowdsourcing
collection model then collect the valid data from S which is related to E and
satisﬁes R. In general, this model deals with the data collection from the real
world.
The crowdsourcing collection model mainly relies on human resources. It
consists of two steps: the shallow crowdsourcing collection and the deep crowd-
sourcing collection. In the shallow crowdsourcing, the crowdsourcing participants
collect large quantity of uncertain data to be conﬁrmed using collection devices.
They ﬁlter out useless information to reduce the cost of subsequent collection.
In the deep crowdsourcing, the model executes the feature analysis, crowdsourc-
ing task division and crowdsourcing task assignment in turn to further process
the uncertain data collected from the ﬁrst step. Among them, crowdsourcing
task assignment is the most challenging since this problem is often NP-hard. To
solve the problem of task assignment, we should model it as a NP-hard problem
ﬁrst. It is assumed that there are several crowdsourcing participants and several
crowdsourcing tasks. Every participant has a cost and a quality for executing
each task. The goal is to ﬁnd a task assignment scheme to minimize the cost and
maximize the quality for executing task. Then we need design an approximate
algorithm to solve this optimization problem.

--- PAGE 97 ---
80 G. Guo
Based on these two steps, our crowdsourcing collection model can collect
valid data from the real world with a low cost.
4.4 Multi-source Data Aggregation Model
The last process is multi-source data aggregation. In this process, we propose a
multi-source data aggregation model to eﬀectively aggregate data collected from
the second process and the third process.
After the second process and the third process, we acquire lots of valid data
related to the target entity E both from Internet and the real world. However,
these data are from diﬀerent sources and lack eﬀective organization. Moreover,
they may have some quality problems such as data redundancy. Therefore, it is
necessary to integrate them all using a uniform data format. The main challenge
of this process is to design entity matching algorithm for multi-source and multi-
domain data. The data collected from the last two processes may have known
patterns or my have unknown patterns. To cope with this scenario, we propose
a data blocking strategy in hybrid mode, which not only improves the eﬀect
of data blocking by using the known patterns, but also have the universality
of handling unknown patterns. On the one hand, we put forward a lazy entity
matching strategy based on the query perception technology, which conducts
entity matching only for the necessary data and only at the necessary time. This
strategy can prevent unnecessary computation cost caused by massive Internet
data. On the other hand, we also propose an incremental updating strategy
for entity matching to deal with the fact that all data sources are constantly
updated. Based on these two strategies, the entity matching algorithm is eﬀective
and eﬃcient.
Finally, We aggregate all valid data within a uniform data format utilizing
the multi-source data aggregation model. Users can acquire desired data which
are related to E and satisfy R from the outputs of the last process.
5 Conclusion
In this paper, we introduce a problem called entity-oriented data collection. An
active workﬂow method is proposed to solve this problem. The active work-
ﬂow method consists of four processes. We design one model and corresponding
process rules for each process. In the future, we will continue to improve our
workﬂow method to conduct entity-oriented data collection.
Acknowledgment. This work was supported in part by the National Key Research
and Development Program of China (No. 2017YFC0820402), the Intelligent Manufac-
turing Comprehensive Standardization and New Pattern Application Project of Min-
istry of Industry and Information Technology (Experimental validation of key technical
standards for trusted services in industrial Internet), and the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (No. 61373023).

--- PAGE 98 ---
An Active Workﬂow Method for Entity-Oriented Data Collection 81
References
1. Buettner, R.: A systematic literature review of crowdsourcing research from a
human resource management perspective. In: Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences, pp. 4609–4618 (2015)
2. Corby, O., Dieng-Kuntz, R., Faron-Zucker, C.: Querying the semantic web with
corese search engine. In: Eureopean Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, ECAI
2004, Including Prestigious Applicants of Intelligent Systems, PAIS 2004, Valencia,
Spain, August, pp. 705–709 (2017)
3. Curcin, V., Ghanem, M., Guo, Y.: The design and implementation of a workﬂow
analysis tool. Philos. Trans. Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 368(1926), 4193 (2010)
4. Doan, A.H., Ramakrishnan, R., Halevy, A.Y.: Crowdsourcing systems on the world-
wide web. Commun. ACM 54(4), 86–96 (2011)
5. Georgakopoulos, D., Hornick, M., Sheth, A.: An overview of workﬂow management:
from process modeling to workﬂow automation infrastructure. Distrib. Parallel
Databases 3(2), 119–153 (1995)
6. Guo, G., Wang, C., Chen, J., Ge, P., Chen, W.: Who is answering whom? Finding
“reply-to” relations in group chats with deep bidirectional lstm networks. Clust.
Comput. 10, 1–12 (2018)
7. Guo, G., Wang, C., Ying, X.: Which algorithm performs best: algorithm selection
for community detection. In: Companion of the The Web Conference, pp. 27–28
(2018)
8. Kobayashi, M., Takeda, K.: Information retrieval on the web. Annu. Rev. Inf. Sci.
Technol. 39(1), 33–80 (2005)
9. Murata, T.: Petri nets: properties, analysis and applications. Proc. IEEE 77(4),
541–580 (1977)
10. Shaila, S.G., Vadivel, A.: Architecture speciﬁcation of rule-based deep web crawler
with indexer. Int. J. Knowl. Web Intell. 4(4), 166–186 (2013)

--- PAGE 99 ---
Visual Non-verbal Social Cues
Data Modeling
Mahmoud Qodseya(B)
Institut de Recherche en Informatique de Toulouse (IRIT),
Université de Toulouse, Toulouse, France
Mahmoud.Qodseya@irit.fr
Abstract. Although many methods have been developed in social signal
processing (SSP) ﬁeld during the last decade, several issues related to
data management and scalability are still emerging. As the existing visual
non-verbal behavior analysis (VNBA) systems are task-oriented, they
do not have comprehensive data models, and they are biased towards
particular data acquisition procedures, social cues and analysis methods.
In this paper, we propose a data model for the visual non-verbal cues.
The proposed model is privacy-preserving in the sense that it grants
decoupling social cues extraction phase from analysis one. Furthermore,
this decoupling allows to evaluate and perform diﬀerent combinations of
extraction and analysis methods. Apart from the decoupling, our model
can facilitate heterogeneous data fusion from diﬀerent modalities since
it facilitates the retrieval of any combination of diﬀerent modalities and
provides deep insight into the relationships among the VNBA systems
components.
Keywords: Social signal processing · VNBA systems
Metadata modeling · Visual non-verbal cues
1 Introduction
Observing and understanding human reactions and interactions with other
human beings are challenging and interesting research directions for a wide
variety of applications from customer satisfaction estimation to social robots
modeling. Thus, the main purpose of SSP ﬁeld is to automatically recognize and
understand the human social interactions by analyzing their sensed social cues.
These cues are mainly classiﬁed into verbal (word, e.g., semantic linguistic con-
tent of speech) and non-verbal (wordless and visual) social cues. The verbal cues
take into account the spoken information among persons like ‘yes/no’ response
in the answering question context. The non-verbal social cues represent a set
of temporal changes in neuromuscular and physiological activities, which send
a message about feelings, mental state, personality, and other characteristics of
human beings [1].
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 82–87, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_16

--- PAGE 100 ---
Visual Non-verbal Social Cues Data Modeling 83
Fig.1. A general visual non-verbal behavioral analysis schema.
Since crowded places are often noisy, most of the existing methods have
been directed toward small group interactions (i.e., meeting, dining). Therefore,
various visual-based SSP methods have been introduced in the literature [1–4],
which generally can be summarized in a common system schema consisting of
ﬁve modules, depicted in Fig.1: (i) data acquisition, (ii) person detection and
tracking, (iii) social cues extraction, (iv) contextual information, and (v) social
cues analysis.
Diﬀerent types of sensors and devices like cameras and proximity detectors
might be exploited in the data acquisition module to record social interactions.
Thus, one or more dedicated computer vision and image processing based (e.g.,
face detection) techniques could be leveraged for treating the input data to detect
and track person(s). The social cues extraction module takes as an input the
detected person(s) to extract a feature vector (per person) describing the social
cues such as head pose (position and orientation). The social cues understanding
module deeply analyzes the primitive social cues through modeling temporal
dynamics and combining signals extracted from various modalities (e.g., head
pose, facial expression) at diﬀerent time scales to provide more useful information
and conclusion on the behavioral level of the detected persons. Indeed, this
module might optionally leverage additional information describing the context
in which the data is captured to provide a precise social behavior prediction and
analysis. Finally, the existence of metadata repository decouples the analysis
phase from the other components as Fig.1 shows.
Inthispaper,weintroduceametadatamodelforthevisualcuesastheyarethe
mostly perceived and unconsciously displayed by human among the non-verbal
cues. Our data model has many beneﬁts in: (i) fusing heterogeneous data from dif-
ferent sources and modalities via facilitating the retrieval process, (ii) decoupling
the social signal extraction phase from the analysis phase, and (iii) preserving pri-
vacybyfacilitatingaccesscontrollayerintegrationwithinthemetadatarepository
[5] to confront the privacy and integrity threats. Therefore, the analysis meth-
ods are going to use the extracted metadata instead of the original input data.
Moreover, it is easy to extend the designed model for supporting the vocal cues
as our model considers per-frame metadata associated with the detected persons.

--- PAGE 101 ---
84 M. Qodseya
Fig.2. Generic data model. This generic data model for visual non-verbal social cues
shows the relationships that exist between experiment, acquisition, video, and feature
groups of entities, which are color-coded as green, orange, yellow, and gray respectively.
(Color ﬁgure online)
Consequently, this provides a capability to integrate the extracted vocal cues at
the frame-level similar to audio-video synchronization.
Paper Outline. Sect.2 presents a detailed description of the designed data
model.The current state of our research is presented in Sect.3. The conclusion
of our work is summarized in Sect.4 with some insights for future works.
2 Visual Non-verbal Social Cues Data Model
Visual non-verbal social cues have been received more attention as they are not
semantic in nature and often occur unconsciously. The explored visual non-verbal
cues include body movements, hand movements, gaze behavior, and signals with
higher level of annotation like smiling, facial expressions, hand gestures, hand-
over-face gestures, head orientations, and mutual gaze. To handle the high vari-
ety of the social visual cues, we design a conceptual data model consisting of
experiment, acquisition, video, and feature groups of entities as Fig.2 shows.
2.1 Experiment Group
Researchers or experts in the VNBA systems are interesting in performing exper-
iments using diﬀerent conﬁgurations of algorithm types and parameters. Thus,
the EXPERIMENT class is dedicated to hold such information that includes
experiment title, date, responsible person, location, and description. On the

--- PAGE 102 ---
Visual Non-verbal Social Cues Data Modeling 85
other side, researcher could be interested in additional information about the list
of algorithms that are used to extract the social cues from a conceptual video.
Therefore, the ALGORITHM class is devoted to carry the algorithm’s name,
URL, description, and feature type (e.g., facial expression, gaze direction) that
can be extracted using this algorithm.
2.2 Acquisition Group
Generally, diﬀerent types of sensors (e.g., camera, GPS, IMU, and microphone)
are used for social cues (verbal/non-verbal) acquiring. In the context of VNBA
systems, cameras are widely adopted, and thus we cover the camera relevant
information within this group in which CAMERA class contains attributes for
holding information about the adopted camera(s) in conducting experiments.
These attributes include the identity number (e.g., 58395FX), owner (e.g., IRIT),
model (e.g., Axis F44 Dual Audio), transmission mode (wired/wireless), and
data format (e.g., .mp4) of the camera. Cameras are controlled by time invari-
ant parameters at diﬀerent frequencies, while these parameters include camera
intrinsic parameters, location, ﬁeld of view, distortion, and image quality.
To model these parameters, we propose separated classes for each one of them
as follows: (i) INTRINSIC class attributes include camera focal length (Fx,Fy),
image sensor format(S), and principal point (Cx,Cy), (ii) LOCATION class con-
tains a system reference as well as the symbolic and geometric (extrinsic camera
parameters) position, where the intrinsic and extrinsic camera parameters are
used in the computation of the camera projection matrix, (iii) FIELD OF VIEW
class contains the attributes (viewable angle, visible distance, and FOV direc-
tion) that are used to determine how wide an area of a camera ﬁeld of view, (iv)
DISTORTION class has ﬁve attributes that are used for lens distortion correc-
tion, and (v) the IMAGE QUALITY class includes common image features such
as resolution, brightness, and contrast.
2.3 Video Group
VIDEO, SEGMENT, and FRAME represent a decomposition relationship since
a video clip is decomposed into segments which represent sequence of frames.
An event is a thing that happens or takes place over a particular time interval
(e.g., type of the played music during a time interval). So, a video clip could
be decomposed into event(s) that contain(s) a sequence of frames. Although
both event and segment represent a part of video, but the event has semantic
descriptions (contextual information).
In multiple cameras views scenarios, for each time-stamp, we need to process
multiple frames (same number of used cameras) together, where same person
could appear in more than one frame. Thus, we will have inconsistence fea-
ture values related to the same detected person. To overcome this challenge, we
introduce both CONCEPTUAL-FRAME and CONCEPTUAL-VIDEO classes.
A conceptual frame represents one to N frames (N is the number of the adopted
cameras within the experiment) that have a common time stamp and must

--- PAGE 103 ---
86 M. Qodseya
be analyzed together. A conceptual video represents one to N videos that are
recoded within an experiment and must be analyzed together. Therefore, we
handle the latter mentioned challenge using the conceptual frame as we will fuse
the extracted cues at the frame-level.
Since the event is related to particular time interval and location, which
are common within the multiple cameras views scenarios, we present an associa-
tion relationship between EVENT and CONCEPTUAL-VIDEO classes as Fig.2
shows.
2.4 Features Group
The “FEATURE” class is designed as an association class containing the
extracted social cues that are extracted for each detected person inside the con-
ceptual frame. The attributes of feature class include the most common visual
non-verbal cues such as gaze direction, head position, facial expression, hand
gesture, hand-over-face gesture, and their detection conﬁdences. “PERSON”
class contains information (name, age, and birthday) about the experiments’
participants.
3 Current Work
Due to the lack of data, we are not able to evaluate the proposed system, so
we are implementing an acquisition platform named OVALIE for data record-
ing. Our prototype consists of four cameras that surrounded a table with four
chairs, where each person who is sitting on the table his face will appear in two
cameras. Furthermore, we have been implemented a software that ables to read
multiple videos, detect and track multiple persons based on an upgraded version
of OpenFace toolkit [6], and detect the facial expression for each detected person
using aﬀectiva SDK1
.
Meanwhile, we implemented a physical model using Mongo database and test
(using synthetic data) diﬀerent quires that can be used for retrieving features
for the analysis phase. Currently, we start collecting food images which will be
used for YOLO [7] retraining. The customized YOLO deep learning based model
could be used for detecting and localizing the diﬀerent types of food on the table.
4 Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we propose a metadata model for the VNBA systems, which is:
(i) privacy-preserving, (ii) easily expendable to cover the vocal and verbal cues,
(iii) smoothing the data fusion among multiple modalities, (iv) decoupling the
social cues extraction phase from the analysis phase, and (v) allowing to evaluate
diﬀerent combinations of the extraction and analysis methods.
As a future direction, we are going to extend our model to include the verbal
and non-verbal cues. In addition to that, we intend to collect and annotate a
dataset for experimenting and validating our data model.
1
https://developer.aﬀectiva.com/.

--- PAGE 104 ---
Visual Non-verbal Social Cues Data Modeling 87
References
1. Akhtar, Z., Falk, T.: Visual nonverbal behavior analysis: the path forward. In: IEEE
MultiMedia (2017)
2. Vinciarelli, A., et al.: Bridging the gap between social animal and unsocial machine:
a survey of social signal processing. IEEE Trans. Aﬀect. Comput. 3, 69–87 (2012)
3. Cristani, M., Raghavendra, R., Del Bue, A., Murino, V.: Human behavior analysis
in video surveillance: a social signal processing perspective. Neurocomputing 100,
86–97 (2013)
4. Salah, A.A., Pantic, M., Vinciarelli, A.: Recent developments in social signal pro-
cessing. In: 2011 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics,
pp. 380–385, October 2011
5. Kukhun, D.A., Codreanu, D., Manzat, A.-M., Sedes, F.: Towards a pervasive access
control within video surveillance systems. In: Cuzzocrea, A., Kittl, C., Simos, D.E.,
Weippl, E., Xu, L. (eds.) CD-ARES 2013. LNCS, vol. 8127, pp. 289–303. Springer,
Heidelberg (2013). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-40511-2 20
6. Baltrusaitis, T., Zadeh, A., Lim, Y.C., Morency, L.P.: Openface 2.0: facial behavior
analysis toolkit. In: 2018 13th IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face
& Gesture Recognition (FG 2018), pp. 59–66 (2018)
7. Redmon, J., Farhadi, A.: Yolov3: An incremental improvement. arXiv (2018)

--- PAGE 105 ---
ER FORUM 2018

--- PAGE 106 ---
Preface to ER 2018 FORUM Workshop
Conceptual Modeling: Research in Progress ER 2018
FORUM Workshop at the 37th International
Conference on Conceptual Modeling (ER 2018)
Xi’an, China
ctober 22–25, 2018
Organized by
Heinrich C. Mayr and Oscar Pastor
The ER Forum Workshop is a vibrant platform for presenting and discussing novel
research that addresses hot topics related to conceptual modelling. Innovation prevails
over maturity, in particular regarding emerging new research topics. Consequently, the
papers in this chapter address a broad spectrum of interesting approaches: new con-
ceptual patterns for modern accounting information systems, the effectiveness of
conceptual modeling languages, the expressiveness of temporal constraints for process
models, knowledge graph embedding and view synchronization upon schema
evolution.
All submitted papers have been peer reviewed by at least three international Pro-
gram Committee members. The accepted papers were carefully revised following the
reviewers’ comments.
We would like to express our gratitude to everyone who helped to make the ER
Forum 2018 FORUM Workshop a success. In particular, we thank the authors for their
valuable submissions, as well the international Program Committee members for their
reviews and helpful comments. The quality of these papers is a tribute to the authors
and to the reviewers who guided any necessary improvement. Finally yet importantly,
we would like to thank the ER2018 Organizing Committee members for their support.
October 2018 Heinrich C. Mayr
Oscar Pastor
Program Co-chairs

--- PAGE 107 ---
Dependency-Based Query/View
Synchronization upon Schema Evolutions
Loredana Caruccio(B)
, Giuseppe Polese, and Genoveﬀa Tortora
Department of Computer Science, University of Salerno,
via Giovanni Paolo II n.132, 84084 Fisciano, SA, Italy
{lcaruccio,gpolese,tortora}@unisa.it
Abstract. Query/view synchronization upon the evolution of a
database schema is a critical problem that has drawn the attention of
many researchers in the database community. It entails rewriting queries
and views to make them continue work on the new schema version.
Although several techniques have been proposed for this problem, many
issues need yet to be tackled for evolutions concerning the deletion of
schema constructs, hence yielding loss of information. In this paper, we
propose a new methodology to rewrite queries and views whose deﬁni-
tions are based on information that have been lost during the schema
evolution process. The methodology exploits (relaxed) functional depen-
dencies to automatically rewrite queries and views trying to preserve
their semantics.
Keywords: Schema evolution · Query rewriting
Functional dependency
1 Introduction
Query/view synchronization (QVS in the following) upon schema evolutions is
an extremely critical problem, since it has been estimated that each schema
evolution step might aﬀect up to 70% of the queries and views operating on
the old schema [12]. The QVS problem has been tackled in several studies, and
many approaches and tools have been proposed to support DBAs during the
schema evolution process (see [9] for a survey). However, the shortage of proper
automated tools has not made the proposed solutions suﬃciently practical [1,
11,15], since they often require programmer’s work to manually rewrite portions
of aﬀected queries and views. Moreover, there are many cases in which it is not
possible to correctly synchronize the aﬀected queries and views, especially when
the evolution entails loss of information. In fact, all the query/view deﬁnitions
based on the lost information cannot be rewritten in a simple way, so limiting
the possibility to have an automatic synchronization process.
In general, approaches aiming to solve the QVS problem in presence of infor-
mation loss either prescribe to remove queries and views that cannot be syn-
chronized, or to block the evolution operations preventing the synchronization
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 91–105, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_17

--- PAGE 108 ---
92 L. Caruccio et al.
of some queries or views. Some other approaches prescribe to ask the DBA about
the best choice to be made.
In this paper, we propose a methodology aiming to automatically rewrite
queries and views relying on the schema constructs that have been deleted dur-
ing the schema evolution. The methodology exploits semantic correlations of
data expressed in terms of relaxed functional dependencies (rfds) [7], for which
automatic tools are now available to extract them from data [6,8]. In particular,
the methodology tries to rewrite aﬀected queries and views by seeking possi-
ble rfds between the deleted information and the remaining ones, in a way to
preserve or approximate the original semantics of queries and views.
The paper is organized as follows. In Sect.2 we recall several basic concepts
on the theory of Schema Evolution and on the theory of Functional Dependen-
cies. Then, we characterize the whole query/view synchronization problem, and
speciﬁcally the necessity to manage the loss of information in Sect.3. In Sect.4
we present our solution to automatically synchronize queries and views when a
loss of information occurs. In Sect.5 we validate the proposed methodology by
presenting the results of several experiments conducted on two public datasets.
Related works have been provided in Sect.6. Finally, conclusions and future
research directions are discussed in Sect.7.
2 Background
In this section we will recall basic notions on the database theory underlying the
proposed solution.
2.1 Schema Evolution
Schema evolutions might occur when a system is ﬁrst released, due to bugs or
incomplete functionalities, or to reﬂect changes in the real world, which might
also entail the evolution of the underlying database. Problems related to the
schema evolutions have been studied not only for databases, but also for Data
Warehouses [14,24] and for Ontologies [23]. In this paper, we focus on the evo-
lution of database schemas.
Definition 1 (Schema evolution). Let S be a database schema, and Inst(S)
be the set of possible instances of S; an evolution of S is the result of one or more
changes to the data structures, constraints, or any other artifact of S, entailing
modiﬁcations to the system catalog.
Changes might consist of simple schema modiﬁcations, such as addition, dele-
tion, or renaming of an attribute, of a constraint, or of a relation, and/or com-
posed schema modiﬁcations, such as join, partition, and decomposition [20]. In
what follows, we denote with S→S
the evolution of the schema S into S
, where
S and S
are called schema versions.

--- PAGE 109 ---
Dependency-Based Query/View Synchronization upon Schema Evolutions 93
Example 1. Let us consider the following database schema:
S : Doctor(idDoctor,Name,Specialization,Role,Experience,Salary,Level,Tax) (1)
where the underlined attribute represents the primary key. The schema repre-
sents a table of doctors, containing name, specialization, role, experience, annual
salary, contractual level, and annual tax. An evolution S → S
of this schema
might concern the removal of the attribute Level, yielding the following new
schema version:
S
: Doctor(idDoctor,Name,Specialization,Role,Experience,Salary,Tax) (2)
There are two basic strategies to specify a schema evolution S → S
; one
strategy describes the operation commands of the procedure to transform S
into S
, and another ﬁrst speciﬁes S
, and then ﬁnds schema correspondences
between S and S
, which can be represented by means of mappings1
[1–3,18,20,
22]. Moreover, there are hybrid strategies mixing the characteristics of the two
previous ones. As a consequence, we can have the following three types of schema
evolution approaches: operation-based, mapping-based, and hybrid, respectively.
In general, operation-based approaches exploit the advantage of knowing a
priori how the schema can evolve and the eﬀects of each evolution. On the other
hand, mapping-based approaches allow us to handle every type of modiﬁcation
[22], but without a complete view of the eﬀects that a single modiﬁcation will
have on the schema.
The impact of schema modiﬁcations on the database instances can be char-
acterized through the concept of information capacity [17]. The latter speciﬁes
whether the set Inst(S
) is equivalent to, extends, or reduces Inst(S) [1]. For
instance, when an attribute is dropped from a database schema, the correspond-
ing information is lost, hence Inst(S
) reduces Inst(S). In this case, we will
denote by NotInst(S,S
) the set of all instances of S that do not have a corre-
sponding instance in Inst(S
).
Schema construct deletions are among the most critical capacity reducing
variations, since they entail loss of information that might irremediably invali-
date some database components, like queries and application programs.
2.2 Relaxed Functional Dependencies
Let us recall some basic concepts of relational databases.
A relational database schema R is deﬁned as a collection of relation schemas
(R1,..., Rn), where each Ri is deﬁned over a ﬁxed set of attributes attr(Ri).
Each attribute Ak has associated a domain dom(Ak), which can be ﬁnite or
inﬁnite. A relation instance (or simply a relation) ri of Ri is a set of tuples such
that for each attribute Ak ∈ attr(Ri), t[Ak] ∈ dom(Ak), ∀ t ∈ ri, where t[Ak]
1
A mapping m between two schemas S and S
is a set of assertions of the form
qS  qS, where qS and qS are queries over S and S
, respectively, with the same
set of distinct variables, and  ∈{⊆,⊇,≡}.

--- PAGE 110 ---
94 L. Caruccio et al.
denotes the projection of t onto Ak. A database instance r of R is a collection
of relations (r1,...,rn), where ri is a relation instance of Ri, for i ∈ [1,n].
In the context of relational databases, data dependencies have been used
to deﬁne data integrity constraints, aiming to improve the quality of database
schemas and to reduce manipulation anomalies. There are several types of data
dependencies, including functional, multivalued, and join dependencies. Among
these, functional dependencies (fds) are the most commonly known, mainly due
to their use in database normalization processes. Since rfds extend fds, let us
recall the deﬁnition of fd.
Definition 2 (Functional dependency). A functional dependency (fd) ϕ,
denoted by X → Y , between two sets of attributes X,Y ⊆ attr(R), speciﬁes a
constraint on the possible tuples that can form a relation instance r of R: X → Y
iﬀ for every pair of tuples (t1, t2) in r, if t1[X] = t2[X], then t1[Y ] = t2[Y ]. The
two sets X and Y are also called Left-Hand-Side (LHS) and Right-Hand-Side
(RHS), resp., of ϕ.
Rfds extend fds by relaxing some constraints of their deﬁnition. In particu-
lar, they might relax on the attribute comparison method, and on the fact that
the dependency must be satisﬁed by the entire database.
Relaxing on the attribute comparison method means to adopt an approxi-
mate tuple comparison operator, say ≈, instead of the “equality” operator. In
order to deﬁne the type of attribute comparison used within an rfd, we use the
concept of similarity constraint [10].
Definition 3 (Similarity constraint). Given an attribute A on a given
domain D, let φ[A] : D × D → R+
be a function which evaluates the similar-
ity between value pairs of A.
As an example, φ can be deﬁned in terms of a similarity metric ≈, like for
instance the edit or Jaro distances [13], such that, given two values a1,a2 ∈ A,
a1≈a2 is true if a1 and a2 are “close” enough w.r.t. a predeﬁned threshold α.
We denote the similarity constraint associated to an attribute A as A≤α, which
indicates that a pair of values (a1,a2) can be considered similar on A if and only
if the φ[A](a1,a2) ≤ α.
Definition 4 (Set of similarity constraints). Given a set of attributes
X ⊆ attr(R) with X = {A1,...,Ak}, a set of similarity constraints, denoted
as XΦ, collects the similarity constraints XΦ = {A1≤α1
,...,Ak≤αk
} associated
to attributes of X.
A dependency holding for “almost” all tuples or for a“subset” of them is said
to relax on the extent [7]. In case of “almost” all tuples, a coverage measure
should be speciﬁed to quantify the degree of satisﬁability of the rfd. Whereas
in case of“subset” (constrained domains in the following), conditions on the
attribute domains should be speciﬁed to deﬁne the subset of tuples satisfying
the rfd.

--- PAGE 111 ---
Dependency-Based Query/View Synchronization upon Schema Evolutions 95
Definition 5 (Coverage measure). Given a database instance r of R, and
an fd ϕ : X → Y , a coverage measure Ψ on ϕ quantiﬁes the satisﬁability degree
of ϕ on r, Ψ : dom(X)×dom(Y ) → R+
measuring the amount of tuple pairs in
r satisfying ϕ.
As an example, the conﬁdence measure introduced in [16] evaluates the max-
imum number of tuples r1 ⊆ r for which ϕ holds in r1.
Several coverage measures can be used to deﬁne the satisﬁability degree of
an rfd, but usually they return a value normalized on the total number of tuple
pairs
n
2

for n cardinality of R, so producing a value v ∈ [0,1]. In the context
of the canonical fds, this measure evaluates to 1.
Definition 6 (Constrained domain). Given a relation schema R with
attributes {A1,...,Ak} with attributes {A1,...,Ak} of a given domain D =
D1 × D2 × ··· × Dk = dom(R), let ci ∀i = 1,dots,k be a condition on Di the
constrained domain Dc is deﬁned as follows
Dc =

t ∈ dom(R)|
k 
i=1
ci(t[Ai])}.
Constrained domains enable the deﬁnition of “subsets” of tuples on which depen-
dencies apply [5].
Then, a general deﬁnition of rfd can be given:
Definition 7 (Relaxed functional dependency). Let us consider a rela-
tional schema R. An rfd  on R is denoted by

XΦ1
Ψ≥ε
− − − → YΦ2

Dc
(3)
where
– Dc is the constrained domain that ﬁlters the tuples on which  applies;
– X,Y ⊆ attr(R), with X ∩ Y = ∅;
– Φ1 and Φ2 are sets of similarity constraints on attributes X and Y , respec-
tively;
– Ψ is a coverage measure deﬁned on Dc;
– ε is a threshold.
Given r ⊆ Dc, a relation instance r on R satisﬁes the rfd , denoted by
r |= , if and only if: ∀ (t1,t2) ∈ r, if Φ1 is true for each constraint A≤α ∈ Φ1,
then almost always Φ2 is true for each constraint B≤β ∈ Φ2. Here, almost always
means that Ψ(πX(r),πY (r)) ≥ ε.
In other words, if t1[X] and t2[X] agree with the constraints speciﬁed by Φ1,
then t1[Y ] and t2[Y ] agree with the constraints speciﬁed by Φ2 with a degree of
certainty (measured by Ψ) greater than ε.
In the following we use rfds having only one attribute on the RHS; this
condition can always be reached by means of the usual transformations of fds.

--- PAGE 112 ---
96 L. Caruccio et al.
Example 2. As an example, for the database schema of Doctor shown in (1), it
is likely to have the same Specialization for doctors having the same Name and
PlaceOfBirth. An fd {Name,PlaceOfBirth} → Specialization might hold. However,
the names, places and specializations might be stored by using diﬀerent abbre-
viations. Thus, the following rfd might hold:
{Name≈,PlaceOfBirth≈} −→ Specialization≈
where ≈ is the string similarity function. On the other hand, the few cases of
homonyms for the doctors born in the same place have to be considered. For this
reason, the previous rfd should also admit exceptions. This can be modeled by
introducing a diﬀerent coverage measure into the rfd, making it approximate:
{Name≈,PlaceOfBirth≈}
ψ(Name,PlaceOfBirth,Specialization)≥0.98
− − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − → Specialization≈
3 Problem Description
Let us deﬁne the query/view synchronization problem.
Definition 8 (Query/View Synchronization). Let Q be the set of queries
and views deﬁned on a database schema S; upon a schema evolution S→S
, the
QVS problem consists of ﬁnding a transformation τ of Q producing a set Q
of
queries and views on S
, such that Q
on S
preserves the semantics of Q on
S. If such a transformation exists, we say that there exists a synchronization
Q→Q
, or even that Q
represents a legal rewrite of Q.
Example 3. Let us consider the view on the database schema S of Example 1:
CREATE VIEW getDoctorByLevel AS
SELECT Name,Specialization
FROM Doctor
WHERE Level = “D”
(4)
It extracts the tuples getDoctorByLevel(Name, Specialization) for all the stored
doctors with a contractual level equal to “D”. Clearly, even such a simple view
needs be rewritten upon the schema evolution deﬁned in (2).
The preferred automated tools will be those that give the user the illusion of
deﬁning queries and views on an older version of the schema even though it has
evolved [18].
Example 4. Let us consider the schema S of Example 1. If it evolves into the
following schema:
DoctorData(idDoctor,Name,Specialization,Role,Experience)
DoctorEconomy(idDoctor,Salary,Level,Tax)
(5)

--- PAGE 113 ---
Dependency-Based Query/View Synchronization upon Schema Evolutions 97
then it is possible to automatically synchronize all queries and views involving
attributes of both DoctorData and DoctorEconomy, by introducing a join between
the new two relations.
Unfortunately, it is not always possible to ﬁnd a synchronization for all
queries and views, especially when the modiﬁcation concerns the deletion of
schema constructs instantiated within some queries or views. In the following,
we analyze the schema constructs that can aﬀect the results of a query or of a
view.
Definition 9. Given a relation R and a selection condition c Inst(R,c) is the
set of instances in R satisfying c [28].
Definition 10. Given a schema S, and a query/view Q with selection condition
CQ
sQ = {s ∈ Inst(S,CQ)} (6)
is the result instance of the query/view Q.
Definition 11. Let Q be a query/view, and S → S
an evolution of S, we say
that Q can be automatically rewritten upon the deletion of a schema construct if
and only if the following properties hold:
– There exists an instance si ∈ Inst(S
), which corresponds to (is the same
of) the result instance of Q when applied on S (result data preserving), i.e.
si = sQ.
– For each selection condition c of Q, there exists a constraint c
such that
sQ ∈ Inst(S,c) ∩ Inst(S
,c
) (result construction preserving).
It is worth to noticing that the lack of preservation in result construction does
not necessarily produce the lack of preservation in result data. In fact, when
sQ / ∈ NotInst(S,S
), there can exist a condition cj such that sQ / ∈ Inst(S,cj)∩
Inst(S
,c
j) for each c
j deﬁnable on S
. In other words, this case occurs when the
information on the attributes whose values must be outputted by executing Q
have not been lost, but there is a condition useful to produce the result instance
of Q that cannot be redeﬁned in S
.
4 Methodology
In the literature, there are few methodologies addressing the synchronization of
queries and views upon schema evolutions yielding information loss [9]. They
propose solutions ranging from the possibility of not including all the informa-
tion required by Q in the result instance [1], to the possibility of deﬁning a
priori some parameters and/or policies on Q that block evolutions yielding loss
of information declared as essential for Q [19]. In some other cases, the DBA
intervention is required to manage the loss of information [25], or to replace lost
data with approximated ones within the result instance [26].

--- PAGE 114 ---
98 L. Caruccio et al.
The proposed methodology exploits rfds [7], aiming to produce result
instances equivalent to or approximating those produced on the old schema ver-
sion. In particular, we focus on schema evolutions yielding attribute deletions,
since they can invalidate conditions of queries and views. However, the proposed
methodology can be easily extended to the removal of relations, since they can
be rewritten in terms of removal of several attributes.
More formally, given a schema evolution S → S
, where NotInst(S,S
) = ∅.
Let c1,...,ck in Q, and let c̄1,..., c̄h be the conditions which involve attribute
deleted by the evolution S → S
. For each c ∈ {c̄1,..., c̄h} we construct the
modiﬁed condition c
such that s
Q ∈ Inst(S
,c
) and s
Q = sQ, where sQ ∈
Inst(S,c).
In order to construct c
, we verify the existence of some rfds ψ of the form:
XΦ1
→ AEQ (7)
where A represents the attribute instantiated in c, and eq is the equality con-
straint.
In this way, according to the type of each query/view condition c corrupting
Q, it is possible to transform c into c
through the following general formula:
c
=
k 
i=1
(X1 = x1i ∧ X2 = x2i ∧ ··· ∧ Xn = xni) (8)
∀Xj ∈ X, with j = 1,...,n, and ∀ti such that ti[A]θy, where y is a constant
or an attribute, and θ represents one of the possible operators that can be used
in c.
In this way, each query/view Q including the condition c can be rewritten
into Q
by replacing c with c
.
Example 5. Let us consider the database instance in Table1, and the view Q in
(3).
After the evolution S → S
deﬁned in (2), if the following rfd ϕ
{Role≈, Experience≈} → LevelEQ holds, then we can automatically transform Q
in Q
in the following way:
CREATE VIEW getDoctorByLevel AS
SELECT Name,Specialization
FROM Doctor
WHERE (Role = “Specialized” AND Experience = 2 years)
OR (Role = “SpecializedDr.” AND Experience = 3 years)
(9)
producing the same result instance of the original view.
The transformation rule deﬁned in (8) can be specialized based on the con-
dition used in the query/view (see Table2).
In general, the proposed solution can be applied whenever an rfd is included
within the previously deﬁned general form. Moreover, the whole methodology

--- PAGE 115 ---
Dependency-Based Query/View Synchronization upon Schema Evolutions 99
Table 1. A portion of a doctor database instance.
idDoctor Name Specialization Role Experience Salary Level Tax
1 George Johnson Neurology Junior Dr. 2 years $118,000 E $27,140
2 Joe House Cardiology Head Physician 10 years $314,000 B $94,200
3 Derek Williams Pediatrician Specialized Dr. 2 years $156,000 D $39,000
4 Henry Jones Neurology Specialized 3 years $158,000 D $39,500
5 Victor Sanchez Radiology Senior Surgeon 5 years $225,000 C $63,000
...
Table 2. The transformation rule (8) specialized for each type of query condition.
Condition Type Formula
attribute = constant
(A = 
a
)

i (X1 = x1i ∧ X2 = x2i ∧ ··· ∧ Xn = xni)
∀ti s.t. ti[A] = 
a
, and ∀Xj ∈ X with j = 1,...,n
attribute = attribute
(A = B)

i (X1 = x1i ∧ X2 = x2i ∧ ··· ∧ Xn = xni)
∀ti s.t. ti[A] = ti[B], and ∀Xj ∈ X with j = 1,...,n
attribute θ constant
(A θ 
a
)

i (X1 = x1i ∧ X2 = x2i ∧ ··· ∧ Xn = xni)
∀ti s.t. ti[A] θ 
a
, and ∀Xj ∈ X with j = 1,...,n
attribute θ attribute
(A θ B)

i (X1 = x1i ∧ X2 = x2i ∧ ··· ∧ Xn = xni)
∀ti s.t. ti[A] θ ti[B], and ∀Xj ∈ X with j = 1,...,n
attribute in Query
(A in Q)

i (X1 = x1i ∧ X2 = x2i ∧ ··· ∧ Xn = xni)
∀ti s.t. ti[A] = (v1∨,...,∨vk) ∀vz ∈ {v1,...,vk}
result value of Q, and ∀Xj ∈ X with j = 1,...,n
attribute not in Query
(A not in Q)

i (X1 = x1i ∧ X2 = x2i ∧ ··· ∧ Xn = xni)
∀ti s.t. ti[A] <> (v1∧,...,∧vk) ∀vz ∈ {v1,...,vk}
result value of Q, and ∀Xj ∈ X with j = 1,...,n
attribute θ any Query
(A θ any Q)

i (X1 = x1i ∧ X2 = x2i ∧ ··· ∧ Xn = xni)
∀ti s.t. ti[A] θ (v1∨,...,∨vk) ∀vz ∈ {v1,...,vk}
result value of Q, and ∀Xj ∈ X with j = 1,...,n
attribute θ all Query
(A θ all Q)

i (X1 = x1i ∧ X2 = x2i ∧ ··· ∧ Xn = xni)
∀ti s.t. ti[A] θ (v1∧,...,∧vk) ∀vz ∈ {v1,...,vk}
result value of Q, and ∀Xj ∈ X with j = 1,...,n
attribute between 
a1

and 
a2

(A between 
a
1 and 
a
2)

i (X1 = x1i ∧ X2 = x2i ∧ ··· ∧ Xn = xni)
∀ti s.t. ti[A] ≥ 
a
1 ∧ ti[A] ≤ 
a
2,
and ∀Xj ∈ X with j = 1,...,n
can be eﬀectively used in practice, due to the fact that many rfds can be
automatically extracted from data [6,21].
Finally, it is fair to note that it is possible to ﬁnd more than one correct
rewritings of queries/views corrupted by an evolution. This is also another issue
related to the general QVS problem. To this end, in order to choose the best
candidate synchronization, we will select the query/view rewrite maximizing the
length of c
in term of ∨ sentences (i.e. c
such that the value of k is minimum).
In this way, more general rewritings of queries/views will be used.

--- PAGE 116 ---
100 L. Caruccio et al.
4.1 Query/View Synchronization with Approximate Results
In case there is no rfd suitable to accomplish the synchronization process, it
would be desirable to rewrite queries/views in a way to produce results approxi-
mating those of the original query/view version. This can be done due to approx-
imate nature of rfds.
More formally, in order to transform c into c
, so that s
Q ∈ Inst(S
,c
) and
s
Q ≈ sQ, we verify the existence of some rfd ϕ of the form:
XΦ1
→ AΦ2
(10)
where A represents an attribute instantiated in c that has been deleted during
the schema evolution, with Φ2 a similarity constraint.
Example 6. Let us consider again the database instance in Table1, and the
view Qin (3). After the evolution S → S
deﬁned in (2), if the rfd ϕ
Experience≈→ Level≈ holds, then we can automatically transform Q in Q
in
the following way:
CREATE VIEW getDoctorByLevel AS
SELECT Name,Specialization
FROM Doctor
WHERE Experience = 2 years OR Experience = 3 years
(11)
producing a result that is not equal, but similar to the one of the original view,
as shown in Table3. It is worth to notice that a level of acceptance for the result
approximations can be managed by domain experts, by restricting similarity
constraint thresholds of valid rfds.
Table 3. An approximate version of the view getDoctorByLevel.
idDoctor Name Specialization
1 George Johnson Neurology
3 Derek Williams Pediatrician
4 Henry Jones Neurology
5 Evaluation
We made a prototype implementation of the proposed methodology in Java.
When synchronizing queries aﬀected by an evolution, the prototype considers
all the rfds that have one of the removed attributes on the RHS and none of
the removed attributes on the LHS. The choice of the rfd to be used for the
synchronization follows this rule:

--- PAGE 117 ---
Dependency-Based Query/View Synchronization upon Schema Evolutions 101
Choice the rfd with an LHS producing the minimum result set of a query
constructed as SELECT LHS Attributes FROM r WHERE affected Condition
where affected Condition represents the condition instantiating one of the
attributes removed during the evolution process, which corresponds to the RHS
of the rfd used for the synchronization.
We evaluated the proposed methodology on two diﬀerent datasets, the
Bridges and the Echocardiogram datasets, drawn from the UC Irvine Machine
Learning repository [4]. Statistics on the characteristics of the considered
datasets are reported in Table4.
In order to evaluate the proposed methodology, we deﬁned several queries on
each dataset, and randomly removed three attributes from each of them. In par-
ticular, there were two queries aﬀected by the attribute removal for the Bridges
and ﬁve for the Echocardiogram dataset. We observed the number of attributes
on the LHS belonging to the rfd selected for the synchronization, and the growth
of the query conditions. In general, the execution time to accomplish the com-
plete synchronization was very small, varying in the range [0.2,0.5] seconds.
Finally, we performed another experimental session, by forcing the selection of
rfds considering approximate matches on the RHS. In this case, we also analyzed
the number of false positives introduced during the synchronization process.
Table 4. Statistics on the datasets considered in the evaluation.
Datasets # Columns # Rows # FD Size [KB]
Bridges 13 108 142 6
Echocardiogram 13 132 538 6
Evaluation results are shown in Fig.1. We can notice that the growth of query
conditions (number of conditions into the synchronized query) does not depend
on the LHS cardinality (|LHS|, number of attributes) of the selected rfd, as
shown in Fig.1(a). However, since the conditions are automatically processed,
their size does not aﬀect the human eﬀort in the synchronization process. More-
over, in the case of rewritings with approximate results (Fig.1(b)), we notice that
by using rfds with similarity constraints on the RHS yields a reduced growth
of the query condition, and the LHS cardinalities does not increase. However,
as expected, in some cases several false positives are generated. Finally, it is
worth to notice that a synchronization process accomplished through an rfd
with a higher LHS cardinality increases the risk of possible future synchroniza-
tions, since it is highest the probability that one of them could be involved in
future schema evolutions. This represents the main limitation of the proposed
approach.

--- PAGE 118 ---
102 L. Caruccio et al.
(a) Exact Rewritings (b) Rewritings with Approximate results
Fig.1. Evaluation results of the proposed methodology.
6 Related Work
QVS approaches and tools deﬁned in the literature are based on one of the
three schema evolution strategies deﬁned in Sect.2.1: operation-based, mapping-
based, and hybrid. Moreover, the QVS problem raises several issues, ranging
from the automation level of the synchronization process to the management of
information loss [9]. QVS approaches should provide solutions for all the issues
related to the general problem. However, in some cases, solutions useful for some
issues might be not appropriate for other cases.
In general, the QVS process permits the synchronization of all the
queries/views aﬀected by the evolution of a given schema. In the previous sec-
tions we discussed the fact that corrupted queries/views cannot be always syn-
chronized. To this end, the concept of policies guiding the synchronization pro-
cess can be used [25]. In particular, three types of policies have been deﬁned
in the literature: (i) propagate, (ii) block, and (iii) prompt, which prescribe how
to handle the portions of the view deﬁnitions aﬀected by the schema modiﬁ-
cation: propagate prescribes to apply changes and synchronize Q, block forbids
changes, and prompt prescribes to ask the DBA for the action to be undertaken
[11]. Although the latter might appear the most suitable policy, it should not
be abused in order to keep the automation level of the QVS process suﬃciently
high.
Another solution to the QVS problem relies on the concept of View Evolution
Parameters (VEPs) [29], which enables the possibility to deﬁne how to handle
the single components of a view during the synchronization process, by specifying
a priori whether the component (e.g. an attribute) is replaceable, or whether it
is mandatory. In addition, the View Extent2
Parameter (VE) [29] associated
to a view Q speciﬁes a condition on the extent of a view Q
in order for Q
to be considered an acceptable synchronization of Q. In other words, the V E
parameter φ ∈ {≡,⊆,⊇,≈}, speciﬁes a priori whether the extent of Q
must
be equivalent (≡), be included (⊆), include (⊇), or approximate (≈) the extent
of Q, in order for Q
to be considered a legal rewrite of Q. In other words, the
2
The view extent is the usually adopted term indicating the result-set of a view
statement, i.e. the materialized view.

--- PAGE 119 ---
Dependency-Based Query/View Synchronization upon Schema Evolutions 103
V E parameter establishes a relationship that must hold between the projections
of Q
and Q on their common attributes.
Fault tolerance is the idea underlying the approach [27], in which attempts
are made to recover data from the source schema, even with some errors. This
has been done by means of default mappings, a formalism based on default logic,
which is suitable to express rules allowing exceptions. This solution permits to
deﬁne approximate versions of queries/views invalidated from the evolution.
Finally, a cooperative approach to querying has been used in the context of
logic-based data integration of heterogeneous databases [18]. In particular, this
solution exploits heuristics to produce approximate answers, which are submitted
to the user or to the DBA for approval. Such a process exploits a dialogue for
information seeking, in which participants (user and system) aim at ﬁnding an
adequate mapping between the query and the modiﬁed schema.
All of approaches previously mentioned aim to provide a general solution to
the QVS problem. However, they do not propose a speciﬁc solution w.r.t. the fact
that queries/views might be corrupted even when their result instances can be
recovered upon the evolution, and the latter only aﬀects the query/view selection
conditions. The proposed methodology aims to isolate this kind of situations, by
providing possible rewritings of queries/views based on semantic correlations
among data, expressed in terms of rfds. For this reason, the proposed solution
not only can be embedded within more generic solutions, but should also permit
to increase the automation level of the QVS process.
7 Conclusion and Future Work
We have proposed a new methodology to automatically rewrite queries/views
corrupted as a consequence of schema evolutions causing loss of information on
which they were deﬁned. The transformation procedure exploits the semantic
correlations among data provided by rfds, in oder to derive a general trans-
formation formula for the QVS problem. It can be included in every approach
or tool aiming to solve the general QVS problem. Moreover, since rfds can be
automatically extracted [6,21], the proposed methodology allows to improve the
automation level of the synchronization process.
In the future, we would like to investigate the eﬀects of instance evolutions
of previous query/view synchronization processes. In particular, the addition
or deletion of some data might change the set of rfds holding on the dataset,
possibly altering parts of previous synchronization processes. Thus, we would
like to investigate how to make the query/view synchronization methodology
incremental w.r.t. instance updates. To this end, it might be useful to investigate
the possibility of exploiting rfds that relax on the extent [7], that is, rfds
holding only on a subset of the database.

--- PAGE 120 ---
104 L. Caruccio et al.
References
1. Bernstein, P.A., Melnik, S.: Model management 2.0: manipulating richer mappings.
In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management
of Data (COMAD), pp. 1–12. ACM (2007)
2. Bernstein, P.A., Rahm, E.: Data warehouse scenarios for model management. In:
Laender, A.H.F., Liddle, S.W., Storey, V.C. (eds.) ER 2000. LNCS, vol. 1920, pp.
1–15. Springer, Heidelberg (2000). https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-45393-8 1
3. Bertino, E.: A view mechanism for object-oriented databases. In: Pirotte, A., Delo-
bel, C., Gottlob, G. (eds.) EDBT 1992. LNCS, vol. 580, pp. 136–151. Springer,
Heidelberg (1992). https://doi.org/10.1007/BFb0032428
4. Blake, C.L., Merz, C.J.: UCI repository of machine learning databases. http://
archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/index.php. Accessed 3 Mar 2018
5. Bohannon, P., Fan, W., Geerts, F., Jia, X., Kementsietsidis, A.: Conditional func-
tional dependencies for data cleaning. In: 2007 IEEE 23rd International Conference
on Data Engineering, pp. 746–755. IEEE (2007)
6. Caruccio, L., Deufemia, V., Polese, G.: On the discovery of relaxed functional
dependencies. In: Proceedings of the 20th International Database Engineering &
Applications Symposium (IDEAS), pp. 53–61 (2016)
7. Caruccio, L., Deufemia, V., Polese, G.: Relaxed functional dependencies - a survey
of approaches. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 28(1), 147–165 (2016)
8. Caruccio, L., Deufemia, V., Polese, G.: Evolutionary mining of relaxed dependen-
cies from big data collections. In: Proceedings of the 7th International Conference
on Web Intelligence, Mining and Semantics, WIMS 2017, p. 5 (2017)
9. Caruccio, L., Polese, G., Tortora, G.: Synchronization of queries and views upon
schema evolutions: a survey. ACM Trans. Database Syst. (TODS) 41(2), 9 (2016)
10. Cohen, W., Ravikumar, P., Fienberg, S.: A comparison of string metrics for match-
ing names and records. In: KDD Workshop on Data Cleaning and Object Consol-
idation, vol. 3, pp. 73–78 (2003)
11. Curino, C.A., Moon, H.J., Zaniolo, C.: Graceful database schema evolution: the
prism workbench. Proc. VLDB Endow. 1(1), 761–772 (2008)
12. Curino, C.A., Tanca, L., Moon, H.J., Zaniolo, C.: Schema evolution in wikipedia:
toward a web information system benchmark. In: Proceedings of the 10th Interna-
tional Conference on Enterprise Information Systems (ICEIS), pp. 323–332. Cite-
seer (2008)
13. Elmagarmid, A.K., Ipeirotis, P.G., Verykios, V.S.: Duplicate record detection: a
survey. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 19(1), 1–16 (2007)
14. Golfarelli, M., Lechtenbörger, J., Rizzi, S., Vossen, G.: Schema versioning in
data warehouses: enabling cross-version querying via schema augmentation. Data
Knowl. Eng. 59(2), 435–459 (2006)
15. Hick, J.M., Hainaut, J.L.: Database application evolution: a transformational app-
roach. Data Knowl. Eng. 59(3), 534–558 (2006)
16. Huhtala, Y., Kärkkäinen, J., Porkka, P., Toivonen, H.: TANE: an eﬃcient algorithm
for discovering functional and approximate dependencies. Comput. J. 42(2), 100–
111 (1999)
17. Hull, R.: Relative information capacity of simple relational database schemata.
SIAM J. Comput. 15(3), 856–886 (1986)
18. Lakshmanan, L.V.S., Sadri, F., Subramanian, I.N.: On the logical foundations of
schema integration and evolution in heterogeneous database systems. In: Ceri, S.,
Tanaka, K., Tsur, S. (eds.) DOOD 1993. LNCS, vol. 760, pp. 81–100. Springer,
Heidelberg (1993). https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-57530-8 6

--- PAGE 121 ---
Dependency-Based Query/View Synchronization upon Schema Evolutions 105
19. Lee, A.J., Nica, A., Rundensteiner, E.A.: The EVE approach: view synchronization
in dynamic distributed environments. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 14(5), 931–
954 (2002)
20. Lerner, B.S.: A model for compound type changes encountered in schema evolution.
ACM Trans. Database Syst. (TODS) 25(1), 83–127 (2000)
21. Liu, J., Li, J., Liu, C., Chen, Y.: Discover dependencies from data - a review. IEEE
Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 24(2), 251–264 (2012)
22. Melnik, S.: Generic Model Management: Concepts and Algorithms. LNCS, vol.
2967. Springer, Heidelberg (2004). https://doi.org/10.1007/b97859
23. Noy, N.F., Klein, M.: Ontology evolution: not the same as schema evolution. Knowl.
Inf. Syst. 6(4), 428–440 (2004)
24. Oueslati, W., Akaichi, J.: A survey on data warehouse evolution. Int. J. Database
Manag. Syst. (IJDMS) 2(4), 11–24 (2010)
25. Papastefanatos, G., Vassiliadis, P., Simitsis, A., Vassiliou, Y.: Policy-regulated
management of ETL evolution. In: Spaccapietra, S., Zimányi, E., Song, I.-Y.
(eds.) Journal on Data Semantics XIII. LNCS, vol. 5530, pp. 147–177. Springer,
Heidelberg (2009). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-03098-7 6
26. Polese, G., Vacca, M.: A dialogue-based model for the query synchronization prob-
lem. In: IEEE 5th International Conference on Intelligent Computer Communica-
tion and Processing (ICCP) (2009)
27. Polese, G., Vacca, M.: Notes on view synchronization using default logic. In: Pro-
ceedings of 17th Italian Symposium on Advanced Database Systems (SEBD), pp.
253–260 (2009)
28. Poulovassilis, A., McBrien, P.: A general formal framework for schema transforma-
tion. Data Knowl. Eng. 28(1), 47–71 (1998)
29. Rundensteiner, E.A., Lee, A.J., Nica, A.: On preserving views in evolving environ-
ments. In: Knowledge Representation meets DataBases (KRDB), CEUR Workshop
Proceedings, vol. 8, pp. 13.11–13.11 (1997)

--- PAGE 122 ---
Knowledge Graph Embedding
via Relation Paths and Dynamic
Mapping Matrix
Shengwu Xiong1,2
, Weitao Huang1
, and Pengfei Duan1,2(B)
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Wuhan University of Technology,
Wuhan 430070, China
{swxiong,duanpf}@whut.edu.cn
2
Hubei Key Laboratory of Transportation Internet of Things, Wuhan 430070, China
Abstract. Knowledge graph embedding aims to embed both entities
and relations into a low-dimensional space. Most existing methods of rep-
resentation learning consider direct relations and some of them consider
multiple-step relation paths. Although those methods achieve state-of-
the-art performance, they are far from complete. In this paper, a noval
path-augmented TransD (PTransD) model is proposed to improve the
accuracy of knowledge graph embedding. This model uses two vectors
to represent entities and relations. One of them represents the meaning
of a(n) entity (relation), the other one is used to construct the dynamic
mapping matrix. The PTransD model considers relation paths as trans-
lation between entities for representation learning. Experimental results
on public dataset show that PTransD achieves signiﬁcant and consistent
improvements on knowledge graph completion.
Keywords: Representation learning · Knowledge graph
Dynamic mapping matrix · Relation path
1 Introduction
Knowledge graphs encode structured information of entities and their rich rela-
tions. Although typical knowledge graphs, such as Freebase [18] (Bollacker et al.
2008), WordNet [19] (Miller 1995), Yago [20], usually are large in size and contain
thousands of relation types, millions of entities and billions of triples, they are
usually far from complete. Knowledge graphs usually contain large-scale struc-
tural information by using the form of triples (head entity, relation, tail entity).
Knowledge graph completion is similar to link prediction in social network
analysis [11], but traditional approach of link prediction is not capable for knowl-
edge graph completion. Inspired by the translation invariant phenomenon in
word vector space [10], Bordes et al. propose the TransE [3] model, which achieves
state-of-the-art prediction performance. TransE learns low-dimensional embed-
dings for each entity and relation. These vector embeddings are donated by the
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 106–118, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_18

--- PAGE 123 ---
Path-Based TransD: PTransD 107
same letter in boldface. The basic idea of TransE is that every relation is regarded
as translation between head entity and tail entity in the embedding space. For
example, for a triplet (h,r,t), the embedding h is close to the embedding t by
adding the embedding r, that is h + r ≈ t. TransE has outstanding performance
in 1-to-1 relations, but it’s not good at dealing with 1-to-N, N-to-1 and N-to-N.
In order to overcome the problems of TransE [3] in modeling 1-to-N, N-to-
1, N-to-N relations, Researchers propose many methods such as TransH [13],
TransR [7] to extend the model and achieve excellent performance. These meth-
ods are proposed to assign an entity with diﬀerent representations when involved
in various relations. TransH enables an entity to have distributed representations
when involved in diﬀerent relations. However, TransE and TransH both assume
embeddings of entities and relations being in the same space Rk
is the seman-
tic space dimension, so it’s hard for TransE, TransH to distinguish among the
entities which are on the many sides. To deal with the above problem, TransR
is proposed to model entities and relations in distinct space, i.e., entity space
and multiple relation spaces [4], and performs translation in the corresponding
relation space. TransR achieves signiﬁcant improvements compared to base-lines
including TransE and TransH.
In both TransH [13] and TransR [7], all types of entities share the same
mapping vectors/matrices. However, diﬀerent types of entities have diﬀerent
attributes and functions, it is insuﬃcient to let them share the same transform
parameters of a relation [14]. And for a given relation, similar entities should have
similar mapping matrices and otherwise for dissimilar entities. Furthermore, the
mapping process is a transaction between entities and relations that both have
various types. TransD [9] names two vectors to represent symbol object (entities
and relations). The ﬁrst one is used to construct mapping matrices, the other one
captures the meaning of entity (relation). TransD has less complexity and more
ﬂexibility than TransR/CTransR. When learning embeddings of named symbol
objects (entities or relations), TransD considers the diversity of them both.
One shortcoming of the above approaches is that they only consider the
direct relation between entities. In a knowledge graph, it’s known that there are
also substantial multiple-step relation paths between entities indicating their
semantic relationships. For example, the relation path h
son
→ e1
son
→ t indicates
the relation grandson between h and t, i.e., (h,grandson,t). Fortunately, the
problem is already alleviated eﬀectively by using information of relation paths.
PTransE (Guu et al., 2015) [1] tries to extend TransE to model relation paths
for representation learning of knowledge graphs and achieves signiﬁcant and
consistent improvements on knowledge graph completion and relation extraction
from text.
In this paper, we aim at enhancing TransD [9] with information of relation
paths and ﬁnally propose a new variant named PTransD. The model is evalu-
ated on a typical large-scale knowledge graph Freebase (Bollacker et al., 2008).
In this paper, we adopt a dataset extracted from Freebase, i.e., FB15K. Experi-
mental results show that modeling relation paths provide a good supplement for
representation learning of knowledge graphs.

--- PAGE 124 ---
108 S. Xiong et al.
2 Our Method
In Sect.1, we introduce the advantages and disadvantages of existing meth-
ods, including TransE [3], TansH [13] and TransR/CTransR [7]. In this section,
PTransD model will be introduced in detail.
2.1 Based Method: TransD
Model TransR/CTransR [7] segments triples of a speciﬁc relation r into several
groups and learns a vector representation for each group. However, entities also
have various properties. In both TransH [13] and TransR/CTransR [7], all types
of entities share the same mapping vectors/matrices. It is insuﬃcient to show
diﬀerent attributes and functions of diﬀerent types of entities. And for a given
relation similar entities should have similar mapping matrices and otherwise for
dissimilar entities. TransD [9] considers diﬀerent types of both entities and rela-
tions, to encode knowledge graphs into embedding vectors via dynamic mapping
matrices produced by projection vectors.
In TransD [9] model, each named symbol object (entities and relations) is
represented by two vectors. The ﬁrst one captures the meaning of entities (rela-
tions), the other one is used to construct mapping matrices. For example, given
a triplet (h,r,t), its vector are h,hp,r,rp,t,tp, where subscript p marks the pro-
jection vectors, h,hp,t,tp ∈ Rn
and r, rp ∈ Rm
. For each triplet (h,r,t), TransD
[9] set two mapping matrices Mrh, Mrt ∈ Rm×n
to project entities from entity
space to relation space. They are deﬁned as fellow:
Mrh = rph
p + Im×n
(1)
Mrt = rpt
p + Im×n
(2)
where Im×n
is an identity matrix of m×n, h
p and t
p are the transpose matrices
of hp and tp. The mapping matrices Mrh and Mrt are determined by both
entities and relations, and this kind of operation makes the two projection vectors
interact suﬃciently because each element of them can meet every entry comes
from another vector. With the mapping matrices, the projection vectors were
deﬁned as follows:
h⊥ = Mrhh,t⊥ = Mrtt (3)
The score function is:
fr (h,t) = −||h⊥ + r − t⊥||2
2 (4)
In experiments, TransD [9] enforce constrains as ||h||2 ⩽ 1,||t||2 ⩽ 1,||r||2 ⩽
1,||h⊥||2 ⩽ 1,||t⊥||2 ⩽ 1. To train the model, TransD [9] generate negative
samples and use the margin-based rank loss. The overall function of the TransD
model is:
L =

(h,r,t)∈S

(h,r,t)∈S−
[γ + fr(h
,r
,t
) − fr(h,r,t)]+ (5)

--- PAGE 125 ---
Path-Based TransD: PTransD 109
where [x]+ = max(0,x), S and S−
denote golden triples and negative triples.
S−
is constructed as follows:
S−
= (h
,r,t) ∪ (h,r
,t) ∪ (h,r,t
) (6)
And γ is the margin separating golden triples and negative triples. (h,r,t) and
(h
,r
,t
) denote a golden triplet and a corresponding negative triplet, respec-
tively. The process of minimizing the above objective is carried out with stochas-
tic gradient descent (SGD) [12]. In order to speed up the entity and relation
embeddings with the results of TransE [3] and initiate all the transfer matrices
with identity matrices.
2.2 Path-Based TransD: PTransD
Compared to TransE [3], PTransE [1] achieves consistent and signiﬁcant improve-
ments on knowledge graph completion and relation extraction from text. Obvi-
ously, it is eﬀectively to improve the ability of knowledge representation by
considering multiple-step relation paths. Therefore, we propose a path-based
TransD [9] model (denoted as PTransD) (Fig.1).
Fig.1. An illustration of the PTransD model. Mrihi and Mriti are mapping matrices
of i-th (i = 1, 2, ..., n) head entity hi and tail entity ti, PTransD set two mapping
matrices to project entities from entity space to relation space.
Multi-step relation paths between entities indicating their semantic relation-
ships. The relation paths reﬂect complicated inference patterns among in knowl-
edge graphs. However, on the one hand, not all relation paths are meaningful and
reliable for learning. For example, a typical relation path h
Friend
− − − − → e1
profession
− − − − − − − →
t, but actually it does not indicate any semantic relationship between h and t.
In experiments, it will bring negative inﬂuence. Therefore, in the model we use
path-constraint resource allocation algorithm to measure the reliability of rela-
tion paths and we select the reliable relation paths for representation learning.
To evaluate the reliability of a path, we use a path-constraint resource algorithm
(PCRA) just like PTransE [1] model. The basic idea is that assuming a certain

--- PAGE 126 ---
110 S. Xiong et al.
amount of resource is associated with the head entity h, and will ﬂow following
the given path p. We use the resource amount that eventually ﬂows to the tail
entity t to measure the reliability of the path p.
Formally, for a path triple (h,r,t), we compute the resource amount ﬂowing
from h to t given the path p = (r1,...,rl). Starting from h and following the
relation path p, the following path can be represented by S0
r1
− → S1
r2
− → ...
rl
− →
Sl, where h = S0 and t ∈ Sl. For any entity m of Si(i.e.,m ∈ Si), its direct
predecessors along relation ri in Si−1 is donated as Si−1(·,m), The resource
ﬂowing to m is deﬁned as (Fig.2)
Rp(m) =

n∈Si−1(·,m)
1
|Si(n,·)|
Rp(n) (7)
where Si(n,·) is the direct successors of n ∈ Si−1 following the relation ri, and
Rp(n) is the resource obtained from the entity n. For each relation path p, we
set the initial resource in h as Rp(h) = 1. By performing resource allocation
recursively from h through the path p, the tail entity t eventually obtains the
resource Rp(t) which indicates how much information of the head entity h can
be well translated. We use Rp(t) to measure the reliability of the path p given
(h,t), i.e., R(p|h,t) = Rp(t). It can be simply described as Fig.3.
Fig.2. An illustration of PCRA [17].
On the other hand, it is necessary to represent relation paths in the low-
dimensional space. It is obvious that the semantic meaning of a relation path
depends on all relations in this path. Given a relation path p = (r1,...,rn), we will
deﬁne and learn a binary operation function (◦) to obtain the path embedding
p by recursively composing multiple relations, i.e. p = (r1 ◦ ... ◦ rn). We add the

--- PAGE 127 ---
Path-Based TransD: PTransD 111
Fig.3. An simple illustration of PCRA.
embedding of these primitive relations, given by
p = r1 + r2 + ... + rn (8)
For that in PTransE [1] model, addition operation outperforms other composi-
tion operations including multiplication operation and recurrent neural network.
In PTransD model, for each triple (h,r,t), we deﬁne the energy function as
G(h,r,t) = E(h,r,t) + E(h,P,t) (9)
where E(h,r,t) models correlations between relations and entities with direct
relations. E(h,P,t) models the inference correlations between relations with
multiple-step relation path triples, which is deﬁned as
E(h,P,t) =
1
Z

p∈P(h,t)
R(p|h,t)E(h,p,t) (10)
where R(p|h,t) indicates the reliability of the relation path p given the entity
pair (h,t), Z =

p∈P(h,t) R(p|h,t) is a normalization factor, and E(h,p,t) is the
energy function of triple (h,p,t).
For a multiple-step relation path triple (h,r,t), we could have followed
TransE [3] and deﬁne the energy function as E(h,p,t) = ||h + p − t||. How-
ever since we have minimized ||h + r − t|| with the direct relation triple (h,r,t)
to make sure r ≈ t−h, we may directly deﬁne the energy function of (h,p,t) as
E(h,p,t) = ||p − (t − h)|| = ||p − r|| = E(p,r) (11)
which is expected to be a low score where the multiple-step relation path p is
consistent with the direct relation r, and high otherwise, without using entity
embeddings.

--- PAGE 128 ---
112 S. Xiong et al.
In conclusion, we formalize the optimization objective of PTransD as
L(S) =

(h,r,t)∈S
[L(h,r,t) +
1
Z

p∈P(h,t)
R(p|h,t)L(p,r)] (12)
Following TransE [3] model, L(h,r,t) and L(p,r) are margin-based loss functions
with respect to the triple (h,r,t) and the pair (p,r):
L(h,r,t) =

(h,r,t)∈S−
[γ + E(h,r,t) − E(h
,r
,t
)]+ (13)
and
L(p,r) =

(h,r,t)∈s−
[γ + E(p,r) − E(p,r
)]+ (14)
where [x]+ = max(0,x) returns the maximum between 0 and x, γ is the margin,
S is the set of valid triples existing in a knowledge graph and S−
is the set of
invalid triples. The objective will favor lower scores for valid triples as compared
with invalid triples. The invalid triples set with respect to (h,r,t) is deﬁned as
S−
= (h
,r,t) ∪ (h,r
,t) ∪ (h,r,t
). That is, the set of invalid triples is compose
of the original valid triple (h,r,t) with one of three components replaced.
For a entity pair (h,t), we consider its direct relation and multiple-step rela-
tion paths. The score function of PTransD is deﬁned as
G(h,r,t) = ||h⊥ + r − t⊥||L1/L2
+
1
Z

p∈P(h,t)
R(p|h,t)||p − r||L1/L2
(15)
and the score function is further deﬁned as
G(h,r,t) = E(h,r,t) + E(h,P,t)
= ||(rph
p + Im∗n
)h + r − (rpt
p + Im∗n
)t||L1/L2
=
1
Z

p∈P(h,t)
R(p|h,t)||p − r||L1/L2
(16)
where hp,rp,tp are projection vectors which are used to construct dynamic map-
ping matrices. A
is the transport matrix of A. We use Im∗n
to denote the
identity matrix of size m × n. R(p|h,t) indicates the reliability of the relation
path p given the entity pair (h,t),

p∈P(h,t) R(p|h,t) is a normalization factor.
2.3 Training Method and Implementation Details
Existing knowledge graphs only contain correct triples. We get the set of invalid
triples by replacing one of three components of original valid triple (h,r,t).
When corrupting the triple, we follow (Wang et al. 2014) [13] and assign diﬀer-
ent probabilities for head/tail entity replacement. For those 1-to-N, N-to-1 and

--- PAGE 129 ---
Path-Based TransD: PTransD 113
N-to-N relations, by giving more chance to replace “one” side, the chance of
generating false-negative instances will be reduced. In experiments, we initialize
entity vectors and relation vectors by the training result of TransE [3] to avoid
overﬁtting.
For optimization, we use stochastic gradient descent (SGD) to minimize the
loss function. We also enforce constraints on the norms of the embeddings h, r,
t. That is, we set ||h||2 ⩽ 1,||t||2 ⩽ 1,||r||2 ⩽ 1,||hp||2 ⩽ 1,||rp||2 ⩽ 1,||tp||2 ⩽
1,||Mrhh||2 ⩽ 1,||r⊥||2 ⩽ 1,||Mrtt||2 ⩽ 1. The head entity vector and the tail
entity vector are projected from the entity semantic space Rn
to the relation
semantic space Rm
through the mapping matrices Mrh and Mrt. It obvious that
projected vectors rely on entities and relations.
In addition, there are some implementation details that will inﬂuence the
performance of representation learning. In this paper, we add reverse relations
for each relation in knowledge graph and We just consider 2-step relation paths
existed in knowledge graph.
3 Experiments and Analysis
3.1 Data Set
Freebase is a huge and growing knowledge graph of a large number of the world
facts, there are currently around 1, 2 billion triples and more than 80 million
entities. In this paper, we adopt the subset of Freebase: FB15K (Bordes et al.
2014). Table1 lists statistics and triple types of the FB15K dataset.
Table 1. Statistics of dataset FB15K.
Dataset Ent Rel Train Test Valid 1-to-1 1-to-N N-to-1 N-to-N
FB15K 14,951 1,345 483,142 59,071 50,000 26.2 (%) 22.7 (%) 29.3 (%) 22.8 (%)
In experiments, we use approach in TransH (Wang et al. 2014) [13] to replace
the head and tail entity when corrupting the triple, which depends on the map-
ping property of the relations.
For comparison, we select all methods in (Lin et al., 2015) [1] as our baselines
and use their reported results directly since the evaluation dataset is identical.
The learning process of PTransD is carried out using stochastic gradient descent
(SGD). To avoid overﬁtting, we initialize entity and relation embeddings with
results of TransE [3], and initialize relation matrices as identity matrices.
3.2 Link Prediction
Link prediction [8] is to predict the missing h or t for a golden triple (h,r,t). In
this task, we remove the head entity or tail entity and then replace it with all
the entities of the dictionary in turn for each triple in test set. We ﬁrst compute

--- PAGE 130 ---
114 S. Xiong et al.
Table 2. Evaluation results on entity prediction.
Metric Mean Rank Hits@10(%)
Raw Filter Raw Filter
RESCAL [15] 828 683 28.4 44.1
SE [6] 273 162 28.8 39.8
SME(linear) [2] 274 154 30.7 40.8
SME(bilinear) [2] 284 158 31.3 41.3
LFM [16] 283 164 26.0 33.1
TransE [3] 243 125 34.9 47.1
TransH [13] 212 87 45.7 64.4
TransR [7] 198 77 48.2 68.7
TransE(our) 235 136 51.6 71.4
TransD [9] 221 78 51.9 77.4
PTransE(ADD,2-step) [1] 200 54 51.8 83.4
PTransE(MUL,2-step) [1] 216 67 47.4 77.7
PTransE(RNN,2-step) [1] 242 92 50.6 82.2
PTransE(ADD,3-step) [1] 207 58 51.4 84.6
PTransD(ADD,2-step) 147.32 21.04 54.97 92.58
the scores of corrupted triples and then rank them in descending order, the rank
of correct entity is ﬁnally store.
For evaluation, we use two ranking measures: the mean of those predicted
ranks and the Hits@10, i.e. the proportion of correct ranked in the top 10. We
call the original setting “Raw”. Consider that a corrupted triple may also exist
in knowledge graphs, the corrupted triple should be regarded as a correct triple.
To avoid such a misleading behavior, we propose to remove from the list of
corrupted triples all the triples that appear either in the training, validation or
test set. We call this evaluation setting“Filter”. In this paper, we provide mean
rank and Hits@10 of the two settings.
For experiments of PTransD, we select learning rate λ among {0.1, 0.01,
0.001}, the dimensions of entity embedding m and relation embedding n among
{20, 50, 100}, and the margin γ among {1, 2, 4}. The best conﬁguration is deter-
mined according to the mean rank in validation set. The optimal conﬁgurations
are λ = 0.001, the margin γ = 1,m = n = 50 and taking L1 as dissimilarity. For
the FB15K dataset, we traverse to training for 1000 rounds.
Evaluation results of entity prediction are show in Table2. For that the addi-
tion operation and 2-step paths outperforms other composition operations in
both mean rank and Hits@10, we just consider 2-step relation paths and use
addition operation to represent the relation path.
From Table2 we observe that: (1) PTransE [1] gets surprisingly low mean
rank. It indicates that PTransD handles complicated internal correlations of

--- PAGE 131 ---
Path-Based TransD: PTransD 115
entities and relations in knowledge graphs better than other methods. (2) In
Hits@10, PTransD signiﬁcantly and consistently outperforms other baselines
including PTransE [1] and TransD [9].
As deﬁned in (Bordes et al. 2013), relations in knowledge graphs can be
divided into various types according to their mapping properties such as 1-to-1,
1-to-N, N-to-1, N-to-N. In order to further observe the performance of PTransD
and other methods facing diﬀerent complex relations, Table4 shows that detailed
results by mapping properties of relations on FB15K.
Table 3. Evaluation results by mapping properties of relations (%)
Tasks Prediction head entities (Hits@10) Prediction tail entities (Hits@10)
Relation category 1-to-1 1-to-N N-to-1 N-to-N 1-to-1 1-to-N N-to-1 N-to-N
SE [6] 35.6 62.6 17.2 37.5 34.9 14.6 68.3 41.3
SME(linear) [2] 35.1 53.7 19.0 40.3 32.7 14.9 61.6 43.3
SME(bilinear) [2] 30.9 69.6 19.9 38.6 28.2 13.1 76.0 41.8
TransE [3] 43.7 65.7 18.2 47.2 43.7 19.7 66.7 50.0
TransH [13] 66.8 87.6 28.7 64.5 65.5 39.8 83.3 67.2
TransR [7] 78.8 89.2 34.1 69.2 79.2 37.4 90.4 72.1
TransD [9] 86.1 95.5 39.8 78.5 85.4 50.6 94.4 81.2
PTransE(ADD,2-step) [1] 91.0 92.8 60.9 83.8 91.2 74.0 88.9 86.4
PTransE(MUL,2-step) [1] 89.0 86.8 57.6 79.8 87.8 71.4 72.2 80.4
PTransE(RNN,2-step) [1] 88.9 84.0 56.3 84.5 88.8 68.4 81.5 86.7
PTransE(ADD,3-step) [1] 90.1 92.0 58.7 86.1 90.7 70.7 87.5 88.7
PTransD(ADD,2-step) 91.79 96.51 82.48 92.47 91.79 94.88 89.58 94.31
From Table3 we can conclude that, where the head entities are predicted:
(1) PTransD signiﬁcantly outperforms other baselines including TransD [9] and
PTransE [1] when dealing with the 1-to-1, N-to-1 and N-to-N relations types. (2)
The performance of PTransD when dealing with the 1-to-N relations type out-
perform than other baselines. When the tail entities are predicted: (1) Compared
with other models, PTransD is a more ﬁne-grained model which considers the
1-to-1 and 1-to-N types of relations. (2) PTransD has poor ability of knowledge
representation when dealing with N-to-1 type of relations, and it is inferior to
TransD [9] model. (3) PTransD model performs well in dealing with N-to-N type
of relations. It is observed that, on some mapping types of relations, PTransD
achieves signiﬁcant improvement as compared with other models. However, the
performance of PTransD is not very well with respect to some types of relations
[6].
3.3 Relation Prediction
Relation prediction aims to predict the relation of two entities, which is an
important information source to enrich knowledge graphs. We use FB15K as our
dataset. We use the score function to rank the candidate relations in relation

--- PAGE 132 ---
116 S. Xiong et al.
prediction. Evaluation results are showed in Table4, where we report Hits@1
instead of Hits@10 for comparison, because Hits@10 for both TransE [3] and
PTranE [1] exceeds 95%. Similar to Hits@10, Hits@1 represents the proportion
of correct ranked in the number one.
The best conﬁgurations of PTransD for relation prediction is λ = 0.001,
γ = 1, m = n = 50 and take L1 as dissimilarity.
Table 4. Evaluation results on relation prediction (%)
Metric Mean Rank Hits@1
Raw Filter Raw Filter
TransE [3] 2.8 2.5 65.1 84.3
PTransE(ADD,2-step) [1] 1.7 1.2 69.5 93.5
PTransE(MUL,2-step) [1] 2.5 2.0 66.3 89.0
PTransE(RNN,2-step) [1] 1.9 1.4 68.3 93.2
PTransE(ADD,3-step) [1] 1.8 2.5 68.5 94.0
PTransD(ADD,2-step) 1.5 1.1 70.83 94.76
From Table4, we can observe that: (1) PTransD (in mean rank respect) is
lower than the results of TransE [3] and PTransE [1] models under both raw
and ﬁlter settings. (2) In Hits@1, PTransD obtains 0.2 to 0.5% points higher
than other models. That is, PTransD handles complicated internal correlations
of entities and relations in knowledge graphs better than other methods. Obvi-
ously, PTransD signiﬁcantly and consistently outperforms other baselines, which
indicates that embedding by relation paths and dynamic mapping matrix pro-
vide a good supplement for representation learning.
4 Conclusions and Future Work
This paper proposes a noval representation learning method for knowledge
graphs named PTransD, which embeds both entities and relations into a low-
dimensional space for their completion [5]. In PTransD, to take advantage of rela-
tion paths, we consider multiple-step relation paths between entities and use the
addition operation to represent relations paths for optimization; We divide enti-
ties and relations into diﬀerent semantics spaces and construct mapping matrix
dynamically. Experimental results on FB15K dataset show that PTransD out-
performs TransE [3], TransD [9] and PTransE [1] on two tasks including link
prediction and relation prediction.
As shown in Tables2 and 3, evaluation results on some types of relations (e.g.
1-to-N) preforms not very well. One possible reason is that the way to replace
the head and tail entity provides negative eﬀect to the evaluation results. In
the future, we will explore a new approach to replace the head and tail entity.

--- PAGE 133 ---
Path-Based TransD: PTransD 117
Besides, we will extend PTransD to better deal with complicated scenarios of
knowledge graphs.
Acknowledgments. This work was partially supported by National Key R&D Pro-
gram of China (No. 2016YFD0101903), National Natural Science Foundation of China
(No. 61702386, 61672398), Major Technical Innovation Program of Hubei Province
(No. 2017AAA122), Key Natural Science Foundation of Hubei Province of China (No.
2017CFA012), Applied Fundamental Research of Wuhan (No. 20160101010004), Fun-
damental Research Funds for the Central Universities (WUT:2018IVB047) and Excel-
lent Dissertation Cultivation Funds of Wuhan University of Technology (2017-YS-061).
References
1. Lin, Y., Liu, Z., Luan, H., Sun, M., Rao, S., Liu, S.: Modeling relation paths
for representation learning of knowledge graphs. In: The Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 2015) (2015)
2. Bordes, A., Glorot, X., Weston, J., et al.: Joint learning of words and meaning
representations for open-text semantic parsing. In: AISTATS 2012, vol. 22, pp.
127–135 (2012)
3. Bordes, A., Usunier, N., Garcia-Duran, A., et al.: Translating embeddings for mod-
eling multi-relational data. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
pp. 2787–2795 (2013)
4. Bengio, Y., Courville, A., Vincent, P.: Representation learning: a review and new
perspectives. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 35(8), 1798–1828 (2013)
5. Xie, R., Liu, Z., Jia, J., et al.: Representation learning of knowledge graphs with
entity descriptions. In: AAAI 2016, pp. 2659–2665 (2016)
6. Bordes, A., Weston, J., Collobert, R., et al.: Learning structured embeddings of
knowledge graphs. In: Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (2011). (EPFL-CONF-
192344)
7. Lin, Y., Liu, Z., Sun, M., Liu, Y., Zhu, X.: Learning entity and relation embed-
dings for knowledge graph completion. In: The 29th AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (AAAI 2015) (2015)
8. Yang, B., Yih, W., He, X., et al.: Embedding entities and relations for learning
and inference in knowledge bases. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6575 (2014)
9. Ji, G., He, S., Xu, L., et al.: Knowledge graph embedding via dynamic mapping
matrix. In: ACL, vol. 1, pp. 687–696 (2015)
10. Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., et al.: Eﬃcient estimation of word represen-
tations in vector space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781 (2013)
11. Yang, C., Liu, Z., Zhao, D., et al.: Network representation learning with rich text
information. In: IJCAI 2015, pp. 2111–2117 (2015)
12. Bottou, L.: Large-scale machine learning with stochastic gradient descent. In:
Lechevallier, Y., Saporta, G. (eds.) Proceedings of COMPSTAT’2010, pp. 177–186.
Physica-Verlag, Heidelberg (2010). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-7908-2604-3 16
13. Wang, Z., Zhang, J., Feng, J., Chen, Z.: Knowledge graph embedding by translating
on hyperplanes. In: Proceedings of AAAI, pp. 1112–1119 (2014)
14. Fan, M., Zhou, Q., Chang, E., et al.: Transition-based knowledge graph embedding
with relational mapping properties. In: PACLIC 2014, pp. 328–337 (2014)
15. Egger, P., Pfaﬀermayr, M.: The proper panel econometric speciﬁcation of the grav-
ity equation: a three-way model with bilateral interaction eﬀects. Empir. Econ.
28(3), 571–580 (2003)

--- PAGE 134 ---
118 S. Xiong et al.
16. Jenatton, R., Roux, N.L., Bordes, A., et al.: A latent factor model for highly
multi-relational data. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp.
3167–3175 (2012)
17. Duan, P., Wang, Y., Xiong, S., Mao, J.: Space projection and relation path based
representation learning for construction of geography knowledge graph. In: China
Conference on Knowledge Graph and Semantic Computing, CCKS 2016 (2016)
18. Bollacker, K., Evans, C., Paritosh, P., et al.: Freebase: a collaboratively created
graph database for structuring human knowledge. In: Proceedings of the 2008 ACM
SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data, pp. 1247–1250. ACM
(2008)
19. Miller, G.A.: WordNet: a lexical database for English. Commun. ACM 38(11),
39–41 (1995)
20. Suchanek, F.M., Kasneci, G., Weikum, G.: Yago: a core of semantic knowledge.
In: Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on World Wide Web, pp.
697–706. ACM (2007)

--- PAGE 135 ---
Expressiveness of Temporal Constraints
for Process Models
Johann Eder(B)
, Marco Franceschetti, Julius Köpke, and Anja Oberrauner
Department of Informatics-Systems, Alpen-Adria-Universität Klagenfurt,
Klagenfurt, Austria
{johann.eder,marco.franceschetti,julius.koepke}@aau.at,
aoberrau@edu.aau.at
https://www.aau.at/isys
Abstract. Temporal constraints are an important aspect for the mod-
eling of processes. We analyze the expressiveness of diﬀerent features
for the representation of temporally constrained processes. In particular
we are able to show that the provision of non-contingency for activities
and of references to start events of activities are redundant. We provide
transformations for mapping process models employing the richer sets
of features to process models using a reduced set of features. We show
the equivalence of these process models and discuss the advantages of
reducing redundancies in the representation of temporal constraints.
1 Introduction
Process models have been successfully introduced for modeling dynamic phe-
nomena in many areas like business, production, health care, etc. In many of
these application areas of process technology temporal issues are crucial aspects,
which motivated a substantial body of research to master these requirements:
modeling of temporal aspects such as durations, deadlines, and other temporal
constraints, formulating diﬀerent notions of correctness of process models with
temporal constraints, checking the temporal correctness of process deﬁnitions,
computing execution schedules for processes and supporting adherence to tem-
poral constraints at runtime with proactive time management (see [4,8,12] for
overviews).
The work on time patterns for business processes and workﬂows [15,16]
brought a necessary consolidation to the formulation of temporal constraints
for business processes by collecting and unifying various existing notions of
representing temporal aspects of business processes and formally deﬁning the
semantics of all these constructs. It was not the aim of these papers to present
a minimal basis of temporal constraints which are able to express all the other
constraints.
In this paper we contribute to the question of identifying redundancies in
temporal constraint pattern languages. Note that it is not the intention of this
work to remove some of the patterns, as they are very well suited in aiding
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 119–133, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_19

--- PAGE 136 ---
120 J. Eder et al.
modelers in expressing temporal aspects. However, for researchers developing
and proving algorithms for, e.g., checking controllability of process models, or
for implementors of tools dealing with all these patterns, it is worthwhile to
know, whether it is possible to express all these patterns with a reduced set of
more basic patterns.
In this paper we focus on two features which are contained in many constraint
languages (e.g. [8]: (1) non-contingent duration of activities (contained in pattern
TP2 [Durations] of [14,16] and formally deﬁned in [6]) in addition to contingent
duration of activities and (2) constraints on start events of activities (contained
in the patterns TP1 [time lags between activities] and TP3 [time lags between
events] of [16]) in addition to constraints o end events. We will show that both
are redundant and can be expressed by other patterns. And we will give some
examples for the beneﬁts of a smaller set of basic features.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: in Sect.2 we introduce
a quite lean generic process model with temporal constraints on this model.
We formally deﬁne the (temporal) semantics of temporally constrained process
models by specifying which scenarios (runs, traces) conform with the speciﬁed
constraints. In Sect.3 we deﬁne transformations mapping process models using
the extended pattern set to process models using only the basic set of patterns
(without non-contingent activities and without references to start events in con-
straints). We deﬁne mappings between the schedules of these models. We also
give examples of the transformations. In Sect.4 we state the main theorem that
the original and the transformed process models are equivalent and sketch the
proof. Section5 provides some discussions why we regard the investigation of
redundancies in constraint formulation patterns worthwhile. Section6 then dis-
cusses related work and in Sect.7 we draw some conclusions.
2 Process Models and Temporal Constraints
We consider here a generic process model represented as an acyclic process graph
composed of nodes and edges, where nodes are the activities and control struc-
tures of the model and the edges express precedence constraints between the
nodes. Such a process model generalizes in particular the well-known basic work-
ﬂow control patterns [19] such as sequence, XOR-splits and -joins, AND-splits
and -joins, etc.
Temporal aspects are represented by durations and time points in form of
natural numbers, where all durations have to be greater or equal 0. Time points
are represented as distance to a time origin (here usually the time point of the
start of a process). Activity instances start at a certain time point (time point
for the start event of an activity instance) and end at a certain time point (end
event); their distance is the duration of an activity instance. A duration can
be contingent, i.e. the actual duration of an activity between the minimum and
maximum duration can only be observed but not controlled, or non-contingent,
which means that the actual duration between a minimum and a maximum
duration can be inﬂuenced by a controller.

--- PAGE 137 ---
Expressiveness of Temporal Constraints for Process Models 121
2.1 Running Example
In Fig.1 we present, as our running example, a BPMN fragment of a temporally
constrained process model from the medical domain, where various patterns for
temporal constraints and non-contingent activities are modeled. First (activity
A), a patient is admitted to the hospital for treatment. The admission procedure
is known to last between 0 and 1h. Subsequently, the patient is hospitalized and
taken to her room (activity H), which requires 1 to 2h. Then, two activities M
and C are performed in parallel. M (taking 1 to 3h) is performing a MRT scan of
the patient, and C is growing a cell culture from a patient’s sample. Growing the
cell culture is a task which takes at least 24h and at most 60h, but depending
on factors such as urgency or availability of technicians, can be controlled in
its duration, provided that it is within the allowed interval. C has therefore
a non-contingent duration. In the following ﬁgures we denote non-contingent
durations in italics. A decision on the type of intervention is taken in activity
D, taking 1 to 4h. Then, depending on the decision, either a non-invasive, long
lasting treatment is done in activity T (72 to 144h), or a surgery is performed in
activity S (24 to 48h including post-surgical rehabilitation). Finally, the patient
is released (activity R), which requires 0 to 1h. Three upper-bound constraints
are stated in the process:
1. ubc(H.s, T.s, 72): hospital policies enforce the treatment to start no more
than 72h after the hospitalization has started.
2. ubc(M.e, D.s, 2): in order for a doctor to take a decision on the type of
intervention with up-to-date information, the MRT scan must have been
completed no more than 2h before the start of the decision-making task.
Notably, the presence of a parallel task with long duration (activity C)
together with the upper-bound constraint forces a delay in the execution
of activity M.
3. ubc(A.e, R.e, 240): hospital policies enforce the completion of the process
after no more than 10 days (240h) after patient admission.
After formally introducing our generic process model, we show how it can be
used to express the hospitalization process using a reduced set of constraint
patterns and only contingent activities.
A
[0,1]
H
[1,2]
M
[1,3]
C
[24,60]
D
[1,4]
T
[72,144]
S
[24,48]
R
[0,1]
ubc(H.s, T.s, 72)
ubc(M.e, D.s, 2)
ubc(A.e, R.e, 240)
PS PJ XS XJ
Fig.1. BPMN fragment of a medical process with temporal constraints.

--- PAGE 138 ---
122 J. Eder et al.
2.2 Process Model
We now formally deﬁne our process model including the formulation of temporal
constraints.
Definition 1 (Process Model). A process model P is a tuple (N,E,C),
where:
– N is a set of nodes.
– E ⊆ N × N is a set of directed edges.
– Ne
= {ns
,ne
|n ∈ N} is a set of start and end events of the nodes in N.
– C is a set of temporal constraints consisting of
• duration constraints for each n ∈ N : d(n,n.dmin,n.dmax,n.contingent);
• upper-bound constraints: ubc(a,b,δ), where a,b ∈ Ne
,δ ∈ N.
– Nc
= {n|n ∈ N,n.contingent = true}. Nnc
= N − Nc
.
Duration constraints associate each node with an interval [n.dmin,n.dmax]
expressing its minimum and maximum duration. The actual runtime duration of
node execution falls in this interval. The boolean property n.contingent expresses
whether the node and its duration is considered contingent or non-contingent.
Nc
is the set of all contingent nodes, Nnc
the set of all non-contingent nodes.
Contingent activities have a ﬁxed minimum and maximum duration, but their
actual duration at runtime cannot be controlled; instead, the duration of a con-
tingent activity can only be observed after the activity was executed. An example
of a contingent activity is a bank money transfer, for which some time between
one and four days is required but there is no way to control it. Non-contingent
activities have a deﬁned minimum and maximum duration as well, but the actual
duration can be controlled by the process execution system.
A H
M
C
D
T
S
R PS PJ XS XJ
N = {A, H, PS, M, C, PJ, D, XS, T,S,XJ,R}
Nc = {A, H, PS, M, PJ, D, XS, T, S, XJ, R}
Nnc = {C}
Ne = {As, Ae, Hs, He, PSs, PSe, Ms, Me,
… … Cs, Ce, PJs, PJe, Ds, De, XSs, XSe,
… … Ts, Te, Ss, Se, XJs, XJe, Rs, Re}
C = {d(A, 0, 1, T), d(H, 1, 2 , T), d(M, 1, 3 , T), d(C, 24, 60 , F), d(D, 1, 4 , T),
…d(T, 72, 144 , T), d(S, 24, 48 , T), d(R, 0, 1 , T), d(PS, 0, 0 , T), d(PJ, 0, 0 , T),
…d(XS,0,0 ,T),d(XJ,0,0 ,T),ubc(Hs,Ts,72),ubc(Me,Ds,2),ubc(Ae,Re,240)}
Fig.2. Process model for the example of Fig.1.

--- PAGE 139 ---
Expressiveness of Temporal Constraints for Process Models 123
Each node n in the process model is associated with 2 events: the start
(ns
) and the end (ne
) event of the execution of the node. Temporal constraints
can then be deﬁned on these events. Upper-bound constraints express maximum
allowed durations between events. An upper-bound constraint (fs
,ge
,12) means
that the time-span between the start of node f and the end of node g must not
be longer than 12 time units.
Figure2 shows the representation of the hospitalization process of Fig.1
according to our formalism. For simplicity, we have visualized the sets of nodes
and edges in the form of a graph.
2.3 Semantics
We deﬁne the semantics of a temporally constrained process model by deﬁning
which executions of the process model are valid. This has 2 aspects: (1) is the
sequence of events (or of node-executions) admissible according to the process
model, and (2) are all temporal constraints satisﬁed? In this paper we focus on
question (2). An execution (also called run, possible trace, or instance type) of
a process model is a subgraph of the process graph. Which subgraphs of the
process graph are correct executions - question (1) - depends on the types of the
nodes (e.g. AND-split, XOR-split, etc.) and the control semantics. To remain
as general as possible in our considerations, in this paper we regard this as
externally deﬁned and do not reason about particular properties.
We deﬁne a scenario as a run with time-stamps for the start and end events
of the nodes. Then we deﬁne an execution as (temporally) correct, if the scenario
fulﬁlls all temporal constraints (valid scenario).
Definition 2 (Scenario). S̄(P) = (N,E) is a scenario for a process model
P(N
,E
,C), iﬀ N ⊆ N
,E ⊆ E
,E ⊆ N×N and each ns
,ne
∈ Ne
is associated
with a time-stamp ns
.t,ne
.t ∈ N, the time points of the start and end events of
node n in the process instance.
The deﬁnition of scenarios and valid scenarios is generic in the sense that a
decision which subgraphs of the process graph are admissible remains generic,
i.e. it depends on the specialization of the generic process model deﬁning the
types of provided (control) nodes and their speciﬁc semantics.
Definition 3 (Valid Scenario). A scenario S̄(P) = (N,E) of a process model
P(N
,E
,C) is valid, iﬀ
1. ∀n ∈ N : 0 ≤ ns
.t
2. ∀(m,n) ∈ E : me
.t ≤ ns
.t
3. ∀d(n,dmin,dmax,n.contingent) ∈ C : dmin ≤ ne
.t − ns
.t ≤ dmax
4. ∀ubc(s,d,δ) ∈ C : d.t ≤ s.t + δ
Following Deﬁnition3, it is easy to verify that the scenario depicted in Fig.3
constitutes a valid scenario for the process of our running example.
A process model is satisﬁable, iﬀ it has a valid scenario. The notion of satis-
ﬁability is frequently used in model checking approaches for validating process

--- PAGE 140 ---
124 J. Eder et al.
A H
M
C
D
T
R PS PJ XS XJ
As=0, Ae=1,
Hs=1, He=2,
PSs=2, PSe=2,
Ms=48, Me=50,
Ts=55, Te=175,
XJs=175, XJe=175,
Rs=175, Re=175
Cs=2, Ce=51,
PJs=51, PJe=51,
Ds=51, De=55,
XSs=55, XSe=55,
Fig.3. Scenario for the process example of Fig.2.
models. It has the shortcoming, that the correct execution might depend on
external properties (like the actual duration of contingent activities) which can-
not be inﬂuenced by the process controller [6,21]. We therefore strive usually
for the diﬀerent forms of controllability which provide better guarantees for a
correct execution.
2.4 Controllability
Controllability [6,20] is deﬁned as a characteristic of a process model which
guarantees that it is within the capabilities of the process execution system
(the controller) to guarantee for an execution of a process instance satisfying all
temporal constraints, irrespective of inﬂuences from the environment - such as
the actual duration of contingent activities.
A schedule deﬁnes when each node has to start its execution and an interval
when the execution has to ﬁnish.
Definition 4 (Schedule). A schedule S for a process P(N,E,C) associates
each n ∈ N with n.s the start time for node n, and the end time interval as
[n.ee,n.el] with n.ee the earliest end time and n.el the latest end time for node
n. We call (n,n.s,n.ee,n.el) ∈ S a schedule entry.
The property of controllability of a process requires that there is a schedule
for the process, such that all scenarios are valid for which the time-stamps of the
scenarios are taken from the respective intervals of this schedule. We will call a
schedule with such a property in the following “controllability schedule”.
Definition 5 (Controllability). A temporally constrained process P(N,E,C)
is controllable, iﬀ it has a schedule S, such that all scenarios S̄(P) are valid, iﬀ
∀n ∈ N : n.s = ns
.t ≤ n.ee ≤ ne
.t ≤ n.el.
We now deﬁne conditions for schedules to be correct in such a way that
the existence of a correct schedule is a necessary and suﬃcient condition for
controllability.

--- PAGE 141 ---
Expressiveness of Temporal Constraints for Process Models 125
Definition 6 (Correct Schedule). A schedule S for a process P(N,E,C) is
correct, iﬀ for all nodes n,m ∈ N, for all (n,m) ∈ E, for all a,b ∈ N:
1. n.s ≥ 0
2. n.el ≤ m.s (successor m starts after termination of n)
3. n.ee ≥ n.s + n.dmin
4. n.el ≤ n.s + n.dmax
5. n.ee ≤ n.el
6. n.ee = n.s + n.dmin, if n.contingent=true
7. n.el = n.s + n.dmax, if n.contingent=true
8. ∀ubc(as
,bs
,δ) ∈ C : b.s ≤ a.s + δ
9. ∀ubc(ae
,bs
,δ) ∈ C : b.s ≤ a.ee + δ
10. ∀ubc(as
,be
,δ) ∈ C : b.el ≤ a.s + δ
11. ∀ubc(ae
,be
,δ) ∈ C : b.el ≤ a.ee + δ
Note that for contingent nodes the end time interval is a function of the start
time, while for non-contingent nodes the end time interval can be chosen within
the limits deﬁned by the maximum and minimum duration. It is easy to see that
the schedule for the running example process in Fig.7 (top-left) is correct.
Lemma 1. A process is controllable, iﬀ it has a correct schedule.
Proof. That a correct schedule fulﬁlls all requirements of a controllability sched-
ule follows from the deﬁnitions. In the other direction: each controllability sched-
ule is correct.  
3 Transformations
In this section we deﬁne transformations which replace all non-contingent nodes
in the process graph and all references to start events in the upper-bound con-
straints. With these transformations we show that non-contingent nodes and
references to start events in upper-bound constraints are redundant in the for-
malisms for temporally constrained process models. We show the equivalence of
the transformed processes to their original ones in the next section.
3.1 Transformation of Non-contingent Nodes
As shown in Fig.4, we replace each non-contingent node n with 2 nodes nf
(the
front node) and nt
(the tail node) connected with an edge (nf
,nt
). Both nodes
are contingent, the front node has minimum and maximum duration 0, and
the tail node has the minimum duration of n as both minimum and maximum
durations. All incoming edges at n are redirected to nf
, all edges originating
from n are transferred to originate from nt
.
In all upper-bound constraints, references to the start event of n are replaced
with the end event of the front node, and all references to the end event of n
are replaced with the end event of the tail node. An additional upper-bound
constraint is included which limits the time-span between the end event of the
front node and the end event of the tail node to the maximum duration of the
non-contingent node.

--- PAGE 142 ---
126 J. Eder et al.
A A A
[A.dmin,A.dmax] [0,0] [A.dmin,A.dmin]
nc-transf.
f t
ubc(A,A,A.dmax) f t
... ... ... ...
Fig.4. Transformation of non-contingent nodes to contingent nodes.
Definition 7 (nc-transformation). Let P(N,E,C) be a process model, let
Nnc
be the set of non-contingent nodes in N. Let the substitution θ(x) = (nf
)e
,
if x = ns
,n ∈ Nnc
;(nt
)e
,if x = ne
,n ∈ Nnc
; or x, otherwise. Then the nc-
transformation T 1
(P) = P
(N
,E
,C
) is deﬁned as follows:
1. N
= Nc
∪ {nf
,nt
|n ∈ Nnc
}
2. E
= {(n,m)|n,m ∈ Nc
,(n,m) ∈ E}
∪{(n,mf
)|n ∈ Nc
,m ∈ Nnc
,(n,m) ∈ E}
∪{(nt
,m)|n ∈ Nnc
,m ∈ Nc
,(n,m) ∈ E}
∪{(nt
,mf
)|n,m ∈ Nnc
,(n,m) ∈ E}
∪{(nf
,nt
)|n ∈ Nnc
}
3. C
= {d(n,d1,d2,true)|d(n,d1,d2,true) ∈ C}
∪{d(nf
,0,0,true),d(nt
,dmin,dmin,true)|d(n,dmin,dmax,false) ∈ C}
∪{ubc(a,b,δ)|ubc(x,y,δ) ∈ C,a = θ(x),b = θ(y)}
∪{ubc((nf
)e
,(nt
)e
,n.dmax)|n ∈ Nnc
}
3.2 Transformation of Upper-Bound Constraints on Start Events
In this sub-section we propose a transformation which replaces all references to
start events of activities in upper-bound constraints with the corresponding end
events. The basic idea is shown in Fig.5, which reports the three relevant cases
involving start events, while the formulas are deﬁned in Deﬁnition8.
n
n
n
n
n
n
m
m
m
m
m
m
[dmin,dmax]
[dmin,dmax]
[dmin,dmax]
[dmin,dmax]
[dmin,dmax]
[dmin,dmax]
[dmin,dmax]
[dmin,dmax]
[dmin,dmax]
[dmin,dmax]
[dmin,dmax]
[dmin,dmax]
ubc-transf.
ubc-transf.
ubc-transf.
s
s
e
e
e
e
s
e
s
e
e
e
ubc(n,m,)
ubc(n,m,)
ubc(n,m,)
ubc(n,m, m.dmax - n.dmin)
ubc(n,m, - n.dmin)
ubc(n,m, + m.dmax)
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
Fig.5. Transformation of upper-bound constraints on start events.

--- PAGE 143 ---
Expressiveness of Temporal Constraints for Process Models 127
Definition 8 (ubc-transformation). Let P(N,E,C) be a process graph.
T 2
(P) = P
(N,E,C
) is deﬁned as:
C
= {t(ubc(n,m,δ))|ubc(n,m,δ) ∈ C}, where for all n,m ∈ N:
t(ubc(ns
,ms
,δ)) = ubc(ne
,me
,δ + m.dmax − n.dmin)
t(ubc(ns
,me
,δ)) = ubc(ne
,me
,δ − n.dmin)
t(ubc(ne
,ms
,δ)) = ubc(ne
,me
,δ + m.dmax)
t(ubc(ne
,me
,δ)) = ubc(ne
,me
,δ)
We now combine the replacement of the non-contingent nodes and of refer-
ences to start events into a single transformation.
Definition 9 (Transformation). The combined transformation T (P) of T 1
and T 2
is deﬁned as: T (P) = T 2
(T 1
(P)).
A H
M
Cf
D
T
S
R PS PJ XS XJ
N={A,H,PS,M,Cf,Ct,PJ,D,XS,T,S,XJ,R}
Nc={A,H,PS,M,Cf,Ct,PJ,D,XS,T,S,XJ,R}
Nnc = {}
Ne={As,Ae,Hs,He,PSs,PSe,Ms,Me,
… …(Cf)s, (Cf)e, (Ct)s, (Ct)e, PJs, PJe, Ds, De,
… …XSs, XSe, Ts, Te, Ss, Se, XJs, XJe, Rs, Re}
C={d(A,0,1,T),d(H,1,2 ,T),d(M,1,3 ,T),d(Cf,0,0,T) , d(Ct,24,24,T),
… d(D, 1, 4, T), d(T, 72, 14, T), d(S, 24, 48, T), d(R, 0, 1, T),
… ubc(He,Te,215), ubc(Me,De,6), ubc(Ae,Re,240), ubc((Cf)e,(Ct)e,60)}
Ct
Fig.6. Transformed process model for the medical example of Fig.1.
Figure6 shows the resulting process from the application of the combined
transformation on our running example process.
Now we are ready to deﬁne transformations on schedules. T (S) is a transfor-
mation which transforms a schedule for an original process model to a schedule
for the transformed process model; T 
(S
) is the inverse transformation.
Definition 10 (Schedule-transformations). T (S) is deﬁned as follows. Let
S be a schedule for a process model P(N,E,C).
S
= T (S) = {(n,n.s,n.ee,n.el)|(n,n.s,n.ee,n.el) ∈ S,n ∈ Nc
}
∪{(nf
,n.s,n.s,n.s),(nt
,n.ee − n.dmin,n.ee,n.ee)|(n,n.s,n.ee,n.el) ∈ S,n ∈
Nnc
}

--- PAGE 144 ---
128 J. Eder et al.
(A, 0, [0,1]), (H, 1, [2,3]), (PS, 3, [3,3]),
(M, 60, [61,63]), (C, 3, [27,63]),
(PJ, 63, [63,63]), (D, 63, [64,67]),
(XS, 67, [67,67]), (T, 67, [139,211]),
(S, 67, [91,115]), (XJ, 211, [211,211]),
(R, 211, [211,212])
(A, 0, [0,1]), (H, 5, [6,7]), (PS, 7, [7,7]),
(M, 64, [65,67]), (Cf, 7, [7,7]), (Ct, 7, [31,31]),
(PJ, 67, [67,67]), (D, 67, [68,71]),
(XS, 71, [71,71]), (T, 71, [143,215]),
(S, 67, [95,119]), (XJ, 215, [215,215]),
(R, 215, [215,216])
… (C, 3, [31,31]), … … (Cf, 3, [3,3]), (Ct, 3, [27,27]), …
schedule-transformaƟon schedule-transformaƟon
Fig.7. Two diﬀerent schedules. On the left: for the example process with non-
contingent activities before (top) and after (bottom) applying T (S). On the right:
for the process without non-contingent activities, before and after T 
(S
).
T 
(S’) is deﬁned as follows. Let S
be a schedule for T (P).
S
= T 
(S
) = {(n,n.s,n.ee,n.el)|(n,n.s,n.ee,n.el) ∈ S
,n ∈ Nc
}∪
{n,nf
.s,nt
.ee,nt
.el)|n ∈ Nnc
,(nf
,nf
.s,nf
.ee,nf
.el),(nt
,nt
.s,nt
.ee,nt
.el) ∈
S
}
In the upper part of Fig.7 two diﬀerent schedules are shown; the lower part
shows the schedules obtained by applying T (S), resp. T 
(S
) to them.
The following lemma states that the transformations generate actual sched-
ules for their respective process models.
Lemma 2. Let P(N,E,C) be a process model and let S be a schedule for P,
and let S
be a schedule for T (P). Then:
(1) T (S) is a schedule for T (P);
(2) T 
(S
) is a schedule for P.
The proof of this lemma is straightforward, as it is suﬃcient to show that for
each node of the process model there is a schedule entry.
4 Equivalence
In this section we show that a process model and its transformation are equiv-
alent. In particular, we show that if the process model is controllable, so is its
transformed process model and vice versa.
We need the following assumptions about admissible runs: if we replace all
contingent nodes in the run in the same way as we replace them in the pro-
cess model then we derive an admissible run of the transformed process model.
Formally, we assume: iﬀ (N
,E
) is a run for P(N,E,C) and (N
,E
,C
) =
T 1
(N
,E
,C) then (N
,E
) is a run for T 1
(P). It is easy to see that this
assumption holds for all workﬂow nets.
Theorem 1 (control-equiv). Let P be a process model and T (P) the trans-
formed process model. P is controllable, iﬀ T (P) is controllable.

--- PAGE 145 ---
Expressiveness of Temporal Constraints for Process Models 129
Proof. Proof-sketch: We show: if S is a correct schedule for P then T (S) is a
correct schedule for T (P) and if S
is a correct schedule for T (P) then T 
(S
)
is a correct schedule for P.  
The proof is not diﬃcult but somewhat lengthy. The theorem can be proved
straightforward from the deﬁnition of correct schedules and the deﬁnition of
the transformations but requires a considerable amount of term transformations
using in particular transitivity of inequalities. Details of the proof can be found
in [18].
5 Discussion
In this section we discuss some of the possible advantages and consequences of
the ﬁndings presented above.
– Academic curiosity: it is a well-established tradition in computer science
research to search for a minimum basis of some formalisms. So, part of our
motivation was to see whether certain features in temporal constraint lan-
guages for processes were actually redundant. We do not argue that they
should be removed from these languages, as they frequently make it easier for
designers to express temporal constraints in process models as they are seen
in the application domain. However, knowing about these redundancies allows
for transformations which reduce the complexity of internal representations.
– The reduction of the number of features leads to more compact languages
or meta-models for the representation of processes. This makes it easier to
reason about properties of process models (such as controllability here), and
signiﬁcantly reduces the size of deﬁnitions, algorithms and proofs. For an
example, after the transformation we introduced here, the deﬁnition of a
correct schedule can be reduced to 3 clauses instead of 11. Below we show
how the deﬁnitions of the notions of process, schedule, and correct schedule
can be simpliﬁed if we do not provide non-contingent activities and references
to start events in our process model.
– The elimination of non-contingent nodes has the disadvantage of increasing
the number of nodes, but has the advantage that for example schedules can be
expressed much more compact, since it suﬃces to state one of the parameters
start time, earliest end time, or latest end time. The other parameters can
then be calculated.
– When all upper-bound constraints can be expressed on the end events of nodes
then the mapping of process models to temporal constraint networks can be
reduced to mapping only the end events and not the start events to variables
of the temporal constraint network. Many algorithms for these networks have
a higher than linear complexity [2] (some have even exponential complexity)
in the number of variables. To halve the number of variables reduces the
runtime of these algorithms enormously.

--- PAGE 146 ---
130 J. Eder et al.
Here we show how the deﬁnitions of process model, of schedule, and of correct
schedule can be drastically shortened, if non-contingent activities and references
to start events are dismissed.
Definition 11 (Process Model-2). A process model P is a tuple (N,E,C),
where:
– N is a set of nodes.
– E ⊆ N × N is a set of edges.
– C is a set of temporal constraints consisting of
• duration constraints for each n ∈ N : d(n,n.dmin,n.dmax);
• upper-bound constraints: ubc(a,b,δ), where a,b ∈ N,δ ∈ N.
A schedule deﬁnes when each node has to start execution and an interval
when the execution has to ﬁnish. Since the end-time interval for contingent
activities is a function of the start time it is suﬃcient to state the start time for
deﬁning a schedule.
Definition 12 (Schedule-2). A schedule S for a process P(N,E,C) associates
each n ∈ N with n.s the start time for node n. We call (n,n.s) ∈ S a schedule
entry.
We now deﬁne conditions for schedules to be correct in such a way that
the existence of a correct schedule is a necessary and suﬃcient condition for
controllability. The most dramatic reduction is the deﬁnition of a correct schedule
where now 3 clauses are suﬃcient compared to the original 11.
Definition 13 (Correct Schedule-2). S is a correct schedule for a process
P(N,E,C), iﬀ for all nodes n,m ∈ N, for all (n,m) ∈ E, for all a,b ∈ N:
1. n.s ≥ 0
2. n.s + n.dmax ≤ m.s (successor m starts after termination of n)
3. ∀ubc(a,b,δ) ∈ C : b.s + b.dmax ≤ a.s + a.dmin + δ
Comparing these deﬁnitions with the original ones shows the reduction of
redundant features for temporally constrained process models leads to signiﬁ-
cantly simpler deﬁnitions and algorithms.
6 Related Work
Time management in business processes and workﬂows has been matter of stud-
ies for the last decades. Overviews on the related works can be found in [4,8,12].
Temporally constrained business processes have been considered in [1,11,17] for
the analysis of their temporal qualities, by the application of diﬀerent techniques
such as network analysis or constraint analysis. These works focus on determin-
ing whether the temporal constraints in a process model can be fulﬁlled and if
deadlines can be met. Here, however, we concentrate on the modeling aspects

--- PAGE 147 ---
Expressiveness of Temporal Constraints for Process Models 131
and in particular we strive for a simpliﬁed modeling language without losing
expressive power for activity durations and temporal constraints.
This work simpliﬁes the representation of temporal constraints expressible
from the workﬂow time patterns identiﬁed in [3,15]. Temporal constraints are
classiﬁed in 10 time patterns, which can refer to any combination of start/end
events of activities. Our proposed transformations give modelers ﬂexibility to
deﬁne temporal constraints on any combination of start/end events (thus in
accordance to the patterns), yet simplifying their representation in the underly-
ing model for easier reasoning, as discussed in Sect.5.
Distinguishing between contingent and non-contingent activities, and assess-
ing temporal qualities in the presence of uncertain durations dates back to works
on temporal reasoning for planning in various research domains such as Artiﬁcial
Intelligence [20,21]. The application of Temporal Constraint Networks [9] for rep-
resenting business processes and reasoning on their temporal qualities has been
studied extensively in recent years [6,8] with several reﬁnements on the notion of
controllability, resulting in more advanced algorithms for its check [2,5,7]. Other
works [10,13] considered diﬀerent formalisms for representing timed workﬂows
and determining correct schedules for execution of activities also in the case of
cross-organizational cooperations.
7 Conclusions
The ambition of this work was to investigate redundancies in patterns for
expressing temporal aspects of process models. We focused on two particular
features of temporal constraints: non-contingent activities, where the controller
can inﬂuence the actual duration of the activity execution within a minimum and
a maximum duration, and references to start events in activities in formulating
upper-bound constraints (max-gaps) between events of the process execution.
We proposed some transformations which transform process models with the
richer set of features to a process model using fewer features, and we were able to
show that we do not lose information, i.e. the original model and the transformed
process model are equivalent.
By deﬁning the notions of process model, schedule and correct schedule using
the reduced set of features we were able to show that these reductions are highly
signiﬁcant. Moreover, we discussed that encodings of process models in tempo-
ral constraint networks can be essentially halved. We therefore conclude that
the strive for less redundancy in models as investigated in this paper is worth-
while and does not only satisfy academic curiosity but also delivers signiﬁcant
improvements for practice.

--- PAGE 148 ---
132 J. Eder et al.
References
1. Bettini, C., Wang, X., Jajodia, S.: Temporal reasoning in workﬂow systems. Dis-
trib. Parallel Databases 11(3), 269–306 (2002)
2. Cairo, M., Rizzi, R.: Dynamic controllability made simple. In: 24th International
Symposium on Temporal Representation and Reasoning (2017)
3. Cheikhrouhou, S., Kallel, S., Guermouche, N., Jmaiel, M.: Toward a time-centric
modeling of business processes in BPMN 2.0. In: Proceedings of International
Conference on Information Integration and Web-based Applications and Services,
p. 154. ACM (2013)
4. Cheikhrouhou, S., Kallel, S., Guermouche, N., Jmaiel, M.: The temporal perspec-
tive in business process modeling: a survey and research challenges. Serv. Oriented
Comput. Appl. 9(1), 75–85 (2015)
5. Combi, C., Hunsberger, L., Posenato, R.: An algorithm for checking the dynamic
controllability of a conditional simple temporal network with uncertainty-revisited.
In: Filipe, J., Fred, A. (eds.) ICAART 2013. CCIS, vol. 449, pp. 314–331. Springer,
Heidelberg (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-44440-5 19
6. Combi, C., Posenato, R.: Controllability in temporal conceptual workﬂow
schemata. In: Dayal, U., Eder, J., Koehler, J., Reijers, H.A. (eds.) BPM 2009.
LNCS, vol. 5701, pp. 64–79. Springer, Heidelberg (2009). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-642-03848-8 6
7. Combi, C., Posenato, R.: Towards temporal controllabilities for workﬂow schemata.
In: 2010 17th International Symposium on Temporal Representation and Reason-
ing (TIME), pp. 129–136. IEEE (2010)
8. Combi, C., Pozzi, G.: Temporal conceptual modelling of workﬂows. In: Song, I.-Y.,
Liddle, S.W., Ling, T.-W., Scheuermann, P. (eds.) ER 2003. LNCS, vol. 2813, pp.
59–76. Springer, Heidelberg (2003). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-39648-2 8
9. Dechter, R., Meiri, I., Pearl, J.: Temporal constraint networks. Artif. Intell.
49(1–3), 61–95 (1991)
10. Eder, J., Gruber, W., Panagos, E.: Temporal modeling of workﬂows with condi-
tional execution paths. In: Ibrahim, M., Küng, J., Revell, N. (eds.) DEXA 2000.
LNCS, vol. 1873, pp. 243–253. Springer, Heidelberg (2000). https://doi.org/10.
1007/3-540-44469-6 23
11. Eder, J., Panagos, E., Rabinovich, M.: Time constraints in workﬂow systems. In:
Jarke, M., Oberweis, A. (eds.) CAiSE 1999. LNCS, vol. 1626, pp. 286–300. Springer,
Heidelberg (1999). https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-48738-7 22
12. Eder, J., Panagos, E., Rabinovich, M.: Workﬂow time management revisited. In:
Bubenko, J., Krogstie, J., Pastor, O., Pernici, B., Rolland, C., Søvberg, A. (eds.)
Seminal Contributions to Information Systems Engineering, pp. 207–213. Springer,
Heidelberg (2013). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-36926-1 16
13. Eder, J., Pichler, H., Tahamtan, A.: Probabilistic time management of choreogra-
phies. In: Ardagna, D., Mecella, M., Yang, J. (eds.) BPM 2008. LNBIP, vol. 17, pp.
443–454. Springer, Heidelberg (2009). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-00328-
8 45
14. Lanz, A., Posenato, R., Combi, C., Reichert, M.: Controlling time-awareness in
modularized processes. In: Schmidt, R., Guédria, W., Bider, I., Guerreiro, S. (eds.)
BPMDS/EMMSAD -2016. LNBIP, vol. 248, pp. 157–172. Springer, Cham (2016).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-39429-9 11
15. Lanz, A., Reichert, M., Weber, B.: Process time patterns: a formal foundation. Inf.
Syst. 57, 38–68 (2016)

--- PAGE 149 ---
Expressiveness of Temporal Constraints for Process Models 133
16. Lanz, A., Weber, B., Reichert, M.: Workﬂow time patterns for process-aware infor-
mation systems. In: Bider, I., et al. (eds.) BPMDS/EMMSAD -2010. LNBIP,
vol. 50, pp. 94–107. Springer, Heidelberg (2010). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
642-13051-9 9
17. Marjanovic, O., Orlowska, M.: On modeling and veriﬁcation of temporal con-
straints in production workﬂows. Knowl. Inf. Syst. 1(2), 157–192 (1999)
18. Oberrauner, A.: Expressiveness of temporal constraints in process models. Master’s
thesis, Alpen-Adria-Universitaet Klagenfurt, Austria (2018)
19. van der Aalst, W.M.P., Ter Hofstede, A.H., Kiepuszewski, B., Barros, A.P.: Work-
ﬂow patterns. Distrib. Parallel Databases 14(1), 5–51 (2003)
20. Vidal, T.: Handling contingency in temporal constraint networks: from consistency
to controllabilities. J. Exp. Theor. Artif. Intell. 11(1), 23–45 (1999)
21. Vidal, T., Ghallab, M.: Dealing with uncertain durations in temporal constraint
networks dedicated to planning. In: Proceedings of the 12th European Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (ECAI 1996), pp. 48–54. PITMAN (1996)

--- PAGE 150 ---
Thoroughly Modern Accounting:
Shifting to a De Re Conceptual Pattern
for Debits and Credits
Chris Partridge1,3(&)
, Mesbah Khan2
, Sergio de Cesare3
,
Frederik Gailly4
, Michael Verdonck4
, and Andrew Mitchell1
1
BORO Solutions Ltd., London, UK
{partridgec,mitchella}@borogroup.co.uk
2
OntoLedgy Ltd., London, UK
khanm@ontoledgy.io
3
University of Westminster, London, UK
s.decesare@westminster.ac.uk
4
Faculty of Economics and Business Administration,
Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium
frederik.gailly@UGent.be, Michael.Verdonck@ugent.be
Abstract. Double entry bookkeeping lies at the core of modern accounting. It
is shaped by a fundamental conceptual pattern; a design decision that was
popularised by Pacioli some 500 years ago and subsequently institutionalised
into accounting practice and systems. Debits and credits are core components of
this conceptual pattern. This paper suggests that a different conceptual pattern,
one that does not have debits and credits as its components, may be more suited
to some modern accounting information systems. It makes the case by looking at
two conceptual design choices that permeate the Pacioli pattern; de se and
directional terms - leading to a de se directional conceptual pattern. It suggests
alternative design choices - de re and non-directional terms, leading to a de re
non-directional conceptual pattern - have some advantages in modern complex,
computer-based, business environments.
Keywords: De se  De re  Directional terms  Debits and credits
Accounting information systems
Miss Dorothy Brown: You’re a modern! Millie Dillmount:
Thoroughly!
Thoroughly Modern Millie (1967)
1 Introduction
Double entry bookkeeping is at the core of modern accounting practice. The system
was devised by the merchants of Venice and popularised by Pacioli in a book printed in
1494. Its basic principles have largely remained intact over the last ﬁve centuries
despite business environments becoming signiﬁcantly more complex and, more
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 134–148, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_20

--- PAGE 151 ---
recently, the emergence of computing technology. This is testimony to the good design
of Pacioli’s conceptual pattern (though cynics may say the accounting community’s
inherent traditionalism also played a part). However, as noted elsewhere (for example
Mattessich [1] and McCarthy [2]) the roots in a manual paper-based system (and a
simpler business environment) may also indicate that these structures are ripe for
change. The question then arises; what kind of change?
This research paper has two goals. Firstly, to provide an analysis of one of the core
conceptual patterns that underlie modern accounting information systems. Put differ-
ently, we look at two conceptual design choices that permeate Pacioli’s approach -
leading to what we call a de se directional conceptual pattern. This pattern emerges from
the decision to manage ﬁnancial information from an owner/proprietor’s perspective
and it permeates the conceptual model. At its heart is the notion of debits and credits. We
reflect upon the pressures that would motivate these choices in Pacioli’s time.
Secondly, we then ask whether this de se directional pattern still makes sense in the
context of modern computing technology and accounting requirements of transnational
corporations. We do this by contrasting it with a different conceptual pattern - what we
call a de re non-directional conceptual pattern. This pattern is an alternative ‘view from
nowhere’ from which particular de se perspectives and their debits and credits can be
generated. We speculate on why this pattern might be better for some modern
accounting requirements.
We start by describing, in Sect. 2, the approach that was followed for identifying
the conceptual pattern and the design choices that underlie them. In Sect. 3, we show
how this conceptual pattern shapes the conceptual model of accounting information
systems. In Sect. 4 we review the issues the pattern gives rise to and then in Sects. 5
and 6 look at the structures that materialise from the alternate choices. Finally, the
paper ends with a conclusion and some future research directions.
2 Background: Two Related Conceptual Patterns
As noted above, while it seems likely, if not obvious, that Pacioli’s approach is ripe for
change, it is far from obvious or easy to work out how it should change. We spotted the
opportunity for change described here in our legacy system re-engineering work [3].
This has involved the mining of ontologies from a number of accounting and ERP
systems. In every case, one aspect of the resulting ontology – a view from nowhere –
has struck us as odd. This was that the mining of the debit and credit transactions
revealed a picture with no debits and credits [4]. More recently, when implementing the
mined ontology, we have noticed that in the implementation we have needed to mark
the owner/proprietor in the system and generate debits and credits (essentially adding
back perspectival details that the original ontology mining removed). Reflection upon
these and some initial research led us to recognise that a well-researched topic in
philosophy – the de se – de re distinction [5] – underlay these two phenomena. We
reported this in [6] which investigated the general topic of de se and de re. However, in
the case of accounting, and speciﬁcally debits and credits, we recognised that de se is
only part of the picture, that there was another philosophical topic in play – directional
attributes [7, 8]. In this paper we give the more detailed picture that takes account of
Thoroughly Modern Accounting 135

--- PAGE 152 ---
both topics. We focus on the speciﬁc case of debits and credits in accounting and two
design choices that have surfaced in our legacy reengineering work.
2.1 Directional Terms
Identity plays a big, often unrecognised, role in formalisation [9]; one particular con-
cern is that different views on identity lead to different conceptual models. The con-
ceptual design choice we are interested in here is the decision to use what we call
directional terms and the temptation to simply reify these as objects.
This topic has ancient roots. It appears in Aristotle [7] where he discusses the road
from Thebes to Athens and contrasts it with the road from Athens to Thebes; where the
ﬁrst is uphill and the second downhill. It seems inconsistent to say that one road is both
uphill and downhill, but equally it seems odd to say there are two roads. More than that,
as shown in Fig. 1, there are perfectly reasonable ways of showing the gradient of the
road without any commitment to uphill and downhill objects.
Wiggins [8] considers this conundrum. He suggests “that either ‘road’ means an
actual feature of the landscape, in which case ‘uphill’ collects a term giving the
direction and there is a simple relational predicate true of that road, or it means ‘journey
by road’, in which case there is no identity.” As Wiggins notes, in the ﬁrst case, the
work that uphill and downhill are doing is not picking out different objects, but
building on a bundling together of the road with a direction - making the neutral ‘road
between Athens and Thebes’ into the directional ‘road from Athens to Thebes’. This
‘directional term’ can then be qualiﬁed as ‘uphill’.
We explain below how much of modern accounting, in particular talk of debits and
credits, uses these kinds of directional terms and so provides an opportunity to
unbundle the term into the underlying objects.
2.2 De Se (And De Re)
Another important conceptual design choice is when and how to use the de se (Latin ‘of
oneself’) [5]. In ordinary language, whenever we use indexicals like ‘me’, ‘myself’ and
‘I’ we are making a de se formalisation choice - where the self plays the role of the
deitic centre (From Greek deixis, lit. ‘display, demonstration, or reference’, meaning
point of reference in contemporary linguistics). Technically a de se statement can be
translated into a neutral one - called de re (Latin ‘of the thing’) - by replacing the
Fig. 1. The road between Athens and Thebes.
136 C. Partridge et al.

--- PAGE 153 ---
indexical with a proper noun - what could be called de-re-ifying. So, John saying ‘I am
left-handed’, can be translated into ‘John is left-handed’; though it would be odd, but
not incorrect, for John to describe himself in the third person. Directional terms and the
de se can overlap, in that de se phrases can provide the direction needed for directional
term. The traditional example is, ‘I am walking uphill’ where the deictic centre pro-
vides the context for the directional term.
In information systems, the de se appears in guises other than these natural lan-
guage indexicals, which can make it difﬁcult to identify. To help us with our analysis of
the underlying formalisation choices, we can draw on an observation from philosophy
and linguistics, (where a good understanding of what differentiates the de se (indexical)
and de re (non-indexical) has been developed). A characteristic of pure (de se)
indexical utterances is that the reference (and truth) of a sentence can shift from use to
use. For instance, if John and Mary both utter the sentence ‘I am left-handed’, the two
utterances refer to different things; namely that (in de re non-indexical terms) ‘Mary is
left-handed’ and ‘John is left-handed’ respectively. And there is no (logical) incon-
sistency in one of the utterances being true and the other false. This does not happen
with non-indexical de re uses. So, for example, the reference (and truth) of the sentence
‘Mary is left-handed’ does not change whoever, wherever and whenever it is uttered -
each utterance has exactly the same content.
2.3 Accounting Information Systems Implications
Accounting information systems often have de se directional reporting requirements.
For example, companies’ major ﬁnancial accounting reports are de se directional; the
balance sheet and proﬁt and loss statements report the balances from the ‘owner’s
perspective’. The simplest prima facie design for this reporting is to store the infor-
mation in de se form and then report it directly (let’s call this ‘de se storage and
reporting’). The alternative design, storing the information in de re form and then
querying the de se information (let’s call this ‘de re storage and de se querying’) seems
to be unnecessary extra work. Furthermore, the de se storage will appear more parsi-
monious than the de re as it has no need to make the deitic centre explicit (though one
could counter-argue that the implicit deitic centre is not transparent).
However, this assumes that only a single de se perspective is required. If multiple
de se reporting over the same de re information is required, then the situation is
different. Firstly, it makes more sense to input the information once (whether in de re or
de se form) and then calculate the required reporting/presentation forms. Given this,
adopting a ‘de se storage and reporting’ approach here would need multiple processing
on input and lead to multiple de se storage silos each with the same information stored
in different de se formats. This will open the door to the data anomalies and corruption
associated with data redundancy. Here a ‘de re storage and de se querying’ strategy
becomes more attractive. The master de re information is stored only once and the de se
queries generated as required. It becomes even more attractive if the de se reporting
requirements are volatile, in the sense of new de se perspectives emerging and old de se
perspectives retiring (for example, companies joining and leaving a group).
Thoroughly Modern Accounting 137

--- PAGE 154 ---
3 De Se and Directional Terms in Accounting
In this section, we look at de se directional conceptual pattern in the double entry
accounting conceptual model.
3.1 Pacioli Introduces Modern Accounting
Fra Luca Bartolomeo de Pacioli is known as the father of modern accounting and
bookkeeping because he was the ﬁrst person to publish a detailed description of
double-entry bookkeeping that is the foundation for modern accounting. He described
this as the method used by Venetian merchants in the ﬁnal chapter (Particularis de
computis et scripturis - About accounts and other writings) of his mathematical text-
book Summa de arithmetica, geometria. Proportioni et proportionalita [10] published in
Venice in 1494. It was published soon after the introduction of moveable type printing,
making it signiﬁcantly more accessible, and this undoubtedly contributed towards its
popularity.
Pacioli’s system starts with an inventory and then has a system of internal controls
containing three books which has a well-deﬁned process to update the records in a
speciﬁc order. Whenever there is a transaction, the system starts with a description of
the complete transaction in the Day Book or Memorandum (from, as we shall discuss
later, the perspective of the owner). From this debit and credit postings for the day are
extracted and recorded in the Journal. Finally, these postings are re-recorded under the
appropriate account in the Ledger [10].
3.2 Pen and Paper – Designing for Presentation
With pen and paper technology, the storage is external (on paper) but the processing is
human. Where the ﬁnal presentation data is viewed many times, it makes sense to have
a system where humans process the data into the ﬁnal presentation format and then
store it (on paper) in that format – then the paper storage can be read directly. This is
rather than store the data in its original format and process it into the presentation
format each time it is required. Pacioli’s design for his process recognizes this. Figure 2
represents the Pacioli process - Pacioli’s ‘Summa Mathematica’ is included in the
ﬁgure, as it acts as a kind of conceptual model for the manual process.
Fig. 2. Pen and paper based accounting process.
138 C. Partridge et al.

--- PAGE 155 ---
This process-once-before-storage approach makes even more sense when one
considers the practical concerns with the errors that could arise in the manual recording
process. Pacioli takes advantage of the process’ algorithmic nature to provide step by
step instructions as well as internal controls to mitigate this. From the very beginning,
he identiﬁes these internal controls as key to successful bookkeeping [10] and describes
a number of them in detail (for example, numbering the pages of the journal to make it
easy to identify when a page has been removed and double underlining the journal side
entry to mark the two entries in the ledger). There is a signiﬁcant amount of algorithmic
manual processing to keep the entire dataset consistent - with checks to ensure the
algorithms were followed correctly.
If the data was not stored on paper in the ﬁnal presentation format, then this
burdensome processing would have to be done multiple times, each time the data was
reported. So the ﬁnal presentation format (which is de se directional) dictates the
structure of the paper storage. As we discuss later, these information management
concerns were formative for the de se directional conceptual pattern in the design of the
system.
3.3 Automation - The Modern Implementation of Pacioli
From our modern perspective, the transcription from Journal to Ledger is just an
automatable sort, where the postings are arranged ﬁrstly by date (in the Journal) and
then by date within account (in the Ledger). And the transcription from Day Book to
Journal as an automatable query over the transaction details. So, to our modern eyes the
process reveals itself as algorithmic and so automatable. One that we can break down
further into a kind of data model for the items being processed - see Fig. 3 - where the
leg is the implicit asset (economic resource) that is being posted against.
One of the advantages of computing over pen and paper technology is that it
enables automated processing inside the computer system rather than manual pro-
cessing by humans – and the cost of repeating a computer process is insigniﬁcant when
compared with the cost of repeating the equivalent manual human process. So there is
Fig. 3. Breakdown of a typical transaction.
Thoroughly Modern Accounting 139

--- PAGE 156 ---
no longer a pressure to store data in the form it will be presented – the computer can
reshape the stored data into the format needed for presentation. This enables infor-
mation architectures where the form of the information that is entered or presented is
different from that which is stored - as shown in Fig. 4, compare this with the
equivalent Fig. 2 for pen and paper technology.
Moresophisticateddataarchitectures,suchastheANSI-SPARC3-layermodel[11]-
divorces the design of the information system from the particular constraints of a
physical implementation technology by introducing a conceptual layer. Each new layer
raises questions about how its information structures should be formalized: whether the
conceptual design choices and corresponding conceptual model developed for flat,
sequential pen and paper technology architectures should carry over to the new tech-
nologies.Later on, welookat howour two selected conceptualdesignchoiceshave been
and should be architected in the conceptual layer.
The obvious opportunities for automation are the manual processes prescribed by
the double entry system and these have been exploited by modern accounting systems.
Typically, users only enter the transaction once, into the computer equivalent of the
Day Book. Then the system algorithmically generates the debit and credit postings and
posts them into the journal and ledger accordingly. The question we explore here
through our investigation of the conceptual patterns in accounting is whether there are
less obvious opportunities for a layered implementation of information architecture yet
to be exploited.
Fig. 4. Accounting information system accounting process
140 C. Partridge et al.

--- PAGE 157 ---
3.4 Examples of De Se Directional Terms
In this section, we make clear through examples that Pacioli’s accounting information
system (and so also modern systems) have consistently made a choice for a de se
directional conceptual pattern based upon a single owner’s perspective. The examples
show how this choice extends from the owner, through transactions to debits and
credits.
Transaction Party - Counterparty Distinction
In Pacioli’s section on day book entries and examples, he writes this description of a
transaction: “Purchased from Phillip Ruffon - white silks at 12 ducats each”. Presum-
ably, Phillip Ruffon would write in his books: “Sold to Fra Luca Pacioli - white silks at
12 ducats each”. This illustrates the de se directional tradition, still used today, of
recording the parties to a transaction; where the owner of the books is the deitic centre
and is assumed to be one party to the transaction, then only the other party, the coun-
terparty needs to be explicitly recorded. Clearly, this is de se directional: one can only be
a counterparty relative to an owner: it would be more accurate to call them owner
counterparties. There are no de re counterparties; in the de re ‘perspective’, transactions
have parties, simpliciter: no party has a priority. This situation is shown in Fig. 5.
The two example descriptions also show how the introduction of a silent owner
with a counterparty has a knock-on effect, in that it naturally leads to the use of owner-
relative terms such as ‘purchase’ and ‘sale’ - which reflect the direction of flow of
goods to the owner. These terms make no sense in the de re ‘perspective’.
Fig. 5. Parties - viewed in de se as party and counterparty.
Thoroughly Modern Accounting 141

--- PAGE 158 ---
Owner of the Books
The owner is clearly a silent partner in the transaction recorded in the day book. But for
this system to work, it needs to be clear who this silent owner is. Pacioli consistently
says that his ‘internal control system’ is for a businessman - this is the silent owner of
all the books. This greatly simpliﬁes identifying the owner, it is the same entity for all
the transactions in the set of books. In Pacioli’s day, the owner’s name might be written
on the cover of the books. In modern systems, it may be recorded in a system con-
ﬁguration ﬁle. However, as we discuss later, this simpliﬁcation comes at a cost - as the
owner has to be a party to all the transactions and they all need to be accounted for from
its perspective.
Directional De Se Debits and Credits
The owner’s de se directional formalization extends to debits and credits. Typically, a
debit from one party’s perspective is a credit from the other party’s perspective. To
return to the original Pacioli example; where he purchased 20 white silks at 12 ducats
each - 240 ducats in total. In the Journal he will credit Cash for this payment to Phillip
Ruffon. In his counterparty’s (Phillip Ruffon) books, this entry would appear in his
journal as a debit to Cash for the receipt from Luca Pacioli. This is slightly clearer in
Pacioli’s original language where he uses the terms ‘to’ and ‘from’ (in Italian ‘per’ and
‘a’) rather than debit and credit.
4 De Se Accounting Issues
As we noted earlier, the Pacioli conceptual pattern assumes a single de se directional
perspective across all the books. So, where a requirement for accounting for the same
transactions across multiple perspectives/parties arises within the books, we would
expect the current system of accounting to begin to show signs of strain with work-
arounds that result in unnecessary complications. Where one party has a number of
other parties as components, the de se requirements are even more convoluted as in
some sense there is a requirement to share books. A common example of this, which
we explore below, is the consolidation required for inter-company accounting. This
requirement was not common in Pacioli’s time, because the kind of company own-
ership structures we have today did not exist then. However, today with large multi-
national ﬁrms with operations around the globe and disparate local legal and tax
obligations, this requirement is common. A similar case occurs in correspondent
banking where effectively banks share accounts (this is explored in [6]). More gen-
erally, where there is a need for a cross-organisational viewpoint (for example, supply
chain management – see [12]) or for interoperability between organisational units the
single de se perspective becomes unwieldy.
Today, global value chains account for 80% of global trade1
. A large proportion of
this is intra-ﬁrm trade (i.e. international flows of goods and services between parent
companies and their afﬁliates or among these afﬁliates). Part of this growth in recent
times is through consolidation of larger multinationals through acquisitions.
1
http://unctad.org/en/pages/PressRelease.aspx?OriginalVersionID=113.
142 C. Partridge et al.

--- PAGE 159 ---
These consolidations result in heterogeneous accounting systems and charts of
accounts being amalgamated using ‘band-aid tactics’ with the result that the data does
not satisfy the requirements of all the primary stakeholders, namely accounting, tax and
treasury [13].
The current standards for inter-company accounting, build on the same de se
foundations and therefore yield some interesting complications. This is because there is
a requirement to take the following perspectives over the transactions:
1. Parent company only de se and directional. This is for accounting for the parent
company as a legal entity that transacts with other legal entities (including its
subsidiaries).
2. Company group including subsidiaries de se. This is for accounting and ﬁnancial
reporting of the group as a single entity (treating all transactions within the group as
internal).
3. Subsidiaries de se. This is for accounting for the subsidiary as an independent legal
entity that transacts with other legal entities (including the parent company and
other subsidiaries of the parent company).
Figure 6 shows the various directions the transactions can flow in this kind of
setting [14].
Therefore, when a downstream transaction is initiated (from parent to subsidiary),
each party records the transaction from its perspective as if it is transacting with a third
party. Later when the parent company accounts have to be consolidated, the parent
company’s books have to view the same transactions as if they were internal and
therefore have a net-zero effect on the group’s assets and liabilities. There is no simple
way to reconcile the individual de se transactions into a single parent de se transaction.
Calculations have to be carried out outside the books to work out the net changes
required to ‘hide’ the internal transaction. All this overhead is there because there is no
single de re, non-directional account of the transaction and each de se account is
incompatible with the other.
Fig. 6. Directions inter-company accounting.
Thoroughly Modern Accounting 143

--- PAGE 160 ---
Worked example: in the case where a parent pays £600 to a subsidiary, the fol-
lowing postings will be made:
– Parent’s books credit £600
– Subsidiary’s books debit £600
– later parent has to post another debit £600 again into its books to net out the
transaction (as if it never happened).
In the above, there is only one movement, but there are three postings, because it is
not possible to record the movement in an agent neutral representation. The above
example is a very simple transaction leg posting, the actual process of elimination is
typically quite intricate, because the transaction’s impact has to be externally calculated
for each affected account of the parent/subsidiary books. These elimination amounts are
then posted into the relevant ledger accounts in order to show either that the ‘trans-
action never happened’ (where all legs of the transaction are within the Parent com-
pany’s owned entity structure) or that the internal changes did not happen but the
external component of the transaction did (where there is a third party involved). This
process does not stop at the initial transaction but needs to be continued every time any
loss or gain needs to be booked. For example, when an asset is sold downstream,
depreciation has to be calculated from the subsidiary’s perspective using the sub-
sidiary’s purchase price. However, from the parent company perspective, because the
transaction ‘never happened’, an adjustment has to be posted in the parent company’s
depreciation account to account for the Parent company’s purchase price.
The current design for managing this intercompany accounting is based on a large
number of off-book calculations that have to be performed to establish the values of
adjustment postings required. This is additional work that is outside of the standard
practices of entity accounting and has to be standardised separately and is implemented
differently in different organisations. The manual nature and complexity of the pro-
cessing introduces risks of mistakes and inconsistencies in the accounting data. It also
becomes very difﬁcult to account for all the regulatory and ﬁnancial requirements
imposed by the tax and treasury departments based on their speciﬁc perspectives over
the ﬁnancial data.
5 Related Research
This review of the conceptual patterns is raising questions about the foundations of
accounting’s information architecture. People have been raising these kinds of questions
for a while. In the 1960s there was an interest in developing axiomatic foundations for
accounting. Mattessich in [15] developed a set theoretical axiomatisation of accounting
where full chart of accounts was structured as entries stored in a matrix. More recently
the REA approach [2] has aimed at rethinking accounting conceptual models, explicitly
suggesting this is driven by the introduction of computing technology. While both these
projects challenge some of the elements of the current traditional architecture, neither
has made any real attempt to shift away from Pacioli’s de se directional formalisation
choices apart from changing names; for example, talking of inflows and outflows rather
than debits and credits. We look at REA’s approach briefly below.
144 C. Partridge et al.

--- PAGE 161 ---
More interestingly, one can see the de se directional approach coming unstuck
when faced with the practical challenges of implementing interoperability and reuse.
We show this happening in the FIX messaging standard2
and Universal Enterprise Data
Models [16] which both drop the de se structure of owner/counterparty for a simple de
re party structure. However, none of these try to unravel the choices inherent in
Pacioli’s debits and credits. So ﬁnally, we briefly outline how this can be done, and
show what a de re version of these would look like.
Accounting Theory - The REA Framework
REA [2] has the goal of modelling accounting entities semantically to support data
integration at the enterprise level - and sees the Pacioli information structures as
irrelevant to this purpose, saying: “The primary contention of this paper is that the
semantic modelling of accounting object systems should not include elements of
double-entry bookkeeping such as debits, credits and accounts. As noted previously by
both Everest and Weber [17] and McCarthy [18], these elements are artefacts associ-
ated with journals and ledgers (that is they are simply mechanisms for manually storing
and transmitting data). As such, they are not essential aspects of an accounting system.”
REA, in our view, correctly recognises that the Pacioli structure as driven by the
manual demands inherent in pen and paper technology and identiﬁes the opportunity
for shifting to a new structure to exploit computing technology. It explicitly discusses
how computing technology enables the ANSI-SPARC separation of views. It fur-
thermore recognises that the economic events happen to economic resources (assets).
However, despite its stated rejection of the Pacioli information structures, it continues
to subscribe to the fundamental de se directional view inherent in its foundations. Prima
facie its talk of ‘inflow’ and ‘outflow’ as well as ‘increments’ and ‘decrements’ are
directional. And further inspection shows that it adopts an owner-counterparty view -
focusing on the view from a single entity. Hruby et al. [19] makes this point (in
Section 1.2.1), where he clariﬁes that “(t)he terms decrement and increment are relative
to the model viewpoint: they depend upon the economic agent which is in the focus of
the model” and in the context of his example, “if we modelled the same process from
the perspective of the Customer, the transfer of the pizza would be an increment (would
be called Purchase) …”. The pattern of the transaction shifting from a sale to a pur-
chase as the perspective changes we described earlier reappears here.
FIX Messages
The Financial Information eXchange protocol is used for real-time exchange of
information between organisations in the international securities transactions and
markets. It provides us with an example of how the practical requirements of inter-
operability lead to a de re view of parties. The protocol includes a <Parties> component
that is used to identify the transacting parties or any other parties that have a role
(broker, clearing ﬁrm, exchange, settlement bank) in the transaction. All parties are
handled in the same format, and they are allowed to have multiple roles in different
transactions. In this complex ecosystem, with a high volume of ﬁnancial instrument
trading, the de re party structure offers a fast, reliable and efﬁcient way for different
2
FIX - www.ﬁxtrading.org.
Thoroughly Modern Accounting 145

--- PAGE 162 ---
organisations to exchange transaction data. It is not clear how this could be done in a
simple de se way as there is no obvious candidate for the owner - any de se solution
would lead to each of the parties having to create data from their individual perspec-
tives, in other words, a multiple de se architecture.
Universal Data Models
Silverston has produced a series of volumes (including [16]) documenting practition-
ers’ experiences in building what he calls a universal data model for all enterprises.
This provides a good insight into data modelling. As with FIX, this clearly uses a de re
party pattern, there is no evidence of a de se directional owner-counterparty pattern.
Indeed, given the overall structure of the model it is difﬁcult to see how a single
privileged owner party could be identiﬁed. FIX and the universal data model examples
show that, at least at the party level, modern computing data architectures are often not
suited to a de se architecture.
6 Outline of a Universal (Pure) De Re System
However, the de se aspect of debits and credits is more intransigent; remaining in both
accounting theory, data modelling practice and implemented systems. We use onto-
logical analysis to help unravel the historical de se choices and reveal the underlying de
re. We do this using the BORO [3] four-dimensional top ontology, which reveals that
assets (economic resources) have stages where they are owned by parties. This is
shown for the cash element of an exchange in the space-time map in Fig. 7.
Fig. 7. 240 ducats state change event space-time map.
146 C. Partridge et al.

--- PAGE 163 ---
For a period, a state of the 240 ducats is owned by Fra Luca Pacioli, then the
subsequent state is owned by Phillip Ruffon. The boundaries of these states mark
changes in ownership. These states and their state boundaries ﬁt into a wider de re
system from which a variety of de se reports, with different owners (deitic centres) can
be generated - illustrated in Fig. 8.
7 Conclusion
We introduced two conceptual design choices and used these to clearly expose how a de
se directional choice permeates the whole of Pacioli’s accounting conceptual model. We
show how this choice stretches from the owner’s books, through owner/counterparty
transactions to de se directional debits and credits. We recognised that Pacioli’s con-
ceptual model was well suited to his contemporary requirements but also marshalled the
arguments for change. Suggesting that the evolution of more complex business struc-
tures and the emergence of computing technology has changed the landscape to such an
extent that there is an opportunity for improvement. We then outlined, using the four-
dimensional BORO foundational ontology, a de re non-directional conceptual pattern to
replace debits and credits and how this would ﬁt into a complete de re non-directional
conceptual model.
Fig. 8. Transaction viewed in de se/directional terms.
Thoroughly Modern Accounting 147

--- PAGE 164 ---
References
1. Mattessich, R.: Two Hundred Years of Accounting Research. Taylor & Francis, London
(2007)
2. McCarthy, W.E.: The REA accounting model: a generalized framework for accounting
systems in a shared data environment. Account. Rev. 57, 554–578 (1982)
3. Partridge, C.: Business Objects: Re-Engineering for Re-Use (2005)
4. Partridge, C.: A new foundation for accounting: steps towards the development of a
reference ontology for accounting. In: Proceedings of the European Conference on
Accounting Information Systems (ECAIS 2003), Seville, Spain (2003)
5. Perry, J.: The problem of the essential indexical. Noûs 13, 3–21 (1979)
6. Partridge, C., de Cesare, S., Mitchell, A., León, A., Gailly, F., Khan, M.: Ontology then
agentology: a ﬁner grained framework for enterprise modelling. In: 6th MODELWARE,
SCITEPRESS-Science and Technology Publications (2018)
7. Aristotle: Aristotle: Physics Books III and IV. Oxford University Press, Oxford (1993)
8. Wiggins, D.: Identity and Spatio-Temporal Continuity. Blackwell, Oxford (1967)
9. Guizzardi, G., Halpin, T.: Ontological foundations for conceptual modeling. Appl. Ontol. 3,
91–110 (2008)
10. Pacioli, L.: Summa de arithmetica, geometria. Proportioni et proportionalita (1494)
11. ANSI/X3/SPARC Study Group on Data Base Management Systems: Interim Report.
ACM SIGMOD Bull. 7 (1975)
12. Laurier, W., Poels, G.: Invariant conditions in value system simulation models. Decis.
Support Syst. 56, 275–287 (2013)
13. Deloitte: Intercompany Accounting and Process Management - Survey Results (2017)
14. Fischer, P.M., Taylor, W.J., Cheng, R.H.: Fundamentals of Advanced Accounting (2007)
15. Solomons, D., Zeff, S.A.: Accounting Research, 1948-1958: Selected Articles on
Accounting History. Garland Pub. (1996)
16. Silverston, L.: The Data Model Resource Book. A Library of Universal Data Models for All
Enterprises, vol. 1. Wiley, Chichester (2011)
17. Everest, G.C., Weber, R.: A relational approach to accounting models. Account. Rev. 52,
340–359 (1977)
18. McCarthy, W.E.: Entity-relationship view of accounting models. Account. Rev. 54, 667–686
(1979)
19. Hruby, P., Kiehn, J., Scheller, C.V.: Model-Driven Design Using Business Patterns.
Springer, New York (2006). https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-30327-2
148 C. Partridge et al.

--- PAGE 165 ---
Evaluation of the Cognitive Effectiveness
of the CORAS Modelling Language
Eloïse Zehnder, Nicolas Mayer(&)
, and Guillaume Gronier
Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology,
5, avenue des Hauts-Fourneaux, 4362 Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg
{eloise.zehnder,nicolas.mayer,
guillaume.gronier}@list.lu
Abstract. Nowadays, Information System (IS) security and Risk Management
(RM) are required for every organization that wishes to survive in this net-
worked and open world. Thus, more and more organizations tend to implement
a security strategy based on an ISSRM (IS security RM) approach. However, the
difﬁculty of dealing efﬁciently with ISSRM is currently growing, because of the
complexity of current IS coming with the increasing number of risks organi-
zations need to face. To use conceptual models to deal with RM issues, espe-
cially in the information security domain, is today an active research topic, and
many modelling languages have been proposed in this way. However, a current
challenge remains the cognitive effectiveness of the visual syntax of these
languages, i.e. the effectiveness to convey information. Security risk managers
are indeed not used to use modelling languages in their daily work, making this
aspect of cognitive effectiveness a must-have for these modelling languages.
Instead of starting deﬁning a new cognitive effective modelling language, our
objective is rather to assess and benchmark existing ones from the literature. The
aim of this paper is thus to assess the cognitive effectiveness of CORAS, a
modelling language focused on ISSRM.
Keywords: Security  Risk management  Visual syntax Physics of notations
1 Introduction
Risk management is today a steering instrument used in many domains, such as, for
example ﬁnance, insurance, environment or security. From a process perspective, risk
management has been standardized for years, at a generic level like in ISO 31000, as
well as in speciﬁc domains such as ISO/IEC 27005 for information security. However,
at the product level (i.e. the result(s) obtained as output of the different steps of the risk
management process), a great variability can be observed, going from tables to detailed
and speciﬁc conceptual models (e.g., in the security domain, attack-trees [1] or
enterprise architecture models [2]). To propose conceptual models to deal with risk
management, especially in the information security domain, is today an active research
topic, and our aim is to contribute to it by improving existing languages.
In this context, this paper ties in a broader project that aims at integrating con-
ceptual models with Information System Security Risk Management (ISSRM) [3]. This
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 149–162, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_21

--- PAGE 166 ---
integration seems to us as a promising approach to deal with issues related to the
complexity of organizations and associated risks, especially the difﬁculty to have a
clear and manageable documentation for ISSRM activities. One of our main concerns
is to take into account the target users’ group of our research results that is information
security risk managers. This target group is not used to use conceptual models in its
daily work, and the associated modelling languages need so to be effective to this target
group to convey information, i.e. to be cognitively effective.
In this frame, we have already assessed the “Risk and Security Overlay” (RSO) of
the ArchiMate language [2], ArchiMate being a standardized modelling language
developed by The Open Group to provide a uniform representation for diagrams that
describe Enterprise Architecture (EA). The conclusion established was that the RSO
can decently not be considered as an appropriate notation from a cognitive effective-
ness point of view and that there is room to propose a notation better on this aspect [4].
CORAS is another well-known modelling language for ISSRM [5]. It is thus a second
candidate we want to evaluate. The research question addressed in this paper is then:
how cognitive effective is the CORAS language to support the users in their ISSRM
activities?
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In the next section, the
background of our work is described: it introduces cognitive effectiveness and the
“Physics of Notation” (PoN), a set of nine principles we use to assess cognitive
effectiveness, and then the CORAS approach itself. Section 3 is about related work.
Section 4 presents the assessment of the cognitive effectiveness of CORAS: the
approach followed and the results obtained. Section 5 is the discussion about the
results. Finally, Sect. 6 concludes about our current work and presents our future work.
2 Background
2.1 Cognitive Effectiveness and the “Physics of Notation”
Conceptual models are now widely used to visually communicate a great deal of
information (about processes, systems, etc.) to users. Despite their interest in the
communication of complex information, conceptual models can, however, give inter-
pretation problems to their users. Indeed, several empirical studies have already shown
that they can be misunderstood [6–9]. To improve the understanding of conceptual
models, one of the most relevant approach comes from the cognitive sciences and is
called ‘cognitive effectiveness’. Cognitive sciences refer to the theories of information
processing, which speciﬁcally include many concepts from cognitive psychology such
as perception, memory (short and long term), attention or information processing.
Thus, conceptual models are understood as an interaction between a user and a visual
representation. In this context, cognitive effectiveness is embodied in the ability of
conceptual models to support appropriate translations between cognitive and visual
models [10].
Cognitive effectiveness in software engineering has been addressed for years [11]
but it became a more active research topic since Moody’s work. In order to evaluate
and obtain a better quality in the design of modelling languages, Moody has established
150 E. Zehnder et al.

--- PAGE 167 ---
nine principles, called the “Physics of Notation” (PoN) [12]. These principles have
already been applied to assess the cognitive effectiveness of many different modelling
languages [13–16] and are used in this paper to assess the one of CORAS. The nine
principles, who will be detailed later, are: semiotic clarity, graphic economy, perceptual
discriminability, visual expressiveness, dual coding, semantic transparency, cognitive
ﬁt, complexity management, and cognitive integration.
2.2 The CORAS Approach
CORAS is an approach for ISSRM consisting basically of a modelling language, a
method and a tool [5]. A particular focus is done in this paper on the modelling
language of CORAS and associated models. The CORAS language is composed ofﬁve
types of (so-called) diagrams. The ﬁrst one is the asset diagram, describing the focus of
the analysis and coming with the context establishment. Then, the threat diagram
supports the risk identiﬁcation and the risk estimation steps. Threat diagram describes
“scenarios which may cause harm to the assets”. An example of threat diagram is
proposed in Fig. 1. Next, risk diagram basically summarizes the risks presented in
threat diagrams. Finally, treatment overview diagram proposes treatments to risks.
The CORAS language also includes three extensions. High-Level CORAS supports
abstraction and comprehensible overviews or large risk models. Dependent CORAS
supports documentation of assumptions and provide tools to separate the target of study
from assumptions. Finally, Legal CORAS supports documentation of legal aspects
(legal risks and legal norms) and their impact.
Fig. 1. Example of a threat diagram, including the Legal CORAS extension
Evaluation of the Cognitive Effectiveness of the CORAS Modelling Language 151

--- PAGE 168 ---
For illustration purpose, Fig. 1 is an example of threat diagram. In this example, a
network outage (non-human threat) may harm the clients’ private information (asset)
by making the server going down (threat scenario) caused by the use of an immature
technology (vulnerability). The GDPR (legal norm) actually puts a legal risk because
citizens shall have access to their data and they shall be able to update them. The fact
that the clients are not able to update their data (unwanted incident) can also occur
because of deliberate or accidental human threats, respectively because a developer
causes a flaw in the application because of lack of competence or because a hacker
exploits a non-updated software to infect a website with a malware.
In this paper, our analysis is on the CORAS language as a whole (i.e. all provided
diagrams) and is based on the reference book entitled: “Model-Driven Risk Analysis:
The CORAS Approach” [5]. It has the advantage of presenting the CORAS modelling
language in a self-contained, up-to-date and detailed manner. We are also aware of the
existence of the more recent ISMS-CORAS method [17] which adds more detailed
steps in the process and more diagrams and symbols related to the implementation of
an Information Security Management System (ISMS). However, we decided to stick at
the core CORAS approach and not to study this context-speciﬁc extension.
3 Related Works
According to a recent study based on a Systematic Literature Review [18], Moody’s
framework and associated principles are one of the most cited and used approach in the
assessment of visual notations. In this review, 70 papers dealing with the application of
the PoN for the development and/or evaluation of a visual notation were identiﬁed,
excluding overlapping versions of already included work. Languages such as UML
[13], i* [14], BPMN 2.0 [15], or ArchiMate [16] (to name just a few) were already
evaluated thanks to the principles of the PoN. The PoN is globally appreciated for his
scientiﬁc support and accuracy compared to other proposals in the same domain.
However, the PoN approach is targeted by some criticisms coming mainly from the
lack of clear guidelines provided for its practical application to assess an existing
language. Operationalisation of the principles have already been attempted [19, 20], but
they remain unsatisfactory because incomplete (they do not include all the principles)
or impractical to use in real cases for some principles according to their authors
themselves [18].
Some other frameworks exist to support visual syntax assessment. The SEQUAL
framework, developed by Krogstie et al. [21], addresses the quality of every aspects of
a modelling language through several qualities. Putting the focus on visual syntax,
SEQUAL is considered as lacking some concrete guidelines to design effective visual
notations, as argued by Genon [22]. Frank addresses the visual notation design in the
context of the Domain-Speciﬁc Modeling Language which represents the concepts and
constraints of a well-deﬁned domain-level knowledge [23]. Regarding the design of
graphical notations, the guidelines provided are built on the author’s own experience
and on the respective literature analysis. However, the approach developed by Frank
aim at being applied during the design phase of the graphical notation. The Cognitive
Dimensions (CDs) of notations is another framework aiming at improving design
152 E. Zehnder et al.

--- PAGE 169 ---
practice by focussing on the usability aspects of artefacts [11]. It provides different
dimensions (from 9 to 13 depending on the users) that can be used during exploratory
design of a modelling language. Guizzardi et al. propose an ontology-based assessment
and design method of domain-speciﬁc visual modelling languages [24]. This method
aims at evaluating, on the one hand, the language ability to support the users in
communicating and reasoning with the produced models and on the other hand, its
truthfulness and appropriateness to the domain which it is supposed to represent.
Kleppe introduces and explains the factors that influence an effective domain speciﬁc
language design and proposes a design strategy for language creation [25]. Once again,
these approaches are developed to be used during design time of a modelling language
and are less suited than the PoN for the evaluation of an existing visual notation.
4 Assessment of the Cognitive Effectiveness of CORAS
4.1 Methodological Approach
Since the PoN principles are today considered as one of the most advanced framework
to evaluate an existing visual modelling language [22], our analysis will be based on
these principles. However, as argued in the previous section, their operationalisation
remains a complex and open issue. What they lack the most is usability, which,
according to ISO 9241-11 can be deﬁned by “the degree to which a product can be
used, by means of identiﬁed users, to achieve deﬁned goals with efﬁciency, effec-
tiveness and satisfaction, in a context of speciﬁed use”. Indeed, Moody’s principles are
neither proposing quantitative benchmarks allowing us to know the limitations of the
syntax to elaborate, nor proper guidelines to use them. Therefore, we will follow
recommendations established thanks to lessons learnt from previous usages of these
principles: try to operationalise the principles in quantitative metrics to objectify the
analysis, whenever it is possible, and apply the PoN with care by providing account-
ability with design rationale of the evaluated language [18, 20].
To do so, we ﬁrst operationalised all the principles into tables to get a better view of
them, gathering their deﬁnition, with the speciﬁc characteristics of each of them (for
example, cognitive integration regroups conceptual and perceptual integration), and
associated metrics established from the deﬁnition of the principle. In parallel, we
gathered every symbol of CORAS in a document and we designed an illustrative
example for every type of diagram included in the language in order to have a concrete
example supporting our evaluation (not included in this paper because of space
constraints).
Aiming simplicity and usability in its format, our evaluation approach is intended to
be used under the guise of the expert or heuristic evaluation. The heuristic evaluation is
“an informal method of usability analysis where a number of evaluators are presented
with an interface design and asked to comment on it” [26]. With this method, end-users
are not involved in the evaluation process, the evaluation being only based on expert
analysis. According to their authors, heuristic evaluation can be improved signiﬁcantly
by involving multiple evaluators. Thus, three evaluators (that are the authors of this
paper) were involved in the review of the CORAS language: one of them is an expert in
Evaluation of the Cognitive Effectiveness of the CORAS Modelling Language 153

--- PAGE 170 ---
security and risk management, the two others are expert in cognitive science. Heuristic
evaluation was performed by each evaluator who inspected the CORAS language
alone. Then, the individual ﬁndings were discussed and aggregated. The next section
summarizes the results obtained.
4.2 Results
Hereafter, we analyse the cognitive effectiveness of the RSO through the nine prin-
ciples elaborated by Moody. We ﬁrst remind a short deﬁnition for each principle,
extracted from the PoN reference article [12]. Then, we report on how CORAS meets
this principle, based on associated metrics.
Principle of Semiotic Clarity. According to the semiotic clarity principle, there
should be a one-to-one correspondence between semantic constructs and graphical
symbols. CORAS is a language composed of 17 different graphical symbols and 20
semantic constructs overall. There is a 1:1 correspondence between semantic constructs
and graphical symbols for almost all constructs. The only exception is for the following
constructs: initiates, leads-to, impacts and harm relations are all represented with the
same arrow as graphical symbol. According to Moody, there is thus an anomaly with
regards to the semiotic clarity principle called symbol overload (when two different
constructs are represented by the same graphical symbol) occurring 6 times (one for
each couple of two different constructs represented by the same graphical symbol). The
other anomalies with regards to semiotic clarity have an occurrence of 0, as reported in
Table 1.
Principle of Perceptual Discriminability. Regarding perceptual discriminability,
different symbols should be clearly distinguishable from each other. Discriminability is
primarily determined by the visual distance between symbols. Visual distance between
symbols occurs when these symbols differ on a sufﬁcient number of visual variables
(e.g., shape, size, colour, position, etc.) For this purpose, we compared the visual
distance between every symbol two-by-two in a grid (not reported here because of
space constraints). CORAS takes proﬁt of three different visual variables in its lan-
guage (colour, texture and shape; see the visual expressiveness principle for additional
Table 1. Anomalies with regards to semiotic clarity.
Anomaly Deﬁnition Occurrence
Symbol
redundancy
Multiple graphical symbols can be used to represent the
same semantic construct
0
Symbol
excess
Graphical symbols do not correspond to any semantic
construct
0
Symbol
overload
Two different constructs are represented by the same
graphical symbol
6
Symbol
deﬁcit
There are semantic constructs that are not represented by any
graphical symbol
0
154 E. Zehnder et al.

--- PAGE 171 ---
information), leading to a visual distance that could be between 0 and 3. As an
example, the differences between the risk and the stakeholder symbols are the shape
(warning sign versus human shape in a suit) and the colour (red and white versus white
and brown). This gives us a visual distance of 2 for this couple. Among a total of 190
couples analysed, the summary of the visual distance between constructs is reported in
Table 2.
We found that symbols are mostly separated by a visual distance of 2 and 6
interactions have a visual distance equal to 0, which are obviously the ones for which
symbol overload has been found for the principle of semiotic clarity.
Principle of Semantic Transparency. Semantic transparency corresponds to the use
of visual representations whose appearances suggest their real meaning without
inducing another and/or false one. In other words, the meaning of a symbol should be
understood by looking at its representation.
Determining when a symbol suggests its meaning (or not) is a quite subjective task
since it can depend on a lot of individual variables such as culture or education. We
thus decided to count the number of symbols (conceptual forms you can link to a
concept, a referent) and the number of signs (non-representational symbol, arbitrarily
assigned with a wholly learned connection to a referent) according to the work of
Zender and Mejía [27]. The limit we try to deﬁne regarding semantic transparency
resides in “what has to be learned or not in order to be understood”.
We found 12 symbols (unwanted incident, asset, indirect asset, threat scenario,
treatment scenario, risk, vulnerability, stakeholder, deliberate human threat, acci-
dental human threat, non-human threat, referring scenario), and 5 signs (legal norm,
border line, initiates, leads-to, impacts and harm relations – having all four the same
symbol, treats relation and because relation). As an example, the legal norm and its ‘§’
sign, according to the authors, does not explicitly refers to a legal symbol. None can
guess the legal norm symbol refers to something at least legal unless it is learned. On
the other hand, the unwanted incident is represented by an “exploding” symbol, which
could be linked to a ﬁre, an explosion, an incident, etc. Therefore it can be classiﬁed as
a symbol.
Principle of Complexity Management. According to Moody, the notation should
include explicit mechanisms for dealing with complexity between the different dia-
grams, basically modularization and/or hierarchy. The goal of complexity management
is to reduce the cognitive overload while reading or creating diagrams. For this prin-
ciple, we assessed the presence or not of modularization and hierarchy. There is
Table 2. Visual distance between the semantic constructs.
Visual distance Occurrence
Visual distance equal to 0 6
Visual distance equal to 1 26
Visual distance equal to 2 125
Visual distance equal to 3 33
Evaluation of the Cognitive Effectiveness of the CORAS Modelling Language 155

--- PAGE 172 ---
actually no way in CORAS to introduce hierarchy, but modularization is admitted by
the High-Level CORAS extension and its referring and referred symbols which allows
to expand events happening in any kind of scenario.
Principle of Cognitive Integration. Explicit mechanisms to support integration of
information from different diagrams should be included. This principle only applies
when multiple diagrams are used to represent a system (this is the case for CORAS)
and is closely related to the principle of complexity management, when modularity is
used. However, it can still apply if modularity is not used in order to integrate diagrams
of different types. We assessed the principle of cognitive integration through the
presence or absence of related mechanisms (see Table 3). Concerning perceptual
integration (perceptual cues to simplify navigation and transitions between diagrams),
CORAS includes no identiﬁcation (labelling of diagrams), no navigational cues, and no
navigational map. The text linked to the symbols is not considered here as a label but
more as a description (for example, the text in a threat scenario describes the scenario
itself, not the symbol that is a threat scenario). There are also no indication or rules
about the level numbering. Regarding conceptual integration (mechanisms to help the
reader assemble information from separate diagrams into a coherent mental represen-
tation of the system), we can ﬁnd as ‘summary diagram’ the treatment overview
diagram, but it is only focused on risk treatment aspects. Contextualization is con-
sidered absent from the CORAS language since we have not identiﬁed any, through
symbols or diagrams mechanisms.
Principle of Visual Expressiveness. The full range and capacities of visual variables
should be used. Visual variables are shape, size, colour, brightness, orientation, and
texture for retinal variables, and horizontal and vertical position for planar variables. It
is worth to note that perceptual discriminability and visual expressiveness are very
Table 3. Mechanisms to simplify navigation and transitions between diagrams.
Perceptual
integration
Deﬁnition Presence/Absence
Identiﬁcation Labelling of diagrams Absence
Level numbering Orientation information Absence
Navigational
cues
Sign-posting Absence
Navigational
map
To show all diagrams and the navigation paths
between them
Absence
Conceptual
integration
Deﬁnition Presence/Absence
Summary
diagram
Provides a view of the system as a whole Presence
Contextualization The part of a system of current interest is
displayed in the context of the system as a whole
Absence
156 E. Zehnder et al.

--- PAGE 173 ---
close to each other but however different. The ﬁrst aims at measuring the visual
variation between constructs in pairs, and the second aims at measuring the visual
variation across the entire visual vocabulary. Among the 17 graphical symbols, 9
different shapes (human shape, flag, warning triangle, oval shape, money bag, explo-
sion, padlock symbol, arrowhead link, and square) were identiﬁed. Two different
textures (full lines and ﬁne strokes) and seven different colours (white, black, red,
brown, yellow, green, light blue) are used. However, no kind of orientation are sug-
gested. Furthermore, we could not ﬁnd any semantic meaning for the vertical or hor-
izontal position. As a conclusion, across the whole visual vocabulary, we identiﬁed 3
visual variables, as depicted in Table 4.
Principle of Dual Coding. Dual coding relates to the use of text to complement
graphics. In the CORAS language, text is present to describe what a symbol may
represent, like a precision (describing a law or an article), but it doesn’t refer to the
associated construct (legal norm). The symbols and the notation of CORAS are purely
graphic. Therefore, CORAS is not allowing dual coding.
Principle of Graphic Economy. The number of different graphical symbols should be
cognitively manageable. The graphic complexity is deﬁned by the number of different
graphical conventions used in a notation (i.e. number of legend entries). CORAS is
composed of 17 different graphical symbols, but not all of them are used in every
diagram. The reference book of CORAS [5] clearly states what are the elements that are
used in the ﬁve different diagrams. For example, an asset diagram can contain only
stakeholders, (direct or indirect) assets, and harm relations. The maximum number of
legend entries is thus 4 for asset diagram. We used this notion of maximum since the
number of legend entries can differ from one model to another: some constructs
allowed to be used in a given diagram may not be used in a speciﬁc instance of this
Table 4. Visual variables and associated variations.
Visual
variable
Total of visual
variations
Variations
Shape 9 Human shape, flag, warning triangle, oval shape, bag,
explosion, padlock symbol, arrowhead link, square (high
level CORAS gates)
Texture 2 Full lines, ﬁne strokes
Brightness –
Size –
Colour 7 White, Black, red, brown, yellow, green (treatment), light
blue (legal norm)
Orientation –
Horizontal
position
–
Vertical
position
–
Evaluation of the Cognitive Effectiveness of the CORAS Modelling Language 157

--- PAGE 174 ---
kind of diagram, reducing thus the number of legend entries in this case. For example,
in a threat diagram, identiﬁed threats can be only human, when no non-human threat
have been identiﬁed. Moreover, we can include CORAS extensions (High-Level
CORAS, Dependent CORAS, Legal CORAS) and their symbols in the different dia-
grams, increasing the maximum number of legend entries. The graphic economy scores
for the ﬁve different types of diagrams in CORAS are depicted in Table 5.
Principle of Cognitive Fit. For a satisfying cognitive ﬁt, a visual language is supposed
to make a good use of different visual dialects for different tasks and audience. The aim
is to come up with a good ability to communicate through peers for the language and to
be usable for different situations. CORAS proposes one kind of dialect, with ﬁve types
of diagrams, for more than one type of audience (are cited: analysis leader, analysis
secretary, representatives of the customer with decisions makers, technical expertise
and users) and eight different tasks to complete a risk assessment (see Table 6).
5 Discussion
As already argued earlier in this paper, although the PoN is one of the most elaborated
approach to evaluate cognitive effectiveness of a modelling language, it is difﬁcult, if
not impossible, to establish clear-cut conclusions with this framework. Indeed, because
of the lack of reference scales or explicit outcome to achieve associated to the prin-
ciples of the PoN, it is not possible to ﬁrmly claim a language is considered as
Table 5. Graphic economy scores
Types of diagrams Max number of legend entries
Asset diagram 4
Threat diagram 9
Risk diagram 5
Treatment diagram 12
Treatment overview diagram 7
High-level CORAS +1
Dependent CORAS +1
Legal CORAS +2
Table 6. Cognitive ﬁt characteristics.
Cognitive ﬁt elements Occurrences
Number of dialects for this language 1
Number of different audiences 1+
Number of different tasks admitted 8
Other 5 types of diagrams
158 E. Zehnder et al.

--- PAGE 175 ---
satisfactory (or not). However, the conclusions we draw from the results obtained after
the evaluation of the cognitive effectiveness of CORAS are the following:
• The notation of CORAS seems not very difﬁcult to apprehend by security risk
managers as a larger number of symbols compared to signs are used, making the
notation pretty transparent and, therefore, understandable. The semiotic clarity
principle is largely fulﬁlled, as only four constructs are represented with the same
graphical symbol, this aspect constituting the sole anomaly with regards to semiotic
clarity. Furthermore, perceptual discriminability of the language is globally
allowing users to visually differentiate and compare symbols, the visual distance
between the different constructs of the language being 2 or more in more than 80%
of the cases. The lack of dual coding and the use of additional visual variables (e.g.,
spatial position or size of constructs) are however ways for improvement;
• The use of the language to support a whole security risk assessment would suffer
from the low support proposed by CORAS for cognitive integration, despite the
presence of the High-level CORAS extension as complexity management mecha-
nism. Considering the complexity of current IS associated to the large number of
risks to manage (usually more than hundred based on our experience), it is clearly
difﬁcult to consider that CORAS would be efﬁcient at this level;
• Regarding the graphic economy principle, CORAS seems cognitively manageable
for most diagrams, that means individual models produced are usually manageable
by our short-term memory. Indeed, Miller came up with the fact that our short-term
memory can manage seven, plus or minus, two items [28]. As depicted in Table 5,
asset diagram, threat diagram, risk diagram and treatment overview diagram have
plus or minus seven legend entries in the general case (this result may however be
modiﬁed when some allowed legend entries are not introduced or when some
extensions are used). Nevertheless, memory span can differ depending on the
hierarchical organisation of these items in chunks. Therefore, we cannot really draw
a line here on what we consider as cognitively manageable or not. An experience on
short-term memory management of visual items and chunk strategy would be
necessary in order to put clearer limits in an appropriate context;
• The fact that there is actually only one kind of dialect (cognitive ﬁt) could represent
some sort of challenge for the various audiences addressed. Security risk managers
are the target group of CORAS model designers, but CORAS model users in
general are broader, ranging from security experts to people generally weakly
skilled and aware on security aspects such as the top management of a company.
During our evaluation, we identiﬁed two main threats to validity of the results
obtained. The ﬁrst one is that the analysis performed remains subjective, because
performed (only) by three evaluators who are the authors of this article. To reduce the
biases coming from this aspect, we used as much as possible quantitative and veriﬁable
metrics during our analysis. However, it is clear to us that most of the principles would
beneﬁt from an approach based on users, who would be involved in the evaluation of
the language. This “user centric approach” could be performed by semi-structured
interviews, focus groups composed of actual users, and, more speciﬁcally, user testing,
where users are invited to do tasks, while their behaviours are observed to identify
flaws of the language. The problems found with user testing are true problems in the
Evaluation of the Cognitive Effectiveness of the CORAS Modelling Language 159

--- PAGE 176 ---
sense that at least one user encountered each identiﬁed problem [29]. In contrast, the
problems found with heuristic evaluation, as we made in this study, are potential
problems: the evaluators suspect that something may be a problem to users.
A second threat to validity is that the discussion and conclusions are not based on
some ‘reference cognitive effectiveness scale’ to which we could compare our quan-
titative results. Several quantitative analysis of modelling languages could lead us to
establish such a calibration scale in order to better compare languages between them
and get a benchmark of them for speciﬁc applications/contexts.
6 Conclusion
In this paper, we evaluated the cognitive effectiveness of the modelling language of
CORAS, an approach for ISSRM. As evaluation framework, we used the PoN, a
comprehensive set of principles based on a synthesis of theories from, e.g., the psy-
chology and cognitive science ﬁelds, that can be used in order to analyse the cognitive
effectiveness of existing visual notations, or aid the design of new ones. The need for
such an evaluation comes from some drawbacks we observed in traditional ISSRM
methods, especially the difﬁculty to have a clear and manageable documentation for
ISSRM activities. Our insight is to introduce conceptual models as support of ISSRM
activities and, in this context, the cognitive effectiveness of the produced models is
considered as a must-have.
Based on the conclusion drawn during the evaluation performed, CORAS seems
not very difﬁcult to apprehend by security risk managers and individual models should
generally be manageable by users. The main weaknesses identiﬁed are the difﬁculty to
support a whole security risk assessment due to the weak inclusion of cognitive inte-
gration and complexity management mechanisms, and the absence of consideration of
the different audiences that can be involved in a risk assessment. Compared to the RSO,
the other ISSRM language we evaluated thanks to the PoN [4], CORAS can be con-
sidered from a general point of view as more cognitive effective, mainly because of a
broader use of iconic shapes, a better semiotic transparency and a better perceptual
discriminability.
Regarding future work, to complete the heuristic evaluation, we want to adopt a
User Centred Design (UCD) approach, in order to take into account the capabilities of
actual users, as well as their skills and cognitive limitations. To do that, we plan to
apply some methods, like interviews and personas, which establish user needs and
speciﬁcations. We also plan to use the experience map method, allowing us to draw and
understand the walkthrough of the security risks managers when they assess the risks of
an organisation. UCD should allow us to suggest recommendations and improvements
aligned with actual needs of users, and to make decisions on the necessary trade-offs
about our visual syntax, taking care of a speciﬁc context.
Acknowledgments. Supported by the National Research Fund, Luxembourg, and ﬁnanced by
the ENTRI project (C14/IS/8329158).
160 E. Zehnder et al.

--- PAGE 177 ---
References
1. Kordy, B., Mauw, S., Radomirović, S., Schweitzer, P.: Foundations of attack–defense trees.
In: Degano, P., Etalle, S., Guttman, J. (eds.) FAST 2010. LNCS, vol. 6561, pp. 80–95.
Springer, Heidelberg (2011). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-19751-2_6
2. Band, I., Engelsman, W., Feltus, C., Paredes, S.G., Hietala, J., Jonkers, H., Massart, S.:
Modeling Enterprise Risk Management and Security with the ArchiMate® Language. The
Open Group (2015)
3. Mayer, N., Grandry, E., Feltus, C., Goettelmann, E.: Towards the ENTRI framework:
security risk management enhanced by the use of enterprise architectures. In: Persson, A.,
Stirna, J. (eds.) CAiSE 2015. LNBIP, vol. 215, pp. 459–469. Springer, Cham (2015). https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-19243-7_42
4. Mayer, N., Feltus, C.: Evaluation of the risk and security overlay of archimate to model
information system security risks. In: IEEE 21st International Enterprise Distributed Object
Computing Conference Workshops (EDOCW), pp. 106–116. IEEE (2017)
5. Lund, M.S., Solhaug, B., Stolen, K.: Model-Driven Risk Analysis: The CORAS Approach.
Springer, Heidelberg (2010). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-12323-8
6. Hitchman, S.: Practitioner perceptions on the use of some semantic concepts in the entity–
relationship model. Eur. J. Inf. Syst. 4, 31–40 (1995)
7. Hitchman, S.: The details of conceptual modelling notations are important - a comparison of
relationship normative language. Commun. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 9, 167–179 (2002)
8. Nordbotten, J.C., Crosby, M.E.: The effect of graphic style on data model interpretation. Inf.
Syst. J. 9, 139–155 (2001)
9. Shanks, G.: The challenges of strategic data planning in practice: an interpretive case study.
J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 6, 69–90 (1997)
10. Figl, K., Derntl, M., Rodriguez, M.C., Botturi, L.: Cognitive effectiveness of visual
instructional design languages. J. Vis. Lang. Comput. 21, 359–373 (2010)
11. Green, T.R.G., Petre, M.: Usability analysis of visual programming environments: a
‘Cognitive Dimensions’ framework. J. Vis. Lang. Comput. 7, 131–174 (1996)
12. Moody, D.: The “Physics” of notations: toward a scientiﬁc basis for constructing visual
notations in software engineering. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. 35, 756–779 (2009)
13. Moody, D., van Hillegersberg, J.: Evaluating the visual syntax of UML: an analysis of the
cognitive effectiveness of the UML family of diagrams. In: Gašević, D., Lämmel, R., Van
Wyk, E. (eds.) SLE 2008. LNCS, vol. 5452, pp. 16–34. Springer, Heidelberg (2009). https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-00434-6_3
14. Moody, D.L., Heymans, P., Matulevičius, R.: Visual syntax does matter: improving the
cognitive effectiveness of the i* visual notation. Requir. Eng. 15, 141–175 (2010)
15. Genon, N., Heymans, P., Amyot, D.: Analysing the cognitive effectiveness of the BPMN
2.0 visual notation. In: Malloy, B., Staab, S., van den Brand, M. (eds.) SLE 2010. LNCS,
vol. 6563, pp. 377–396. Springer, Heidelberg (2011). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-
19440-5_25
16. Moody, D.L.: Review of ArchiMate: The Road to International Standardisation. ArchiMate
Foundation and BiZZDesign B.V. (2007)
17. Beckers, K., Heisel, M., Solhaug, B., Stølen, K.: ISMS-CORAS: a structured method for
establishing an ISO 27001 compliant information security management system. In: Heisel,
M., Joosen, W., Lopez, J., Martinelli, F. (eds.) Engineering Secure Future Internet Services
and Systems. LNCS, vol. 8431, pp. 315–344. Springer, Cham (2014). https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-319-07452-8_13
Evaluation of the Cognitive Effectiveness of the CORAS Modelling Language 161

--- PAGE 178 ---
18. van der Linden, D., Hadar, I.: A systematic literature review of applications of the physics of
notation. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. PP, 1 (2018)
19. Störrle, H., Fish, A.: Towards an operationalization of the “Physics of Notations” for the
analysis of visual languages. In: Moreira, A., Schätz, B., Gray, J., Vallecillo, A., Clarke,
P. (eds.) MODELS 2013. LNCS, vol. 8107, pp. 104–120. Springer, Heidelberg (2013).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-41533-3_7
20. van der Linden, D., Zamansky, A., Hadar, I.: How cognitively effective is a visual notation?
On the inherent difﬁculty of operationalizing the physics of notations. In: Schmidt, R.,
Guédria, W., Bider, I., Guerreiro, S. (eds.) BPMDS/EMMSAD -2016. LNBIP, vol. 248,
pp. 448–462. Springer, Cham (2016). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-39429-9_28
21. Krogstie, J.: Using a semiotic framework to evaluate UML for the development of models of
high quality. In: Uniﬁed Modeling Language: Systems Analysis, Design and Development
Issues, pp. 89–106. IGI Global (2001)
22. Genon, N.: Unlocking Diagram Understanding: Empowering End-Users for Semantically
Transparent Visual Symbols (2016)
23. Frank, U.: Domain-speciﬁc modeling languages: requirements analysis and design
guidelines. In: Reinhartz-Berger, I., Sturm, A., Clark, T., Cohen, S., Bettin, J. (eds.)
Domain Engineering, pp. 133–157. Springer, Heidelberg (2013). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-642-36654-3_6
24. Guizzardi, G., Pires, L.F., van Sinderen, M.: Ontology-based evaluation and design of
domain-speciﬁc visual modeling languages. In: Nilsson, A.G., Gustas, R., Wojtkowski, W.,
Wojtkowski, W.G., Wrycza, S., Zupančič, J. (eds.) Advances in Information Systems
Development, pp. 217–228. Springer, Boston (2006). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-
36402-5_19
25. Kleppe, A.: Software Language Engineering: Creating Domain-Speciﬁc Languages Using
Metamodels. Addison-Wesley Professional (2008)
26. Nielsen, J., Molich, R.: Heuristic evaluation of user interfaces. In: Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 249–256. ACM, New
York (1990)
27. Zender, M., Mejía, G.M.: Improving icon design: through focus on the role of individual
symbols in the construction of meaning. Vis. Lang. 47, 66–89 (2013)
28. Miller, G.A.: The magical number seven, plus or minus 2: some limits on our capacity for
processing information. Psychol. Rev. 63, 81–97 (1956)
29. Lauesen, S., Pave Musgrove, M.: Heuristic evaluation of user interfaces versus usability
testing. In: User Interface Design - A Software Engineering Perspective, pp. 443–463 (2005)
162 E. Zehnder et al.

--- PAGE 179 ---
Symposium on Conceptual Modeling
Education (SCME) 2018

--- PAGE 180 ---
Preface to SCME 2018
6th Symposium on Conceptual Modeling Education
(SCME 2018) at the 37th International Conference
on Conceptual Modeling (ER 2018)
Xi’an, China
October 22–25, 2018
Organized by
Isabelle Comyn-Wattiau and Hui Ma
The 6th Symposium on Conceptual Modeling Education (SCME 2018) is held in
conjunction with the 37th International Conference on Conceptual Modeling (ER
2018), in Xi'an (China). SCME aims at providing a forum for discussing education and
teaching concepts conceptual modeling. It is an opportunity to exchange on the reasons
why conceptual modeling must be taught, the context in which it may take place, and
the “what” and the “how” of teaching conceptual modeling.
We would like to thank all of the authors who submitted papers to SCME 2018 for
their efforts in promoting concepts and methods for teaching conceptual modeling and
sharing their experience. Each paper was carefully reviewed by at least three members
of the program committee. We thank all the program committee members for their
constructive and timely reviews of the papers, meeting tight deadlines. Finally, we are
grateful to the ER 2018 Conference, Program and Workshop Chairs, for their help in
organizing this Symposium.
We hope that the interesting presentations of SCME 2018 will contribute to the
efﬁciency and efﬁcacy of the reader’s teaching of conceptual modeling and will
motivate future editions of the SCME. The ﬁrst paper entitled Teaching physical
database design describes an active learning approach experimenting how students can
better acquire the main skills of database design, allowing them to choose between
different physical design alternatives in the context of relational databases. The second
paper entitled The Simple Enterprise Architecture Framework: Giving Alignment to IT
Decisions presents a methodological framework facilitating the deﬁnition of enterprise
architectures, aligned with IT decisions and organizational needs. Its experimentation
for teaching enterprise architecture is described.
We hope that much fruitful conversation and exchange will occur during the ses-
sion, and so, we express special appreciation to everyone who will participate in the
workshop.
October 2018 Isabelle Comyn-Wattiau
Hui Ma
Program Co-chairs

--- PAGE 181 ---
Teaching Physical Database Design
Karen C. Davis(&)
Computer Science and Software Engineering Department, Miami University,
Oxford, OH 45056, USA
karen.davis@miamioh.edu
Abstract. Database design is traditionally taught as a process where require-
ments are captured in a conceptual model, then forward engineered into a logical
model, followed by implementation in a physical model. Conceptual models are
intended to be abstract and platform-independent, thus expressing aspects of the
application being modeled without narrowing the design choices prematurely.
The early stages of the process are more established in pedagogy, while the last
stage, physical design, seems largely unexplored in the computing education
literature. Moreover, if the choice for the logical model is relational, there are
several possible implementation models; the design space widens again after the
phase of transforming a conceptual model into a logical model. This paper
explores teaching students about the design space for physical modeling. The
contents of learning modules on physical design are presented, including scaf-
folding of technical content in an abstract (conceptual) manner, followed by
connection to real-world analogues, culminating in a project that requires
application of conceptual knowledge to explore the impact of physical design
alternatives. The achievement of learning outcomes with and without the ﬁnal
project is assessed for courses taught in two consecutive academic terms. Future
areas of research are discussed, such as expanding and reﬁning the physical
design space, the student preparation, and the types of impact investigated.
Keywords: Teaching database design  Physical design  Index selection
Cost models
1 Introduction
The ACM/IEEE Joint Task Force on Computing Curricula (2013) deﬁnes knowledge
areas for computer science undergraduate education. The area that encompasses con-
ceptual modeling and database design is Information Management. The Information
Management area includes topics such as data modeling and abstraction, physical data
models, and selecting appropriate techniques that address design concerns. The
learning outcomes associated with the topics include:
• identifying appropriate indexes for a given relational schema and query set,
• estimating the time to retrieve information with and without indexes,
• working with primary, secondary, and clustering indexes, including B+trees, and
• determining how physical database design affects transaction efﬁciency.
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 165–175, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_22

--- PAGE 182 ---
While the ACM/IEEE curriculum guidelines consider all of these topics to be
elective subjects for computer science students, other recent task forces have consid-
ered data management as a critical component in the study of data science.
Widespread interest in developing and enhancing undergraduate data science
education is evidenced by the interim report Envisioning the Data Science Discipline:
The Undergraduate Perspective (2017) by the US National Academies of Science,
Engineering, and Medicine. The National Academies report states that “the need to
manage, analyze, and extract knowledge from data is pervasive across industry, gov-
ernment, and academia.” The report acknowledges that data science is a hybrid area of
study, drawing on diverse ﬁelds including statistics and computer science. Their list of
critical curricular topics includes principles of effective data management, techniques
for data description and curation, and data modeling approaches, among many other
skills and areas necessary for students to achieve competency in data science.
The US National Science Foundation funded a study entitled Realizing the
Potential of Data Science (2016) that deﬁnes data science as “processes and systems
that enable the extraction of knowledge and insights from data in various forms, either
structured or unstructured.” In their lifecycle view of data science, data management
permeates all phases: acquisition, cleaning, using/reusing, publishing, and preserving/
destroying data.
I believe the interest in studying database design will continue to increase as a result
of the popularity of data science; particularly relevant is how to store and retrieve data
effectively. I also contend that what we term physical modeling in database education is
sufﬁciently abstract to be considered a kind of conceptual modeling (but not in the
traditional use of the term as applied to a database design process). To keep the phases
of database design distinct, in this paper I will refer to the conceptual part of physical
modeling as abstract modeling.
The options for physical storage and retrieval of data have proliferated recently
with the advent of NoSQL systems. The question about which logical/physical model
to use for data management is a pressing issue for many projects and organizations, and
sometimes the answer is still the relational model; however, even for the relational
model there are numerous possibilities for physical designs that impact performance. In
a recent conversation with a colleague who was using MySQL for a large research data
set, he said that it took 2.5 h to load his data using the MySQL backend InnoDB; he
switched to an older backend system, MyISAM, and it took 5 min. I was intrigued and
I wanted to investigate the reason why with my database class. They were using
MySQL for their database implementation project. We were concurrently studying
physical storage design, including abstract models of the structure and performance of
different kinds of indexes. The students had some experience with the Google Cloud
Platform and I was also intending to use Google’s Big Query in an assignment. I de-
vised a new assignment to apply what they were learning in class to a scenario based on
real-world systems. I hoped relating the abstract physical modeling to actual systems
would help motivate them to learn the topic and that there would be a corresponding
increase in their achievement of course learning outcomes.
This paper focuses on an assignment addressing the impact of physical design
choices that reflect real-world relational systems. The abstract models for physical
design that are studied are: a multi-level primary index, a B+tree index, and a column
166 K. C. Davis

--- PAGE 183 ---
store with data distribution and parallel query execution. These correspond to the real-
world implementations of MySQL’s MyISAM, MySQL’s InnoDB, and Google’s Big
Query.
Section 2 reviews physical design topics covered in selected database textbooks and
research about teaching physical design from the computer science educational litera-
ture. Section 3 outlines an aspirational educational pedagogy that is partly implemented
in the learning activities described in Sect. 4. Section 5 examines results of student
learning in the same database course offered in two academic terms. Section 6 discusses
lessons learned and directions for future enhancements and investigation.
2 Related Work on Teaching Physical Design
Table 1 gives an overview of typical coverage of physical design topics in some well-
known general database textbooks. For convenience, the numbered citations are [1]
Connolly and Begg (2009), [2] Elmasri and Navathe (2016), [3] Garcia-Molina et al.
(2000), [4] Ramakrishnan and Gehrke (2000), and [5] Silberschatz et al. (1997).
Connolly and Begg (2009) focus on database design and offer the only textbook to
include a discussion of forward engineering a logical schema design to a physical
schema design in SQL DDL; they do not include details of index implementation. Both
Ramakrishnan and Gehrke (2000) and Garcia-Molina et al. (2000) include extensive
coverage of the physical database design space, query optimization, and performance
tuning. For database textbooks that cover physical design, it is standard practice to
include the indexes that are utilized in the assignment described in Sect. 4. Only one of
the textbooks surveyed includes a discussion of columnar storage on query perfor-
mance (note that this may be due to older editions of the other books used because of
their ready availability to the author.) Table 1 is included here to illustrate that the
focus of the lesson discussed in Sect. 4 is typical for introductory database courses; it is
not intended as an evaluation of textbooks.
There are research papers discussing teaching of database design, but digital
searches of the ACM, IEEE, and Google Scholar databases did not identify any rele-
vant papers about teaching physical design. A manual search through the table of
contents of the ACM Transactions on Computing Education journal and the Journal on
Information Systems Education for the last 10 years did not identify any related lit-
erature. A manual search of ten years of the ACM SIGCSE Technical Symposium on
Computer Science Education proceedings contents yielded papers describing:
• an undergraduate database course where students develop a database management
system, including implementing B-trees (Sotomayor and Shaw 2016), and
• an undergraduate database course where students investigate database internals that
mostly focuses on transactions processing (Sciore 2007).
These two papers are the closest match to teaching of physical design concepts and
neither addresses physical database design; they are more targeted toward the devel-
opment of systems rather than design. To the best of my knowledge, there is no other
educational research investigating the teaching of physical database design.
Teaching Physical Database Design 167

--- PAGE 184 ---
3 Active Learning Pedagogy
The merits of active learning (as opposed to passive listening to a lecture) are well-
documented. A meta-study by Freeman et al. (2014) examined 225 STEM education
research efforts and came to the conclusion that the evidence for impact on student
learning is overwhelmingly positive for active learning techniques. One of the best
models I have encountered, supported by research and practice, is given in the recent
book Flipped Learning by Talbert (2017). Instructors do not have to commit to a fully
flipped model to use active learning, but the flipped model can provide good student
outcomes and it frees up time to do more active learning.
Two important ideas for the flipped model are the individual space and the group
space. The individual space is where a student learns on their own, which ideally
prepares a student to engage more fully in the group space activities by ﬁrst encoun-
tering and becoming familiar with simpler learning outcomes. The instructor should
provide guided practice resources and exercises for the individual space.
In the group space, usually in the classroom, the instructor can focus on more
complex learning outcomes. The time and activities in the classroom can be broken
down into several phases: (1) opening minutes: connecting with pre-class preparation,
keeping students accountable for the preparation, and clarifying misconceptions,
(2) middle of class: conducting the group activity, and (3) the closing minutes:
debrieﬁng the activity and reflection on issues and learning.
The post-group activity can be a continuation or extension of the in-class activity.
The reader is referred to Talbert’s book (2017) for an extensive discussion of the
history and pedagogy of flipped learning as well as detailed instructions about how to
design lessons and troubleshoot common problems. The next section describes a partial
application of the model, with particular emphasis on a new post-group space exercise.
Table 1. Physical design topics in database textbooks
Topic [1] [2] [3] [4] [5]
File structures • • • • •
External hashing – • • • •
Indexes: primary – • • • •
Clustered – • • • •
Secondary unique – • • • •
Secondary non-unique – • • • •
B+tree (or variant) – • • • •
Multi-level indexes – • • • •
Column storage model – • – – –
Index selection (cost-model based) – • • • –
• indicates coverage; - indicates no coverage
168 K. C. Davis

--- PAGE 185 ---
4 Active Learning Applied to Physical Database Design
The introductory database course described and studied here is a ﬁrst course taken by
undergraduate computer science and software engineering students, students pursuing a
minor in either of those two disciplines, or students pursuing an analytics co-major
offered jointly by Statistics and Information Systems and Analytics departments. The
only prerequisite for the course is a data structures course. The course was offered as a
blended course rather than a fully flipped course (a combination of mini-lectures and
in-class active learning group exercises.)
4.1 Individual Space: Student Preparation
Ideally in the flipped model, ﬁrst exposure to the material comes through individual
preparation using a guided practice established by the instructor. In the blended model,
the ﬁrst exposure may be through a mini-lecture in class, although resources are pro-
vided in advance. If students are not accountable in any way for preparation, it is likely
that they will not prepare. In the case of the course under discussion here, the resources
posted in advance on the course learning management system are lecture slides and
textbook readings. Students were occasionally required to complete online quizzes
prior to class, but this was not consistently assigned. An example of the learning
outcomes and resources posted in advance in the course learning management system
is given in Fig. 1. This learning module is one of two related to physical design.
Additional learning outcomes for the other physical design learning module are
summarized here:
1. compute performance characteristics (size of indexes and number of accesses) for a
secondary index with unique values.
2. sketch a secondary index with a unique index key for sample data ﬁles.
3. compute performance characteristics (size of index and number of accesses) for a B
+tree.
4. search and insert into a B+tree.
5. discuss advantages and disadvantages of all indexes discussed in the course.
4.2 Group Space: Active Learning Classroom Exercises
The course was offered in blended mode, so the ﬁrst exposure to the new material was
generally through mini-lectures delivered in class, followed by working through a
typical problem the students would be asked to do in class. Students worked in small
groups, generally pairs or trios, while the instructor and TA would walk around and
provide guidance. In the case of widespread misconceptions or other difﬁculties, the
instructor would generally work a problem on a document camera or whiteboard to
clarify the issues. Students were provided the opportunity to engage in peer instruction
while working on low-stakes exploration of the topic, with expert help on hand to assist.
Students were expected to work through to a correct solution, although the grading was
effort-based rather than correctness-based. Correct solutions were generally provided on
the board by the end of class, although we sometimes ran out of time and had to continue
in the next class. Ideas for improving the lessons are discussed in Sect. 6.
Teaching Physical Database Design 169

--- PAGE 186 ---
An excerpt from an in-class problem set is given in Fig. 2. Figure 3 shows a cost
model computational exercise. These are the problems the instructor would work
through, followed by the students working similar problems together and with guidance
readily available.
4.3 Post-class Assignment
A new assignment was created in a recent course offering to reinforce the abstract
physical design concepts and connect them to real-world systems. In the assignment,
students were allowed to work in pairs to apply their understanding of data in sorted
ﬁles and unsorted ﬁles, multi-level primary indexes and B+trees, and centralized and
distributed/parallel data access.
A mini-lecture introduced the real-world analogues for abstract models as follows:
• multi-level primary index: MySQL MyISAM1
• B+tree ﬁle and index: MySQL InnoDB2
• column store (centralized and distributed): Google Big Query3
Fig. 1. Introducing physical design in the course
learning management system
Fig. 2. Example problem for sketching
a primary index
Fig. 3. Cost modeling for primary and
multilevel indexes
1
https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/myisam-storage-engine.html.
2
https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/innodb-storage-engine.html.
3
https://cloud.google.com/blog/big-data/2016/01/bigquery-under-the-hood.
170 K. C. Davis

--- PAGE 187 ---
Students were already familiar with the necessary background to perform com-
putations with these three abstract models, but they could now map their understanding
to existing systems. The assignment still remained in the abstract realm, however; the
main point of the assignment was for students to see that their course learning out-
comes were reflections of contemporary systems. The students were asked to think of
themselves as professional consultants and justify the answers they computed for each
of the techniques. The introduction to the problem, parameters to use, and the ﬁrst
computation are shown in Fig. 4. Questions 2 and 3 (not shown) increase the number
of records to 10,000,000 and 1,000,000,000, respectively.
Figure 5 shows questions 4 and 5 of the assignment. Question 4 asks students to
consider adding more nodes (processors) to distribute the data in a columnar storage
format. Big Query does not utilize any indexes, it scales out horizontally to improve
performance. Since the data is unsorted, the expected time to answer a single exact
match query on average is n/2, where n is the number of blocks at the node. The
students were asked to determine how many nodes were needed for the Big Query
storage (a vertical fragment of the data with just one column) to have better perfor-
mance than either of the centralized, indexed data ﬁles. The students were allowed to
solve the problem manually, in a spreadsheet, or write a program. The ﬁnal question,
Question 5, asks the students to reflect on the style of their solution choice and how
easy it would be to alter the parameters of the problem and respond to their client in a
timely fashion.
5 Evaluation of Learning Outcomes
There are two sets of student assessment data relevant to physical database design that
were collected as a normal part of the course offerings. Neither was established
speciﬁcally to evaluate the impact of the new assignment. A closer alignment of the
assessment with the learning outcomes remains as future work. One data set consists of
pre- and post-assessment of a student’s perception of their competency regarding the
learning outcomes for the course. The second is the instructor’s assessment of learning
outcomes based on the ﬁnal exam for the course.
Fig. 4. Assignment introduction
Teaching Physical Database Design 171

--- PAGE 188 ---
The pre- and post-assessment surveys completed by students have a number of
general course outcomes established by a departmental curriculum committee. The
question most closely related to physical design asks the students to rate their agree-
ment with the following statement: I can explain the ﬁle structures that are used by
Relational Database Management Systems.
The student scores range from 1 = strongly disagree and 5 = strongly agree. Data
was collected in two consecutive academic terms where the course was taught by the
same instructor. Results of a paired t-test for each term indicate that statistically sig-
niﬁcant improvement is shown from the pre-assessment at the beginning of the course
to the post-assessment at the end of the course. Only observations for students who
gave consent to use their data and who completed both pre- and post-assessment results
are reported here (about 1/3 to 1/2 of the students enrolled in each course). The
summary statistics are shown in Table 2.
It is interesting to note that the variation decreased in the post-responses for course
B while the average increased. This might possibly indicate that the additional practice
with a project based on real-world database storage models had a positive impact on
learning, or at least a positive impact on increasing students’ conﬁdence that they
understood the concepts, compared to course A students. Further study will investigate
this idea and continue to improve the assignment as well as the student’s preparation
and instructor’s feedback.
Fig. 5. Comparison of centralized solutions to distributed/parallel solutions
Table 2. Self-reported competency for RDBMS ﬁle structures
n avg (pre) stdev (pre) avg (post) stdev (post) p-value
Course A 18 1.78 0.41830 4.00 1.05882 0.000000084072
Course B 24 1.96 1.08514 4.25 0.36957 0.000000007174
172 K. C. Davis

--- PAGE 189 ---
Course A students did not have the project introduced in Sect. 4.3, while course B
students did. In order to examine the impact on abstract learning, the scores for an
exam question are compared for course A and course B using a one-tailed t-test for
unequal variances. The points awarded for the question are normalized to a 100 point
scale. The exam question involved deciding which of the three indexes could be built
over a sample data set and then sketching the selected indexes. For the exam, students
were asked to determine which of the indexes they studied apply to the data set, and
then they are asked to sketch an index, if applicable, for the given data set. The
statistical summary is given in Table 3. Only scores for students providing consent to
use their data in this study are utilized.
The results indicate that students in course B performed signiﬁcantly better than
students in course A on the abstract physical design exam question. It is encouraging
that the average score is higher and the standard deviation is lower, however, there is
still a great deal of room for improvement in the scores. It is anticipated that additional
reﬁnement of the assignment and increased preparation guidelines, additional in-class
project time, and instructor follow-up after completion of the assignment and before the
exam will have increased positive impact on achievement of student learning outcomes,
although this remains to be demonstrated.
6 Reflections
Teaching physical database design embodies the usage of conceptual models for
communication, discussion, and most especially for analysis. A new assignment was
created in an introductory database class to teach physical design concepts. The
assignment was motivated by a desire to create a post-group space learning experience
that would relate abstract physical storage models to actual systems. Some positive
impact on learning was measured in the course that featured the assignment compared
to a prior offering of the course without the new assignment. However, the assignment
and the method of teaching the concepts can be improved, as can the assessment
methods used to study student learning. In terms of organizing the lesson, suggested
revisions include
• create individual space guided practice (Talbert 2017; Garcia 2018) for basic out-
comes emphasizing familiarity with the terminology and having some account-
ability on the part of the student,
• allocate more time for group space activities (in-class work on problem sets and the
project itself), and
• debrief after the assignment, including time for questions, verifying solutions, and
student reflection.
Table 3. Exam question scores
n Average stdev p-value
Course A 36 61.30 34.72594 0.033017
Course B 42 74.29 24.83862
Teaching Physical Database Design 173

--- PAGE 190 ---
The assignment itself could be better supported by creating a small assignment to
write queries using Big Query. This would not require any additional SQL knowledge
beyond the course outcomes and activities for SQL already in place, but it would make
the discussion about columnar storage for distributed query processing more pertinent.
Another option to allow students more practice with the physical design assignment
and to give them better feedback before their exam would be to offer the assignment in
phases. The conceptual modeling assignment the students do earlier in the semester
leverages two phases: an individual phase (where they receive copious feedback) and a
paired phase, where they revise and merge their individual designs into a consensus
design. The scores on the second phase are several letter grades higher than on the ﬁrst
phase, so the second one contributes more to their grade. A marked improvement on
students’ exam performance was also observed (Davis 2014).
The study could be strengthened by assessing the impact on learning with more
precise questions, for example, revising the pre- and post-statements toward the
activities emphasized in the course. Additional exam questions about the computational
aspects of performance that relate directly to the assignments could be examined as
well.
References
ACM/IEEE Joint Task Force on Computing Curricula: Computer science curricula 2013:
curriculum guidelines for undergraduate degree programs in computer science. Technical
report, Association for Computing Machinery (ACM). IEEE Computer Society (2013)
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim Report, The
National Academies of Science/Engineering/Medicine (2017)
Realizing the Potential of Data Science, Final Report from the National Science Foundation
Computer and Information Science and Engineering Advisor Committee Data Science
Working Group, co-chairs: Francine Berman and Rob Rutenbar, December 2016
Connolly, T.M., Begg, C.E.: Database Systems: A Practical Approach to Design, Implemen-
tation, and Management, 5th edn. Pearson Education, New York (2009)
Davis, K.C.: Teaching conceptual design capture. In: Parsons, J., Chiu, D. (eds.) ER 2013.
LNCS, vol. 8697, pp. 247–256. Springer, Cham (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
14139-8_26
Elmasri, R., Navathe, S.B.: Fundamentals of Database Systems, 7th edn. Pearson Education,
New York (2016)
Freeman, S., et al.: Active learning increases student performance in science, engineering, and
mathematics. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 111(23), 8410–8415 (2014)
Garcia, S.: Improving classroom preparedness using guided practice. In: Proceedings of the 49th
ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, pp. 326–331. ACM, February
2018
Garcia-Molina, H., Ullman, J.D., Widom, J.: Database System Implementation. Prentice Hall,
Upper Saddle River (2000)
Ramakrishnan, R., Gehrke, J.: Database Management Systems, 2nd edn. McGraw Hill, Boston
(2000)
Sciore, E.: SimpleDB: a simple Java-based multiuser system for teaching database internals. In:
ACM SIGCSE Bulletin, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 561–565. ACM, March 2007
174 K. C. Davis

--- PAGE 191 ---
Silberschatz, A., Korth, H.F., Sudarshan, S.: Database System Concepts, 4th edn. McGraw-Hill,
New York (1997)
Sotomayor, B., Shaw, A.: chidb: building a simple relational database system from scratch. In:
Proceedings of the 47th ACM Technical Symposium on Computing Science Education,
pp. 407–412. ACM (2016)
Talbert, R.: Flipped Learning: A Guide for Higher Education Faculty. Stylus Publishing,
Sterling (2017)
Teaching Physical Database Design 175

--- PAGE 192 ---
The Simple Enterprise Architecture
Framework: Giving Alignment to IT Decisions
Giovanni Giachetti1(&)
, Beatriz Marín2
, and Estefanía Serral3
1
Universidad Tecnológica de Chile INACAP, Santiago, Chile
ggiachetti@inacap.cl
2
Facultad de Ingeniería y Ciencias, Universidad Diego Portales, Santiago, Chile
beatriz.marin@mail.udp.cl
3
Faculty of Economics and Business, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
estefania.serralasensio@kuleuven.be
Abstract. Context: Enterprise Architecture seeks to align organizational
objectives with decisions associated to people, processes, information and
technology. Different frameworks have been proposed for designing an enter-
prise architecture, such as TOGAF or Zachman. However, deﬁning an enterprise
architecture following these frameworks is not an easy task since it requires the
alignment of organizational needs with technological decisions. Goal: This
paper presents a methodological framework, called Simple Enterprise Archi-
tecture (SEA), that eases the deﬁnition of an enterprise architecture and provides
concrete proof of the alignment between IT decisions and organizational needs.
Method: The SEA framework has been developed by integrating components
from existing ones in order to generate a concrete process that guides analysts in
the correct deﬁnition of an enterprise architecture. Results: This framework has
been used in teaching system architecture master courses for 5 years with
positive results.
Keywords: Enterprise architecture  Information technology  Framework
Teaching  Lessons learned  IT decisions
1 Introduction
Enterprise Architecture (EA) is a ﬁeld intended to improve the management and
functioning of complex enterprises and their information systems by aligning organi-
zational objectives with decisions associated to people, processes, information and
technology. EA helps an organization to transform its business vision and strategy into
effective enterprise change through a clear understanding of its current state (as-is) and
its expected future state (to-be) [12].
Numerous frameworks have been created for deﬁning EA [19], such as the Open
Group Architecture Framework (TOGAF) [6] or the Zachman framework [24]. They
provide a set of practices or activities that guide the EA deﬁnition. However, correctly
deﬁning an EA using one of these frameworks (or combination of them) is still a
complex task, since it requires understand each framework speciﬁcation, its use to
represent the set of key concepts related to the organizational context, and ﬁnally,
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 176–186, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_23

--- PAGE 193 ---
understanding how to align the organizational needs with technological decisions that
is represented by a conceptual speciﬁcation. This complexity makes the quality of an
EA modeling design directly dependent on the experience of the work team or external
consultants that creates it.
In this paper, we present the Simple Enterprise Architecture (SEA) Framework that
is oriented to guide analysts in the correct deﬁnition and validation of an enterprise
architecture for IT projects. The SEA framework builds on and integrates different
practices from the well-known EA frameworks TOGAF and the Zachman framework,
with system architecture and measure speciﬁcation methods, the Attribute-Driven
Design [23] (ADD), the Architecture Tradeoff Analysis Method (ATAM) [11], and
the Goal Question Metric (GQM) strategy [1]. Moreover, some lessons learned from
the use of SEA framework in system architecture master courses for novel and senior
engineers during ﬁve years are presented, which can be a reference for practitioners
related to use and/or teaching of enterprise architectures.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the state of the art
and related work on EA architectures, Sect. 3 introduces the SEA framework. Sec-
tion 4 presents the analysis and lessons learned from applying the SEA framework.
Finally, Sect. 5 presents our main conclusions and future work.
2 Related Work
The initial idea about considering different dimensions of an enterprise was developed
simultaneously within different disciplines in the early nineties. This inevitably led to
the emergence of several EA frameworks (EAFs) [2]. An EAF tries to map the
enterprise organizational goals to the work processes and IT infrastructure that are
needed to reach those goals. EA frameworks support a broad range of objectives and
enable decision making on different levels. According to [7, 13], more than 50 EAFs
are available to date. Some examples are: the Zachman framework, ARIS, TOGAF, the
Federal Enterprise Architecture (FEA) framework, the Department of Defense Archi-
tecture Framework (DoDAF), the Treasury Enterprise Architecture Framework
(TEAF), Enterprise Architecture Planning (EAP), or more recently, ArchiMate, and the
integrated electronic Requirements Information Management framework (eRIM). For
EAFs’ comparisons and analyses, the authors refer to [2, 13, 16, 17, 25].
The Zachman Framework [24] is organized as a matrix with two dimensions. The
ﬁrst dimension represents six perspectives or views: Planner, Owner, Designer,
Builder, Subcontractor, and User. The second dimension deals with the following six
basic questions: what, how, where, who, when and why. These questions allow to gain
insights into different aspects of an enterprise. The framework does not provide
guidance on sequence, process, or implementation, but rather focuses on ensuring that
all views are well established, regardless the order in which they are created.
ARIS [18] is a framework for modeling business information systems from a
process-based perspective. The framework is close to a classic software development
process consisting of the sequence of requirements elicitation, design speciﬁcation, and
implementation description, applied to the different views of a business information
systems: organization, data, function, output, and control.
The Simple Enterprise Architecture Framework 177

--- PAGE 194 ---
TOGAF [6] provides a structure and classiﬁcation schema used as a reference for
architecture development. It gives a comprehensive description of the relevant elements
of EA and provides a clear distinction of the business oriented description and the
derived technological implementation. A key element of TOGAF is the Architecture
Development Method (ADM), which is an iterative method for developing EA.
TOGAF explains rules for developing three levels of principles: (1) support decision
making across the entire enterprise, (2) provide guidance of IT resources, and
(3) support architecture principles for development and implementation.
The FEA framework [10] consists of a set of interrelated reference models that
provide standardized categorization for strategic, business, and technology models. The
main goal of FEAF is to organize and promote sharing of Federal information for the
entire Federal Government. FEA allows for flexibility in the use of methods, work
products, and tools to be used by the individual federal agencies.
DoDAF [4] is a holistic framework and conceptual model for EA development
particularly in Department of Defense agencies. The framework builds on three sets of
views: Operational, System, and Technical Standards. These views are linked in a
fourth view by means of a dictionary to deﬁne terms and by providing context, sum-
mary, or overview-level information. This framework provides descriptions of ﬁnal
products as well as guidance and rules for consistency to facilitate comparison and
integration of systems and architectures.
TEAF [3] aims at facilitating the integration, information sharing, and exploitation
of requirements across the Department of the Treasury [3]. Similar to DoDAF, TEAF
includes descriptions of work products for documenting and modeling enterprise
architectures. The framework was created to map the interrelationships among the
organizations of the department in order to manage IT resources.
EAP [20] proposed by Capgemini contains activities and processes in order to
achieve a To-Be architecture by considering four perspectives: Business, Data,
Application, and Infrastructure.
The ArchiMate Standard [5] is a synthesis of ideas coming from previous EAFs. It
introduces an integrated language for describing EAs. ArchiMate ﬁts into the TOGAF
framework as it provides concepts for creating a model that correlates to its three
architectures (layers).
eRIM [9] was deﬁned for managing information about client requirements across
all phases of a construction project and through-life of a built facility. The framework
deﬁnes an information-centric EA approach that is process and service-oriented.
Some works have also been proposed to integrate different EA frameworks in order
to better support the design of an EA. The Integrated Architecture Framework
(IAF) [22] is based on ideas from Zachman and EAP and it provides practical
guidelines to apply it. In [14], a framework is presented for the deﬁnition of EA of
government organizations. The framework integrates TOGAF ADM with the Service
Architecture Network Architecture (SONA) for connecting network infrastructure,
network services, and application. In [25], a framework that integrates Zachman, Four-
domain (processes, procedures, business tools, and dependencies required to support
business functions), TOGAF, and the Reference Model of Open Distributed Processing
(RM-ODP) is introduced to be used as a common framework to communicate about
EAFs of different businesses and relate them to each other.
178 G. Giachetti et al.

--- PAGE 195 ---
While some of these frameworks (e.g., DoDAF, FEAF, and TEAF) have been
designed to address speciﬁc needs, others (e.g., Zachman and TOGAF) can be more
widely applied. In any case, these frameworks are still too abstract, they lack of
straightforward guidelines to apply them, which makes difﬁcult their understanding and
accurate application [17, 21]. Moreover, no framework provides a concrete process that
guides analysts in the deﬁnition of an EA, which gives evidence on how IT decisions
are aligned with the organizational goals. All these issues provoke that students cannot
properly use these frameworks, resulting in a frustrating experience. Next section
presents the SEA framework, which overcome the issues identiﬁed.
3 The Simple Enterprise Architecture (SEA) Framework
The SEA framework builds on the three levels shared by TOGAF and Zachman (see
Fig. 1). The Business Architecture, shown on top of the pyramid, deﬁnes the business
goals and processes, and is used as the driving artefact to align the two levels below:
the Information Systems Architecture, which deﬁnes the design of the information
systems that must support the deﬁned business processes, and the Technical Archi-
tecture, which deﬁnes the technical infrastructure (e.g., hardware, networks, etc.) that
will support those information systems.
To guide the alignment of these levels, quality attributes must be considered to
evaluate to what extent the organizational requirements are met. These attributes are
used to drive the information systems and technical decisions (at lower levels of the
pyramid) that support the identiﬁed business processes. SEA applies the Attribute-
Driven Design [23] (ADD) method and the utility tree form Architecture Tradeoff
Analysis Method (ATAM) to use these attributes as architectural drivers that guide
Data
Architecture
Application
Architecture
Business
Architecture
Technical Architecture
BusinessModel
• BusinessDirection
• Stakeholders
• Processes
• ApplicationTechnology
• Server Technology
• Network / Communications
• Platforms/ OperatingSystems
• DatabaseSystems
• SecurityTechnologies
• etc.
• Applications
• ApplicationIntegration
• Data Model
• InformationFlows
InformationSystems Architecture
Fig. 1. Architectural levels of the EAF framework from TOGAF
The Simple Enterprise Architecture Framework 179

--- PAGE 196 ---
analysts to reﬁne the ﬁrst version of the information system and technical architectures.
Thus, the EA will be depicted in a way that all decisions of the three levels are aligned
to these architectural drivers.
In order to validate and reﬁne this version, we use tradeoffs analysis template from
ATAM [11], which complements the previous step. This step allows obtaining a set of
indicators that can be used to evaluate and support the architectural decisions.
Finally, the indicators obtained are used to deﬁne speciﬁc measures that demon-
strate the alignment between the three levels, mainly the alignment of the technical
decisions (technical architecture) with the business objectives. To obtain these mea-
sures, we use the GQM (goal, question, metric) approach.
Figure 2 shows the complete SEA process. It is iterative and incremental, starting
with a ﬁrst deﬁnition of the EA guided by the business strategy. This deﬁnition is
iteratively evaluated and reﬁned by the application of ADD, ATAM and GQM.
Regarding the visual representation of the EA, we propose UML, a language that is
very well known by IT analysts. We recommend using the use case diagram for
business architecture, class model for data architecture, component (or package) model
for application architecture, and the deployment model for the technical architecture.
However, the correct use of the UML notation may also be an obstacle for deﬁning the
ﬁrst version of the EA. Thus, we recommend using a free and very simple notation ﬁrst,
e.g., a notation based on boxes and arrows, and use the UML to give a detailed and
reﬁned EA deﬁnition once a ﬁrst EA version is obtained.
3.1 Business Strategy: EAF Levels
The starting point of SEA is to stablish a ﬁrst proposal for the EA taking as guidance
the business strategy, by following the next steps: deﬁnition of the business architec-
ture, deﬁnition of the data architecture, deﬁnition of the application architecture, and
deﬁnition of the technical architecture.
Fig. 2. Elements of the SEA framework
180 G. Giachetti et al.

--- PAGE 197 ---
The business architecture determines the data and application architecture, but also
the implementation of new technology can modify the data and the business architec-
tures: the business strategy and the technology of an organization are tightly related and
greatly influence each other. Therefore, once the business, the data, and the application
architectures are deﬁned, they are reﬁned starting the process in the opposite order (see
bottom of Fig. 3): ﬁrst considering the application architecture, then the data architec-
ture, and ﬁnally the business architecture. In this second iteration, the ﬁrst EA proposal
is analyzed to evaluate whether additional elements are necessary. A new component in
the application architecture can create the need to support additional data, and conse-
quently the need of additional processes that support the management of those data.
Normally, new elements for adding functionality or services not previously supported
and needed to perform the organizational change are identiﬁed in this second iteration,
such as applications to integrate legacy systems, to deal with security issues, or to
support distributed services or user interfaces (Web, mobile, etc.).
The right-to-left process ﬁnishes when no new elements are identiﬁed. Once these
three architectures are deﬁned, a ﬁrst deﬁnition of the technical architecture is created
where the technical components to support the correct execution of the applications and
data management are identiﬁed.
3.2 Quality Attributes as Architectural Drivers
In order to organize the different architectural drivers, we extend the utility tree pro-
posed by ATAM [11] (see Fig. 4). This tree identiﬁes a set of quality attributes in the
ﬁrst level. These attributes are: Performance, Modiﬁability, Availability, and Security.
In the second level of the tree, the different architectural drivers are detailed, and ﬁnally
TechnicalArchitecture
DB Servers
App Servers
Business Architecture Data Architecture ApplicationArchitecture
Process1
Process2
Data1
Data2
Data3
App. Component1
App. Component2
Seconditeration(to-the-left)
Starts from the
ApplicationArchitecture
App. Component3
Data4 Process3
Business Architecture Data Architecture ApplicationArchitecture
Process1
Process2
Data1
Data2
Data3
App. Component1
App. Component2
First iteration(to-the-right)
Starts from the
Business Architecture
TraceabilityBetween
ArchitecturalLayers
New Business Process
Stakeholders Stakeholders
Cloud/Service
Providers
Networks
Other
Technologies
…
Fig. 3. Right-to-left deﬁnition schema for EA levels
The Simple Enterprise Architecture Framework 181

--- PAGE 198 ---
the intended scenarios for each driver are presented. In the SEA framework, we pro-
pose two changes to this utility tree. The ﬁrst is to consider the six ISO 9126 [8] quality
attributes and their sub-characteristics for internal and external quality instead of the
four attributes originally proposed by ATAM.
As example, consider a Retail company that wants to develop a website for online
sales. Important quality attributes in this example following the ISO 9126 classiﬁcation
are: security that comes from functionality and usability; and fault tolerance that comes
from reliability. The following architectural drivers can be identiﬁed: payment security,
ease of use, response time, and fault recovery.
ADD is applied to use quality attributes as architectural drivers. (a) for each driver,
speciﬁc scenarios are described to make explicit how the system should behave to
successfully support the driver related to some quality attribute (third level of ATAM
utility tree); (b) one or more technical solutions (patterns) are proposed to deal with
each scenario. To show the technical alternatives (patterns) related to the different
scenarios, we have included an extra level after the scenarios deﬁnition in the utility
tree of the ATAM approach (see Fig. 4). It is important to mention that a same pattern
may support more than one scenario.
3.3 Tradeoff Analysis and Technical Indicators
In order to choose the appropriate patterns for the different scenarios, the SEA
framework uses the tradeoffs analysis template proposed by ATAM [11]. For instance,
from the information of Table 1, if the cost of having the server down for 1 min on
Black Fridays is 500 then, the most appropriate pattern will be the 3 replicated servers.
However, the architects can also choose to combine patterns, in case it is possible. For
instance, another alternative is to consider the three replicated servers together with the
cloud server since the cost having the server down is much higher and the cloud server
can mitigate the risk R1 for pattern P1.
Fig. 4. SEA utility tree schema (Reliability branch is detailed)
182 G. Giachetti et al.

--- PAGE 199 ---
3.4 Measures for Aligning Technical Architecture and Strategy
In order to make explicit the relation between the technical architecture indicators and
the organizational goals, we use the GQM approach. GQM allows us to generate
measures that use these indicators as input GQM proposes the following three levels to
align objectives with speciﬁc measures: Conceptual Level – Goals, Operational Level–
Questions, and Quantitative Level – Measures.
At the conceptual level, the goals that have driven the EA are identiﬁed. In the
Retail example, to increase the number of sales is a goal. At the operation level, we
deﬁne the questions to evaluate to what extent the goal is reached. A key aspect to
increase sales is to offer a good customer service. Thus, a question associated to this
goal can be, e.g., is the company offering a good customer service? Questions can be
linked to more than one goal, e.g., knowing if a company offers a good customer
service is also important for the goal of increasing customer satisfaction.
Finally, the quantitative level set the measures that can evaluate the questions in a
quantitative manner. Figure 5 shows that the Recovery time indicator enables the
deﬁnition of the measures cost of system down and number of unattended requests.
This indicator is obtained from the tradeoffs analysis in the previous (ATAM) step.
We recommend applying GQM by following a hybrid approach (between top-down
and bottom-up). Figure 5 shows the indicator I1 (recovery time), which allows the
deﬁnition of the measure number of unattended request and costs of system down. In
this case, the lower is the recovery time, the lower is the cost to deal with the system
failure as well as the not processed requests.
Table 1. Example of ATAM template for deﬁning scenarios.
Architectural Driver: Fast recovery of the system
Scenario: Application server must be able to recover in less of
5 min
Environment: Execution with more than 10.000 concurrent
customers (Black Friday)
Stimulus: The main server is not responding
Response: The system resumes in less of 5 min
Architectural Patterns Sensitivity TradeOff Risk No Risk
P1: 3 replicated servers T1 R1
P2: local and cloud server S1 T2
Reasoning T1: Lower recovery time (1 min), but
higher cost (100)
T2: Lower cost (50), but higher
recovery time (5 min)
S1: Dependency of the cloud provider
R1: The three servers may fail
The Simple Enterprise Architecture Framework 183

--- PAGE 200 ---
4 Analysis and Lessons Learned
Previous to the use of SEA framework, former students of the system architecture
master course fail in the proper alignment of the IT architecture with the organizational
goals, in the representation of the architectural models, and ﬁnally, they were not able
to explain how the deﬁned architecture ﬁts to the organizational needs. Moreover, we
have observed that students put the main focus on the intended system functionality,
omitting how the system interacts with other organizational processes and stakeholders.
During the last ﬁve years, SEA has been used by more than 400 students of the
system architecture course of a master program. The SEA framework breaks the lack of
organizational vision, providing a systematic process and tools that guide the students
in the deﬁnition of technical solutions driven by the business strategy.
The use of a well-known notation as UML facilitates the communication among the
technical team. However, it can be difﬁcult to start with the architecture representation
in a speciﬁc notation since students pay more attention to properly represent the model
more than to determine if all the relevant elements are included. To solve this issue, we
propose to start with a free notation (boxes and arrows) for representing the initial EA
model, mainly centered on identifying the relevant concepts, and, in a further step, to
translate the initial model with a concrete notation.
We have observed another interesting effect of translating the EA from a free
notation model to a concrete notation model: inconsistencies are identiﬁed during the
translation process. Normally, these inconsistencies are non-identiﬁed actors (stake-
holders) or hidden uses cases (process). Thus, this translation step also works as a
veriﬁcation activity for the EA speciﬁcation using SEA.
5 Conclusions and Future Work
This paper has presented a simple framework called SEA that integrates best practices
from well-known EAFs and system architecture and measure speciﬁcation methods.
The SEA framework has been designed to systematically guide analysts in the correct
deﬁnition of EAs. The SEA framework facilitate the proper design of technical solu-
tions, and also provides evidence that allows these solutions to be evaluated in terms of
how they contribute to the achievement of organizational goals.
G1 G2 G3
Increase number of
sales
Q1
Costs of system
down M2
Is the company
providing a good
service?
Number of
Unattended requests
M1 M3
Q1
Increase customers’
satisfaction
Recovery Time I1
Conceptual
Level
Operational
Level
Cuantitative
Level
Top-Down
and
Bottom-Up
definition
Goal: G1
To increase
the company sales
through an internet
sales portal
from the company
perspective
Purpose:
Issue:
Object:
Viewpoint:
Fig. 5. GQM for generation of measures aligned with business objectives
184 G. Giachetti et al.

--- PAGE 201 ---
The aim of the SEA framework is to facilitate the teaching of EA courses at
computer engineering careers, due to existing approaches, such as [15], where too
complex according to the students perception. The evaluations surveys of the courses
where SEA was applied has scores of 90% or above regarding comprehension, support
and guidance material, ability of apply the knowledge acquired, and the feasibility of
use SEA in professional practice. In contrast, similar curses without SEA have an
average between 50–70%. This provides an initial evidence of the perception of the
students about the use of SEA framework to correctly deﬁne an enterprise architecture.
Nevertheless, the validation of the SEA framework and industrial empirical evaluation
of SEA is planned as future work.
Finally, we are preparing an online course to teach the SEA framework and
facilitate its free use by practitioners and students, this is the Open SEA initiative.
Some online lectures have already been recorded (such as https://vimeo.com/album/
2472336/video/72053189).
References
1. Basili, V., Caldeira, G., Rombach, H.D.: The Goal Question Metric Approach. Wiley,
Hoboken (1994)
2. Buckl, S., Schweda, C.M.: On the State-of-the-Art in Enterprise Architecture Management
Literature. Technische Universität München, Munich (2011)
3. Goethals, F.: An overview of enterprise architecture framework deliverables (2003)
4. Group, D.o.D.A.F.W.: Department of Defense Architecture Framework, January 2003
5. Group, T.O.: The Open Group, ArchiMate 2.0 Speciﬁcation, Berkshire, UK (2012)
6. Haren, V.: TOGAF Version 9.1. Van Haren Publishing (2011). ISBN: 9087536798
7. Hinkelmann, K., Gerber, A., Karagiannis, D., Thoenssen, B., Van der Merwe, A., Woitsch,
R.: A new paradigm for the continuous alignment of business and IT: combining enterprise
architecture modelling and enterprise ontology. Comput. Ind. 79, 77–86 (2016)
8. ISO: ISO/IEC 9126-1. In: Software engineering – Product quality – Part 1: Quality Model.
ISO (2001)
9. Jallow, A.K., Demian, P., Anumba, C.J., Baldwin, A.N.: An enterprise architecture
framework for electronic requirements information management. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 37(5),
455–472 (2017)
10. Ji, W.-L., Xia, A.-B.: Federal enterprise architecture framework. Comput. Integr. Manuf.
Syst. Beijing 13(1), 57 (2007)
11. Kazman, R., Klein, M., Clements, P.: ATAM: Method for Architecture Evaluation. Software
Engineering Institute, Carnegie-Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA (2000)
12. Lapkin, A., et al.: Gartner clariﬁes the deﬁnition of the term ‘enterprise architecture’. Gartner
Res. (2008)
13. Matthes, D.: Enterprise Architecture Frameworks Kompendium: Über 50 Rahmenwerke
für das IT-Management. Springer, Heidelberg (2011). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-
12955-1
14. Muhamad-Firmansyah, C., Bandung, Y.: Designing an enterprise architecture government
organization based on TOGAF ADM and SONA. In: 2016 International Conference on
Information Technology Systems and Innovation (ICITSI), pp. 1–6. IEEE (2016)
15. Pereira, C.M., Sousa, P.: A method to deﬁne an Enterprise Architecture using the Zachman
Framework. In: ACM Symposium on Applied Computing, pp. 1366–1371. ACM (2004)
The Simple Enterprise Architecture Framework 185

--- PAGE 202 ---
16. Romero, D., Vernadat, F.: Enterprise information systems state of the art: past, present and
future trends. Comput. Ind. 79, 3–13 (2016)
17. Rouhani, B.D., Mahrin, M.N.R., Nikpay, F., Najafabadi, M.K., Nikfard, P.: A framework for
evaluation of enterprise architecture implementation methodologies. Int. J. Soc. Behav.
Educ. Econ. Bus. Ind. Eng. 9(1) (2015)
18. Scheer, A.-W., Nüttgens, M.: ARIS architecture and reference models for business process
management. In: van der Aalst, W., Desel, J., Oberweis, A. (eds.) Business Process
Management. LNCS, vol. 1806, pp. 376–389. Springer, Heidelberg (2000). https://doi.org/
10.1007/3-540-45594-9_24
19. Schekkerman, J.: How to Survive in the Jungle of Enterprise Architecture Frameworks:
Creating or Choosing an Enterprise Architecture Framework. Trafford Publishing, Bloom-
ington (2004)
20. Spewak, S.H., Tiemann, M.: Updating the enterprise architecture planning model.
J. Enterp. Architect. 2(2), 11–19 (2006)
21. Urbaczewski, L., Mrdalj, S.: A comparison of enterprise architecture frameworks. Issues Inf.
Syst. 7(2), 18–23 (2006)
22. Van’t Wout, J., Waage, M., Hartman, H., Stahlecker, M., Hofman, A.: The Integrated
Architecture Framework Explained: Why, What, How. Springer, Heidelberg (2010). https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-11518-9
23. Wojcik, R., et al.: Attribute-driven design (ADD), version 2.0. Software Engineering
Institute, Carnegie-Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA (2006)
24. Zachman, J.A.: Concepts of the framework for enterprise architecture (1996)
25. Zarvić, N., Wieringa, R.: An integrated enterprise architecture framework for business-IT
alignment. Des. Enterp. Architect. Framew. Integr. Bus. Process. IT Infrastruct. 63, 9 (2014)
186 G. Giachetti et al.

--- PAGE 203 ---
Empirical Methods in Conceptual
Modeling (Emp-ER) 2018

--- PAGE 204 ---
Preface to EmpER’18
1st Workshop on Empirical Methods in Conceptual
Modeling (EmpER’18) at the 37th International
Conference on Conceptual Modeling (ER 2018)
Xi’an, China
October 22–25, 2018
Organized by
Jennifer Horkoff and Sotirios Liaskos
Conceptual modeling has enjoyed substantial growth over the past decades in diverse
ﬁelds such as Information Systems Analysis, Software Engineering, Enterprise
Architecture, Business Analysis and Business Process Engineering. A plethora of
conceptual modeling languages, frameworks and systems have been proposed,
promising to facilitate activities such as communication, design, documentation or
decision-making.
Success in designing a conceptual modeling system is, however, predicated on
demonstrably attaining such goals through observing their use in practical scenarios. At
the same time, the way individuals and groups produce and consume models gives
raise to cognitive, behavioral, organizational or other phenomena, whose systematic
observation may help us better understand how models are used in practice and how we
can make them more effective.
The inaugural International Workshop on Empirical Methods in Conceptual
Modeling (EmpER’18), co-located with the 37th International Conference on Con-
ceptual Modeling (ER 2018), aimed at bringing together researchers with an interest in
the empirical investigation of conceptual modeling systems and practices. The work-
shop invited three kinds of papers: ﬁnished empirical studies, proposed empirical
studies and theoretical, review or experience papers on the topic of empirical research
in conceptual modeling. The workshop particularly welcomed proposed empirical
studies that are in their design stage so that authors can beneﬁt from early feedback and
adjust their designs prior to a potentially effort- and resource-intensive administration.
A review checklist based on standard validity concerns, geared primarily towards
experimental studies, was constructed and distributed to the reviewers to be used – at
their discretion – for reviewing the papers and organize their feedback to the authors.
A total of twenty (20) reviewers were invited to serve in this ﬁrst offering of the
workshop based on their record of past contributions in the area of empirical conceptual
modeling.
Overall, a total of three (3) papers were accepted out of the six (6) that were
reviewed. Two of the accepted papers describe proposed experimental studies and one

--- PAGE 205 ---
proposes a methodological tool. The workshop involves presentations of the papers
followed by extensive discussion and audience feedback to the authors.
We would like to thank all authors, reviewers and workshop chairs of ER’2018 for
their valuable work in making this workshop possible. We are hoping that this only the
ﬁrst small step of a long and exciting journey of community building and mutual
learning in the area of Empirical Methods in Conceptual Modeling.
July 2018 Jennifer Horkoff
Sotirios Liaskos
Program Co-chairs
1st Workshop on Empirical Methods in Conceptual Modeling (EmpER’18) 189

--- PAGE 206 ---
Towards an Empirical Evaluation
of Imperative and Declarative Process
Mining
Christoﬀer Olling Back1(B)
, Søren Debois2
, and Tijs Slaats1
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen,
Emil Holms Kanal 6, 2300 Copenhagen S, Denmark
{back,slaats}@di.ku.dk
2
Department of Computer Science, IT University of Copenhagen,
Rued Langgaards Vej 7, 2300 Copenhagen S, Denmark
debois@itu.dk
Abstract. Process modelling notations fall in two broad categories:
declarative notations, which specify the rules governing a process; and
imperative notations, which specify the flows admitted by a process. We
outline an empirical approach to addressing the question of whether cer-
tain process logs are better suited for mining to imperative than declar-
ative notations. We plan to attack this question by applying a ﬂagship
imperative and declarative miner to a standard collection of process logs,
then evaluate the quality of the output models w.r.t. the standard model
metrics of precision and generalisation. This approach requires perfect
ﬁtness of the output model, which substantially narrows the ﬁeld of avail-
able miners; possible candidates include Inductive Miner and MINER-
ful. With the metrics in hand, we propose to statistically evaluate the
hypotheses that (1) one miner consistently outperforms the other on
one of the metrics, and (2) there exist subsets of logs more suitable for
imperative respectively declarative mining.
Keywords: Process mining · Modelling paradigms
Statistical evaluation · Declarative models · Imperative models
Hybrid models · Evaluation metrics
1 Introduction
Workﬂow notations are commonly categorised as falling within either the impera-
tive or declarative paradigm [1]. Imperative notations use ﬂow-based constructs
to explicitly model the paths through a process [2]. Declarative notations use
T. Slaats—This work is supported by the Hybrid Business Process Management
Technologies project (DFF-6111-00337) funded by the Danish Council for Indepen-
dent Research, and the EcoKnow project (7050-00034A) funded by the Innovation
Foundation.
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 191–198, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_24

--- PAGE 207 ---
192 C. O. Back et al.
constraint-based constructs to model the rules of a process. A declarative model
allows all paths not forbidden by the constraints, and therefore the behaviour
of the model is implicit in the rules and needs to be deduced by the system
or users [3–5]. While the imperative paradigm is more mature, both paradigms
have seen industrial adoption [6–8].
A recent trend in both academia and industry is to extract models from
real-life data via process discovery [9], where an output model is automatically
constructed from an event log of observed process executions. Research into
this approach has focused primarily on the discovery of imperative models, but
substantial energy has been directed towards algorithms that discover declarative
models as well [10–12].
Thus, when constructing process models by process discovery, we have a
choice regarding which paradigm to use. Does one approach return better models
than the other? Would such a diﬀerence be universal or depend on the particular
input log?
This paper outlines an approach to empirically evaluating the eﬀect of
miner paradigm (independent variable) on output model quality (dependent vari-
able) [13,14]. We propose to measure model quality using notation-agnostic met-
rics for precision and generalisation from [15], which apply equally to imperative
and declarative models. These metrics are analogous to the standard data min-
ing metrics of the same name and are intended to capture the degree to which a
model is underﬁtting or overﬁtting the data, respectively. Other quality metrics
exist, such as ﬁtness, simplicity/understandability, and soundness; but we are
forced to keep these as controlled variables due to the fact that this formula-
tions of precision and generalisation restricts our choice of miners, which in turn
restricts our ability to include other metrics as dependent variables. Namely,
since precision and generalisation require output models either be perfectly ﬁt-
ting or that data be aligned to the model to account for “noise”, and since we
have chosen to exclude the alignment procedure as a confounding variable in
the ﬁrst iteration of this evaluation approach (see Sect. 2.2), we are restricted
to perfectly ﬁtting output models.
We propose Inductive Miner [16] and MINERful [11] as representatives of the
imperative and declarative paradigms, respectively, as they fulﬁll our require-
ments and are widely considered to be at the cutting edge of their respective
ﬁelds. Evaluating the miners on publicly available, real-life logs, we test the
following hypotheses:
Hypothesis 1: One miner consistently outperforms the other on one of the
metrics:
(a) outperformance on precision (b) outperformance on generalisation
Hypothesis 2: There exist subsets of logs:
(a) more suited for imperative mining (b) more suited for declarative mining

--- PAGE 208 ---
Empirical Evaluation of Imperative and Declarative Process Mining 193
That is, there exists a subset of logs which when mined either declaratively or
imperatively represents a Pareto improvement over the other; and this deviation
from the zero mean lies outside of the bounds of what can be accounted for by
random chance.
A Pareto improvement simply denotes an improvement on at least one met-
ric without sacriﬁcing performance on the remaining metric. The zero mean is
the mean of the probability distribution associated with the null hypothesis,
and represents no performance diﬀerence between models produced by diﬀerent
miners from the same log.
Note that in the most extreme case, a subset may consist of a single log
which is best suited to one paradigm, with the remaining logs showing only an
insigniﬁcant diﬀerence in precision and generalisation, or requiring a tradeoﬀ
between the metrics, thus not a Pareto improvement. We are, in fact, testing
multiple sub-hypotheses for hypothesis 2: one for each log. To compensate for
the increased likelihood of making a type I error (false positive), we perform the
appropriate adjustment to statistical signiﬁcance testing: a Bonferroni correc-
tion. We leave as future work the task of identifying the characteristics of event
logs which distinguish them as best suited for a given paradigm, in the interest
of ﬁrst rigorously establishing a clear framework for evaluation.
2 Methods
2.1 Log Selection
In the interest of reproducibility, we base log selection on the criteria of pub-
lic availability, drawing upon the IEEE Task Force on Process Mining Real-life
Event Log Collection1
, with the addition of one additional real-life log originat-
ing from our own industrial contact, the Dreyer Foundation in Denmark [17].
The logs stem from diverse sectors, including healthcare related processes, ﬁne
management, permit, loan and grant applications, as well as production, soft-
ware engineering, and robotic vehicle related processes. The logs vary in degree
of structure, number of activities, and trace length.
2.2 Process Discovery
We will mine the selected logs both imperatively and declaratively, selecting
miners according to the following criteria:
1. Miners must be conﬁgurable to always produce perfectly ﬁtting models.
2. Miners must be conﬁgurable to produce models of a given simplicity, save one
which can serve as a benchmark.
The ﬁrst criterion follows from both precision and generalisation requiring
perfect ﬁtness of the output model. It would have been an option to allow non-
ﬁtting output, and then use model-log alignment [15,18], but without domain
1
http://data.4tu.nl/repository/collection:event logs real.

--- PAGE 209 ---
194 C. O. Back et al.
knowledge or access to an expert, we cannot know which exact alignment is more
appropriate for the real-world log. This means that we would be evaluating
not just the mining algorithm, but the combination of mining algorithm and
alignment function. In particular, we would not know whether to attribute a
result in favour of one miner over the other to the miner itself, or to a fortunate
choice of alignment for that particular miner.
The second criterion follows partly from a tendency of declarative miners to
produce output models containing excessive numbers of constraints: for large
logs, on the order of hundreds of thousands. More importantly, we require model
simplicity to be held constant, so that the choice of mining algorithm remains
the only independent variable.
The two criteria left us only two miners: The Inductive Miner and MINERful.
Inductive Miner is an imperative miner developed by Leemans et al. [16] which
uses a divide-and-conquer approach to generate sound, block-structured process
models output as process trees or Petri nets. With only one parameter, noise
threshold, which for our purposes must be held at 1.0 to ensure perfect ﬁtness,
the model generated by Inductive Miner provides a baseline model from which
to set a threshold on model simplicity.
MINERful is a declarative miner developed by Di Ciccio et al. [11]. It uses a two-
phase approach: in the ﬁrst phase, a knowledge base of statistical information
on the log is built; in the second, this knowledge is queried in order to infer the
constraints of the process. The output is a Declare model, possibly including
negative constraints.
MINERful has conﬁgurable thresholds for support, interest factor, and con-
fidence. By iteratively adjusting these settings until a model is found which has
the highest possible number of constraints without exceeding the complexity of
the imperative model, we ensure that the imperative and declarative models are
of comparable simplicity. We note that while many measures of simplicity have
been proposed for imperative models, there exists no widely accepted method
for comparing the simplicity of imperative and declarative models. For this rea-
son, we begin by simply comparing the number of edge elements: edges between
transitions vs. constraints between activities.
2.3 Computing Metrics
Deﬁning standard measures for precision and generalisation remains an open
research challenge for two main reasons. First, in process mining, data is gen-
erally not assumed to be labelled, i.e. event logs contain examples of what did
happen, not what should not happen. This means that the standard deﬁnitions
used in data mining and statistics cannot be applied to process discovery, since
they rely on deﬁning true and false positives, and true and false negatives. Sec-
ond, the prevalence of unbounded loops in process models means that they often
describe an inﬁnite set of allowed behaviour. Therefore, deﬁnitions of precision
and generalisation which take into account all of the of behaviour allowed by

--- PAGE 210 ---
Empirical Evaluation of Imperative and Declarative Process Mining 195
the model are not applicable in practice. Instead most metrics aim to reduce the
measured behaviour of the model to a ﬁnite set of traces.
Metric Selection. To compare imperative and declarative models, we require
metrics that can be applied to both equally. This means that they need to be
deﬁned on either the level of languages or transition systems. Accordingly, we
have chosen to employ the metrics introduced in [15], in particular:
Precision [15, p. 10] measures the degree to which a model is “underﬁtting” or
“allowing too much behaviour” relative to the input log. This particular metric
is based on the notion of escaping edges, which represent a point at which the
model allows behaviour not seen in the log. The measured amount of additional
behaviour is kept ﬁnite by only considering the ﬁrst divergent activity. I.e. an
escaping edge may lead to a loop representing an inﬁnite set of traces that did
not occur in the log, but only the trace ending with the ﬁrst divergent activity
will be counted.
Generalisation [15, p. 11], on the other hand, measures the degree to which
a model is “overﬁtting”: is there behaviour not allowed by the model and not
exhibited in the log, but that can be reasonably expected to occur in the future?
This particular metric approximates generalisation by estimating for each state
in the model the likelihood that a new, hitherto unseen, activity will occur.
This estimation is based on the number of activities that have been observed,
and how often the state was visited. Two alternatives are oﬀered: event-based
generalisation takes into account the number of visits to a state, state-based
generalisation does not.
Implementation. The widely used process mining framework, ProM, contains
a plugin for computing the metrics of [15] on Petri nets, but does not oﬀer
support for declarative models. Also, we seek the ability to run tests in batches
and easily pipeline several operations (mining, metrics computation, analysis) on
multiple logs. Therefore we developed our own evaluation framework2
. The code,
methods and results are straightforward to inspect and reproduce by following
instructions provided on the associated wiki. The framework was tested against
the examples and results reported in [15].
Challenges arise when computing precision and generalisation: mainly regard-
ing time and space eﬃciency, but also handling nondeterminism arising from
silent transitions present in models produced by Inductive Miner. When iden-
tifying enabled activities in a given marking, a greedy algorithm will naively
follow silent transitions until encountering a non-silent transition, potentially
ﬁring silent transitions unnecessarily and associating incorrect markings with
an event: subsequently excluding activities which should be enabled. Using the
shortest path to a non-silent transition prevents this.
2
Available at: https://bitbucket.org/coback/qmpm.

--- PAGE 211 ---
196 C. O. Back et al.
To minimize redundancy, a preﬁx tree is built from the event log, replaying
each trace on the given model as it is added to the trie. In each node (corre-
sponding to an event in the log), the state of the model is saved, unless the node
has been visited previously, in which case a counter associated with the node is
incremented, recording the number of occurrences of that preﬁx. Finally, a map
containing model states (markings) as keys, and sets of nodes (events) as values,
is maintained in order to facilitate the calculation of state-based generalisation.
Given an event, the enabled activities in the log simply correspond to that node’s
children, while the enabled activities in the model are obtained by querying the
model using the model state associated with that node. This approach minimizes
redundancies, keeping state-space enumeration to a minimum.
3 Conclusion
We outline an approach to systematically compare the performance of imperative
and declarative process mining algorithms based on notation-agnostic quality
metrics for precision and generalisation deﬁned in [15]. We will investigate two
hypotheses: ﬁrst, one miner performs better on precision and/or generalisation;
second, there exist logs on which either miner provides a statistically signiﬁcant
Pareto improvement.
To the best of our knowledge, this will be the ﬁrst study comparing imperative
and declarative process discovery techniques using this approach. Future evalua-
tions incorporating other aspects of the process mining life-cycle, e.g. alignment,
will be able to use this approach as a point of reference. Not least, we contribute
a comprehensive software framework and tackle a number of methodological and
implementation challenges, providing a foundation upon which further work can
build.
Finally, we believe that the proposed study will be extremely valuable to the
ﬁeld of hybrid process mining [19–21], which aims to combine the strengths of
the two paradigms. Research into which characteristics identify a portion of a
log as more suitable to one paradigm have been hampered by the lack of an
objective procedure on which to compare models across paradigms [22]. Our
approach lays the groundwork for addressing this shortcoming.
References
1. Reijers, H.A., Slaats, T., Stahl, C.: Declarative modeling–an academic dream or
the future for BPM? In: Daniel, F., Wang, J., Weber, B. (eds.) BPM 2013. LNCS,
vol. 8094, pp. 307–322. Springer, Heidelberg (2013). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-642-40176-3 26
2. Van der Aalst, W.M.P.: Veriﬁcation of workﬂow nets. In: Azéma, P., Balbo, G.
(eds.) ICATPN 1997. LNCS, vol. 1248, pp. 407–426. Springer, Heidelberg (1997).
https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-63139-9 48
3. van der Aalst, W.M.P., Pesic, M., Schonenberg, H., Westergaard, M., Maggi, F.M.:
Declare. Webpage (2010). http://www.win.tue.nl/declare/

--- PAGE 212 ---
Empirical Evaluation of Imperative and Declarative Process Mining 197
4. Debois, S., Hildebrandt, T.T., Slaats, T.: Replication, reﬁnement & reachability:
complexity in dynamic condition-response graphs. Acta Informatica 55, 489–520
(2017)
5. Hull, R., et al.: Business artifacts with guard-stage-milestone lifecycles. In: DEBS
2011, pp. 51–62 (2011)
6. Object Management Group: Business Process Modeling Notation Version 2.0.
Technical report, Object Management Group Final Adopted Speciﬁcation (2011)
7. Marquard, M., Shahzad, M., Slaats, T.: Web-based modelling and collaborative
simulation of declarative processes. In: Motahari-Nezhad, H.R., Recker, J., Wei-
dlich, M. (eds.) BPM 2015. LNCS, vol. 9253, pp. 209–225. Springer, Cham (2015).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-23063-4 15
8. Object Management Group: Case Management Model and Notation, version 1.0.
Webpage, May 2014. http://www.omg.org/spec/CMMN/1.0/PDF
9. Van der Aalst, W.M.P.: Process Mining: Data Science in Action. Springer, Heidel-
berg (2016)
10. Maggi, F.M., Bose, R.P.J.C., van der Aalst, W.M.P.: Eﬃcient discovery of under-
standable declarative process models from event logs. In: Ralyté, J., Franch, X.,
Brinkkemper, S., Wrycza, S. (eds.) CAiSE 2012. LNCS, vol. 7328, pp. 270–285.
Springer, Heidelberg (2012). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-31095-9 18
11. Di Ciccio, C., Mecella, M.: On the discovery of declarative control ﬂows for artful
processes. ACM Trans. Manag. Inf. Syst. 5(4), 24 (2015)
12. Debois, S., Hildebrandt, T.T., Laursen, P.H., Ulrik, K.R.: Declarative process min-
ing for DCR graphs. In: Proceeding of the Symposium on Applied Computing, SAC
2017, pp. 759–764 (2017)
13. Buijs, J.C.A.M., van Dongen, B.F., van der Aalst, W.M.P.: On the role of ﬁtness,
precision, generalization and simplicity in process discovery. In: Meersman, R.,
et al. (eds.) OTM 2012. LNCS, vol. 7565, pp. 305–322. Springer, Heidelberg (2012).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-33606-5 19
14. Buijs, J.C.A.M., van Dongen, B.F., van der Aalst, W.M.P.: Quality dimensions in
process discovery: the importance of ﬁtness, precision, generalization and simplic-
ity. Int. J. Coop. Inf. Syst. 23(1), 1440001 (2014)
15. van der Aalst, W.M.P., Adriansyah, A., van Dongen, B.F.: Replaying history on
process models for conformance checking and performance analysis. Wiley Inter-
disc. Rew. Data Min. Knowl. Disc. 2(2), 182–192 (2012)
16. Leemans, S.J.J., Fahland, D., van der Aalst, W.M.P.: Discovering block-structured
process models from event logs - a constructive approach. In: Colom, J.-M., Desel,
J. (eds.) PETRI NETS 2013. LNCS, vol. 7927, pp. 311–329. Springer, Heidelberg
(2013). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-38697-8 17
17. Debois, S., Slaats, T.: The analysis of a real life declarative process. In: CIDM
2015, pp. 1374–1382 (2015)
18. Adriansyah, A., Munoz-Gama, J., Carmona, J., van Dongen, B.F., van der Aalst,
W.M.P.: Alignment based precision checking. In: La Rosa, M., Soﬀer, P. (eds.)
BPM 2012. LNBIP, vol. 132, pp. 137–149. Springer, Heidelberg (2013). https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-36285-9 15
19. Slaats, T., Schunselaar, D.M.M., Maggi, F.M., Reijers, H.A.: The semantics of
hybrid process models. In: Debruyne, C. (ed.) OTM 2016. LNCS, vol. 10033, pp.
531–551. Springer, Cham (2016). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-48472-3 32
20. Maggi, F.M., Slaats, T., Reijers, H.A.: The automated discovery of hybrid pro-
cesses. In: Sadiq, S., Soﬀer, P., Völzer, H. (eds.) BPM 2014. LNCS, vol. 8659, pp.
392–399. Springer, Cham (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-10172-9 27

--- PAGE 213 ---
198 C. O. Back et al.
21. Schunselaar, D.M.M., Slaats, T., Maggi, F.M., Reijers, H.A., van der Aalst,
W.M.P.: Mining hybrid business process models: a quest for better precision. In:
Abramowicz, W., Paschke, A. (eds.) BIS 2018. LNBIP, vol. 320, pp. 190–205.
Springer, Cham (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-93931-5 14
22. Back, C.O., Debois, S., Slaats, T.: Towards an entropy-based analysis of log vari-
ability. In: Teniente, E., Weidlich, M. (eds.) BPM 2017. LNBIP, vol. 308, pp. 53–70.
Springer, Cham (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-74030-0 4

--- PAGE 214 ---
Artifact Sampling in Experimental Conceptual
Modeling Research
Roman Lukyananko1
, Jeffrey Parsons2(&)
, and Binny M. Samuel3
1
HEC Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada
roman.lukyanenko@hec.ca
2
Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John’s, NL, Canada
jeffreyp@mun.ca
3
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA
samuelby@uc.edu
Abstract. Experimental research in conceptual modeling typically involves
comparing grammars or variations within a grammar, where differences between
experimental groups are based on a focal construct of interest. However, a
conceptual modeling grammar is a collection of many constructs and there is a
danger that grammatical features other than those under consideration in an
experiment can influence or confound the results obtained. To address this issue,
we propose the use of artifact sampling as a way to systematically vary non-
focal grammatical features in experimental conceptual modeling research to
control for potential confounds or interactions between constructs of interest and
other grammatical features. In this paper, we describe the approach and illustrate
its application to the design of a large-scale study to compare alternative
notations within the Entity-Relationship family of grammars.
Keywords: Artifact sampling  Conceptual modeling  Experimental research
1 Introduction
Conceptual modeling grammars serve as important boundary objects in the develop-
ment and use of information systems. Many grammars have been proposed for such
diverse applications as modeling data, business processes, and objects.
Historically, the design of grammars has paid scant attention to justifying the
selection and visual design of modeling constructs – an issue brought into focus by
Moody’s concept of the “physics of notations” [1]. Design decisions made in creating a
modeling grammar (e.g., why diamonds for relationship types in the original Entity-
Relationship (ER) model) are often not justiﬁed during the development and articu-
lation of a grammar.
Empirical research in conceptual modeling, particularly that focusing on experi-
mental evaluation of the effects of grammars (or constructs within a grammar) on
dependent variables of interest (such as comprehension), generally compares grammars
based on variations in some focal construct(s) of interest. Examples include whether or
not optional attributes are permitted [e.g., 2], or whether domain familiarity affects
understanding [e.g., 3]. However, in such comparisons, most components of the
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 199–205, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_25

--- PAGE 215 ---
grammar are taken as given, and their potential impact on results is not explicitly
considered. For example, does it matter if the effect of optional versus mandatory
attributes is tested using the ER grammar or using the UML class diagram grammar?
As a consequence, it may be difﬁcult to disentangle meaningful results in such studies
from the capricious effects of incidental features of the grammar that might confound or
interact with the independent variables of interest. There is evidence from other ﬁelds
that: (1) “subtle differences in interface can cause major differences” [4] in a dependent
variable of interest [for discussion, see 5]; (2) the ¨[r]eal-world impact of Information
Systems¨ may be hindered by the potentially unpredictable large effects of ¨seemingly
small design choices¨ [6]; and (3) ¨[u]nless sound criteria for evaluating instantiation
validity of IS design research is applied, doubts remain whether results are due to
extraneous factors or attributable to idiosyncratic¨ design choices [7].
In this research, we propose a large-scale study using artifact sampling [8] to
illustrate the value of systematically varying features of a conceptual modeling
grammar as a way of studying their effect on a focal construct of interest in an
experimental study. We begin by describing artifact sampling. We then tailor the
artifact sampling approach to a speciﬁc empirical study of conceptual modeling
grammars. Next, we outline our empirical study. We conclude by summarizing the
expected contributions of our study.
2 Artifact Sampling
2.1 The Need for Artifact Sampling
Any conceptual modeling script generated for use in an experimental study is an
artifact instantiated from some design principles – speciﬁcally, the rules of a conceptual
modeling grammar. However, typically only a few variations of the artifact are used in
a particular experimental study. For example, in a study to examine whether allowing
or prohibiting optional properties on entity types affects ER diagram comprehension,
there might be as few as two scripts compared in a study – one depicting optional
attributes and the other replacing optional attributes with subclasses having only
mandatory attributes [e.g., 2]. Thus, it is impossible to determine whether any observed
effects are due solely to the treatment, or are influenced by interactions between the
treatment and the way attributes are depicted in the grammar (e.g., as bubbles attached
to an entity type or as a list inside the entity type box). Likewise, such incidental
choices might mitigate potential effects of a treatment. We contend that examining such
potential effects is needed to ensure conﬁdence in the results of conceptual modeling
experiments that examine modeling grammars or scripts, and to understand the
boundary conditions for any observed effects.
2.2 Artifact Sampling Foundations
Sampling theory underlies much of scientiﬁc experimental work [9]. Fundamental to the
theory is the principle that one may generalize the results of observations only to those
subjectsorobjectsthathavebeensampled[10].However,whilesamplingtheoryhasbeen
readily applied to research subjects, it has rarely been used for experimental stimuli [11].
200 R. Lukyananko et al.

--- PAGE 216 ---
While the beneﬁts of involving multiple subjects in experiments and surveys have
been widely recognized, applying this to research objects has been largely overlooked,
casting doubts on the validity of conclusions drawn from such studies. To increase the
validity of experimental studies, some researchers call for stimuli sampling – selecting
objects at random from the theoretical feature space [12, 13].
We extend this suggestion of sampling object stimuli (experimental or question-
naire items) to the sampling of artifacts such as scripts (or diagrams) used in experi-
mental conceptual modeling research. As the scripts generated using conceptual
modeling grammars are relatively complex artifacts (note, psychologists suggest
stimuli sampling even for simple line drawings, see [14]), the interpretation of diagrams
by model readers might be influenced by incidental decisions about how to visualize a
modeling construct or how to arrange symbols in a script. Therefore, many ways of
depicting these constructs should be tested to enable conclusions to be drawn about the
generalizability ofﬁndings or the extent to which they are limited to particular forms of
representation.
3 Experimental Design
To demonstrate the utility of artifact sampling for experimental conceptual modeling
research, we plan to conduct an exemplar artifact sampling study to compare an
exhaustive set of variants of grammar features. By testing whether these features lead to
different results on dependent variables of interest, we expect to determine the utility
and practical limitations of artifact sampling.
3.1 Experimental Context
We choose as an experimental setting a replication of Khatri et al. [15], who studied the
effects of IS domain knowledge and application domain knowledge of conceptual
modeling scripts generated using the ER and EER grammars on comprehension of the
semantics conveyed in scripts (comparisons were only made within one grammar and
not between the grammars). In that context, speciﬁc diagrams were used to represent
the semantics of familiar and unfamiliar domains. However, no attempt was made to
vary the stimuli (e.g., depiction of elements on a diagram). Figure 1 contains four
variants of a portion of one of the original diagrams used in the study. Starting in the
top left corner of the Fig. 1 and moving clockwise:
(1) Figure 1a directly replicates their work
(2) Figure 1b alters Fig. 1a by using a UML cardinality notation
(3) Figure 1c alters Fig. 1b and removes the relationship diamond
(4) Figure 1d alters Fig. 1c by moving the attributes inside the entity type
To determine whether the ﬁndings are robust across a range of diagram variants, we
propose to use artifact sampling to replicate the study under a variety of conditions.
Artifact Sampling in Experimental Conceptual Modeling Research 201

--- PAGE 217 ---
3.2 Artifact Sampling Method
Following Lukyanenko et al. [8, 16], we adopt an artifact sampling method based on
four steps. First, we identify the artifact population space; in our study it is the space of
all possibilities for conducting data modeling in practice. As it is impossible to
implement every variation within this space (there could be thousands of ways to draw
a data modeling diagram for a domain), reducing this space is necessary to reduce the
number of diagrams to a manageable level.
Second, we theoretically sample from the artifact population space by considering
the constructs within an ER-based conceptual model which we conjecture (based on
theory, past research and intuition) to potentially interact with the theoretical constructs
in Khatri et al. [15]. This created an artifact instantiation space – a theoretical enu-
meration of artifact properties within population space we are interest in implementing
and varying. Table 1 identiﬁes the constructs we considered and the variations within
each. Note that other constructs could be considered, such as the size of diagrams or
whether they are real diagrams or ones artiﬁcially constructed for an experiment – this
choice depends on the intent of the study and researcher’s knowledge of potential
confounds.
Fig. 1. Sample diagram variations based on Khatri et al. [15]
202 R. Lukyananko et al.

--- PAGE 218 ---
Third, as there could be multiple ways to instantiate the instantiation space [for
discussion, see 5], we perform the second round of sampling. As indicated in Table 1,
we attempt to sample systematically across several dimensions for which visual
representations are handled differently in various data-oriented conceptual modeling
grammars. In doing so, note that the diagrams generated in some conditions will not
correspond to modeling notations as published by the developers of a particular
grammar. This does not mean the sampling is invalid. On the contrary, by systemat-
ically varying features to capture the range of visual notations used for constructs, we
will be able to discern whether, how, and under what conditions such variants influence
results.
Fourth, we created variants of diagrams to instantiate each condition determined by
combinations of variants shown in Table 1 (72 conditions in total). Based on general
recommendations in experimental research and uncertainty about the effect size in each
condition, we plan to use 40 human subjects for each of the 72 conditions [17].
We are currently designing the study and intend to collect data in the upcoming
academic year for analysis. Thus, we expect to complete the remaining steps of the
artifact sampling method [8] in time to present preliminary results at the EmpER
workshop.
4 Conclusions
Experimental research in conceptual modeling is vital to obtain a clear understanding
of how modeling grammars affect important outcomes related to the ability of model
readers to understand the semantics of the domain as represented in a script. However,
prior experimental research in conceptual modeling has largely ignored issues related to
possible unanticipated effects of design choices unrelated to the focal construct of
interest on outcomes of interest such as comprehension. In this work, we propose using
an artifact sampling approach to systematically vary elements of visual notation in a
conceptual modeling grammar to understand how elements might interact or interfere
with hypothesized relationships about the effect of design decisions on dependent
variables in a study. We have designed a study in the context of ER-style conceptual
modeling, with a view to replicating and better understanding a published study in
which artifact sampling was not undertaken.
Table 1. ER constructs and variants to be considered in the experiment
Construct Variations Number of conditions
Cardinalities Martin, UMLa
2
Attributes Outside entity type, Inside Entity Type 2
Relationships Diamond, Line 2
Domain Familiar, Unfamiliar, Void 3
Type hierarchies ER-style, EER-style, UML-style 3
a
Labels refer to different notations, which depict cardinalities in visually different
ways
Artifact Sampling in Experimental Conceptual Modeling Research 203

--- PAGE 219 ---
We expect this research to both lead to a better understanding of how to design
modeling grammars to best represent constructs of interest in a visual manner, and to
provide evidence of the importance of artifact sampling in the methodological toolkit of
conceptual modeling researchers and scholars in other disciplines that rely on artifacts
for theory testing and other analysis.
References
1. Moody, D.L.: The “Physics” of notations: toward a scientiﬁc basis for constructing visual
notations in software engineering. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. 35, 756–779 (2009)
2. Bodart, F., Patel, A., Sim, M., Weber, R.: Should optional properties be used in conceptual
modelling? A theory and three empirical tests. Inf. Syst. Res. 12, 384–405 (2001)
3. Parsons, J.: An experimental study of the effects of representing property precedence on the
comprehension of conceptual schemas. J. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 12, 441–462 (2011)
4. Briggs, R.O., Nunamaker, J.J., Sprague, R.: 1001 unanswered research questions in GSS.
J. Manag. Inf. Syst. 14, 3–21 (1997)
5. Lukyanenko, R., Parsons, J.: Reconciling theories with design choices in design science
research. In: vom Brocke, J., Hekkala, R., Ram, S., Rossi, M. (eds.) DESRIST 2013. LNCS,
vol. 7939, pp. 165–180. Springer, Heidelberg (2013). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-
38827-9_12
6. Ableitner, L., Tiefenbeck, V., Hosseini, S., Schöb, S., Fridgen, G., Staake, T.: Real-world
impact of information systems: the effect of seemingly small design choices. In: Workshop
on Information Technologies and Systems (WITS 2017) (2017)
7. Lukyanenko, R., Evermann, J., Parsons, J.: Instantiation validity in IS design research. In:
Tremblay, M.C., VanderMeer, D., Rothenberger, M., Gupta, A., Yoon, V. (eds.) DESRIST
2014. LNCS, vol. 8463, pp. 321–328. Springer, Cham (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-319-06701-8_22
8. Lukyanenko, R., Parsons, J., Samuel, B.M.: Artifact sampling: using multiple information
technology artifacts to increase research rigor. In: Proceedings of the 51st Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS 2018), Big Island, Hawaii, pp. 1–12
(2018)
9. Lohr, S.L.: Sampling: Design and Analysis. Cengage Learning, Boston (2009)
10. Hammond, K.R., Stewart, T.R.: The Essential Brunswik: Beginnings, Explications
Applications. Oxford University Press, Oxford (2001)
11. Brunswik, E.: Organismic achievement and environmental probability. Psychol. Rev. 50,
255 (1943)
12. Fontenelle, G.A., Phillips, A.P., Lane, D.M.: Generalizing across stimuli as well as subjects:
a neglected aspect of external validity. J. Appl. Psychol. 70, 101 (1985)
13. Wells, G.L., Windschitl, P.D.: Stimulus sampling and social psychological experimentation.
Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 25, 1115–1125 (1999)
14. Snodgrass, J.G., Vanderwart, M.: A standardized set of 260 pictures: norms for name
agreement, image agreement, familiarity, and visual complexity. J. Exp. Psychol.
[Hum. Learn.] 6, 174–215 (1980)
204 R. Lukyananko et al.

--- PAGE 220 ---
15. Khatri, V., Vessey, I., Ramesh, V., Clay, P., Park, S.-J.: Understanding conceptual schemas:
exploring the role of application and IS domain knowledge. Inf. Syst. Res. 17, 81–99 (2006)
16. Lukyanenko, R., Evermann, J., Parsons, J.: Guidelines for establishing instantiation validity
in IT artifacts: a survey of is research. In: Donnellan, B., Helfert, M., Kenneally, J.,
VanderMeer, D., Rothenberger, M., Winter, R. (eds.) DESRIST 2015. LNCS, vol. 9073,
pp. 430–438. Springer, Cham (2015). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-18714-3_35
17. VanVoorhis, C.R.W., Morgan, B.L.: Understanding power and rules of thumb for
determining sample sizes. Tutor. Quant. Methods Psychol. 3, 43–50 (2007)
Artifact Sampling in Experimental Conceptual Modeling Research 205

--- PAGE 221 ---
Design of an Empirical Study for
Evaluating an Automatic Layout Tool
Haoyuan Zhang, Tong Li(B)
, and Yunduo Wang
Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, China
zhyuan97@163.com, litong@bjut.edu.cn, wangyunduochn@gmail.com
Abstract. Generating meaningful layout of iStar models is a challeng-
ing task, which currently requires signiﬁcant manual eﬀorts. However,
it is time-consuming when dealing with large-scale iStar modeling, ris-
ing the need of having an automatic iStar layout tool. Previously, we
have proposed an algorithm for laying out iStar SD models and have
implemented a corresponding prototype tool. In this paper, we report
our ongoing empirical work which aims to evaluate the eﬀectiveness and
usability of the prototype tool. In particular, we present a research design
which is applied to compare manual layout and automatic layout in terms
of eﬃciency and model comprehensibility. Based on such a design, we are
planning to carry out empirical studies accordingly in the near future.
Keywords: iStar models · Automatic layout · Controlled experiment
Prototype tool
1 Introduction
iStar modeling language is a wildly used social goal modeling language, based on
which hundreds of requirements analysis approaches have been proposed [1]. As
a modeling language, one of the key performance indicators is enabling eﬃcient
communication among requirements engineers and stakeholders. To this end, it
is essential to layout iStar models in a meaningful manner, as a bad layout could
bring tremendous troubles to model comprehension [2].
Manually laying out iStar models is time-consuming, especially for large-scale
models1
that consists of hundreds of nodes. Unfortunately, there are no eﬀective
algorithms for automatically laying out iStar models, which motivates us to pro-
pose a corresponding solution [3]. Moreover, our proposed layout algorithm has
been implemented by a prototype tool, which is supposed to signiﬁcantly facil-
itate iStar modeler’s work. In particular, the tool can automatically lay out an
iStar model that is in the format of iStarML [4], an example of which is shown in
Fig.1(a). In addition, our prototype tool also support manual adjustment on top
of its automatic layout, enabling a semi-automatic layout strategy. Figure1(b)
presents an corresponding example.
1
Large iStar models can be found at https://zenodo.org/record/581653.
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 206–211, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_26

--- PAGE 222 ---
Design of An Empirical Study for Evaluating An Automatic Layout Tool 207
(a) Automatic layout (b) Semi-automatic layout
Fig.1. Prototype tool demonstration
In this paper, we report our ongoing empirical work which aims to evaluate
the eﬀectiveness and usability of the prototype tool. In particular, we present
the research design of a controlled experiment in detail, which will be carried
out in the near future to compare manual layout and automatic layout in terms
of eﬃciency and model comprehensibility. In addition, our empirical study also
includes case studies and performance testing for evaluating usability and scal-
ability of the tool, respectively.
2 Related Work
Santos et al. have proposed and designed a comprehensive experiment to evaluate
the layout of the iStar model in terms of the understandability of social goal
models [2]. They performed a quasi-experiment where participants were given
two understanding and two reviewing tasks. Both tasks involved a model with
a bad layout and another model following the iStar layout guidelines. They
evaluated the impact of layouts by combining the success level in those tasks and
the required eﬀort to accomplish them. Eﬀort was assessed using time, perceived
complexity with regard to NASA TLX (Task Load Index), and eye-tracking data.
Matulevičius and Heymans have presented an experiment to compare the
quality of two goal languages (i.e., iStar and KAOS) by the means of the semi-
otic quality framework [5]. The experiment consisted of three steps: interviewing,
creating goal models, and evaluating models and languages. They quasi-equally
divided 19 students into four groups, and randomly assigned each group with

--- PAGE 223 ---
208 H. Zhang et al.
a goal model language for creating goal models by using corresponding model-
ing tools. They evaluated the experiment by letting each participant ﬁll out a
questionnaire.
Opdahl and Sindre have taken an experiment to compare the attack trees
and misuse cases for identifying security threats [6]. They reported a pair of
controlled experiments, in which 28 and 35 participants are asked to identify
security threats by using the two approaches accordingly. In particular, they use
a Latin-Squares design to control for technique and task order.
Buyens & Joosen evaluated and compared a selected set of risk analysis tech-
niques based on a realistic case study [7]. The contribution for their analysis were
threefold: they deﬁned a set of high-level criteria, they compared the results of
the diﬀerent methods, and they used statistical analysis techniques for study-
ing additional characteristics. The analysis was performed on an independently
developed case study of a signiﬁcant scale.
España et al. extended the conceptual model quality framework proposed
by Lindland et al. in regard to the completeness and granularity of models [8].
They deﬁned four new metrics to improve the integrity of the model and assessed
whether a functional requirement speciﬁcation has an appropriate granularity
with respect to a given set of unity criteria. In particular, They propose mea-
suring the degree of functional encapsulations completeness and the degree of
linked communications completeness with respect to a reference model (which
is agreed by an expert modelling committee).
3 Research Design
3.1 Controlled Experiments
The major research goal of our study is to investigate whether the models that
are automatically laid out by our tool can be well comprehended like models
that are manually laid out.
Selection of Participants. Participants for the controlled experiments are ide-
ally recruited among iStar modeling experts. Pragmatically, in order to ensure
the number of participants to draw comparatively sound conclusions, we plan
to involve 60 third-year bachelor students who majored in computer science in
the experiment. In particular, the students will be taught about iStar model-
ing language during their software engineering course for one hour or so. Their
performance of the students during the experiment will be associated with their
ﬁnal marks in order to better motivate their participation.
Experimental Materials and Tasks. We plan to use publicly available iStar
models2
as experimental materials. The models have been divided into two sets,
i.e., smaller models and larger models, and we will randomly pick up 3 models
2
https://zenodo.org/record/581653 and https://zenodo.org/record/581654.

--- PAGE 224 ---
Design of An Empirical Study for Evaluating An Automatic Layout Tool 209
from each set. Note that such models all have been manually laid out in a
reasonable manner, and our tool will import those model ﬁles and automatically
produce an alternative layout according to our algorithm. Participants will be
assigned with particular models for read, after which they will be asked to answer
a series of questions regarding the semantics of iStar models.
Variables and Hypotheses. There are three independent variables that will
be controlled in our experiment: model scales, layout approaches and time. In
particular, we have two scales of models, large-scale models and small-scale mod-
els. It is worth noting that such scales are determined according to the two model
sets we use. Generally speaking, small models contain less than 100 elements,
while the large models involve hundreds of elements. The layout approaches com-
pared in the experiment are manual layout created by experienced iStar modelers
and automatic layout created by our tool. Moreover, we plan to have two time
settings of the experiment, ﬁxed time and unlimited time.
After participants perform the model comprehension tasks, there are two
dependent variables will be measured. First, we will measure the accuracy of
questions (AOQ) to evaluate to which extent the participants can comprehend
the models. Second, we will measure the time used by the participants when the
experiment setting is unlimited time in order to evaluate to which extent the
model is diﬃcult to read.
Our studies aim at evaluating the following hypotheses:
– H1 Given a ﬁxed time span and small models, participants read automati-
cally laid out models can have similar (+/−5%) AOQ with participants read
manually laid out models.
– H2 Given a ﬁxed time span and large models, participants read automati-
cally laid out models can have similar (+/−5%) AOQ with participants read
manually laid out models.
– H3 Given unlimited time and small models, both participants read automat-
ically laid out models and participants read manually laid out models can
achieve 100% AOQ.
– H4 Given unlimited time and small models, participants read automatically
laid out models will spend similar (+/−5%) time with participants read man-
ually laid out models.
– H5 Given unlimited time and large models, both participants read automat-
ically laid out models and participants read manually laid out models can
achieve 100% AOQ.
– H6 Given unlimited time and large models, participants read automatically
laid out models will spend similar (+/−5%) time with participants read man-
ually laid out models.
Experimental Design. We design a series of experiments according to the
independent variables we want to control, the details of which is shown in Table1
In addition, we will divide the participants into 4 groups of 15 participants each.

--- PAGE 225 ---
210 H. Zhang et al.
Each group is supposed to read small and large models, respectively. Taken into
account the learning eﬀect, all groups will start with small model experiments.
In particular, group 1 and group 3 are always under a ﬁxed time setting, while
the other two groups are always under an unlimited time setting.
Table 1. Experiment design
Auto Manual
Small-scale models & Fixed time Group1 Group3
Small-scale models & Unlimited time Group2 Group4
Large-scale models & Fixed time Group1 Group3
Large-scale models & Unlimited time Group2 Group4
Threats to Validity. As there are diﬀerent ways of classifying validity in the
literature, we here adopt the classiﬁcation used by Runeson et al. [9], which has
an focus on case study research in software engineering.
– External Validity. As the developers of the tool, we are able to train partici-
pants in a lot of more details than others, which may hinder the generalization
of our conclusion. Thus, we plan to develop a comprehensive guideline and
enable a standardized training.
– Construct Validity. The accuracy of questionnaire may or may not be able
to measure the level of model comprehension, depending on the quality of
the questions. Thus, we plan to have experience iStar expert to design such
questions and iteratively reﬁne them via pilot study.
– Conclusion Validity. The motivation of participants to join the experiment
will dramatically aﬀect the conclusion validity. Thus, we associate the perfor-
mance of the participants with their ﬁnal marks of the software engineering
course to ensure they will carefully read the models.
3.2 Case Study
We would conduct in-depth case studies to further evaluate the usability of
our tools. In particular, participants will be asked to use our tool to model a
particular scenario, after which they need to describe the steps they took and
the diﬃculties encountered during the practices. Moreover, we plan to use eye-
tracking tools to further understand the participants’ mind while they dealing
with a speciﬁc layout. As for abnormal phenomena obtained from qualitative
analysis, we will interview the participants to deeply understand his rationale.
3.3 Performance Test
To further evaluate the performance of our prototype tool, we will produce a set
of iStar models in diﬀerent scales with particular parameters (such as number

--- PAGE 226 ---
Design of An Empirical Study for Evaluating An Automatic Layout Tool 211
of actors and dependencies). Speciﬁcally, we plan to test models consist of 100
elements, 1000 elements, and 10000 elements, respectively. For one thing, we
record the time used for laying out the model. For another, we also plan to
check whether large-scale models can be arranged in a meaningful manner.
4 Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper, we present the design of empirical studies that we plan to carry
out to verify the eﬀectiveness of our proposed layout algorithm, as well as the
usability and performance of our prototype tool. Speciﬁcally, We plan to include
controlled experiments, case studies, and performance testing in our study. As
for future work, we plan to ﬁrst implement our experiment, based on which
iteratively optimize our layout algorithm. In addition, we also plan to deploy
and publish our tool in order to be practically used by domain experts.
Acknowledgements. This work is supported by National Key R&D Program of
China (No. 2017YFC08033007), the National Natural Science of Foundation of China
(No. 91546111, 91646201) and Basic Research Funding of Beijing University of Tech-
nology (No. 040000546318516).
References
1. Horkoﬀ, J., et al.: Goal-oriented requirements engineering: an extended systematic
mapping study. Requir. Eng. 1–28 (2017)
2. Santos, M., Gralha, C., Goulao, M., Araújo, J., Moreira, A., Cambeiro, J.: What is
the impact of bad layout in the understandability of social goal models? In: IEEE
24th International Requirements Engineering Conference (RE) 2016, pp. 206–215.
IEEE (2016)
3. Du, X., Li, T., Wang, D.: An automatic layout approach for istar models (2017)
4. Cares, C., Franch, X., Perini, A., Susi, A.: istarml: an xml-based interchange format
for i* models. In: Proceedings of the 3rd International i* Workshop, Recife, Brazil,
February, pp. 11–12. Citeseer (2008)
5. Matulevičius, R., Heymans, P.: Comparing goal modelling languages: an experiment.
In: Sawyer, P., Paech, B., Heymans, P. (eds.) REFSQ 2007. LNCS, vol. 4542, pp.
18–32. Springer, Heidelberg (2007). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-73031-6 2
6. Opdahl, A.L., Sindre, G.: Experimental comparison of attack trees and misuse cases
for security threat identiﬁcation. Inf. Softw. Technol. 51(5), 916–932 (2009)
7. Buyens, K., De Win, B., Joosen, W.: Empirical and statistical analysis of risk
analysis-driven techniques for threat management. In: The Second International
Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security, ARES 2007, PP. 1034–1041.
IEEE (2007)
8. España, S., Condori-Fernandez, N., González, A., Pastor, Ó.: An empirical compar-
ative evaluation of requirements engineering methods. J. Braz. Comput. Soc. 16(1),
3–19 (2010)
9. Runeson, P., Höst, M.: Guidelines for conducting and reporting case study research
in software engineering. Empir. Softw. Eng. 14(2), 131 (2009)

--- PAGE 227 ---
Conceptual Modeling in Requirements
and Business Analysis (MREBA) 2018

--- PAGE 228 ---
Preface to MREBA 2018
5th Workshop on Conceptual Modeling in Requirements
Engineering and Business Analysis (MREBA 2018)
at the 37th International Conference on Conceptual
Modeling (ER 2018)
Xi’an, China
October 22–25, 2018
Organized by
Jennifer Horkoff, Renata Guizzardi and Jelena Zdravkovic
It is our pleasure to welcome you to the ﬁfth edition of the International Workshop on
Conceptual Modeling in Requirements Engineering and Business Analysis (MREBA)
as a co-located event of the 37th International Conference on Conceptual Modeling
(ER 2018), in the city of Xi’an, China.
The MREBA workshop aims to provide a forum for discussing the interplay
between Requirements Engineering and Business Analysis topics and Conceptual
Modeling. Requirements Engineering (RE) and Business Analysis (BA) are common
practices within organizations, often applied in tandem. In particular, the workshop
focuses on how requirements modeling can be effectively used as part of Business
Analysis and Systems Engineering.
MREBA builds on the success of the previous four instances, as well as an evo-
lution of the previous RIGiM (Requirements Intentions and Goals in Conceptual
Modeling) Workshop (2007–9, 12–13). While RIGiM was speciﬁcally dedicated to
goal modelling and the use of intentional concepts in RE, MREBA handles any kind of
modelling notation or activity in the contexts of RE and BA.
This year, MREBA started with a keynote by Prof. João Araujo from New
University of Lisbon, entitled “On the Quality of Requirements: the Case of Goal
Models”. The workshop proceeded with the presentation and discussion of ﬁve high-
quality full-accepted papers.
Each of the submitted papers went through a thorough review process with at least
three reviews from our program committee. We deeply thank the authors of the sub-
mitted papers for their high-quality papers. We also thank the Program Committee
members and additional reviewers for their effort and dedication in the review of the
submitted works. And we ﬁnally thank the ER workshop chairs, PC chairs and the
remaining of the organizing committee for their support.
October 2018 Jennifer Horkoff
Renata Guizzardi
Jelena Zdravkovic
Program Co-chairs

--- PAGE 229 ---
On the Quality of Requirements:
The Case of Goal Models
João Araujo
NOVA LINCS, Departamento de Informática, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal
joao.araujo@fct.unl.pt
Abstract. Requirements models have been developed for the requirements engineers and
stakeholders work, providing abstraction mechanisms to, for example, facilitate the
communication among them by providing better structuring of requirements, thus helping
with their analysis. Nevertheless, the extent to which requirements modelling languages
are adequate for communication purposes has been somewhat limited. Several quality
aspects have contributed to that, ranging from lack of abstraction mechanisms to address
model’s complexity, to the impact of layout of models or the actual notation adopted. For
example, in large-scale systems, building requirements models may end in complex
and/or incomplete models, which are harder to understand and modify, leading to an
increase in costs of product development and evolution. Consequently, for large-scale
systems, the effective management of complexity and completeness of requirements
models is vital. Moreover, it is undeniable that the communication potential of require-
ments modelinglanguages isnot entirelyexplored, as their cognitive effectivenessisoften
not boosted. For example, choosing an adequate layout for requirements models may be a
relevant issue, as a bad layout may compromise the adequacy of the models. Also,
although visual notations are often adopted (as they are perceived as more effective for
conveyinginformationtonontechnicalstakeholdersthantext),their carefuldesignisoften
not considered. Not taking all this into account, in the long run, may result in poorly
understood requirements, leading to problems in artifacts produced in later stages of
software development. So, in this talk, I will discuss in detail these issues based on the
results of experiments where metrics were collected to evaluate and discuss some quality
aspects of requirements models, in particular requirements goal models (increasingly
popular in the requirements community), such as complexity, completeness, under-
standability and semantic transparency.

--- PAGE 230 ---
Representing and Analyzing Enterprise
Capabilities as Specialized Actors - A BPM
Example
Mohammad Hossein Danesh1(&)
and Eric Yu1,2
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
danesh@cs.toronto.edu, eric.yu@utoronto.ca
2
Faculty of Information, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
Abstract. The notion of capability is used by practitioners and researchers
alike to enable better understanding of business trajectories and the role of IT in
achieving them. Building on the origins of the concept from strategic man-
agement, this paper lays out the requirements for capturing enterprise-speciﬁc
and social characteristics of capabilities. The paper proposes adoption of a goal-
driven agent-oriented modeling approach to satisfy the requirements. The ability
of such an approach to explicate social and technical design alternatives and
enable decision making on their tradeoffs is illustrated on a BPM capability.
Keywords: Enterprise capability  Dynamic capability
Agent-oriented modeling  i* framework  Enterprise modeling
1 Introduction
As organizations face ongoing challenges to take advantage of advancing technologies,
they are increasingly using notions of capability to conceptualize how emerging
technologies can be deployed and integrated into their existing organizational and
technological fabric [1–3]. For example, capability heatmaps are widely used in
industry practices to identify gaps in enterprise capabilities and to prioritize invest-
ments [2, 3].
Research and academic communities are actively contributing to advance the state
of the practice for modeling capabilities. For example, in the ArchiMate modeling
language, the capability extension facilitates analysis of how resources and capabilities
are aligned with strategic goals [4]. The Capability Driven Development (CDD) ap-
proach [1], provides methods and techniques to enable better adaptation of information
systems and software services to changes in the contextual situation of enterprise.
The concept of capabilities has long been studied in the ﬁeld of strategic man-
agement with the aim to attain and sustain competitive advantage [5–8]. In this paper,
an approach to representing and analyzing capabilities drawing on insights from the
strategic management literature about how capabilities are developed and evolve within
the context of an enterprise is presented. In an earlier work, an integrative meta-model
representing enterprise capability and its related concepts was presented [9]. In this
paper, the focus is on the treatment of Enterprise Capability (EC) as a specialized kind
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 217–227, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_27

--- PAGE 231 ---
of strategic actor modeled in the i* language [10] that enables reasoning about:
(a) couplings of resources and processes to form ECs, (b) how the couplings account
for unique characteristics that can result in competitive advantage, (c) the organiza-
tional and social setting that co-evolve with ECs, and (d) the network of comple-
mentary ECs that are orchestrated to offer services/products.
In Sect. 2, the socio-technical characteristics and requirements of modeling ECs are
discussed. Section 3 offers arguments on the suitability of an agent-oriented modeling
approach that can represent and reason on EC development and evolution meeting the
requirements set out in Sect. 2. In Sect. 4, the related work and alternative represen-
tations of EC are reviewed. The paper is concluded in Sect. 5 with discussion on
beneﬁts of the agent-oriented paradigm and future research direction.
2 Characterizing Enterprise Capabilities
Drawing on the strategic management literature [7, 8, 11, 12], Enterprise Capability
(EC)1
is deﬁned as an intentional combination of ﬁrm-speciﬁc assets, organizational
routines (business processes), and human knowledge (skillset/know-how) that take
advantage of complementary relations and are created and evolved overtime through
social collaboration and learning. Five characteristics of ECs are evident in the pro-
posed deﬁnition. First, ECs are intentionally built and evolved to pursue continuously
changing enterprise objectives that serve strategic trajectories and create/sustain com-
petitive standing [6, 8, 11, 13]. Second, an EC emerges as a result of intelligent
coupling of enterprise-speciﬁc resources and processes, implying (a) enterprise
resources and processes are heterogenous across ﬁrms, and (b) the form and format of
their coupling has signiﬁcant impact on the output [6, 8, 12–14].
Third, ECs are most impactful when developed and used in a harmonizing and
synergetic way as a series of complementary and cospecialized capabilities [7, 8, 13].
Fourth, ECs have a social characteristic because the social capital, reputation and
relationships of the managers and teams responsible for them have an immense impact
on their development and evolution options [12, 15]. Fifth, ECs are continuously
applying meta-level learning processes to codify and extend their knowledge base
serving as the foundation of their operation and evolution [12, 14, 16]. As such,
modeling ECs requires a socio-technical approach that can express these characteristics
and support reasoning at the right abstraction level to satisfy the following
requirements:
Req-1: Enabling representation and reasoning on technical, business and organiza-
tional goals (aspects of intentionality) in a fashion to enable co-design of IT and
business is essential. The need is heightened as in today’s environment most capa-
bilities, particularly the competitive differentiators, are IT-enabled capabilities [17–19].
Capturing intentions from multiple perspectives (a) enhances stakeholder onboarding
1
The term enterprise capability is purposefully used to distinguish this research from some other more
general treatment of the notion of capability. This enterprise focus is supported by the management
literature and its deﬁnition and usage of the concept.
218 M. H. Danesh and E. Yu

--- PAGE 232 ---
and communication, (b) enables requirement speciﬁcation and co-design of business
and IT, and (c) enhances the understanding of the context in which decisions are made.
Req-2: Decision making about resource and process couplings that form and shape an
EC is not trivial, yet entails (often) long-lasting commitments referred to as path
dependency [5, 12]. To enable reasoning on such decisions one needs to (a) specify and
elaborate the means of coupling ﬁrm-speciﬁc resources and processes to satisfy
objectives, and (b) identify the conditions under which an alternative is preferable to
another while considering multiple perspectives (Req-1).
Req-3: ECs often create value in combination, forming complementary and inter-
locking relationships [7, 11, 13]. As enterprises today are heavily dealing with dynamic
and continuously evolving ecosystems with loose boundaries, enterprises and conse-
quently their ECs are ever more required to participate in co-creating networks even
beyond organizational boundaries [11, 18]. On the other hand, to keep up with the fast-
paced changing environment and foster innovation, capabilities and their decision
making process should be decentralized to the extent of near autonomy [7, 18].
As a result, one needs to represent and reason about ECs that are nearly autono-
mous in their decision making, yet highly interdependent in creating value. The
combination of multi-perspective intentions, autonomous nature, fast-paced evolution,
and highly interdependent network(s) results in emergent behaviors and desires, cre-
ating a sense of identity for an EC. Therefore, any conceptual representation of the
capability should be able to account for localized intentions and their trajectory,
interdependent goals and needs, and alignment between the two.
Req-4: Expression of the social setting [12, 14], cultural aspirations [12, 14, 15], and
organizational and team structure [15] is an essential step for decision making as they
can inhibit or enable certain alternatives for the development and evolution of capa-
bilities. Therefore, the ability to (a) represent and analyze options for organizing teams,
(b) provide understanding of social relationships among organizational actors, and
(c) identify and steer the impact of social norms and cultural values are important
requirements for making decisions about the development and evolution of ECs.
3 Agent-Oriented Modeling of Enterprise Capabilities
Agent-oriented modeling approaches have been well-studied for capturing requirement
of social, technical and interdependent networks of software systems [20]. Particularly
the internal makeup of agents in terms of goals, means-ends, quality attributes, con-
tributions, and tradeoffs are of signiﬁcant beneﬁt when considering requirements of
modeling EC. Representation of actors’ external relationships through dependencies
and associations will empower understanding of the social and complementary
requirements of modeling ECs. As such, this section demonstrates and assesses the
beneﬁts of an agent-oriented representation and illustrates the extent to which the set-
out requirements of Sect. 2 are satisﬁed. This is achieved by building on the proposed
extension to the i* framework [21] that represents EC as specialized i* actors.
Representing and Analyzing Enterprise Capabilities as Specialized Actors 219

--- PAGE 233 ---
For illustration, we refer to a set of best practices for managing an enterprise wide
Business Process Management (BPM) capability proposed by Dumas et al. [22]. The
proposal motivates investments in a “mature holistic BPM practice” as shown in the
model of Fig. 1. The analysis in this section demonstrates how a speciﬁcation of a
capability meant to prescribe best practices might in fact contain design choices that
can lead to vastly different outcomes. In the following, we highlight several distinctive
features of a goal-based agent-oriented approach to modeling ECs that can analyze and
identify the strengths and weaknesses of capability design strategies.
3.1 Explicating Alternatives and Quality Attributes to Capture EC
Intentions and Perspectives
In Fig. 1, we model the BPM capability as an intentional actor, thus revealing intent in
terms of functional and quality objectives. There can be different ways of achieving
these objectives. These are shown as tasks pointing to the goal via the means-end link.
Here we show only the one approach proposed by Dumas et al. [22]. This approach is
modeled as consisting of sub-elements corresponding to the three main components of
BPM capability identiﬁed by Dumas et al., accompanied by two quality objectives
(softgoals in i*). By making goals and means-ends relationships explicit in the model,
the EC designer is provoked to think carefully about what the EC is aiming to achieve,
and that there can be different ways of achieving those objectives. Such representation
of intentions and their qualitative aspects enables satisfaction of Req-1 and Req-2.
Using this model of the intentional structure of the BPM capability, an architect can
readily adapt the best practice recommendations, by adding, for example, quality goals
“Design business processes with reusability in mind” and “Incentivize development of
horizontal business processes” (not shown in the model of Fig. 1) in the context of a
highly vertically optimized enterprise. Such enterprise-speciﬁc requirements are con-
siderations that are often not captured in best practices such as Dumas et al. [22].
Manage Stakeholder
on-boarding &
Communication of
the Bigger Picture
Manage &
Orchestrate
BPM Efforts in
Alignment to
other
Management
Activities
Employ BPM
Practices
Across the
Enterprise BPM
Continuously
Mature the
Capability
Approach of
Dumas et al in
BPM
Actor Actor
Boundary
Resource
Goal
Softgoal
Capability
Task
Role
Agent
Contribution
Links
Actor Associations
Legend
Inferred from the description
& not directly specified in the
original source
Position
Holistic
Management
Responsible
For
Balance the Focus
between Methods &
Tools and
Strategic Objectives
& Priorities
Ensure
Strategic
Alignment
Decomposition
Means-end
Dependency
Managing the
Interrelationships of
BPM projects across
the organization
Fig. 1. A high-level view of a BPM capability (For high-quality ﬁgures see “http://www.cs.
toronto.edu/*danesh/AgentCapBPM.pdf”)
220 M. H. Danesh and E. Yu

--- PAGE 234 ---
3.2 Using Actor Boundaries and Associations
Building on the i* agent-oriented approach with ECs represented as specialized actors,
the actor boundaries play an important role in the design of EC by enabling reasoning
on what to include or exclude from a capability. This treatment enables:
(1) Leveraging Actor Associations & Dependencies to Represent Intentions of
Capability Decompositions: In the BPM case, six underlying ECs are discussed as
presented in Fig. 2 that are coordinated with one another to ensure a holistic BPM
practice. One could choose to have “Align Strategy” and “BPM Governance” as two
distinct capabilities, so that each can develop on its own with autonomy, which requires
coordination from the parent capability (BPM). Alternatively, one could make a case of
integrating the two into a single capability. The two ways of setting boundaries for
these capabilities result in different topologies and have different contributions to
softgoals.
In the agent-oriented paradigm, ECs cannot be simply decomposed to sub-
capabilities, instead capability relationships are described through dependencies and
associations. Representing decompositions with “is-part-of” associations will force the
modeler to explore and explicate motivations behind the decomposition. The actor
boundaries and dependencies will allow analysis on the implications of the decom-
position. This treatment of capabilities contributes to the satisfaction of Req-3.
(2) Use of Actor Associations to Represent Organizational Structure and Needs:
Dumas et al. [22] recommends separating the development of methods and tools for
“Project & Program Management” from “BPM Methods & Tools” as captured in
Fig. 2. The separation allows for more flexibility when evolving each discipline and
BPM
Governance
Manage cultural
Expectations &
Transformation
Manage Stakeholder
on-boarding &
Communication of
the Bigger Picture
Manage &
Orchestrate
BPM Efforts in
Alignment to
other
Management
Activities
Managing the
Interrelationships of
BPM projects across the
organization
Employ BPM Practices
Across the Enterprise
Continously
Mature the
Capability
Approach of
Dumas et al in
BPM
Establish Governance
Structure
Continuously Update
Knowledge Based
Employ Right
HR Policies
*
Understand &
Communicate
Strategic Direction
*
Employ &
Coordinate
Management
Practices
Develop & Mature
a Variety of
Methods & Tools
*
Address
BPM
Lifecycle
D
Manage
BPM
Methods &
Tools
D
Effective
Application
of Tools &
Methods
Guide Selection of
Methods & Tools
D
BPM
Motivate
Learning
Align
Strategy
Objectives, Measures &
Implementation Plan
*
D
Balance the Focus
between Methods &
Tools and Strategic
Objectives & Priorities
BPM Skillset
Development
Project &
Program
Management
Enforce Appropriate
Governance Across
Projects & Programs *
Like “Align Strategy”, all capabilities have“is part of” relationship to the“BPM” capability which are hidden to avoid clutter
Fig. 2. Illustrating the decomposition of BPM capability – legend provided in Fig. 1
Representing and Analyzing Enterprise Capabilities as Specialized Actors 221

--- PAGE 235 ---
enables application of localized expertise. In Fig. 3, we use the means-end links to
indicate that there can be (at least) four ways to separate and coordinate the two
capabilities. Each of these alternatives will require their own organizational structure
(s). For example, alternatives 1 and 2 require one member on the “BPM Team” albeit
with very different expertise represented as P1 covering two distinct roles in Fig. 3.
Alternatives 3 and 4 each requires three team members represented by P2, P3 and P4.
Expressing the organizational structure and setting contributes to the satisfaction of
Req-1 and Req-4 by ﬁrstly, enabling the identiﬁcation of enterprise-speciﬁc objectives
that impact each alternative and their contribution to quality goals, e.g., “Balanced Cost
of Human Resources” (not shown in the model due to space limitation) as the objective
of the “BPM Team” and “Effective Coordination Among Projects and Program(s)” as
the objective of the “Project & Program Management” will impact the speciﬁed
alternatives of Fig. 3. Secondly, allowing explication of the relevant stakeholders and
their interests that will ease onboarding and communication, e.g., the three depen-
dencies to the “Procurement Management” capability in Fig. 3, represent different
stakeholder needs with respect to project management. Lastly, the expression distin-
guishes the interests of the teams from capabilities while explicating their dependen-
cies. Thus, it enables reasoning on the alignment and co-evolution of the two sets of
objectives as decoupling the teams’ interests from capability interests is neither
desirable nor possible.
Effective
Coordination
Among
Projects &
Program(s)
Management
Provision Methods & Tools
for Management
*
Project &
Program
Management
Project
Management
Office
Establish
Pactices
Responsible For
Perform with
PMO Support
Source
Appropriate
Tooling
*
Perform with
Standard
Configured Tool *
Perform
Project
Management
& Reporting
Establish Formal
Collaboration Processes Money
Negotiate &
Sign Tooling
Contracts
Customized
Configuration
Licensing &
Environment
Knowledge
& Expertise
Outsource to
Specialized
Partner
Employ
Methods &
Tools to Manage
Program(s)
D
Enterprise
Project
Management
Software
Access
D
*
*
*
*
Employ Methods &
Tools for Managing
individual Projects
*
D
D
Find &
Source
Provider *
*
* *
*
*
*
Manage
BPM
Methods &
Tools
Cater for BPM
Requirements
when Purchasing
Tools
Procurement
Management
*
BPM
Procurement
Expert
Project
Manager
Tool
Expert
Software
Specialist
Employ PMO
Office
*
Communicat
ion
Expert
John Sara P2
P3
Manage
Relation
Determine
Fit
P4
P1
All P1, P2, P3 and P4 have
“is-part-of” association to BPM Team
1
2
*
3
4
Execute D
Configure D
Manage
Data
BPM
Team
Fig. 3. Illustrating alternatives and organizational structure – legend in Fig. 1
222 M. H. Danesh and E. Yu

--- PAGE 236 ---
3.3 Using Means-Ends and Dependencies to Illustrate Historical
Decisions
Depicting boundaries, explicating intentions of decompositions, and enforcing means-
ends relationships will clarify the logic behind (historical) decisions. Furthermore, it
will empower reasoning on limitations in the paths ahead when evolving capabilities
both from an organizational standpoint, i.e., explaining responsibilities and loss/gain of
control through positioning i* elements in actor boundaries, and a technical standpoint,
i.e., through comparing alternatives regarding their satisfaction of goals, softgoals and
dependencies. Understanding the limitations in the paths ahead plays a primary role in
managing resistance when evolving ECs [5, 12, 16].
For example, the decision to rely on the “Enterprise Project Management” capa-
bility by the “BPM Team” as described in Fig. 3, will limit the team’s ability to propose
new methods and tools for managing BPM projects in the future. The limitation is due
to commitments and investments made by the “Project Management Ofﬁce” on
establishing processes, preparing and disseminating training material, and acquiring
software.
3.4 Building on Strategic Dependencies to Orchestrate Capability
Choices
Decision makers need to orchestrate choices in a network of interdependent ECs. As an
example, the choice among the four alternatives presented in Fig. 3 should be
orchestrated with decisions made on the alternative methods and tools employed by the
“Project Management Ofﬁce” to shape the “Enterprise Project Management”
capability.
Orchestrating alternatives among capabilities will not be possible if (a) alternatives
with clear contribution to goals are not explicitly represented, and (b) the intention
behind capability relationships are not expressed. The agent-oriented representation can
do both as discussed in a prior publication [21] and will enable satisfaction of Req-3.
3.5 Using Means-Ends, Quality Tradeoffs, and Dependencies to Allow
Expression of Meta-level Capabilities and Choose Among Design
Patterns
Meta capabilities refer to the set of capabilities that initiate and redesign other capa-
bilities [7]. The BPM capability as proposed by Dumas et al. [22] is a meta-level
capability that enterprises need in order to trigger and manage changes to business
processes. Figure 4, illustrates how an insurance company will employ the BPM
capability to evolve its operational capabilities through the dependencies 1 and 2.
The very nature of the changes required by these dependencies are different and
therefore require diverse design patterns to be developed and employed. An effective
selection of design patterns cannot be achieved without modeling the full context and
requirements of the capability. For example, the capability of “Manage Customer
Policies” in Fig. 4 that relies on the “BPM” capability is co-developed by two
departments. Therefore, the dependency to “Improve the Quality of the Process for
Representing and Analyzing Enterprise Capabilities as Specialized Actors 223

--- PAGE 237 ---
Validating Customer Policies” needs to be reﬁned with respect to the needs of each
participating stakeholder. The co-development of “Manage Customer Policies” is
illustrated by the set of “is part of” and “Responsible For” relationships.
4 Related Work
In this section, three kinds of representational constructs for the notion of capability are
reviewed and their strengths and weaknesses are discussed.
Capability Maps: Capability maps and heatmaps depict the set of prioritized capa-
bilities and their decomposition in a simple view used to communicate investment
allocation and technology maturity. The analysis supporting such prioritization is often
done behind the scenes and then summarized in a capability heatmap. Many industry
practices such as those promoted by the Business Architecture Guild [3] and Gartner
[2] employ such maps. The maps are often used to make decisions regarding which
capabilities and organizational teams to fund, and how to align business and IT.
The kind of representation lacks the ability to (a) investigate resource and process
couplings that form alternatives, (b) reason on the quality goals and their tradeoffs,
(c) identify required social capital and organizational choices, and (d) express and
reason on complementarities among capabilities.
ArchiMate: A capability according to the ArchiMate extension [4] can be a capability
of a person or of an enterprise, and hence viewed as a more general concept than the
EC concept discussed in this paper. By introducing the capability concept, the
extension focuses on expressing and tracking linkages among capabilities and
resources that generate value to layers of an enterprise architecture.
The extension also introduces the concept of a “capability enabling bundle” which
can be used to describe couplings of processes and resources and their relation to
strategic goals comparable to what is done in Sect. 3.1 in this paper. However, it cannot
Improve Efficiency
of Home Insurance
Claims Handling
Process
Provision
Home
Insurance
Provision
Motor
Insurance
Commercial
Ins Dep
Motor
Ins Dep
Manage
Customer
Policies
Budget
Budget
Provision
Commercial
Insurance
BPM
D
D
Improve the Quality
of the Process For
Validating
Customer Policies
D
Ensure High
Quality Service
Ensure High
Quality Service
1
2
Fig. 4. Illustrating dependencies to the meta-level capability – legend provided in Fig. 1
224 M. H. Danesh and E. Yu

--- PAGE 238 ---
reason on the quality attributes of the coupling, the social capital needed, and the
organizational structure necessary to support a capability. Furthermore, ArchiMate
would need to be supplemented with guidelines and methods to prompt modelers to
state why relationships among two capabilities are desirable or not, perhaps by
extending the “Relationships” between capabilities in the extended ArchiMate
metamodel.
The EKD Based Capability Driven Development (CDD) Approach: The CDD
approach inherits goal-based features from the Enterprise Knowledge Development
(EKD) methodology and representation [1]. It focuses on varieties in the processes that
can deliver a capability and enables adaptation of the process in response to changing
contextual parameters at run-time. The adaptation relies on the variations in the
activities of a business process as oppose to couplings of resources and processes that
form enterprise-speciﬁc capabilities. Therefore, the approach cannot reason on the
qualitative aspects of couplings, unless they are captured under the broad category of
contextual parameters. The social capital and its organizational setting supporting the
capability are not explored and modeled in the CDD approach.
5 Conclusion and Future Work
To enable co-design of business and IT, researchers and practitioners have raised the
abstraction level of design artifacts so they can capture the intertwined relationship of
software requirements and organizational/business context [1, 18, 23]. To this end, the
notion of capability is used to represent enterprise strengths and weaknesses and its
strategic trajectories. Capability modeling practices are developed and used to enable
better communication of strategic priorities [2, 3, 23], expression of architecture layers
and their business alignment [4], and adaptation to changing contexts [1].
Building on the i* framework, this papers argues for a goal-driven and agent-
oriented modeling approach that results in: (1) explication of choices for coupling
enterprise-speciﬁc resources and processes to enable understanding of capability for-
mation and emerging quality attributes, (2) expression of the social and organizational
setting that capabilities reside in to empower analyzing the influences and interests of
multiple stakeholders, and (3) representation of interdependent networks of capabilities
and actors to enable orchestration of design choices among capabilities, information
systems and organizational structure(s).
By enabling identiﬁcation and expression of the socio-technical situation in which
capabilities are designed for, the proposed representation will complement existing
practices by serving as an early requirements elicitation approach. The approach
empowers enterprise architects to choose and tailor reference models and design pat-
terns to ﬁt enterprise context. Analysis and reasoning techniques presented in earlier
publications [21, 24] enable orchestration of design choices for a network of interde-
pendent enterprise capabilities, information systems and organizational actors.
Prior publications [21, 24] have explored the suitability of the actor-based repre-
sentation on a few IT intensive case studies but further validation is necessary to
determine the conditions and types of situations that require a socio-technical analysis.
Representing and Analyzing Enterprise Capabilities as Specialized Actors 225

--- PAGE 239 ---
Methods and guidelines that will steer the modeler in gathering the required infor-
mation for reasoning on capability formation and evolution with more detailed spec-
iﬁcation of how i* elements are used and extended is required. The i* language has the
capacity to represent organizational and social settings but lacks guidelines and tech-
niques to guide the modeler in doing so which is a critical step in modeling capabilities
and should be addressed in the future.
References
1. Stirna, J., Grabis, J., Henkel, M., Zdravkovic, J.: Capability driven development – an
approach to support evolving organizations. In: Sandkuhl, K., Seigerroth, U., Stirna, J. (eds.)
PoEM 2012. LNBIP, vol. 134, pp. 117–131. Springer, Heidelberg (2012). https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-642-34549-4_9
2. Burton, B.: Eight Business Capability Modeling Best Practices. Gartner (2012)
3. Business Architecture Guild: A Guide to the Business Architecture Body of Knowledge
(2014)
4. Azevedo, C.L.B., Iacob, M.-E., Almeida, J.P.A., van Sinderen, M., Pires, L.F., Guizzardi,
G.: Modeling resources and capabilities in enterprise architecture: a well-founded ontology-
based proposal for ArchiMate. Inf. Syst. 54, 235–262 (2015)
5. Teece, D.J., Pisano, G., Shuen, A.: Dynamic capability and strategic management. Strat.
Manag. J. 18, 509–533 (1997)
6. Helfat, C.E., Peteraf, M.A.: The dynamic resource-based view: capability lifecycles. Strat.
Manag. J. 24, 997–1010 (2003)
7. Teece, D.J.: Explicating dynamic capabilities: the nature and microfoundations of
(sustainable) enterprise performance. Strat. Manag. J. 28, 1319–1350 (2007)
8. McKelvie, A., Davidsson, P.: From resource base to dynamic capabilities: an investigation
of new ﬁrms. Br. J. Manag. 20, S63–S80 (2009)
9. Danesh, M.H., Loucopoulos, P., Yu, E.: Dynamic capabilities for sustainable enterprise IT –
a modeling framework. In: Johannesson, P., Lee, M.L., Liddle, S.W., Opdahl, A.L., López,
Ó.P. (eds.) ER 2015. LNCS, vol. 9381, pp. 358–366. Springer, Cham (2015). https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-319-25264-3_26
10. Yu, E.: Modeling Strategic Relationships for Process Reengineering (1995). ftp://ftp.cs.
toronto.edu/pub/eric/DKBS-TR-94-6.pdf
11. Sirmon, D.G., Hitt, M.A., Ireland, R.D., Gilbert, B.A.: Resource orchestration to create
competitive advantage breadth, depth, and life cycle effects. J. Manag. 37, 1390–1412
(2011)
12. Leonard-Barton, D.: Core capabilities and core rigidities: a paradox in managing new
product development. Strat. Manag. J. 13, 111–125 (1992)
13. Helfat, C.E., et al.: Dynamic Capabilities: Understanding Strategic Change in Organizations.
John Wiley & Sons, New York (2009)
14. Collis, D.J.: Research note: how valuable are organizational capabilities? Strat. Manag. J. 15,
143–152 (1994)
15. Adner, R., Helfat, C.E.: Corporate effects and dynamic managerial capabilities. Strat.
Manag. J. 24, 1011–1025 (2003)
16. Zollo, M., Winter, S.G.: Deliberate learning and the evolution of dynamic capabilities.
Organ. Sci. 13, 339–351 (2002)
226 M. H. Danesh and E. Yu

--- PAGE 240 ---
17. Ross, J.W., Sebastian, I.M., Beath, C.M., Jha, L., Technology Advantage Practice of the
Boston Consulting Group: Designing Digital Organizations - Summary of Survey Findings.
MIT CISR, Boston, MA (2017)
18. Bosch, J.: Speed, data, and ecosystems: the future of software engineering. IEEE Softw. 33,
82–88 (2016)
19. Nevo, S., Wade, M.: The formation and value of IT-enabled resources: antecedents and
consequences. Manag. Inf. Syst. Q. 34, 163–183 (2010)
20. Horkoff, J., et al.: Goal-oriented requirements engineering: an extended systematic mapping
study. Requir. Eng. 1–28 (2017). https://rdcu.be/7sH5
21. Danesh, M.H., Yu, E.: Modeling enterprise capabilities with i*: reasoning on alternatives. In:
Iliadis, L., Papazoglou, M., Pohl, K. (eds.) CAiSE 2014. LNBIP, vol. 178, pp. 112–123.
Springer, Cham (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-07869-4_10
22. Dumas, M., Rosa, M.L., Mendling, J., Reijers, H.: Fundamentals of Business Process
Management. Springer, Heidelberg (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-56509-4
23. Homann, U.: A business-oriented foundation for service orientation. MSDN, Microsoft
Corporation (2006)
24. Danesh, M.H., Yu, E.: Analyzing IT flexibility to enable dynamic capabilities. In: Persson,
A., Stirna, J. (eds.) CAiSE 2015. LNBIP, vol. 215, pp. 53–65. Springer, Cham (2015).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-19243-7_5
Representing and Analyzing Enterprise Capabilities as Specialized Actors 227

--- PAGE 241 ---
An Approach Toward the Economic
Assessment of Business Process Compliance
Stephan Kuehnel1(&)
and Andrea Zasada2
1
Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle (Saale), Germany
stephan.kuehnel@wiwi.uni-halle.de
2
University of Rostock, Rostock, Germany
andrea.zasada@uni-rostock.de
Abstract. Business process compliance (BPC) denotes business processes that
adhere to requirements originating from different sources, e.g., laws or regula-
tions. Compliance measures are used in business processes to prevent compli-
ance violations and their consequences, such as ﬁnes or monetary sanctions.
Compliance measures also incur costs, e.g., for tools, hardware, or personnel. To
ensure that companies can work economically even in intensively regulated
environments, the economic viability of BPC has to be taken into account.
A body of literature is already devoted to the economic assessment of processes
and focuses on the business perspective, whereas corresponding approaches for
BPC appear to be lacking. Consequently, we introduce a novel approach that
allows for an economic assessment of process-based compliance measures. The
approach takes monetary consequences of compliance violations into account
and is based on the well-known basic workflow patterns for control flows. We
demonstrate its applicability by means of an exemplary ordering process
affected by Article 32 (1) of the EU General Data Protection Regulation.
Keywords: Business process compliance  Economic assessment
Compliance cost  Workflow patterns
1 Introduction
Business Process Compliance (BPC) denotes business processes that adhere to appli-
cable requirements that originate from various sources, e.g., laws, regulations or
internal guidelines [1]. BPC checking approaches are aimed at checking business
processes against regulatory requirements, focusing on technical methods to provide
(semi)automated support for managing BPC [2]. However, complying with a con-
stantly increasing number of requirements is not only a technical but also an economic
challenge. For example, Article 32 (1) of the EU General Data Protection Regulation
2016/679 (GDPR) requires data processors to implement technical and organizational
measures for protecting personal data. The implementation of such measures incurs
The original version of this chapter was revised: There was an error in the ﬁrst paragraph of page
236. The correction to this chapter is available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_38
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 228–238, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_28

--- PAGE 242 ---
noticeable costs [3, 4], for example, for software (e.g., encryption tools), hardware
(e.g., backup databases), and personnel (e.g., working hours). In turn, refraining from
implementing such measures and thus provoking a compliance violation entails eco-
nomic risks, e.g., ﬁnes or penalty fees [5]. To ensure that companies can work eco-
nomically even in intensively regulated environments, the economic viability of BPC
must be taken into account. Several studies [6–10] have demonstrated that business
processes offer a sound basis for cost analyses and economic assessment. To the best of
our knowledge, the existing approaches are focused on the business perspective [6–10]
but not on BPC. Hence, the research goal of this paper is the development of an
approach that allows for an economic assessment of process-based compliance mea-
sures taking into account the monetary consequences of compliance violations.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 deﬁnes basic terms
and integrates the concept of economic assessment into the conceptual framework of
BPC. Section 3 presents the formulas used in our approach that are required for the
economic assessment of process-based compliance measures. Section 4 exempliﬁes its
applicability to an ordering process affected by Article 32 (1) GDPR. Subsequently,
related work is discussed in Sect. 5. Section 6 concludes the paper with a summary and
a discussion of limitations.
2 Basic Terms and Conceptual Structure
The conceptual structure of BPC checking and the extension of this structure for
economic assessment have already been analyzed in greater detail in a previous study
[3]. The conceptual model in Fig. 1 provides a brief overview of the concepts relevant
to our approach and illustrates their interrelations. For a more in-depth understanding
and for reasons of traceability, a brief description of the concepts is given below.
A Compliance Requirement is a condition or restriction that describes desirable
results or binding obligations. Compliance requirements derive from the interpretation
of Compliance Sources, such as subsections or paragraphs of laws, regulations, con-
tracts, etc. Using logical languages, compliance requirements can be mapped as
machine-readable Formal Compliance Rules and checked against business processes
Assessment-relevant Concepts
Compliance Domain
Compliance Requirement
Formal Compliance Rule
Compliance Source Compliance Risk
Compliance Activity
Economic Assessment
Business Process
Business Activity
Activity
consists of v
1
assessed by v formalized as v
< constitutes 1
< checked against
< affect 1 ..n
specified as v
1 ..n
1 ..n
1..n
1..n
1 ..n
1
hedged by v
assessed by v
1 ..n
1
1
1
1 ..n
1..n
1..n
1
1..n
Business Process Domain
Fig. 1. Basic terms and conceptual structure (based on [3])
An Approach Toward the Economic Assessment of Business Process Compliance 229

--- PAGE 243 ---
by means of process-veriﬁcation tools. A Business Process is a sequence of work items
(or so-called Activities) that takes one or more kinds of input and transforms them into
valuable output [11]. Failure to observe a relevant compliance source results in a
compliance violation, so that each compliance source constitutes a Compliance Risk.
A compliance risk is commonly deﬁned quantitatively as the product of an uncertain
consequence and its probability of occurrence [3]. The probability of occurrence cor-
responds to the relative frequency with which a compliance violation occurs in a
business process instance. Uncertain consequences result from compliance violations
and can take various forms. While monetary consequences such as ﬁnes or monetary
sanctions [5] can easily be used for calculation purposes, non-monetary consequences
such as prison sentences or trade bans can limit risk quantiﬁcation [3]. Therefore, the
approach in this paper is initially limited to the assessment of monetary consequences
and leaves the consideration of non-monetary factors as a subject for future research.
To protect against a compliance violation and, thereby, the uncertain consequence of a
compliance risk, process-integrated compliance measures are used (hereafter referred to
simply as compliance measures). Since compliance measures are part of a business
process, they can be mapped as compliance activities or activity combinations using
business process modeling languages such as the expressive Business Process Model
and Notation (BPMN) [12]. A Compliance Activity serves the fulﬁllment of a com-
pliance task that results from a requirement. The Economic Assessment of BPC is based
on the economic principle and thus on the relationship between an economic result
(monetary output) and the required means (monetary input) [3, 13]. The monetary input
of BPC is generated in establishing and executing compliance activities and is con-
sidered as its total costs. The monetary output of BPC is represented by the proportion
of the monetary compliance risk that is prevented by the use of compliance activities.
3 Economic Assessment of Compliance Measures
3.1 Cost of Compliance Measures
Magnani and Montesi [6, 7] have shown that the calculation of business costs can be
realized on the basis of business processes. We follow this approach and adapt it for the
cost assessment of compliance measures. To this end, we deﬁne a business process as a
3-tupel G¼ðN, E, typeÞ [14], where: N ¼ BA [ CA [ C is a set of nodes in G. BA
is a set of business activities and CA is a set of compliance activities, where:
BA \ CA ¼£: C is a set of coordinating nodes and EN  N is a set of edges
between nodes representing a control flow such that ðN, EÞ is a connected process
graph [14]. The function type: C ! start, end, split, synchronize, choice, merge f g
assigns a coordinator type to each coordinating node of G.
Existing approaches dealing with the economic assessment of business processes
capture a selection of real processes by means of process classes [6, 7] or selected
process patterns [8, 9] to ensure both a simple and broad applicability. We follow the
idea of using patterns for assessment, but make use of the well-known workflow
patterns of van der Aalst et al. [15], as they have done a comprehensive study on the
most frequently recurring process patterns. Since our approach does not serve to assess
230 S. Kuehnel and A. Zasada

--- PAGE 244 ---
an entire business process but rather its compliance measures, we only consider
compliance activities ca 2 CA for assessment.
For our ﬁrst approach and due to space limitations, we focus on the basic control
flow patterns as represented in Table 1. We use these patterns to represent different
combinations of i¼1...m compliance activities cai;j that are needed to hedge a
compliance risk CRj that arises from a compliance source CSj (8j ¼1...q). Van der
Aalst et al. [15] describe the Sequence pattern as follows: “An activity in a workflow
process is enabled after the completion of a preceding activity in the same process.” We
assume that each cai;j can be speciﬁed by variable costs and allocable average ﬁxed
costs. Given that w is the number of workflow instances of a period s and that cfi;j
represents the ﬁxed costs of cai;j incurred in s, then cfi;j  w1
represents the average
ﬁxed costs per execution of cai;j. Together with the variable costs cvi;j, the total costs of
a cai;j per instance are calculated by tci;j ¼cvi;j þ cfi;j  w1
. Since all cai;j of a
sequence pattern are executed one by one, the total pattern costs tcp;j of a sequence
consisting of i ¼1...m activities cai;j are simply calculated by summing the tci;j’s:
tcp;j ¼
Xm
i¼1
tci;j ð1Þ
In Table 1, the sequence pattern is represented in BPMN, using an example with three
cai;j labeled A, B, and C. For this example, the total pattern costs are calculated by
tcp;j ¼tcA;j þ tcB;j þ tcC;j.
The Parallel Split pattern depicts the divergence of a single thread of control into
multiple threads of control that are executed concurrently [15]. For a clearer illustration
and due to space restrictions, we mapped this pattern in Table 1 in conjunction with the
corresponding converging counterpart, the Synchronization pattern, which depicts the
convergence of several parallel activities or subprocesses into a single thread of control
[15]. Since all branches and, therefore, all activities are executed in a combined pattern
of split and subsequent synchronization, the total costs are calculated in the same way
as shown in formula (1). Table 1 shows a combination of the parallel split and syn-
chronization pattern, using an example with four cai;j labeled A, B1, B2 and C, with B1
and B2 being parallel activities. For this example, the total pattern costs are calculated
by tcp;j ¼tcA;j þ tcB1;j þ tcB2;j þ tcC;j.
Table 1. Exemplary representation of basic control flow patterns in BPMN
Sequence Parallel Split & Synchronization Exclusive Choice & Simple Merge
A C B
h
h
A C
B2
B1
h
h
A D
C
B
h
h
An Approach Toward the Economic Assessment of Business Process Compliance 231

--- PAGE 245 ---
The Exclusive Choice pattern depicts a point at which one of several branches is
chosen [15]. As with the parallel split, we mapped this pattern in Table 1 together with
its corresponding counterpart, the Simple Merge pattern, which depicts two or more
alternative branches coming together without synchronization [15]. Mathematically, an
exclusive choice can be resolved by identifying all k ¼ 1...v alternative paths Pk,
determining the associated path probabilities bk as well as path costs tck;j, and calcu-
lating an expected cost value. As with formula (1), the tck;j are calculated as the sum of
the costs of the activities (tck;j ¼
Pm
i¼1 tck;i;j). The bk can be estimated at design time,
derived from empirical data or, if completely unknown, initially assumed to be equally
distributed [7]. Thus, the expected pattern costs are calculated by
tcp;j ¼
Xv
k¼1
bk  tck;j ¼
Xv
k¼1
Xm
i¼1
bk  tck;i;j ð2Þ
Table 1 shows the combination of the exclusive choice and simple merge pattern, using
an example with four cai;j labeled A, B, C and D. Since B and C are exclusive
activities, there are two alternative paths P1 ¼ A, B, D f g and P2 ¼ A,C, D f g. For this
example, the pattern costs are calculated by tcp;j ¼b1  tcA;j þ tcB;j þ tcD;j
 
þ
b2  tcA;j þ tcC;j þ tcD;j
 
.
3.2 Reliability of Compliance Measures and Compliance Risks
Both business and compliance activities are characterized not only by costs but also by
a certain reliability of execution ri;j. In the context of the cost assessment of BPMN
diagrams, Sampathkumaran and Wirsing [8, 9] deﬁned reliability as the rate at which a
business activity is executed successfully, i.e., without errors. We follow this idea and
adapt the concept of reliability for compliance activities. Since these are used to ensure
compliance, reliability indicates the extent to which compliance violations, and thus
monetary sanctions and ﬁnes, are prevented. The probability of a compliance violation
decreases with increasing reliability. Similar to the determination of costs, reliabilities
can also be determined for the basic control flow patterns. In a Sequence, all cai;j are
executed one by one, so that the overall reliability of the sequence pattern depends on
the reliabilities of its activities. To calculate the pattern reliability rp;j of a sequence
consisting of i¼1...m activities cai;j, the ri;j’s are simply multiplied [9]:
rp;j ¼
Ym
i¼1
ri;j ð3Þ
For the example of the sequence pattern shown in Table 1, the reliability is calculated
by rp;j ¼rA;j  rB;j  rC;j. The calculation of the pattern reliability for the Parallel Split
and Synchronization pattern follows the same calculation principle as shown in (3).
Here, too, all cai;j are executed so that the reliability of each individual activity
influences the overall reliability of the pattern. For the example of the parallel split and
synchronization pattern shown in Table 1, the reliability is calculated by
rp;j ¼rA;j  rB1;j  rB2;j  rC;j. In contrast, to calculate the pattern reliability for the
Exclusive Choice and Simple Merge pattern, the branch probabilities bk for k¼1...v
232 S. Kuehnel and A. Zasada

--- PAGE 246 ---
exclusive branches must be taken into consideration. The sum of the products of branch
probabilities bk and branch reliabilities rk;j results in the expected pattern reliability:
rp;j¼
Xv
k¼1
bk  rk;j¼
Xv
k¼1
bk 
Ym
i¼1
rk;i;j ð4Þ
For the example of the exclusive choice and simple merge pattern shown in Table 1,
the reliability is calculated by rp;j ¼b1  rA;j  rB;j  rD;j
 
þ b2  rA;j  rC;j  rD;j
 
.
As mentioned above, a compliance risk CRj is mathematically described as the
product of an uncertain consequence cj and its probability of occurrence pj [3]. If a
single pattern hedges CRj, then rp;j describes the extent to which a compliance violation
is prevented by this pattern, which is actually the opposite of pj:
CRj = pj  cj¼ ð1  rp;jÞ  cj ð5Þ
3.3 Economic Beneﬁt of Compliance Measures
Taking into consideration the formulas deﬁned in the previous sections, the economic
beneﬁt per instance ebP;j can be determined for compliance measures whose process
design is based strictly on the basic control flow patterns (see Table 2). The monetary
damage prevented by a pattern is determined by multiplying cj by rp;j. The tcp;j are
deducted from this value to determine ebP;j. Of course, calculations can also be per-
formed for more complex processes in which, for example, exclusive and parallel
gateways are combined. To determine the economic beneﬁt ebj of such complex
processes, the cost formulas of the patterns must be combined additively and the
reliability formulas multiplicatively. A corresponding example is provided in Sect. 4.
4 Running Scenario
We illustrate the applicability of our approach using a simpliﬁed process model of an
online retailer (see Fig. 2). In the business process, once a customer’s order has been
received, the order is processed, the goods are delivered, and an invoice is sent.
The process is affected by Article 32 (1) GDPR, which corresponds to the com-
pliance source CS1 (with j ¼ 1). Article 32 (1) deals with data-processing security and
Table 2. Formulas for calculating the economic beneﬁt of patterns
Pattern Economic beneﬁt
Sequence ebP;j ¼cj  ð
Qm
i¼1 ri;jÞ 
Pm
i¼1 tci;j
Parallel Split &
Synchronization
ebP;j ¼cj  ð
Qm
i¼1 ri;jÞ 
Pm
i¼1 tci;j
Exclusive Choice & Simple
Merge
ebP;j ¼cj  ð
Pv
k¼1 bk 
Qm
i¼1 rk;i;jÞ 
Pv
k¼1
Pm
i¼1 bk  tck;i;j
An Approach Toward the Economic Assessment of Business Process Compliance 233

--- PAGE 247 ---
stipulates that controllers and data processors must take appropriate technical and
organizational measures to adequately hedge data-protection risks. Table 3 provides an
overview of the compliance requirements (R1–R4) applying to the process. These were
derived directly from the legal provisions laid out in Article 32 (1) GDPR and must be
fulﬁlled for preventing a compliance violation. To meet the requirements R1–R4, ﬁve
compliance activities cai;1 (highlighted in gray in Fig. 2) were integrated into the
process. To simplify matters, we assume that w ¼ 50 instances of the illustrated
ordering process are executed per year, whereby a total worldwide annual turnover of
€500,000 is realized. The compliance risk CR1 arises from a potential violation of R1–
R4 and is subject to an administrative ﬁne of 2% of the total worldwide annual turnover
of the ﬁnancial year in accordance with Article 83 (4) GDPR. This results in an
uncertain consequence per instance of cj = €10,000.
In [7], it is shown that parameters such as costs and probabilities can be annotated
to BPMN models for calculation purposes. Following this, we annotated an activity
identiﬁer i, total costs tci;1 and reliabilities ri;1 as well as the addressed compliance
requirements (ad_Req) to each cai;1 in Fig. 2. For example, ca2;1 (i ¼ 2) “create data
Physical or
technical incident?
Yes
No
Restore access
to personal data
Protect
personal data
Deliver
goods
Send
invoice
Order
database
Order
database
Backup
database
Backup
database
Create
data backup
i = 2
tc_i1 = €1,300
r_i1 = 0.9997
ad_Req = R2
i = 4
tc_i1 = €2,000
r_i1 = 0.9998
ad_Req = R4
Conduct
employee
training
ERP system ERP system
Conduct
system tests
i = 3
tc_i1 = €100
r_i1 = 0.9999
ad_Req = R3
Process
customer order
i = 1
tc_i1 = €1,000
r_i1 = 0.9999
ad_Req = R1
Regularly
control?
Yes
No
i = 5
tc_i1 = €2,000
r_i1 = 0.9998
ad_Req = R4
0.99
0.01 0.1
0.9
Customer order
received
Payment
received
Fig. 2. Simpliﬁed BPMN process model of an online retailer
Table 3. Compliance requirements pursuant to Article 32 (1) GDPR
# Compliance requirement
R1 Before the customer’s order can be processed, his or her personal data must be
protected from unauthorized access
R2 To ensure the availability and security of personal data, a copy of the data record must
be stored in a backup database after taking data-protection measures
R3 Given a physical or technical incident, the access to personal data must be restored
R4 The effectiveness of technical and organizational measures is ensured by regularly
conducting employee trainings and system tests
234 S. Kuehnel and A. Zasada

--- PAGE 248 ---
backup” addresses requirement R2 with a reliability of r2;1¼ 0:9997. In other words,
the activity and thus the backup fails with a probability of 0.03%. If ca2;1 generates
variable personnel costs for operating the backup software of cv2,1 = €100 and ﬁxed
annual costs for the software license of cf2,1 = €60,000, the total costs are calculated by
tc2;1 ¼cv2;1 þ cf2;1  w1
= €100 + €60,000 * 50−1
= €1,300. For reasons of space
and clarity, we refrained from differentiating between variable and ﬁxed activity costs
in Fig. 2 and simply annotated all as tci;1.
For the assessment of compliance measures, only the cai;1 and the gateways linking
these cai;1 are taken into consideration. Accordingly, the business activities “process
customer order”, “deliver goods”, and “send invoice” as well as the ﬁrst splitting
gateway can be disregarded. Since the process model contains two exclusive choices
linking cai;j, there are four alternative paths. In accordance with formulas (2) and (4),
the path probabilities bk must be determined for each path. This is done using the
transition probabilities that are annotated on the edges emanating from the exclusive
gateways. The ﬁrst path P1 contains ca1;1 “protect personal data” and ca2;1 “create data
backup”, given physical or technical incident = FALSE and regularly con-
trol = FALSE. The associated path probability b1 results from multiplying the transi-
tion probabilities of the exclusive choices: b1 ¼ 0:99  0:9 ¼ 0:891. The other bk are
calculated analogously; the remaining results are shown in Table 4.
After resolving the exclusive choices, tck;1 must be determined by summing tck;i;1,
and rk;1 must be determined by multiplying rk;i;1 for each Pk. For P2 ¼ ca1;1;

ca2;1;ca3;1g the total path cost is tc2;1 ¼
P3
i¼1 tc2;i;1 = €1,000 + €1,300 + €100 =
€2,400. The reliability of P2 is r2;1¼
Q3
i¼1 r2;i;1 ¼0:9999  0:9997  0:9999¼ 0:9995.
The other tck;1 and rk;1 are calculated analogously; the remaining results are shown in
Table 4. Using these interim results, the economic beneﬁt of the compliance measures
contained in the process model can be determined. For reasons of traceability and
clarity, we use mathematical vectors for the subsequent calculation:
Table 4. Interim results of the calculation example
Pk bk tck;1 rk;1
P1¼ ca1;1;ca2;1
 
0.8910 €2,300 0.9996
P2¼ ca1;1;ca2;1;ca3;1
 
0.0090 €2,400 0.9995
P3¼ ca1;1;ca2;1;ca4;1;ca5;1
 
0.0990 €6,300 0.9992
P4¼ ca1;1;ca2;1;ca3;1;ca4;1;ca5;1
 
0.0010 €6,400 0.9991
An Approach Toward the Economic Assessment of Business Process Compliance 235

--- PAGE 249 ---
The economic beneﬁt eb1 is positive and amounts to a total of €7,294.59 per
instance. The expected total cost of an instance is t1 = €2,701 and results from the
scalar product of path probabilities and path costs (both right vectors). The expected
reliability of an instance is r1 ¼ 0:9996 and results from the scalar product of path
probabilities and path reliabilities (both left vectors). This allows for the probability of
occurrence to be determined by p1 ¼ 1  r1 ¼ 0:0004. Accordingly, the probability of
an instance violating Article 32 (1) GDPR is 0.04%.
5 Related Work
Magnani and Montesi [6, 7] developed an approach to evaluate the costs of business
processes based on four selected classes of BPMN diagrams. Using BPMN annota-
tions, business activities were expanded by costs, and cost models were derived con-
sidering the control flows of the four classes. Sampathkumaran and Wirsing [8, 9]
introduced a construct called business cost, which allows the calculation of costs
necessary for a business process to reach its goal. Similar to [6, 7], they deﬁne four
process patterns, but the possibility of combining them opens up a wider range of
application. However, the applicability of both approaches is somewhat limited by the
fact that these are based on selected process templates and not on the frequently
occurring workflow patterns of van der Aalst et al. [15]. In addition, both approaches
disregard the compliance perspective.
Narendra et al. [16] analyzed the feasibility of continuous process monitoring at
runtime considering economic criteria, thus building a bridge between process-based
assessment and compliance. They are concerned with the selection of a reasonable
number of policy clauses imposing requirements on process tasks that are referred to as
control points. They deﬁne a two-tier optimization problem that identiﬁes the minimum
number of control points while taking costs into consideration. Bhamidipaty et al. [17]
developed an integrated quantitative system for compliance management in IT service
delivery (called Indra), which extends the optimization of control points by a subse-
quent analysis phase. Calculated optimal solutions are checked for real optimality and,
in the event of deviation, a new optimization phase is initiated. However, both
approaches deal exclusively with the optimization of control points but not with the
economic assessment of compliance measures.
6 Conclusion
The approach presented in this paper is an initial attempt towards the economic
evaluation of process-based compliance measures taking into account the monetary
consequences of compliance violations. We introduced variables and formulas for
calculating the costs and reliabilities of compliance activities and for quantifying
compliance risks. In addition, for combinations of compliance activities that are based
on the basic control flow patterns of van der Aalst et al. [15], we derived calculation
rules for pattern reliabilities, pattern costs and economic beneﬁt. The combinability of
236 S. Kuehnel and A. Zasada

--- PAGE 250 ---
the pattern formulas allows for an assessment of even more complex processes, as has
been shown by an exemplary ordering process affected by Article 32 (1) GDPR.
Our approach is subject to a number of assumptions, such as disjoint business and
compliance activities, a one-period view or the focus on monetary consequences of
compliance violations. Furthermore, we did not distinguish between different types of
requirements, such as requirements depending on roles or data. The assumptions made
are necessary for the applicability of our approach, but limit its scope. It takes future
research to eliminate these assumptions and to expand the scope of application.
Moreover, our approach is a pessimistic one that assumes that monetary damages
increase proportionally with the number of compliance violations. This was intended to
ensure that uncertain monetary consequences would not be underestimated. In practice,
however, monetary damages are often not necessarily proportional to the number of
violations but instead depend on the type and severity of the infringements. Further-
more, we derived formulas only for the basic control flow patterns. Although these are
very common patterns, further research is needed to derive costs and reliability for-
mulas for other patterns to broaden the scope of the approach. In addition, the appli-
cability has been demonstrated only by way of an example. In the future, the usefulness
and usability of our approach must be evaluated with the help of scientiﬁc methods,
which will be the consequent next step of our research.
The assessment approach presented offers application potentials especially for
situations in which the use of alternative compliance measures is conceivable, e.g.,
alternative compliance tools or different employees with varying qualiﬁcations and
salaries. In this case, this approach can be used to identify the economically best
alternative. It also opens up the potential for sensitivity analyses and, for example, the
identiﬁcation of ﬁxed-cost degression effects of compliance measures.
References
1. Governatori, G., Hashmi, M., Lam, H.-P., Villata, S., Palmirani, M.: Semantic business
process regulatory compliance checking using LegalRuleML. In: 20th International
Conference on Knowledge Engineering and Knowledge Management, pp. 746–761 (2016)
2. Schultz, M.: Towards an empirically grounded conceptual model for business process
compliance. In: 32nd International Conference on Conceptual Modeling, pp. 138–145
(2013)
3. Kühnel, S.: Toward a conceptual model for cost-effective business process compliance. In:
Proceedings of Informatik 2017. Lecture Notes in Informatics (LNI), pp. 1631–1639 (2017)
4. Pham, H.C., Pham, D.D., Brennan, L., Richardson, J.: Information security and people.
A conundrum for compliance. Australas. J. Inf. Syst. 21, 1–16 (2017)
5. Kumar, A., Yao, W., Chu, C.-H.: Flexible process compliance with semantic constraints
using mixed-integer programming. INFORMS J. Comput. 25, 543–559 (2013)
6. Magnani, M., Montesi, D.: Computing the cost of bpmn diagrams. Technical report UBLCS-
07-17, Bologna (2007)
7. Magnani, M., Montesi, D.: BPMN: how much does it cost? An incremental approach. In:
Alonso, G., Dadam, P., Rosemann, M. (eds.) BPM 2007. LNCS, vol. 4714, pp. 80–87.
Springer, Heidelberg (2007). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-75183-0_6
An Approach Toward the Economic Assessment of Business Process Compliance 237

--- PAGE 251 ---
8. Sampath, P., Wirsing, M.: Computing the cost of business processes. In: Yang, J., Ginige,
A., Mayr, H.C., Kutsche, R.-D. (eds.) UNISCON 2009. LNBIP, vol. 20, pp. 178–183.
Springer, Heidelberg (2009). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-01112-2_18
9. Sampathkumaran, P.B., Wirsing, M.: Financial evaluation and optimization of business
processes. Int. J. Inf. Syst. Model. Des. 4(2), 91–120 (2013)
10. Vom Brocke, J., Recker, J., Mendling, J.: Value-oriented process modeling: integrating
ﬁnancial perspectives into business process re-design. BPM J. 16, 333–356 (2010)
11. Hammer, M., Champy, J.: Reengineering the Corporation. A Manifesto for Business
Revolution. HarperBusiness Essentials, New York (2003)
12. Seyffarth, T., Kühnel, S., Sackmann, S.: A taxonomy of compliance processes for business
process compliance. In: Carmona, J., Engels, G., Kumar, A. (eds.) BPM 2017. LNBIP, vol.
297, pp. 71–87. Springer, Cham (2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-65015-9_5
13. Kirzner, I.M., Boettke, P.J., Sautet, F.E.: The Economic Point of View. An Essay in the
History of Economic Thought. Liberty Fund, Indianapolis (2009)
14. Rastrepkina, M.: Managing variability in process models by structural decomposition. In:
International Workshop on Business Process Modeling Notation, pp. 106–113 (2010)
15. van der Aalst, W.M.P., ter Hofstede, A.H.M., Kiepuszewski, B., Barros, A.P.: Workflow
Patterns. Distrib. Parallel Databases 14, 5–51 (2003)
16. Narendra, N.C., Varshney, V.K., Nagar, S., Vasa, M., Bhamidipaty, A.: Optimal control
point selection for continuous business process compliance monitoring. In: International
Conference on Service Operations and Logistics, and Informatics, pp. 2536–2541 (2008)
17. Bhamidipaty, A., Narendra, N.C., Nagar, S., Varshneya, V.K., Vasa, M., Deshwal, C.: Indra:
an integrated quantitative system for compliance management for IT service delivery.
IBM J. Res. Dev. 53, 1–12 (2009)
238 S. Kuehnel and A. Zasada

--- PAGE 252 ---
Visual Representation of the TOGAF
Requirements Management Process
Elena Kornyshova1(&)
and Judith Barrios2
1
CEDRIC, Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers, Paris, France
elena.kornyshova@cnam.fr
2
GIDyC, Systems Engineering School, University of Los Andes, Mérida,
Venezuela
Abstract. TOGAF Architecture Development Method (ADM) covers different
aspects of Enterprise Architecture (EA) management as well as it provides
textual guidelines to adapt and perform EA processes including the requirements
management (RM) process. We observed that adopting ADM following these
guidelines is an intricate task because the effort required to deﬁne a sequential
interaction between related activities is meticulous and hard. During a real case
experience we have formalized the ADM-TOGAF Requirements Management
textual guidelines with the Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN) to
facilitate its comprehension and usage. Afterwards, the usefulness of the pro-
posed process models has been qualiﬁed with a group of engineering and master
students.
Keywords: Requirements management  ADM-TOGAF  Process model
Visual notation  Industrial experience
1 Introduction
The Open Group and Gartner consider Enterprise Architecture (EA) as a discipline that
assists an organization deﬁning, developing and exploiting information flow capabil-
ities in order to achieve organization´s strategies and intentions [1–3]. In order to really
take advantage of an EA inside an organization or a business, many frameworks have
emerged. Among the more known and used we have Zachman [4], FEAF [5], DODAF
[6], TOGAF [3], and GEAF [1]. TOGAF (The Open Group Architecture Framework)
is one of the most used in modern organizations [7, 8]. TOGAF framework also
provides a dedicated method ADM (Architecture Development Method) for supporting
the work of developing EA.
TOGAF covers all different aspects of the EA management work as well as it
provides speciﬁc textual guidelines to adapt and complete the development processes
and steps prescribed in its method. However, we have observed in practice that
understanding, interpreting and implementing TOGAF processes through the ADM
method and following its textual guidelines is not a simple task. It is reported in the
literature that textual guidelines are heavy to read, to follow and to understand, even for
domain users [9]; whereas, visual representations are easy to understand, to follow and
they may provide a wider perspective of the available courses of action included into
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 239–248, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_29

--- PAGE 253 ---
the ADM workflow. The research work of Kathrin Figl [9] expounds, among other
signiﬁcant issues, that visual process models meet better user preferences because
process models provide a more complete and precise visual representation.
The main intention of this work is to provide a visual representation of the ADM-
TOGAF Requirements (RM) textual guidelines using the Business Process Model and
Notation (BPMN). This work was done in a commercial organization1
.
Based on our experience, we consider that, a holistic method view, built with visual
process models, is easiest to read and to understand, thus to be followed than existing
textual guidelines representations. We preserve the original meaning of method
guidelines prescriptions by keeping consistency between textual and visual guidelines
representations. Afterwards, the usefulness of the proposed process models has been
qualiﬁed with a group of engineering and master students.
The remaining of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents the problem
and motivation of our work. Section 3 contains the BPMN models of the ADM-
TOGAF Requirements Management activities. In Sect. 4 we present an analysis of the
positive and negative aspects of using visual process models used to represent ADM
guidelines and give results of the obtained models validation by students. Finally,
Sect. 5 concludes the paper and outlines future work.
2 Problem and Motivation
Methods are usually accompanied with a set of rules of action, suggestions, strategies
or practices attested to be effective to complete or to perform a prescribed step, to
execute an action or a technical procedure, in turn. As mentioned earlier TOGAF is a
framework for developing and managing enterprise architectures [3]. It has been
developed by the members of the Open Group working within the Architecture Forum
[10]. This means that experience and knowledge of enterprise architects are included at
essential sections of the framework; thus, it increases the potential of the framework for
its practical use. TOGAF considers three business perspectives building three com-
plementary architectures: Business Architecture, Information Systems Architecture
(Applications and Data Architectures), and Technology Architecture. The framework
allows enterprise architects to develop a consistent, feasible and integrated model from
the business, information systems and IT infrastructure perspectives of any enterprise.
However, the process of architecting an enterprise is technically complex and the
design of heterogeneous, multi-perspective architectures is not easy, thus TOGAF
provides the method ADM (Architecture Development Method) that aims to help users
while designing and implementing an enterprise architecture. It is composed of a set of
ten phases, considered as business processes, their corresponding steps or activities, and
some guidelines to assist method customization. The phases are: Preliminary phase,
Architecture Vision, Business Architecture, Information System Architecture, Tech-
nology Architecture, Opportunities and Solutions, Migration Planning, Implementation
Governance, Architecture Change Management, and Requirements Management.
1
The name of the organization was intentionally hidden in order to preserve conﬁdentiality.
240 E. Kornyshova and J. Barrios

--- PAGE 254 ---
The Requirements Management (RM) phase is the central and key element of the
ADM method. RM plays a particular and essential role in the entire EA development
process and is strong related to all other ADM phases. The goal of the RM phase, as
deﬁned in TOGAF 9.1 document [3], is “To deﬁne a process whereby requirements for
enterprise architecture are identiﬁed, stored, and fed into and out of the relevant ADM
phases”. It means that the requirements phase drives the whole process of development
an Enterprise Architecture and, that current or new requirements for the EA under
development, as well as any modiﬁcation on their speciﬁcations, should be considered
at any stage of an ADM cycle. For each new requirement, an impact analysis is
prepared; thus its potential effect over current EA requirements as well as on EA
development project plans is considered. The main result of the impact analysis is the
identiﬁcation of those ADM phases that should or need to be revised in order to tag
subsequent implications and changes on current requirements. Finally, if a change on
actual requirements is approved, it must be registered and scheduled in current project
transition plan.
In order to assist architects, ADM-TOGAF provides textual guidelines to adapt and
completetheprescribeddevelopmentprocessesoftheADManditssteps.Aguidelineisa
recommendationofwhatoughttobedoneinordertofulﬁllaspeciﬁcmethodtargetorjust
thedescriptionof howtoperform a particulartechnicaltask included aspart ofamethod.
As mentioned earlier, textual guidelines are heavy to read, to follow and to under-
stand, even for domain users [9]; additionally, we observed in practice that to follow,
interpret and implement what is prescribed by TOGAF processes through the ADM
method is an intricate task as well as it demands a signiﬁcant amount of time and
dedicated effort from architects and project leaders. This difﬁculty is due not only to the
fact that guidelines are documented as connected text – hypertext, that can be routed
according to the level of reﬁnement demanded by architects; but, to the fact that it does
not exist an entire method representation linking inputs/outputs to sources/destinations
for every method phase and step. Consequently, the levels of details trailed by the
architect to build a speciﬁc project workflow may yield him/her to lose the holistic
perspective of current process, and the wider view of what has to be done or how setting-
up current process inputs/outputs with other method phases sources/destinations.
To support our work, we have reviewed some domain literature and we found no
research or practical work directly associated with providing supplementary help,
support or guidelines about understanding, interpreting or following the ADM guide-
lines. However, we found some tips and informal advises about what to do or what to
consider while developing an EA project in some enterprise architectures specialized
blogs [11]. Nevertheless, and considering that the RM process is our instructive
example, we search and analyzed some ADM-RM reported works and practices as well
as some guidelines provided by some EA supporting tools. For instance, the framework
TOGAF-SABSA [12] describes the integration of both perspectives TOGAF and
SABSA® (Sherwood’s Applied Business-driven Security Architecture) showing how
the requirements management processes in TOGAF may be complemented with the
SABSA concept of Business Attribute Proﬁling. The guidance support provided by this
integration concerns enabling an efﬁcient management of enterprise architecture
security requirements: business and risk management and, secure architectures to
support business outcomes.
Visual Representation of the TOGAF Requirements Management Process 241

--- PAGE 255 ---
In order to complete our work position, we also revised some EA modeling and
management tools like Enfocus Solutions [13] which enables the capture, development
and traceability of architecture requirements deﬁned as IT service components; and, the
EA (Enterprise Architecture) of Sparx Systems [13], that enables ADM requirement
activities by providing facilities for manipulating and producing TOGAF inputs and
outputs artifacts. There are some others tools like iServer for EA from Orbus Systems,
Abacus, BiZZDesign, etc.2
, that put into service the OMG Archimate notation concepts
and other visual notations for facilitating the production and management of artifacts
used by ADM phases, including inputs and outputs of the Requirement Management
phase. But, none of them provides complementary ADM adaptation guidelines or
textual description of ADM guidelines.
Assenting with Zachman [14] and the work reported in [15], about the beneﬁts of
having a holistic vision of the information needed to deﬁne the architecture of an
enterprise, we decided to represent ADM guidelines by using business process models.
In addition, this decision is supported by the following arguments: (1) the fact that
enterprise architects and EA team members have technical competences and conceptual
fundaments for using, understanding, interpreting and exploiting business process
models because they are used to work with business processes models3
; (2) because
graphical business process models have evidenced to be useful and pertinent for
describing complex workflows as well as their inter-processes communications [16–
18]; and, (3) because business process models are powerful tools for designing, ana-
lyzing, implanting, controlling and optimizing business processes as well as they offer a
way for representing practical process knowledge which is acquired from performing
EA projects with their corresponding method customization [19, 20].
Finally, it is important to mention that the process models presented here are
independent of the graphical notation used to represent business process models.
Architects may choose UML activity diagrams [21] or UML business [16], BPMN
[17], Archimate [13], among the most used. In our case, we have selected BPMN
because it is a standard and complete notation for representing business processes; it
allows modelers to represent several and connected levels of processes detail as well as
their inputs/outputs, dependencies and links and, because BPMN diagrams may be
transformed into executable sets of workflows thus processes can be simulated, mea-
sured and enhanced, if necessary.
2
https://www.capstera.com/enterprise-architecture-tools/.
3
Process modelling is included in specialized domain curricula like EABoK, ACM curricula, SEBoK.
242 E. Kornyshova and J. Barrios

--- PAGE 256 ---
3 Process Model of the ADM Requirements Management
Guidelines
In this section we describe process models that represent in detail the activities included
as part of the RM phase. Process models have been built based on TOGAF 9.1 ofﬁcial
documents and represented using BPMN (Figs. 1, 2, and 3)4
.
Considering that BPMN activity diagrams are all-inclusive, we will give just a brief
explanation of each one. The most relevant feature of this process representation is that
it allows to assure consistency between modeling levels.
Figure 1representstheRMprocessatthehighlevel.Inordertokeepcorrespondence
withtextualADMguidelines,wepreservedthesameADMactivity´numbersintheprocess
model representations of the ADM guidelines. The RM process includes four composed
activities detailed as sub-processes. Figures 2 and 3 offer two sub-processes of the RM
phasenamely“Determinebaselinerequirements”and“Identifychangedrequirementsand
recordpriorities”,respectively.Forthelackofspacewedonotpresentthedetailedactivities
of the two other sub-processes which are included in other ADM processes (“Identify
changed requirements” and “Assess and issue impact of changed requirements”).
Following the ADM description, Fig. 1 includes two pools corresponding to the
RM process and processes from other ADM phases, respectively. As mentioned before,
the RM process is tightly related to other phases thus, it is mandatory to show what are
its interactions with activities performed in other ADM phases.
The process is initiated from one of the other ADM phases by identifying and
documenting new requirements which are transferred to the RM phase. The baseline
requirements are determined. The sub-process of the activity “Determine baseline
requirements” is given at Fig. 2. It includes the following activities: Determine pri-
orities arising from current phase of ADM, Conﬁrm stakeholder buy-in to resultant
priorities, Record requirements priorities and place in Requirements Repository. All
these activities are performed based on the information from the Requirements Catalog
(“Stored requirements” from the Requirements Repository) and, the new requirements
are also stored in the Requirements Repository at the end of this sub-process. There-
after, the requirements are monitored.
If requirements changes are detected during any other ADM phase, they are corre-
spondingly transferred to the RM phase to be analyzed. This is performed by the activity
“Identify changed requirements and record priorities” which is detailed as a sub-process
shown in Fig. 3. The sub-process includes the following activities: Identify changed
requirements and ensure the requirements are prioritized, Record new priorities, Ensure
that any conflicts are identiﬁed and managed through the rest of ADM phases and,
GenerateRequirementsImpactStatement.Thissub-processusesthestoredrequirements
fromtheRequirementsRepository,takesintoaccountthechangedrequirementsfromthe
other ADM phases and analyses them to deﬁne priorities. At the end, it produces the
Requirements Impact Statement, sends it to corresponding ADM phases and, stores the
changed requirements with their priorities into the Requirements Repository.
4
The processes in this paper are modeled with Bizagi Modeler (https://www.bizagi.com/en/products/
bpm-suite/modeler).
Visual Representation of the TOGAF Requirements Management Process 243

--- PAGE 257 ---
Fig. 1. Activities of the RM process at the high level. (We chose to represent ADM phases as
pools to separate the RM team process responsibilities from others EA teams’ process
responsibilities.)
Fig. 2. Sub-process “Determine baseline requirements”.
244 E. Kornyshova and J. Barrios

--- PAGE 258 ---
Compared to the textual description from the ADM-TOGAF documentation, we
have completed these models with different links between activities (the BPMN
message flows) and with documents which are not mentioned in the ADM textual
description, but are useful to understand the corresponding processes. Concerning the
links, the textual guidelines suggest only sequences naturally existing between steps
(from 1 to 2, from 2 to 3, and so on). However, these links and activities are not
sufﬁcient. As sequences between steps were not explicit, we have completed them
following our experience (for instance, the step 4 follows the step 1, and takes into
account the results of the step 3).
Regarding documents, the ADM textual guidelines do not mention that activities of
the RM process use the Requirements Catalog available in the Requirements Reposi-
tory. However, the information about existing requirements (we call them “Stored
requirements”) is used at different steps as steps 2, 5, and 8 (at step 2 to compare with
other existing requirements and deﬁne priorities; at step 5, to compare the changes with
the previous version of the requirements and associated priorities; at step 8, to update
information in the Requirements Repository). The ADM textual guidelines do not
detail explicitly the input “Stored requirements” for these steps. We have added this
input to three mentioned activities to have a more complete vision of the documents
moving along the RM process. The same was done with the “Integrated requirements”
transferred from the step 7 to the step 8 (the ADM text does not mention any document
at this place).
Additionally, several amendments were made to transform the textual description
into the process models due to the modeling constraints:
1. The step 2 was renamed from “Baseline requirements” to “Determine baseline
requirements”. It was done to have a verb in the activity name.
2. The name “Assess and issue impact of changed requirements” was given to the step
6. As this step in the ADM textual guidelines contains only different activities and
does not have a name.
Fig. 3. Sub-process “Identify changed requirements and record priorities”.
Visual Representation of the TOGAF Requirements Management Process 245

--- PAGE 259 ---
4 Discussion
In this section we indicate the observed advantages of using business process models
for representing the ADM-TOGAF RM guidelines. First, we generalize relevant ben-
eﬁts of visual process model representations and their positive consequences in the
context of an EA development project. Next, we present a set of beneﬁts reported from
some engineering and master students who validated the experience of adapting ADM-
TOGAF RM process using process model guidelines. We also introduce limitations of
process model use as well as some of the weak points detected during the practice.
Advantages of visual process model have been already listed; among the most
relevant we remark that visual process models are comprehensible for architects
because of their professional background and, that by using them architects can rep-
resent several levels of detail of an ADM process; architects can describe method
processes from high and general level to low and speciﬁc detailed level without losing
coherence and integrity between levels. Therefore, a visual process shows an ADM
business process, its inputs, outputs, sources and destinations allowing architects to
visualize, at a glance, the set of artifacts and documents that are implicated in the
execution of process activities as well as the interactions with other ADM phases. Thus,
architects can make associations according to current project factors, analyze alterna-
tive orders for actions that should be executed before setting what is the speciﬁc
workflow that current project situation needs. Accordingly, architects´ practical
knowledge can be kept and reused in other similar projects, because EA project´s
experiences can be included as part of ADM existing process models; same way,
contextual factors may also be added thus method management process can be
enhanced and optimized, if needed.
For validating the usefulness of the proposed process model guidelines, we pre-
pared an exercise with a group of 18 selected engineering and master students. As part
of the practical work assigned in a requirements engineering course, students had to
adapt the RM-ADM prescribed process for a speciﬁc project situation. A half of
selected students (group A) had all information about ADM as textual TOGAF
guidelines; the other half (group B) used the proposed process models guidelines. The
main results of this experience, based on a qualitative observation, are that the students
of group A asked for extra time for reading, understanding and tailoring once the
requirement management process; whereas group B had the opportunity of rereading
the documentation and adapt two times the tailored process. Group B students qualiﬁed
the proposed process model representation as a valuable means because it shows, at a
glance, the set of EA project elements to be considered at a given method phase. In
consequence, this guidelines representation opens them the option to inspect method
details like terms glossary, process´ inputs and their sources, transforming tasks that
should be executed and, project team responsibilities. One relevant point remarked by
group B students is they have always the option of going back to the original RM
process perspective, in one click, at any time. According to students, it was easier and
faster to understand and follow graphical that textual guidelines; besides, a lower
possibility of getting loss inside the vast ADM documentation.
246 E. Kornyshova and J. Barrios

--- PAGE 260 ---
Finally, we have detected two important weak points about taking advantage of
process model guidelines: ﬁrst, we corroborate that it is mandatory to have practical
knowledge on process model notations as well as medium to high level of modeling
abilities for well understanding and really take advantage of what it is represented by
process model guidelines; second, we veriﬁed that practical exploitation of process
models is strong limited by technology constraints. It is recommended to install a
Business Process Management (BPM) tool not just to use any graphical representation
software: a business process modeling tool has, among other user interface facilities, to
simplify the work required to state process models consistency, to keep account of
models updates as well as enabling their customization. Further, a BPM tool will
facilitate the deﬁnition, analysis, store, enactment and automatic execution, with BPEL,
of process models guidelines, if required.
5 Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper, we proposed to represent ADM-TOGAF guidelines by using process
models because this kind of models seem to be suitable tools for describing business
processes and activities as well as for detailing their dependence and sequence links.
A visual process model of the ADM-TOGAF RM textual guidelines offers a
comprehensive high level representation containing the whole participant elements and
activities. Along with the relevant beneﬁts listed for any business process model like
reuse, simulation, process automation and optimization, ADM guidelines could be
completed with references coming from architects’ practical work on EA projects
improving method recommendations and enhancing future processes of tailoring
method to speciﬁc project characteristics.
In addition, we observed, from a qualitative perspective, the usefulness of the
results of our experience by performing a short validation exercise with a group of
engineering and master students. Main result of this validation process was that the
time needed for the group (A) of students to tailor ADM-RM by following textual
guidelines almost doubled the time needed for the group (B) that used process model
guidelines. It is important to observe that after students´ experience, the time required
for understanding what they might do before they have to do it, was a key factor for
well adapting ADM RM phase to each of their particular project situations. Further-
more, knowing which documents, products and artifacts are in/out of each RM activity
helped students to improve their understanding of when and how to perform a cus-
tomized activity.
Future work will ﬁrst concentrate on a formal validation study of the practical
advantages of using process model representation for expressing ADM guidelines.
After that, we look forward to deliver process model guidelines for the whole ADM
process allowing architects to store and manage their own data from practical process
model customized guidelines.
Visual Representation of the TOGAF Requirements Management Process 247

--- PAGE 261 ---
References
1. James, G.A., Handler, R.A., Lapkin, A., Gall, N.: Gartner Architecture Framework
Evolution (2005)
2. Lapkin, A., et al.: Gartner clariﬁes the deﬁnition of the term “enterprise architecture”.
Gartner Research (2008)
3. TOGAF 9.1. The OpenGroup Architecture Framework (2011). http://www.opengroup.org/
togaf/
4. Zachman, J.A.: About Zachman framework for enterprise architecture. Zachman Interna-
tional Enterprise Architecture Framework (2008)
5. A Common Approach to Federal Enterprise Architecture, Executive Ofﬁce of the President
of the United States (2012)
6. The DoDAF Architecture Framework Version 2.02. Department of Defense (2011)
7. A Comparison of the Top Four Enterprise-Architecture Methodologies. ObjectWatch, Inc.
Microsoft Development Network (2007)
8. Cameron, B., McMillan, E.: Analyzing the Current Trends in Enterprise Architecture
Frameworks (2013). http://ea.ist.psu.edu/documents/journal_feb2013_cameron_2.pdf
9. Figl, K.: Comprehension of Procedural Visual Business Process Models: A Literature
Review. Bus. Inf. Syst. Eng. 59(1), 41–67 (2017)
10. The Open Group working within the Architecture Forum (http://www.opengroup.org/
architecture)
11. Enterprise Architecture Blogs. https://enterprisearchitectureblog.wordpress.com/top-enter-
prise-architecture-blogs/
12. The Open Group TOGAF-SABSA Integration Working Group, White paper, October 2015
13. The Open Group EA Standard Notation. Archimate 3.0. (http://www.opengroup.org/
subjectareas/enterprise/archimate)
14. Lapalme, J., Gerber, A., Van der Melwer, A., Zachman, J., De Vries, M., HinKelmann, K.:
Exploring the future of enterprise architecture: a Zachman perspective. Comput. Ind. 79,
110–113 (2016)
15. Pinggera, J., Soffer, P., Fahland, D., Weidlich, M., Zugal, S., Weber, B., Reijers, H.A.,
Mendling, J.: Styles in business process modeling: an exploration and a model. Softw. Syst.
Model 14, 1055–1080 (2015)
16. Ericksson, H.-E., Penker, M.: Business Modeling with UML: Business Patterns at Work.
Wiley, New York (2000)
17. Object Management Group (OMG): Business process model and notation (BPMN), version
2.0 (2011)
18. Moreno Montes de Oca, I., Snoeck, M.: Pragmatic Guidelines for Business Process
Modeling. Technical Report. KU Leuven – FEB - Management Information Systems Group
(2015). http://ssrn.com/abstract=2592983
19. Weske, M.: Business Process Management: Concepts, Languages, Architectures. Springer,
Heidelberg (2007)
20. van der Aalst, W.M.P.: Business process management: A Comprehensive Survey. www.
vdaalst.com
21. Object Management Group (OMG). Uniﬁed Modeling Language (UML) Version 2.5. OMG
Document Number ptc./2013-09-05 (http://www.omg.org)
248 E. Kornyshova and J. Barrios

--- PAGE 262 ---
Technology-Transfer Requirements
Engineering (TTRE) – on the Value
of Conceptualizing Alternatives
Blagovesta Pirelli(B)
and Alain Wegmann
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
{blagovesta.pirelli,alain.wegmann}@epfl.ch
Abstract. In this paper, we describe a requirements engineering
method with a focus on the conceptualization of alternative service oﬀer-
ings. The practical context for our project is based on the ﬁrst author’s
work in a startup. Our proposed method is suitable for exploring mar-
ket opportunities while specifying a service oﬀering. Our method helps
requirements engineering practitioners understand the business and tech-
nology worlds by modeling business needs and technical capabilities in
the same model.
Keywords: Technology transfer
Market-driven requirements engineering · Conceptualization
Modeling · Service design
1 Introduction
One of the key roles of requirements engineering (RE) during software devel-
opment projects is to achieve consensus and a common understanding between
business and technology. A major challenge of bringing business and technology
together is the diﬀerent conceptualization of the world that people from the two
domains hold. The business domain requires understanding the inner workings
of an enterprise, its strategy, operations, and organization. Technology, and in
particular research technology, requires specialized knowledge to understand and
use it. To ﬁnd a solution to a business problem and an application for a piece of
technology, RE practitioners need to elicit requirements from the business and
understand the capabilities of the technology.
Technology-intensive startups (e.g., research spin-oﬀs) have to undergo a
technology-transfer process that is a type of market-driven RE (MDRE) process
[17]. Startups scout the market space for opportunities that they can address
with their technology, instead of producing a customized product for a single
customer. They implement a technology push strategy, which involves collabo-
ration with potential customers to ﬁnd applications for the research technology.
The collaboration and feedback from the interaction with potential customers
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 249–259, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_30

--- PAGE 263 ---
250 B. Pirelli and A. Wegmann
is valuable, as service oﬀerings require information to shape the technology in a
usable and proﬁtable way.
The RE community currently explores the area of RE for technology trans-
fer [2,6]. Technology transfer projects lack direct applicability to an immediate
market, unlike most traditional software-development projects. Yet, technology
transfer projects have a potential for a high impact. For example, Popek and
Golberg developed the hardware virtualization principles in 1974 [15]. It was only
30 years later that the founders of VMWare1
used these principles to advance
the research and to create the market for virtualization [4]. We believe that RE
can accelerate the process of ﬁnding a technology-market ﬁt for new research
projects.
In this paper, we present the artifact from the ﬁrst iteration of a design
science research (DSR) [10] project - a proposal for a technology transfer RE
method to systematically specify alternative service oﬀerings based on research
technology in the process of market exploration. The DSR project is based on
the experience of the ﬁrst author who worked at technology-intensive startup for
over a year. The method is an explicit prescription [9] to the following question:
How to productize a research technology in a service?
The structure of the paper is the following. In Sect.2, we present our research
methodology. In Sect.3, we present the knowledge base of the DSR project. In
Sect.4, we present our RE method. In Sect.5, we present the business environ-
ment with the example of a pilot project in secure data exchange for an e-health
platform. In Sect.6, we conclude and give an outlook for future work.
2 Research Methodology
In our research, we use the design science research (DSR) framework as described
by Hevner et al. [10]. To both solve a practical problem and contribute an
abstract theory, DSR gives guidelines to researchers on how to build socio-
technical artifacts, such as system design, methods to design systems, and
requirements of systems [14].
A DSR project has three main components: the environment, the knowl-
edge base, and the IS research artifact. Our artifact, a requirements engineering
method for early-stage technology-intensive ventures, falls under the category
of methods for designing systems [9]. Our method for technology transfer RE
is prescriptive: it gives explicit guidelines on how to achieve a task, rather than
provide an analysis, an explanation, or a prediction [9,10]. Our contribution is
a theory for design and action [9].
Environment: We obtained our data from the environment via a qualitative
study that examines the real-life settings of a startup. The ﬁrst author was the
ﬁrst employee of the startup (denoted as XYZ), and, as such, could follow the
evolution of the company from the beginning. The observed period was ﬁfteen
months. Our practical question stems from the environment.
1
www.vmware.com.

--- PAGE 264 ---
TTRE – on the Value of Conceptualizing Alternatives 251
Qualitative research methods have a number of characteristics [13]: (1) the
data are rich and contextual; (2) the emerging themes are validated often with
informants; and (3) the researcher gains an integrated (holistic) overview of
the study. This data collection method is an ethnographic method. We use the
Gold’s classiﬁcation of roles: a complete observer, an observer-as-participant, a
participant-as-observer, and a complete participant [7]. The ﬁrst author assumed
a participant-as-observer role, with the observer role being secondary to the
participant role. It enables researchers to gain access to more information, as
they become part of the environment they study [8]. The drawback is that the
collected data are subject to interpretation, reﬂection and reﬂexivity [20].
Knowledge Base: The knowledge base consists of foundations and method-
ologies. The foundations are previously published theoretical contributions. The
foundations for our method are requirements engineering theories, service sci-
ence, and conceptual modeling literature. The methodologies from the knowledge
base are formalisms such as models and code.
Artifact: Our artifact is a method for early-phase technology transfer RE. To
reﬁne and evaluate the artifact, we use concepts from the knowledge base and
interact with the environment. Our assumptions are that with the help of existing
RE methods, the conceptual modeling techniques, the service science lens, and
technology road-mapping concepts, we can accelerate the technology-transfer
process of technology-intensive startups, such as research spin-oﬀs.
3 Literature Review
Our literature review presents the knowledge base of our DSR project. The
diﬀerent streams of literature are conceptual modeling, service science, and RE.
In this section, we outline the main relevance of these theories and the portion
of them that we use to design our DSR artifact.
3.1 Conceptual Modeling
We base our understanding – of how people conceptualize and model their obser-
vations – on the literature of conceptual modeling. A universe of discourse (UoD)
is an observed portion of the “reality” during conceptual modeling [1]. A UoD is
a set of objects, such as people, physical objects, and technology. The observer
establishes semantics (i.e., gives meaning) to the UoD, and with a predeﬁned
syntax (formalisms, models) expresses observations [1]. Diﬀerent purposes for
modeling result in diﬀerent levels of detail and of precision of the models.
An observer, after perceiving the UoDs, conceptualizes and models the
observed portion of the reality. The conceptualization is possible after the
observer is able to break down the observed UoDs into nameable, i.e., meaning-
ful, objects (or entities), such as a service, a graphical interface, a data storage,
a department [3]. Conceptualization gives meaning to the observed entities and
their relationships, whereas modeling gives a structure to the conceptualization.

--- PAGE 265 ---
252 B. Pirelli and A. Wegmann
3.2 Service Science
We use service science to structure our observations. Service science recognizes
the value of combining diﬀerent theories to achieve a holistic view of the service
environment [11]. Service-dominant logic provides a perspective over the combi-
nation of elements into service systems, and it is the philosophical foundation of
service science [18,19]. Services are the application of competences for the bene-
ﬁt of others hence the means to create value for others [19]. Service systems are
conﬁgurations of resources - people and technology [11]. Service science assumes
a service system to be the basic unit of analysis of the value exchange [12]. In
these value networks, the value added by the socio-technical elements determine
their place in the conﬁguration of components.
3.3 RE Methods
We use guidelines from the RE literature to understand how to conduct RE in a
technology-intensive project. Some of the challenges that RE faces are to ground
its ﬁndings in the reality in which the technical system will operate and instead
of describing the system to be built [23]. There are diﬀerences between RE for
market-driven and bespoke development, e.g. how to elicit, prioritize, negotiate
and analyze the impact of requirements [5,17]. The main goal of market-driven
RE (MDRE) is to gauge a product for a broad market [17].
We use SEAM, an RE method: it enables service designers to model and
design systems [21]. SEAM recognizes the importance of an observer of the
reality that is being modeled. SEAM includes methods for analyzing explicitly
the relationship between diﬀerent stakeholders [22] and to conduct goal-oriented
RE [16]. This enables service designers to deﬁne terms concretely (“What is a
market/beneﬁt/value?”) and to perform analysis of the stakeholders’ goals in
the environment in which an IT system would operate. The explicit positioning
of technology within a service system model enables us to also reason about the
beneﬁts for service adopters, or the market position of new customers (either
market re-segmentation, or customers of competitors within the same segment).
The service models use the same ontology to represent diﬀerent parts of the
reality – both business and technology.
4 Technology Transfer Requirements Engineering
(TTRE)
We choose to model the service oﬀerings with the help of SEAM and to further
develop its applicability to designing new service oﬀerings based on research tech-
nology. We formulate explicit hypotheses about potential beneﬁts directly stem-
ming from the technology for service adopters, and we build proof-of-concept
prototypes to test the assumptions we have regarding the market propensity.
After multiple feedback cycles, we keep only the requirements for the features
that show high impact for a broad market. The distillation from concrete steps
to conduct such early-phase RE lead to TTRE:

--- PAGE 266 ---
TTRE – on the Value of Conceptualizing Alternatives 253
1. Observe - Examine the existing technology and the potential business settings
in details.
2. Conceptualize and model - Deﬁne explicitly a set of alternative services that
emerge from the observations.
3. Construct - Build proof-of-concept prototypes for the current prospects of the
company to validate that services are of actual value for them.
4. Contextualize - Collect feedback from the prospects to make adjustments to
the service alternatives and to the market assumptions.
The TTRE method is iterative and the expected outcome is to be able to
outline a general proﬁle of a customer and extrapolate the industry and the
market segments that the service addresses.
5 TTRE in Context
In this section, we present the environment of the DSR project and the way
TTRE applies in it, based on the ﬁrst author’s experience. We describe the four
diﬀerent steps (Observe, Conceptualize and model, Construct, Contextualize)
with the example of XYZ and a pilot project with E-Health Cisco Switzerland
(Cisco for short). We show only one industry and illustrate TTRE with alter-
native technical service oﬀerings. Another application for TTRE, and area for
future work, is to show the same service alternatives in diﬀerent industries.
5.1 Observe
Technology. The initial technology of XYZ enables operations such as search
and share on end-to-end encrypted data. In this context, end-to-end refers to the
notion of encryption at the point of creation of the data and storage of the data
only in an encrypted form (cipher text) when it is outside of the boundaries of
the creating unit. XYZ’s technology consists of a set of various components, each
of which has a diﬀerent function. The purpose of the components is to provide
searchable and sharable encrypted data. The features that the technology can
oﬀer are (1) libraries - encryption, searchable encryption, and sharable encryp-
tion libraries, (2) storage - data and search index storage, and (3) graphical user
interface for end-user applications.
We stop making the observations on the research technology at the level
where the components are meaningfully divided into diﬀerent-purpose compo-
nents. The components contribute to achieving the main goal of the technology:
in XYZ’s case, search and share end-to-end encrypted remotely-stored data.
Business. Our running example is a project between Cisco and XYZ. The cur-
rent oﬀering to the healthcare organizations is a health-data exchange platform.
Cisco’s role is to provide a secure medical-data exchange infrastructure that
enables diﬀerent stakeholders to communicate in a uniﬁed way.

--- PAGE 267 ---
254 B. Pirelli and A. Wegmann
While in the process of delivering treatment to patients, certain data is gen-
erated, for example, prescribed medications, test results, courses of treatment,
and check-up dates. All of these data are associated with the patient and stored
in their record. The electronic health record is sensitive information and requires
a secure exchange process between diﬀerent actors. Additionally, diﬀerent stake-
holders have access to only a subset of the records.
We stops the observations on the business domain at the level of service
exchange between our potential customer (Cisco) and their customer(s) (hos-
pitals, medical practitioners). These observations give us information on what
value we can bring to the value network of our customer to enable them to oﬀer
a feature desired by their customer.
5.2 Conceptualize and Model
Observers form concepts about what they have observed, as a precursor for
expressing ideas in concrete formal models. Conceptualization is an interpreta-
tive step of translating the observed signals into semantically coherent entities
and relationship between those entities. Using these observations, we compose
diﬀerent conﬁgurations (alternatives) of the XYZ’s technical components.
Technology. The observed features of the technology are grouped together in
three possible services. There are diﬀerent ways to group features. For example,
at random, with the core functionality in mind (share data or search data),
and based on the abstraction level (software libraries, development toolkit, end-
user graphical interface). We choose to group the features of the alternatives
service oﬀerings, based on their abstraction level. Table1 shows the grouping
of features that form the three alternative services for XYZ’s technology: an
encryption package, a secure data-storage platform, and an encrypted cloud-
storage system.
Table 1. Features and services.
Feature Encryption package Secure data-storage
platform
Encrypted
cloud-storage
system
Encryption libraries   
Shareable
encryption libraries
  
Searchable
encryption libraries
  
Data storage  
Search index storage  
GUI 
Encryption Package. The shareable encryption package is a library that oﬀers
encryption that preserves operations (search and share) on the data. The user

--- PAGE 268 ---
TTRE – on the Value of Conceptualizing Alternatives 255
of this package is a software developer, who develops their own applications and
already has mechanisms in place to interact with their storage servers.
Secure Data-Storage Platform. In this package, we propose a service: a platform
that handles the interaction with the data and the search servers, as well as the
data encryption and decryption. The user is a software developer who develops
end applications for their users and makes use of the platform to enhance the
security of users’ data.
Encrypted Cloud-Storage Application. This service alternative bundles all the
features of XYZ’s technology. The user of this package is an end user.
Business. With the help of formalized models, we are able to reason about the
diﬀerent actors in the service system, the process in which they participate and
the possible integration points for XYZ’s service oﬀerings. Figure1 represents
the model of the e-health data exchange ecosystem. We choose to model the
ecosystem in three levels; each of them represents the grouping of features based
on Table1. On the topmost level, the model depicts the e-health data-exchange
service system in Switzerland. The actors (medical practitioners, pharmacies,
post-hospital facilities, and the Swiss Post e-health unit) all contribute their
services to the process of “secure exchange of electronic patients data”. These
are the customers of our customer.
One of the alternative service oﬀerings - the encrypted cloud-storage system -
can take the place of the electronic medical record (EMR) system. This requires
working with chief oﬃcers (CxOs) of the organizations to further deﬁne the
requirements of the system and working with the end users from the ﬁrst level.
However, there is an EMR system provided by the “software vendor” already
in place, hence the competition with the incumbent software vendor would be
hard.
The next integration point for XYZ is within the software vendor’s value net-
work on Level 2. The software vendor’s value network provides the EMR system
as a service. This value network is on the same level of granularity as XYZ’s
platform. The EMR system of the “Software vendor” provides the infrastruc-
ture for storing and searching through medical records and the mechanisms to
share them with other members of the system. XYZ’s platform service oﬀering
has a limited but well-deﬁned role. The main feature of the service is encrypting
the most sensitive parts of the data that contains details about person’s health,
e.g., EMRs. XYZ has to communicate with the people (project managers and
software developers) who choose and conﬁgure the diﬀerent systems that will
work with each other.
The last alternative, the encryption package, would require going to Level 3,
where the system is built. On this level, the service oﬀering is a software library
for the software developers who build the EMR system. XYZ works with the
developers to understand their requirements.

--- PAGE 269 ---
256 B. Pirelli and A. Wegmann
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Fig.1. E-health data-exchange service system (Switzerland)
5.3 Construct
During the construct, we take as input the models from the previous conceptu-
alization step and build prototypes. The construction has a two-fold purpose: to
test the market propensity towards the service oﬀering by placing in the hands of
prospective users a concrete implementation and to check the technical feasibility
of the service oﬀering.
In the case of XYZ, there were prototypes for all three alternatives. XYZ’s
software developers, guided by the identiﬁed dependencies between the service
oﬀerings, used the service oﬀering alternatives to package the components.
5.4 Contextualize
The last step is to “place” the service oﬀering in the environment of the cus-
tomers. At this stage, the service oﬀering prototypes serve both to sell to cus-

--- PAGE 270 ---
TTRE – on the Value of Conceptualizing Alternatives 257
tomers (generate revenue) and to orient the technology development during the
next iteration. The service alternatives transfer a limited vocabulary from the
technology to the business application domain. Little by little searchable and
shareable encryption becomes a part of the business vocabulary. Also, the busi-
ness vocabulary inﬂuences the technology UoD with terms such as electronic
health/medical records. The RE practitioners’ role is to carry these concepts
from one UoD to the other and to show the potential to the other is crucial.
Also, the explicit position of the alternatives points towards a diﬀerent app-
roach in the service-integration process, depending on who the customer is and
who the user is. For example, the CxOs are the customers of the storage system
but the hospital practitioners are the users of it, hence the technical development
has to satisfy the needs of both.
5.5 Findings
The value of the explicit conceptualization is that XYZ categorizes the user and
the customer proﬁle of each alternative and collects systematized feedback. This
categorization serves to test the viability of alternatives by cross referencing
feedback from diﬀerent industries.
In the case of XYZ, the search for systematically conceptualizing alternative
service oﬀerings resulted in a catalog of opportunities that linked the market,
the market segment and the layering of technology components. XYZ worked on
projects for various industries, namely insurance, e-health, banking compliance.
In each industry, XYZ had a pilot project using one of the service alternatives.
The conceptualization of the services helped the development team develop a
stack of services to oﬀer to the diﬀerent projects and to reuse as many compo-
nents as possible.
6 Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we have addressed the question on how to transfer technology with
RE methods. We have presented the results of a DSR project for technology
transfer RE. We have described a method highlighting the value of conceptual-
izing alternative technical service oﬀerings. We have presented a startup in its
search for a service/market ﬁt and a project that we observed.
Our future work is to show not only how technical alternatives, but also
industry alternatives, inﬂuence the choice of technology and market evolution.
For a next step, we will link TTRE with value-based RE to explicitly estimate
market potential in monetary terms. Furthermore, we will expand our modeling
tooling and use goal-oriented RE to delve into the motivational analysis. One
of the limitations of our work is that it is based on one startup case. To test
the generalizability of the TTRE method, we plan to evaluating the method in
another context.

--- PAGE 271 ---
258 B. Pirelli and A. Wegmann
References
1. Boman, M., Bubenko Jr., J.A., Johannesson, P., Wangler, B.: Conceptual Mod-
elling. Prentice-Hall, Inc., London (1997)
2. Cleland-Huang, J., Damian, D.: Ready-set-transfer! Technology transfer in the
requirements engineering domain. In: 2011 IEEE 19th International Requirements
Engineering Conference, pp. 327–328. IEEE, August 2011
3. Daft, R.L., Weick, K.E.: Toward a model of organizations as interpretation systems.
Acad. Manag. Rev. 9(2), 284–295 (1984)
4. Devine, S.W., Bugnion, E., Rosenblum, M.: Virtualization system including a vir-
tual machine monitor for a computer with a segmented architecture, May 2002
5. Dos Santos, J.R.F., Albuquerque, A.B., Pinheiro, P.R.: Requirements prioritization
in market-driven software: a survey based on large numbers of stakeholders and
requirements. In: 2016 10th International Conference on the Quality of Information
and Communications Technology (QUATIC), pp. 67–72. IEEE (2016)
6. Duarte, C.H.C., Gorschek, T.: Technology transfer-requirements engineering
research to industrial practice an open (ended) debate (panel). In: 2015 IEEE
23rd International Requirements Engineering Conference (RE), pp. 414–415. IEEE
(2015)
7. Gold, R.L.: Roles in sociological ﬁeld observations. Soc. Forces 36(3), 217–223
(1958)
8. Gray, D.E.: Doing Research in the Real World. Sage, London (2013)
9. Gregor, S.: The nature of theory in information systems. MIS Q. 30(3), 611–642
(2006)
10. Hevner, A.R., March, S.T., Park, J., Ram, S.: Design science in information systems
research. MIS Q. 28(1), 75–105 (2004)
11. Maglio, P.P., Spohrer, J.: Fundamentals of service science. J. Acad. Mark. Sci.
36(1), 18–20 (2008)
12. Maglio, P.P., Srinivasan, S., Kreulen, J.T., Spohrer, J.: Service systems, service
scientists, SSME, and innovation. Commun. ACM 49(7), 81–85 (2006)
13. Miles, M.B., Huberman, A.M., Saldana, J.: Qualitative Data Analysis: A Source-
book. Sage, Beverly Hills (1984)
14. Oﬀermann, P., Blom, S., Schönherr, M., Bub, U.: Artifact types in information
systems design science – a literature review. In: Winter, R., Zhao, J.L., Aier, S.
(eds.) DESRIST 2010. LNCS, vol. 6105, pp. 77–92. Springer, Heidelberg (2010).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-13335-0 6
15. Popek, G.J., Goldberg, R.P.: Formal requirements for virtualizable third generation
architectures. Commun. ACM 17(7), 412–421 (1974)
16. Regev, G., Wegmann, A.: Deﬁning early it system requirements with regulation
principles: the lightswitch approach. In: 2004 Proceedings of the 12th IEEE Inter-
national Requirements Engineering Conference, pp. 144–153. IEEE (2004)
17. Regnell, B., Brinkkemper, S.: Market-driven requirements engineering for software
products. In: Aurum, A., Wohlin, C. (eds.) Engineering and Managing Software
Requirements, pp. 287–308. Springer, Heidelberg (2005). https://doi.org/10.1007/
3-540-28244-0 13
18. Vargo, S.L., Lusch, R.F.: Evolving to a new dominant logic for marketing. J. Mark.
68(1), 1–17 (2004)
19. Vargo, S.L., Lusch, R.F.: Service-dominant logic: continuing the evolution. J. Acad.
Mark. Sci. 36(1), 1–10 (2008)
20. Weber, R.: The reﬂexive researcher. MIS Q. 27(4), v–xiv (2003)

--- PAGE 272 ---
TTRE – on the Value of Conceptualizing Alternatives 259
21. Wegmann, A.: On the systemic enterprise architecture methodology (SEAM). In:
International Conference on Enterprise Information Systems (2003)
22. Wegmann, A., Julia, P., Regev, G., Perroud, O., Rychkova, I.: Early requirements
and business-IT alignment with SEAM for business. In: Proceedings of the 15th
IEEE International Requirements Engineering Conference, RE 2007. pp. 111–114.
IEEE (2007)
23. Zave, P., Jackson, M.: Four dark corners of requirements engineering. ACM Trans.
Softw. Eng. Methodol. (TOSEM) 6(1), 1–30 (1997)

--- PAGE 273 ---
Conceptual Modeling to Support Pivoting –
An Example from Twitter
Vik Pant1(&)
and Eric Yu1,2
1
Faculty of Information, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
vik.pant@mail.utoronto.ca, eric.yu@utoronto.ca
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
Abstract. Pivoting is used by many startups and large enterprises to recon-
ﬁgure their structures and relationships in line with their changing environments
and requirements. However, pivoting is a non-trivial undertaking that has far
reaching consequences for the focal organization. Conceptual models of actor
intentionality can be used to design and analyze organizational pivots in a
systematic and structured manner. Conceptual modeling is preferable to ad hoc
evaluation as it can provide more detailed and systematic analysis of pivoting
decisions. It can be used to uncover mistakes and gaps in reasoning that are
missed or obscured via ad hoc evaluation. Actor- and goal-modeling can be used
to differentiate among beneﬁcial and deleterious pivoting options. Correctly
designed and implemented pivots can avoid substantial value destruction from
direct damages as well as opportunity loss for the focal organization. In this
paper we present conceptual models of pivoting based on a retrospective case
example of Twitter.
Keywords: Pivoting  Modeling  Entrepreneurship  Design  Analysis
1 Introduction
Pivoting refers to changing the structure and relationships of an organization to improve
its overall viability and sustainability [1]. The business world offers numerous examples
of organizations that have used pivoting succesfully to their advantage. For example,
Microsoft pivoted away from protecting the market for its Windows operating system
(OS), which was one product line, to capturing the market for its larger product portfolio
including applications for Linux OS [2]. This allowed Microsoft to pursue a larger
addressable market of application software for multiple OSs rather than the market for
just one OS. Amazon pivoted away from being an online bookseller to one of the
world’s largest eCommerce websites [3] selling everything from avocados to zinc.
Such examples of successful pivots notwithstanding, pivoting remains a risky and
complicated undertaking for many organizations. This is because it involves
redesigning and reconﬁguring an organization and its relationships. The case example
of Twitter [4–8], a popular microblogging social network, shows that undertaking the
wrong pivot can be harmful for an organization since it can lead to value destruction
through direct damages as well as opportunity loss.
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 260–270, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_31

--- PAGE 274 ---
Ries [1] popularized the notion of pivoting in the entrepreneurial context via his
book titled “Lean Startup”. He deﬁned pivoting as the continual testing of the fun-
damental beliefs, logics, and assumptions underlying an organization’s business model
[1]. Ries proposed ten pivot archetypes [1] and other researchers have since proposed
other pivot archetypes [9]. While Ries deﬁned the pivot archetypes and highlighted
numerous real-world examples of each archetype in action – he did not offer a struc-
tured or systematic methodology for designing and evaluating pivots.
As a consequence, many startup enterpreneurs and corporate decision-makers
planned and analyzed pivots for their organizations in an ad hoc manner. This exposed
their organizations to risks and uncertainties that could have otherwise been abated or
mitigated through the application of a structured or systematic methodology for gen-
erating and discriminating organizational pivots [10].
Conceptual modeling provides a means for deﬁning and exploring problem and
solution spaces in an orderly and meticulous manner. It entails building abstract pat-
terns and decontextualized representations of real-world phenomenon that may com-
prise descriptive, predictive, and prescriptive qualities. Many types of models (e.g.,
physical, conceptual, etc.) are used by humans to communicate ideas, explicate
assumptions, codify designs, test conﬁgurations, and simulate outcomes.
Strategic modeling, with actor- and goal- models, is used to represent and reason
about relationships in and between actors whose goal structures might be partially
congruent and partially divergent [11]. Such techniques can be useful for reasoning
about organizational pivoting because pivoting involves changing the conﬁguration of
an organization as well as its relationships with other organizations and individuals.
i* (stands for “Distributed Intentionality” or “Intentional STrategic Actors Rela-
tionships”) modeling is an actor- and goal- modeling language [12]. It comprises of
two types of models – Strategic Dependency (SD) and Strategic Rationale (SR) dia-
grams [13]. SD diagrams portray dependencies between different actors. Actors depend
on each other to take advantage of opportunities that they cannot pursue alone.
However, dependencies also make the depending actor vulnerable to the actor on
which it depends.
SR diagrams depict the inner intentional structure of actors to explicate the reasons
for their dependence on other actors. i* is useful for modeling organizational pivots
and has been applied by Pant et al. in [10] for this purpose. This paper presents strategic
models of pivoting based on a retrospective case example of Twitter. This example of
pivoting by Twitter is used to illustrate the point that strategic modeling can provide
more detailed and systematic analysis than an ad hoc approach to uncover mistakes in
reasoning. A systematic analysis can potentially avert premature implementations,
which, upon discovering that they don’t work out, necessitate the focal organization to
go back, or pivot again to something else.
In this paper we use a historic case to illustrate the application of conceptual
modeling to support pivoting. In such a case the solution space (i.e., To-Be options) is
already known to the modeler. In a real-world setting, subject matter experts (SMEs)
and domain specialists would apply their contextual knowledge and situational
awareness to generate a solution space with new alternatives incrementally, creatively,
and iteratively.
Conceptual Modeling to Support Pivoting 261

--- PAGE 275 ---
2 Case Example: Twitter’s Pivot from “Advertising”
to “Commerce” and Back
Twitter is a popular social network for microblogging with an average of 330 million
active users per month. Users publish posts of 140 characters or less and these
“Tweets” can include video, audio, and images. Users subscribe to other users whose
tweets they wish to view in their social feed. Twitter content is accessible via web
browsers on desktop and laptop computers as well as on mobile devices such as
smartphones and tablets.
The reach and span of Twitter makes it attractive for businesses to advertise and
promote their offerings. Brands create Twitter accounts from which they tweet content
related to marketing and public relations. Brands also hire influencers to promote their
products overtly or covertly. The importance of Twitter for organizations is evidenced
by the viral mainstreaming of new entrants (e.g., upstart startups) as well as large-scale
boycotts of established incumbents.
Advertising revenue is the original source of income for Twitter. Monetizing of
Ads was Twitter’s ﬁrst income model and was ﬁrst implemented in 2010. Organiza-
tions pay Twitter for displaying their tweets in the feeds of Twitter’s users. A Twitter
user can click on a link and is redirected to the marketer’s website. Marketers target
users based on demographic and psychographic attributes and Twitter displays the
marketer’s tweets (marking them as advertisements) in feeds of its users that meet the
marketer’s targeting criteria. Twitter leverages an auction system for ad-buying
wherein marketers compete to place their advertisements on Twitter users’ feeds.
Twitter offers CPI (cost per impression) and CPC (cost per click) pricing options to
marketers. Fees are based primarily on targeting criteria and quantity of ad placements.
In 2015, Twitter pivoted to a different income model which was based on mone-
tization of Commerce revenue stream. Twitter introduced a “Buy Now” button that
allowed its users to buy items directly in a Twitter storefront. Twitter assumed that its
users would welcome the ability to conduct transactions directly from their Twitter
feeds. Twitter wanted to be a ﬁrst mover and market maker by popularizing social
commerce in the industry since the advertising income model was already in use by
other social networks such as Facebook and LinkedIn.
By contrast, Social Commerce was not well established in the industry in 2015 and
Twitter attempted to change that by pivoting its income model to monetize this revenue
stream. Twitter assumed that an innovative income model could help it to better
achieve its objective of revenue growth. It presumed that by processing transactions in
its storefronts it could increase its revenues by earning sales commissions rather than
charging fees on ad placements. Sales commission would be based mainly on the price
and quantity of the item purchased by a Twitter user. However, Twitter’s attempts at
monetizing the Commerce revenue stream was unsuccessful and, in 2017, Twitter
abandoned it by reverting to its advertising-based business model.
262 V. Pant and E. Yu

--- PAGE 276 ---
3 Conceptual Modeling of Twitter’s Pivoting
Conceptual modeling with concepts of goals and agents can be used to answer several
important questions to guide decision-making about organizational pivoting. These
include questions such as ‘is a pivoting option attractive?’ as well as ‘what is the effect
of a speciﬁc pivoting option on certain objectives?’. We note that the content of the
models in this paper is based on details about the case example of Twitter that are
obtained from secondary sources including [4–8]. Therefore, some of these details may
be incomplete or erroneous and are used in this paper just for illustration.
3.1 Rationale for Pivoting Away from “Advertising”
Figure 1 presents an i* SR diagram showing the Advertising income model in the
Twitter case. “Twitter”, “Twitter User”, and “Vendors” are portrayed as actors. In i*,
actors are intentional and strategic. They reason about their strategic interests within a
network of interdependent social actors. Twitter’s highest-level objective mandated
“revenue growth for the corporation”. This is depicted as a softgoal which is a quality
criterion that is judged to be sufﬁciently satisﬁed or denied from the subjective per-
spective of its encompassing actor.
Twitter’s top-level objective was supported by its mid-level aim of “revenue
growth via advertising”. This mid-level aim is denoted as a softgoal and its relationship
with Twitter’s top-level objective is shown via a ‘Help’ contribution link. Softgoal
contribution (SC) links can be of different types (e.g., help, hurt) and are used to show
the impact of a softgoal (or task) on other softgoals. SC links can be used to depict
hierarchies of quality criteria with positive, negative, and neutral impacts going up as
well as across different branches of softgoals. The top-most ‘Help’ contribution link in
Twitter connects the softgoal corresponding to the Advertising income model with the
softgoal corresponding to its superordinate objective (i.e., “revenue growth for the
corporation”). Similarly, the Advertising income model is itself supported by contri-
butions from “Ad Sales of placement”.
When softgoals have been reﬁned to become sufﬁciently speciﬁc, they can be
operationalized. The softgoal “Ad Sales from Placement” is operationalized into the
task “Auction of impressions”. This lowest-level softgoal is operationalized via an
“Auction of impressions” which corresponds to bidding for ad placements by Vendors.
This operationalization allows Twitter to satisfy its functional goal of “Content be
served” to Twitter Users wherein the content refers to ads mixed in with “Social
Network Updates”. Operationalizations are represented in i* as tasks since a task is a
speciﬁc way of achieving a goal. Actors can have goals which are states of affairs that
they wish to achieve in the world. Task are connected to goals via Means-Ends
(ME) links whereby the completion of any task leads to the fulﬁlment of the goal to
which it is associated. SC and ME links jointly help an analyst to perform trade-off
analysis among multiple competing options with respect to the quality criteria (soft-
goals) that each satisﬁes or denies.
Twitter must “Track” click-throughs on ads as part of its “Auction of impressions”
task otherwise neither it nor Vendors would be able to measure the performance of their
ad campaigns. Therefore, “Track click-throughs” is depicted as a sub-task of the task
Conceptual Modeling to Support Pivoting 263

--- PAGE 277 ---
Revenue Growth
[Corporation]
Content be Served
[Social Network Updates]
Traffic
[Shoppers]
Awareness
[Promotions]
Twitter
Twitter
User
Understanding
[Buying Flow]
Views/Clicks
[Advertisements]
Relevant Content
[Social Connections]
Vendors
Fees
[Placement]
Track
[Clickthroughs]
Auction
[Impressions]
Ad Sales
[Placement]
Procure
[Placement]
Familiarity
[Shopping Process]
First Mover
[Market Maker]
Revenue Growth
[Advertising]
?
Goal Softgoal Task Resource
Means-End
Link
Help Contribution
Link
Hurt Contribution
Link
Legend
Actor Actor Boundary
Actor Goal Softgoal Task Resource
ISA
Link
Task Decomposition
Link
Dependency
Link
?
Satisfied Label Denied Label Unknown Label Initial Label
Fig. 1. i* SR diagram showing Advertising income model in the Twitter case
264 V. Pant and E. Yu

--- PAGE 278 ---
“Auction of impressions”. Tasks can be decomposed via Task-Decomposition
(TD) links to show their constituent parts wherein each constituent part must be suc-
cessfully performed for the task to succeed. In evaluating the viability of goal
achievement, ME links between goals and tasks behave as “OR” links whereas TD
links between tasks and other elements act as “AND” links.
Twitter Users depend on Twitter for “Relevant Content generated by their social
connections” and Twitter depends on Twitter Users for “Views/Clicks on ads in their
social feeds”. In i*, a depender is an actor that depends on another actor while a
dependee is an actor on which another actor depends. A dependum is the thing for
which the depender depends on the dependee. When dependums are regarded as being
sufﬁciently fulﬁlled or denied solely from the perspective of the depender then they are
shown as softgoals.
Initial labels denote starting points in the analysis and are shown as dashed circles
around evaluation labels. Twitter’s Advertising income model was predicated on
Vendors “Procuring ad placements” and paying Twitter “Fees for ad placements”.
Vendors placed ads and paid fees to Twitter to direct “Trafﬁc of shoppers” (Twitter
Users) to their websites and to generate “Awareness about their promotions”. This
arrangement only beneﬁted any Vendor if Twitter Users were “Familiar with the
shopping processes” and “Understood the buying flows” on their eCommerce website.
If these preconditions were not satisﬁed – then ad placements and fees payments to
Twitter by a Vendor would not translate into additional revenues for that Vendor.
Therefore, these preconditions are denoted with initial labels such that if they are
denied then Twitter’s Advertising income model would be unsuccessful.
Twitter’s Advertising income model was established in the industry and was
already in use by other social networks including Facebook and LinkedIn. Twitter
Users were accustomed to seeing ads in their social feeds because this was com-
monplace in other social networks such as Facebook and LinkedIn. Figure 1 shows that
Twitter’s Advertising income model was reasonably successful because all but one of
the model elements were satisﬁed. The objectives of each actor other than Twitter were
fulﬁlled. However, Twitter’s quality criterion of being a “First Mover and market
maker” was denied because it did not innovate the Advertising income model.
Therefore, top-most softgoal is labeled as unknown in the Advertising income model.
In 2015 Twitter pivoted its income model from Advertising to Commerce. It did so to
better achieve its top-most softgoal of “Revenue Growth for the corporation”.
3.2 Rationale for Pivoting to “Commerce”
Figure 2 presents an i* SR diagram showing the Commerce income model in the
Twitter case. Original model elements corresponding to the Advertising income model
from Fig. 1 are greyed-out to simplify visual presentation of the model. Actors as well
as dependencies between Twitter and other actors related to the Advertising income
model have been updated in Fig. 2 to reflect the changes resulting from the switch to a
Commerce income model.
Twitter’s highest-level softgoal of “revenue growth” for the corporation was sup-
ported by its pivot to a mid-level softgoal of “Net revenue via Commerce”. Twitter
intended to switch from its income model of charging fees for placement of ads to
Conceptual Modeling to Support Pivoting 265

--- PAGE 279 ---
Replicate
[Catalogs]
Revenue Growth
[CorporaƟon]
Net Revenue
[Commerce]
Content be Served
[Social Network Updates]
IntegraƟon
[eCommerce]
Vendor Share
[Revenue]
Storefront
Presence [Sellers]
TwiƩer
Understanding
[Buying Flow]
Purchase
[Recommended Item]
Relevant Content
[Social ConnecƟons]
Mediated
Vendor
Commission
[Sales]
Track
[Clickthroughs]
AucƟon
[Impressions]
Ad Sales
[Placement]
Agreement
[Reselling] Familiarity
[Shopping Process]
First Mover
[Market Maker]
Revenue Growth
[AdverƟsing]
Gross Revenue
[Commerce] Purchase via
TwiƩer [Item]
Purchase from
Vendor [Item]
Purchase be Made
[Item]
TwiƩer
User
Goal SoŌgoal Task Resource
Means-End
Link
Help ContribuƟon
Link
Hurt ContribuƟon
Link
Legend
Actor Actor Boundary
Actor Goal SoŌgoal Task Resource
ISA
Link
Task DecomposiƟon
Link
Dependency
Link
?
SaƟsfied Label Denied Label Unknown Label IniƟal Label
Fig. 2. i* SR diagram showing Commerce income model in the Twitter case
266 V. Pant and E. Yu

--- PAGE 280 ---
earning commissions on items sold in its storefronts. Therefore, this Commerce income
model is supported by an intermediary objective of “Gross revenue from Commerce”
and this is supported by the lowest-level softgoal of “Storefront presence for Vendors”
on Twitter. Twitter mediated the relationship between Vendors and Twitter Users.
The “Storefront Presence” softgoal, having been sufﬁciently reﬁned, is opera-
tionalized into the task of “Integration” with eCommerce systems of Vendors. This
necessitated “Replication of Vendor catalogs” by Twitter so that they could be accessed
by Twitter Users in storefronts on Twitter. Compared to the Advertising-based business
model, this operationalization is an alternate way for Twitter to satisfy its goal of
“Content be served” to its users wherein the content now includes “purchase recom-
mendations” mixed in with “Social Network Updates”. Clicking on a “purchase rec-
ommendation” would take a Twitter User to the Twitter storefront of the Vendor whose
item was recommended for purchase. That Twitter User could then buy that item
directly on that Twitter storefront.
As in the Advertising income model, Twitter Users in the Commerce income model
also depended on Twitter for “Relevant Content” generated by their Social Connec-
tions. However, unlike with Advertising, in Commerce – Twitter depended on Twitter
users to “Purchase the recommended item” in their social feed from a Twitter store-
front. This was different from the case with Advertising where Twitter depended on
Twitter Users for “Views/Clicks on Advertisements” in their social feeds.
The Commerce income model necessitated Twitter to establish different relation-
ships with Mediated Vendors. Twitter depended on Mediated Vendors for “Commis-
sions” on Sales and for “Agreements to Resell” Mediated Vendors’ items in Twitter’s
storefronts. Mediated Vendors depended on Twitter for “Vendor’s Share” of Revenue.
Twitter Users’ relationships with Mediated Vendors also changed across Advertising
and Commerce income models because in the former Twitter User’s bought items
directly from a Vendor while in the latter Twitter Users bought items from Mediated
Vendors indirectly via Twitter. Twitter earned “Commissions” on Sales and Mediated
Vendor earned “Vendor’s Share” of Revenue only when Twitter Users made purchases
directly in a Twitter Storefront.
By performing goal modelling evaluation as shown in Fig. 2, one could conclude
that Twitter’s Commerce approach would be unsuccessful. The business logic under-
lying the Commerce approach was beneﬁcial for any Mediated Vendor only when
Twitter Users were “Familiar with the shopping processes” and “Understood the
buying flows” on the Twitter storefront of that Mediated Vendor. However, most
Twitter Users were neither “Familiar with the shopping processes” nor “Understood the
buying flows” on Twitter because unlike eCommerce websites, social networks were
not regarded by users as marketplaces. Twitter was unable to convince Twitter Users to
make “Purchases” of Recommended Product directly on Twitter.
Despite success with some of the elements in the model, the overall objective was
not achievable. Consequently, Twitter was unable to generate “Gross Revenue” or
“Sales Commissions” because Mediated Vendors were unable to generate “Vendor
Share of Revenue” from orders in Twitter storefronts by Twitter Users. Revenues
earned via “Sales Commissions in Commerce” were lower than Revenues accruing via
“Placement Fees in Advertising”. This meant that the larger softgoal of Twitter (i.e.,
“Revenue Growth for the corporation”) was denied because of the pivot from
Conceptual Modeling to Support Pivoting 267

--- PAGE 281 ---
Advertising to the Commerce. Analysis of this i* model indicates that Twitter’s pivot
to a Commerce approach was unsuccessful because its central premise was faulty. This
is depicted by denied initial labels over dependums between Mediated Vendors and
Twitter Users. Twitter abandoned its unsuccessful Commerce approach and reverted
back to selling Advertisements in 2017 [4–8].
4 Related Work
This paper focused on the strategic modeling of pivoting in organizations. We pre-
sented strategic models of pivoting based on a retrospective case example of Twitter.
Our work is related to the strategic modeling literature because researchers in that
discipline express and analyze organizations and their relationships using visual
models. In this respect our work is related to research by Samavi et al. [14] that
proposes a conceptual modeling approach to reason about strategies and business
models. Our work is also related to research by Giannoulis et al. that describes a
language for modeling strategy maps [15]. Kim et al. posit a modeling technique to
depict a value chain of virtual enterprises [16]. Cardoso et al. [17] offer architectural
guidelines and methodological recommendations for modeling different types of goals
in organizations. This paper also builds upon our prior work [10] in which we pre-
sented models that were abstract generalizations and decontextualized representations
of the ten pivot archetypes proposed by Ries in [1].
5 Conclusion and Future Work
This paper contributes to conceptual modeling research by applying i* to analyze
pivoting based on a retrospective case example of Twitter. i* modeling allowed us to
express and assess pivoting in a structured and systematic manner. However, in doing
so we also encountered certain limitations of i* for modeling this case example. These
limitations pertain to lack of support in i* for temporal and conditional reasoning as
well as expression of negative dependencies and quantities. These are open topics that
are being studied by strategic modeling researchers.
i* does not support the analysis of temporality and this is a hinderance for
designing organizational pivots because pivots entail shifting the structural conﬁgu-
ration of an organization (and its relationships) from a past or present state to a future
state. Currently, a sequence of i* models are needed to depict structural conﬁgurations
at different time steps. i* also does not support the analysis of conditionality which is
necessary for understanding inclusivity and exclusivity relationships between elements.
Some options may be viable only when certain other options are deactivated while
some options may be viable only when certain other options are activated. Currently,
different i* models are needed to portray such conditionality among elements. i* does
not support the depiction of negative dependencies which makes it difﬁcult to separate
those dependencies which are left out of the model because they are unimportant from
those that are left out of the model because they must be avoided. i* also does not
support the depiction of quantities which are necessary for assessing attainment of
268 V. Pant and E. Yu

--- PAGE 282 ---
numerical targets and for comparing among tactics using objective indicators. How-
ever, extensions of i* such as Goal-oriented Requirements Language (GRL) support
the depiction of quantities.
Overcoming these inadequacies of i* for modeling organizational pivots satisfac-
torily shall comprise the core of our future work. Some of these gaps can be partially
ﬁlled by providing tool support for i* modeling. Such a tool can present i* models to
humans in a way that is explainable and interpretable. Examples of functions and
features in such a tool could include coloring/discoloring, revealing/hiding,
expanding/collapsing, pulsing/ﬁxing and enlarging/shrinking model elements.
References
1. Ries, E.: The Lean Startup: How Today’s Entrepreneurs Use Continuous Innovation to
Create Radically Successful Businesses. Crown Publishing Group, New York (2011)
2. Townsend, K.: Why Microsoft’s Linux lovefest goes hand-in-hand with its Azure cloud
strategy, 15 July 2016. https://www.techrepublic.com/article/why-microsofts-linux-lovefest-
goes-hand-in-hand-with-its-azure-cloud-strategy/
3. Penenberg, A.L.: Amazon’s Pivot, 02 May 2017. https://www.fastcompany.com/1842702/
amazons-pivot
4. Guynn, J.: Buh bye Twitter ‘buy’ button, 20 January 2017. https://www.usatoday.com/story/
tech/talkingtech/2017/01/18/goodbye-twitter-buy-button/96726766/
5. McCarthy, A.: Twitter Unclicks Buy Button, 19 January 2017. https://www.emarketer.com/
Article/Twitter-Unclicks-Buy-Button/1015070
6. Gagliordi, N.: Twitter kills the buy button, ends focus on ecommerce, 19 January 2017.
https://www.zdnet.com/article/twitter-kills-the-buy-button-ends-focus-on-ecommerce/
7. Lunden, I.: Twitter is phasing out the “Buy” button, will continue to offer donations, 18
January 2017. https://techcrunch.com/2017/01/17/bye-buy-on-twitter/
8. Rey, J.D.: Twitter’s ‘Buy’ button is ofﬁcially dead, 18 January 2017. https://www.recode.
net/2017/1/18/14311230/twitter-buy-button-dead-killed-shuts-down
9. Bajwa, S.S., Wang, X., Duc, A.N., Abrahamsson, P.: “Failures” to be celebrated: an analysis
of major pivots of software startups. Empir. Softw. Eng. 22(5), 2373–2408 (2017)
10. Pant, V., Yu, E., Tai, A.: Towards reasoning about pivoting in startups and large enterprises
withi*.In:Poels,G.,Gailly,F.,SerralAsensio,E.,Snoeck,M.(eds.)PoEM2017.LNBIP,vol.
305, pp. 203–220. Springer, Cham (2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-70241-4_14
11. Pant, V., Yu, E.: Modeling simultaneous cooperation and competition among enterprises.
Bus. Inf. Syst. Eng. 60(1), 39–54 (2018)
12. Yu, E.S.K., Giorgini, P., Maiden, N., Mylopoulos, J. (eds.): Social Modeling for
Requirements Engineering. MIT Press, Cambridge (2011)
13. Pant, V., Yu, E.: Modeling strategic complementarity and synergistic value creation in
coopetitive relationships. In: Ojala, A., Holmström Olsson, H., Werder, K. (eds.) ICSOB
2017. LNBIP, vol. 304, pp. 82–98. Springer, Cham (2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
319-69191-6_6
14. Samavi, R., Yu, E., Topaloglou, T.: Strategic reasoning about business models: a conceptual
modeling approach. IseB 7(2), 171–198 (2009)
15. Giannoulis, C., Petit, M., Zdravkovic, J.: Towards a uniﬁed business strategy language: a
meta-model of strategy maps. In: IFIP Working Conference on the Practice of Enterprise
Modeling (PoEM), pp. 205–216 (2010)
Conceptual Modeling to Support Pivoting 269

--- PAGE 283 ---
16. Kim, C.H., Son, Y.J., Kim, T.Y., Kim, K., Baik, K.: A modeling approach for designing a
value chain of virtual enterprise. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 28(9–10), 1025–1030 (2006)
17. Cardoso, E., Mylopoulos, J., Mate, A., Trujillo, J.: Strategic enterprise architectures. In:
Horkoff, J., Jeusfeld, Manfred A., Persson, A. (eds.) PoEM 2016. LNBIP, vol. 267, pp. 57–
71. Springer, Cham (2016). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-48393-1_5
270 V. Pant and E. Yu

--- PAGE 284 ---
Modeling and Management of Big Data
(MoBiD) 2018

--- PAGE 285 ---
Preface to MoBiD 2018
Seventh International Workshop on Modeling
and Management of Big Data (MoBiD 2018) at the 37th
International Conference on Conceptual Modeling
(ER 2018)
Xi’an, China
October 22–25, 2018
Organized by
Il-Yeol Song, Jesús Peral and Alejandro Maté
In recent years, the quick adoption of Big Data technology has led to the apparition of a
wide landscape of technologies and applications. Together with a wide variety of
devices, including sensor-enabled smart devices, and all types of wearables, connected
to the Internet, vast amounts of data are powering newly connected applications and
solutions. From real-time information to purely digital environments, like social media
where all information is stored in the Cloud have led to the apparition of new
expressions such as Internet of Things, Industry 4.0, Big Data, Cloud Computing or
Fog Computing among others.
Given the necessity to obtain faster and deeper insights related to business objec-
tives from these data, there is a special interest in reducing the effort of integrating,
processing, and understanding Big Data. In this sense, conceptualization and methods
to effectively model and manage Big Data have led to the apparition of new ways of
analyzing Big Data. Thus, the objective of MoBiD’18 is to be an international forum
for exchanging ideas on the latest and best proposals for modeling and managing big
data in this data-driven paradigm. The workshop is a forum focused on the use of the
conceptual modeling approaches for the development of new applica-tions based on
Big Data, where researchers and practitioners are invited to exchange ideas and present
their novel methodologies.
The workshop has been announced in the main announcement venues and attracted
papers from four different countries distributed all over the world: China, United States,
Finland, and Spain. We have ﬁnally received 5 papers and the Program Committee has
selected 3 papers, making an acceptance rate of 60%.
The ﬁrst paper by Jie Lian et al. shows a comparison between SQL and NoSQL
systems for storing big spatio temporal data. The authors propose a general architecture
oriented to the storage and retrieval of high-dimensional spatio-temporal data. Using
this architecture, the authors compare the performance of MongoDB against Post-
greSQL, showing how they behave in terms of space and insertion time as the volume
of data increases. The architecture allows an easy comparison of technologies oriented
to big spatio temporal data and highlights the most important factors to take into

--- PAGE 286 ---
account when selecting a technology. The second paper by Guangxuan Zhang et al.
presents an approach to conceptualize conflict models from unstructured information
stored in emails and online discussions. The approach uses categories of argumentation
and features from text mining to detect argumentative messages, obtaining better
results than the baseline models that relied solely on classiﬁers. In this way, the
approach allows developers and online communities to better understand the nature of
the discussion and improve conflict management in virtual collaborative work envi-
ronments. The third paper, by Jiaheng Lu et al. presents a vision to manage the variety
in Big Data by means of a uniﬁed architecture that covers both relational and NoSQL
systems. The architecture makes use of a two-layer system. The ﬁrst layer, Core layer,
is dedicated to query processing and schema managing, using a model-agnostic query
language that makes use of indexes dedicated to each technology. The second layer,
Storage layer, is dedicated to the extraction and storage of information through a
model-agnostic data storage interface that interacts with different datasource tech-
nologies. Finally, the keynote by Tok Wang Ling, Conceptual Modeling Views of
Relational Databases vs Big Data, discusses the importance of conceptual modeling
and semantics in relational databases and Big Data environments, and which set of
characteristics can help us decide between one or the other technology.
Acknowledgments. We would like to express our gratitude to the Program Committee
members for their hard work in reviewing papers, the authors for submitting their
papers, and the ER 2018 organizing committee for supporting our workshop. We also
thank ER 2018 workshop chairs Carson Woo and Jiaheng Lu for their direction,
guidance and support. MoBiD’18 was organized within the framework of the following
project SEQUOIA-UA (TIN2015-63502-C3-3-R) from the Spanish Ministry of
Economy and Competitiveness (MINECO).
October 2018 Il-Yeol Song
Jesús Peral
Alejandro Maté
Program Co-chairs
Preface to MoBiD 2018 273

--- PAGE 287 ---
Conceptual Modeling Views of Relational
Databases vs Big Data
Tok Wang Ling
Department of Computer Science, School of Computing,
National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore
lingtw@comp.nus.edu.sg
The concepts of object class, relationship type, and attribute of object class and rela-
tionship type, are the three basic concepts in Entity Relationship Model. They are
termed ORA-semantics. Without knowing the ORA-semantics in the databases, the
quality of some database areas are low. Both Relational Model and Big Data Model do
not capture ORA-semantics.
We ﬁrst give an introduction to the current 3 Vs + 2 Vs characteristics of big data
applications and the types of big data applications and their characteristics. The outline
of the talk is as follows:
– We recall the requirements and criteria for traditional database applications in
RDBMS using SQL and highlight some limitations and performance issues of
RDBMS. We review the use of ACID for handling concurrent update transactions,
join of relations, redundancy and updating anomalies, normal forms, performance
issues in parallel and distributed databases, etc.
– Briefly, we present the basic data models of the 4 major categories of NoSQL
databases for big data applications, namely, key-value store, wide-column store,
document store, and graph database. We further compare the expressive power of
the NoSQL databases with relational databases for capturing the ORA-semantics in
the data, such as object class, relationship type, redundancy and normalization,
recursive relationship type, multiple relationship types between/among same object
classes, ISA relationship type, etc.
– Next, we compare the relational model and big data model using a set of charac-
teristics. We describe some of the existing techniques which can be used to improve
the performances of certain database applications, such as materialized view design,
the concepts of strong FD/MVD and weak FD in physical database design, hori-
zontal and vertical partitioning of data, etc.
– We further present some seldom mentioned but very important issues in data and
schema integration, such as entity resolution vs relationship resolution, primary key
vs object identiﬁer (OID), local OID vs global OID, system generated OID vs
manually designed OID, local FD/MVD vs global FD/MVD, semantic dependency
vs FD/MVD, etc. All these concepts are related to ORA-semantics and they have a
signiﬁcant impact on the quality of the integrated relational databases and big data.
We need to discover these ORA-semantics in the data in order to perform data
integration with good value quality.
– Lastly, we give conceptual modeling views on RDBMS vs Big Data Computing
using a set of requirements and characteristics of the applications. This set of
characteristics helps us to decide when to use SQL or NoSQL for big data
applications.

--- PAGE 288 ---
SQL or NoSQL? Which Is the Best
Choice for Storing Big Spatio-Temporal
Climate Data?
Jie Lian1(B)
, Sheng Miao2
, Michael McGuire2
, and Ziying Tang2
1
Shanghai Normal University, 100 Guilin Road, Shanghai, China
lianjie@shnu.edu.cn
2
Towson University, 8000 York Road, Towson, MD, USA
Abstract. Management of big spatio-temporal data such as the results
from large scale global climate models has long been a challenge because
of the sheer vastness of the dataset. Although diﬀerent data manage-
ment systems like that incorporate a relational database management
system have been proposed and widely used in prior studies, solutions
that are particularly designed for big spatio-temporal data management
have not been studied well. In this paper, we propose a general data
management platform for high-dimensional spatio-temporal datasets like
those found in the climate domain, where diﬀerent database systems
can be applied. Through this platform, we compare and evaluate several
database systems including SQL database and NoSQL database from
various aspects and explore the key impact factors for system perfor-
mance. Our experimental results indicate advantages and disadvantages
of each database system and give insight into the best system to use for
big spatio-temporal data applications. Our analysis provides important
insights into the understanding of performance of diﬀerent data manage-
ment systems, which is very useful for designing high dimensional big
data applications.
Keywords: Spatio-temporal database · NoSQL
Big spatio-temporal data · Performance
1 Introduction
Big data is not a new term in the ﬁeld of climate science. Advances in various
technologies including high precision remote sensing systems, distributed data
computation have resulted in a large accumulation of high dimensional data.
Over time, the management of such a dataset becomes unwieldy and diﬃcult
to access, explore, and analyze. For example, in climate science, the dataset is
multi-dimensional and multi-variable, which is computational prohibitive to ﬁnd
patterns. To complicate this problem, a legacy exists where the data are man-
aged using array-based ﬁle formats such as the popular NetCDF format [1] where
scientists have to ﬁrst download the entire dataset and run manual software to
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 275–284, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_32

--- PAGE 289 ---
276 J. Lian et al.
decompress and preprocess the data to access a single time step. Recently, with
improved capabilities in distributed computing, using database technology to
manage this data has become a reality. Recent research has investigated the use
of NoSQL databases such as Hadoop [2] and MongoDB [3] for managing spatial
and temporal data. There are many attributes to NoSQL databases that make
them attractive for this application including scalability, ﬂexibility, and the abil-
ity to deal with unstructured data. In this paper we investigate the performance
of a document-oriented NoSQL database in its ability to store and query a mul-
tivariate global climate dataset. We compare this performance to a traditional
relational database management system, and analyze the results with theoretic
explanations. The research presented in this paper is largely motivated by the
high dimensional spatio-temporal datasets that result from large-scale simula-
tions of the Earth’s Climate. Consider applying a basic data mining operation
such as clustering on a dataset that have millions of data points, where the
clustering needs to be done for each time step. Under the current data man-
agement method, one would have to ﬁrst download all of the required NetCDF
ﬁles, decompress, and extract them before applying any clustering operations.
This process alone is very time consuming. Furthermore, the entire ﬁle must be
loaded into main memory for processing no matter user’s interest is only two
months, which wastes a lot of memory space. Because of this, we are motivated
to apply new technology in cloud-based NoSQL databases.
The focus of this research is to study and understand the data storage and
management requirements for high dimensional datasets by implementing and
analyzing database solutions for big spatio-temporal climate data, which com-
pares and evaluates the performance of the SQL and NoSQL database systems.
With this in mind, we make the following contributions. First, we design a
document-oriented schema to manage multivariate climate data and implement
the design using a NoSQL database in both single node and multi-nodes envi-
ronments. Second, we implement a similar database design in PostgreSQL and
compare the performance of each implementation in terms of disk usage, memory
usage, insert time, and query time. Third, we provide analysis and insights on
diﬀerent types of database system, which can be used as references for any high
dimensional database applications. The rest of this paper is organized as follows.
After reviewing related works in Sect.2, we discuss three diﬀerent data models
in Sect.3. Section4 presents experimental results and discussions. Section5 con-
cludes this paper with limitation and future works.
2 Related Work
A revolution in distributed computation is currently underfoot driven by cloud
computing and virtualization solutions. This emerging technology enables the
analysis of big data. One of the important aspects of climate data research is
that the spatial and temporal domain of the climatic system is multi-scale in
nature. The inclusion of multiple scales of spatio-temporal data is therefore very
computationally intensive. With this in mind, using a distributed cloud-based

--- PAGE 290 ---
SQL or NoSQL? 277
architecture scales well to support these types of analyses. Cloud-based data
warehouses have been shown to be eﬃcient on big data processing [4] and it
is possible to conduct aggregation queries using the MapReduce framework [5].
Recently, there has been some researches on processing spatial queries using the
MapReduce framework [6] and a grid-based architecture has been implemented
on Amazon EC2 cloud storage to perform hydrologic simulation [7]. Document
databases such as MongoDB have shown to be very eﬀective in the distributed
management of spatial data [8] and geoanalytic frameworks [9]. Also, the cloud
architecture has proven to be eﬀective for visual analytics of spatio-temporal
data [10].
There have also been a number of studies who propose custom database
solutions for the storage, manipulation, and query of multi-dimensional arrays.
Early solutions have proposed a database and query language for the manage-
ment of multi-dimensional arrays [11]. This research eventually evolves into the
RasDaMan or raster data manager array database system which is implemented
as an extension to PostgreSQL [12]. Bimonte [13] et al. presented a UML proﬁle
for spatial data warehouse, and a eﬃcient ROLAP architecture. Tang [14] devel-
oped a parallel spatial computing framework for vector-based geo-spatial data.
However, to our knowledge, there has yet to research that tests the performance
of a multi-node NoSQL database for the use of storing high dimension spatio-
temporal data. This paper adds to the state of the art in cloud computing and
NoSQL databases in that we test the performance of a distributed database in
its ability to store and retrieve multidimensional data such as that associated
with global climate simulations.
3 System Architecture
The data models presented in this paper are candidate databases to be used as
the core database for the spatio-temporal climate data analysis. This work will
contribute to the overall design of this system in that it will guide the choice for
the central data model. As such, one of the main requirements of the system is
eﬃcient data insert and query performance and because of commodity hardware,
less of a focus is placed on data storage size and memory usage.
3.1 NoSQL Data Model
MongoDB is a document-based NoSQL database system that uses ﬂexible JSON-
style documents. It can host many databases in one server and each database
owns a number of collections. Every collection stores any numbers of documents
that are grouped by a set of key-value pairs. To put this in climate data, a
single MongoDB database would consist of data for a given climate model, e.g.
the Reanalysis I dataset. Then within this database, there would be a set of
collections that would represent a given set of variables such as air temperature.
Then within each collection, a set of documents would exist for each time step
in the model where the document in its most simple form would store both a
time step and a multi-dimensional array.

--- PAGE 291 ---
278 J. Lian et al.
Single-Node MongoDB. In our framework, data is four dimensional (lati-
tude, longitude, time stamp, values) spatio-temporal data which will be queried
by users during data processing. To store such data in a database system, there
are two approaches. The ﬁrst approach is to convert the n-dimensional array to
a number of individual documents where each document stores a tuple consist-
ing of latitude, longitude, time stamp, and value. However, doing so needs to
store the same information repeatedly and therefore is not eﬃcient. The second
approach is to directly load the n-dimensional array into the database system.
It improves disk usage and reduces I/O operation times. This method which
named as “multi-dimensional array framework” has been widely used, especially
in relational database systems. This framework is based on array abstraction
which can be mapped in a relational database. Whereas, retrieving one record
from the n-dimensional array is similar to search for the desired value directly
from a ﬂat ﬁle. Both of these scenarios need to load entire array into memory and
only choose the desired subset for processing. Therefore, ﬁnding one appropriate
data model is based on the requirements for the speciﬁc application. Since our
application is to cluster every point in the global dataset into six climate types
based on six geographical attributes daily, we choose to store the data using two
key/value pairs, time and space. By doing so, query time is reduced and disk
space is minimized. Moreover, matrix operations could also be used directly at
the application level in this method. In MongoDB database, array object could
be encoded in BSON (Binary JSON). BSON is a binary-encoded serialization of
JSON-like documents. It supports the embedded documents and arrays. After
retrieving data from database, the BSON documents could be decoded to array
for data processing. In MongoDB data model, we have a database at the top-
most level that stores all of the climate data. Then we have collections for each
climate attribute. Documents in every collection are key-value pairs; key is set
by ‘date’ which is also index, and value is a two dimensional array.
Multi-node MongoDB. Big data often requires the scaling out of a database
where a single database is distributed across a number of nodes. With respect to
climate data, as more and more data is produced, this becomes a big data prob-
lem and thus the ability to scale out is required. MongoDB has the capability to
scale out horizontally across a number of nodes. Horizontal scaling is diﬀerent
from vertical scaling where more resources are added to a single node; horizon-
tal scaling adds more nodes to an existing framework. This approach is not only
easier for setup also exceed one machine’s power limit. In the distributed imple-
mentation, there are generally three types of components, including the Mongos
query router, conﬁg server, and slave nodes, also known as shards. First, data
are divided into shards based on shard key which is an index or composite index.
The chosen shard key determines on which node each document is stored. As
such, performance will vary based on the shard key and it is optimal to keep
data that is typically queried together on the same node. Therefore, choosing an
ideal shard key is important in big data system. Another component of the sys-
tem is the Mongos Query Router which is responsible for processing queries and

--- PAGE 292 ---
SQL or NoSQL? 279
locating on which shard a particular document exists. Moreover, all the other
database operations are executed in the Mongos Query Router. To improve high
frequency operations, more Mongos Query Routers could be added to share the
load. The last component is Conﬁg Server which is responsible for serving as a
connection between mongos and shard clusters. The Conﬁg Server also stores
metadata of sharded clusters. It only does read-write operations when there is a
new Mongos Query Router instance initializing and data chunks are splitting or
migrating between shard clusters. And for this data model, time is used as both
the index and the shard key.
3.2 PostgreSQL Data Model
Another option for the database system is PostgreSQL which is a relational
database management system. PostgreSQL has been used to manage spatial
data using the PostGIS extension. PostgreSQL also provides data storage and
database operations and supports storage of array objects. In the PostgreSQL
model, there are six tables for each variable and a Date table. The six variable
tables store the multi-dimensional arrays and include a primary key and foreign
key that will be related to the Date table as well as an array object. The Date
table as the center in data model stores date id which is the primary key and
also the other six tables foreign key as well as the date value. D id is set for
index in Date table and every attribute id is set for their own index.
4 Expriment Results
4.1 Environment Setting and Testing Data
The goal of the experiments presented in this paper is to evaluate the three data
models presented in Sect.3 to determine which should be used for storing and
retrieving big climate data. With this in mind, we ﬁrst test the performance of the
single node MongoDB implementation versus the PostgreSQL implementation.
Then, a more detailed test was performed to compare the single node MongoDB
versus the multi-node MongoDB. In particular, tests were performed to evaluate
insert time, disk space usage, memory usage and query time. In order to do
so, a VM Hypervisor (VMware vSphereESXi 5.1) was employed to build our
testing platform on a PC with a single Intel Core i5-3570@3.40GHz processor,
16GB RAM and a 2TB SATA hard drive. For the experiments, the system
resources were partitioned into four nodes. The ﬁrst three nodes each had 4GB
of RAM and a 400GB disk and were used to house the single node MongoDB
implementation, PostgreSQL server, and the Mongos Query Router for the multi-
node MongoDB implementation. The fourth node was given 2GB of RAM and a
100GB disk and was used to house the multi-node MongoDB conﬁg server. This
VM was given less resource because the MongoDB conﬁg server generally needs
less system resources than the other nodes. In addition to the hypervisor PC,
three more PCs were used as shard nodes in the multi-node MongoDB system.

--- PAGE 293 ---
280 J. Lian et al.
They each have 8GB RAM and 2TB disk. The NOAA Reanalysis I Dataset [15]
is used in this experiment. This dataset consists of daily modeled results based
on in situ readings for air temperature, pressure, relative humidity, precipitation,
u-wind, and v-wind from 1948 to 2012. The data is distributed on a 73 by 144
latitude longitude grid.
4.2 Performance Metrics
We evaluate the performance of the database implementations using four metrics:
inserting time, disk size, querying time and memory usage. Inserting time and
querying time mean the time to do insert and query operations on database
system. Disk size is deﬁned as the storage usage of database. Memory usage
is recorded during querying data. In general, query time and memory usage
are the most important metrics. In the experiment, insert time was measured
by recording the time to insert data into the single node MongoDB, multi-
node MongoDB and PostgreSQL. To show the result of increasing data size, the
dataset used for testing was increased from one to thirty years. After the insert
operation, disk size was calculated as the dataset size increased. We recorded the
disk size from the database conﬁgurations.To record the query time, we used a
script to retrieve the same dataset from three database systems separately. The
running time of the script was recorded as the query time. Memory usage was
calculated by capturing the peak value and steady value from the system monitor
when the query operation was being performed. For the multi-node MongoDB
implementation, Mongos who handles most of database operations was chosen
for record memory usage instead of recording all the nodes memory usage.
4.3 Results
In this section, we present the results of our experiments.
The results of insert time between PostgreSQL and the single node Mon-
goDB database are shown in Fig.1(a). The blue dotted line represents the insert
time for PostgreSQL and red solid line represents the insert time for single node
MongoDB, which is the same in subsequent ﬁgures. It is shown that the single
node MongoDB system uses less time to insert the same data than PostgreSQL.
The insert time of the PostgreSQL increases linearly with the size of the dataset
and the insert time of the single node MongoDB shows an inﬂection point when
inserting 26years of data. The reason is that the system has reached the physical
memory limit and has begun to use swap space. It is known that frequent swap-
ping between physical and virtual memory will lead to poor eﬃciency. Figure1(b)
shows the comparison between the single node in red line and multi-node
MongoDB in green line. From the ﬁgure, we can see that the multi-node Mon-
goDB takes more time to insert data than the single node MongoDB at the
beginning. However, the multi-node MongoDB system does not have the inﬂec-
tion point because it distributes data to three shards and each shard uses its own
memory to insert data. As a result, the multi-node MongoDB will face memory
bottleneck much later. The experiment dataset was not large enough to reach

--- PAGE 294 ---
SQL or NoSQL? 281
(a) Insert Time (PostgreSQL and
Single node MongoDB).
(b) Insert Time (Single node and
Multi-Node MongoDB).
(c) Disk Size (PostgreSQL and Sin-
gle node MongoDB).
(d) Disk Size (Single node and
Multi-Node MongoDB).
Fig.1. Insert time and disk size comparison of PostgreSQL and MongoDB.
the total physical memory size for the multi-node MongoDB but this result sug-
gests that this is an ideal database for big data. All in all, both single node and
multi-node MongoDB outperform the PostgreSQL in insert time.
Figure1(c) shows disk usage for PostgreSQL and the single node MongoDB.
For PostgreSQL, the storage size rises linearly as the data size increases. For the
single node MongoDB, the disk size increases in steps. It is because MongoDB
uses a disk pre-allocation algorithm where disk space is pre-allocated to support
data of a predetermined size. The purpose of this mechanism is to reduce disk
fragmentation and to assure that documents are stored in a contiguous block
on the hard disk. As documents are inserted, the pre-allocated space ﬁlls up.
However when there is not enough free space for a new record, MongoDB will
pre-allocate disk space that is twice the size of the previous pre-allocation size. As
the data further increases, MongoDB will continue to pre-allocate more and more
double-sized data ﬁles. This mechanism will result in an ineﬃcient use of disk
space. Another reason is that MongoDB does not use any data compression but
PostgreSQL implements TOAST (The Oversized-Attribute Storage Technique),
which is a form of LZ compression. Disk usage of the single node and multi-node
MongoDB implementations are shown in Fig.1(d). Multi-node MongoDB system
has a similar behavior in terms of the pre-allocation of disk space yet the growth

--- PAGE 295 ---
282 J. Lian et al.
(a) Memory Usage (PostgreSQL
and Single node MongoDB).
(b) Memory Usage (Single node
and Multi-Node MongoDB).
(c) Query Time (PostgreSQL and
Single node MongoDB).
(d) Query Time (Single node and
Multi-Node MongoDB).
Fig.2. Memory usage and query time comparison of PostgreSQL and MongoDB.
in disk space is more pronounced than the single node implementation, which
is because the multi-node MongoDB implementation uses three shards and the
disk space for each shard is pre-allocated. As a result, there is more unused
space totally. Thus for the disk size comparison, MongoDB should be used in
situations where disk size is not a major concern. Figure2(a) shows the memory
usage of PostgreSQL and the single node MongoDB during query. From the
ﬁgure, it is evident that the growth trends of two database systems are similar.
But it is still notable that the single node MongoDB takes up more memory
than PostgreSQL for two reasons. First, MongoDB adopts memory-mapped ﬁle
mechanism, which associates data ﬁles with memory. It makes querying data as if
it were directly located in memory. But the ﬁxed memory size will generate some
data ﬁles that are not mapped into memory which results in a page fault and thus
deteriorates performance. In general, this memory mapping mechanism brings
out an eﬃcient query time at the expense of using more memory. Second, the
MongoDB database employs as much memory as it can for query operations. But
its memory usage is dynamic; when other processes need memory, it will yield
cached memory. The memory usage of the single node and multi-node MongoDB
are shown in Fig.2(b). It is understandable that these two systems have similar
memory usage as they have the same data model and the same memory-mapping

--- PAGE 296 ---
SQL or NoSQL? 283
mechanism. And in multi-node, rather than recording the performance of three
nodes, the Mongos Query Router is used to calculate memory usage. In general,
our results show that all the three database systems occupy similar memory
usage with PostgreSQL being slightly more eﬃcient.
Figure2(c) shows the query performance of the single node MongoDB and
PostgreSQL. It is obvious to see that single node MongoDB performs much bet-
ter than PostgreSQL. When querying small amounts of data, PostgreSQL has
a linear trend in query time, but after querying more than 24years of data, the
query time increased sharply. The exponential growth is due to frequent memory
swapping. The MongoDB shows an amazing speed before querying 20years data
because of the memory-mapping mechanism referred to the previous section.
After that, the query speed also increases rapidly which is also because of mem-
ory swapping. However, even with virtual memory, it is evident that the speed of
the single node MongoDB is still extremely faster than PostgreSQL. The single
node and multi-node MongoDB query time results are shown in Fig.2(d). The
two systems perform in a similar fashion. However, after querying 20years data,
both of the two database systems need more time to do querying which is due to
memory swapping but the multi-node outperforms the single node because the
overall amount of memory available in the system is much larger. The results of
query performance show that MongoDB has advantage over PostgreSQL.
5 Conclusion
In this paper, we have proposed a novel data management platform to study
and understand the data storage and management requirements for big high
dimensional dataset. We analyze the performance of document-oriented NoSQL
database system from various aspects, and compare it with traditional SQL
database system. The focus of our work is to understand the key impact factors of
a system’s performance and the theoretic reasons behind them. Our experimental
results are satisfactory and clearly indicate advantages and disadvantages of
each database system. We believe that our analysis and insights are very useful
for designing high dimensional data applications. In the future, we will include
other database types such as scalable multi-dimensional array database such as
the RasDaMan array database. We will also consider comparing performances
of other NoSQL databases such as Hadoop, Spark as well as content-based data
storage and object-based data storage.
References
1. Unidata: NetCDF. http://www.unidata.ucar.edu/software/netcdf/
2. Apache: Hadoop (2011). http://hadoop.apache.org/
3. MongoDB: Mongodb. http://www.mongodb.org/
4. Cuzzocrea, A., Moussa, R.: A cloud-based framework for supporting eﬀective and
eﬃcient OLAP in big data environments. In: IEEE/ACM International Symposium
on Cluster, Cloud and Grid Computing, pp. 680–684 (2014)

--- PAGE 297 ---
284 J. Lian et al.
5. Brezany, P., Yan, Z., Janciak, I., Chen, P., Ye, S.: An elastic OLAP cloud platform.
In: IEEE Ninth International Conference on Dependable, Autonomic and Secure
Computing, pp. 356–363 (2011)
6. Singh, H., Bawa, S.: A survey of traditional and MapReducebased spatial query
processing approaches. ACM SIGMOD Rec. 46(2), 18–29 (2017)
7. Chiang, G.T., Dove, M.T., Bovolo, C.I., Ewen, J.: Implementing a grid/cloud
eScience infrastructure for hydrological sciences. In: Yang, X., Wang, L., Jie, W.
(eds.) Guide to e-Science. CCN, pp. 3–28. Springer, London (2011). https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-0-85729-439-5 1
8. Ameri, P., Grabowski, U., Meyer, J., Streit, A.: On the application and performance
of MongoDB for climate satellite data. In: IEEE International Conference on Trust,
Security and Privacy in Computing and Communications, pp. 652–659 (2014)
9. Jern, M., Franzen, J.: “GeoAnalytics” - exploring spatio-temporal and multivariate
data. In: Tenth International Conference on Information Visualization, pp. 25–31
(2006)
10. Lian, J., Mcguire, M.P., Moore, T.W.: FunnelCloud: a cloud-based system for
exploring tornado events. Int. J. Digit. Earth 10, 1–25 (2017)
11. Baumann, P.: Management of multidimensional discrete data. VLDB J. 3, 401–444
(1994)
12. Baumann, P., Dehmel, A., Furtado, P., Ritsch, R., Widmann, N.: The multidimen-
sional database system RasDaMan. In: ACM SIGMOD International Conference
on Management of Data, pp. 575–577 (1998)
13. Bimonte, S., Zaamoune, M., Beaune, P.: Conceptual design and implementation
of spatial data warehouses integrating regular grids of points. Int. J. Digit. Earth
10, 1–22 (2017)
14. Tang, W., Feng, W.: Parallel map projection of vector-based big spatial data:
coupling cloud computing with graphics processing units. Comput. Environ. Urban
Syst. 61(11), 187–197 (2014)
15. Arndt, D.S., et al.: State of the climate in 2011 special supplement to the bulletin
of the American meteorological society. Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc. 93(7), S1–S263
(2012)

--- PAGE 298 ---
UDBMS: Road to Unification
for Multi-model Data Management
Jiaheng Lu1(B)
, Zhen Hua Liu2
, Pengfei Xu1
, and Chao Zhang1
1
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
jiaheng.lu@helsinki.fi
2
Oracle, Redwood Shore, CA, USA
Abstract. One of the greatest challenges in big data management is
the “Variety” of the data. The data may be presented in various types
and formats: structured, semi-structured and unstructured. For instance,
data can be modeled as relational, key-value, and graph models. Having a
single data platform for managing both well-structured data and NoSQL
data is beneﬁcial to users; this approach reduces signiﬁcantly integration,
migration, development, maintenance, and operational issues. There-
fore, a challenging research work is how to develop an eﬃcient consoli-
dated single data management platform covering both NoSQL and rela-
tional data to reduce integration issues, simplify operations, and elim-
inate migration issues. In this paper, we envision novel principles and
technologies to handle multiple models of data in one uniﬁed database
system, including model-agnostic storage, uniﬁed query processing and
indexes, in-memory structures and multi-model transactions. We discuss
our visions as well as present research challenges that we need to address.
1 Introduction
As data in all forms and sizes are critical to making the best possible decisions
in businesses, we see the continued growth of demands to manage and analyze
massive volume of diﬀerent types of data. The data may be presented in various
types and formats: structured, semi-structured and unstructured [14,16,22]. In
the case of structured data, data might be structured as relational, key-value,
and graph models [15]. In the case of semi-structured data, data might be repre-
sented as XML and JSON documents [19]. Consequently, beyond the traditional
relational database (RDBMS), there has been a blooming of diﬀerent big data
management solutions, specialized for diﬀerent kinds of data and tasks, to name
a few, distributed ﬁle systems (e.g. Ceph and HDFS), NoSQL data stores (e.g.
Bigtable, Redis, Cassandra, Mongodb, Neo4j), and distributed data processing
frameworks (e.g. MapReduce, Spark). This is also known for “one size does not
fit all“ argument. However, managing heterogeneous data sources across the sys-
tems imposes a big challenge for practitioners in that the deployment of multiple
systems has led to a wide diversiﬁcation of data store interfaces and the loss of
a common programming paradigm.
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 285–294, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_33

--- PAGE 299 ---
286 J. Lu et al.
Let us consider three application scenarios to illustrate the variety of data.
First, consider an application called customer-360-view, which often requires to
aggregate multiple data sources, including graph data from social networks, doc-
ument data from product orders and customer information in a relation database.
Second, in Oil & Gas industry, a single oil company can produce more than
1.5TB of diverse data per day. Such data may be structured or semi-structured
and come from heterogeneous sources, such as sensors, GPS devices, and other
measuring instruments. Third, in health-care: North York hospital needs to pro-
cess 50 diverse datasets, including structured and unstructured data from clin-
ical, operational and ﬁnancial systems, and data from social media and public
health records. These emerging applications clearly demand the need to manage
multiple-model data in complex, modern applications.
There exist two approaches to address the challenge of multi-model data man-
agement: (i) polyglot persistence [10,13] and (ii) multi-model database. The ﬁrst
solution uses multiple databases to handle diﬀerent forms of data and integrates
them to provide a uniﬁed interface, whereas the second supports multiple data
models against a single, integrated backend while meeting the growing require-
ments for fault tolerance, scalability, and performance. We discuss the issues of
both solutions below.
The history of polyglot persistence may trace back to the federation of rela-
tional engines [11], or distributed DBMSs, which were extensively studied in
depth during the 1980s and early 1990s. Polyglot persistence approach is sim-
ilar to the use of mediators in early federated database systems. For example,
Musketeer [10] provides an intermediate representation between applications
and data processing platforms. DBMS+ [13] aims at embracing several pro-
cessing and storage platforms for declarative processing, and BigDAWG [8]
has recently been proposed as a federated system that enables users to run
their queries over multiple vertically-integrated systems such as column stores,
NewSQL engines, and array stores. Overall, the polyglot persistence solution
needs to integrate multiple systems to provide a uniﬁed interface, which imposes
operational complexity and cost, because the integration of multiple indepen-
dent databases imposes a signiﬁcant engineering and operational cost. Further,
in order to answer a global query, all of the sub-systems need to remain up, which
makes the fault tolerance of the application equal to the weakest component in
the stack.
The second approach is to develop a new database to support multiple data
models against a single, integrated backend, while meeting the growing require-
ments for scalability and performance. We observe a recent trend among rela-
tional and NoSQL databases in moving away from one single model to multi-
model databases. For example, OrientDB is extending graph database to support
key-value and json models. ArangoDB is moving from document model to sup-
port key-value and graph models. AgensGraph simultaneously supports both the
property graph model and the relational model based on a PostgreSQL kernel.
Compared to the polyglot persistence, a single multi-model database can reduce
the cost of integration, migration, development and maintenance on multiple

--- PAGE 300 ---
UDBMS: Road to Uniﬁcation for Multi-model Data Management 287
systems. Furthermore, during query execution, it can leverage a uniﬁed query
language directly to access the data stores without query decomposition because
of its native store nature.
This paper envisions a multi-model database system, called UDBMS
(Uniﬁed DataBase Management System), that provides several new components
and functions to enable a uniﬁed and eﬃcient management of multi-model data.
The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows. (1) We envision the
architecture of UDBMS system to enable the uniﬁed data access and manage-
ment; (2) We show ﬁve model-agnostic properties of UDBMS on data storage,
query processing, index structure, in-memory structure and transaction; and
(3) we illustrate three new research challenges of UDBMS on schema discovery,
model evolution and multi-model data sharding.
In the sequel, we introduce UDBMS’s architecture, and walk the readers
through the main technical elements of our solutions. Finally, we discuss related
works, then conclude.
2 Architecture
The overview of UDBMS architecture is illustrated in Fig.1.
The main component of the system includes two layers: the core layer receives
queries from the client and returns the uniﬁed results; and the storage layer
Core Layer
Storage Layer
SQL
Data Source
JSON
Data Source
Graph
Data Source
Client application
Multi-model Query
Optimizer
Flexible Schema
Manager
Model-agnostic Query Processing
Model-agnostic Data Storage
Consistency
Controller
Unified Query Language
Unindexed
Data
Consistency
Commands
Query
Plan
Flexible Schema
Query
Monitor
Data Accesses
Unified Result
Unified
Index
JSON
Index
Graph
Index
SQL
Index
Fig.1. Architecture of the UDBMS.

--- PAGE 301 ---
288 J. Lu et al.
loads data with diverse models and stores them in a uniﬁed storage platform.
We depict the important components in these two layers below:
(i) Model-agnostic query processing is responsible for validation and compilation
incoming uniﬁed queries, as well as query plan generation and optimization.
The validation and compilation are supported in cooperation with the ﬂex-
ible schema manager. Moreover, multiple types of indexes are developed to
eﬃciently answer ad hoc queries.
(ii) Flexible schema manager is to handle the diverse schema of multi-model
data. Relational DBMS works according to “schema-on-write” principle,
which pre-deﬁnes the schema prior to feeding data into system. Whereas
NoSQL usually agrees “schema-on-read”, where schema is needed only when
reading data from system. To gain a high level of schema ﬂexibility, we con-
tinue to use the “schema-on-read” principle by employing a schema manager
which tracks data accesses (including read and write) and automatically gen-
erates schema and reﬁnes them when necessary. By doing this we are able to
give an answer without any input schema - we can generate one by ourselves.
(iii) Model-agnostic data storage is to provide a model-agnostic abstraction of
multi-model data to the accesses of data. The physical data can be stored in
diﬀerent formats and dispersed on a distributed platform, e.g. Hadoop and
Spark.
(iv) Consistency controller controls the level of data consistency for a single
query by using multi-model locks on data. The locks have various types for
diﬀerent models of data, and they support the ﬁne-grained management for
better eﬃciency, e.g., record-, document-, and node/edge-level.
From the above description, it can be seen that UDBMS is diﬀerent from the
existing wrapper-mediator systems [10,13], where data resides in various stores
and query execution is divided between the mediator and the wrappers. Instead,
UDBMS imports data across the diﬀerent-data model stores and employs the
same abstraction and approach to access and manage them.
3 Under the Hood
UDBMS aims at eﬃciently managing heterogeneous datasets through a uniﬁed
set of interface and abstraction. In this section we lay out several model-agnostic
properties and discuss how we approach each of them respectively.
3.1 Model-Agnostic Data Storage
Classical RDBMS makes a tight connection between logic data model and phys-
ical storage so that the storage engine assumes that data is physically stored
in a particular sequence of bytes to support relational access pattern. Though
Object-Relational Database Management System (ORDBMS) can be consid-
ered as an early version of multi-model DB via handling non-relational data in
RDBMS, its starting point is that relational data is the ﬁrst class citizen. But in

--- PAGE 302 ---
UDBMS: Road to Uniﬁcation for Multi-model Data Management 289
UDBMS, relational data is just one kind of data models, and there is no speciﬁc
bias towards relational data. Therefore, the storage layer of UDBMS makes no
assumption of how multi-model data is internally laid out. It provides a collec-
tion of abstraction API that holds a set of objects. Each of the object is accessed
by an object id with version based time stamp. There is a key-value interface
that supports generic put()/get()/replace()/delete() APIs for an object collec-
tion. From storage layer perspective, the value is a sequence of bytes which are
not interpreted by the storage engine. The sequence of bytes can be a relational
row with well-deﬁned schema, or a piece of graph, or an XML document etc.
Speciﬁcally, the get(objectId, timeStamp, objectBytes) interface returns a
sequence of bytes from the storage given an object id. In addition to the object
id, the get() interface accepts a time stamp snapshot parameter. This parameter
identiﬁes the version of the object bytes for that object id that the data storage
engine will provide. The put(objectId, objectBytes) interface returns a new object
id for a sequence of bytes for storage. The replace(objectId, objectBytes) interface
replaces the content of the object with object id and a new sequence of bytes
and returning the new time stamp for the data. The delete(objectId) interface
deletes the object with the id. However, get(objectId, oldTimestamp) may still
be able to retrieve the object with the old time stamp. In addition, to support
both ACID, BASE or hybrid transactional semantics, the object collection can
be declaratively speciﬁed as ACID or BASE. The transaction layer then enforces
diﬀerent transaction semantics for the model-agnostic data.
(a)
(b)
[
{
"id": 85,
"name": "Keyboard",
"price": 20,
"stock": 70
}, {
"id": 86,
"name": "Webcam",
"price": 35,
"stock": 8
},
…
]
[
{
"id": 1,
"customer_id": 101,
"items": [
{"product_id": 85, "quantity": 5,
"price": 100, "rating": 5},
{"product_id": 86, "quantity": 1,
"price": 35, "rating": 4}
],
"total_price": 135
},
…
]
customer
_id: 145
customer
_id: 101
customer
_id: 56
customer
_id: 33
friend
friend
id name city
33
56
101
145
Anna Turku
Emilia Oulu
Sami Helsinki
Laura Helsinki
Products (JSON) Orders (JSON) Social Network (Graph) Customers (Relational)
Customers
city
equals("Helsinki")
id*
customer_id
customer_id*
friend
Orders
customer_id items
rating
equals(5)
product_id
Products
id name
equals("Keyboard")
Fig.2. Example of (a) multi-model datasets and (b) query represented with a forest
pattern. The elements marked with asterisk (*) are returned in query results.
3.2 Multi-model Query Processing
The original ORDBMS does not embrace a language to process multi-model
data, nor does it address the idea of doing inter-model compilation and opti-
mization. To develop a uniﬁed query to accommodate all the data, there are

--- PAGE 303 ---
290 J. Lu et al.
several existing works towards providing a global language to query multi-model
data simultaneously. For instance, SQL++ [21] is proposed to query both JSON
native stores and relational data. ArangoDB AQL can be used to retrieve and
modify both document and graph data. We use the following example to demon-
strate the core structure in a multi-model query.
Example 1. Consider an application involving JSON documents, a relational
table and a graph data in Fig.2(a). One example query is to return the friends
of the customers in Helsinki who bought a keyboard and gave a five-star feedback.
This query can be used for product recommendation. Note that there are three
types of joins in the query of Fig.2(b): graph-relational (a), relational-JSON
(b) and JSON-JSON (c) joins. The answer of this query is two pairs of
customer IDs: (101,145) and (101,56).  
To process the above query eﬃciently, as the order of joins can signiﬁcantly
aﬀect the execution time, a query optimizer evaluates available plans and selects
the best one. For example, how to decide the join orders among a, b and c
in Example1. Therefore, one challenge is to develop new algorithms to select the
best query plan for a multi-model query. In addition, statistics, such as histogram
or wavelet can be used to provide detailed information about data distribution for
query optimization. The existing statistics techniques on RDBMS are developed
based on the static relation schema, but multi-model data requires the diverse
and ﬂexible schema. Therefore, it starts to crystallize that dynamic statistics
techniques are necessary here to adapt for the frequent schema changes.
3.3 Model-Agnostic Index Structure
Original ORDBMS builds up domain index for each data, cross-domain query
join is done by doing separate domain index probes for each domain data, and
then joining the index results which are typically at document object ID level.
This approach works if we do inter-document object join. However, in UDBMS,
such single domain index idea needs to be re-visited if we want to do intra-
document object join. For example, to support full text search and relational
scalar data search, we need to built up search indexes to incorporate IR-style
inverted lists to index various data together. But building a universal search
index for all data models requires more deep thoughts. Existing index structures
focus upon a single data model, e.g. B-tree is used for relational joins, XB-
tree [4,20] is developed for XML data, and gIndex [23] is applicable for graph
queries, our visioned system, however, executes queries on more than one data
model. Therefore, how to index multiple data models to accelerate operations
such as cross-model filtering and join? For example, how to support a and b
operations in Example1 for graph-relation and JSON-relation joins eﬃciently?
In general, we envision two types of auxiliary structures. The ﬁrst is using
inverted index based search index for full-text search. This index integrates
domain context aware inverted index for XML and JSON, full text, and leaf
scalar relational data together as one uniﬁed index. The second is building ad-hoc

--- PAGE 304 ---
UDBMS: Road to Uniﬁcation for Multi-model Data Management 291
global indexes to capture the structural feature in multi-model data to speedup
structural query processing.
3.4 Multi-model In-Memory Structure
Classical RDBMS uses buﬀer cache and assumes that the data layout on disk
is the same as what is cached in memory. Nevertheless, UDBMS data storage
engine makes no assumption of the domain speciﬁc data layout, nor it makes
any assumption on how the domain speciﬁc data format is when it is cached in
memory for fast query. Each domain speciﬁc data model may cache the data in
diﬀerent format from what is stored on disk.
Multi-model in-memory cache merely uses callback to delegate to each data-
model to get its speciﬁc in-memory format. For example, the proposed in-
memory data structures for relational database include, to name a few, Ora-
cle columnar layout, IBM DB2 BLU Acceleration and SQL Server In-Memory
Columnstore. Through adopting the idea of decoupling the storage format with
in-memory query friendly format, UDBMS will provide fast in-memory access
for multi-model data using its domain speciﬁc query language without worrying
about ﬁnding the optimal storage model for multi-model data. In fact, there
is probably no single best storage format for a domain speciﬁc data to satisfy
all the workload requirements. For example, columnar layout of the relational
data might not always be faster than row layout of the relational data for OLTP
query. Another aspect of in-memory cache for domain speciﬁc model data is to
enable eﬃcient intra-object navigation and traversal when domain speciﬁc query
language is being evaluated.
3.5 Model-Agnostic Transaction
RDBMS supports ACID guarantee, while NoSQL employs BASE pertaining as
the ways for scaling and workaround on CAP theorem. We envision a per-query
choice of consistency between ACID and BASE for multi-model data, which is
ﬂexible so that the user has a clear understanding and control over the perfor-
mance as well as the consistency guarantees. To support a hybrid transactional
semantics, the model-agnostic object collection can be declaratively speciﬁed
as ACID or BASE. The transaction layer then enforces diﬀerent transaction
semantics for the data.
Further, to boost the performance of transaction execution, a ﬁne-granular
isolation at diﬀerent levels in multi-model data can achieve the ﬂexibility and
performance beneﬁt. For example, objects can be isolated in the forms of subtree
locks, subgraph locks, path locks and neighbor node locks. Further, an eﬀective
global node labeling scheme can be developed to enable the quick jump to a
particular inner data node as required in the lock manager (e.g. to support
getParent operations in a tree).

--- PAGE 305 ---
292 J. Lu et al.
3.6 Other Research Challenges
Schema Discovery. Original ORDBMS assumes the perfect schema based
world. Semi-structure data and unstructured data challenge ORDBMS with
schema-less design. We understand the value of NoSQL point of schema-less
DB development, but further enhances it to argue that schema-less for write is
half of the story, schema-rich for query is the other half of the story via auto-
schema discovery. Therefore, UDBMS is expected to support schema discovery
interface. Enhancing schema discovery for multi-model data is a new challenge
which involves knowledge and techniques from neighboring research communities
such as data mining, machine learning and human-computer interaction.
Model Evolution is a unique challenge in a multi-model database [17]. With
the increasing maturity of NoSQL databases, a plethora of applications turn
to store data with JSON documents or graph representations. But the legacy
data are still stored in the traditional RDBMS. Thus, the model evolution may
aﬀect the usability of queries and applications developed on the RDBMS. There-
fore, a research challenge is how to perform model mapping and query rewriting
to automatically handle such model evolution. Note that model evolution is a
more complicated than schema evolution on RDBMS, because it raises the issues
involving both the attribute diﬀerence and the structural diﬀerence.
Multi-model Sharding is a method for distributing data across multiple
machines. A relational database shard is a horizontal partition of data and each
shard is held on a separate database server instance to spread load. But in the
scenario of multi-model data management, do we support inter-object or intra-
object sharding ? It is easy to support inter-object sharding. But if a graph or
a tree is a big object, then we need to consider about intra-object sharding.
Therefore, the distributed data sharding technology needs further investigation
in UDBMS.
4 Related Work
Heterogeneous Query Processing. The interests of providing a uniﬁed data
access and processing interface for heterogeneous data sets have been extensively
explored in previous systems and prototypes [6,9,18]. For example, BigIntegra-
tor [24] supports SQL-like queries that combines data in Bigtable stores in the
cloud and data in relational stores; Forward presents SQL++ [21], an SQL-like
language designed to unify the data model and query language capabilities of
NoSQL and relational databases; Dremel [2] uses semi-structure data model,
however, it can execute queries based on a ﬂattened columnar storage. Vertexica
[12] runs graph queries in a relational database; Asterix follows the motto “one
size fits a bunch” and has built a data model-agnostic query compiler substrate,
called Algebricks [3], and has used it to implement three diﬀerent query lan-
guages: HiveQL, AQL, and XQuery, on diﬀerent format of data. Compared to
the previous works which focus on speciﬁc models, our approach is more generic,
with several model-agnostics principles (for data storage, query processing and

--- PAGE 306 ---
UDBMS: Road to Uniﬁcation for Multi-model Data Management 293
index structures) that enable the eﬃcient heterogeneous query processing for
multiple data stores.
Tightly-Coupled Multistore System. Recent works (e.g. Polybase [7],
HadoopDB [1] and Estocada [5]) also demonstrate the performance beneﬁts of
using seamless integrated multi-stores, these systems aim at eﬃcient manage-
ment of structured and unstructured data for big data analytic, particularly for
integration of HDFS and RDBMS data. Diﬀerent from the purpose of combining
relational and distributed unstructured stores, UDBMS focus on the uniﬁcation
of relational and transactional NoSQL stores for on-line hybrid OLTP and OLAP
data processing.
5 Conclusion and Future Works
“The intellect seeking after a unified theory cannot rest content with the
assumption that there exist two distinct fields totally independent of each
other by their nature.”
— Albert Einstein in his Nobel lecture in 1923
In this paper, we present our visions to build a system to query, index and
update multi-model data in a uniﬁed fashion. While the road to uniﬁcation is
full of challenges, this paper has laid down our visions to build a UDBMS with
model agnostic properties and structures. In the future work, we shall investigate
the following three categories of challenges on UDBMS: diversity, extensibility
and ﬂexibility.
(1) Diversity: The ﬁrst challenge is the “diversity” of multi-model data. The
existing results for query optimization and transaction model mainly work on
a single model, either structured or semi-structured data. The highly diverse
nature of multi-model data makes a uniﬁed system complicated and fasci-
nated.
(2) Extensibility: The second challenge is to identify the boundary of UDBMS.
In this paper, we envision a uniﬁed system for several types of data, i.e.
relation, JSON, XML and graph. A further question is how to adopt more
types of data such as streaming data and time series data. This calls for the
future research on the extensibility of a multi-model system.
(3) Flexibility: Finally, NoSQL DBMS can support schema-less for storage,
and schema-rich for query according to the automatically discovered schema.
It would be interesting to explore the model-agnostic storage and query pro-
cessing in UDBMS – in particular, we call this “what we store is not what
we get”.
Acknowledgment. Contact email: Jiaheng.Lu@helsinki.ﬁ. This work is partially sup-
ported by Academy of Finland (Project No. 310321).

--- PAGE 307 ---
294 J. Lu et al.
References
1. Abouzeid, A., Bajda-Pawlikowski, K., Abadi, D.J., Rasin, A., Silberschatz, A.:
HadoopDB: an architectural hybrid of MapReduce and DBMS technologies for
analytical workloads. PVLDB 2(1), 922–933 (2009)
2. Afrati, F.N.: Storing and querying tree-structured records in Dremel. PVLDB
7(12), 1131–1142 (2014)
3. Borkar, V.R., et al.: Algebricks: a data model-agnostic compiler backend for big
data languages. In: ACM SoCC, pp. 422–433 (2015)
4. Bruno, N., Koudas, N., Srivastava, D.: Holistic twig joins: optimal XML pattern
matching. In: ACM SIGMOD, pp. 310–321 (2002)
5. Bugiotti, F., Bursztyn, D., Deutsch, A., Ileana, I., Manolescu, I.: Invisible glue:
scalable self-tunning multi-stores. In: CIDR (2015)
6. Chen, J., et al.: Big data challenge: a data management perspective. Front. Com-
put. Sci. 7(2), 157–164 (2013)
7. DeWitt, D.J., et al.: Split query processing in polybase. In: SIGMOD, pp. 1255–
1266 (2013)
8. Elmore, A.J., et al.: A demonstration of the BigDAWG polystore system. PVLDB
8(12), 1908–1911 (2015)
9. Franklin, M.J., Halevy, A.Y., Maier, D.: From databases to dataspaces: a new
abstraction for information management. SIGMOD Rec. 34(4), 27–33 (2005)
10. Gog, I., et al.: Musketeer: all for one, one for all in data processing systems. In:
EuroSys, pp. 1–16 (2015)
11. Heimbigner, D., McLeod, D.: A federated architecture for information manage-
ment. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. 3(3), 253–278 (1985)
12. Jindal, A., et al.: VERTEXICA: your relational friend for graph analytics!. PVLDB
7(13), 1669–1672 (2014)
13. Lim, H., Han, Y., Babu, S.: How to ﬁt when no one size ﬁts. In: CIDR (2013)
14. Lin, C., Lu, J., Wei, Z., Wang, J., Xiao, X.: Optimal algorithms for selecting top-k
combinations of attributes: theory and applications. VLDB J. 27(1), 27–52 (2018)
15. Liu, Y., Lu, J., Yang, H., Xiao, X., Wei, Z.: Towards maximum independent sets
on massive graphs. PVLDB 8(13), 2122–2133 (2015)
16. Liu, Y., et al.: ProbeSim: scalable single-source and top-k simrank computations
on dynamic graphs. PVLDB 11(1), 14–26 (2017)
17. Lu, J.: Towards benchmarking multi-model databases. In: CIDR (2017)
18. Lu, J., Holubová, I.: Multi-model data management: what’s new and what’s next?
In: EDBT, pp. 602–605 (2017)
19. Lu, J., Ling, T.W., Bao, Z., Wang, C.: Extended XML tree pattern matching:
theories and algorithms. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 23(3), 402–416 (2011)
20. Lu, J., Ling, T.W., Chan, C.Y., Chen, T.: From region encoding to extended
dewey: on eﬃcient processing of XML twig pattern matching. In: VLDB, pp. 193–
204 (2005)
21. Ong, K.W., Papakonstantinou, Y., Vernoux, R.: The SQL++ semi-structured data
model and query language: A capabilities survey of SQL-on-Hadoop, NoSQL and
NewSQL databases. CoRR abs/1405.3631 (2014)
22. Xu, P., Lu, J.: Top-k string auto-completion with synonyms. In: Candan, S., Chen,
L., Pedersen, T.B., Chang, L., Hua, W. (eds.) DASFAA 2017. LNCS, vol. 10178, pp.
202–218. Springer, Cham (2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-55699-4 13
23. Yan, X., Yu, P.S., Han, J.: Graph indexing: a frequent structure-based approach.
In: SIGMOD, pp. 335–346 (2004)
24. Zhu, M., Risch, T.: Querying combined cloud-based and relational databases. In:
CSC, pp. 330–335 (2011)

--- PAGE 308 ---
Extracting Conflict Models from Interaction
Traces in Virtual Collaborative Work
Guangxuan Zhang1
, Yilu Zhou2
, Sandeep Purao3(&)
, and Heng Xu4
1
Microsoft, Redmond, USA
2
Fordham University, New York City, USA
3
Bentley University, Waltham, USA
spurao@bentley.edu
4
American University, Washington, D.C., USA
Abstract. This paper develops a model of conflicts that relies on extracting text
and argument features from traces of interactions in collaborative work. Much
prior research about collaborative work is aimed at improving the support for
virtual work. In contrast, we are interested in detecting conflicts in collaborative
work because conflict undetected can escalate and cause disruptions to pro-
ductive work. It is a difﬁcult problem because it requires untangling conflict-
related interactions from normal interactions. Few models or methods are
available for this purpose. The extracted features, interpreted with the help of
foundational theories, suggests a conceptual model of conflicts that include
categories of argumentation such as reasoning and modality; and informative
language features. We illustrate the extraction approach and the model with a
dataset from Bugzilla. The paper concludes with a discussion of evaluation
possibilities and potential implications of the approach for detecting and
managing conflicts in collaborative work.
Keywords: Conflict  Conflict detection  Argumentation
Online collaboration
1 Introduction
Much collaborative activity is now conducted online, within and across organizations,
with geographically dispersed teams that rely on email, instant messaging, and social
media (Hinds and Mortensen 2005). In addition, online communities enable mass
debate (Somasundaran and Wiebe 2010) and collaboration for complex tasks such as
software development (Wang et al. 2015) and product design (Brabham 2008).
Improving support for collaborative work continues to be an important research
direction in this setting for tasks such as progress reporting, team awareness, agenda
keeping and others. Platforms for collaboration are also increasingly sophisticated and
track collaborative activity. As a result, the research community now possesses new
opportunities to make sense of collaborative activity. We address one speciﬁc problem
in this context: understanding and extracting models of conflict. An online discussion
can contain multiple participants and overlapping threads. Detecting and modeling
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 295–305, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_34

--- PAGE 309 ---
conflicts for the purpose of learning from them as well as managing them is, therefore,
a difﬁcult problem (Barcellini et al. 2005; Bex et al. 2013).
Some contemporary scholars are responding to the challenge (e.g. Bex et al. 2013;
Lippi and Torroni 2015; Schneider 2014). However, few methods and tools are directly
aimed at extracting arguments from the data available via online discussions. One
reason for this may be that online communication tools, including group decision
support systems, are rarely equipped with capabilities necessary for processing argu-
mentative content (Zhang and Purao 2014; Zhang et al. 2016). Another is that the
existing tools are focused on analyzing the argument structure in articles or essays
(Moens et al. 2007; Ozyurt 2012), which tend to be different from online discussions in
vocabulary and structure (Yates 1996). Further, these models tend to be inconsistent in
feature selection and lack robustness due to the lack of strong theoretical foundations.
To address the contemporary problems outlined above, the objective of this research is
to design a conceptual model that can serve as the foundation for tools and methods for
conflict detection in online discussions.
In this paper, we develop a theory based conceptual model that combines textual
and argument features to effectively detect argumentative messages in online discus-
sion. In particular, the model reflects ﬁve categories of argumentation functions:
announcement, reasoning, modality, transition, and affect, and textual features that are
informative for recognizing argumentative language. The paper develops the concep-
tual model and demonstrates, with the help of an example from the Bugzilla platform
how it can be used for detecting conflicts. The model is evaluated with a dataset form
Bugzilla that provides an indication of the effectiveness of the model compared to
baseline models. The paper concludes with a brief discussion of implications for using
the conceptual model for building tools, which may be useful for practice; and for
future research related to extension of the model.
2 Related Work
We begin with a motivating example, followed by a review of relevant prior work.
2.1 A Motivating Example
Consider the following scenario faced by a small team of software designers, including
John and Mary. The team is engaged in an effort to develop a systems integration
solution for one of their clients.
The work involves constructing a catalog of services from a legacy scheduling
application so that contractors and customers can use these, and outlining a set of
procedures to work with other legacy applications in a similar manner. Their concerns
revolve around scalability and security but they are also unclear about how they might
go about aligning their current business processes. John and Mary propose different
solution approaches. Because they work remotely on the project, their proposals are
brought up and discussed on the email threads. The proposals rely on different tech-
nology platforms, one more mature and secure; the other more cutting-edge. The team
engages in a discussion that includes a number of concerns such as characteristics of
296 G. Zhang et al.

--- PAGE 310 ---
the platforms, resource constraints, and expertise available. The email discussion
spawns several threads and sub-groups, cordial as well as argumentative. It is clear to
some of the individuals in the group that at least some of the discussions have the
potential to degenerate into conflicts that may be more harmful than helpful. They
foresee posturing and arguments that include both substantive as well as affective
concerns.
The problems faced by the integration team are not new. With online collaboration,
the individuals in teams often express their points of view and preferences about a
project work in public discussion threads. These contributions can include argumen-
tative elements as well as uses of language to explain, convince and persuade. In teams
that either work across projects or in long-term projects, the individual proclivities are
sometimes well-known, allowing individuals to understand and predict conflicts.
However, without the beneﬁt of such expertise conflicts can be difﬁcult to identify. We
take ﬁrst steps towards such proactive approaches to conflict detection by developing a
theory-driven conceptual model (similar to Purao et al. 2018). The theory we draw
upon is Argumentation Theory, outlined next.
2.2 Argumentation Theory
The labels Argument and Argumentation are often used loosely because they signiﬁ-
cantly overlap in meaning. For example, they have been used interchangeably in recent
research (Lippi and Torroni 2015; Mochales and Moens 2011). In this study, we
distinguish the two by ﬁrst deﬁning an argument as an utterance (expressed as a text
fragment). An argument, then, contributes to the process of argumentation, which we
deﬁne as the process of reasoning, systematically organized in support of an opinion.
This distinction is important for online discussions and email threads that capture the
traces of collaboration because an argumentation process may be spread across several
messages (unlike, say, a scientiﬁc communication where all arguments may be part of
the argumentation expressed within a single document). This dispersal of arguments
across messages can also make it challenging to detect the progression of conflicts.
A complete argumentation consists of three elements: a proposition, a standpoint,
and reasoning. A proposition is the matter of interest, which can be a description, a
prediction, a judgment, or a suggestion. One can then take a positive standpoint to
justify the proposition, a negative standpoint to refute the proposition, or a neutral
standpoint. An argumentation is strengthened when some kinds of reasoning are pro-
vided to justify the standpoint (Eemeren et al. 2002). In a conversation, the three
components may not be included in a single statement. For example, reasoning might
not be included at the beginning of a discussion, while the proposition and parties’
standpoints are often left out as the conversation moves forward. Eemeren et al. (2002)
stress that verbal expressions provide strong indicators of argumentation and its ele-
ments. They provide an initial list of vocabularies that signal standpoint and reasoning,
which however, need to be enriched and reﬁned for the purpose of automatic argument
detection and processing.
Eemeren et al. (2002), describe argumentation as the means of resolving a differ-
ence of opinion. It is performed when one party’s opinion meets with objections from
the other party and both parties have intentions to discuss the matter and address the
Extracting Conﬂict Models from Interaction Traces 297

--- PAGE 311 ---
difference (Thomas 1992). Argumentation theory arose in response to the need of
understanding the actual argumentation practice in conversation (Eemeren et al. 2002).
In contrast to the logician’s view, which focuses on abstract forms and patterns of
argumentation (Toulmin 2003; Walton et al. 2008), argumentation theory concentrates
on rules and guidelines in constructing, detecting, and analyzing arguments. It has been
employed to promote critical thinking and scientiﬁc argument (Bricker and Bell 2008),
and recognize effective communication patterns in online environments (Clark and
Sampson 2008).
2.3 Argument Detection Models
Argument detection in online discussion remains understudied. Relevant studies are
mostly found in the ﬁeld of argumentation mining, aimed at detecting, decomposing,
and reconstructing argumentation in textual materials (Lippi and Torroni 2015; Palau
and Moens 2009; Schneider 2014). To achieve this, a few models have been proposed
(see Table 1). Most are developed to analyze documents like articles and essays. Their
applicability for online discussion is, therefore, questionable because of differences in
vocabulary and sentence structures (Yates 1996). One exception is the work by Levy
et al. (2014). Their model aims to detect claims in online debates. Another important
aspect of existing models is that they heavily rely on classic features for text repre-
sentation, such as bag-of-words, word bigrams/trigrams, part-of-speech information,
and text statistics (Conrad et al. 2012; Palau and Moens 2009; Stab and Gurevych
2014). There are, however, a few exceptions that incorporate sentiment analysis
indicators (Conrad et al. 2012) and subjectivity scores of sentences (Levy et al. 2014).
A third observation is that while word indicators have been recognized and applied in
these models, there is little to no consistency across features that should be included for
analyses. Lexicons in these models vary with regard to size, part of speech, and
composition. Finally, features included in these models mainly represent researcher
experience and peculiarities of the corpora, instead of foundational theories about
arguments and argumentation.
3 A Conceptual Model for Conflicts in Online Collaborations
Building on this prior work, we develop a conceptual model for representing conflicts.
The conceptual model builds on prior theories. We emphasize that this does not rep-
resent an exercise in YAML: yet another modeling language (see Purao and Woo
2014). Instead, our work represents a theory-driven approach similar to Purao et al.
(2018), where the authors develop a modeling language for systems integration by
extending coordination theory (Malone and Crowston 1994). In this paper, we focus on
such a conceptual model that can capture conflicts in online collaborations. The paper
does not elaborate the mechanics for extracting the components in such a model.
Instead, our focus is on outlining the model itself. The model consists of elements that
are inspired by two sources: foundational theories about argumentation, and features of
the language that participants in an online setting use to express these arguments.
298 G. Zhang et al.

--- PAGE 312 ---
3.1 Elements Inspired by Argumentation Theory
Drawing on prior work (e.g. Eemeren et al. 2002), we identify ﬁve elements of
argumentation: announcement, reasoning, modal qualiﬁer, transition and affect.
Announcement. Typing to speak is constrained by space, time pressure, and available
attention. Participants in online collaboration, therefore, tend to express their ideas in a
clear, straightforward language (Yates 1996), e.g., one often starts with an
announcement of his/her standpoint with phrases such as: I think, I assert, I vote, and
others. Negative standpoints can be announced with phrases like I debate, I doubt, I
disagree and others as well as verb indicators that appear as nouns, e.g., My assertion is
and The suggestion is.
Reasoning. Participants often use reasoning to support announcements, e.g. providing
evidence, making cause-effect analysis, delimiting the problem scope, and making
comparison/evaluation. This provides grounds, premises, warrants that can be used
independently or combined with others (Toulmin 2003). Indicators of reasoning
includes phrases such as for example, demonstrate, because, so that, respect, circum-
stance, more, than, superior and others.
Modal Qualiﬁer. An argumentation may be made with total conviction or it may be
uncertain. An experienced participant may present a mix of arguments that vary in
force to highlight his/her ﬁrmness on some points (Joni and Beyer 2009). The strength
of an argument may be expressed with phrases such as: absolute/absolutely, always,
maybe, must, possible/possibly, perhaps, sometimes, and so on. They reflect one’s
conﬁdence in the stated evidences and warrants.
Table 1. Argument detection models in prior work
Works Corpus Machine learning features
Moens et al. 2007;
Palau and Moens 2009;
Mochales and Moens
2011
News articles,
Legal text,
Reports
Generic Features: punctuation, text statistics,
n-grams. Special Lexicons: verbs, adverbs,
modal auxiliary, rhetorical relations
Ozyurt 2012 Biomedical
literature
Generic Features: POS, position of sentence,
semantic network. Special Lexicons: predict
noun, head word
Conrad et al. 2012 Blogs and
editorials
Generic Features: sentiment. Special
Lexicons: relation phrases, noun, verb
Levy et al. 2014 Debate forum Generic Features: cosine similarity between
sentences, subjectivity score, sentiment, name
entity. Special Lexicons: claim words
Stab and Gurevych
2014
Persuasive
essays
Generic Features: text statistics, location of
sentences, punctuation marks, n-grams, POS
n-grams. Special Lexicons: verbs, adverbs,
pronoun, reasoning markers
Extracting Conﬂict Models from Interaction Traces 299

--- PAGE 313 ---
Transition. Transitions are essential for organizing and connecting elements of
argumentation. As an example, one technique, concession, relies on admitting some
points claimed by opponents to build a cooperative relationship and promote
reciprocity (Johnson and Cooper 2009). Transitions can be indicated by coordinators
and conjunct adverbs, e.g. and, or, ﬁrst, ﬁnally and others to establish links among
clauses and argument components. Subordinators, such as although and despite, can
indicate concession.
Affect. Conflicts may sometimes include heated debate and strong language. In online
collaborations participants are often less constrained by social norms (Johnson and
Cooper 2009). Offensive and abusive languages, therefore, can emerge when a debate
escalates indicated by words such as f***, damn, stupid, hell and others. Other indi-
cators may include words such as annoying and upset, and emoticons to convey one’s
anger, disappointment, or other negative attitude.
An argumentation lexicon can be created based on these categories, and drawing on
prior work (e.g. for announcement and reasoning indicators, relying on Eemeren
(2002), model qualiﬁers relying on Knott and Dale (1993), affective content based on
Chen et al. (2012) and others).
3.2 Elements Based on Contextual and Language Features
Drawing on prior work related to linguistic features (Chen et al. 2012; Mochales and
Moens 2011; Stab and Gurevych 2014), we identify additional features.
Contextual Lexicon. Similar to other text mining tasks (Chen et al. 2012), under-
standing context is important for argument detection. A contextual lexicon can help
based on identiﬁcation of vocabularies speciﬁc to the context. In our illustration that
follows, this is the Bugzilla platform with vocabularies about topics such as usability,
performance, and easy use; competitors such as other browsers Chrome, Google, and
IE, and abbreviations such as IMHO and FWIW.
Sentence Style. In online discourse, it is a common practice that speakers use special
punctuation and word formats to indicate feelings or speaking volume. Punctuations,
such as repeated exclamation marks, or questions marks, or a combination of both, and
words with all uppercased letter often appear in arguments of strong tone.
Sentence Structure. Sentence function indicates a speaker’s purpose in uttering a
speciﬁc sentence, phrase, or clause. In arguments, combinations of various sentence
functions yield different intentions or different argumentation levels. For example,
intensive use of interrogative sentences is observed when one refutes others’ argu-
ments. Explanative and imperative sentences often appear in strong persuasive argu-
ments. These represent a third feature.
Sentiment. Sentiment analysis has been widely used to understand attitude (negative,
neutral, and positive) to an idea. To incorporate sentiment information, we incorporate
both positive score and negative score of a message’ sentiment. The rationale is that an
argument can be made either in favor of or in conflict with statements made in previous
messages.
300 G. Zhang et al.

--- PAGE 314 ---
System Information. To facilitate communication and reduce confusion, commuta-
tion platforms provide functions like specifying reply-to messages, quoting previous
messages, adding attachments, and so on. These functions have been intuitively
employed in online discussion. For example, by explicitly indicating the reply-to
message, one can deliver a targeted argument that is to refute a previous argument or
provide supplement argument. Automatically generated system information on Bug-
zilla, including reply-to indicator, quotation, create attachment, and comment on
attachment, are thus also included in TAD.
4 An Illustrative Example
To illustrate the conceptual model, we use a corpus of email threads from the online
collaboration platform Bugzilla, selecting one email thread for the illustration. Figure 1
shows a visual representation of the thread with several sub-threads. From this ﬁgure,
we investigate eight sub-threads. Table 2 provides a summary of each.
An examination of the argument visualization, combined with\investigation of the
data showed that a modeling exercise can, in fact, provide the ability to see the structure
of an argument – and provided the foundation to create mechanics to distinguish
argumentative and non-argumentative messages.
4.1 The Email Corpus, Initial Annotation and Feature Extraction
Annotated corpora for argument detection are still in short supply (Lippi and Torroni
2015). The few existing corpora are mainly based on articles and essays. To address
this challenge, we created a corpus using email data collected from Bugzilla. We
selected this data source for three reasons. First, arguments are a common phenomenon
in its emaillists (Wang et al. 2015). Second, it represents a sample from a much larger
data source that can be further employed to create a larger argumentation corpus. And
third, it represents a corpus that is relatively easy to access. Based on email threads
identiﬁed in Wang et al.’s study (Wang et al. 2015), we selected 7 email threads,
consisting of 671 messages that constitute the corpus. The length of one message
Fig. 1. An example bug discussion on Bugzilla: a visualization
Extracting Conﬂict Models from Interaction Traces 301

--- PAGE 315 ---
ranges from 1 to 734 words (median 50 words). The time fame of a thread ranges from
1 month to 4 years (median 10 months).
During the initial annotation, we ﬁrst removed stop words, and noise (such as
unrecognized symbols and wrongly encoded characters). Then, two undergraduate
students (both native English speakers with a background in information systems)
labeled messages in the corpus after undergoing several rounds of training to under-
stand the argumentation lexicons and features, and becoming familiar with topics on
Bugzilla. Each independently annotated the messages as argumentative or not,
resolving any disagreements via discussion. The annotation results showed that out of
671 messages, 396 were argumentative.
Stanford CoreNLP (Manning et al. 2014) was then used for tokenization. The
conceptual model pointed to features that we extracted from the corpus. The same
practice was performed to extract a contextual lexicon, sentence structure and style
features. To extract sentiment feature, we adopted opinion lexicon provided by Hu and
Liu (2004) and generated a positive and a negative sentiment score for each message.
All these features are then used in text classiﬁcation algorithms.
4.2 Feasibility Evaluation
To evaluate feasibility, we compared the possibilities offered by the conceptual model
against two baseline models, which have primarily focused on text classiﬁcation: Bag-
of-Words (BoW) and 2-g. The Bag-of -Words approach uses each word as a repre-
sentation, disregarding grammar and order. Word frequency, excluding stop words, is
then used for classiﬁcation. The 2-g approach captures all sequences of 2 words in a
text to some certain contextual information. However, similar to Bag-of-Words, it does
not concern grammar or orders between the tokens. Frequency of each 2-g token is
used as a feature value in classiﬁcation. The evaluation then consisted of a comparison
between feature extraction based on the conceptual model against the baseline models.
Four text-mining algorithms were used to make the comparisons: Decision Tree (J48),
Naïve Bayes, Logistic, and Support Vector Machine.
In line with previous studies in text mining (Abbasi et al. 2012; Chen et al. 2012),
standard evaluation metrics were used. Overall accuracy is captured as the percent of
Table 2. Sub-threads in the example discussion
# Sub-threads Description
1 5−6*−15* Clarify what to do to unify the browser behaviors
2 18−21* Propose a patch code
3 24*−25−26 Discuss a proposed patch code
4 28−43−45−48 Debate on the add-on solution to be used by those against
5 29−33 Remind to update user document
6 37−38 Debate on the rationale of the change
7 49−50 Argue against the change - breaking previous use patterns
8 51−52 Argue against the change – losing flexibility
Notes: Messages 6, 15, 21, and 24 mistakenly classiﬁed as argumentative.
302 G. Zhang et al.

--- PAGE 316 ---
messages, including both argumentative and non-argumentative ones that are correctly
classiﬁed. Precision is captured as the percent of identiﬁed messages that are truly
argumentative messages. Recall is captured as the percent of actually argumentative
messages that are correctly identiﬁed. F-measure (Chen et al. 2012) is used to represent
the weighted harmonic mean of precision and recall, which is deﬁned as: F = 2*
(Precision * Recall)/(Precision + Recall). ROC area (Abbasi et al. 2012) represents the
ability of the model to correctly classify argumentative and non-argumentative
messages.
We ﬁrst tested baseline models with different classiﬁcation algorithms. Both of
them achieved best performance with the Support Vector Machine (SVM). The
baseline models with SVM Bag-of-Words (baseline 1) performed better than 2-g model
(baseline 2) on all measures, achieving a 0.77 F-Measure. The conceptual model
(CML) achieved best performance with SVM, too. It achieved 82.7% accuracy, 87.9%
recall and 0.86 F-measure. The F-measure is an 11.6% improvement from the best
performing baseline model (0.77). The improvements in these four metrics are tem-
pered by different learning mechanisms. The Accuracy scores improved from 76.3%
(baseline 1) to 82.7% attributable to CML + SVM. Corresponding improvements for
Recall scores show a move from 66.9% (baseline 1) to 87.9%, also attributable to CML
+ SVM; for the F-measure score, a move from 0.77 (baseline 2) to 0.86, again attri-
butable to CML + SVM; and for the ROC area measure, a move from 0.78 (baseline 1)
to 0.88, attributable to CML + Bayes.
Thus, we found that all extraction approaches that relied on the conceptual model
(CML) achieved similar or better performance than the two baseline models. Although
the two baseline models obtained better precision rates, they had low recall rates. Use
of the CML improved recall for the two baseline models: by 31.3% and 60.4%. In other
words, the baseline models missed a number of argumentative messages. The CML,
thus, helped improve recall consistent with the strategy of maximally argumentative
interpretation (Eemeren et al. 2002).
5 Conclusions and Next Steps
In this paper, we proposed a conceptual model that captures conflicts (as argumentative
messages) in online discussions. As a part of this project, we hope to continue clari-
fying how the notion of conflicts (which we see as incompatible argumentation from
different parties) can provide the foundation for future work. The model we build,
therefore, relies on (a) categories of argumentation functions and (b) language features
from classical text mining. The feasibility evaluation results show that the use of the
conceptual model achieves higher Accuracy and Recall rates in detecting argumenta-
tive messages, compared to baseline models. The illustrative example shows the
application and usefulness of the conceptual model for making sense of conflicts in
online discussions. To the best of our knowledge, this is a ﬁrst such conceptual model
built upon features of argumentation theories, combined with classical text mining
functions. There are some limitations to our work. Our corpus is comparatively small. It
prevents us from conducting extensive evaluation (similar to challenges faced in other
studies (Lippi and Torroni 2015)). The model we have proposed has the potential to
Extracting Conﬂict Models from Interaction Traces 303

--- PAGE 317 ---
parse an argument message further into claims and premises. Our illustrative example
shows that argument information is more informative when integrated with other
interaction data. Further work is needed to explore innovative use of argument infor-
mation with respect to sense making, collaboration, and conflict management.
Acknowledgements. The work reported has been funded by the National Science Foundation
under award number CNS 1551004. Any opinions, ﬁndings and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Science Foundation (NSF). We also acknowledge the commentary from the review
team that has helped us reﬁne the paper.
References
Abbasi, A., et al.: Metafraud: a meta-learning framework for detecting ﬁnancial fraud. Mis Q.
36(4), 1293–1327 (2012)
Barcellini, F., et al.: A study of online discussions in an open-source software community. In:
Van Den Besselaar, P., et al. (eds.) Communities and Technologies 2005, pp. 301–320.
Springer, Netherlands (2005). https://doi.org/10.1007/1-4020-3591-8_16
Bex, F., et al.: Implementing the argument web. Commun. ACM 56(10), 66–73 (2013)
Brabham, D.C.: Crowdsourcing as a model for problem solving an introduction and cases.
Convergence 14(1), 75–90 (2008)
Bricker, L.A., Bell, P.: Conceptualizations of argumentation from science studies and the
learning sciences and their implications for the practices of science education. Sci. Educ.
92(3), 473–498 (2008)
Chen, Y., et al.: Detecting offensive language in social media to protect adolescent online safety.
In: International Conference Social Computing (SocialCom), pp. 71–80 (2012)
Clark, D.B., Sampson, V.: Assessing dialogic argumentation in online environments to relate
structure, grounds, and conceptual quality. J. Res. Sci. Teach. 45(3), 293–321 (2008)
Conrad, A., et al.: Recognizing arguing subjectivity and argument tags. In: Proceedings of
ExProM 2012, Stroudsburg, pp. 80–88 (2012)
Eemeren, F.H., et al.: Argumentation : Analysis, Evaluation, Presentation. Routledge, Mahwah
(2002)
Hinds, P.J., Mortensen, M.: Understanding conflict in geographically distributed teams. Organ.
Sci. 16(3), 290–307 (2005)
Hu, M., Liu, B.: Mining and summarizing customer reviews. In: Proceedings of the 2004
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD
2004, vol. 04, p. 168 (2004)
Johnson, N.A., Cooper, R.B.: Power and concession in computer-mediated negot: an
examination of ﬁrst offers. Mis Q. 33(1), 147–170 (2009)
Knott, A., Dale, R.: Using Linguistic Phenomena to Motivate a Set of Rhetorical Relations
Human Communication Research Centre. University of Edinburgh, Scotland (1993)
Levy, R. et al.: Context Dependent Claim Detection. In: Proceedings of COLING 2014, the 25th
International Conference on Computational Linguistics, Dublin, pp. 1489–1500 (2014)
Lippi, M., Torroni, P.: Argument Mining: A Machine Learning Perspective. In: Black, E.,
Modgil, S., Oren, N. (eds.) TAFA 2015. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 9524, pp. 163–176. Springer,
Cham (2015). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-28460-6_10
Malone, T.W., Crowston, K.: The interdisciplinary study of coordination. ACM Comput. Surv.
26(1), 87–119 (1994)
304 G. Zhang et al.

--- PAGE 318 ---
Manning, C.D., et al.: The stanford CoreNLP natural language processing toolkit. In: ACL
(System Demonstrations), pp. 55–60 (2014)
Mochales, R., Moens, M.F.: Argumentation mining. Artif. Intell. Law 19(1), 1–22 (2011)
Moens, M.-F., et al.: Automatic detection of arguments in legal texts. In: Proceedings of ICAIL
2007, New York, pp. 225–230 (2007)
Ozyurt, I.B.: Automatic identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation of noun argument structures in
biomedical literature. IEEE/ACM Trans. Comput. Biol. Bioinform. 9(6), 1639–1648 (2012)
Palau, R.M., Moens, M.-F.: Argumentation mining: the detection, classiﬁcation and structure of
arguments in text. In: Proceedings of ICAIL 2009, pp. 98–107. New York (2009)
Purao, S., Woo, C.: Conceptual modeling: going beyond the stigma of YAMA. SIGSAND
Workshop, May 2014, St. Louis, MI (2014)
Purao, S., et al.: A modeling language for conceptual design of systems integration solutions.
ACM Trans. Mis. Forthcoming (2018, Forthcoming)
Schneider, J.: Automated argumentation mining to the rescue? Envisioning argumentation and
decision-making support for debates in open online collaboration communities. In:
Proceedings of the First Workshop on Argumentation Mining, pp. 59–63 (2014)
Somasundaran, S., Wiebe, J.: Recognizing stances in ideological on-line debates. In: Proceedings
of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Computational Approaches to Analysis and
Generation of Emotion in Text, pp. 116–124, June 2010
Stab, C., Gurevych, I.: Identifying argumentative discourse structures in persuasive essays. In:
Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP), pp. 46–56 (2014)
Thomas, K.: Conflict and negotiation process in organizations. In: Dunnette, M.D., Hough, L.M.
(eds.), Handbook of Industrial and Organizational Psychology, vol. 3, pp. 651–717.
Consulting Psychologists Press (1992)
Toulmin, S.: The Uses of Argument. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2003)
Walton, D., Reed, C., Macagno, F.: Argumentation Schemes. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge (2008)
Wang, J., Shih, P.C., Carroll, J.M.: Revisiting Linus’s law: beneﬁts and challenges of open
source software peer review. Int. J. Hum. Comput. Stud. 77, 52–65 (2015)
Yates, S.J.: Oral and written linguistic aspects of computer conferencing. In: Herring, S.C. (ed.)
Computer-mediated Communication: Linguistic, Social, and Cross-cultural Perspectives,
pp. 29–46. John Benjamins Publishing Co. (1996)
Zhang, G., Purao, S.: CM2: a case-based conflict management system. In: Tremblay, M.C.,
VanderMeer, D., Rothenberger, M., Gupta, A., Yoon, V. (eds.) DESRIST 2014. LNCS, vol.
8463, pp. 257–272. Springer, Cham (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-06701-8_17
Extracting Conﬂict Models from Interaction Traces 305

--- PAGE 319 ---
Quality of Models and Models of Quality
(QMMQ) 2018

--- PAGE 320 ---
Preface to QMMQ 2018
5th Workshop on Quality of Models and Models
of Quality (QMMQ 2018) at the 37th International
Conference on Conceptual Modeling (ER 2018)
Xi’an, China
October 22–25, 2018
Organized by
Samira Cherﬁ, Beatriz Marín and Oscar Pastor
The 5th Workshop on Quality of Models and Models of Quality (QMMQ), organized
by Samira Si-Said, Beatriz Marín, and Oscar Pastor has focused on the information
systems development practices that are continuously evolving in the internet age. In a
world in which we observe traditional methods that depends on heuristics in decision
making and new data driven approaches, we believe that conceptual models of quality
have a crucial role to play. Quality assurance has been and is still a very challenging
issue within the Information Systems (IS) and Conceptual Modeling (CM) disciplines.
It is now more and more agreed that there is a need to develop the capacity to
understand how the quality of data affects the quality of the insights that we derive from
it. However, this quality, to be ensured, requires reliable IS that can only be designed
with a precise ontological commitment. Moreover, research on quality needs more
contributions based on experimentation to provide empirical evidences of successful IS
design in different, challenging working domains to show how modeling provides
beneﬁts, and how assessing their quality becomes a major need. Empirical Software
Engineering techniques and protocols should be followed in the CM discipline in order
to provide reliable and useful results to assess IS quality.
With all these aspects in mind, for its 5th edition the QMMQ workshop has had a
special focus on data quality. From a total of 6 submissions, up to 3 papers have been
ﬁnally selected, which are related to data quality, data management in big data, and the
integration of systems by following a model-driven approach. All of them provide a
signiﬁcant set of insights related to the problem under investigation, and they conﬁrm
an interesting technical program to stimulate discussion and going one step forward
according to the QMMQ workshops series goals.
October 2018 Samira Cherﬁ
Beatriz Marín
Oscar Pastor
Program Co-chairs

--- PAGE 321 ---
Data Quality Evaluation in Document
Oriented Data Stores
Emilio Cristalli(B)
, Flavia Serra, and Adriana Marotta
Universidad de la República, Montevideo, Uruguay
{emilio.cristalli,fserra,amarotta}@fing.edu.uy
Abstract. Data quality management in document oriented data stores
has not been deeply explored yet, presenting many challenges that arise
because of the lack of a rigid schema associated to data. Data quality
is a critical aspect in this kind of data stores, since its control is not
possible and it is not a priority in the data storage stage. Additionally,
data quality evaluation and improvement are also very diﬃcult tasks due
to the schema-less characteristic of data. This paper presents a ﬁrst step
towards data quality management in document oriented data stores. In
order to address the problem, the paper proposes a strategy for deﬁning
data granularities for data quality evaluation and analyses some data
quality dimensions relevant to document stores.
Keywords: Document store · Data Quality · Schema-less
Data quality dimensions · Data granularities
1 Introduction
The great popularity of document oriented data stores, a kind of NoSQL data
stores, is mainly due to the ﬂexibility they present for storing information, which
is achieved through the absence of a rigid schema that imposes many restrictions
to data (as there is in RDs). In document stores, data is organized in a semi-
structured way, where the users are allowed to vary the data organization for
each piece of data they store.
On the other hand, in this kind of data stores, data quality (DQ) is much more
exposed and vulnerable than in structured databases, where the existence of a
schema often enforces a lot of properties on data, such as “not null” or“unique”
restrictions and more complex ones. Moreover, data manipulation for evaluating
and improving DQ becomes much more diﬃcult in “schema-less” contexts, due
to the absence of a ﬁxed schema that determines the way to access data items
and groups of data items.
The main contributions of this work are the following: (i) a set of data gran-
ularities in document stores (it will be deﬁned in Sect.4), so that data can be
manipulated in order to measure their quality, (ii) the identiﬁcation and analy-
sis of a set of DQ dimensions particularly relevant to this context, and (iii) an
example of application of DQ metrics to a document store, deﬁning a DQ model
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 309–318, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_35

--- PAGE 322 ---
310 E. Cristalli et al.
for a speciﬁc dataset. It is important to note that this proposal accomplishes
document stores DQ management without the need to apply schema discovery
techniques, which are extremely expensive. It shows that this kind of data can
be manipulated for managing their quality while respecting the schema-less phi-
losophy, fact that avoids costly data preprocessing, optimizing DQ management
processes.
The rest of this document is organized as follows. Section2 presents related
work, Sect.3 presents some preliminary concepts that are necessary to under-
stand the proposal, Sect.4 focuses on the problem of deﬁning granularities for
data manipulation, Sect.5 presents the analysis of DQ dimensions, and Sect.6
presents the application of the proposal to example data. Finally, Sect.7 presents
conclusions and future work.
2 Related Work
Recently, many works started to consider four “V” dimensions for characterizing
Big Data, adding veracity to the three “Vs” volume, velocity and variety [3,11].
Although veracity refers to the same abstract concept in all these works, they
present many diﬀerences at the time of exactly deﬁning what veracity means and
to which DQ dimensions it corresponds [4,5]. In some cases, authors focus on
data integration contexts and they relate veracity to the quality of the sources
(coverage, accuracy, and timeliness) [3]. In other cases, some DQ dimensions are
selected as the main quality indicators. For example, in [11] veracity is reliability,
uncertainty, incompleteness, in [6] the consistency and completeness dimensions
stand out as the main quality indicators in Big Data analytics. In general, the
most mentioned quality dimensions are: accuracy, completeness, and consistency.
None of these works focuses on deﬁning interesting DQ dimensions for document
oriented data stores, although these are a very relevant kind of data stores among
Big Data alternatives.
To the best of our knowledge, the problem of data manipulation for managing
DQ in Big Data was not addressed by any work in the literature, neither the
problem of DQ management in the speciﬁc context of document oriented data
stores. If we consider semi-structured data in XML format, we ﬁnd the proposal
of [9], where a model for associating quality values to XML data is proposed.
However, they do not deal with the problem of deﬁning quality metrics and
measuring quality of XML data solving the problem of structure heterogeneity.
Our proposal focuses on document data stores, and aims to identify a set of DQ
dimensions relevant to this speciﬁc context and to give solutions for measuring
DQ in this kind of data, solving the problem of structure heterogeneity.
3 Preliminaries
In this section we present an example that will be used throughout the paper,
some basic concepts and deﬁnitions about DQ that are necessary for the following
sections, as well as the main characteristics of document oriented data stores.

--- PAGE 323 ---
Data Quality Evaluation in Document Oriented Data Stores 311
3.1 Running Example
We introduce an example that will be used throughout the paper: A company
selling TV cable subscriptions is interested in keeping track of their customers
and the subscription plan they are paying for. The company needs to store per-
sonal information for each customer, like name, addresses and phones, and each
customer is subscribed to one of the many subscription plans the company oﬀers
(basic plan, family plan, VIP, etc) which have diﬀerent prices and descriptions.
3.2 Data Quality
DQ is a multi-faceted concept, which is represented by DQ dimensions that
address diﬀerent aspects of data. At the same time, the approach of DQ as
fitness for use has been widely adopted by the research community. A huge
set of DQ dimensions have been deﬁned in the literature in the last 20 years,
existing a subset that is used by most of the authors, with similar notions and/or
deﬁnitions. Some works that gather deﬁnitions of DQ and DQ dimensions [8,10],
show that there is not a standard or agreement about the set of dimensions
that characterize DQ. Managing DQ in a dataset involves the complex tasks
of evaluating, improving and monitoring DQ. To carry out these tasks it is
necessary to deﬁne a DQ Model that serves as the basis and conduct all the
involved processes. In this work we deﬁne a DQ Model as a set of DQ dimensions
and DQ metrics, where the former represent general quality aspects and the
latter deﬁne the way the DQ dimensions are measured. The same DQ dimension
can be measured through many diﬀerent DQ metrics, which address speciﬁc DQ
problems. The DQ Model also includes the information of which DQ metrics will
be applied over which data items. The DQ metrics are deﬁned considering the
following characteristics: Name (metric name), Description (what is measured by
the metric and how), Measurement unit (how the result is represented; boolean,
grade, enumeration), and Granularity (level of detail of the dataset at which
the metric is applied, e.g., in relational model this would be cell, row, column,
table or database). In the DQ model deﬁnition task, quality aspects and data
items are prioritized, since all aspects cannot be measured for all data items.
Therefore, the most relevant data items are selected and for each one, the most
relevant quality aspects are chosen.
3.3 Document Oriented Data Stores
Document oriented databases store data as documents, usually in a format sim-
ilar to JSON or XML. As explained in [7], a document can encapsulate multiple
related objects that are to be treated as a unit. Documents can contain a com-
plex structure of ﬁelds and embed a collection of related objects that altogether
represent the unit. Whereas in a relational database (RD) these related objects
would usually be stored in separate tables and referenced using foreign keys, in
a document store they can be embedded in the same document to provide bet-
ter performance when fetching an entity and its related objects (Fig.1). This is

--- PAGE 324 ---
312 E. Cristalli et al.
known as an embedded data model, and even though it is particularly useful
for sharding purposes (because the document can be stored as a unit in one
node of the cluster, so the entity can be fetched with all its related data from
the same node in one operation), it is also possible to use a more normalized
data model referencing other documents, or even a combination of both models
embedding part of the referenced document and also a reference to it. As men-
tioned in [2], each data model approach has its beneﬁts and drawbacks in terms
of performance, data duplication, consistency and other aspects, so choosing a
data model is a trade-oﬀ decision and can vary for each attribute.
Fig.1. Example documents in a document oriented data store.
Most document stores group documents in collections. Even though docu-
ments belonging to the same collection are not required to have the same struc-
ture, usually documents that represent the same type of entities are stored in
the same collection to keep data organized and facilitate queries. For example, a
collection might be used for all customer documents, and a diﬀerent one for all
the subscription plans. Documents are composed of ﬁeld (id, name and phones)
and value (1, John and [(111) 111 1111, (222) 222 2222]) pairs. In addition,
document stores support a variety of data types for ﬁeld values, including num-
bers, strings and arrays as well as nested documents. Documents that represent
the same type of entities can have diﬀerent structures, ﬁelds and data types for
their values. In the example of Fig.1, the ﬁeld phones has an array value for
the customer John, a string value for Paul, null for Mike, and the document for
Jack does not include the ﬁeld at all.
4 Dealing with Data Granularities
When evaluating the DQ of a dataset, it is extremely important to understand
the underlying data model (e.g., relational, document oriented, key-value), so
that diﬀerent granularities for the DQ metrics can be properly deﬁned. For
example a customer with multiple phone numbers associated to him might be
represented in two tables using foreign keys in a RD. But this same scenario
might be modeled as a document in the customers collection with an embedded
array of phones as shown in Fig.1. To evaluate the quality of each phone in the
document dataset, it would be necessary to look at each element of the embedded
array, instead of looking at each row of the phones table in the relational model.

--- PAGE 325 ---
Data Quality Evaluation in Document Oriented Data Stores 313
In Sects.4.1 and 4.2, we propose six diﬀerent granularities to measure DQ at
diﬀerent detail levels of a document dataset. Moreover, we discuss the potential
recursiveness of these granularities due to the likelihood of having embedded
documents.
4.1 Granularities
Database. In this case, the metric is applied over the database. A metric with
this granularity evaluates the dataset as a whole, and as a result it provides only
one DQ measure for the dataset. This is the granularity with the least speciﬁcity.
Example 1. In our running example, a completeness metric with Database gran-
ularity can be evaluated as the ratio between null values and non-null values.
Collection. Databases group documents in collections, being usual to store
similar documents or documents representing the same type of records in the
same collection. Collections can be compared to tables of RD. To store DQ
measures of this granularity, the collections can be identiﬁed by their names,
given that collection names are unique in document databases.
Example 2. Accuracy of the customers collection can be measured as the ratio
of correct documents (for example verifying them with an external source) by
the total amount of documents in the collection. This provides an overall DQ
measure for the correctness of the collection.
Document. Documents are the main unit to store data in document stores,
and therefore it is relevant to deﬁne document as another possible granularity.
Albeit being comparable to a row of a relational table, a document can include
multiple related objects. This feature allows evaluating the quality of the entity
it represents as a whole, without having to analyze data from other documents
(which would be diﬀerent tables in a RD). Most document data stores require
each document to have a unique identiﬁer. This identiﬁer, alongside the name
of the collection, can be used to associate the obtained DQ measures to the
corresponding documents.
Example 3. With this granuarity each customer document is evaluated. Figure1
shows how very diﬀerent groups of data would be measured through a metric
with this granularity. Therefore, each document would have an associated DQ
measure. One advantage of this granularity is that it allows identifying the doc-
uments that require data cleaning actions.
Field Across Documents. One of the traditional DQ granularities in RDs
is the column granularity, which evaluates the quality of an attribute across all
rows in a table. Even though the column concept that would cross all documents
doesn’t exist in document stores, the values for a ﬁeld across all documents in a

--- PAGE 326 ---
314 E. Cristalli et al.
collection can be evaluated to measure the DQ of that ﬁeld regardless of whether
the ﬁeld exists in all documents or not. We call this granularity “Field across
documents”.
Example 4. In our running example, the completeness of the address can be
analyzed calculating the amount of empty (i.e., null value or ﬁeld not present)
values for that ﬁeld, divided by the total amount of documents in the collection.
Field Value. This granularity captures the value of a speciﬁc ﬁeld for a given
document (analogously to cell granularity in RDs). Regardless of the data type,
metrics with this granularity evaluate quality of the value as a unit, even if it is
an array or nested document. Each ﬁeld can be uniquely identiﬁed by its name
inside a document, so this can be used to associate a DQ measure to a ﬁeld
value.
Array Element. Most document stores support having arrays as values for any
ﬁeld. The quality for the ﬁeld value granularity can be evaluated considering the
array as a whole, but in some cases it may be important to measure the quality
for each element of the array. Using a combination of the ﬁeld name and array
element index, each element can be uniquely identiﬁed and associated with its
DQ measure.
Example 5. In Fig.1, the phones ﬁeld for the ﬁrst document is represented as an
array of three values. The syntactic accuracy can be evaluated for each phone
number and identiﬁed by phones[0], phones[1], phones[n].
4.2 Nesting
The deﬁnition of the granularities mentioned in Sect.4.1 can be also applied to
nested documents. We propose using a “dot notation” and indexes to construct
a path to identify the subject for each DQ measurement at diﬀerent nested gran-
ularities. A dot indicates going one level deeper to a nested document, an index
[n] references the n-th element of an array, and an empty index ([]) references a
ﬁeld across multiple documents of an array. For example, field1.field2[3] would
reference the third element of the field2’s array value, of the document nested
in field1. Field1[].field2 would reference the ﬁeld field2 across all documents in
field1’s array value.
Example 6. The customer document of Fig.2 contains an array of address
documents. We could measure: addresses[0], DQ for the ﬁrst address doc-
ument (Document granularity); addresses[].state, DQ for the state ﬁeld
across all addresses (Field across documents granularity); addresses[0].state,
DQ for the state ﬁeld of the ﬁrst address (Field value granularity);
addresses[0].phones[0], DQ for the ﬁrst phone of the ﬁrst address (Array
element granularity);

--- PAGE 327 ---
Data Quality Evaluation in Document Oriented Data Stores 315
Fig.2. Document containing embedded documents.
5 Relevant DQ Dimensions
We propose the following group of DQ dimensions that we think are particularly
relevant and useful when deﬁning the DQ model for a document store dataset.
We put special focus on a speciﬁc engine, MongoDB, so we can take advantage
of its features and implementation details. We chose MongoDB since it is the
most popular document store reported by [1].
5.1 Consistency and Redundancy
Document stores usually lack support for foreign keys. In order to be able to
associate diﬀerent documents, users have to manually reference them using a
custom ﬁeld with the target document’s id for example. Because the system
does not perform any checks on these manual references, it can lead to potential
reference consistency issues, ending up with broken associations and orphan
documents.
On the other hand, it is a common practice to embed documents instead of
referencing them to avoid doing an extra query to get the referenced documents,
due to the lack of support for join operations. In some cases it is useful to use
a combination of both the embed and reference strategies (despite the risks it
carries) depending on the frequency at which these documents are updated and
read frequency. For instance, in our running example it might be better to store
just the subscription plan’s name and id embedded in the customer document
and keep the rest of the ﬁelds in a diﬀerent collection as shown in Fig.3, because
the subscription plan name is not likely to change and it is needed each time the
customer information is shown. On the other side, the subscription plan price
and description might change more often so it is good to keep them in another
collection and avoid repeating this information for every customer.
5.2 Entity Heterogeneity
Most document stores do not enforce documents to comply to a predeﬁned
schema, and it is a big beneﬁt when looking for ﬂexibility or having hetero-
geneous data. However, it represents a problem for applications that query the

--- PAGE 328 ---
316 E. Cristalli et al.
Fig.3. Embedded and referenced documents.
data assuming certain ﬁelds or some kind of structure (implicit schema [7]).
Entity heterogeneity in terms of data structure and data formats can be an
important DQ dimension, in particular when applications expect some structure
that some documents do not have.
5.3 Completeness
One of the most common strategies to evaluate data completeness is analyzing
null or empty values. In document stores with ﬂexible schema this requires more
attention because values can also be empty arrays, empty documents, documents
with empty values, or the ﬁeld can even be completely missing.
5.4 Freshness
The usage of ObjectIds as id in MongoDB (usually recommended [2]) can sim-
plify the calculation of Freshness, eliminating the need of any extra data. Given
a document that is using the default auto-generated ObjectId for the id ﬁeld
value, the date and time of creation can be extracted using its ﬁrst 4 bytes [2],
and it can be used to calculate how fresh this object is in terms of creation date
without explicitly storing any creation date information. This way of implement-
ing a Freshness metric has the limitation that it does not allow calculating when
the document was last updated.
5.5 Uniqueness
MongoDB has support for unique indexes which prevents the user from insert-
ing two documents with the same value for the indexed ﬁeld. In this scenario,

--- PAGE 329 ---
Data Quality Evaluation in Document Oriented Data Stores 317
uniqueness DQ dimension might be as important as in RDs. However, the exis-
tence of an index in this kind of data store is not often a suitable option when
huge volumes of data are being managed.
6 Defining a DQ Model
A DQ model that speciﬁes the dimensions, metrics and data to which they apply,
should be deﬁned. In Table1 we present an example of a DQ model for evaluating
DQ of a document store corresponding to the running example.
Table 1. DQ model.
Dimension Metric Measured
On
Consistency Subscription Reference Integrity
Verify the existence of the referenced subscription plan for
each customer document
Granularity: Nested Field Value
Collection:
customers
Nested
Field:
subscription.id
Subscription Reference Consistency
Verify the consistency between the subscription data embed-
ded in each customer document and the complete subscrip-
tion document in the subscriptions collection
Granularity: Field Value
Collection:
customers
Field:
subscription
Heterogeneity Customer Structure Heterogeneity
Analise the percentage of documents with each ﬁeld
Granularity: Collection
Collection:
customers
Customer Address Data Type Heterogeneity
Analise diﬀerent data types used to represent customer
addresses
Granularity: Field value
Collection:
customers
Field: address
Completeness Empty addresses
Verify if a costumer document’s address ﬁeld is empty (either
it doesn’t exist, is null, an empty array or an empty
document)
0 if address is empty, 1 otherwise
Granularity: Field Value
Collection:
customers
Field: address
Accuracy Telephone Format
Verify each telephone number for each customer is composed
of 9 digits
0 if telephone is has wrong format, 1 otherwise
Granularity: Array element
Collection:
customers
Array Field:
telephones
Uniqueness Duplicate telephones
Count the amount of duplicate telephone numbers in the
customers collection
Granularity: Field across documents
Collection:
customers
Field:
telephones

--- PAGE 330 ---
318 E. Cristalli et al.
7 Conclusions
With the rising popularity of NoSQL databases, and document oriented stores
in particular, it is surprisingly hard to ﬁnd literature and studies focusing on
DQ aspects for this speciﬁc type of databases. In this paper we show a ﬁrst
approach to analyze DQ on document oriented stores taking into account their
nature, features and limitations that can determine the quality of the data and
increase the risk of potential DQ issues. We are currently working on applying
these concepts, deﬁning a DQ model and measuring DQ of a real-world dataset,
to demonstrate the feasibility of our approach and the type of DQ problems it
can discover. At the same time, a tool is being developed to be able to deﬁne a
DQ model and evaluate DQ of document stores in a more automated way.
References
1. Db-engines ranking of document stores. https://db-engines.com/en/ranking/
document+store. Accessed 03 Feb 2018
2. Chodorow, K.: 50 Tips and Tricks for MongoDB Developers: Get the Most Out of
Your Database. O’Reilly Media, Sebastopol (2011)
3. Dong, X., Srivastava, D.: Big Data Integration. Synthesis Lectures on Data Man-
agement. Morgan & Claypool Publishers, San Rafael (2015)
4. Firmani, D., Mecella, M., Scannapieco, M., Batini, C.: On the meaningfulness of
“big data quality” (invited paper). Data Sci. Eng. 1(1), 6–20 (2016). https://doi.
org/10.1007/s41019-015-0004-7
5. Juddoo, S.: Overview of data quality challenges in the context of big data. In: 2015
International Conference on Computing, Communication and Security (ICCCS),
pp. 1–9, December 2015. https://doi.org/10.1109/CCCS.2015.7374131
6. Kwon, O., Lee, N., Shin, B.: Data quality management, data usage experience
and acquisition intention of big data analytics. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 34(3), 387–394
(2014). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2014.02.002
7. Sadalage, P.J., Fowler, M.: NoSQL Distilled: A Brief Guide to the Emerging World
of Polyglot Persistence. Addison-Wesley Professional, Upper Saddle River (2012)
8. Scannapieco, M., Catarci, T.: Data quality under a computer science perspective.
Arch. Comput. 2, 1–15 (2002)
9. Scannapieco, M., Virgillito, A., Marchetti, C., Mecella, M., Baldoni, R.: The
daquincis architecture: a platform for exchanging and improving data quality in
cooperative information systems. Inf. Syst. 29(7), 551–582 (2004). https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.is.2003.12.004
10. Shankaranarayanan, G., Blake, R.: From content to context: the evolution and
growth of data quality research. J. Data Inf. Qual. 8(2), 9:1–9:28 (2017). https://
doi.org/10.1145/2996198
11. Storey, V.C., Song, I.Y.: Big data technologies and management: what conceptual
modeling can do. Data Knowl. Eng. 108, 50–67 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.datak.2017.01.001

--- PAGE 331 ---
Genomic Data Management in Big Data
Environments: The Colorectal Cancer Case
Ana León Palacio1(&)
, Alicia García Giménez1
,
Juan Carlos Casamayor Ródenas1
,
and José Fabián Reyes Román1,2
1
Research Center on Software Production Methods (PROS),
Universitat Politècnica de València, Valencia, Spain
{aleon,jreyes}@pros.upv.es, algargi2@posgrado.upv.es,
jcarlos@dsic.upv.es
2
Department of Engineering Sciences, Universidad Central Del Este (UCE),
San Pedro de Macorís, Dominican Republic
Abstract. If there is a domain where data management becomes an intensive
Big Data issue, it is the genomic domain, due to the fact that the data generated
day after day are exponentially increasing. A genomic data management strategy
requires the use of a systematic method, intended to assure that the right data are
identiﬁed, using the adequate data sources, and linking the selected information
with a software platform based on conceptual models, which allows guaran-
teeing the implementation of genomic services with quality, efﬁcient and valu-
able data. In this paper, we select the method called “SILE” –for Search,
Identiﬁcation, Load and Exploitation-, and we focus on validating its accuracy
in the context of a concrete disease, the Colorectal Cancer. The main contri-
bution of our work is to show how such methodological approach can be applied
successfully in a real and complex clinical context, providing a working envi-
ronment where Genomic Big Data are efﬁciently managed.
Keywords: SILE  Genomics  Big Data  Data quality  Colorectal cancer
1 Introduction
Since the completion of the Human Genome Project and the appearance of the next-
generation sequencing (NGS) techniques, the sequencing cost per genome (i.e. reading
the DNA of a person) has been exponentially decreasing, as well as the speed of the
sequencing has been increasing [1]. Technological innovation combined with
automation are responsible for the explosion in data production [2]. The postgenomic
era in which we currently are, requires speciﬁc strategies for the interpretation, analysis
and exploitation of large amounts of data.
Veracity is an important factor due to the fact that data comes –in some cases- from
uncontrolled environments because of the lack of rules to submit the information.
Moreover, in genomics, data heterogeneity, variability and variety are the main
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 319–329, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_36

--- PAGE 332 ---
problems because they can derive in inconsistencies of the information managed. Thus,
it is fundamental to identify the accurate and relevant data. The variability dimension is
especially relevant for our work, as the problem of identifying the right data in the
genomic domain depends on the disease under analysis. This is why applying the
appropriate data selection method for one disease can be substantially different from
applying it to other diseases. To understand analogies and differences, experiences
from real cases related to different diseases are required. In this context, this paper
reports the colorectal cancer (CRC) case, analyzing the methodological background
that has been applied to identify those variations (changes in the DNA) that are con-
sidered relevant for the genomic diagnosis of CRC.
The challenge of our genome-oriented data management is to discard useless data,
collect relevant information and turn it into knowledge. By identifying signiﬁcant
variations and loading them in the corresponding database, our work is intended to
allow an early detection of the selected disease, as well as help the development of
speciﬁc treatments to reduce health care costs and motivate one of the potential uses of
Big Data in health care, i.e. Personalized Medicine [3].
There are multitude of public databases where scientists can extract information to
validate the results of their experiments. For example, in its last update, the NAR
Online Molecular Biology Database Collection summarizes information about 1,737
repositories [4]. This huge number of potentially valid data sources conforms a ﬁrst
problem: how to select those data sources that are considered relevant for the disease
under investigation. Some criteria are strictly required: this is why we are going to
focus on the currency, accuracy, completeness and reliability of the available infor-
mation. The main contribution of this paper is to provide a systematic approach to
assist the population of a genomic database with useful, curated, veriﬁed and structured
data by applying a method called SILE and validating its accuracy in this speciﬁc
context. As an additional value related to further work, doing this task in detail for a
particular disease and reporting accurately the subsequent process details, it will be
possible to analyze how the method works by comparing different instantiations of the
used method when applied to different diseases.
With all this in mind, the following section presents a general view of the SILE
method, that conforms the selected methodological background. In Sect. 3 the genetic
causes of the CRC will be introduced. Next, in Sects. 4 and 5, the steps of the SILE
method will be followed for the CRC case: searching relevant data sources, identifying
the signiﬁcant variations, loading the data into a speciﬁc database and using the
GenesLove.Me (GLM) [5] platform for its interpretation. Finally, lessons learned, and
future work are presented in the last section.
320 A. León Palacio et al.

--- PAGE 333 ---
2 The SILE Method
The SILE method, developed within PROS Research Group1
, is composed by the
following four steps: search, identiﬁcation, load and exploitation. The aim of this
method is to identify efﬁciently relevant genetic information (variations2
) about the risk
of suffering a certain disease, in this case CRC, and load them into the internally
developed Human Genome Database (HGDB) [6]. Next, each step of the method is
briefly explained.
2.1 Search
The ﬁrst step of this method is based on exploring the different scientiﬁc sources
(articles, databases, etc.) related to the disease. The goal is to select those repositories
containing relevant information for the disease under study. In order to determine the
optimal ones to obtain information from, the sources must be analyzed, according to
some quality criteria, called dimensions. Three main dimensions are considered in this
step:
• Currency: the extent to which data is sufﬁciently up to date for the task at hand.
Genomics domain is in constant evolution, so the information stored in the data-
bases must be frequently updated in order to maintain the data quality (less than one
year before the last update).
• Accuracy: the extent to which data correctly describes the “real world” objects. For
example, the DNA sequence is a four-letter code which contains A, C, T or G, no
other letters. It is important that the selected databases use standards to represent the
information, such as the HGVS nomenclature3
for the name of a variation.
• Completeness: the extent to which data are in sufﬁcient depth and breath for the
task at hand. In order to obtain information as complete as possible, different
databases must be checked, such as those speciﬁc of a disease, as the Colorectal
Cancer Atlas4
, and more general ones such as the data sources of the National
Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI5
).
The application of these criteria guides the process of selecting those data sources
that will allow us to proceed with the next step: the precise identiﬁcation of relevant
variations for clinical genomic diagnosis purpose.
1
Research Center on Software Production Methods (PROS), http://www.pros.webs.upv.es/.
2
Variation: Naturally occurring genetic differences among organisms in the same species [Scitable by
Nature Education].
3
HGVS Nomenclature: http://varnomen.hgvs.org/.
4
Colorectal Cancer Atlas: http://colonatlas.org/index.html.
5
The National Center of Biotechnology Information: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/.
Genomic Data Management in Big Data Environments 321

--- PAGE 334 ---
2.2 Identiﬁcation
Using the data sources selected in the previous step, the relevant variations must be
identiﬁed. One of the problems to face when dealing with genomic information is the
lack of a standard to deﬁne the core concepts, which leads to inconsistencies and
discrepancies between data sources. The Conceptual Schema of the Human Genome
(CSHG) [7, 8] was speciﬁcally developed to describe in a uniﬁed and structured way
the main concepts of the domain. The use of the CSHG helps to describe these concepts
in a non-ambiguous way and to determine the main attributes to consider when
searching for information about a certain topic. In addition, it is important to highlight
that the application of conceptual modeling techniques in this domain (complex) is
essential to achieve information management based on data quality.
The meaningful information about the relevant variations is gathered from the
selected databases according to the speciﬁcation of the CSHG. The use of the con-
ceptual schema determines which attributes are required, and it guides the mappings
that must be speciﬁed to link conceptual schema attributes with their data sources
attribute counterpart.
Once the information required from each source is identiﬁed, speciﬁc quality cri-
teria controls must be proposed in order to assure a correct integration of the infor-
mation. Three additional criteria are used in our work in this step: accuracy,
completeness and reliability.
• Data Accuracy means that the data of a ﬁeld is represented using the correct format
and its value is correct. For example, it cannot be possible the existence of a
chromosome 50 because there is a speciﬁc number of chromosomes from 1 to 22
and the sexual ones (X and Y).
• Completeness is related to the presence of missing values. Some attributes can be
missing, but others are necessary to provide a consistent representation of the data,
e.g. the position in the DNA where the variation occurs.
• Reliability is another important quality control. The reliability of a variation is
related to the type of reports associated with it and the status of review. This is
fundamental criteria to determine the signiﬁcance of a variation when talking about
its clinical application.
The aforementioned criteria are assured by the restrictions described in the con-
ceptual schema, which guarantees the consistency of the data representation
2.3 Load
The Load step implies the extraction of information from the databases and its storage
into the Human Genome Data Base (HGDB), the database that corresponds to the
CSHG. In order to accomplish this task, three more sub steps are performed: data
extraction, transformation and load.
322 A. León Palacio et al.

--- PAGE 335 ---
First of all, the information of interest is extracted from the databases. Then, that
information is transformed by making the correspondence between the ﬁelds in the
datasets and the ﬁelds in the HGDB. Besides the controls applied in the identiﬁcation
step, other quality controls must be taken into account:
• Consistency assess if that data coming from the implied data sources are consistent
and represented in the same format. It is not an easy task because most genomic
databases where developed in an ad-hoc way to solve a speciﬁc research require-
ment and the use of ontologies and controlled vocabularies is not a common
practice. This can lead to situations where a common –semantically speaking- data
unit can appear with different formats. The HGDB ﬁxes the target format to be used,
according to the CSHG where it comes from.
• Uniqueness is related to the fact that the database will not have redundant data or
duplicate records.
2.4 Exploitation
Once the right data are stored in the database, a software platform to manage them for
genome diagnosis purposes is ready to be used. This “Exploitation” step is the ﬁnal one
of the SILE method and it is focused on the accurate interpretation of the stored data.
The information that has been loaded and stored in the HGDB is transformed into
useful knowledge, which can be exploited by a speciﬁc tool, i.e. GenesLove.Me
(GLM) [9]. This tool analyses the information obtained from a patient sample and
determines if there are variations associated to a certain disease, according to the data
stored in the database.
3 The Colorectal Cancer Case
After having introduced the SILE method, it is time to evaluate how it works in practice
when applied to a concrete case –the Colorectal Cancer use-. Two main objectives are
pursued:
1. to check the value of the method in the selected case,
2. to create a set of practical experiences of the SILE method in particular diseases, in
order to be able to compare in the next future commonalities and differences in the
application of the method to different diseases.
The paper focuses on the ﬁrst point, to make viable to face the second one in further
works. CRC is the chosen disease to validate the SILE method. The main reasons are
associated to the high prevalence of the hereditary form, the knowledge of the genes
involved in the disease and its difﬁculty to be diagnosed. The study of this disease by
genome variation analysis focusing on an early detection is fundamental in the diag-
nosis of new cases. It is necessary because the prognosis6
of the disease is better as
soon as the cancer is detected. All these aspects make the CRC case a very relevant one
6
Prognosis is deﬁned as the likely course of a medical condition.
Genomic Data Management in Big Data Environments 323

--- PAGE 336 ---
for our analysis of validity of the SILE method in practice. Our aim is to determine
relevant variations related to the disease that could be used for its effective genomic
diagnosis in the advanced context of Precision Medicine.
4 Searching Relevant Data Sources
As seen previously in the Search step of the SILE method, the valuable information is
dispersed over several data sources. Moreover, data does not always match due to
inconsistencies or incongruences, what makes necessary to study each data source and
its associated information carefully.
In the context of CRC, the databases DisGeNET [10], ClinVar [11], Ensembl [12],
InSiGHT, Phenotype-Genotype integrator [13] and dbSNP [14] have been selected to
obtain information from.
From the CSHG, a set of relevant attributes are selected (See Table 1). Each
attribute of the CSHG must be linked to a corresponding attribute of the selected data
source that will provide its content.
Let us close this section remarking that well-known, speciﬁc CRC databases as In-
SiGHT, the Colon Cancer Gene Variation Databases7
and the Colorectal Cancer Atlas
were not unfortunately be considered because they are outdated, what violates one of
our basic quality criteria (i.e., currency).
Table 1. An extract of the attributes and information contained in each data source.
Identiﬁer Description Data Source
Ofﬁcial symbol Gene ofﬁcial symbol HGNC
Allele ID Allele identiﬁer ClinVar
Variation ID Variation identiﬁer ClinVar
“rs” identiﬁer dbSNP link and identiﬁer dbSNP
Clinically important Clinical effect of the variation ClinVar
Review status Status of review of the variation ClinVar
Evaluation Last evaluation of the variation ClinVar
Citations Number of citations All databases
VAR Variation-disease association score DisGeNET
EI Evidence index DisGeNET
MAF Minor Allele Frequency Ensembl
HPMAF Highest population MAF Ensembl
Population Population of Highest population MAF Ensembl
7
CCGVD, http://chromium.lovd.nl/LOVD2/colon_cancer/home.php.
324 A. León Palacio et al.

--- PAGE 337 ---
5 Identifying Signiﬁcant Variations
The data obtained from the different sources in the previous step were analyzed in order
to eliminate redundancies and corroborate the quality. After the interpretation and
annotation of the variations from NGS data, they are commonly classiﬁed as benign,
likely benign, pathogenic or likely pathogenic, or as a variation of unknown signiﬁ-
cance (VUS) following the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics
(ACMG) guidelines [15]. As a ﬁrst applied criteria, only pathogenic or likely patho-
genic variations were considered for the ﬁnal dataset. Then, high Minor Allele Fre-
quencies (MAF) and low Functional Consequence Score (FCS) were used as negative
criteria. Variations with a high MAF levels were discarded because it indicates a
common variation, and a low FCS indicates a variation without a deleterious effect.
A variation with a FCS lower than 0.65 was discarded, variations with a FCS between
0.70 and 0.65 were exhaustively studied and ﬁnally, variations with a FCS between 0.9
and 1 were considered pathogenic. Moreover, the prediction of PolyPhen and SIFT was
considered. The population genetics is also studied because some variations are
common in a population and uncommon in another or can be present in a population
and absent in other. Finally, a restrictive p-value was also used in order to select the
strength phenotype associated variations. A lower P-value is related to a high level of
association, there is an inversely proportional association. Other applied criteria are the
status of review, the clinical signiﬁcance of the references, the absence of discrepancies
among data bases, the speciﬁcity against the disease -in this case, the CRC-, or
pathways to tumorigenesis, and the related bibliography.
The ﬁnal dataset consists in 34 pathogenic variations. This conforms the most
valuable contribution of this work. The application of a sound method leads to the
selection of this set of 34 valid variations, ready to be use in clinical contexts for an
accurate genomic diagnosis of the disease.
It is important to remark that the result is dependent on the criteria that were
applied. But the strength of the method is that we know why the selected variations are
these ones and not others. We also know that changing the selected criteria, a different
result would be obtained. But the application of the SILE method always let us pre-
cisely know why the selected variations are the ones that conform the ﬁnal dataset.
A summary of some of the selected variations and their associated attributes is shown
in Table 2.
This result must be open to change and adaptation to the context. Indeed, 105
variations are classiﬁed as likely useful in order to be considered in the near future: they
are ready to be studied again when more evidence appears. Additionally, there are some
variations, as rs555607708, that have potential to become a clinically relevant varia-
tion, but they are too recent to be sure.
Genomic Data Management in Big Data Environments 325

--- PAGE 338 ---
6 Data Load and Interpretation: The GenesLove.Me
Platform
Once the meaningful information has been identiﬁed it is the time to load it in the
database. It acts as the main component of the software platform that must perform the
genomic analysis by detecting if the relevant variations are present in an analyzed DNA
sample of a patient. This is when the genome information system becomes a valuable
asset, having the right data for diagnosis purposes thanks to the methodological
background that the use of the SILE method provides.
In our case we use the HGDB to store the variations identiﬁed related to the CRC,
and the GLM platform to present the results to the user according to its speciﬁc interest.
The load process is performed following three main steps:
1. Extraction of the information from the sources: From each data source the required
attributes have been identiﬁed so, using the mechanisms provided by each repos-
itory, an automatic process has been implemented to extract the associated
information.
2. Transformation of the data collected to match the quality criteria established and to
solve the possible inconsistencies that can hinder the load process.
3. Load the information into the HGDB.
When the HGDB is populated with the desired information, it can be exploited by
proper tools to extract knowledge that can be presented to the ﬁnal user. In this case we
use the GLM platform [5, 9]. This tool allows the user to know the risk of suffering
CRC by processing a VCF ﬁle that contains the variations detected after sequencing
his/her DNA. After the VCF ﬁle is processed, the user receives a report with their
probability of suffering the disease, according to his genetic characteristics.
Table 2. Selection of annotated variations. For each variation, “rs” identiﬁer, gene symbol,
chromosome, position, HGVS name, reference and alternative allele, variation type, functional
consequence score (FC) and minor allele frequency (MAF) are shown. Del: Deletion; SNV:
single nucleotide variations; Dup: Duplication; Chr: chromosome.
rs identiﬁer Gene Chr Position NC identiﬁer Ref Alt Type FCS MAF
rs193922376 MSH2 2 47414421 NC_000002.12 A T SNV 0,95 0,02
rs267608172 PMS2 7 5982823 NC_000007.14 C T SNV 0,95 <0,01
rs63750909 MSH6 2 47799427 NC_000002.12 C T SNV 0,95 <0,01
rs267606674 AXIN2 17 65536467 NC_000017.11 C – Del 0,95 <0,01
rs587780078 MUTYH 1 45331515 NC_000001.11 – CC Dup 0,95 <0,01
rs63751615 MLH1 3 37012098 NC_000003.12 C T SNV 0,95 <0,01
rs16892766 EIF3H 8 116618444 NC_000008.11 A C SNV 0,6 0,08
326 A. León Palacio et al.

--- PAGE 339 ---
7 Conclusions
In a very complex data management domain as the genomic one is, the correct iden-
tiﬁcation of speciﬁc DNA variations and the efﬁcient use of Big Data analysis will
enhance our understanding of the molecular basis of diseases. In this context, a
methodological background is essential to guide the process of selecting the right
genomic data sources, identifying the correct variations and interpreting them ade-
quately in the resulting genome analysis. This paper shows how the SILE method has
been applied in a real case associated to the CRC disease.
CRC is the third most prevalent cancer, so the creation of a variation database using
the SILE method helps to improve its diagnosis and comprehension. The method
provides an easy way to perform the analysis of the big amount of available data-bases
and related information. Besides, the use of quality criteria improves the reliability of
the information stored in the ﬁnal database and confers a sound structure to the whole
process. The complexity of the colorectal study is related to the great variety of syn-
dromes and genes affected and the huge amount of variations. Moreover, as well as in
other types of cancer, the risk of develop the disease depends on speciﬁc combinations
of variations. The SILE method was designed having these dynamic aspects in mind. It
means that the application of different quality criteria can generate new results, assuring
the semantic traceability that makes possible to known why the selected variations were
chosen instead of others.
Validating the accuracy of the SILE method in the context of Colorectal Cancer
(CRC) allows scientiﬁc community to reproduce it in other complex diseases in order
to create a useful, curated, actualized and promising database. This is indeed the most
signiﬁcant further work that we want to do. Our goal is to replicate the use of the
method in different clinical contexts (considering other diseases) in order to accumulate
knowledge on how the application of the method is dependent on the selected disease.
We have results of the application of the method in the case of the Alzheimer’s disease,
and we are currently analyzing commonalities and differences that should help to
improve the method application.
Additionally, the SILE method is being applied in two concrete clinical projects. In
the ﬁrst one, developed together with clinical experts from “Fundación INCLIVA-
Hospital Clínico” in València, the selected disease is breast cancer. The method is
used to manage data related to micro-RNAs with the aim of extending its application to
other types of genome information. The second application of the SILE method is
being done in the context of an international project with the “Hospital Nacional del
Cáncer” and “Hospital de Clínicas” in Paraguay. In this case, the analysis focuses on
lung cancer with the aim of extending the conventional Electronic Health Record with
genomic data. The SILE method will be also applied to search and identify the relevant
variations to be considered in this extension, following a similar process in a different
clinical working context.
In all these cases the results of the method application are being successful thanks
to the combination of conceptual modeling and the application of quality metrics,
which ensure the data quality, it is for this reason that more applications are planned in
order to extend the HGDB with more information about other diseases.
Genomic Data Management in Big Data Environments 327

--- PAGE 340 ---
As a major advantage, even though there is a lot to be discovered and understood,
we accumulate evidences that let us to perceive how the SILE method can be used to
unravel the variations related to an increased risk of developing a disease.
Acknowledgement. The authors would like to thank members of the PROS Research Centre
Genome group for the fruitful discussions regarding the application of CM in the medicine ﬁeld.
This work has been supported by the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation through project
DataME (ref: TIN2016-80811-P) and the Research and Development Aid Program (PAID-01-
16) of the Universitat Politècnica de València under the FPI grant 2137.
References
1. van Dijk, E.L., Auger, H., Jaszczyszyn, Y., Thermes, C.: Ten years of next-generation
sequencing technology, Trends Genet. 30(9), 418–426 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tig.
2014.07.001
2. Auffray, C., et al.: Making sense of big data in health research: towards an EU action plan.
Genome Med. 8, 71 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1186/s13073-016-0323-y
3. Wylie, B., Psaty, B.M.: Personalized medicine in the era of genomics. Jama 298(14),
pp. 1682–1684 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.298.14.1682
4. Rigden, D.J., Fernández, M.X.: The 2018 Nucleic Acids Research database issue and the
online molecular biology database collection. Nucleic Acids Res. 46(D1), D1–D7 (2017).
https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkx1235
5. Reyes Román, José F., Iñiguez-Jarrín, Carlos, Pastor, Óscar: Genomic Tools*: web-
applications based on conceptual models for the genomic diagnosis. In: Damiani, Ernesto,
Spanoudakis, George, Maciaszek, Leszek (eds.) ENASE 2017. CCIS, vol. 866, pp. 48–69.
Springer, Cham (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-94135-6_3
6. Reyes Román, J.F.: Diseño y Desarrollo de un Sistema de Información Genómica basado en
un Modelo Conceptual Holístico del Genoma Humano. Universitat Politècnica de València
(2018). https://doi.org/10.4995/Thesis/10251/99565
7. Reyes Román, J.F., Pastor, Ó., Casamayor, J.C., Valverde, F.: Applying conceptual
modeling to better understand the human genome. In: Comyn-Wattiau, I., Tanaka, K., Song,
l-Y., Yamamoto, S., Saeki, M. (eds.) ER 2016. LNCS, vol. 9974, pp. 404–412. Springer,
Cham (2016). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-46397-1_31
8. López, Ó.P., Palacio, A.L., Román, J.F.R., Casamayor, J.C.: Modeling life: a conceptual
schema-centric approach to understand the genome. In: Cabot, J., Gómez, C., Pastor, O.,
Sancho, M., Teniente, E. (eds.) Conceptual Modeling Perspectives. Springer, Cham (2017).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-67271-7_3
9. Reyes Román, J.F., Iñiguez-Jarrín, C., Pastor López, O.: GenesLove.Me: a model-based-
web-Application for direct-To-consumer genetic tests, In: ENASE 2017 - Proceedings of the
12th International Conference on Evaluation of Novel Approaches to Software Engineering,
pp. 133–143 (2017). https://doi.org/10.5220/0006340201330143
10. Piñero, J., et al.: DisGeNET: a comprehensive platform integrating information on human
disease-associated genes and variants, Nucleic acids research, gkw943 (2016). https://doi.
org/10.1093/nar/gkw943
11. Landrum, M.J., et al.: ClinVar: improving access to variant interpretations and supporting
evidence. Nucleic Acids Res. 46(D1), D1062–D1067 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/
gkx1153
328 A. León Palacio et al.

--- PAGE 341 ---
12. Zerbino, D.R., et al.: Ensembl 2018. Nucleic Acids Res. 46(D1), D754–D761 (2017). https://
doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkx1098
13. Ramos, E.M., et al.: Phenotype–Genotype Integrator (PheGenI): synthesizing genome-wide
association study (GWAS) data with existing genomic resources. Eur. J. Hum. Genet. 22(1),
144 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2013.96
14. Sherry S. T., Ward M-H, Kholodov M., et al.: dbSNP: the NCBI database of genetic
variation. Nucleic Acids Res. 29(1), 308–311 (2001)
15. Richards, S., et al.: Standards and guidelines for the interpretation of sequence variants: a
joint consensus recommendation of the American College of Medical Genetics and
Genomics and the Association for Molecular Pathology. Genet. Med. 17, 405–424 (2015).
https://doi.org/10.1038/gim.2015.30
Genomic Data Management in Big Data Environments 329

--- PAGE 342 ---
Domain Speciﬁc Models as System Links
Vladimir A. Shekhovtsov1
, Suneth Ranasinghe1
,
Heinrich C. Mayr1(&)
, and Judith Michael2
1
Alpen-Adria-Universität, Klagenfurt, Austria
{volodymyr.shekhovtsov,suneth.ranasinghe,
heinrich.mayr}@aau.at
2
Software Engineering, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany
michael@se-rwth.de
Abstract. Digital Ecosystems consist of a variety of interlinked subsystems.
This paper presents a flexible approach to deﬁne the links between such sub-
systems. The idea is to exploit the paradigm of Model Centered Architecture
(MCA) and to specify all links/interfaces by means of appropriate Domain
Speciﬁc Modeling Languages. The approach has been successfully applied and
evaluated in several projects. As a proof of concept, we present the model-based
interfacing between assistive systems and human activity recognition systems,
which showed good performance as needed in real-world applications.
Keywords: Model Centered Architecture  Domain Speciﬁc Modeling
Digital ecosystem  Language hierarchies  Interfacing
1 Introduction
From a model centered perspective, any kind of information managed and/or processed
by a part of a digital ecosystem (DEC) is an instance of an explicitly speciﬁed or
implicitly underlying model. The same is true for the processes as well as for the
models themselves [6], the latter being instances of metamodels. Consequently, we
may see any DEC as a construct consisting of model handlers (consumers and/or
producers). This leads to the paradigm of “Model Centered Architecture (MCA)” [13],
independently from the nature of the handlers that may be digital or living ones.
MCA is a generalization of Model Driven Architecture (MDA) and Model Driven
Software Development (MDSD) [11], as well as models@runtime [2]. Like multilevel
modeling, MCA advocates, for any system aspect, the use of (possibly recursive)
hierarchies of Domain Speciﬁc Modeling Languages (DSML), each embedded into a
Domain Speciﬁc Modeling Method (DSMM). I.e., MCA focuses on models (and their
metamodels) in any design and development step up to the running system.
This paper deals with an important aspect of MCA, namely the model-based linking
of digital ecosystem parts. We illustrate this by an example taken from the domain of
supportive systems in Active and Assisted Living (AAL) [22]. Such systems need as
complete information as possible about a person’s activities (in the sense of sequences
of actions) and the context, in which these activities take place. Humans and so-called
Human Activity Recognition (HAR) systems may provide such information. However,
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, pp. 330–340, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_37

--- PAGE 343 ---
although the effectiveness of the latter has signiﬁcantly improved in recent years [20],
most of the accessible HAR systems are either still in project state or have a rather
restricted sphere of recognition like fall incidents, anomaly behavior detection in
crowded places, trafﬁc monitoring etc. I.e., the stand-alone use of such systems does
not meet the needs of comprehensive assistive systems.
Combining several (specialized) HAR systems, each of them covering a particular
sphere, seems to be promising, as in combination the HARs could deliver the necessary
recognition results. Such a combination requires a smooth coupling with the AAL
component to manage whatsoever any output structure and integrate new and
upcoming HAR systems. We show that the MCA paradigm provides the means for
such a flexible, scalable and transparent integration.
The paper’s organization is as follows: Sect. 2 outlines the main MCA concepts
and discusses the variety of domain speciﬁc modeling and representation languages
coming into play. Section 3 discusses the general aspects of model-based component
linking. In Sect. 4 we present the proof of concept by means of the integration of AAL
ecosystem components. Section 5 sketches related work. The paper concludes with an
outlook on future research.
2 MCA: Concepts and Language Hierarchies
MCA treats all processes as well as the data they process (MOF1
level 0) as instances of
models (MOF level 1). These models in turn are instances of metamodels (MOF level
2), described using particular DSMLs, and represented using corresponding domain
speciﬁc representation languages. Consequently, all system interfaces are deﬁned
through models as well, and the system components have the role of model handlers.
Figure 1 sketches the related MOF hierarchy (for simplicity we omit here the more
complex view when using a multilevel modeling approach). Note that in the case of
DECs there might be not only various interface metamodels but also several application
metamodels, and consequently several DSMLs.
The M2 interfaces support the management of metamodels and the integration of
external metamodels (metamodel exchange). On M1 (model level) the M2 metamodels
are instantiated for a concrete application situation. On M0 (instance level), the
application itself results from creating extensions of the M1 models.
If the application domain metamodels are comprehensive in the sense of providing
concepts for structure, dynamics and functionality, the M0 extensions form the mod-
els@runtime, which might be handled by an interpreter (orchestrated by M2, visualized
by the arrows from M2 to M0). Alternatively, a MDA tool could generate code from
the M1 models (static, dynamic and functional).
In parallel to the model hierarchy, we have to provide languages for representing
the semantic artifacts (the models) by appropriate syntactic artifacts. These represen-
tation languages again form a hierarchy of three levels: (1) Grammar deﬁnition level
(top level): contains the means of deﬁning the language grammars. In our research, we
1
Meta-Object FacilityTM
http://www.omg.org/mof/.
Domain Speciﬁc Models as System Links 331

--- PAGE 344 ---
use a speciﬁc version of EBNF, compatible with the ANTLR grammar deﬁnition
language. (2) Language deﬁnition level: deﬁnes grammars for the representation lan-
guages (RL) related to the deﬁned DSMLs: meta-metamodel RLs, metamodel RLs,
model RLs and instance/data RLs. (3) Language usage level: representations of the
models of all levels.
3 Linking Model-Centered Architectures
MCA proposes the explicit model-based deﬁnition for both, user interfaces and
interfaces between technical parts of a DEC. This means that appropriate DSMLs and
representation languages (mostly subsets of natural language in the case of user
interfaces) have to be speciﬁed.
There are three general types for linking two systems:
A: Two non-MCA systems (“black boxes”): In this case, no model deﬁnitions are
known or accessible. Therefore, we have to deﬁne (1) a DSML such that the
outputs of both systems can be described as instances of models of that DSML,
and (2) mappings between the particular models driving the conversion on M0 (if
the models are not identical).
Fig. 1. MCA model hierarchy
332 V. A. Shekhovtsov et al.

--- PAGE 345 ---
B: Black box system and MCA system: If the outputs of the former can be modeled
using the DSML of the latter, we could proceed according to A) for the black box
system and provide the appropriate model mapping.
C: Two MCA systems: In this case, we only would have to provide the model
mapping if the models are not identical.
These types also apply for the other links appearing in a digital ecosystem: E.g.,
user interfaces and device interfaces are of type B, where the users and devices are seen
as black boxes. External data and model interfaces are of type C, as in this case the
particular (data) models are expected to be accessible.
The example given in Fig. 2 sketches such links between Systems 1, 2 and 3, all
being of type C. The other links (to users and managers) are of type B, as well as the
link between System 1 and a device (robot).
Linking may materialize on all MOF levels. We distinguish from top to down:
• M2 level (metamodel link): uses the same metamodel but different models. This
implies the need of deﬁning appropriate mappings that drive the translation between
the particular representation languages. Note that linking based on different meta-
models using different DSMLs for one link might be possible, but will not be
discussed here.
• M1 level (model link): uses the same models.
• M0 level (data link): uses the same model instances (possibly represented using
different representation languages, which makes conversion necessary).
4 Example: Integrating the Components of an AAL
Ecosystem
4.1 Metamodel and Languages
We introduce a metamodel-based HAR (Human Activity Recognition) interface for
connecting arbitrary heterogeneous HAR systems in an AAL ecosystem. Such interface
has to interpret HAR systems’ outputs and deliver appropriately converted data to a
given AAL system. Moreover, it has to be adaptable to new HAR semantics in order to
be sustainable. As pointed out in the introduction, such ‘multi HAR system’ approach
might increase the recognition realm as needed by an AAL support system.
Our approach is to link a consumer MCA AAL system with several blackbox HAR
systems on M2 (type B). For that purpose, we introduce two link DSMLs that cover the
recognition outputs of at least the HAR systems known to us:
• Activity Recognition Environment Modeling Language (AREM-L, metamodel:
Fig. 3), a visual conceptual modeling language for describing recognition structures
as conceptual models; this language covers both, basic and instrumental (complex)
human activities including their context [10, 15].
• Activity Recognition Instance Speciﬁcation Language (ARIS-L), a textual language
for M0 level representations of concrete recognition objects.
Domain Speciﬁc Models as System Links 333

--- PAGE 346 ---
The main concept of the AREM-L metamodel is Recognition being an aggregate of
four sub-concepts: (1) ActionPart: contains Actions which conceptualize simple or
complex activities; (2) ThingPart: contains recognized Things, i.e. persons or con-
textual objects; Person is deﬁned as a specialization of Thing; (3) PropertyPart:
contains Properties, each having a Value of a speciﬁc Type; (4) ConnectionPart:
contains Connections between Things.
Except from the PropertyPart (containing a mandatory TimeStamp Property), the
other sub-concepts are optional, i.e., a Recognition may consist of the PropertyPart and
none, one, or more of the others.
Fig. 2. MCA ecosystem
Fig. 3. HAR interface metamodel concepts
334 V. A. Shekhovtsov et al.

--- PAGE 347 ---
Things are involved in Actions: they may (1) execute an action, e.g. a coffee
machine brews a coffee; this is reflected by the relationship ThingExecutesAction,
(2) call an action (e.g. a Person pushing the ‘brew’ button); this is reflected by the
relationship ThingCallsAction, (3) passively participate in an action (e.g., the coffee in
the brewing action); this is reflected by the relationship ThingParticipatesInAction.
Actions, Things, and Connections may have Properties. To cover complex situa-
tions, Things and Actions can hierarchically be decomposed into structures of Things
and Actions, respectively. This is reflected by the corresponding part-of relationships.
Location is a speciﬁc Property to cover the information necessary for locating Things.
Summing up, an instance of this metamodel, i.e. a model, will describe the concepts
underlying the output of a speciﬁc HAR system.
AREM-L is a visual modeling language; Fig. 4 shows its basic elements. We waive
here a complete speciﬁcation of the AREM-L syntax, as it should be intuitively
understandable based on the example model in Fig. 5a. It represents a type of obser-
vation that a HAR system in a smart home environment might make: A person who put
objects (e.g. keys) into a container (e.g. a handbag), as step in a “go to shopping”
activity.
ARIS-L serves to represent the instances of AREM-L recognition models, i.e., such
instances are models of concrete recognitions. Consequently, our goal was to allow for
machine-readable representations of recognition data, that are easy to parse and efﬁ-
cient to process. The ARIS-L syntax is inspired by JSON, but includes speciﬁc con-
structs corresponding to the elements of AREM-L. The main rule of ARIS-L is as
follows: all data belonging to a speciﬁc recognition is encapsulated inside the corre-
sponding rRecognition construct.
Figure 5b shows an ARIS-L fragment for an instance of the recognition model
depicted in Fig. 5a. The names of AREM-L model elements precede the representation
of their instances’ data. These names, in turn, can be preceded optionally by the
corresponding concept names (Action, Thing, Property, Connection). Figure 5b
illustrates these options by omitting the keyword Thing in the container section, adding
this keyword in the object section and providing the keyword Person in the “Observed
Person” section. The ConnectionPart shows, as an example, the observed connection
“in” between the things “main keys” and “red handbag”, which is instance of the model
element “in”. The links of the ThingPart components to the Action put (i.e., Partici-
patesIn, Executes) are instances of the corresponding model element links.
Again, we have to waive presenting the entire grammar.
4.2 Implementation Approach
Our AAL ecosystem consists of (1) a set of HAR systems capturing user’s activities
(through sensors or by other means), (2) the AAL consumer system providing service
to the user based on the captured activities; (3) the HAR interface between them.
According to the classiﬁcation provided in Sect. 3, all links are of type B, the HAR
systems are black boxes and the AAL system is a MCA system. The AREM-L models
are used as semantic references for the conversion of HAR output to ARIS-L in the
interface, and for parsing ARIS-L in the consumer system. On the data link level, HAR
systems’ output data is converted into ARIS-L representation.
Domain Speciﬁc Models as System Links 335

--- PAGE 348 ---
The steps for implementing the HAR interface were as follows:
• Implementing AREM-L by deploying the ADOxx meta modeling framework [7] and
for generating the AREM-L modeling tool.
• Implementing the AREM-L parser, which serves for converting AREM-L models
into the internal HAR interface representation.
• Implementing ARIS-L by deﬁning the ARIS-L grammar using the ANTLR
framework.
• Implementing the ARIS-L parser to be included into the consumer system.
• Implementing the MCA-Links (see Fig. 2). They consist of (a) a common core,
which uses the AREM-L model and the ARIS-L grammar to convert data into
ARIS-L representations to be further processed by the model handlers of the con-
sumer system, and (b) a HAR-speciﬁc (black box) plug-in converter for each HAR
Fig. 4. AREM-L visual modeling elements
Fig. 5. AREM-L (a) and ARIS-L (b) models for the sample recognition
336 V. A. Shekhovtsov et al.

--- PAGE 349 ---
to be integrated. Such converter transforms HAR output data for being processible
in the common core.
• Conﬁguring the interface. Creating AREM-L models, making components acces-
sible to each other via the network etc.
The most technically challenging and time-consuming tasks are implementing the
AREM-L and the ARIS-L parser, and the MCA-Link common core. Note, that these
components are a kind of standard in the sense that they have to be implemented only
once and may be reused for any other HAR and consumer system combination. In
contrast to that, the problem-speciﬁc tasks (e.g., creating the AREM-L model for the
given combination) are straightforward and require less technical knowledge except
from the concrete HAR setting. I.e., our approach substantially reduces the effort of
linking HAR systems.
4.3 Proof of Concept
For a proof of concept, we used an experimental lab, established in the context of a
funded research project. As at that time there was no comprehensive HAR system in
product stage available, we developed some experimental systems ourselves, namely
(1) a sensor-based system using a Nimbits2
server as a central point for sensor com-
munication, (2) a video-based HAR (V-HAR) system, which uses a technique from [9]
to generate semantic descriptions of video frames in text form, and (3) a HAR simu-
lator for providing environmental data.
As a consumer system, we used HBMS [16], an ambient assistance system sup-
porting daily life activities. The HBMS system abstracts, aggregates and integrates the
observed behavior data into an individual Human Cognitive Model (HCM) [12], and
assists the supported person via a multimodal interface by retrieving knowledge from
his/her HCM. The HBMS input consists of sequences of recognized behavioral actions:
in our setup, they are coming from the HAR interface. The “observation engine” of the
HBMS system integrates these sequences into HCM as behavioral clusters based on
reasoning algorithms that deduce the goal of a sequence of actions.
The MCA-Links to the experimental HARs were developed following the approach
described in Sect. 4.2. The resulting ecosystem has been tested against various criteria,
involving several user groups in different settings. It showed good performance
regarding both, response time and recognition accuracy, as needed in real-world
applications.
To sum up, following our approach one has to spend signiﬁcant effort only for
implementing standard components like common core and parser parts. Adding new
HAR systems causes no additional effort of this kind: only a simple converter has to be
implemented for each system. Providing AREM-L models and conﬁguring the link are
high-level activities requiring mainly domain knowledge. Generating the parsers’ core
based on the language grammar speciﬁcation by means of the ANTLR environment
brings further effort reduction. In contrast to that, following the classical approach
would require implementing a separate low-level data converter for each new HAR and
2
https://www.nimbits.com/.
Domain Speciﬁc Models as System Links 337

--- PAGE 350 ---
embedding it into the consumer system. No semantics would then be intrinsically
associated with the incoming data and the conversion process.
5 Related Work
Related Work on Model-Based System Linking. The current body of research on
model-based system linking deals with applications of model@runtime and MDA
paradigms to this problem. In particular, on-the-fly interoperability for the systems
based on the models@runtime paradigm is a topic of [1]. [3] provides a solution for
automated synthesis of mediators to support component interoperability. An aspect of
the model exchange while coupling systems is treated in [8]. An example of using
MDA for establishing system links is [5], which introduces the concept of model-
driven domain-speciﬁc middleware. The difference to our approach is that the above
techniques apply models in a limited way (e.g. only at development time for MDA)
without providing an integrated model-centered solution.
Related Work on Universal HAR Interfaces. The need of a generic interface to
handle heterogeneous data coming from HAR [4] has been discussed since long. [21]
presents a survey of ontological approaches to this problem. [17] shows a speciﬁc
example of using foundational ontologies underlying the middleware for smart homes.
Generic knowledge-based approaches are presented in [14], proposing a knowledge-
driven framework for context-aware activity recognition, and in [23], introducing an
architectural solution for cognitive sensing of activities. Some research deals with the
speciﬁc categories of inputs, e.g. [18] describes how domain and contextual knowledge
can be utilized for human activity recognition in video streams. Despite the above
research, a commonly recognized standard or language for HAR interoperability has
not been proposed to date [19] and few practical solutions exist.
6 Future Research
There is still a couple of research questions to answer and challenges to meet. For
example, a comprehensive semantic grounding of the languages and models requires an
appropriate hierarchy of ontologies. For practical purposes in situations where different
kinds of components are to be linked in a digital ecosystem, a modeling/development
framework would be advantageous, that allows for the management of several meta-
models, their instance models and languages, and provides means for an easy and
efﬁcient generation of the necessary parsers and converters. In addition to that, inte-
grating the models@runtime approach or MDA code generation would be a further step
to a comprehensive MCA development environment.
338 V. A. Shekhovtsov et al.

--- PAGE 351 ---
References
1. Bencomo, N., Bennaceur, A., Grace, P., Blair, G., Issarny, V.: The role of models@ run.
time in supporting on-the-fly interoperability. Computing 95, 167–190 (2013)
2. Bencomo, N., France, R., Cheng, B.H.C., Aßmann, U. (eds.): Models@run.time: Founda-
tions, Applications, and Roadmaps. LNCS, vol. 8378. Springer, Cham (2014). https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-319-08915-7
3. Bennaceur, A., Issarny, V.: Automated synthesis of mediators to support component
interoperability. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. 41, 221–240 (2015)
4. Chen, L., Khalil, I.: Activity recognition: approaches, practices and trends. In: Chen, L.,
Nugent, C., Biswas, J., Hoey, J. (eds.) Activity Recognition in Pervasive Intelligent
Environments, pp. 1–31. Springer, Paris (2011). https://doi.org/10.2991/978-94-91216-05-
3_1
5. Costa, F.M., Morris, K.A., Kon, F., Clarke, P.J.: Model-driven domain-speciﬁc middleware.
In: Proceedings of ICDCS 2017, pp. 1961–1971. IEEE (2017)
6. Embley, D.W., Liddle, S.W., Pastor, O.: Conceptual-model programming: a manifesto. In:
Embley, D., Thalheim, B. (eds.) Handbook of Conceptual Modeling, pp. 3–16. Springer,
Heidelberg (2011)
7. Fill, H.-G., Karagiannis, D.: On the conceptualisation of modelling methods using the
ADOxx meta modelling platform. EMISA J. 8, 4–25 (2013)
8. Götz, S., et al.: Adaptive exchange of distributed partial models@run.time for highly
dynamic systems. In: Proceedings of SEAMS 2015, pp. 64–70. IEEE Press (2015)
9. Karpathy, A., Fei-Fei, L.: Deep visual-semantic alignments for generating image descrip-
tions. In: Proceedings of IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pp. 3128–3137 (2015)
10. Kofod-Petersen, A., Cassens, J.: Using activity theory to model context awareness. In:
Roth-Berghofer, T.R., Schulz, S., Leake, D.B. (eds.) MRC 2005. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 3946,
pp. 1–17. Springer, Heidelberg (2006). https://doi.org/10.1007/11740674_1
11. Liddle, S.W.: Model-driven software development. In: Embley, D.W., Thalheim, B. (eds.)
Handbook of Conceptual Modeling, pp. 17–54. Springer, Heidelberg (2011)
12. Mayr, H.C., et al.: HCM-L: domain-speciﬁc modeling for active and assisted living. In:
Karagiannis, D., Mayr, H., Mylopoulos, J. (eds.) Domain-Speciﬁc Conceptual Modeling,
pp. 527–552. Springer, Cham (2016)
13. Mayr, H.C., et al.: Model centered architecture. In: Cabot, J., Gómez, C., Pastor, O., Sancho,
M., Teniente, E. (eds.) Conceptual Modeling Perspectives, pp. 85–104. Springer, Cham
(2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-67271-7_7
14. Meditskos, G., et al.: MetaQ. Perv. Mob. Comput. 25, 104–124 (2016)
15. Michael, J., Steinberger, C.: Context Modeling for Active Assistance. In: Proceedings of ER
Forum 2017. CEUR Workshop Proceedings 1979, CEUR-WS.org, pp. 207–220 (2017)
16. Michael, J., et al.: The HBMS Story. Enterp. Model. Inf. Syst. Arch. 13, 345–370 (2018)
17. Ni, Q., et al.: A foundational ontology-based model for human activity representation in
smart homes. J. Ambient. Intell. Smart Environ. 8, 47–61 (2016)
18. Onofri, L., et al.: A survey on using domain and contextual knowledge for human activity
recognition in video streams. Expert Syst. Appl. 63, 97–111 (2016)
19. Peláez, M.D., López-Medina, M., Espinilla, M., Medina-Quero, J.: Key factors for
innovative developments on health sensor-based system. In: Rojas, I., Ortuño, F. (eds.)
IWBBIO 2017,Part II. LNCS, vol. 10209, pp. 665–675. Springer, Cham (2017). https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-319-56154-7_59
Domain Speciﬁc Models as System Links 339

--- PAGE 352 ---
20. Ranasinghe, S., et al.: A review on applications of activity recognition systems with regard
to performance and evaluation. Int. J. Distrib. Sens. Netw. 12, 1550147716665520 (2016)
21. Rodríguez, N.D., Cuéllar, M.P., Lilius, J., Calvo-Flores, M.D.: A survey on ontologies for
human behavior recognition (CSUR). ACM Comput. Surv. 46, 43 (2014)
22. Siegel, C., Dorner, T.E.: Information technologies for active and assisted living—Influences
to the quality of life of an ageing society. Int. J. of Med. Inform. 100, 32–45 (2017)
23. Zgheib, R., et al.: A flexible architecture for cognitive sensing of activities in ambient
assisted living. In: Proceedings of WETICE 2017, pp. 284–289. IEEE (2017)
340 V. A. Shekhovtsov et al.

--- PAGE 353 ---
Correction to: An Approach Toward
the Economic Assessment of Business
Process Compliance
Stephan Kuehnel and Andrea Zasada
Correction to:
Chapter “An Approach Toward the Economic Assessment
of Business Process Compliance” in: C. Woo et al. (Eds.):
Advances in Conceptual Modeling, LNCS 11158,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_28
In the original version of this chapter, the term “vector product” was used instead of
“scalar product” in the ﬁrst paragraph of page 236. This has now been corrected.
The updated version of this chapter can be found at
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_28
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2019
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, p. C1, 2019.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2_38

--- PAGE 354 ---
Tutorials 2018

--- PAGE 355 ---
Behavior-Derived Reuse - Conceptual
Foundations and Practical Tools for Increasing
Software Reuse
Iris Reinhartz-Berger(&)
and Anna Zamansky
University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel
Abstract. Software reuse has many known beneﬁts, yet in practice variants are
created, challenging their identiﬁcation. Identiﬁcation of similar software arti-
facts can increase reuse in a number of scenarios, such as software product line
engineering, organizational knowledge sharing, and acquisitions and mergers. In
such scenarios, the similarity analysis needs to take into consideration that the
software artifacts may not have been developed by the same teams, and thus
may not be similar on the level of implementation.
The goal of this tutorial is to introduce researchers and practitioners to a novel
approach for increasing reuse, which looks beyond implementation level simi-
larities by analyzing behavioral similarity and making concrete reuse recom-
mendations based on polymorphism-inspired variability mechanisms. The
approach is supported by the VarMeR tool, which enables analysis of multiple
large-scale projects developed in Java.
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, p. 343, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2

--- PAGE 356 ---
Visual Querying on Graphs: Models
and Techniques
Sourav S. Bhowmick1(&)
and Byron Choi2
1
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore
2
Hong Kong Baptist University, Kowloon Tong, China
Abstract. Querying graph databases has emerged as an important research
problem for real-world applications that center on large graph data. Given the
complexity of graph query languages (e.g., SPARQL, Cypher), visual graph
query interfaces make it easy for non-expert users to query such graph data
repositories. In this tutorial, we survey recent developments in the emerging area
of visual graph querying paradigm that bridges traditional graph querying with
human computer interaction (HCI). We discuss models and techniques for visual
graph query formulation, query processing, and visual exploration of graph
query results. In addition, the tutorial suggests open problems and new research
directions.
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, p. 344, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2

--- PAGE 357 ---
Conceptualizing Analytics
Christoph G. Schuetz(&)
and Michael Schrefl
Johannes Kepler University (JKU) Linz, Linz, Austria
Abstract. Business intelligence and data analytics projects often involve low-
level, ad hoc data wrangling and programming, often resulting in high devel-
opment effort and low usability of analytics solutions. Conceptual modeling
allows us to move data analytics onto a higher level of abstraction, facilitating
the implementation and use of analytics solutions. This tutorial gives an over-
view of conceptual modeling methods along the (big) data analysis pipeline,
based on literature and experience from cooperative research projects with
industry. The tutorial targets practitioners involved in the planning and imple-
mentation of analytics projects as well as researchers interested in the state of the
art and open research questions of business intelligence and data analytics.
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, p. 345, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2

--- PAGE 358 ---
Abstraction in Conceptual Models,
Maps and Graphs
Carlo Batin1(&)
and John Mylopoulos2,3
1
University of Milano Bicocca, Milan, Italy
2
Universities of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
3
Universities of Trento, Trento, Canada
Abstract. Models are ubiquitous in Computer and Information Sciences as
they help us understand our physical and social environment, and also design
systems that facilitate our lives. In this tutorial, we focus on three types of
models that are heavily used in the literature: conceptual models, maps, and
graphs (for short, CMMGs). To build and make effective use of such models, we
use abstractions. An abstraction over a model m removes some detail from m, to
make it easier to understand, use, analyze and manage. In this tutorial we focus
on conceptual abstractions that are motivated by Cognitive Science and Phi-
losophy, as opposed to mathematical abstractions. (Conceptual) Abstractions
that have been extensively studied in the literature include generalization (is-a),
aggregation (part-of), classiﬁcation (instanc`e-of), manifestation (aka material-
ization), contextualization (context-of) and granularization, but also many oth-
ers. The tutorial introduces a unifying syntax and semantics for CMMGs,
deﬁnes the six abstractions mentioned above, and studies the way they have
been used for CMMGs.
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
C. Woo et al. (Eds.): ER 2018 Workshops, LNCS 11158, p. 346, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01391-2

--- PAGE 359 ---
Author Index
Back, Christoffer Olling 191
Barrios, Judith 239
Batin, Carlo 346
Bhowmick, Sourav S. 344
Caruccio, Loredana 91
Casamayor Ródenas, Juan Carlos 319
Chai, Yan-sheng 3
Chen, Jun 7
Chen, Yueguo 7, 26
Choi, Byron 344
Cristalli, Emilio 309
Danesh, Mohammad Hossein 217
Davis, Karen C. 165
de Cesare, Sergio 134
Debois, Søren 191
Ding, Xiaoou 12, 69
Dong, Zhaoan 17
Du, Xiaoyong 7, 17, 26
Duan, Pengfei 106
Eder, Johann 119
Enquist, Håkan 31
Fan, Fengfeng 22
Fan, Ju 17
Franceschetti, Marco 119
Gailly, Frederik 134
Gao, Hong 12
García Giménez, Alicia 319
Geng, Congkai 49
Giachetti, Giovanni 176
Gronier, Guillaume 149
Guo, Gaoyang 76
Han, Jianshan 44
Huang, Weitao 106
Jin, Guodong 26
Jonsson, Tomas 31
Khan, Mesbah 134
Köpke, Julius 119
Kornyshova, Elena 239
Kuehnel, Stephan 228
León Palacio, Ana 319
Li, Bo-han 3
Li, Jianzhong 12
Li, Lin 35
Li, Tong 49, 206
Li, Xingluo 59
Li, Zhanhuai 22
Li, Zhixu 39
Lian, Jie 275
Ling, Tok Wang 17
Liu, An 39
Liu, Guanfeng 39
Liu, Yang 35
Liu, Zhen Hua 285
Lu, Jiaheng 17, 285
Lukyananko, Roman 199
Ma, Huang-lei 3
Marín, Beatriz 176
Marotta, Adriana 309
Mayer, Nicolas 149
Mayr, Heinrich C. 330
McGuire, Michael 275
Miao, Sheng 275
Michael, Judith 330
Mitchell, Andrew 134
Mylopoulos, John 346
Ni, Yeming 49
Oberrauner, Anja 119
Pant, Vik 260
Parsons, Jeffrey 199
Partridge, Chris 134
Pirelli, Blagovesta 249

--- PAGE 360 ---
Polese, Giuseppe 91
Purao, Sandeep 295
Qin, Xiaolin 59
Qin, Xiongpai 26
Qodseya, Mahmoud 82
Ranasinghe, Suneth 330
Reinhartz-Berger, Iris 343
Reyes Román, José Fabián 319
Samuel, Binny M. 199
Schrefl, Michael 345
Schuetz, Christoph G. 345
Serra, Flavia 309
Serral, Estefanía 176
Shao, Mingrui 7
Shekhovtsov, Vladimir A. 330
Shi, Jiuchao 39
Slaats, Tijs 191
Su, Jiaxuan 12
Sun, Jiayi 49
Tang, Ziying 275
Tortora, Genoveffa 91
Tu, Jianhong 17
Verdonck, Michael 134
Wang, Hongzhi 12
Wang, Meihong 44
Wang, Xiaoli 44
Wang, Xu 3
Wang, Yixuan 26
Wang, Yunduo 49, 206
Wegmann, Alain 249
Wei, Xiangyu 54
Xiang, Jianwen 35
Xie, Aoran 12
Xie, Xiaojun 59
Xing, Lin-quan 3
Xiong, Shengwu 106
Xu, Heng 295
Xu, Jianqiu 54
Xu, Pengfei 285
Yu, Eric 217, 260
Zamansky, Anna 343
Zasada, Andrea 228
Zehnder, Eloïse 149
Zhang, Chao 285
Zhang, Guangxuan 295
Zhang, Haoyuan 49, 206
Zhao, Anqi 39
Zheng, Kai 39
Zhou, Yanghao 59
Zhou, Yilu 295
348 Author Index