--- PAGE 1 ---
Microservice Maturity of Organizations
Towards an assessment framework.
Jean-Philippe Gouigoux1
, Dalila Tamzalit2
, Joost Noppen3
1
Group CTO SALVIA Développement, Bât. 270, 45, Av. Victor Hugo 93300 Aubervilliers,
France
2
Université de Nantes, CNRS, LS2N, F-44000, Nantes, France
3
BT Applied Research, Adastral Park, Barrack Square, Martlesham, Ipswich IP5 3RE, UK
1jp.gouigoux@salviadeveloppement.com, 2Dalila.Tamzalit@univ-
nantes.fr, 3 johannes.noppen@bt.com
Abstract. This early work aims to allow organizations to diagnose their capacity
to properly adopt microservices through initial milestones of a Microservice Ma-
turity Model (MiMMo). The objective is to prepare the way towards a general
framework tohelp companiesandindustriestodeterminetheir microservicesma-
turity. Organizations lean more and more on distributed web applications and
Line of Business software. This is particularly relevant during the current Covid-
19 crisis, where companies are even more challenged to offer their services
online, targeting a very high level of responsiveness in the face of rapidly in-
creasing and diverse demands. For this, microservices remain the most suitable
delivery application architectural style. They allow agility not only on the tech-
nical application, as often considered, but on the enterprise architecture as a
whole, influencing the actual financial business of the company. However, mi-
croservices adoption is highly risk-prone and complex. Before they establish an
appropriate migration plan, first and foremost, companies must assess their de-
gree of readiness to adopt microservices. For this, MiMMo, a Microservices Ma-
turity Model framework assessment, is proposed to help companies assess their
readiness for the microservice architectural style, based on their actual situation.
MiMMo results from observations of and experience with about thirty organiza-
tions writing software. It conceptualizes and generalizes the progression paths
they have followed to adopt microservices appropriately. Using the model, an
organization can evaluate itself in two dimensions and five maturity levels and
thus: (i) benchmark itself on its current use of microservices; (ii) project the next
steps it needs to achieve a higher maturity level and (iii) analyze how it has
evolved and maintain a global coherence between technical and business stakes.
Keywords: Microservices, Maturity Model, assessment, Information Systems.
1 Introduction and problem statement
With an increasingly connected world and the expectation of services being available
online, organizations are increasingly faced with the challenge of delivering or use their
software in a shape that can handle demand at scale and ready for the Cloud. This is

--- PAGE 2 ---
2
much more relevant during the current crisis, where companies are even more chal-
lenged to offer their services online, targeting a very high level of responsiveness in the
face of rapidly increasing and diverse demands.
In recent years, service-oriented architectures [7, 8, 9] have emerged as the most
popular paradigm in this space, with in particular the concept of microservices [4], hy-
per-scalable small algorithms of a transactional nature, becoming one of the core build-
ing blocks to achieving these goals [10, 11]. The fine-grained nature of these micro-
services combined with their horizontal scaling properties allows companies to easily
pivot their services while at the same time supporting large workloads inherent to mod-
ern online systems [4]. Microservices are a good targeted architecture for the moderni-
zation of software systems [12, 13]. However, for all the benefits microservice-based
architecture offer, the journey for a company to migrate to this architectural style can
be challenging and perilous. In fact, legacy processes and lack of knowledge are the
main hurdles that companies face for adopting microservices [1, 2, 3]. In addition, sev-
eral authors consider that microservices are not viable for every software system, as
there are numerous trade-offs to consider [5, 6] and reasons to adopt microservices and
how may vary considerably between different organizations.
In an ideal situation, an organization that delivers its software through this paradigm
is fully aligned in both its technical and business parts. For example, from a technical
point of view the organization has a comprehensive understanding of the size of its user
base and the performance implications this has. The organization also understands
which parts of the software architecture are most affected by this scale (e.g., a payment
component in a webshop) and has isolated this to become one of the aforementioned
microservices to support the scaling demand. In addition, the organization also has
aligned its organizational structure to support this mode of development through hiring
the right talent, empowering teams for rapid feature deployment and technology use,
service-oriented earnings models, and having a fundamental understanding of the up-
and downsides of the service-oriented paradigm across the organization. In this situa-
tion an organization is best placed to take full advantage of the benefits offered by a
microservices architecture from both an economic and technical perspective while at
the same time minimizing constraints and managing risks inherent to the approach. The
organization in such situation can therefore be described as a Mature Microservice Or-
ganization.
However, the large majority of companies do not find themselves in the position
described above. Many larger organizations are still in the early stages of the migration
towards being primarily a software company and ensuring their software is of high
quality and delivered at speed. Adopting microservices is much more than simply lev-
eraging APIs as microservices, as, regrettably, many enterprises are understanding.
Technical challenges in such migration paths typically include migrating legacy sys-
tems to scalable cloud architectures, defining andimplementing software deliverypipe-
lines, reimplementing software that in its original form does not support cloud-based
deployment, etc. In addition, from an organizational perspective, the organization typ-
ically has to redefine its software development methods, upskill its staff and redefine
how it makes money from the services it offers. For example, the company might have
to shift from selling software wholesale to offering the functionality up as a service

--- PAGE 3 ---
3
with a pay-as-you-go model for monetization. An organization who finds itself on this
migration trajectory is less able to take maximum advantage of microservice-based
software development and can therefore be classified as Immature Microservice Or-
ganization.
Naturally every organization will have completed a distinct set of challenges in this
migration process, some focusing more on addressing legacy software and technical
challenges first, while others emphasize change management of the business processes
first. And while those steps do not necessarily make an organization mature, they can
already enable the organization to gain initial benefits of microservice-based develop-
ment. As such it can be argued that microservice maturity of an organization needs to
be considered from several dimensions’ points of view, like the usual business and
technical dimensions.
The paper is organized as follow: this first section introduces the context and the
problem statement. Section 2 presents MiMMo, the proposed Microservice Maturity
Model. Section 3 illustrate the results of using the MiMMo through two organizations.
Section 4 is dedicated to related works and Section 5 discuss the work and open some
future research tracks to conclude.
2 MiMMo: towards a Microservice Maturity Assessment
Framework
MiMMo proposes the initial milestones towards a general framework to help compa-
nies and industries determine their microservices maturity, one of the main challenges
for organizations. It helps to determine at what stage of maturity they are before con-
sidering to build an appropriate strategy to adopt properly microservices with a sub-
stantial Return Over Investment.
2.1 General presentation
MiMMo proposes to consider two main dimensions of importance for companies: the
organizational dimension, that supports the business strategy, and the technical dimen-
sion. In order to assess the degree of maturity, each dimension is declined in different
levels of maturity. The maturity assessment obtained will represent a good starting
point for organizations to evaluate the necessary effort to adopt microservices and if it
is worth doing it. The strategy of adoption microservices can be thus built appropriately
to the context of each organization.
The proposed MiMMo framework has been derived from authors’ experience, mainly
based on 6-years field observations of about thirty organizations, each having between
40 and 8000 users (Table 11
). By working with and advising these organizations, one
of the industrial authors has observed the journeys of these organizations on their tra-
jectory towards using microservices. By comparing journeys, identifying recurring
1
Names of companies are not given for aims of confidentiality but their type is specified.

--- PAGE 4 ---
4
patterns and successful actions taken, the authors have compiled their observations into
a generalized framework that can be used by organizations to assess their microservices
maturity and readiness to take this paradigm to the next level. This maturity assessment
framework therefore is a heuristic advice mechanism that captures observed industry
best practices. This paper presents the first steps.
2.2 Followed Methodology
ThederivationoftheMicroserviceMaturityModel(MiMMo) cameintwomain stages:
observations and elaboration:
2.2.1 Observations
This observations stage lasted from 2014 to 2019. It represents the period where one
of the authors was working with and advising around thirty organizations. These stud-
ied organizations include public agencies, like ministries, regional and departmental
councils mainly in France, as well as some large cities and some mid-sized private en-
terprises.
Phase 1 – Implicit observations (2014-2018): from 2014 to 2016, only public or-
ganizations have been addressed with projects of Information System alignment around
a modular software suite. The evolution in time of maturity did not clearly appear as
closely related with the technical aspect of Service Oriented Architecture, since the
domains were so close (almost the same) and the organizations have the same public
status. It was only logical that they behave and evolve the same way. In 2017, the ap-
proach of what started to get called a microservice architecture became a significant
advantage for the organizations addressed and the board of the company decided to
create a dedicated Business Unit to approach other categories of customers. New cate-
gories of companies started to be advised in 2018. The 20 companies concerned by this
first phase are presented in Table 1 – Left side.
Phase 2 – Explicit observations (2018-2019): the same step in evolution of the ar-
chitecture appeared among the different customers. And although the method to help
them changed radically from one to the other (in terms of length and mission content,
but also in actors), the experience of the first phase helped to clearly identify a pattern
of evolution. All companies that were accompanied, were they small (40 users) or big
(8000 users), were they using one technology or another, were they operating on one
business domain or some that were completely different, went through steps in their
Information System evolution towards Service Orientation that were basically similar
to each other, and also to the steps observed in the first phase. The 9 companies con-
cerned by this second phase are presented in Table 1 – Right side.
2.2.2 Elaboration
Afterwards, in2019,thesameexperiencewas shared between theauthors, comingfrom
different backgrounds, and since the evolution of maturity towards microservices

--- PAGE 5 ---
5
architecture seemed to have common features whatever the context, the idea of an as-
sessment model was devised among the authors. In 2020, based on their respective ex-
pertise, the authors analyzed notes, observations, and extrapolated and generalized ob-
served best practices of successful transformational journeys. As a general methodol-
ogy for derivation of MiMMo, a comparative analysis was performed of the experi-
ences and best practices observed in the organizations by the authors. In particular
shared successful behavior was identified, such as the application of enabling technol-
ogies and the restructuring of the organization with respect to new challenges in licens-
ing. The identified patterns in turn were ordered chronologically based on observed
change management to understand their logical progression. Finally, 5 stages were
identified based on observable evolution steps inside organizations. The key thoughts
are formalized within the MiMMo framework in terms of levels and dimension of ma-
turity, detailed in Section 3.
Table 1. 29 Organizations observed during 6 years.
20 Observed organizations (2014-2018) 9 Observed organizations (2018-
2019)
As this was a retrospective rather than an in-situ exercise, and therefore no system-
atic data collection and analysis could be performed, MiMMo was decided to be a heu-
ristic assessment framework representative of observed industry experience, as a first
step for a further research objective to form the foundation for a formalized maturity
model.
3 Levels and Dimensions of the MiMMo Framework
The proposed Microservice Maturity Model (MiMMo) aims to capture the maturity of
organizations for software delivery using microservices by identifying five distinct lev-
els of maturity applied on two dimensions.

--- PAGE 6 ---
6
3.1 Maturity Levels
The authors identified 5 levels per dimension, totally based on observations from the
field starting at level 1 (least mature) and up to level 5 (most mature). Each of these
levels consists of a set of attributes and behaviors that can be observed in an organiza-
tion that puts them at this level of maturity:
• Level 1: Theory Understood but not Applied: at this stage, the organization has
received training and / or has gained a basic understanding of the microservices
approach, but no effort has been taken in applying it. No projects have been de-
fined to serve as a first application and no business plans have been put in place
for the new methods of software delivery. The knowledge of microservices at this
point is purely theoretical.
• Level 2: Unskilled Application of Principles: This second level starts when the
first initiatives are taken to apply the new knowledge on microservices. Applica-
tion projects start and the first microservices are created without a complete grasp
of the implication of granularity nor the organizational implications. Generally,
the first technical realizations are being delivered but the organization is not in a
position to take advantage of the opportunities offered from a technical and busi-
ness perspective.
• Level 3: Microservices by the Book: This is the level that should in theory be
usedassoonas theprojectstartsandtheteam leaves level1, butboththetechnical
application and embedding in the organization and business model of micro-
services requires understanding them in the specific context of the organization.
After acquiring this additional contextual knowledge at level 3 the organization
is now capable of applying microservices by the book. Technically the software
produced is sound and the organization has realigned its business model to take
advantage of the new mode of software development and productization. At this
level the organization can also be observed correcting some of the mistakes made
at level 2, such as re-architecting software systems and redefining business roles.
• Level 4: Expertise: This level 4 corresponds to a level of maturity where the
external principles recommendations have been digested by the team and are rou-
tinely used. Best practices are shared and teams not only follow them but under-
stand what they stand for and what will be the risk of not following them. In some
cases, adaptations are made to the best practices, but this is done with full con-
sciousness of its impact to the software and the organization itself.
• Level 5: Application Beyond Best Practice: The highest level of maturity is
considered reached when the principles of level 4 are constantly applied (not only
a few best practices, but a major part of the state of the art on the domain) and the
organization starts new best practices or advanced experimentation on its own.
Generally, this level will be achieved on a few domains only where the organiza-
tion has gained complete expertise and can now explore disruptive approaches to
push the microservices benefits further.

--- PAGE 7 ---
7
3.2 Maturity Dimensions
The levels of maturity defined in the previous section can serve as a framework for
organizations to assess how far along they are in the journey towards a full micro-
service-oriented organization. By determining their own behavior against the core ele-
ments described above, these organizations can determine their next steps to further
their maturity. However, maturity with respect to microservices covers many different
aspects of an organization. In addition to purely the technical challenges there are also
organizational challenges, such as management buy-in and licensing models, and sus-
tainability considerations, such as environmental and social sustainability concerns and
implications for employees. To accommodate these specialized dimensions of maturity
in this section, authors explore the most prominent maturity dimensions, i.e., technical
and organizational maturity, and illustrate how the aforementioned maturity levels
translate to these specific domains.
3.3 Technical Maturity Dimension
Most of the microservices adoption stories start from a grassroot experimentation from
the developers and technical experts and, though many managers now know that the
technical bits are not worth much when they are not accompanied with the right gov-
ernance, there is an old craftsmanship reflex in IT that focuses attention for the infor-
mation system on its technical implementation, since this is the easier part to observe
changes on.
The global overview of the maturity-level applied on the technical dimension is
given in Fig. 1. while Table 2 gives examples and is an illustration of the maturity
levels in the technical dimensions. It lists typical behaviors and practices observed de-
pending on the level of maturity of the company on its technical path to microservices
use. The correspondence between Fig. 1. and the correspondence matrix Table 2 is
made with corresponding letters (A), (B)…. When there is no letter, that means that the
observation is generic.
Even if some manifestation from one level can be observed at the same time as some
from another level, it is rare that a company has a high level of maturity on one axis
and a low one on another. In the end, the global technical maturity of the observed
entity is an average of the possible behaviors listed below.

--- PAGE 8 ---
8
Fig. 1. Maturity-level correspondence matrix for the Technical Dimension.
Table 2. Maturity-level Correspondence Matrix Illustration for the Technical Dimension.
Maturity levels Technical Observations
Theory Understood
but not Applied
• A few APIs have been coded but do not respect the REST best practices
(there is a dedicated maturity model for RESTful APIs, developed by Leon-
ard Richardson)
• (A) Integration between them or between them and the legacy systems is
pure point to point, without any interfaces
• (B) The services deal with security in exactly the same way as the legacy
system, without any contextual adaptation
• (C) First step of decoupling appears in the system, but this is mainly done at
the cost of performance, since separation of responsibility is not compen-
sated by adequate actions and the result is thus slower than the old monolith
• (D) These first tests are deployed with dedicated tools, or with Docker used
in its simplest way, managing containers one by one
• (E) Thefeatures aredeveloped using the sametools asforthe legacy systems
Unskilled Approach
• Actual REST API are created and an external contract is created
• (A) A middleware is used to handle integration and calls between APIs,
sometimes using publish and subscribe and sometimes direct calls
• (B) A unified authentication method is dedicated to microservices
• (C) Cache is added to restore performance of the whole, by choosing bottle-
necks to correct
• (D) First orchestration approaches are attempted with Docker Swarm or
other low-level techniques
• (E) Thoughthe tools arenot adapted to microservices, developers are trained
to their specificities with respect to legacy code

--- PAGE 9 ---
9
Microservices
by the Book • APIs are created using the contract-first approach, and the definition of the
API is handled by functional experts and not technical people anymore
• (A) A service discovery system is put in place
• (B) Authentication is standardized and uses a token-based approach to avoid
performance impact of a central connected authentication service use
• (C) The performance of the services is monitored and dealt dynamically on
each of them, while taking into account their functional dependencies upon
each other’s service level
• (D) Kubernetes or other high-level orchestration systems are put in place
• (E) Training has been achieved and developers start elaborate best practices
on APIs and microservices.
Expertise
• (A) All services are contracted and exposed in a central directory based on
the orchestration system
• (B) Federated security and external identity providers are routinely used for
the microservices security
• (C) Performance is measured and adjusted continuously, depending on Ser-
vice Level Agreement, current load and financial cost of the resources
• (D) The orchestrator is externalized or even hybrid, managing several cloud
systems
• (E) Services are developed in the best platform for each usage, using the
promise of the best tool for each service
Beyond Commonly
Accepted Best Practices
• The whole company functions (not only the applications) is exposed in an
API platform
• (A) Non-technical users are enabled to create value-added integration by
plugging APIs together using dedicated middleware or low code platforms
• (B) Authentication, identification, authorization are completely isolated re-
sponsibilities
• (C) Resource use is balanced with performance for optimal usage depending
on the business constraints solely
• (D) A multiple cloud system is used and the location of containers is fully
hybrid,depending on cost and proximity to the sourceor the consumerof the
service
• (E) Implementation of some low-level services are generated without any
developer intervention
3.3.1 Organizational Maturity Dimension.
As said previously, when considering microservice maturity it can be tempting to
focus primarily on technical aspects, such as understanding of engineering principles
and deployment. However, a second major component in the successful application of
microservices is to have an organizational structure that is able to maximize the busi-
nesspotential of thebenefitsmicroservices have tooffer. This not only includes provid-
ing development teams with access to relevant knowledge and technology, but also
realignment of for example how software products are sold and which unique selling
points these software products will have. The shift to microservices can lead to a rea-
lignment in target markets and even bring the company in competition with organiza-
tions it did not have to consider before. The global overview of the maturity-level ap-
plied on the organizational dimension is given in Fig. 2. is illustrated with Table 3.

--- PAGE 10 ---
10
Fig. 2. Maturity-level correspondence matrix for the Organizational Dimension.
It is thus an illustration of the maturity levels for the organizational dimensions. It iden-
tifies behavior and attributes that can be observed in an organization at the correspond-
ing level of maturity and will help the organization identify which steps need to be
taken to drive the maturation process forward from an organizational perspective.
Table 3. Maturity-level Correspondence Matrix Illustration for the Organizational Dimension.
Ma-
turity
levels
Organizational Observations
Theory Under-
stood but not
Applied
• The concept of microservices is understood uniformly across the organization
• Benefits and downsides can be discussed from a technical and business perspective
without entrenched positions
• Implications for products offered and target market understood
• Implications for employees understood in terms of training and role definitions
• No decisions have been made and actions taken to initiate the creation and use of
microservices in the organization
Unskilled Approach
• The organization has invested into creating their first microservices
• A small number of teams have gone through training and have been provided with
tools and infrastructure
• Microservice versions of a small number of products are developed in parallel with
existing software
• Market research is being done to determine how to monetize the new software prod-
ucts
• Information streams from technical teams to management to inform of product attrib-
utes, which needs to be translated to organizational change
• Initial disillusionment due to lack of expertise and early mistakes
• Recruitment of talent difficult due to a lack of understanding of what skillset is re-
quired

--- PAGE 11 ---
11
Microservices by the Book • Having learned from the previous stage, technical and organizational blockers have
been removed
• Relevant contracts for supporting developments have been agreed (e.g., cloud pro-
viders)
• Information streambetween technical teamsand management, with business require-
ments influencing development and technical knowledge influencing planning and
feature strategy
• Talent recruitmentis easier as abetterappreciation of job expectations isputin place.
• Software licensing has shifted towards selling software as a service rather than a
product
• Management has redefined its business model and future planning to center around
microservices.
Expertise
• Substantial earnings and revenue of the organization is generated by microservice-
based software
• Organization is comfortable expanding feature sets and moving into new markets,
trusting their software to cope
• Development teams have been empowered to develop and restructure software sys-
tems based on technical considerations
• Theorganization exploresand experiments with product and product featuresin rapid
fashion, with minimal impact on workload and management
• New markets are now fully available to the organization and competition with tech-
nically capable competitors is possible on a consistent basis.
Application Beyond Best Practice
• The majority of software products offered by the company are now centered around
microservice architectures
• Understanding of microservice benefits and limitations from a technical perspective
and business implications permeate the entire organization
• Measures have been put in place to isolate the organization from vendor lock-in chal-
lenges
• Tooling support is explored and encouraged to ease development beyond core soft-
ware teams and upskill relevant parts of the organization
• Active participation in microservices community is encouraged with employees be-
ing allowed to make in-house tools publicly available and attend and present at tech
conferences
• Experimentation and sandboxing are supported and expected to be regular practice to
ensure staying ahead of the curve
• Activeknowledge sharing across the organization with acommon senseofpride with
respect to the level that has been reached
• Organizational imagehaschanged towardsbeing ahigh-tech company with customer
trust in software offerings
• Able to compete with the best in the business and a business model that aims to
achieve this
• Old software products (almost) completely phased out and maintenance no longer
invested in
As a result, the proposed model not only highlights the current maturity level but
also a path to new attributes and behaviors that will make the organization as a whole
better suited to microservice-based software delivery. It is good to note that these at-
tributes and observations do not always apply uniformly and are not considered to be
complete. However, they do highlight elements that have been observed in practice
within companies with various levels of organizational maturity.

--- PAGE 12 ---
12
4 Illustration on two organizations
Out of 29 customers of one of the authors, two organizations illustrating very differ-
ent trajectories in the maturity model have been chosen. The first one (for confidential-
ity reasons, let’s call it company A) is a mid-sized established vertical software editor,
with a strong technical culture. It is locally recognized as a pioneer in Service Oriented
Architecture. The change to microservices was grassroot: the architects and technical
leaders started the implementation as a full-blown replacement of the old monolithic
architecture, while the financial and operational impacts were largely ignored. The ma-
turity level on most of the technical axes is high and has reached target in most of them,
while only some of the organizational axes have moved and some of them remain ex-
tremely low (Table 4) and radar diagram (Fig. 3). The use of the maturity model has
helped in raising managers attention and internal as well as external training has been
focused on functional- and commercial-oriented workforce. A remaining lack in inte-
gration and earning model still hurts financial return on the technical investment. Com-
pany A has been chosen because it represents, at its paramount level, the maturity path
of a fair share of companies that have been observed by the authors. The corresponding
maturity radar diagrams are established in Fig. 3.
The second one (for confidentiality reasons, let’s call it company B) is a slightly
larger but still middle-sized company that operates in retail services, also on a national
scale. Though it does not belong to the software market, it could almost be considered
as digital native, since most of its organization has been thought from the beginning
around its information system. Company B has progressively come to a microservices
approach, due to the same problems as company A, namely the increasingly problem-
atic rate of evolution due to its monolithic information system. The main difference
between the two companies, which are by other means quite comparable, is that com-
pany B has a financial approach to its software systems, and has prolonged the use of
the legacy system until the risks indicators made it needed to think of a replacement.
This replacement activity has been carefully thought of, based on a benchmark using
the proposed maturity model in its technical dimension and evolution plan where costs,
benefits and risks are modeled and adjusted along a three-year planning.
Table 4. Microservice Maturity As-
sessment of Company A. Fig. 3. Maturity radar diagram of Company A.
Though the objectives are high, the rate of evolution is more than satisfying. The
drive on this plan, backedupby the managers, direction and even financial stakeholders

--- PAGE 13 ---
13
is identified as the main reason for the high rate of transformation. Company B’s ma-
turity is stated through its assessment (Table 5).
Table 5. Microservice Maturity
Assessment of Company B
Fig. 4. Maturity radar diagram of Company B
Company B’s maturity radar diagrams are represented above (Fig. 4.). It should be
noted that these diagrams cannot be used to compare the rate of maturity change, but
only the state of maturity itself, since the time between the last evaluation against the
maturity model and the current evaluation that represents the achieved maturity is not
the same for the two companies (more than two years for company A and less than a
year for company B, which has started its microservices journey several years later but
evolves much faster, certainly due to the fact that much more return of experience is
now available).
5 Related Work
Maturity is a measurementof the abilityof anorganization for continuous improvement
in a particular discipline [18]. Even if there is no consensus nor theoretical foundations
on how to build them [19], there are multiple approaches for both researchers and prac-
titioners to develop maturity models and a wide range of maturity assessment models
have been developed as well by practitioners and academics over the past years. Al-
most each field (Analytics, Change Management, Continuous Delivery, Enterprise Ar-
chitecture, Information Technology, Business Process Management…) has its proper
maturity models. There are also universal maturity models like the most know of ma-
turity models, Capability Maturity Model Integration (CMMI) [20]. The main idea of a
maturity model is to briefly describe the typical behavior (activities) exhibited by an
organization at a number of levels of maturity [21]. For each activity, it provides a
description of the activity as it might be performed at each defined maturity level. Ma-
turity models are designed to assess the maturity of a selected domain [22] andprovides
guidelines how to reach the next, higher maturity level [21]. All maturity models serve
as informed approach for continuous improvement [20, 21] or as means of self or third-
party assessment [25, 21]. MiMMo falls under the second category. It has been pro-
posed to assess the current state and the desired future state of maturity of organizations
regarding microservices. This paper proposes the initial milestones towards a general
framework, with the objective to serve as a foundation for future research into a fully
formalized maturity model, by involving as well academics and practitioners.

--- PAGE 14 ---
14
Even if there are reference architectures available in the service-oriented field, like
the Open Group SOA Reference Architecture2
, there is no standard or reference archi-
tecture for micro-services. There are some beginning works, like the microservices ca-
pability model and a maturity model proposed in the book [26]. As for MiMMo, it is
based on experience in industry. The capability model is divided in four areas: Core
Capabilities (for components of a MS), Supporting Capabilities (not directly linked to
MSs but to necessary for their development), Process & Governance Capabilities (tools
andguidelines aboutMSs implementations) andInfrastructure Capabilities (fordeploy-
ment and management of MSs). A maturity model presents 4 levels of maturity on 5
layers (application, database, infrastructure, monitoring and processes). It is interesting
on the technical side but no organizational dimension is considered. In addition, no
opening is considered to embody other dimensions.
From the academicview, regarding the microservice domain,several research works
start to give some good pointers to the use of microservices and research trends. Among
the most cited papers, Pahl & al. [15] proposed a mapping study and a characterization
method but from the perspective of continuous development context, cloud and con-
tainer technology but there is no organizational consideration. Jaramillo & al. [16] ad-
dress leveraging microservices architecture via Docker technology. The book of Na-
dareishvili & al [17] addresses principles and practices of microservice architecture.
These works are just an excerpt of numerous research contributions on the topic. How-
ever, the authors found only one contribution dedicated to the assessment of Micro-
services Maturity Models. Behara & al. [14] propose a Microservices Maturity Model.
The paper outlines the problem of considering microservices by companies only from
the technical dimension. They consider different assessment parameters (architecture,
functional decomposition, codebase, data…) and, as for our MiMMo framework, dif-
ferent levels of maturity. They propose an assessment methodology but it is completely
tied to the parameters they considered, making this methodology not applicable for any
specific situation. According to the lack of research works on the topic and the im-
portant need of companies to assess their microservices maturity before considering
their adoption and how, the authors considers that this field is in emergence. They thus
proposed the first steps of MiMMo, that can continue to mature by leaning of all exist-
ing initiatives.
6 Discussions and Conclusion
6.1 Discussion
The MiMMo proposed in this paper aims to provide a framework and guidance for
organizations who are keen to embark on and improve their use of microservices as the
foundation for their software development. As MiMMo is a generalization of observed
best-practice in industry across a large number of organizations, it will have general
2
http://www.opengroup.org/soa/source-book/soa_refarch/index.htm

--- PAGE 15 ---
15
applicability. However, there are a number of challenges and discussion points that
need to be considered.
Generalizability across Domains and Organizations: while MiMMo is grounded in
real-world observations of best practice in industry, it can be argued that further work
is needed to establish its applicability across a wider range of domains. Depending on
the starting point and knowledge inherent to the organization as well as the core busi-
ness domain, refinement or adjustment of the model is required for aspects it currently
does not consider. For example, it is highly likely that the organizations studied have
gone through knowledge acquisition, training and experimentation even before making
organizational changes. The current study does not consider such influences, making it
a heuristic advice framework at this point rather than a full-fledged model. To ascertain
completeness and to identify such refinement a more in-depth analysis and systematic
evaluation of MiMMo is required. Another research track is to lean and to sustain the
building of the model with the theory of design science.
Longevity and Technology Progress: a second consideration is the applicability of
MiMMo in the long-term. Microservices are currently gaining in popularity, but their
technology and management is rapidly changing and improving. In particular, the cre-
ation and management of microservices and serverless functions has been considerably
streamlined over the last few years, which in turn will lower the bar for adoption of the
technology. However, designing and architecting a software system and company in-
frastructure that is capable of taking advantage of this capability will remain as hard as
before. It is likely that MiMMo will require continual updating with current best prac-
tices and deeper understanding of technical and business challenges to remain relevant.
Further analysis of this is needed over a longer period of time to ensure the framework
is up to date and has extension mechanisms that can cover these evolutions.
6.2 Conclusions
The main hurdles companies face for adopting microservices is lack of knowledge of
how to adopt, in an appropriate way and according to their context, the microservice
architectural style [1, 2, 3]. In this paper the authors proposed a Microservice Maturity
Model (MiMMo) to help organizations to assess their degree of maturity in order to
adopt the microservice architectural style by leaning before all on their situation, weak-
ness and strengths. The proposed MiMMo represents the first milestones of an assess-
ment framework upon which an organization can: (i) benchmark itself on its current
use of microservices; (ii) project the next steps it needs to make in order to achieve a
higher microservices maturity level and (iii) analyze how it has evolved and which area
needs improvement to maintain global coherence between technical and business
stakes.
The proposed MiMMo has been defined on the two most important dimensions of an
organization: the technical and the organizational dimensions. Each of them has been
declined in 5 levels of maturity in a correspondence matrix (Fig. 1 and Fig. 2). Each of
this matrix has been illustrated on encountered situations (Table 2 and Table 3).

--- PAGE 16 ---
16
However, depending on the type of organization (for-profit, foundation, open-source,
etc.) as well as the domain in which they are active, not only the technical and organi-
zational dimensions can be refined, but likely additional dimensions can be identified
and detailed as well the levels of maturity.
This paper presents the first steps, with the objective to serve as a foundation for future
research into a fully formalized maturity model, by involving as well academics and
organizations. For this, MiMMo is intended to be extensible by design, with the levels
of maturity as a general categorization that is relevant and relatable across all dimen-
sions. Adding a new dimension needs to establish the maturity-level correspondence
matrix of the new dimension (for instance Sustainability dimension) by making the
projection of the MiMMo level on the considered dimension, like in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2
for the Technical and Organizational dimensions. This creates the flexibility to define
new and refined dimensions for specific domains and types of organizations in parallel
to the dimensions already addressed in this article.
The overall maturity of an organization can then be interpreted as a combination of the
score in each individual dimension, which can be represented for example as a score
card or a spider chat. The authors did not propose a detailed methodology on how to
assess the maturity of an organization with MiMMo. Proposing a methodology is not
viable since there are so many numerous trade-offs to consider. Reasons to adopt mi-
croservices and how may vary considerably between different organizations [5, 6]. It
completely depends on the organizations, their context and the adopted business strat-
egy. The authors’ position is to propose the MiMMo and explain its use through the
case of two organizations and then let each organization find its proper barycenter of
maturity. This is completely tied to the business strategy. Moreover, MiMMo is pro-
posed basedonauthorsexperience.Itneedstobeimproved inthefuturewith interviews
of industry experts to help practitioners develop their assessment capabilities, tied with
the objective to facilitate academic contributions, ideally around a formal framework.
7 References
1. Beyond agile: is it time to adopt microsevices (2017),
https://info.leanix.net/hubfs/leanIX_Microservices-Study.pdf
2. Balalaie, A., Heydarnoori, A., & Jamshidi, P. (2016). Microservices architecture enables
devops: Migration to a cloud-native architecture. Ieee Software, 33(3), 42-52.
3. Knoche, H., & Hasselbring, W. (2019). Drivers and barriers for microservice adoption-a
survey among professionals in germany. Enterprise Modelling and Information Systems Ar-
chitectures (EMISAJ)-International Journal of Conceptual Modeling, 14(1), 1-35.
4. L J., Fowler M. (2014) Microservices http://martinfowler.com/articles/microservices.html
5. Killalea, T. (2016). The hidden dividends of microservices. Communications of the ACM,
59(8), 42-45.
6. Singleton, A. (2016). The economics of microservices. IEEE Cloud Computing, 3(5),16-20.
7. Erl, T. (1900). Service-oriented architecture. Pearson Education Incorporated.
8. Krafzig, D., Banke, K., & Slama, D. (2005). Enterprise SOA: service-oriented architecture
best practices. Prentice Hall Professional.
9. MacKenzie, C. M., Laskey, K., McCabe, F., Brown, P. F., Metz, R., & Hamilton, B. A.
(2006). Reference model for service oriented architecture 1.0. OASIS standard, 12(S 18).

--- PAGE 17 ---
17
10. Hasselbring, W. (2016, March). Microservices for scalability: keynote talk abstract. In Pro-
ceedings of the 7th ACM/SPEC on International Conference on Performance Engineering
(pp. 133-134).
11. Hasselbring, W., & Steinacker, G. (2017, April). Microservice architectures for scalability,
agility and reliability in e-commerce. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Software
Architecture Workshops (ICSAW) (pp. 243-246). IEEE.
12. Newman, S. (2015). Building microservices: designing fine-grained systems." O'Reilly.
13. Wolff, E.(2016).Microservices: flexible software architecture. Addison-Wesley Profes-
sional.
14. Behara, G. K., & Khandrika, T. (2017). Microservices Maturity Model. International Jour-
nal of Engineering and Computer Science, 6(11), 22861-22864.
15. Pahl & Jamshidi (2016). Microservices: A Systematic Mapping Study. CLOSER (137-146).
16. Jaramillo, Nguyen, Smart, R. (2016, March). Leveraging microservices architecture by us-
ing Docker technology. In SoutheastCon 2016 (pp. 1-5). IEEE.
17. Nadareishvili, I., Mitra, R., McLarty, M., & Amundsen, M. (2016). Microservice architec-
ture: aligning principles, practices, and culture. " O'Reilly Media, Inc.".
18. Aceituno, Vicente. "Open Information Security Maturity Model". Retrieved 18 March 2021.
19. Mettler, T. (2011). Maturity assessment models: a design science research approach. Inter-
national Journal of Society Systems Science, 3(1-2), 81-98.
20. SEI - Team, C. P. (2006). CMMI for Development, version 1.2. Software Engineering In-
stitute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
21. Fraser, P., Moultrie, J., & Gregory, M. (2002, August). The use of maturity models/grids as
a tool in assessing product development capability. In IEEE international engineering man-
agement conference (Vol. 1, pp. 244-249). IEEE.
22. De Bruin, T., Rosemann, M., Freeze, R., & Kaulkarni, U. (2005). Understanding the main
phases of developing a maturity assessment model. In Australasian Conference on Infor-
mation Systems (ACIS): (pp. 8-19). Australasian Chapterof the Association for Information
Systems.
23. Paulk, M. C., Curtis, B., Chrissis, M. B., & Weber, C. V. (1993). Capability maturity model,
version 1.1. IEEE software, 10(4), 18-27.
24. Ahern, D. M., Clouse, A., & Turner, R. (2004). CMMI distilled: a practical introduction to
integrated process improvement. Addison-Wesley Professional.
25. Hakes, C. (1995). The corporate self assessment handbook: for measuring business excel-
lence. Chapman & Hall.
26. Rajesh, R. V. (2017). Spring 5.0 Microservices. Packt Publishing Ltd.