--- PAGE 1 ---
How EAInformation Drives Digital
Transformation:AMultiple Case Study and
Framework
Frank Grave
Department of Information Science
Open University
Heerlen, The Netherlands
frank.grave@ou.nl
Rogier van de Wetering
Department of Information Science
Open University
Heerlen, The Netherlands
rogier.vandewetering@ou.nl
Rob Kusters
Department of Information Science
Open University
Heerlen, The Netherlands
rob.kusters@ou.nl
Abstract—The ability to systematically anticipate changes in
an increasingly complex environment has been referred to as
dynamic capability. Therefore, dynamic capabilities contribute
to successful digital transformations. Firms use information
about the configuration of people, processes, and information
technology—also known as an enterprise architecture (EA)—to
enable digital transformation strategies. However, it is unclear
what EA information drives digital transformations from a
dynamic capabilities perspective. Hence, we performed a
multiple case study to identify the EA-information that drives
the dynamic capability for digital transformations. 22
interviews, and the 36 documents we analyzed, were used to
establish information inputs and outputs for an EA-driven
dynamic capability. This study extends previous research on
EA-driven dynamic capabilities with a framework of EA
information driving the dynamic capability for digital
transformations. Furthermore, decision-makers and enterprise
architects of organizations can use our results to organize the
information needed for an EA-driven dynamic capability.
Keywords— Enterprise Architecture, Digital Transformation,
Dynamic Capabilities, EA-driven Dynamic Capabilities, Digital
Transformation Strategy, Information Framework
I. INTRODUCTION
Firms struggle to cope with the integration and
exploitation of new digital technologies in the face of an
increasingly complex environment. Top management must
formulate and implement a digital transformation strategy
(DTS) to embrace these challenges [1], [2]. The enterprise
architecture management (EAM) function provides an
elaboration of the DTS to understand, plan, develop and
control the configuration of the enterprise architecture (EA)
[3], [4]. Moreover, the EA, being the organizing logic of an
enterprise’s processes, data, information systems (IS), and
information technology (IT), is documented in EA artifacts
[5],[6].EAartifactsdocumentthecurrentanddesirablefuture
states of an organization’s EA and lay down a roadmap
containing a plan to get from the current to the future state EA
[7], [8]. Thus, EA artifacts, specifically the information
contained in these artifacts, document key socio-technical
insights for a DTS [9].
The ability to systematically anticipate changes following
the integration and exploitation of new digital technologies in
an increasingly complex environment has been referred to as
dynamiccapability[10],[11].Teeceetal.[11]definedynamic
capabilities as “the firm’s ability to integrate, build, and
reconfigure internal and external competencies to address
rapidly changingenvironments” (p.516).Teece[12] adds that
dynamic capabilities can be broken down into the capacity to
continuously sense and shape opportunities and threats, seize
opportunities, and maintain competitiveness through
enhancing, combining, protecting, and, when necessary,
reconfiguring the firm’s intangible and tangible assets. Hence,
firms realize digital transformations by exploiting their
dynamic capabilities. These dynamic capabilities actively
contribute to sensing digital transformation opportunities,
mobilizing resources in line with the DTS objectives, and
realizing the actual transformation. Specifically, EA drives
digitaltransformationsbecausedigitaltransformationsrequire
a reconfiguration of a combination of processes, data, IS, and
IT [8]. Therefore, in line with Van de Wetering et al. [8], we
argue that EA information drives DTS decision-making.
However, until today, EA studies do not clearly explain
the relationship between the sensing, mobilizing, and
transforming capabilities for digital transformations and the
EA information that drives these capabilities. Therefore, the
present work wants to gain insight into this gap by studying
the research questions: “What EA information drives the
sensing, mobilizing, and transforming capabilities for digital
transformations?”
In order to accumulate knowledge on dynamic
capabilities, this paper builds on previous research on EA-
driven dynamic capabilities for digital transformations and
deepens our understanding of these capabilities in the context
of a real-life setting [10], [13]. Van de Wetering [14] has
conceptualized and defined EA-driven capabilities based on
the dynamic capabilities view. Furthermore, his study showed
that “when firms developed higher levels of EA-driven
dynamic capabilities, they are better equipped to enhance
theiroperationalcapabilities”[14].Moreover,Graveetal.[6]
extend his research by focusing specifically on EA-driven
artifacts facilitating the strategic planning process of digital
transformations. Their systematic literature review and
multiple case study identified EA-driven artifacts for each of
the EA-driven dynamic capabilities.
Additionally, Grave et al. [6] have conceptualized a
strategic planning process for digital transformations founded
onthedynamiccapabilitytheory.Furthermore,theypresented
a theoretical perspective and empirical exploration of the
facilitating role of EA-driven artifacts in that process. Our
research expands these foundations by exploring the EA-
driven information of the strategy planning process for digital
transformations from a dynamic capabilities perspective. We
do so independent of the artifact the information is
documented in to disconnect form from content. By using an
exploratory multiple case study, this research clarifies our
understanding of EA information that drives a dynamic
capability for digital transformations. Besides, our approach
offers both academic and managerial contributions.
176
2022 IEEE 24th Conference on Business Informatics (CBI)
2378-1971/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CBI54897.2022.00026
2022 IEEE 24th Conference on Business Informatics (CBI) | 978-1-6654-6016-3/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/CBI54897.2022.00026
Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 09:56:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 2 ---
This paper is organized as follows. First, we review the
core theories relevant to this study and synthesize core
literature on EA information driving a DTS from a dynamic
capability perspective. Second, we present the research
method,thecaseselection,andthedatacollectionandanalysis
process. Third, the results are presented in section IV and
discussed in section V. Finally, section VI presents
conclusions, limitations, and suggestions for future research.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Digital transformation: strategic renewal through
dynamic capabilities
Vial [15] defines digital transformation as “a process that
aims to create new value propositions by triggering
significant changes to the properties of an organization
through combinations of information, computing,
communication, and connectivity technologies” (p. 118). The
use of new digital technologies enables changes in value
creation paths and new value propositions [15], [16]. These
digital technologies are often referred to with the acronyms
SMACIT and BRAICQ [17]. SMACIT stands for social,
mobile, analytics, cloud computing, and Internet of Things
technologies. Moreover, BRAICQ is the acronym for
blockchain (and smart contracts), robotics (including 3D
printing), artificial intelligence, and cognitive and quantum
computing technologies. Specifically, Rogers [18], Ross et al.
[16], and Vial [15] emphasize the importance of digital
platforms, such as Instagram and Airbnb, as an important type
of business model enabled by digital technologies. Thus,
digital transformations realize new value propositions by
using new digital technologies.
Digital transformations result from a strategic response to
the possibilities of digital technologies and societal and
industrial disruptions [15]. Hence, a digital transformation is
a form of strategic renewal. Therefore, we define strategy as
“the direction and scope of an organization over the long
term, which achieves advantage in a changing environment
through its configuration of resources and competencies to
fulfill stakeholder expectations” [19, p. 3]. Thus, the strategy
involves long-term decisions about a firm’s steps to achieve
its vision and the scope of its activities. The strategy also
considers how the firm wants to achieve a competitive
advantage and how the firm fits in the business environment.
A firm’sposition intheenvironment,forexample,looksat the
extent to which products or services meet identified market
needs. Furthermore, in line with the resource-based view of
strategy, a firm needs to exploit its resources and
competencies to provide a competitive advantage. Moreover,
fulfilling stakeholder expectations satisfies the beliefs and
values of actors in and around the firm. Thus, digital
transformations create new value propositions by triggering
significant changes to the properties of a firm enabled by
digital capabilities. Besides, a strategy is the long-term
direction and scope of a firm. Therefore, a DTS is formulated,
executed, and enabled by digital capabilities to create
differentialvalue [20].In otherwords, adigital transformation
strategy creates differential value by leveraging digital
capabilities to redefine its business model [15], [16], [21].
Achieving advantage in a changing environment through
the configuration of resources and competencies requires
“unique and difficult-to-replicate dynamic capabilities” [12,
p. 1319]. Dynamic capabilities are a set of specific and
identifiable processes that operate to extend, modify, or create
a unique asset base [12], [22], [23]. Therefore, the dynamic
capability’s view is a helpful addition to understanding
strategic analysis and strategic decision-making. Dynamic
capabilities are disaggregated into three distinct capabilities
[4], [8], [12], [14], [24]. First, a sensing capability perceives
strategic threats and business opportunities. Second, once
opportunities and threats have been sensed, the mobilizing
capability addresses them through evaluation, prioritization,
selection, and mobilization of resources for potential new
products, services, or processes. Third, to effectively (re-
)configure resources a transforming capability applies the
actual transformation. While dynamic capabilities are
idiosyncratic, weargue that thedynamic capability’sview can
unveil significant theoretical and practical insights.
B. Enterprise architecture’s value in the digital
transformation strategy process
Toorchestrate the complex coherence of processes, IS, IT,
and accompanying roles and responsibilities, firms
increasingly adopt EA [8]. EA yields insights into the current
and future state of a firm’s processes, IS, IT, and roles and
responsibilitiesandprovidesaroadmaptogetfromthecurrent
to the future state [3], [7], [25]–[28]. The architectural
transparency, documented architecture vision, together with
architecture principles and standards result in more efficient
resource allocation, the creation of synergies, better
organizational alignment, and reduced complexity [3], [26]–
[28]. Furthermore, more efficient resource allocation and
synergies create a more efficient operating cost structure. The
creation of synergies and improved organizational alignment
lead to enhanced support of business strategies. Moreover,
improved organizational alignment and reduced complexity
enablefaster strategic change.Altogether,thevalueof EAlies
in indirectly inducing improved business performance.
EA’s value is realized through EA-driven dynamic
capabilities [6], [7], [24],[29].Vande Wetering et al. [8], [24]
demonstrated the positive relationship between EA-driven
dynamic capabilities and improved businessperformance. For
example, EA-driven dynamic capabilities facilitate the
organization and deployment of organization-specific
resources in line with strategic objectives, such as strategic
digital transformation objectives. The EA-driven sensing
capability uses EA to identify potential business opportunities
and threats and develop a greater strategic proactive and
reactive competence. The EA-driven mobilizing capability
comprises the ability to use EA for the evaluation,
prioritization, and selection of potential solutions and
mobilizing a firm’s resources in line with those solutions.
Finally, the EA-driven transforming capability is the ability to
successfully configure or reconfigure the EA, engage in
resource combination, and cope with unexpected changes. In
conclusion, EA-driven dynamic capabilities positively
enhance an organizations’ performance [4], [8], [14], [24].
C. Enterprise architecture information driving digital
transformation strategies
We ground our research in the EA-driven dynamic
capability because it offers a promising theoretical foundation
to study the mechanisms that enable strategic renewal. For
example, Van de Wetering et al. [8], [24] argue that an EA-
driven dynamic capability ultimately leads to improved
business-IT alignment and organizational benefits and drives
digital transformations [8]. Furthermore, a recent study by
Grave et al. [6] relates EA-driven artifacts to the three distinct
capabilities of a dynamic capability: sensing, mobilizing, and
177
Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 09:56:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 3 ---
transforming. They established three groups of EA-driven
artifactsfacilitatingdigital transformation’s strategicplanning
process. The first group of EA-driven artifacts helps identify
potential business opportunities and threats and develop a
greaterstrategicproactiveandreactivecompetenceEA-driven
sensing capability. The second group of EA-driven artifacts
facilitates evaluating, prioritizing, and selecting potential
solutions and mobilizing a firm’s resources in line with those
solutions. Finally, the third group of EA-driven artifacts
promotes the configuration or reconfiguration of the EA, the
engagement in resource combination, and handles unexpected
changes. However, their EA-driven artifacts do not yet
provide the profundity of EA information that facilitates the
strategic planning process we want to explore.
To extend the theoretical fundament described in the
previous sections, we use the concepts from five prominent
sources. First, Kitsios and Kamariotou [30] did an extensive
literature review on business strategy modeling in which they
assessed the current state of modeling strategy. Second, we
extend their findings with the transformation information
requirements reference model from Labusch et al. [31]
because their more holistic perspective on transformations
differs from Kitsios and Kamariotou’s [30] perspective.
Where Kitsios and Kamariotou [30] have an EA modeling
perspective, Labusch et al. [31] focus on the information
needed to transform successfully. Finally, we used concepts
recommended by the Archimate modeling language [32], the
Business Model Canvas [33], and the Business Motivation
Model (BMM) [34], because of their wide appearance in
scientific research related to modeling the information
requirements for the strategic planning process. Based on
these sources and in line with Labusch et al. [31] we clustered
the EA-driven information into information groups that are
elaborated on in the remainder of this paragraph.
The vision and mission information group contains
important information to guide digital transformations [30],
[34]. A mission indicates the ongoing operational activity of
the enterprise. Furthermore, a mission describes what the
business is or will be doing on a day-to-day basis. A Vision
describes the enterprise’s future state, without regard to its
achievement.
Drivers and their assessment are a group of elements of
information that motivate a digital transformation [30]–[32],
[34]. Drivers, e.g., regulatory changes or new technology
opportunities, can originate from within the organization or
from outside the organization’s boundaries. They are external
or internal conditions motivating an organization to define its
goals and implement the necessary changes. Internal or
external drivers, including risks, have the capability to
produce an effect without apparent exertion of tangible force
or direct exercise of command, and often without deliberate
effort or intent. Moreover, assessments are judgments
regarding drivers and their influence on the organization. For
example, a driver might impact certain resources or the
prioritization of goals of the organization. Thus, drivers are
neutral and more or less simply just there and an assessment
is a judgment on the driver about its digital transformation
potential for the organization.
The value proposition describes the worth of a product or
service as perceived by the customer [30], [32], [33]. In the
end, digitaltransformations seek to solve problems and satisfy
needs with a value proposition.
Goals, objectives, and benefits represent the ends of the
digital transformation. A goal is a statement about a state or
condition of an organization that must be satisfied to attain the
vision [30]–[32], [34]. An objective is a statement of an
attainable, time-targeted, and measurable target that an
organization seeks to meet to achieve its goals [30], [34]. The
benefits of the transformation are the performance benefits
that the organization strives to achieve with the digital
transformation [31].
Next, strategies, tactics, and directives are courses of
action [30]–[32], [34]. A strategy represents the essential
course of action to achieve one or more goals. A strategy
channels efforts towards those goals [30], [31], [34]. A tactic
is a course of action that represents part of the detailing of
strategies. Tactics channel efforts towards objectives [30],
[34]. A directive, e.g., business policies, principles, standards,
and guidelines, has the purpose is to govern or guide the firm
and indicates how strategies and tactics should be carried out
[31], [34].
The financial aspects of the digital transformation are
represented by as-is costs and the budget [31], [33]. As-is
costs are the current costs that are relevant for the digital
transformation. Budget concerns the available budget for the
implementation of the digital transformation.
The customer information group consists of three closely
interconnected parts, namely customers, customer relations,
and customer channels [31], [33]. Customers are the
consumers of the products or services that are realized by the
digital transformation. Customer relations describe the types
ofrelationshipsanorganizationestablisheswithitscustomers.
Customer channels describe how an organization
communicates with and reaches its customers to deliver a
value proposition.
Stakeholders are business partners, suppliers, and internal
stakeholders [30]–[33]. Business partners are forged
partnershipsoralliancesmeanttooptimizethebusinessmodel
or reduce risk. Suppliers are organizations that supply the
resources necessary to realize the value proposition. Finally,
internal stakeholders are individuals or teams within the
organization with a concern regarding the value proposition.
Stakeholder information includes information about contracts
with stakeholders, the stakeholders’ role, influence, and
concerns [31].
The transformation governance information group
consists of the transformation methods, the communication
strategy, and qualitative and quantitative success metrics [31].
The transformation methods are the methods by which a
transformationisexecuted. The communication strategyis the
plan for the process and tone of communication for the digital
transformation. The qualitative and quantitative success
measures are the measures indicating success regarding the
digital transformation objectives.
The EA information group consists of information
concerning capabilities, business functions, business
processes, applications, data structures, and IT infrastructure.
Furthermore, this group includes security aspects associated
with the former elements [30]–[33]. Capabilities represent
abilities that a resource possesses. Business functions
represent a collection of business behavior closely aligned to
an organization, but not necessarily explicitly governed by the
178
Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 09:56:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 4 ---
organization. Business processes represent activities that
achieve a specific result, such as a defined set of products or
businessservices.Anapplicationisalogicallycoherent whole
of automated functionality, including interfaces at an
appropriate abstraction level. Data structures represent the
organizationofdataatan appropriate abstraction level. The IT
infrastructure consists of physical, network, and supporting
software components at an appropriate abstraction level.
Security aspects are aspects regarding the EA that concern the
protection against potential harm. Besides, in line with our
definition of EA, EA information could refer to the current
state, a future state, or the transition states and roadmap to get
from the current to the future state. Furthermore, EA
information includes consolidation potentials, combining
(parts of) solutions for a more efficient and coherent EA.
Consolidation potentials could be recognized within an EA
component, such as data structures, or between different EA
components. Associated with consolidation potentials, EA
information holds information about dependencies between
and redundancies among projects [31]. Finally, EA
information includes the organizational structure which
comprises the breakdown of the organization into smaller
units of responsibility [31], resources, i.e., assets owned and
controlled by the organization and required to offer and
deliver elements of the strategic goals [30], [32], [33] and
locations being a physical or conceptual position or site [31],
[32].
Lastly, the solution information group contains
information about the solution for the digital transformation.
Therefore, it contains information about the requirements,
solution ideas, legal regulations, evaluated technology,
outsourcing potentials, and skills of employees related to the
digital transformation. Requirements are statements of need
defining a property that applies to the solution and the firm's
EA [31], [32]. Solution ideas are ideas on how to achieve the
goals, objectives, and benefits of the digital transformation.
Legalregulationsconcernthelegalregulationstobetakeninto
consideration for the digital transformation. Evaluated
technology are the technologies that have been taken into
consideration for the solution ideas. Outsourcing potentials
are the possibilities for outsourcing (parts of) the solution
ideas. Employees’ skills concern the required skills of
employees regarding the solution [31].
Fig. 1 shows the overview of the EA-driven information
groups and their contents that drive digital transformations.
III. RESEARCH METHOD
This study involved a multiple case study analyzing three
firms using semi-structured interviews and document analysis
to explore the use of EA-driven information for the strategic
planning process of digital transformations. We selected three
digital transformation cases to utilize multiple analytic
benefits compared to a single case study [13]. A total of 22
interviews were held, and 36 artifacts were analyzed to
determine the use of EA information. In addition, we selected
common cases, i.e., firms that completed the strategic
planning process for a digital transformation, for the benefit
of analytical generalization.
The cases were selected following the main criteria that
the firms have undertaken a digital transformation project
involving a redefinition of their value proposition.
Additionally, we selected organizations that differ in the
number of employees, geographical location, and industry to
obtain a more general view and understanding of the EA-
driven concepts used in the strategic planning process for
digital transformations. Furthermore, we chose organizations
withrelativelymatureEAroutinesto attainamorecorrectand
complete understanding of exploring the use of EA-driven
information. Table 1 presents an overview of the case
organizations and conducted interviews.
Data collection and analysis were organized in the
following steps. First, before conducting the interviews, we
Fig. 1 EA information groups and their contents that drive digital transformations
179
Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 09:56:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 5 ---
prepared an interview guide in which we elaborated on the
structure, questions, and probe questions for the interviews.
The interview guide outlined the topics that needed to be
covered by the interviewers and the questions to be asked,
including probe questions. The theoretical background
described in section II informed the interview guide with
topics. The explorative character of our research resulted in
interview questions that avoided being suggestive so that the
interviewee would not respond in a theoretically desirable
manner. The interview guide was used to gather specific
information through semi-structured interviews, which took
around an hour per interview. We requested the interviewees
to make documents accompanying their digital
transformations available during the interviews. Finally, we
transcribed the interviews ad verbatim and coded the
transcriptions and documents.
Furthermore, we contacted the interviewees and sent them
the interview guide before conducting the interviews. This
way the interviewee would have insights into the information
we were investigating, and, additionally, we offered the
interviewee the optionnottoparticipate. Moreover,duringthe
start of each interview, we again pointed out the option to sto p
participation at any time during or after the interview. After
conducting the interviews, we transcribed the interviews, let
the interviewees review the transcriptions, and then started
coding the transcriptions and documents. In our first coding
round, we applied Concept Coding to transcend particular
participants and abstract to a more generalizable context [35].
Next, to build on the theory described in the previous chapter,
we followed the first round of coding with the second round
of coding using Elaborative Coding to refine the theoretical
constructsdescribed in sectionII.C [35]. This secondround of
coding gave us the concepts that we could relate to the
formulated research question.
IV. RESULTS
Previous research has shown how EA-driven dynamic
capabilities and EA artifacts drive the strategic planning
process of digital transformations [6], [8]. According to Van
de Wetering et al. [8], it is crucial for firms to actively invest
in EA-drivendynamic capabilities tobecomemore innovative
and improve overall organizational performance. In this
section, we present the results of our analysis of EA
information that drives the sensing, mobilizing, and
transforming capabilities for digital transformations. First, we
show which EA information was used for and created by the
sensing capability. Subsequently, the mobilizing capability
both refines information produced by the sensing capability
and creates new information. Finally, the transforming
capability uses the information created by the sensing and
mobilizing capabilities to realize the actual transformation.
A. EA information driving the sensing capability
Sensing opportunities and threats, the first sub-capability
of an EA-driven dynamic capability, used information as
input and created information as output. For the sensing
capability as well as for the mobilizing and transforming
capabilities, the three case organizations were remarkably
homogeneous in the use of EA information. This is
remarkable because their strategic planning processes were
quite different. These processes ranged from a relatively
formal process at LocGov to somewhat organized at
FactoAutoCo. FactoAutoCo’s BUVPMD, for example, said
that “It is not that we use extensive studies or analysis for that
[strategic choices]. Gut feeling plays a large role …” This
quote implies that formal external analysis activities to gain
insight into threats and opportunities barely took place.
The vision and mission were recognized as important
guides by all organizations. However, the practicality and
intentions of these concepts are sometimes questioned. The
CIO of LocGov even stated that “The question is if this is
really the vision of LocGov, or if it is just meant as window
dressing to make us look better.” Later explaining that the
vision to him seemed more of a marketing slogan than a
means to govern the organization. In contrast, the SPM from
FactoAutoCo was convinced that all new change initiatives
TABLE 1. OVERVIEW AND SPECIFICS OF THE CASE ORGANIZATIONS AND CONDUCTED INTERVIEWS
Industry and code name of the
case organization
Location Company size
[employees]
Number of
interviews
Position of employees
Factory automation company
(“FactoAutoCo”)
Netherlands 3,250+ 7 Business Development Manager (BDM),
Business Development Manager Digitalization &
Automation (BDMDA),
Business Unit Vice President & Managing Director
(BUVPMD),
Director Strategy & Portfolio Management (DSPM),
Director Service (DS),
Sales Manager Services (SMS),
Strategy & Portfolio Manager (SPM)
Local government (“LocGov”) Netherlands 500+ 7 Business Controller (BC),
Business Manager Social Domain (BMSD),
Chief Information Officer (CIO),
Chief Information Security Officer, Information Advisor
Data-driven Operations (IADO),
Information Architect (IA),
Program Manager Data-driven Operations (PMDO)
Utility services company
(“UtilCo”)
United
States
16,500+ 8 Chief Information Officer (CIO),
Chief Strategy and Digitalization officer (CSDO),
Chief Technology Innovation Officer (CTIO),
Director Digital Services (DDS),
Director Operations / Back Office Efficiency (DIBOE),
Leader of the European Centers of Excellence (LECoE),
Manager Assessment Services Europe (MASE),
Manager Innovation monitoring and control (MIMC)
180
Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 09:56:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 6 ---
always start with a certain line of thought “…and that line of
thought always starts with the mission or vision.”
Furthermore, we found that core values played a significant
role for FactoAutoCo and LocGov. Core values are cultural
norms or values of which the organization wants to
emphasize their importance. For example, one of LocGov’s
core values is to be open and transparent. Desired results that
are derived from the vision should then be elaborated on with
openness and transparency in mind.
Furthermore, information on EA opportunities andthreats
was seen as an important input for establishing sensing
output. EA opportunities and threats consisted of new digital
capabilities, synergy, standardization, integration, lifecycle,
and EA debt opportunities and threats. Hence, sensing output
that relied on this information included desired results,
courses of action, and value propositions. Particularly, all
case organizations considered EA-driven new digital
capability opportunities and threats as being important.
UtilCo’s CSDO, for example, said that “What really led us
forward, we really needed technologies that were
disruptive…” Additionally, the MIMC said that UtilCo
needed to find out “How could you fit needs together with
new possibilities the new technology gives?” Moreover,
customer segment and relation information, business
partners, and drivers were important inputs for the sensing
capability. Particularly, drivers can be very diverse. These
could range from cost savings to the COVID19 pandemic.
The strategic theme concept is essential information for
guiding investments. Strategic themes were mentioned by
FactoAutoCo and LocGov. Alternatively, UtilCo’s DDS
spoke of five overarching targets that correspond with our
observation of strategic themes as abstract topics of
differentiating, desired investment areas. Furthermore, we
noticed that all organizations found transformation
governance essential. Transformation governance organizes
not only decision rights but also success metrics and the
digital adoption approach. For example, LocGov explicitly
defined a digital technology adoption approach stating they
wanted to be a smart follower instead of being a digital
technology leader. Furthermore, the sensing capability
established a high-level future state architecture and strategic
roadmap to improve the EA. An impact analysis to assess the
impact of changes implied by the future state architecture and
strategic roadmap on the current EA. And, finally, budgets
were set, so that in the mobilizing phase these budgets could
be mobilized for selected potential solutions.
B. EA information driving the mobilizing capability
The second sub-capability in an EA-driven dynamic
capability uses the information created by the sensing
capability supplemented by the current EA and requirements.
The current EA was used to review and update processes and
IT in line with best practices and serve as a baseline for
solution ideas, transition work packages, and initiative
dependency analysis and prioritization. Furthermore, all case
organizations distinguished legal, privacy, and security
requirements from other more primary requirements.
It is noteworthy to mention that the mobilizing capability
refined certain information that we identified as output from
the sensing capability. For example, the impact analysis
created by the sensing capability had a strategic character.
Hence, analyzing the impact of changes in the long term.
And, conversely, impact analyses created by the mobilizing
capability were tactical by nature. Analyzing the impact of
changes on shorter terms and in more detail. Thus, the
mobilizing capability refines strategic information to a more
tactical level.
Besides,theoutputgeneratedbythemobilizingcapability
consists of solution ideas containing the high-level design of
a change with a specific desired result. A communication
strategy describing how to communicate with different
stakeholders. A portfolio of initiatives to attain desired
results, the dependencies between initiatives, and the
prioritization and selection of initiatives. Furthermore, EA
information, such as processes and their relations, data and
their relations, applications and their relations, and
infrastructure and their relations were used as input and
output. The input consisted of the current state of those
components, and the output consisted of a future state, gap
analysis, and suggested steps from the current to the future
state. Thereby mobilizing resources in line with solution
ideas. UtilCo’s CIO, for instance, said that he wanted to
“…get a view of the current state. … and then also, we want
the future state. And then, in between the two things are gaps,
gaps we’ve got to fill.” Thereby illustrating an empirical
occurrence of the conceptof current state and future state EA.
C. EA information driving the transforming capability
The third sub-capability in an EA-driven dynamic
capability applies the actual transformation and facilitates
effective (re-)configuration of resources. Hence, this
capability uses information created by the sensing and
mobilizing capability and results in the actual renewal of an
organization’s ordinary capabilities. From an EA point of
view, the mobilizing capability created the directives and
guidelines necessary for successful transformation. In other
words, an EA-driven dynamic capability contributes to the
extension, modification, or creation of ordinary capabilities
with information. Fig. 2 shows our findings of EA
information that drove the sensing, mobilizing, and
transforming capabilities for digital transformations that we
inferred based on our analysis of the data from our case
organizations presented in a framework-like manner.
Furthermore, Fig. 2 shows how information gets refined
from a coarse-grained strategic level on the left side to a more
detailed operational level on the right side. For example, a
desired result formulated by the sensing capability was
mentioned by FactoAutoCo’s BDM, who said that “the
CEO’s ambition is that FactoAutoCo has a yearly sale of one
billion generated by Industry 4.0 in 2022…” Additionally,
FactoAutoCo’sSMSmentionedarefinementofthatambition
by outlining a predictive maintenance service that was being
developed. In this example, the predictive maintenance
service solution is a refinement of the desired result of having
a yearly sale of one billion generated by industry 4.0
technologies in 2022.
Moreover, Fig. 2 shows what information was used as
input information for the sensing, mobilizing, and
transforming capabilities and the output information those
capabilities delivered. The capabilities are shown
sequentially. However, there should always be feedback
loops between the capabilities [12], [23], [24]. This applies to
the entire range from strategy to operations and back. Almost
all interviewees stressed the importance of feedback.
181
Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 09:56:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 7 ---
D. The EA information driving digital transformations
framework
This study aims to find out what EA information drives
the sensing, mobilizing, and transforming capabilities for
digital transformations. Therefore, building upon the existing
body of knowledge, Fig. 1 presented an overview of EA
information driving the strategic planning process of digital
transformations. Furthermore, we explored what EA
information drives the sensing, mobilizing, and transforming
capabilities for digital transformations at three case
organizations. Fig. 2 shows the results of that empirical
exploration. Additionally, based on the existing body of
knowledge supplemented with our empirical findings, Fig. 3
shows our proposed framework of EA information driving
the sensing, mobilizing, and transforming capabilities for
digital transformations. Fig. 3 presents the expansion of our
theoretical synthesis ofEA informationwith theresults ofour
multiple case study.
The overview given in Fig. 1 includes EA information
that was not recognized by the interviewees at our case
organizations. However, to build upon existing knowledge
and not carelessly replacing it with the knowledge we
acquired with our multiple case study, we added three
information components from Fig. 1 to the merely
empirically derived framework. Namely, suppliers and
internal stakeholders, EA principles, guidelines, standards,
and additional policies.
The sensing capability concerns the identification of
potential business opportunities and threats and developing a
greater strategic proactive and reactive competence. New or
existing business partners were recognized as being able to
present potential business opportunities and threats. We
argue that the same holds true for internal stakeholders and
suppliers [31]. For example, internal stakeholders might have
a high degree of willingness to go on strike which could
influence a digital transformation’s feasibility. Furthermore,
suppliers might offer new products or services thereby
enabling new value propositions. Therefore, we added
suppliers and internal stakeholders as extra information for
the sensing input phase.
The mobilizing capability concerns the ability to use EA
for the evaluation, prioritization, and selection of potential
solutions and mobilizing a firm’s resources in line with those
solutions. Various EA information that was included in Fig.
1 did not appear in our case study. However, we deem them
relevant and highly likely to add value as input information
in the mobilizing phase. First, in accordance with Labusch et
al. [31], [32], [34], we added EA principles, guidelines, and
standards as important EA information. This information
facilitates the mobilization of resources in numerous ways.
For example, principles, guidelines, and standards can be
used when elaborating on solution ideas, detailed future
architecture, and work packages. Furthermore, additional
policies, such as, legal policies, are also necessary, e.g., for
the development of solution ideas. The additional policies
information has also been recognized by Labusch et al. [31]
and the Object Management Group [34]. Additionally,
previous work by Grave et al. [6] has already empirically
established EA principles, guidelines, standards, and
additional policies as important EA information relevant for
the mobilizing capability. Furthermore, EA principles,
guidelines, and standards specifically target EA-driven
digital transformations, whereas other policies have a more
general application. Therefore, unlike our conceptualization
in section II.C, we disaggregated directives into two separate
information elements.
This study concludes that, from a dynamic capabilities
perspective, theEA information shownin Fig.3 drives digital
transformations and facilitates the realization of DTSs.
Fig. 2 Empirically established EA information driving the sensing, mobilizing, and transforming capabilities for digital transformations presented as a
framework
182
Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 09:56:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 8 ---
V. DISCUSSION AND CONTRIBUTIONS
Our multiple case study explored EA information that
drives the sensing, mobilizing, and transforming capabilities
for digital transformations and offers several contributions to
theory and practice. First, we contribute to digital
transformation and dynamic capability research by relating
the creation of new value propositions based on digital
technologies to the sensing, mobilizing, and transforming
capabilities. Specifically, we provide insight into the
coherence between a strategic sensing capability, a tactical
mobilizing capability, and an operational transformation
capability. Refinement of strategic information to
increasingly more operational information to support the
transforming capability and the connection in the flow of
information could facilitate managing digital
transformations. Therefore, this study extends previous
research on EA-driven dynamic capabilities. Van de
Wetering et al. [24] showed that the deployment of EA
practices has a positive effect on EA-driven dynamic
capabilities and that EA-driven dynamic capabilities have a
positive effect on the level of process innovation and
business-IT alignment. Furthermore, they demonstrated that
process innovation and business-IT alignment mediate
between EA-driven dynamic capabilities and organizational
capabilities. Besides, Van de Wetering et al. [8] found that a
higher degree of EA-driven dynamic capabilities will
positively impact an organization’s overall innovativeness,
positively impacting organizational benefits. Our study
extends these findings by providing the EA information
necessary to realize improved innovation and business-IT
alignment. Furthermore, Grave et al. [6] developed a set of
EA routines and accompanying EA artifacts that facilitate the
strategy planning process for digital transformations. They
related EA routines to the dynamic capabilities of sensing,
mobilizing, and transforming. In doing so, they provide a set
of EA artifacts that enterprise architects can develop to
support these capabilities effectively. We extend their work
with our framework of EA information driving the sensing,
mobilizing, and transforming capabilities for digital
transformations.OurframeworkprovidestheEAinformation
that should be included in these EA artifacts.
Second, we provide a conceptualization of the EA
information necessary for the sensing, mobilizing, and
transforming capability. We distinguished input and output
information and explained how input and output information
facilitates an EA-driven dynamic capability. This
conceptualization enables decision-makers and enterprise
architects to successfully gather and produce the required
information to realize a digital transformation.
Finally, this work adds value to the IS, and management
literature and practice by providing a framework on EA
information driving the sensing, mobilizing, and
transforming capabilities for digital transformations.
Specifically, this study relates EA information to the sensing,
mobilizing, and transforming capability providing decision-
makers and enterprise architects with a tool to effectively
support digital transformations with the right information at
the right time. With our framework, decision-makers have an
overview of what information their enterprise architects are
expected to provide and what information should be part of
their decision-making process for formulating and
implementing DTSs. Thus, we argue that the explicit
knowledge of what EA information drives digital
transformations leads to better decisions. Besides, we argue
that with the support of our framework, enterprise architects
can facilitate decision-makers with the correct information at
the right time, leading to faster and improved decision-
making. Hence, the framework supports systematically
anticipating changes with the EA-driven information
necessary to formulate and implement a DTS.
Fig. 3 The framework of EA information driving the sensing, mobilizing, and transforming capabilities for digital transformations
183
Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 09:56:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 9 ---
VI. CONCLUSION, LIMITATIONS, AND FUTURE WORK
Prior work has shown the crucial role of EA-driven
artifacts created and maintained by an EA-driven dynamic
capability facilitating digital transformation strategies [6].
The key contribution of this multiple case study resides in the
framework of EA information driving the sensing,
mobilizing, and transforming capabilities for digital
transformations. This contribution extends thatof Grave et al.
[6] and Van de Wetering et al. [8], [24] with information
inputs and outputs necessary for EA-driven dynamic
capabilities and the EA artifacts that facilitate them. In
addition, we explicitly elaborated on the relation between
EA-driven information and the sensing, mobilizing, and
transforming capabilities. Therefore, this study helps leaders
and managers of organizations organize the information
necessary for an EA-driven dynamic capability. Most
notably, this study is the first study to our knowledge, giving
an overview of the information needs that drive an EA-driven
dynamic capability.
However, some limitations are worth noting. Since this
multiple case study uses three case organizations, a broader
and more longitudinal investigation would presumably
provide more valid and reliable insights. However, to
promote internal validity, we established a theoretical pattern
shown in Fig. 1. Additionally, we triangulated the interviews
with documents we collected from the case organizations.
Moreover, we let the interviewees review the interview
transcripts to establish a chain of evidence. Furthermore, we
used three case companies from different branches and sizes.
Nevertheless, the generalizability of our findings across other
situations than the case organizations cannot be ensured.
Our study extends that of Grave et al. [6]and Kotusev [5]
by providing the EA information that should be included in
the set of EA artifacts they determined. However, we have
not investigated which EA artifact should contain which
particular EA information. Future research could benefit
from further engaging with this relationship. Also, the value
oftheinformationneedshasnotbeeninvestigated.Therefore,
future work should include follow-up work designed to
investigate how the information can deliver value. Finally,
each digital transformation is unique, and the specific
information needs can differ from one digital transformation
to another. A large-scale study on the interplay between
differenttypesofinformationandthecapabilitiesthatsupport
or create that information under turbulent conditions would
provide more insight into the unique information needs for
different digital transformations.
REFERENCES
[1] T. Hess, C. Matt, A. Benlian, and F. Wiesböck, “Options for
formulating a digital transformation strategy,” MIS Quarterly
Executive, vol. 15, no. 2, 2016.
[2] J. W. Ross, I. Sebastian, C. Beath, M. Mocker, K. Moloney, and N.
Fonstad, “Designing and executing digital strategies,” 2016.
[3] F. Ahlemann, E. Stettiner, M. Messerschmidt, and C. Legner, Strategic
enterprise architecture management: challenges, best practices, and
future developments. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2012. doi:
10.1007/978-3-642-24223-6.
[4] M. Pattij, R. van de Wetering, and R. J. Kusters, “Improving Agility
Through Enterprise Architecture Management: The Mediating Role of
Aligning Business and IT,” 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://aisel.aisnet.org/amcis2020/digital_agility/digital_agility/3
[5] S. Kotusev, “Enterprise architecture and enterprise architecture
artifacts: Questioning the old concept in lightof new findings,” Journal
of Information Technology, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 102–128, 2019, doi:
10.1177/0268396218816273.
[6] F. Grave, R. van de Wetering, and R. J. Kusters, “Enterprise
Architecture Artifacts Facilitating Digital Transformations’ Strategy
Planning Process: A Systematic Literature Review and Multiple Case
Study,” IADIS International Journal on Computer Science &
Information Systems, vol. 15, no. 2, 2021.
[7] G. Shanks et al., “Achieving benefits with enterprise architecture,”
Journal of Strategic Information Systems, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 139–156,
2018, doi: 10.1016/j.jsis.2018.03.001.
[8] R. van de Wetering, T. Hendrickx, S. Brinkkemper, and S. Kurnia,
“The Impact of EA-Driven Dynamic Capabilities, Innovativeness, and
Structure on Organizational Benefits: A Variance and fsQCA
Perspective,” Sustainability, vol. 13, no. 10, p. 5414, 2021, doi:
10.3390/su13105414.
[9] M. Van den Berg, R. Slot, M. Van Steenbergen, and P. Faasse, “How
enterprise architecture improves the quality of IT investment
decisions,” The Journal of Systems & Software, vol. 152, pp. 134–150,
2019, doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2019.02.053.
[10] T. Eriksson, “Processes, antecedents and outcomes of dynamic
capabilities,” Scandinavian Journal of Management, vol. 30, no. 1, pp.
65–82, 2014, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scaman.2013.05.001.
[11] D. J. Teece, G. Pisano, and A. Shuen, “Dynamic capabilities and
strategic management,” Strategic management journal, vol. 18, no. 7,
pp. 509–533, 1997.
[12] D. J. Teece, “Explicating dynamic capabilities: the nature and
microfoundations of (sustainable) enterprise performance,” Strategic
management journal, vol. 28, no. 13, pp. 1319–1350, 2007.
[13] R. K. Yin, Case study research and applications: design and methods,
Sixth edit. Los Angeles: Sage publications, 2018.
[14] R. van de Wetering, “Enterprise Architecture Resources, Dynamic
Capabilities,and their Pathwaysto Operational Value,”2019. [Online].
Available:
https://aisel.aisnet.org/icis2019/is_development/is_development/6
[15] G. Vial, “Understanding digital transformation: A review and a
research agenda,” The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, vol.
28, no. 2, pp. 118–144, 2019, doi: 10.1016/j.jsis.2019.01.003.
[16] J. W. Ross, C. M. Beath, and M. Mocker, Designed for Digital: How
to Architect Your Business for Sustained Success. Cambridge, MA:
The MIT Press, 2019.
[17] Z. Van Veldhoven and J. Vanthienen, “Digital transformation as an
interaction-driven perspective between business, society, and
technology,” Electronic Markets, 2021, doi: 10.1007/s12525-021-
00464-5.
[18] D. L. Rogers, The digital transformation playbook: Rethink your
business for the digital age. New York, USA: Columbia University
Press, 2016.
[19] G. Johnson, K. Scholes, and R. Whittington, Exploring corporate
strategy: text & cases. Harlow, England: Pearson Education, 2008.
[20] A. Bharadwaj, O. A. El Sawy, P. A. Pavlou, and N. Venkatraman,
“Digital business strategy: toward a next generation of insights,” MIS
quarterly, vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 471–482, 2013, doi:
10.25300/MISQ/2013/37:2.3.
[21] C. Matt, T. Hess, and A. Benlian, “Digital transformation strategies,”
Business & Information Systems Engineering, vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 339–
343, 2015.
[22] S. G. Winter, “Understanding dynamic capabilities,” Strategic
Management Journal, vol. 24, no. 10, pp. 991–995, 2003.
[23] K. M. Eisenhardt and J. A. Martin, “Dynamic capabilities: what are
they?,” Strategic Management Journal, volQRဨSS–
1121, 2000.
[24] R. Van de Wetering, S. Kurnia, and S. Kotusev, “The Effect of
Enterprise Architecture Deployment Practices on Organizational
Benefits: A Dynamic Capability Perspective,” Sustainability, vol. 12,
no. 21, p. 8902, 2020, doi: 10.3390/su12218902.
[25] R. Foorthuis et al., “A theory building study of enterprise architecture
practices and benefits,” Information systems frontiers, vol. 18, no. 3,
pp. 541–564, 2016, doi: 10.1007/s10796-014-9542-1.
[26] T. Tamm, P. B. Seddon, G. Shanks, and P. Reynolds, “How does
enterprise architecture add value to organisations?,” Communications
of the Association for Information Systems, vol. 28, no. 1, p. 10, 2011,
doi: 10.17705/1CAIS.02810.
184
Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 09:56:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 10 ---
[27] E. I. Niemi and S. Pekkola, “Enterprise Architecture Benefit
Realization: Review of the Models and a Case Study of a Public
Organization,” ACM SIGMIS Database: the DATABASE for
Advances in Information Systems, vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 55–80, 2016.
[28] M. Lange and J. Mendling, “An experts’ perspective on enterprise
architecture goals, framework adoption and benefit assessment,” in
2011 IEEE15th InternationalEnterpriseDistributed ObjectComputing
Conference Workshops, 2011, pp. 304–313. doi:
10.1109/EDOCW.2011.41.
[29] J. J. Korhonen and M. Halén, “Enterprise architecture for digital
transformation,” in 2017 IEEE 19th Conference on Business
Informatics, 2017, vol. 1, pp. 349–358. doi: 10.1109/CBI.2017.45.
[30] F. Kitsios and M. Kamariotou, “Business strategy modelling based on
enterprise architecture: a state of the art review,” Business Process
Management Journal, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 606–624, 2019, doi:
10.1108/bpmj-05-2017-0122.
[31] N. Labusch, S. Aier, and R. Winter, “A reference model for the
information-based support of enterprise transformations,” in
International Conference on Design Science Research in Information
Systems, 2014, pp. 194–208. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-06701-8_13.
[32] The Open Group, “The ArchiMate® Enterprise Architecture Modeling
Language,” 2017.
http://www.opengroup.org/subjectareas/enterprise/archimate-
overview
[33] A. Osterwalder and Y. Pigneur, Business model generation: a
handbook for visionaries, game changers, and challengers, vol. 1. John
Wiley & Sons, 2010.
[34] Object Management Group, “Business Motivation Model.” 2015.
[Online]. Available: https://www.omg.org/spec/BMM/1.3/PDF
[35] J. Saldaña, The coding manual for qualitative researchers, 3rd ed.
London: SAGE Publications Ltd, 2016.
185
Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 09:56:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.