--- PAGE 1 ---
Open Universiteit
www.ou.nl
Enterprise Architecture Artifacts’ Role in Improved
Organizational Performance
Citation for published version (APA):
Grave, F., van de Wetering, R., & Kusters, R. J. (2023). Enterprise Architecture Artifacts’ Role in Improved
Organizational Performance. In B. Shishkov (Ed.), Business Modeling and Software Design: 13th International
Symposium, BMSD 2023, Utrecht, The Netherlands, July 3–5, 2023, Proceedings (1 ed., Vol. 483, pp. 214-224).
Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-36757-1_13
DOI:
10.1007/978-3-031-36757-1_13
Document status and date:
Published: 01/07/2023
Document Version:
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Document license:
Taverne
Please check the document version of this publication:
• A submitted manuscript is the version of the article upon submission and before peer-review. There can be important differences between
the submitted version and the official published version of record. People interested in the research are advised to contact the author for the
final version of the publication, or visit the DOI to the publisher's website.
• The final author version and the galley proof are versions of the publication after peer review.
• The final published version features the final layout of the paper including the volume, issue and page numbers.
Link to publication
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
• Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
• You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
• You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal.
If the publication is distributed under the terms of Article 25fa of the Dutch Copyright Act, indicated by the “Taverne” license above, please
follow below link for the End User Agreement:
https://www.ou.nl/taverne-agreement
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at:
pure-support@ou.nl
providing details and we will investigate your claim.
Downloaded from https://research.ou.nl/ on date: 06 Jul. 2026

--- PAGE 2 ---
Enterprise Architecture Artifacts’ Role
in Improved Organizational Performance
Frank Grave(B) , Rogier Van de Wetering , and Rob Kusters
Open University, Valkenburgerweg 177, 6419 AT Heerlen, The Netherlands
{frank.grave,rogier.vandewetering,rob.kusters}@ou.nl
Abstract. The significance of enterprise architecture (EA) in strategic renewal,
suchasdigitaltransformations,isevidentandwidelyaccepted.FirmsrelyonEAto
support strategic renewal, especially digital technology-driven strategic renewal.
EA artifacts are used to document and communicate decisions and facts about
the EA’s current, future, and transition states. They facilitate bridging the com-
munication gap and alignment between business and IT stakeholders. However,
despite extant research in the area of EA, its role in strategic renewal, and its
contribution to improving organizational performance, EA artifacts’ contribution
mechanismisstillunknown.Therefore,thisresearchexploreshowEAartifactcre-
ation and use facilitate strategic renewal, such as digital transformations. Based
on 29 interviews at 4 case firms, we found 17 different EA artifacts and 16 ways
EA contributes to strategic renewal, i.e., 16 EA values. Moreover, we determined
the interrelatedness of EA values and a model of how EA artifacts contribute to
strategicrenewalandimprovedorganizationalperformance.TheEAartifactvalue
contribution mechanism described in this study is simple and universal and, thus,
has significant implications for both practice and research.
Keywords: Enterprise Architecture · Organizational Performance · Enterprise
Architecture Artifacts · Multiple Case Study
1 Introduction
Increasingpressureduetofactorssuchasturbulenceincontemporarymarketsandglobal
technology trends, demand for close alignment of business, and information technology
(IT)[1–3].Globaltechnologytrendsaredigitaltechnologiessuchasbigdata,theInternet
of Things, artificial intelligence, and combinations. The resulting digital technology-
driven strategic renewal of business models is often called digital transformation [3,
4].
Integratingnewdigitaltechnologiesintofirms’existingtechnology,processes,roles,
and responsibilities requires changes in the enterprise architecture (EA) [1, 2]. The EA
capabilitydefinesthecurrentanddesirableorganizinglogicofpeople,processes,andIT
and designs the roadmap for realizing the desired organizing logic [5, 6]. Artifacts that
document these definitions and designs are EA artifacts. EA artifacts describe the EA
from an integrated business and IT perspective, intending to bridge the communication
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
B. Shishkov (Ed.): BMSD 2023, LNBIP 483, pp. 214–224, 2023.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-36757-1_13

--- PAGE 3 ---
Enterprise Architecture Artifacts’ Role in Improved Organizational Performance 215
gap between business and IT stakeholders and improve business-IT alignment [2, 7].
Moreover,enterprisearchitectscreateanduse,oratleastfacilitate,thecreationanduseof
EA artifacts. Thus, EA artifacts are created and used to facilitate digital transformations
and prepare firms to be readily changeable and adaptable.
Recent empirical research on EA artifacts identified which EA artifacts facilitate
digital transformation’sstrategic planning process, thereby expanding our knowledge of
anEAcapabilityfacilitatingthestrategicplanningprocess[2,7–9].However,howthese
EAartifactscontributetoimprovedorganizationalperformanceremainsunclear.Hence,
enterprise architects may have difficulties communicating the need to create and use EA
artifacts. Especially in turbulent environments, where the rate and unpredictability of
change are high [10], the creation and use of EA artifacts might be experienced as
a document-heavy approach delaying the transformation process. Consequently, EA
concerns related to the transformation might not be considered. Therefore, we want to
explore the contribution of EA artifacts to improved organizational performance to add
to existing studies on the EA capability. Our primary research question is: how do EA
artifacts contribute to improved organizational performance?
This study proceeds as follows. First, this study outlines the theoretical background
and related work. Then, we outline the research method. Section four presents the key
results and our proposed EA artifact value contribution mechanism. Finally, in section
five, we discuss the results of this study from the perspective of the current literature on
EA,followedbyourcontributiontoresearchandpractice,adiscussiononthelimitations
of this study, and we end with some concluding remarks.
2 Related Work
The EA capability has been found to contribute to numerous types of organizational
value, such as reduced cost (e.g., [6, 8, 11–15]), increased agility (e.g., [5, 8, 14, 16,
17]), improved project delivery (e.g., [5–8, 11–17]), and competitive differentiation
(e.g., [2, 5, 7, 12–14, 16, 17]). Furthermore, different types of more or less overlapping
value-creation mechanisms have been researched (e.g., [1, 5, 8, 9, 11–13, 15, 17–20]).
For example, Van Steenbergen and Brinkkemper [18] developed a cause-and-effect-
based network model that shows how EA practices contribute to business goals via
organizational performance effects. E.g., an EA practice can improve strategic analysis
byofferinginsightintoneworalteredbusinessmodelsorITopportunities.Theimproved
strategic analysis leads to improved organizational performance through an updated
strategy. As a result, the updated strategy leads to the business goal of, for instance,
improved market share.
Additionally,researchbyHakiandLegner[15]specificallyinvestigatedthemechan-
ics of EA principles. They divided the mechanism into three related concepts: ways,
means, and ends. The means are the required resources to achieve certain ends by fol-
lowing ways. That is, the resources are the EA principles, and the ways are procedures
and inductors to achieve specific desired results. The way of principles resides in their
limitational effect on the EA design space. Subsequently, enforcing the EA principles
leads to appropriate EA outcomes and, finally, to desired organizational results.

--- PAGE 4 ---
216 F. Grave et al.
Furthermore, EA value has been clustered in many different ways. For example,
Shanksetal.[5]andFoorthuisetal.[13]clusterEAvaluesintoprojectandorganization-
wide benefits. Alternatively, Jusuf and Kurnia [21] cluster values into operational, man-
agerial, strategic, IT infrastructure, and organizational benefits. Then again, Niemi and
Pekkola [6] cluster the benefits into first-, second-, and third-level benefits.
These varying perspectives and aspects of EA value and EA value creation mecha-
nismsoffervariousvaluableviewsonEA’sroleinorganizationalperformance.However,
they also highlight the fragmented body of knowledge provided by EA scholars, lack
the general role of EA artifacts, and do not fully explain how EA artifacts contribute to
EA value and improved organizational performance.
3 Research Method
ThisstudyaddressesanewviewofthegeneralmechanismofEAartifacts’contributionto
improved organizational performance through the EA capability, making it exploratory
research. Although preceding empirical research on the EA capability, EA artifacts, and
EA value can be used as a basis for research purposes, no such study is available for the
integral view we aim to investigate. We wanted to gain in-depth insights into the value
contribution mechanism of EA artifacts, which warranted an exploratory case study as
the research method. Furthermore, in the absence of established theories we could use
as a basis for our research, we used an inductive approach.
We assume that the in-depth knowledge of the EA artifact value creation mechanism
necessary to answer our research question is present in the people working at organi-
zations undertaking digital transformations and who are involved in creating and using
EA artifacts. Rather than choosing a single case study, we chose a multiple case study
to gain the data for our research. A multiple case study enables comparisons between
cases, thereby mitigating the idiosyncratic characteristics of a single case and providing
a more substantial base for theory building [22]. The multiple-case approach enabled a
broaderexplorationoftheresearchquestionandyieldedamorerobustandgeneralizable
theory.
We selected four case firms and conducted 29 interviews to base our results. The
firms were selected based on having undertaken a digital transformation and permitting
access to interviewees. For ethical reasons, we anonymized the firms’ names to Alpha,
Beta,Gamma,andDelta.Alphaisalargeretailfirmmainlysellingfurnitureandinterior
decorations.Theyhavearound4,000employeesandmanyphysicalstoresspreadoverthe
Netherlands. Beta is a prominent Dutch local government with over 12,000 employees.
Gamma is a large international financial services organization with more than 55,000
workers and is active in Asia, Europe, North America, South America, and Oceania.
Finally, Delta is a Dutch government agency with nearly 3,000 employees across two
locations. We selected interviewees who created or used EA artifacts for their digital
transformation.WeselectedawiderangeofemployeesfrombusinesstoITandstrategic
to tactical to get a broad view of the EA artifact value contribution mechanism.
We selected semi-structured interviews as the most appropriate research method
[23]. All the interviews were held using an interview guide covering the topics: EA, EA
artifacts, and EA and EA artifact value for digital transformations. All the interviews

--- PAGE 5 ---
Enterprise Architecture Artifacts’ Role in Improved Organizational Performance 217
were recorded with the permission of the interviewees and then transcribed ad-verbatim
for qualitative analysis.
Given the inductive nature of this explorative research, we started the analysis of
the transcribed data with an initial coding cycle, followed by an axial coding cycle.
We finished with a theoretical coding cycle [24]. In the initial coding cycle, we were
motivated by the general components of EA artifacts, EA value, and the mechanics of
valuecreationthroughEAartifacts.Therefore,wecodedEAartifacts,EAvalue,andEA
value mechanics throughout the transcriptions. Furthermore, we coded antecedents of
EA-artifact value and EA-artifacts’ value contributions recognized by the interviewees.
And we also coded relationships among the elements when explicitly mentioned by
the interviewees to increase the explanatory power of the results. Subsequently, we
performedacycleofaxialcodingtorefineourcodingschemeintoamoremanageableset
ofrelatedthemes.Andfinally,wecompletedacycleoftheoreticalcodingtointegrateand
refine the categories we identified in the previous coding cycle. Consequently, relating
EA values and EA artifacts resulted in the model of an EA artifact value contribution
mechanism that integrates the data from our analysis of the concepts and their central
relationships from the interviews.
Based on suggestions from [22], we took several mitigating measures to improve
the quality of our study. Hence, we monitored construct validity and generalizability
by embedding the concepts we used, e.g., the solution overview EA artifact, in existing
scientific literature. Furthermore, although the coding process of the interview was per-
formed only by the first researcher, the second and third researchers reviewed this study
for any anomalies in the use of concepts. For improved internal validity, we triangulated
the interview results with the documents shown during the interviews. To ensure relia-
bility, we maintained a case study database for this study, where we kept all our data.
Finally, ethics were handled by anonymizing the interviewees and case firms, having
the interviewees sign an informed consent form, and assuring our interviewees that they
were free to stop participating in this research whenever they wanted.
4 Results
Our qualitative analysis of the interview data and EA artifacts that were shown to us
identified 17 different EA artifacts and 16 EA values. These EA artifacts and values
have been abstracted into a model of the role of EA artifacts in improved organizational
performance. The values and the abstraction toward the contribution of EA artifacts are
described below.
4.1 EA Artifacts and EA Value
Wefoundatotalof17differentEAartifactsatourcasefirms.Althoughthenamesofthe
EAartifactsdifferedamongthecasefirms,wegeneralizedthemandusedthemostlogical
name and thus distinguished 17 different EA artifacts. For example, Alpha mentioned a
high-level design, and Delta mentioned a solution overview. Since the characteristics of
these EA artifacts were the same, we generalized these EA artifacts into one EA artifact.

--- PAGE 6 ---
218 F. Grave et al.
The values of EA have been studied extensively, e.g., [1, 5, 6, 11, 13, 14, 17, 21].
Despite these studies and the combined knowledge they provide us, we used explorative
interviewquestionstostayopentonewempiricalinsights.Additionally,wetriedtokeep
an open mind during the interview data coding process [24]. This resulted in the list of
values presented in Table 1.
Table 1. Values enabled or provided by the EA capability
Value Alpha Beta Gamma Delta
Improved agility X X X
Improved business-IT alignment X X X X
Improved commitment X X
Improved communication X X X X
Improved complexity control X X X X
Improved decision-making X X X
Improved goal realization X X X
Improved insights X X X X
Improved knowledge conservation X
Improved prioritization and resource allocation X X
Improved regulatory compliance X X
Improved reliability of the IT landscape X X
Improved resource effectiveness X X X
Improved risk management X
Lower cost of change X X X
Shorter lead times X
Following is a short description of the EA values found. Improved agility mani-
fests when the enterprise architecture landscape design becomes more easily adaptable.
Improved business-IT alignment occurs when business and IT strategies and operations
align better. Improved commitment results from providing the information necessary
to convince relevant stakeholders. When many people work together, it takes effort to
communicate clearly. Defining concepts more sharply and visualizing complex situa-
tions through, for example, graphical models improves general communication within
the organization and projects. Furthermore, firms get greater control over the com-
plexity of their enterprise architecture landscape by systematically structuring it. The
available information leads to better-informed decisions and, thus, better-quality deci-
sions. Besides, the EA capability translates high-level goals into a high-level design
of roles, processes, IT, guidelines, and principles. Doing so assures alignment between
the high-level goals and the high-level EA design. Additionally, EA provides insight
into aspects such as the current situation, the target situation, integration design, the

--- PAGE 7 ---
Enterprise Architecture Artifacts’ Role in Improved Organizational Performance 219
impact of changes, necessary capabilities, and EA strengths, weaknesses, opportuni-
ties, and threats. Explicating knowledge in EA artifacts makes that knowledge available
to current and future stakeholders. Improved prioritization and resource allocation are
enabledbytheinsightsprovidedbytheEAcapability.TheEAcapabilityconsiderslegal
requirements when making an architecture that supports legal compliance. EA artifacts
facilitate the reliability and sustainability of the IT landscape, considering aspects such
as scalability and availability. Deploying resources the way they are intended to be
deployed improves through, for example, the reuse of resources. The structures and
insights provided by EA explicate risks, enabling improved risk management. Improved
communication and improved insights facilitated by EA artifacts allow a lower cost of
change. And finally, a more easily adaptable firm can adapt to change in less time.
4.2 EA Artifacts and Organizational Performance
ThedescriptionofEAvalueintheprevioussectionalreadyhintsattheinterrelatednessof
EAvalues.E.g.,itwouldhelpifyouhadinsightintotheEAtocontrolitscomplexity,and
alesscomplexEAlandscapeismoreadaptable,makingthefirmmoreagile.Furthermore,
an EA landscape that becomes easier to manage will lead to lower management effort,
thus lowering the cost for the firm. Through an in-depth analysis of the interviews, we
managed to infer the interrelatedness of EA values. Hence, we derived the relations
between different EA values on empirical data from our interview results.
This study aimed to explore how EA artifacts contribute to improved organizational
performance. We do so because the extant literature does not clarify EA artifacts’ role
in enabling value. Moreover, this gap leaves scholars with the practical inconvenience
of being unable to clearly explain EA artifacts’ value and justify creating and using
them even in highly dynamic environments. After a thorough qualitative analysis of 29
interviews at four case firms and going back and forth through the data, we abstracted a
mechanismofEAartifactroleinorganizationalperformance.WefoundthatEAartifacts
improve knowledge conservation and provide improved insights to its stakeholders, and
creatingtheseinsightsisnotalwaysobvious.TheCIOofDeltadescribedit:“Thismeans
thatasanarchitect,youhavetodoworktomakeprofessionalsketchesbecausethatisthe
explicitly formulated knowledge about the organization. And that is not self-evident.”
An additional quote from Alpha’s project manager highlights the improved insights
aspect of EA artifacts: “The direct value is more about how are we going to set up the
organization and also somewhat directly who is responsible for what, what roles do you
need in that. Then it also comes out of what is a transition; we have the as-is and to-be.”
Ineachcase,itwasapparentthatEAartifacts,asinstrumentsofknowledgeconservation,
provided improved insights into various aspects such as the current situation, desired
situation, integration, and the impact of changes and their risks.
Furthermore, we found that EA artifacts enable improved communication. Beta’s
strategicITconsultant gave anexample ofhow theexplicated knowledge inEAartifacts
is used: “People from HR will be needed to assess whether certain data may be passed
on. This also requires investments on the part of HR. Sharing the design with them also
ensures they are willing to participate in such a process.” Another typical response on
the creation and use of EA artifacts related to the communication aspect was given,
for example, by Gamma’s business owner: “So making an artifact and throwing it over

--- PAGE 8 ---
220 F. Grave et al.
the fence, then no one will ever use it. It’s about the conversation and conviction.”
Independent of EA artifacts, communication was seen as a critical aspect of strategic
renewal. For example, Alpha’s business consultant said, “Those artifacts, yes, they are
important. But even more important is the alignment, the talking, all being on the same
wavelength, so to speak, the soft side of it.”
Wearguethatbyprovidingimprovedinsightandenablingimprovedcommunication,
EA artifacts contribute to improved decision-making. And likewise, the actual commu-
nication and insights provided through EA artifacts contribute to improved decision-
making. Furthermore, EA artifacts were deemed essential for documenting decisions:
“You have made decisions in the past, and you must continue to write them down [in EA
artifacts].” [Gamma’s Chief Architect] Additionally, many interviewees indicated that
improved communication led to improved insights on new possibilities and vice versa,
which we concluded from interview responses such as: “It’s about the conversation and
discovering new possibilities together” [Delta’s business consultant].
Not surprisingly, our analysis revealed a cyclic dependency between improved
knowledge conservation, insights, and communication. These three values depend on
each other and thus mutually influence each other. In the remainder of this paper, we
will refer to this cluster of values as the EA value fundament. Based on the cyclic
nature of the components of the EA value fundament, we argue that EA artifacts, as
instruments of improved knowledge conservation, provide improved insight and enable
improved communication. And improved insight enables improved communications
and improved knowledge conservation. Additionally, improved communication enables
improved insight and improved knowledge conservation.
We also established sequentiality in EA value creation. Our analysis showed that the
EA value fundament precedes improved decision-making and that improved decision-
making influences all other improvements either directly or indirectly. For example,
Fig. 1. EA artifacts’ role in improved organizational performance

--- PAGE 9 ---
Enterprise Architecture Artifacts’ Role in Improved Organizational Performance 221
improved decisions about the target architecture design will impact business-IT align-
ment. Furthermore, when abstracting the improvements that sequentially come after
improved decision-making into the general concept of improved organizational perfor-
mance, we create a clear and straightforward view of the contribution of EA artifacts
to improved organizational performance. Figure 1 shows the position of EA artifact’s
contribution to improved organizational performance.
5 Discussion, Contribution, Limitations, and Conclusion
5.1 Discussion
EA artifacts have received considerable attention in existing EA research. These studies
aim to arrive at a point where a widely used standard exists for their form and function
(e.g., [2, 7, 8, 19]). While these are all sound evidence-based studies analyzing the role
of EA artifacts, the extent they arrive at well-established standards is low. For instance,
Kotusev [7] identified solution overviews, landscape diagrams, and context diagrams as
separateartifacts.However,severalofourintervieweesindicatedthatsolutionoverviews
contain landscape diagrams and that some landscape diagrams are context diagrams.
Furthermore, Grave et al. [2] deviate from Kotusev [7] in multiple aspects. For example,
they presented a strategic plan as an EA artifact. Although enterprise architects can
provide valuable input for a strategic plan, it is in no way their accountability. Our
researchidentifieddifferentEAartifacts,suchasthearchitectureassessmentandscenario
plans. Interestingly, Grave et al. [2] subsequently denote “ambiguity surrounding the
definition of EA artifacts.” The ambiguity and diversity in the practical application of
EA artifacts found in empirical studies and the fragmented body of knowledge provided
by EA scholars seem to be an immaturity trait of the EA discipline.
ContrarytoEAartifactresearch,wearguethatEAvalueresearchisrelativelyconver-
gent. We came across many of the values found in previous studies. We found apparent
values such as improved business-IT alignment, improved agility, and a lower cost of
changereportedbymanyscholarsbeforeus(e.g.,[6,8,14]).Nevertheless,wealsoiden-
tified two EA values that have not been reported by these three studies, i.e., improved
commitment and improved regulatory compliance. Furthermore, Van de Wetering et al.
[20] noted that an EA capability that drives dynamic capabilities enhances a firm’s inno-
vativeness. Our interviewees did not explicitly mention this EA value. Thus, although
there are minor differences and probably improvements in establishing EA’s value, we
believe that research in this area is converging. Scholars seem to agree on its value
generally.
Nevertheless, it remains challenging to clearly show the value of EA and EA arti-
facts in particular. Our elaboration on the relatedness of EA artifacts and organizational
performance uncovers a mutually reinforcing value mechanism. EA values do not stand
independently and, therefore, cannot be seen as separate goals to strive for. EA values
are a complete package enabled by EA knowledge conservation, communication, and
EA insights that lead to improved decisions. These improved decisions manifest them-
selvesbecausetheyarebetter-informeddecisionsthatultimatelyimproveorganizational
performance, such as enhanced agility and lowered costs. However, of course, it is still

--- PAGE 10 ---
222 F. Grave et al.
necessary to balance the level of investment in the EA capability with the benefits it may
offer.
5.2 Contribution to Research and Practice
This study has various theoretical implications. First, our findings extend those of other
EAartifactresearchers(e.g.,[2,7,8,19])intheempiricalobservationthattheuseofEA
artifactsdiffersconsiderablyamongfirms.Thefourcasefirmssubjecttoourstudyagain
showed new artifacts compared to previous studies. Furthermore, this study unveiled a
list of EA values experienced by case firm interviewees. We further ground the values of
EA on empirical findings, and although we found several new values, we notice a strong
convergence of these values in EA value research. More importantly, we established an
empirically based analysis of EA values which provides insights into the relatedness of
EA values. Moreover, improved knowledge conservation, communication, and insights
are at the heart of all EA value opportunities. Finally, we established EA artifacts’ role
in improved organizational performance. I.e., EA artifacts, as an instance of knowledge
conservation, together with the improved communication and insights they enable, lead
to improved decisions and ultimately to improved organizational performance.
The first practical contribution is that this study offers an overview of EA values in
natural, realistic settings. This may help other organizations reflect on their use of EA
artifacts and the realization of EA value. Second, this study touches upon the values of
an EA capability and the interrelatedness of these values. This understanding may help
practitionersintheirworkandhelpthemunderstandwhattheycandotorealizeasmuch
EA value as possible for their organization. For example, they can explain how EA arti-
facts and improved communications and insights can help improve project prioritization
decisions and complexity control. Finally, this study also describes how EA artifacts fit
into the equation of EA value creation. This understanding allows practitioners to reflect
on what to document and what not to document in EA artifacts. Primarily, it helps them
use EA artifacts to improve communication and thus share insights, which might result
in new insights followed by improved decisions by their management.
5.3 Limitations
Deriving the results from a multiple case study is an obvious limitation and might have
caused bias. Furthermore, there are apparent geographical, industry, size, and maturity
limitations. First, our case firms were all headquartered in the Netherlands. Second, we
only investigated one firm in the retail industry, one local government, one financial
services organization, and one government agency. Third, the specific sizes of our case
firms might have influenced the results. Fourth, the case firms we explored had a certain
maturity of their EA capability, and we did not conduct the same number of interviews
in each firm which might have affected the results. We tried to mitigate external validity
limitations by covering diverse firms. However, even with our varied set of firms, we
still encountered a substantial degree of variety in the results.

--- PAGE 11 ---
Enterprise Architecture Artifacts’ Role in Improved Organizational Performance 223
5.4 Conclusion
This study explored EA artifacts’ role in organizational performance in-depth using a
multiple case study at four case firms with 29 semi-structured interviews. We identified
17 EA artifacts and 16 types of value associated with the EA capability. Furthermore,
based on the interviews, we analyzed the interrelatedness of EA values. We touched
upon how the different EA values influence and reinforce each other. Additionally,
we conceptualized EA artifacts’ role in organizational performance consists of five
interrelated concepts. EA artifacts as instances of knowledge conservation, together
with improved communication and improved insights, contribute to improved decision-
making, ultimately leading to improved organizational performance. This study adds to
an enhanced understanding of EA values and the mechanism of EA value creation and,
hence, offers an important contribution to research and practice.
References
1. VandeWetering,R.,Kurnia,S.,Kotusev,S.:Theeffectofenterprisearchitecture deployment
practicesonorganizationalbenefits:adynamiccapabilityperspective.Sustainability12,8902
(2020)
2. Grave, F., Van de Wetering, R., Kusters, R.J.: Enterprise architecture artifacts facilitating
digitaltransformations’strategyplanningprocess:asystematicliteraturereviewandmultiple
case study. IADIS Int. J. Comput. Sci. Inf. Syst. 16, 46–62 (2021)
3. Hess,T.,Matt,C.,Benlian,A.,Wiesböck,F.:Optionsforformulatingadigitaltransformation
strategy. MIS Quarterly Executive 15 (2016)
4. Vial, G.: Understanding digital transformation: a review and a research agenda. J. Strateg.
Inf. Syst. 28, 118–144 (2019)
5. Shanks, G., et al.: Achieving benefits with enterprise architecture. J. Strat. Inf. Syst. 27,
139–156 (2018)
6. Niemi,E.,Pekkola,S.:Thebenefitsofenterprisearchitectureinorganizationaltransformation.
Bus. Inf. Syst. Eng. 62(6), 585–597 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/s12599-019-00605-3
7. Kotusev, S.: Enterprise architecture and enterprise architecture artifacts: questioning the old
concept in light of new findings. J. Inf. Technol. 34, 102–128 (2019)
8. Kurnia, S., Kotusev, S., Shanks, G., Dilnutt, R., Taylor, P., Milton, S.K.: Enterprise archi-
tecture practice under a magnifying glass: linking artifacts, activities, benefits, and blockers.
Commun. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 49, 34 (2021)
9. Van den Berg, M., Slot, R., Van Steenbergen, M., Faasse, P.: How enterprise architecture
improves the quality of IT investment decisions. J. Syst. Softw. 152, 134–150 (2019)
10. Danneels,E.,Sethi,R.:Newproductexplorationunderenvironmentalturbulence.Organ.Sci.
22, 1026–1039 (2010)
11. Ahlemann, F., Stettiner, E., Messerschmidt, M., Legner, C.: Strategic enterprise architecture
management: challenges, best practices, and future developments (2012). https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-642-24223-6
12. Ahlemann, F., Legner, C., Lux, J.: A resource-based perspective of value generation through
enterprise architecture management. Inf. Manage. 58, 103266 (2021)
13. Foorthuis,R.,VanSteenbergen,M.,Brinkkemper,S.,Bruls,W.A.G.:Atheorybuildingstudy
of enterprise architecture practices and benefits. Inf. Syst. Front. 18, 541–564 (2016)
14. Frampton, K., Shanks, G.G., Tamm, T., Kurnia, S., Milton, S.K.: Enterprise Architecture
Service Provision: Pathways to Value. ECIS 2015 Research-in-Progress Papers (2015)

--- PAGE 12 ---
224 F. Grave et al.
15. Haki, K., Legner, C.: The mechanics of enterprise architecture principles. J. Assoc. Inf. Syst.
22, 1334–1375 (2021)
16. Grave,F.,VandeWetering,R.,Kusters,R.:HowEAinformationdrivesdigitaltransformation:
amultiplecasestudyandframework.In:IEEE24thConferenceonBusinessInformatics(CBI)
(2022)
17. Tamm, T., Seddon, P.B., Shanks, G.: How enterprise architecture leads to organisational
benefits. Int. J. Inf. Manage. 67, 102554 (2022)
18. Van Steenbergen, M., Brinkkemper, S.: Modeling the contribution of enterprise architecture
practice to the achievement of business goals. In: Papadopoulos, G.A., Wojtkowski, W.,
Wojtkowski, G., Wrycza, S., Zupancic, J. (eds.) Information Systems Development: Towards
a Service Provision Society, pp. 609–618. Springer, US, Boston, MA (2010)
19. Niemi, E., Pekkola, S.: Using enterprise architecture artefacts in an organisation. Enterp. Inf.
Syst. 11, 313–338 (2017)
20. Van de Wetering, R., Hendrickx, T., Brinkkemper, S., Kurnia, S.: The impact of EA-driven
dynamic capabilities, innovativeness, and structure on organizational benefits: a variance and
fsQCA perspective. Sustainability 13, 5414 (2021)
21. Jusuf MB, Kurnia, S.: Understanding the benefits and success factors of enterprise architec-
ture.In:Proceedingsofthe50thHawaiiInternationalConferenceonSystemSciences(2017).
https://doi.org/10.24251/HICSS.2017.593
22. Yin, R.K.: Case study research and applications: design and methods. Sage publications, Los
Angeles, Sixth edit (2018)
23. Saunders, M.N.K., Lewis, P., Thornhill, A.: Research Methods for Business Students, 8th
edn. Pearson, New York (2019)
24. Saldaña, J.: The coding manual for qualitative researchers, 3rd edn. SAGE Publications Ltd,
London (2016)