--- PAGE 1 ---
HAL Id: hal-03648160
https://inria.hal.science/hal-03648160v1
Submitted on 21 Apr 2022
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive
for the deposit and dissemination of scientific re-
search documents, whether they arepublished or not.
Thedocumentsmaycomefromteachingandresearch
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or pri-
vate research centers.
L’archiveouvertepluridisciplinaireHAL,estdes-
tinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents scien-
tifiquesdeniveaurecherche, publiésounon, émanant
des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche
français ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou
privés.
Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 - Attribution - International License
Understanding How Enterprise Architecture Contributes to
Organizational Alignment
Hong Guo, Jingyue Li, Shang Gao, Darja Smite
To cite this version:
Hong Guo, Jingyue Li, Shang Gao, Darja Smite. Understanding How Enterprise Architecture Contributes to
Organizational Alignment. 20th Conference on e-Business, e-Services and e-Society (I3E), Sep 2021, Galway,
Ireland. pp.383-396, ⟨10.1007/978-3-030-85447-8_33⟩. ⟨hal-03648160⟩

--- PAGE 2 ---
This document is the original author manuscript of a paper submitted to an IFIP
conference proceedings or other IFIP publication by Springer Nature. As such, there
may be some differences in the official published version of the paper. Such
differences, if any, are usually due to reformatting during preparation for publication or
minor corrections made by the author(s) during final proofreading of the publication
manuscript.

--- PAGE 3 ---
Understanding How Enterprise Architecture Contributes
to Organizational Alignment
Hong Guo1,2[0000-0003-3608-0981]
, Jingyue Li2[0000-0002-7958-391X]
, Shang Gao3[0000-0002-3722-
6797]
and Darja Smite2,4[0000-0003-1744-3118]
1
Anhui University, No. 111 Jiulong Road, Hefei, China
2
Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway
{hong.guo, darja.smite, jingyue.li}@ntnu.no
3
Örebro University, Örebro, Sweden
shang.gao@oru.se
4
Blekinge Institute of Technology, Karlskrona, Sweden
darja.smite@bth.se
Abstract. Alignment is one of the most important benefits that Enterprise Archi-
tecture (EA) could bring to organizations. However, it is still unclear what mech-
anism EA uses to help organizations achieve alignment. Related research is very
scattered, making it difficult to accumulate relevant knowledge and experiences,
and thus, the more successful EA application is hindered. To address this issue,
the present research examines essential requirements of alignment and mecha-
nisms with which underlying EA deliverable models impact organizations. By
doing so, we proposed a conceptual framework explaining how EA modeling
activities contribute to organizational alignment. We demonstrated the use of this
framework with three use cases. The results show that EA could help organiza-
tions achieve alignment in quite different ways, and our proposed framework
helped us examine and understand the mechanisms. We expect this research
could establish an essential common understanding of how EA enables organi-
zational alignment, thereby facilitating academia to move forward in this field.
Keywords: Alignment, Enterprise Architecture, EA, Model Quality.
1 Introduction
Empirical studies showed that Enterprise Architecture (EA) brought various benefits to
organizations. However, the application of EA does not always succeed and also faces
multiple challenges such as its complexity, heavy workload demand, and poor user ac-
ceptance [1]. This motivated researchers to examine the mechanism of how to achieve
EA benefits. Among all these benefits, alignment is one of the most important benefits
that EA could bring to organizations, directly or indirectly [2]. Some benefits are di-
rectly referred to as strategy alignment, business-IT alignment, and partner alignment
[2]. Other benefits, such as agility, are thought to be relied on alignment significantly
[3]. We limited our focus on organizational alignment (so called alignment in this pa-
per), covering all such relation compliance in an organizational context. To our

--- PAGE 4 ---
2
knowledge, there is little consensus about how EA brings organizational alignment.
Relevant researches are very scattered [4], fragmented, and lacks explanatory theories
[5], making it difficult to accumulate relevant knowledge and experience.
This problem motivated the present research. In this research, we examined the na-
ture of organizational alignment requirements, EA primary deliverables, and EA mech-
anisms to impact organizations. The result shows alignment focuses on the compliance
ofrelationsamongorganizationalcomponents.Alignmentshallbeachieved with acon-
tinuous process. The result also shows that EA deliverable models provide the capabil-
ity to represent and realize the compliance of relations among organizational compo-
nents through a series of modeling activities. And such activities could be included in
the continuous process of aligning.
To understand how different modeling activities contribute to alignment goals, sep-
arately and as a whole, we proposed a framework named EA-AIR. In this framework,
we decompose thealignmentprocess intoparts wheredifferent modelingactivities con-
tribute to and identify key factors of such activities that impact alignment goals. This
article also demonstrates how to use the framework to analyze EA’s contributions to
organizational alignment with three use cases.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces relevant
background knowledge. Section 3 proposes a conceptual framework based on existing
theories. In Section 4, we present three use cases where EA plays different organiza-
tional roles. We demonstrate how to use the proposed framework to analyze the mech-
anism EA contributes to organizational alignment in each case. Then, we discuss how
to use this framework to better apply EA for alignment goals in Section 5. Lastly, we
conclude the paper in Section 6.
2 Background
This section introduces some background knowledge about organizational alignment
and EA. Because EA is generally delivered as (graphical) models, we also present rel-
evant knowledge about different modeling activities and factors that make good mod-
els. Based on such knowledge, we summarize possible explanations on why and how
EA contributes to alignment achievement.
2.1 Organizational Alignment
Alignment in dictionaries is defined as "the act of aligning or state of being aligned
[6]", "arrangement in a straight line or in correct relative positions [7]", and "the proper
positioning or state of adjustment of parts (as of a mechanical or electronic device) in
relation to each other [6]".
When alignment is used in organizational contexts, it is defined as "the continuous
process, involving management and design sub-processes, of consciously and coher-
ently interrelating all components of the business-IT relationship in order to contribute
to the organization's performance over time [8]". Typically, organizational alignment

--- PAGE 5 ---
3
is often referred to but not limited to Strategy Alignment [9, 10], Business-IT Align-
ment [8, 11, 12], and Partner Alignment [2]. Literally, their focuses differ a little bit on
relations that are primarily considered and strive to achieve. For instance, Strategy
alignment indicates that organizations' resources shall be appropriately arranged to re-
alize strategies. Business-IT alignment cares about whether business and IT compo-
nents have supported each other.
To summarize, organizational alignment is in general about the compliance of rela-
tions among organization components. It is about a status that needs to be achieved by
a continuous process involving a series of activities.
2.2 Enterprise Architecture
EA is generally defined as "The fundamental organization of a system, embodied in its
components, their relationships to each other and the environment, and the principles
governing its design and evolution [13] ". Here, an enterprise is viewed as a "system"
[13].
EA is usually delivered as a set of abstract graphics covering the enterprise's high-
level content across areas such as strategy, business, information, and technology. We
call these abstractions EA artifacts or EA models as they are usually in graphical forms.
To summarize, EA is usuallydelivered as a set of graphical artifacts named EA mod-
els. Such models could represent organizational components and their relations in-
volved in an alignment goal. They could reflect and influence reality (e.g., realizing the
alignment goal) by means of a series of modeling activities.
2.3 Models
Models are generally defined as "explicit representations of some portions of reality
as perceived by some actor [14]". However, models can also influence reality if they
are active [15]. This means when a model is changed, the way some actors perceive
reality (reflected by the model) is also changed. Actors in this context include users and
software components.
Model activation is the process by which a model affects reality. Model activation
involves actors interpreting the model and, to some extent adjusting their behavior ac-
cordingly. This process can be automatic, manual, or interactive. We define a model to
be interactive if it is interactively activated.
An interactive model entails coevolution of the model and its domain. The process
of updating an interactive model is called articulation. The interplay of articulation
and activation reflects the mutual constitution of interactive models and the social real-
ity.
Researchers pursued to define what makes a good model as it is crucial to influence
the reality that the model reflects [16]. In [16], the authors distinguished between goals
and means by separating what to achieve in modeling from how to achieve. The notion
of feasibility was introduced to make goals more realistic. A framework summarizing
modelqualitygoals andmeanswas proposed (hereafter calledthe SEQUALframework

--- PAGE 6 ---
4
[17]). The SEQUAL framework was closely linked to linguistic concepts as it was rec-
ognized that modeling is essentially making statements in some language. Its initial
version [16] considered three quality levels: syntactic, semantic, and pragmatic quality.
The framework was later extended [17] [18] to include more quality aspects such as
physical quality and empirical quality. It was also revised [15] to make it more appro-
priate for active models.
2.4 EA and Organizational Alignment
BasedonourunderstandingofEA(models)andorganizationalalignment asintroduced
above,weidentifiedsomefactswhichexplained whyEAcouldfacilitateorganizational
alignment.
• Organizational alignment is about the compliance of relations among fundamental
components of an organization. EA can represent such relations as well as compo-
nents involved in the relations.
• Organizational alignment often involves statuses of both "as is" and "to-be." EA
can represent such with descriptive and prescriptive models.
• Organizational alignment takes place in reality. EA Models can influence reality by
facilitating (human and technical) actors to learn new knowledge and take action.
• Organizational alignment is achieved through a continuous process. EA model can
evolve and continuously interact with reality utilizing articulation and activation.
Such modeling activities can be embedded in such an aligning process.
• How well models actually influence reality highly depends on the model quality.
Based on these facts, we aim to construct an explanatory theory to systematically un-
derstanding mechanisms of EA-enabled alignment.
3 The EA-AIR Conceptual Framework
We define Alignment Insights and Recommendations (AIR) as descriptive and pre-
scriptive information relevant to alignment relations. Such information can be gener-
ated fromdatacollectedaccordingtothealignmentcontextand convertedtoknowledge
after interpretation of people or tools.
We think EA contributes to organizational alignment, primarily by representing AIR
(entailed by developing EA deliverable models) and realizing AIR (entailed by activat-
ing EA deliverable models). Therefore, we name the proposed framework as EA-AIR
because it helps us decompose the alignment process and examine relevant activity as-
pects that might impact the EA models delivered.
We pursue using the EA-AIR framework to explain the mechanism of EA-enabled
alignment, namely, how different EA activities, separately and as a whole, help organ-
izations achieve alignment goals and the key influencing factors.
We describe how we derived the EA-AIR framework and formalize it in this section.

--- PAGE 7 ---
5
3.1 Deriving the EA-AIR framework
As explained in Section 2, we assume that it is possible to decompose the overall align-
ment process into parts where different (EA) modeling activities can contribute. We
also think it is possible to identify key aspects that impact the quality of delivered (EA)
models. By examining the decomposed parts of the alignment process and key aspects
of involved modeling activities, we can better analyze, at a smaller granularity, how
alignment goals are achieved through EA.
First, we decompose the alignment process into five parts where different modeling
activities could contribute. As shown in Table 1, we could observe how various mod-
eling activities, separately and accumulatively, help organizations achieve alignment
goals. Notably, in the first three parts (colored in light blue in Table 1), EA activities
are primarily leveraged to represent AIR and thus more restricted to (paper or elec-
tronic) models themselves. While in the last two parts, EA activities are more about
realizing AIR and therefore take place in reality.
Table 1. Mapping EA modeling activities to alignment achieving process.
Alignment
process
Alignment
Scoping
(AS)
Alignment
Embodiment
(AE)
Alignment
Augmentation
(AA)
Alignment
Realization
(AR)
Alignment
Maintenance
(AM)
(EA) model-
ling activities
Model concep-
tualization
Model exter-
nalization
Model compu-
tation
Model activation Model evolu-
tion
Second, we identify key aspects of modeling activities in each part, which significantly
impact the quality of delivered models. This work was done in two steps:
• Step 1: observing which model quality goals [15] can be decided in relevant model-
ing activities.
• Step 2: identifying aspects (means) that could impact the quality goals according to
[15, 17], specializing the aspects considering the alignment context, and compensat-
ing with new aspects to activities that are not discussed in [15, 17], according to
common knowledge.
Regarding step 1, we cover five main model quality described in [15, 17]: physical
quality, syntactic quality, semantic quality, empirical quality, and pragmatic quality.
There are more quality aspects described in [15, 17]. We do not include them, namely
organization quality, perceived semantic quality, and social quality, for two reasons.
First, these three aspects are more about how models fit with the environment (organi-
zations and stakeholders) than models themselves. Second, according to [15], such as-
pects are unavailable for a formal inspection.
Regarding step 2, firstly, we identify some modeling aspects that could contribute to
a specific modeling quality according to the SEQUAL framework [15]. For instance,
as defined in [16], feasible completeness is one of the main goals/aspects relevant to
semantic quality. Secondly, we further consider these identified aspects and specialize

--- PAGE 8 ---
6
them in the alignment context. For instance, feasible completeness means that compo-
nents and relations among them relevant to the alignment goal have been completely
covered. In other words, this is about the scoping of EA. We further identify three di-
mensions that could define this scope: domain, abstraction level, and timeline. Thirdly,
for some parts that no model quality is directly related to, we think about general solu-
tions according to our best knowledge and make abstractions to summarize them as
aspects. For instance, for alignment maintenance, a general solution is to evaluate the
models by organizing regularmeetings to collect feedbacks,adjusting, and starting new
cycles. Thus, we propose evaluation and cycle as two aspects in this part. Results of
Step 1 and 2 are appended to Table 1, as shown in the third and fourth rows of Table 2.
Table 2. Model qualities and modeling aspects relevant to modeling activities.
Alignment
process
Alignment
Scoping
(AS)
Alignment
Embodiment
(AE)
Alignment
Augmentation
(AA)
Alignment Real-
ization
(AR)
Alignment
Maintenance
(AM)
Modeling ac-
tivities
Model con-
ceptualiza-
tion
Model externali-
zation
Model compu-
tation
Model activation Model evolu-
tion
Model quali-
ties
Semantic
quality
Syntactic quality,
physical quality,
empirical quality
Pragmatic
quality (as gen-
eral models)
Pragmatic quality
(as active mod-
els)
Modeling as-
pects
• Domain
• Abstrac-
tion level
• Timeline
• Intensity
• Medium
• Repository
• Leveraging
computa-
tion
• Enabling
learning
• Enabling ac-
tions
• Automatic
activation
• Evaluation
• Cycles
3.2 Formalizing the EA-AIR framework
To make Table 2 easy to use, we simplified it by hiding the two middle rows and use
the remainder (bolded parts of Table 2) to formalize the proposed framework, as pre-
sented in Table 3. Each part and aspect in the framework are formally defined as below.
Alignment Scoping (AS): this is to define the scope of alignment, namely, which
components shall be identified/created, and which relations shall be identified/estab-
lished. We identified three dimensions where alignment might cover. The first dimen-
sion is the domain, such as business domain, data domain, application domain, and
service domain. The second dimension is the abstraction level, such as vision, strategy,
capability, solution. The third dimension is about time, like "as is" and "to-be."
Alignment Embodiment (AE): this explicitly represents alignment (i.e., relations and
relevant components). Three aspects are included here. The first aspect is the intensity
indicating how intense the alignment relations are presented (e.g., explicit, based on
taxonomies, formally defined with meta-model, verified by tools). The second aspect
is the medium. It aims to represent which medium is used for the externalization, such

--- PAGE 9 ---
7
as physical medium and electronic medium. The third aspect describes how the model
artifacts are stored, by using a single digital repository, for instance.
Alignment Augmentation (AA): this is to augment and enhance the alignment rela-
tions by calculating them. The augmentation might include static analysis, dynamic
simulation, and prediction by leveraging various computation techniques. AA is the
place where more added value could be explored and attached to original models.
Alignment Realization (AR): in this part, EA models are used to influence reality.
Three aspects are included in this part. The first two aspects describe how models ena-
ble humanusers to learnor take actions (i.e., manual modelactivation). The third aspect
illustrates how to use tools to trigger automatic model activation.
Alignment Maintenance (AM): this is to maintain/ continuously approach the align-
ment status. Often, it is conducted in terms of periodically evaluating and restarting the
whole cycle.
Table 3. Formalization of the EA-AIR conceptual framework.
Alignment
Scoping
(AS)
Alignment
Embodiment
(AE)
Alignment
Augmentation
(AA)
Alignment
Realization
(AR)
Alignment
Maintenance
(AM)
• Domain
• Abstraction level
• Timeline
• Intensity
• Medium
• Repository
• Leveraging
computation
• Enabling learning
• Enabling actions
• Automatic activation
• Evaluation
• Cycles
4 Case studies
According to [19], there are typically three schools of thought regarding EA, namely
Enterprise IT Architecting, Enterprise Integrating, and Enterprise Ecological Adapta-
tion. The scope and purpose of EA differ a lot for these three thoughts, as summarized
in the three right columns of Table 4 [19]. To demonstrate how to use our proposed
framework, we chose representative studies for each type as our cases (as shown in
Table 4). In these empirical studies, comprehensive descriptions about applying EA to
achieve alignment goals can be found.
In the following sub-sections, we analyze how EA has contributed to achieving
alignmentintypicalcasesofeachofthethreeschoolsbasedontheEA-AIRframework.
We also tentatively quantified the results by giving each part of these three cases' align-
ment process a score. According to the author’s preliminary assessment, an integer
score between 0 and 3 is given, depending on the extent to which EA is fully utilized
in each case according to our proposed framework. By doing so, we compared the re-
sults for the three cases in a visualized way. The three cases are summarized as:
Case 1 is about one of the largest insurance companies in the world [20]. The com-
pany introduced agile methods on a larger scale in 2016, ran ten large-scale agile de-
velopment programs with more than 5,000 employees, and decided to initiate the sec-
ond wave of the transformation by applying agile methods across the enterprise. The
EA team was tasked with the alignment of the running large-scale agile development
programs, particularly about the technologies and standards used.

--- PAGE 10 ---
8
Case 2 [21] describes a case of leveraging advanced EA Management (EAM) tools
to implement the EU's General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). GDPR is drawing
increasing attention [22], andaccordingto our previous research [23], it might be avery
typical scenario where EA and EAM tools can play an important role. Industry/com-
mercial tools are often less observed by academia, although their importance has been
recognized [24-26]. We did not find scientific studies where such a case is reported.
We analyzed a customer story reported by a leading EAM tool vendor on their official
website, therefore [21]. Kommunal Landspensjonskasse (KLP), which is Norway's
largest pensions and life insurance company, has used a leading EAM tool, namely
ABACUS, since 2016. To comply with GDPR, the company reconsidered the way they
capture, manage, and process personal data and fully understood how the data manage-
ment is aligned to contribute to their level of compliance and effectively produce regu-
latory documents.
Case 3 [27] described a smart city case where data was collected from an organiza-
tion and a municipality in Norway. In this case, two major EA artifacts were modeled
in the language of ArchiMate [28]. One artifact illustrated how individual enterprises
were aligned/ collaborated to create and provide services. The other one depicted how
business could be aligned and mapped with IT strategies.
Table 4. Cases for different schools of EA thoughts.
Case EA School Scope Purpose
C1 Enterprise IT
Architecting
All compo-
nents of the
enterprise IT
assets
Effectively execute and operate the overall enterprise strategy for
maintaining a competitive advantage by aligning the business and
IT strategies such that the proper IT capabilities are developed to
support current and future business needs
C2 Enterprise
Integrating
All facets of
the enter-
prise
Effectively implement the overall enterprise strategy by designing
the various enterprise facets to maximize coherency between them
and minimize contradictions
C3 Enterprise
Ecological
Adaptation
The enter-
prise and its
environment
Help the organization innovate and adapt by designing the various
enterprise facets to maximize organizational learning throughout
the enterprise and encourage system-in-environment coevolution
4.1 Case 1: EA for Large-Scale Agile Development Environment
We analyze how EA contributed to the alignment goal according to our proposed
framework for this case. First, EA was scoped as architectural principles, guidelines,
and Key Performance Indicators (KPIs). Second, the EA artifacts seemed to be pre-
sented in an initial and direct way. Third, there seemed not to be any computation aug-
mented. Fourth, efforts were put on EAM initiatives which complemented the enforce-
ment-centric view of traditional EAM by an influence-centric view. They were exerted
by normative and mimetic pressures to enforce principles without encountering agile
teams' resistance. Voting on the adoption, refinement, or rejection of EA artifacts also
facilitated the learning and actions. Fifth, the articulation of EA and continuous inter-
actions between EA and the domain was conducted. Web applications have supported

--- PAGE 11 ---
9
automated testing and an overview of which guidelines (EA artifact) were applied by
which teams. Feedbackonusing guidelines was collected forguideline adjustment. The
result is summarized in Table 5.
Table 5. Scoring alignment levels for Case 1.
AS: 1 AE: 0 AA: 0 AR: 2 AM: 2
Abstraction level: high-
level; Domain: architecture
principles, guidelines, and
KPIs to align organizational-
wide goals and implementa-
tions
NA NA Enabling actions: voting
on adoption of EA,norma-
tive&mimeticpressuresto
facilitate the application of
EA
Evaluation: collecting
feedback to change EA,
automated testing, an
overview of the appli-
ance
4.2 Case 2: Leveraging EA Tools to Implement GDPR
According to the EA-AIR framework, the first aspect is about the alignment scope. To
comply with the GDPR, comprehensive data needs to be analyzed in broad scope, in-
cluding personal data, systems, applications, and business priorities. Second, with the
advanced commercial tool's support, data can be managed based on well-defined meta
models and maintained in asingle digital repository. Data canbe imported from various
applications or collected by inviting corresponding stakeholders to input. Third, Avo-
lution [29], as one of the leading EAM tools, provided KLP multiple computation sup-
port.Suchsupportsinclude keepingdatauptodatewhencontentischanged andprovid-
ingan "auto-generatedmulti-pagereportwhichdetailsthecompany'ssystemsandcom-
pliance." Fourth, learning new knowledge was facilitated. As said in [21], "visualize
this analysis, helping people understand." "Day-to-day, this information vault allows
them to generate a picture of the technology, an understanding of what each system
does and what part of the portfolio it fits into." In addition, collaboration was enabled
through inviting data collection and triggering communications. Fifth, the team runs a
full ABACUS report monthly as part of the company's evidence of compliance. The
result is summarized in Table 6.
Table 6. Scoring alignment levels for Case 2.
AS: 3 AE: 3 AA: 3 AR: 1 AM: 1
Domain, abstrac-
tion level, timeline:
comprehensive data
collected in a broad
scope
Intensity: well-defined
meta-models; Reposi-
tory: a single digital re-
pository, inviting data
collection, data integra-
tion
Leveraging
computation:
Keeping data
up to date, au-
tomatic report
generation
Enable learning: eve-
ryday information
vault, rich visualiza-
tion; Enabling ac-
tions: triggering com-
munications
Evaluation, cy-
cles: running
full report
monthly

--- PAGE 12 ---
10
4.3 Case 3: EA in a Smart Cities Project
According to the framework, first, two types of EA artifacts were developed and ap-
plied. One artifact covered high-level enterprise collaboration relations, and the other
one described how business is aligned with IT strategies. Second, EA artifacts were
modeled in well-defined language, namely ArchiMate. Third, no information was
found about if computation was applied to the EA artifacts. Forth, the EA models were
prepared for each session of a focus group, and it was ensured that all vital issues were
discussed. Fifth, after each session, the discussion results were presented in models,
refined, and confirmed. The analysis is summarized in Table 7.
Table 7. Scoring alignment levels for Case 3.
AS: 2 AE: 2 AA: 0 AR: 1 AM:1
Domain, abstraction level:how
enterprises collaborate to pro-
vide services, how business is
aligned with IT strategies
Intensity: well de-
fined meta-models/
modeling languages
NA Enabling learning,
enable actions: en-
suring all issues are
discussed based on
models
Evaluation/cycles:
multiple sessions,
refining &confirm-
ing models
4.4 Comparing the Three Cases
The results are compared and visualized in Figure 1. As shown in the figure, these three
cases present pretty different EA ways to help organizations achieve alignment. While
Case 2 focuses more on representing AIR formally and comprehensively by leveraging
powerful tools and computations (technical aspects), Case 1 paid more attention to re-
alizing AIR (social aspects). Case 3 comparatively employed a more balanced way to
achieve alignment.
Fig. 1. Comparing the three cases by tentatively quantifying the results.

--- PAGE 13 ---
11
5 Discussions
We discuss how to apply our proposed framework to use EA better in contributing to
organizations' various alignment goals.
"Just enough" AIR: EA shouldbe customized to provide "just enough" AIR in a "just
enough" way. EA could provide AIR with different scope, intensity, medium, calcula-
tion, and other capabilities. The cost of EA is different accordingly. Considering the
ever-existed Return on Investment (ROI) pressure in organizations [30], EA should
strive to balance and provide cost-effective AIR. Therefore, EA should focus on users'
needs andbe "just enough" (lightweight, eliminatingwastes, but withoutcompromising
necessary quality). To achieve this goal, analyzing each EA artifact (with small granu-
larity) and each modeling aspect (as indicated by the EA-AIR framework), instead of
analyzing EA as a whole, might be needed.
Between AIR and the reality: Organizations should complement EA with other re-
sources to use AIR to achieve the best alignment. As a set of models, EA strives to
provide the best insights and (learning and acting) recommendations according to or-
ganizations' specific scenarios and requirements to achieve alignment. Organizations
should think about how to make better use of them. This imply not only direct efforts
in AR part of the EA-AIR framework, but also some indirect efforts related to other
parts, such as trainings and governance policies.
Use AIR continuously: Anorganizational environment mightbe changing due tovar-
ious reasons. Besides, when EA users learn and act according to AIR, they gain differ-
ent knowledge and change domains (organizational components and environment).The
new knowledge and the changed domain, in turn, might indicate not only changes in
the facts on which AIR is based but also changes in AIR requirements. Therefore, AIR
often requires to be continuously adapted and applied to keep its effectiveness (AM).
Leverage AIR for organizational agility: It is increasingly important for organiza-
tions to keep agile [3]. On the one hand, organizations need AIR to do the right things
in the right way so that to keep lean (eliminating waste without compromising quality)
and responding to changes. On the other hand, as one component of an organization,
EA by itself should be agile. That also indicates why "just enough" and "continuous"
AIR is important.
Evaluation and Improvement: The proposed EA-AIR framework could be used for
systematically evaluate how well EA has been leveraged for alignment goals, but also
could be used for further analyzing how to improve relevant efforts.
6 Conclusion
This article examined notable theories of EA modeling and alignment and proposed a
framework named EA-AIR explaining how EA helps organizations achieve alignment.
We employed three cases to demonstrate how to use the framework. The result shows
that, in these three cases, EA used quite different mechanismsto help achieve the align-
ment goals, and our proposed framework helped us examine and understand the mech-
anisms. This indicates that our proposed framework can classify and structure relevant

--- PAGE 14 ---
12
studies about applying EA for (achieving, measuring, and maintaining) organizational
alignment. By doing so, a common understanding of how EA enables alignment could
be gained for academia to move forward in this field. With such a picture and relevant
knowledge in mind, we expect organizations to leverage EA-relevant techniques and
methods systematically and intentionally to achieve alignment effectively and effi-
ciently.
The main limitation of the present research is the lack of further validation of the
proposed framework. By far, we have only applied it to three cases which might be
representative but far from sufficient. The proposed modeling aspects also need to be
further enumerated to be more inclusive and exhaustive. In addition, it is not clear
enough how organizations could benefit from this framework concretely and practi-
cally. Thus, we plan to review relevant works systematically to validate and enhance
the framework. We also plan to apply the framework in real projects. In this way, we
will investigate how to deliver feasibly good methods for specific alignment and organ-
izational context based on the proposed framework.
Acknowledgments
This research is financially supported by The European Research Consortium for In-
formatics and Mathematics (ERCIM) (https://www.ercim.eu/). This work has been par-
tially supported by NFR 295920 IDUN.
Reference
1. Guo, H., J. Li, and S. Gao. Understanding challenges of applying enterprise architecture in
public sectors: A technology acceptance perspective. in 2019 IEEE 23rd International
Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Workshop (EDOCW). 2019. IEEE.
2. Niemi, E., Enterprise architecture benefits: Perceptions from literature and practice.
Tietotekniikan tutkimusinstituutin julkaisuja, 1236-1615; 18, 2008.
3. Tallon, P.P. and A. Pinsonneault, Competing perspectives on the link between strategic
information technology alignment and organizational agility: insights from a mediation
model. MIS quarterly, 2011: p. 463-486.
4. Zhang, M., H. Chen, and A. Luo, A systematic review of business-IT alignment research
with enterprise architecture. IEEE Access, 2018. 6: p. 18933-18944.
5. Foorthuis, R., et al., A theory building study of enterprise architecture practices and benefits.
Information Systems Frontiers, 2016. 18(3): p. 541-564.
6. Merriam-Webster. Alignment. 2021; Available from: https://www.merriam-
webster.com/dictionary/alignment.
7. Oxfordify. Alignment. 2021; Available from:
https://www.oxfordify.com/meaning/alignment.
8. Maes, R., et al., Redefiningbusiness-IT alignmentthrough aunified framework. Universiteit
Van Amsterdam/Cap Gemini White Paper, 2000.
9. Gregor, S., D. Hart, and N. Martin, Enterprise architectures: enablers of business strategy
and IS/IT alignment in government. Information Technology & People, 2007.

--- PAGE 15 ---
13
10. Henderson, J.C. and H. Venkatraman, Strategic alignment: Leveraging information
technology for transforming organizations. IBM systems journal, 1999. 38(2.3): p. 472-484.
11. Luftman, J. and T. Brier, Achieving and sustaining business-IT alignment. California
management review, 1999. 42(1): p. 109-122.
12. Luftman, J. and R. Kempaiah, An Update on Business-IT Alignment:" A Line" Has Been
Drawn. MIS Quarterly Executive, 2007. 6(3).
13. ISO/IEC/IEEE, ISO / IEC / IEEE 42020：2019. 2019.
14. Wegner, P. and D. Goldin, Interaction as a Framework for Modeling. Conceptual Modeling,
1999: p. 243-257.
15. Krogstie,J., G. Sindre, andH. Jørgensen, Processmodels representingknowledgefor action:
a revised quality framework. European Journal of Information Systems, 2006. 15(1): p. 91-
102.
16. Lindland, O.I., G. Sindre, and A. Solvberg, Understanding quality in conceptual modeling.
IEEE Software, 1994. 11(2): p. 42.
17. Krogstie, J., O.I. Lindland, and G. Sindre, Defining quality aspects for conceptual models,
in Information System Concepts. 1995, Springer. p. 216-231.
18. Krogstie, J. and H.D. Jørgensen. Quality of interactive models. in International Conference
on Conceptual Modeling. 2002. Springer.
19. Lapalme, J., Three schools of thought on enterprise architecture. IT professional, 2011.
14(6): p. 37-43.
20. Uludag, Ö., S. Nägele, and M. Hauder, Establishing architecture guidelines in large-scale
agile development through institutional pressures: A single-case study. 2019.
21. Avolution. Marshalling data. 2021; Available from:
https://www.avolutionsoftware.com/use-cases/data-privacy-security-enterprise-
architecture/.
22. Rozehnal, P. and V. Novák, The Core of Enterprise Architecture as a Management Tool:
GDPR Implementation Case Study. 2018.
23. Guo, H., et al., Agile Enterprise Architecture by Leveraging Use Cases., in Proceedings of
the 16th International Conference on Evaluation of Novel Approaches to Software
Engineering - MDI4SE. 2021, SciTePress.
24. Nowakowski,E.,M. Häusler,andR. Breu. AnalysisofEnterpriseArchitecture Tool Support
for Industry 4.0 Transformation Planning. in 2018 IEEE 22nd International Enterprise
Distributed Object Computing Workshop (EDOCW). 2018. IEEE.
25. Korhonen, J.J., et al. Adaptive enterprise architecture for the future: Towards a
reconceptualization of EA. in 2016 IEEE 18th Conference on Business Informatics (CBI).
2016. IEEE.
26. Naranjo, D., M.E. Sánchez, and J. Villalobos, Evaluating the capabilities of Enterprise
Architecture modeling tools for Visual Analysis. J. Object Technol., 2015. 14(1): p. 3:1-32.
27. Anthony, B., S.A. Petersen, and M. Helfert. Digital Transformation of Virtual Enterprises
for Providing Collaborative Services in Smart Cities. in Working Conference on Virtual
Enterprises. 2020. Springer.
28. The Open Group, ARCHIMATE® 3.1 SPECIFICATION.
29. Avolution. Avolution. 2021; Available from: https://www.avolutionsoftware.com/.
30. Guo, H., et al., Boost the Potential of EA: Essential Practices, in Proceedings of the 23rd
International Conference on Enterprise Information Systems - Volume 2: ICEIS. 2021. p.
735-742.