--- PAGE 1 ---
Citation: Guo, H.; Li, J.; Gao, S.;
Smite, D. A Method for Enterprise
Architecture Model Slicing. Appl. Sci.
2022, 12, 9604. https://doi.org/
10.3390/app12199604
Academic Editor: Christos Bouras
Received: 8 August 2022
Accepted: 14 September 2022
Published: 24 September 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affil-
iations.
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
applied
sciences
Article
A Method for Enterprise Architecture Model Slicing
Hong Guo 1,*, Jingyue Li 2 , Shang Gao 3 and Darja Smite 4
1 School of Business, Anhui University, Hefei 230093, China
2 Department of Computer Science, Norwegian University of Science and Technology,
7034 Trondheim, Norway
3 School of Business, Örebro University, 701 82 Örebro, Sweden
4 Department of Software Engineering, Blekinge Institute of Technology, 371 41 Karlskrona, Sweden
* Correspondence: 15079@ahu.edu.cn
Abstract: Enterprise Architecture (EA) has been applied widely in industry as it brings substantial
benefits to ease communication and improve business-IT alignment. However, due to its high com-
plexity and cost, EA still plays a limited role in many organizations. Existing research recommends
realizing more of the EA potential. EA can be developed for specific purposes, accumulated in a
digital repository, and reused when needed later. Due to the diversity and inconsistency of the
repository, it is challenging to find relevant EA data and reuse it. In the present research, we propose
using slicing techniques to extract EA models for reuse. We validate the method with an official EA
repository hosted by The Open Group. The result shows that the method could facilitate extracting
existing EA model components for developing new EA artifacts to save cost, alleviate maintenance
effort, and help keep the repository consistent for future (re)use.
Keywords: enterprise architecture (EA); agile; lean; repository; program slicing; model slicing
1. Introduction
Enterprise Architecture (EA) is defined as “fundamental concepts or properties of an
enterprise in its environment and governing principles for the realization and evolution of
this entity and its related life cycle processes” [1]. EA has been applied widely to address
communication issues and align business and IT. However, traditional EA practices follow
formal processes with pre-defined frameworks and pursue extensive and rigid upfront
planning [2], which might bring a heavy workload and limit EA’s application in many
organizations [3].
Theories and agile EA practices were proposed to reduce the workload and improve
the cost-effectiveness of EA implementation [4,5]. Compared with traditional EA practices,
agile EA is more lightweight, suggesting following an informal or no specific process and
developing and using EA for particular purposes when needed (e.g., to catch rapid business
changes) [2]. Studies, e.g., [6], following this direction, indicate that reusing existing
artifacts could reduce the cost and alleviate the effort of maintaining an EA Repository
(EAR). However, specific methods/techniques to find relevant EA models in a repository
for reuse are still missing.
In this research, we propose to “borrow” (adapt) the methods and techniques from
Program Slicing (PS) [7] to support the model reuse in the EA field. PS was originally
introduced as a method to extract a minimal form of interest information from a software
system [7] and has been widely used in various software engineering activities, such
as understanding, debugging, reusing, and maintaining programs. To the best of our
knowledge, no study has addressed how to leverage slicing methods in an EAR for reusing
EA models and save costs of developing new EA artifacts.
We pursue to answer the Research Question (RQ): How to find the relevant set of models in
an EAR to develop new EA artifacts? We propose a method of EA Model Slicing or EA Slicing
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 9604. https://doi.org/10.3390/app12199604 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/applsci

--- PAGE 2 ---
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 9604 2 of 16
(EAS) for short by adapting existing Program Slicing (PS). We validate the EAS method
with a case study. The result shows that the proposed method helped us find the expected
set of EA components and relations in an extensive repository effectively and flexibly.
The remains of this article are organized as follows. Section 2 briefly introduces
background information about EA and PS. Section 3 introduces the research method. In
Section 4, we formalize our EAS method. We validate the method with a case study in
Section 5. Then we discuss the method application in Section 6 and conclude the paper
in Section 7.
2. Background and Related Work
2.1. EA Basics
EA is often referred to as a blueprint for enterprise composition and enterprise oper-
ating systems. EA has brought many benefits [8], including facilitating communication
and aligning business and IT [9]. Despite EA’s many benefits [8], one of EA’s main roles
is to provide the service to understand and communicate enterprise interaction patterns
through abstract and graphical expressions. Another role is to facilitate the alignment of
business and Information Systems (IS) in an enterprise [9].
EA usually covers the high-level content of an organization across areas, including
strategy, business, information, and technology. EA describes some concepts and relations
among them in such areas and is presented in the form of a set of abstract graphics. We call
abstractions presented in one single document an EA artifact.
EA is traditionally developed based on one or more EA Frameworks (EAFs), which
provided a common foundation for EA practitioners. For example, TOGAF [10] is main-
tained by the international standardization organization, namely The Open Group, and
is one of the most widely used EAFs. An EAF usually consists of two parts. One part is
a content framework, which mainly describes what concepts can be included in an EA
and the relations among them. The other part is a development method, which provides
guidelines for developing EA artifacts.
A metamodel is often used for a content framework to accurately define the concepts
(both syntax and semantics) and the relations between them. The metamodel is usually
one of the most critical components of an EAF. Since the primary form of EA is typically a
set of graphical models, content frameworks/metamodels are often associated with a set of
graphic notations. For example, the ArchiMate standard [11] hosted by The Open Group
includes a set of symbols fully compatible with the TOGAF metamodel.
When a well-defined metamodel is applied, it is possible to organize and maintain
a set of EA artifacts as EA data in a digital repository. Such an EAR, therefore, comprises
a set of EA components and relations among them. An EA artifact can be considered a
visualization of some subsets of a repository. Modern EA Management (EAM) tools [12]
usually leverage such an EAR to capture and connect context and information across
different domains (e.g., business, information, solution, and technology), along with other
relevant architectural viewpoints, and to support strategic and tactical decision-making.
Traditionally, EAM practices follow a pre-defined framework (e.g., TOGAF), which
means: (1) EA development process is pre-defined (e.g., TOGAF ADM), formal, separated
from other projects, and pursues rigid and extensive upfront planning [2], (2) developing
EA models according to a content framework (usually a well-defined metamodel and a
set of notations, such as ArchiMate) so that the models are well organized and connected.
The benefits of traditional EA practices are that EA models are rigorous and aligned across
the organization. However, one major challenge is EA development is not cost-effective,
or the development cost is difficult to estimate. On the one hand, the value of developing
each separate EA model is unclear. On the other hand, development is challenging, and
the workload is heavy. The low cost-effectiveness of EA development leads to participants’
low motivation or disorientation. It also might lead to over-development of EA, turn the
overall EA development into an impossible task, and even fail the final EA application. In

--- PAGE 3 ---
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 9604 3 of 16
addition, as changes are happening increasingly rapidly nowadays, such prescribed and
proactive ways of using EA [2] could not meet the flexible and changing requirements well.
Agile EAM practices were proposed in academia and industry [4,5] to overcome the
challenge of low cost-effectiveness of EA development and embrace changes. According to
Agile EAM principles, all artifacts/models to be developed should deliver a clear business
value. The quality and quantity of such models are limited to just enough to provide value.
Doing so can significantly improve the cost-effectiveness of individual EA artifacts/model
development. However, different artifacts might not be connected or aligned in an ideal
way, which can be alleviated by maintaining a single digital repository based on a common
metamodel. That means Agile EAM practices have the following characteristics. (1) The
development process is not pre-defined and rigid, but to follow an informal one and
develop and use EA when needed (e.g., to respond to dramatical business changes) [2]
and separately, each for a specific purpose. One example is the Business Outcome Driven
EA proposed by Gartner [13]. (2) Based on the only EAR, EAs are developed for specific
business purposes and are accumulated gradually. It was advocated to have “just enough,
just in time” architecture and not design EA until needed. All the independently developed
models can be accumulated in a single repository, so that can be used collaboratively, like
a puzzle.
In short, agile EA weakens the development method/process part of EAFs but
strengthens the content framework/metamodel part.
2.2. EAR Management and Data Reuse
Effective EAR management is vital for realizing the more significant potential of EA.
This is because it means developing new artifacts that can be based on existing EA data
(to save cost and improve consistency). It also means the fusion of multiple EA artifacts
to improve the alignment among EA artifacts. In addition, the utilization of various
computing power for analysis, prediction, and visualization of the EA artifacts can be
employed to enable more empowerment.
Traditional EAR management has not sparked much discussion [14], because it was
assumed that EA data are developed according to a (pre-defined and fixed) metamodel,
and the data are complete, structured, rigorous, and consistent. For instance, in [15], BPMN
choreography diagrams can be automatically generated based on existing models stored
in a web-based repository that uses the BPMN ontology to describe each component’s
structural properties. Furthermore, in [16], metadata about the content of UML class
diagrams can be automated and archived into a pre-existing repository.
However, modern Agile EAM practices may bring new challenges for EAR manage-
ment and model reuse. The pursuit of more non-professional participation [17], rapid
model development and validation, and high Return on Investment (ROI) for model devel-
opment around a specific purpose can lead to reduced model quality, which challenges EAR
management. Researchers noticed such potential repository pollution issues and proposed
to use machine learning techniques to avoid adding duplicates to the repository [18].
Reusing existing model data might be challenging because EARs are usually complex
and large, consisting of many components and intricate relationships in multiple dimen-
sions, making them difficult for a human to grasp completely. Moreover, such repositories
rely on a scattered accumulation of workforce because it is often created by humans and
aims for humans (to understand). As a result, the rigor and consistency of the data may be
limited. The complexity, significant volume, and low consistency of EARs make reusing
model data difficult for humans or computers. The vague requirements to develop new
models make model reuse even more difficult. To make it clear, reusing existing model
data in this article does not mean integrating data from other sources, but recommending
and reusing data in the existing model repository for new views/purposes.
Many relations exist implicitly within multiple views. Thus, it is difficult to remember
and find all relevant model data by humans. Due to the diversity of underlying metamodels

--- PAGE 4 ---
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 9604 4 of 16
and the inconsistency of the data, it is not easy to implement an automatic search with a
pre-written (one-time) script.
2.3. Program Slicing
Weiser [7] proposed PS as a method or a task to make an abstract of a program to a
minimal form. The reduced program is called a “slice,” which guarantees representing
the original program within the domain of interest. PS was widely used and accepted
in various software engineering tasks, including code debugging, integration, dataflow
testing, and maintenance [19].
To extract a slice, a slicing criterion <S, V> should be defined to specify a loca-
tion/statement (S) and a variable (V) [20]. There are many types of program slices. For
instance, Weiser initially used executable backward static slices [20]. PS can also be dynamic
or conditional. Different algorithms have been applied to extract program slices. Some
algorithms rely on a control flow graph following [20] and can be thought to solve a data
flow problem and a graph reachability problem [20]. Basically, a directed graph G can be
defined as a set of nodes N and a set of edges [20]. A control flow graph for program P is a
graph in which each node is associated with a statement in P, and the edges represent the
control flow in P [20]. More recent work tends to use the system dependence graph [21].
In general, the process of PS consists of four steps: Relation Extraction, Criteria Deciding,
Slice Generation, and Slice Usage.
2.4. Model Slicing
The application of slicing in the model domain is called Model Slicing [22]. Model
Slicing, however, usually relies on specific restrictions (e.g., model transformation rules
and model constraints [23]) and is only applied to certain types of models (e.g., UML
models [22] or finite-state-machine-based models [24]).
In the EA field, however, many diverse models are embraced. In addition, the consis-
tency between models might not be guaranteed because many models are created manually.
The complexity/diversity and inconsistency issues might limit the applicability of slicing
techniques in the EA field. Levashova et al. [25] studied slicing EA ontologies for context
retrieving, and Jacobs et al. [26] studied constructing an EA Framework (EAF) for slicing
purposes by leveraging data warehouse theories.
However, to our knowledge, no study has addressed how to leverage slicing methods
in an EAR for reusing EA artifacts and saving costs of developing new EA artifacts.
3. Research Method
TherearetwomainparadigmsinISresearch: behavioralscienceanddesignscience [27,28].
The behavioral science paradigm seeks to develop and justify theories that explain or
predict human or organizational behavior. In contrast, the design science paradigm is
more problem-solving and aims to create artifacts to extend the boundaries of human
or organizational capabilities. For the proposed research question, we pursue a solution
contributing to reusing EA models and employ the design science method.
According to [29], design can be both a process (set of activities) and a product
(artifact). As identified by [30], four types of design artifacts/products (constructs, models,
methods, and instantiations) can be produced by design science research in IS. Among
them, a method defines processes and guides how to solve problems. We aim to construct
a method as the design artifact to describe how to extract and reuse existing data in an EAR.
Design processes/activities include building and evaluating artifacts. For design science
research, it is crucial to find a proper balance between rigor and relevance [27]. While rigor
is usually achieved by applying existing foundations and methodologies appropriately,
framing research activities to address business needs could assure research relevance.
When building our proposed method, we selectively applied existing foundations and
methodologies to achieve rigor [27]. We examined and adapted the existing PS techniques.
We analyzed and found commonalities between the two areas (e.g., program reuse and EA

--- PAGE 5 ---
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 9604 5 of 16
reuse) concerning the problem to be solved/goal, solution, criteria pattern, and algorithm
premise. The commonalities support us in applying the PS method to the EA domain. We
then adapted the PS method to derive our EAS based on the EAS’s unique challenges. We
applied pseudo-codes, case studies, and testing to achieve rigor to validate our method.
We used a case study to provide an in-depth observational evaluation [27] in a business
environment. We used pseudo-codes and executed reference implementations to provide
structural and functional testing [27]. The official case study hosted by The Open Group
was selectively chosen to ensure the relevance of our approach to appropriate business
problems. In this case, the EAR was modeled in ArchiMate modeling language, which
conforms to the TOGAF EAF. Both TOGAF and ArchiMate are the most used international
standards in the EA field. More details about the case are provided in Sections 4 and 5.
4. A Method for EA Model Slicing
We first analyzed the commonalities between the programming field and the EA field.
The results indicated the potential of adapting slicing approaches in the programming field
in the EA field. We adopted similar parts in the programming field in EAS. Then, according
to EAS’s unique feature/requirement, we developed the particular components (of the
slicing method/algorithm) for the EA field. We formalize the overall method/algorithm
as follows.
4.1. Adapting PS to Develop EAS
The following insights about the commonalities between the two areas (Program
reuse and EA reuse) support us in deriving parts of EAS similar to PS.
• Goal: Both PS and our proposed EAS aim to save costs on software engineering tasks.
For PS, such tasks are program re-development and program maintenance. While for
EAS, such tasks might include new model development and maintenance.
• Solution: To save costs, both methods exclude irrelevant lines of codes/model com-
ponents that are not “of interest” and try to find the minimum subset of the original
program/repository.
• Criteria pattern: Criteria are needed to clearly define how to select the minimal subset,
namely, what defines the “interest.” Both PS and EAS employ a similar criteria pattern
specifying a location (statement/view) and a variable/component.
• Algorithm premise: Both algorithms of PS and EAS rely on a graph-like structure
provided by the original program/repository. PS depends on a control flow graph
with nodes and edges. In comparison, an EA model repository consists of components
and relations between them and is naturally organized as a graph.
In addition, we require more unique features to slice EA data.
• Flexible parts of Criteria: Criteria define what makes a subset of the original pro-
gram/repository concerning a criterion of <S, V> be “of interest.” For PS, in a slice,
the value of V at the position of S should remain the same as that in the original
program. Such a precise and unambiguous criterion could be found for PS because
programs are usually created by professional programmers, executed by computers,
and therefore are formal and rigorous. However, finding a similar criterion for EAS
might not be easy. Under many circumstances, models are not accurately defined or
used because they are usually created by and used for humans who might not have
specific expertise. In other words, we might not be able to define the criteria in EAS
precisely due to the diversity of metamodels, inconsistent model data, and different
requirements of using a slice in advance. Therefore, the EAS method might need to
allow more flexibility (to allow for manual screening) for the criteria in EAS.
• Flexible parts of Algorithms: To address the flexible part of the criteria, we propose
to introduce manual intervention in addition to a computerizable slicing algorithm.
While the computerizable algorithm captures the fixed and accurate part of the criteria,

--- PAGE 6 ---
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 9604 6 of 16
the manual screen examines the flexible parts and decides on inclusion/exclusion
based on the actual settings.
To summarize, the original version of PS starts from a location/statement, then con-
tinuously finds new points/statements along the edge/flow in the program’s control or
data flow and judges whether it is relevant to the requirement according to the pre-defined
criteria, and when to stop traversing. Our proposed EAS works similarly. The difference is
that the traversal and judgment of PS are automated, while the judgment in our version is
partially manual. As mentioned above, the data in the EAR may have some inconsistent
issues, such as missing attributes or misuse of similar relations. We perform automated
traversal and preliminary screening with pre-set criteria and then use manual screening to
handle data inconsistencies.
4.2. Formalizing the EAS Method
According to the similarities and differences between PS and EAS, we formalize our
method following a similar process as PS, as shown in Table 1. Like PS, we use Step 1,
Extract information, to review the EAR and get a general knowledge of its metamodel and
model data quality. In Step 2, we decide the specific criteria based on the requirements
of the slice (e.g., for new EA artifacts development) and the EAR settings. After that, we
conduct automatic searching to get the subset of the original repository in Step 3. Unlike
PS, due to the complexity and inconsistency issues of EARs, we introduce manual screening
in Step 4 to exclude irrelevant/invalid components within the automatic searching results.
Table 1. The proposed method of EAS.
Steps Activities
Step 1: Extract information
Review and get a general knowledge of the repository settings
and quality.
Step 2: Decide criteria Decide the criteria based on repository settings and requirements.
Step 3: Automatically search (with the automatic algorithm) Automatically search related components for the given criteria.
Step 4: Manually screen (with the manual algorithm) Manually screen the result from the automatic search.
Step 5: Integrate and use the slice
Recurse, integrate the result, and use the slice (e.g., for new EA
artifact development).
After Step 4, for each component in the search results, Steps 1–4 will be recalled in a
recursive way to find additional indirectly related components. We present this part as
a simple recursion in Figure 1, and a more accurate definition of the recursion process is
written in pseudo-codes and is detailed later. At last, in Step 5, we integrate the result
based on all the intermediate results throughout the recursive process and use the slice.
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 9604
Figure 1. The process of the proposed EAS method.
4.3. Formalizing the EAS Algorithm
With this, we formalize the overall slicing algorithm and main functions of t
rithm in pseudo-codes. In the pseudo-codes (Figures 2–4), keywords for the cont
are bolded, while comments are shadowed. We also highlight the function calls
Figure 1. The process of the proposed EAS method.

--- PAGE 7 ---
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 9604 7 of 16
4.3. Formalizing the EAS Algorithm
With this, we formalize the overall slicing algorithm and main functions of the algo-
rithm in pseudo-codes. In the pseudo-codes (Figures 2–4), keywords for the control flow
are bolded, while comments are shadowed. We also highlight the function calls to show
the overall logic.
Figure 1. The process of the proposed EAS method.
4.3. Formalizing the EAS Algorithm
With this, we formalize the overall slicing algorithm and main functions of the algo
rithm in pseudo-codes. In the pseudo-codes (Figures 2–4), keywords for the control flow
are bolded, while comments are shadowed. We also highlight the function calls to show
the overall logic.
Figure 2. Pseudo-codes for the overall recursive slicing process (Step 1–4).
.
Figure 3. Pseudo-codes for the automatic searching algorithm (Step 3).
Figure 2. Pseudo-codes for the overall recursive slicing process (Step 1–4).
Figure 1. The process of the proposed EAS method.
4.3. Formalizing the EAS Algorithm
With this, we formalize the overall slicing algorithm and main functions of the algo-
rithm in pseudo-codes. In the pseudo-codes (Figures 2–4), keywords for the control flow
are bolded, while comments are shadowed. We also highlight the function calls to show
the overall logic.
Figure 2. Pseudo-codes for the overall recursive slicing process (Step 1–4).
.
Figure 3. Pseudo-codes for the automatic searching algorithm (Step 3).
Figure 3. Pseudo-codes for the automatic searching algorithm (Step 3).
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 9604 8 of 16
.
Figure 4. Pseudo-codes for the manual screening algorithm (Step 4).
In EAS, the slicing algorithm is recursive. As shown in the upper part of Figure 2, the
resulting slice consists of two parts. One includes all directly related components called
“direct slice” (Line 4). Another contains slices for all components in the “direct slice” (Line
6). We use GetDirRelComp to get directly related components and construct the recursion
with the Slicing function call.
InthelowerpartofFigure2,weshow“GetDirRelComp”containsautomaticsearching
and manual screening (with corresponding pseudo-codes shown in Figures 3 and 4). By
combining the automatic and manual tasks in an interwoven way, the algorithm realizes
the searching/filtering for all components that (directly or indirectly) are related to a given
component (within a particular view) in the entire EAR, thereby achieving the purpose o
Figure 4. Pseudo-codes for the manual screening algorithm (Step 4).
In EAS, the slicing algorithm is recursive. As shown in the upper part of Figure 2,
the resulting slice consists of two parts. One includes all directly related components
called “direct slice” (Line 4). Another contains slices for all components in the “direct
slice” (Line 6). We use GetDirRelComp to get directly related components and construct the
recursion with the Slicing function call.
In the lower part of Figure 2, we show “GetDirRelComp” contains automatic searching
and manual screening (with corresponding pseudo-codes shown in Figures 3 and 4). By

--- PAGE 8 ---
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 9604 8 of 16
combining the automatic and manual tasks in an interwoven way, the algorithm realizes
the searching/filtering for all components that (directly or indirectly) are related to a given
component (within a particular view) in the entire EAR, thereby achieving the purpose
of slicing.
As indicated by the pseudo-code in Figure 3, the algorithm for the automatic searching
task in Step 3, for the given component in a particular view, is about finding information of
all (directly) related components (Line 6), such as relation names and view names. This task
executes automatically so that the structured retrieving can be conducted quickly and reli-
ably. This task also maps user-friendly information such as component name to IT (Line 3)
to facilitate automatic searching, or vice versa to facilitate human understanding (Line 7).
The result of this task will provide candidates for the subsequent manual screening task.
The pseudo-code in Figure 4 demonstrates the algorithm for the manual screening
in Step 4, which manually selects relevant components based on the information pro-
vided in Step 3. Manual screening includes correlation judgment (Line 4) and consistency
verification (Line 3).
5. Evaluation
We designed a proof-of-concept case study to demonstrate our proposed method’s
use and prove the concepts’ validity. In this section, we introduce the settings of the case
study, present the results, and reflect on the results.
5.1. Settings
Our case study is an insurance enterprise that maintains a digital EAR and needs to
develop a new roadmap artifact. The existing EAR has been used to capture and connect
the context and information across domains (e.g., business, information, solution, and
technology) to support strategic and tactical decision-making. We employ the official
repository [31] hosted by The Open Group [32]. In this case, the repository [33] is modeled
with the ArchiMate modeling language [11] and stored with ArchiMate Model Exchange
File Format [34]. We suppose a new roadmap artifact is required because the management
wants a coherent and straightforward picture representing the overall strategic planning. A
roadmap artifact is usually defined as “structured graphical views of all planned IT initiatives
in specific business areas having direct business value,” serving to “achieve clearer traceability
between the business strategy and future IT investments” [3]. Therefore, we need to find out
existing components and relations that are relevant to this view. Our proposed EAS method
will be used to extract relevant components in the repository and lower the cost of new
artifact development through reuse.
To reuse existing model data to develop the new roadmap artifact, we conducted
several slicing tasks to get relevant components concerning several strategic components.
Due to the space limitation, we demonstrate the process of using our proposed EAS method
for one of the tasks. The task is to find all existing components/IT initiatives that directly or
indirectly support one of the planned Business Output, namely, Detailed Insights in Customer
in the view of Business Strategy.
Here four requirements for the slicing are implicitly given: (1) “support” indicates that
a relation with a meaning of “support” (e.g., Realization and Serving) connects some compo-
nent to others; (2) “directly support” means such relation directly connects one component
and the other, while “indirectly support” happens when more than one such relation
connects or other relations (e.g., Aggregation) are involved additionally; (3) the resulting
components should be at a high level and cannot contain more details than that of general
IT initiatives; (4) as a general non-functional requirement, the model data should be of
acceptably high quality, which means that the data should be at least reasonable to humans
and consistent with other data in the repository.
Note that although these requirements look clear and comprehensive enough for
a human, they are still somewhat vague to be formalized in programs. Take the first
requirement, for instance, we as humans understand the general meaning of “support”.

--- PAGE 9 ---
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 9604 9 of 16
However, we could not determine the exact types of relations to apply in a particular
repository due to various metamodels that can be applied in the EA fields. Other examples
include what defines an “indirect” relation in the second requirement, what components
are sufficiently “high-level” in the third requirement, and what kind of data inconsistency
issues are unacceptable in the fourth requirement. They are all the “undefined” or “vague”
part of the requirements. Such flexible requirements are the primary reason we adopt a
hybrid method to combine automatic searching and manual screening.
We used existing tools for our demonstration and concept-proof validation. We used
Archi 4.8.1 [35], an open-source ArchiMate modeling tool, for reviewing the EAR in a
visualized way (Step 1). An Extensible Markup Language (XML) viewer is also used in
Step 1tohelpusexaminetherepositoryserializedintheexchangefileformat. Weemployed
an Integrated Development Environment (IDE) to implement the criteria/algorithm and
run the automatic searching (Step 3) in Python 3.8. We used a text editor to record the
recursive slicing process and all intermediate results (Step 4). At last, we used Archi [35] to
present the integrated results of the slice (Step 5) to develop the new artifact based on it.
5.2. Results
According to EAS, we recursively conduct the slicing process. First, we find compo-
nents that “directly support” the starting component. Then, for each component found,
we conduct Steps 1–4 to find the components that “directly support” it. We perform this
process recursively until finding no more components. Then we take all the components
and relations found throughout the process and compile the final result. We provide more
details for the first loop as an example.
In Step 1, we browse the entire repository to capture the general information in a
visualized way in Archi (as shown in Figure 5) and in a serialized exchange file format in
an XML viewer (see Figure 6). Such general information includes the overall library size,
major existing views, and types of components and relations used in the repository. The
result shows that, in the repository, 328 EA Components and 701 Relations are presented in
71 EA views spanning different layers of the enterprise, including strategy, business, and
IS. The relations include 643 common relations, such as Serving and Realization, 39 Grouping,
and 19 Junction relations.
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 9604 10 of 16
Figure 5. Browsing the use case repository in Archi. Figure 5. Browsing the use case repository in Archi.

--- PAGE 10 ---
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 9604 10 of 16
Figure 5. Browsing the use case repository in Archi.
Figure 6. One section of the case repository exchange file in an XML viewer.
In Step 2, we define the initial slicing criterion as <Detailed Insights in Custom
ness Strategy>, indicating that the slice should include all valid components that “
support” the starting component of Detailed Insights in Customer in the view of B
Strategy.
This criterion and the corresponding algorithm were programmed in Pyt
shown in Figure 7) in Step 3. After running the automatic searching (as shown in
8), we achieve five relations that connect “Detailed Insights in Customer” with oth
ponents.
Figure 6. One section of the case repository exchange file in an XML viewer.
InStep2, wedefinetheinitialslicingcriterionas<DetailedInsightsinCustomer, Business
Strategy>, indicating that the slice should include all valid components that “directly sup-
port” the starting component of Detailed Insights in Customer in the view of Business Strategy.
ThiscriterionandthecorrespondingalgorithmwereprogrammedinPython(asshown
in Figure 7) in Step 3. After running the automatic searching (as shown in Figure 8), we
achieve five relations that connect “Detailed Insights in Customer” with other components.
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 9604
Figure 7. Sample code snippets for automatic slicing in Python. Figure 7. Sample code snippets for automatic slicing in Python.

--- PAGE 11 ---
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 9604 11 of 16
Figure 7. Sample code snippets for automatic slicing in Python.
Figure 8. Intermediate results of performing an EAS automatic searching.
Then, in Step 4, we conduct a manual validation by examining each relation and
checking if the involved relation, related component, and view are reasonably relevant
and valid according to the criteria. We found that among the five relations, only one of
them is valid and relevant to our specific goal. This relation indicates that the “Data-
Driven Insurance” component realizes the starting component of “Detailed Insights in
Customer Behavior”. Later, we decided to further track the EA components of the slicing
result by starting a new iteration because they are a higher level of abstraction than the
expected “IT plan”.
We conducted four iterations in total. In the last iteration, we found that all relations
in the slicing result are irrelevant or invalid according to the criteria. The observation in-
dicates that all components of interest have been retrieved in previous iterations. There-
fore, we stopped the slicing process. The resulting slice contains four components and
three relations from two original views. They are reasonable and valid data concerning
the slicing goal. We then presented them (by dragging them from the original to the new
views) to reuse them for developing the new artifact, as shown in Figure 9. Note that we
Figure 8. Intermediate results of performing an EAS automatic searching.
Then, in Step 4, we conduct a manual validation by examining each relation and
checking if the involved relation, related component, and view are reasonably relevant
and valid according to the criteria. We found that among the five relations, only one of
them is valid and relevant to our specific goal. This relation indicates that the “Data-Driven
Insurance” component realizes the starting component of “Detailed Insights in Customer
Behavior”. Later, we decided to further track the EA components of the slicing result by
starting a new iteration because they are a higher level of abstraction than the expected
“IT plan”.
We conducted four iterations in total. In the last iteration, we found that all relations
in the slicing result are irrelevant or invalid according to the criteria. The observation
indicates that all components of interest have been retrieved in previous iterations. There-
fore, we stopped the slicing process. The resulting slice contains four components and
three relations from two original views. They are reasonable and valid data concerning
the slicing goal. We then presented them (by dragging them from the original to the new
views) to reuse them for developing the new artifact, as shown in Figure 9. Note that
we examined (manually screened) 18 relations within 22 views throughout the recursive
slicing process. The numbers of components, relations, and views of the original repository,
manual screening, and the resulting slice, are recorded and compared, as Table 2 shows.
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 9604 12 of 1
examined (manually screened) 18 relations within 22 views throughout the recursive slic
ing process. The numbers of components, relations, and views of the original repository
manual screening, and the resulting slice, are recorded and compared, as Table 2 shows.
Figure 9. Using the resulting slice for a new EA artifact development.
Table 2. The number of components, relations, and views before and after slicing.
Component Number Relation Number View Numbe
Original repository 328 701 71
Figure 9. Using the resulting slice for a new EA artifact development.

--- PAGE 12 ---
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 9604 12 of 16
Table 2. The number of components, relations, and views before and after slicing.
Component Number Relation Number View Number
Original repository 328 701 71
Manual screening 18 18 22
Resulting slice 4 3 2
5.3. Reflections
Our experience shows that simple manual or automatic methods are indeed challeng-
ing to achieve the slicing goals in such a representative EA context for the following reasons.
First, it is difficult, if not impossible, for humans to exhaustively and reliably identify
all relevant relations distributed in many views. We felt it was impossible to remember
all the relevant components. We needed to focus on 18 out of 701 relations in our case (as
shown in the second and third lines of Table 2). Secondly, when we need to validate and
extract more detailed information, it is very costly to traverse across a large number of
views. This means checking 18 relations in 22 views in our context (as shown in the third
line of Table 2). Manual operation is not only time-consuming and labor-intensive but also
easy to bring inconsistent and unreliable data.
In addition, for automatic methods (pre-defined or one-time defined programming
methods), it is not easy to cope with various previously mentioned undefined/vague
requirements. Firstly, due to the different metamodels used in EARs and the diverse
preferences of model developers, the relevant slicing principles and algorithms need not be
defined or programmed precisely. For example, in our case, we only selected components
that Realize the starting component for Realization relations. However, for the Aggregation
relations, we selected components that are Aggregated by the starting component. Secondly,
many human-made models have various inconsistency issues which need to be handled
flexibly. For example, in our case, we found that there was no relevant view for some
relations. For some relations, the related component did not have a name. By observing
more relevant information, we think they are possibly caused by previous unregulated
human operations (the models were deleted in views but not in the repositories, for
instance). We, therefore, simply ignored them.
In contrast to pure manual or automatic methods, our proposed method combines the
advantages of manually making intelligent decisions and the computational power of au-
tomation. The EAS method can flexibly handle the metamodel complexities and data incon-
sistencies. It can also traverse the database sufficiently and reliably in a cost-effective way.
6. Discussion
We summarize the benefits of our proposed method and discuss how to apply our
proposed method in the EA field.
6.1. Benefits of Our Proposed EAS Method
In this paper, we propose to use slicing methods in the EA field to lower the cost of
developing new EA artifacts by retrieving and reusing relevant components. Considering
specific characteristics in the EA field, we propose to introduce manual intervention in
addition to an automatic algorithm. Such characteristics are:
(1) There are more flexible requirements in the EA field as EA models are often developed
for human understanding purposes. Accordingly, the slicing criteria can hardly be
defined in a very precise way.
(2) The metamodels used in the EA field can be very diverse. The analogy is to use multi-
ple programming languages (statically or dynamically) in PS. Thus, it is challenging
to implement the algorithms in advance fully.
(3) The EA model data inconsistency issues might widely exist as people manually
develop many models. This imposes diverse and flexible data validation work.

--- PAGE 13 ---
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 9604 13 of 16
However, by weaving automatic and manual tasks together, we can automatically
retrieve component candidates quickly and reliably and present them with meaningful
and readable information to humans. We also benefit from manual screening to ensure
the results are valid and fit flexible requirements (but reasonable enough for humans)
of slicing.
6.2. Balance between the Automatic and Manual Tasks
We have considered the possibility of implementing the EAS algorithm with programs
completely without manual intervention. The answer is yes if a comprehensive review
of the repository could be conducted in advance. However, it can be very uneconomical
and difficult to maintain. Pre-programming requires comprehensive manual browsing of
the entire repository and general rule extraction. While manual screening only takes care
of a small subset of the repository and conducts specific judgments. Since the repository
is dynamically developed and used/maintained and all the metamodels and models can
be continuously changing, maintaining the slicing algorithm might be considerably time-
consuming or even become a mission impossible.
However, itispossibletobalanceanddistributetasksinautomaticormanualpartsunder
different situations differently or even dynamically to achieve the best slicing performance.
6.3. Tool Support
Appropriate tool support would speed up and ensure the quality of EAS, especially
for Step 3 and Step 4 in the slicing method. In our case, we programmed the slicing
criteria/algorithms with Python in Step 3. However, note that this type of program is
quite domain-specific and contains common patterns. Therefore, tools can be developed
to enable no/low code programming to configure patterns rather than writing general
code to configure which types of relations are considered. By doing so, not only could the
slicing process be accelerated, but more stakeholders, such as business architects without
programming expertise, could also benefit and conduct the process independently [17].
Tools could be used to address inconsistency issues in Step 4 by highlighting inconsistent
data and providing automatic corrections, for example. They can also provide What You
See Is What You Get (WYSIWYG) functions to facilitate and accelerate the manual screening
in Step 4 by highlighting related components in corresponding views, for instance.
6.4. Data Validation/Dealing with Model Inconsistency
In EAS, data validation is conducted manually, and model inconsistencies (e.g., differ-
ent relations used for similar purposes) are considered/solved flexibly.
All inventory data should contain time and owner information to facilitate later
verification. In our case study, we are the only user/developer of the EAR. However,
in actual scenarios, multiple users/developers usually operate the repository. Therefore,
information about its owner and timestamp may be required for all data in a repository. In
this way, when relevant data are retrieved, whether such data are valid should be verified
in Step 4 according to the timestamp information. Then, if necessary, the owner could be
contacted to double-check and fix/update the data before reusing it.
6.5. Inventory Maintenance
EA inventories should be maintained while using. In the present research, we propose
a cost-effective method primarily for new EA artifact development by reusing EA mod-
els/data in an existing EAR. However, reusing and developing new data is not the end. In
real scenarios, newly developed artifacts should be merged back into the repository. By
doing so, the repository could be continuously and sustainably accumulated/maintained.
Therefore, we should make sure all relevant data can be retrieved in Steps 3–4. In addition,
after using the data in Step 5, newly developed EA data should be merged back properly
to keep the repository consistent.

--- PAGE 14 ---
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 9604 14 of 16
6.6. Other Slicing Techniques/Algorithms
PS techniques/algorithms could be further explored in the EA field. Many PS algo-
rithms exist, such as static, dynamic, or conditional PS and forward or backward PS. We
have only employed the basic algorithm to reveal the feasibility and potential. Considering
the similarities in the two fields, we believe it would be rewarding to explore further and
apply other relevant techniques/methods.
6.7. Other Application Areas
The present method might be useful in more EAM tasks and reusing for new EA
artifacts development. PS has been widely applied in understanding, testing/debugging,
redesigning, reusing, maintaining/evolving, and measuring programs. We believe the
proposed method could be extended/adapted with a similar algorithm and principle for
further application in more tasks.
In addition, we primarily discussed how this method facilitates activities for EA
models. However, this method can also be applied to general model repositories if they
are based on integrated metamodels and even general data repositories. For instance,
Data lakes are emerging to support extracting knowledge from a large number of highly
heterogeneous and rapidly changing data sources [36,37]. New techniques are needed to
extract complex knowledge patterns from data stored in data lakes. The method proposed
in this article might provide some new insights into this goal.
7. Conclusions
In this paper, we proposed to use a method in terms of slicing techniques to extract
and reuse existing EA models. We validated the method with an official EAR hosted by The
Open Group. The results show that it is possible to reuse existing EA models to develop
new EA artifacts to save cost and help keep the single repository consistent for future use.
There are some limitations of the present research. First, we focused on how to reuse
data in an EAR that contains inconsistent data. We have not discussed in depth how to
deal with/fix such inconsistent data in the EAR systematically. Second, we validated our
method mainly by a proof-of-concept case study. Future work will include developing
prototype tools to explore further how to deal with inconsistency issues, maintain the EAR,
and validate the method with user tests.
Author Contributions: Writing—original draft, H.G.; Writing—review & editing, J.L., S.G. and D.S.
All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was partically funded by the Research Council of Norway grant number NFR
295920 (IDUN Project). And the APC was funded by Anhui University grant number Y040418077
and Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security of the People’s Republic of China grant
number Z010146009.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1. ISO/IEC/IEEE. ISO/IEC/IEEE 42020:2019 Software, Systems and Enterprise—Architecture Processes. 2019. Available online:
https://www.iso.org/standard/68982.html (accessed on 7 August 2022).
2. Kotusev, S.; Singh, M.; Storey, I. Consolidating enterprise architecture management research. In Proceedings of the 2015 48th
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, Kauai, HI, USA, 5–8 January 2015; pp. 4069–4078.
3. Kotusev, S. Enterprise architecture and enterprise architecture artifacts: Questioning the old concept in light of new findings.
J. Inf. Technol. 2019, 34, 102–128. [CrossRef]
4. Hauder, M.; Roth, S.; Schulz, C.; Matthes, F. Agile enterprise architecture management: An analysis on the application of agile
principles. In Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium on Business Modeling and Software Design, Luxembourg, 24–26
June 2014; pp. 38–46.

--- PAGE 15 ---
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 9604 15 of 16
5. Gill, A.Q. Agile enterprise architecture modelling: Evaluating the applicability and integration of six modelling standards.
Inf. Softw. Technol. 2015, 67, 196–206. [CrossRef]
6. Guo, H.; Li, J.; Gao, S.; Smite, D. Boost the Potential of EA: Essential Practices. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference
on Enterprise Information Systems, Online Streaming, 26–28 April 2021; Volume 2, pp. 735–742.
7. Weiser, M. Program slicing. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. 1984, 4, 352–357. [CrossRef]
8. Winter, K.; Buckl, S.; Matthes, F.; Schweda, C.M. Investigating the State-of-the-Art in Enterprise Architecture Management
Methods in literature and Practice. In Proceedings of the Mediterranean Conference on Information Systems (MCIS), Tel Aviv,
Israel, 12–14 September 2010; Volume 90.
9. Korhonen, J.J.; Lapalme, J.; McDavid, D.; Gill, A.Q. Adaptive enterprise architecture for the future: Towards a reconceptualization
of EA. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE 18th Conference on Business Informatics (CBI), Paris, France, 29 August–1 September
2016; pp. 272–281.
10. The Open Group. The TOGAF®Standard. 2020. Available online: https://www.opengroup.org/togaf (accessed on 7 August 2022).
11. The Open Group. ARCHIMATE®3.1 SPECIFICATION. Available online: https://pubs.opengroup.org/architecture/archimate3
-doc/ (accessed on 7 August 2022).
12. Gartner. Enterprise Architecture (EA) Tools Reviews and Ratings. Available online: https://www.gartner.com/reviews/market/
enterprise-architecture-tools (accessed on 7 August 2022).
13. Gartner Research. Stage Planning a Business-Outcome-Driven Enterprise Architecture. Available online: https://www.gartner.
com/en/documents/3642517/stage-planning-a-business-outcome-driven-enterprise-arch (accessed on 7 August 2022).
14. Rouhani, B.D.; Mahrin, M.N.r.; Nikpay, F.; Ahmad, R.B.; Nikfard, P. A systematic literature review on Enterprise Architecture
Implementation Methodologies. Inf. Softw. Technol. 2015, 62, 1–20. [CrossRef]
15. Wiśniewski, P.; Kluza, K.; Suchenia, A.; Szała, L.; Lig˛ eza, A. Recomposition of Process Choreographies Using a Graph-Based
Model Repository. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Knowledge Science, Engineering and Management,
Singapore, 6–8 August 2022; pp. 478–488.
16. Di Felice, P.; Paolone, G.; Paesani, R.; Marinelli, M. Design and Implementation of a Metadata Repository about UML Class
Diagrams. A Software Tool Supporting the Automatic Feeding of the Repository. Electronics 2022, 11, 201. [CrossRef]
17. Sandkuhl, K.; Fill, H.-G.; Hoppenbrouwers, S.; Krogstie, J.; Matthes, F.; Opdahl, A.; Schwabe, G.; Uludag, Ö.; Winter, R. From
expert discipline to common practice: A vision and research agenda for extending the reach of enterprise modeling. Bus. Inf. Syst.
Eng. 2018, 60, 69–80. [CrossRef]
18. Borozanov, V.; Hacks, S.; Silva, N. Using machine learning techniques for evaluating the similarity of enterprise architecture
models. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Advanced Information Systems Engineering, Rome, Italy, 3–7 June
2019; pp. 563–578.
19. Tip, F. A Survey of Program Slicing Techniques; Centrum voor Wiskunde en Informatica: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 1994; p. 58.
20. Binkley, D.W.; Gallagher, K.B. Program slicing. Adv. Comput. 1996, 43, 1–50.
21. Horwitz, S.; Reps, T.; Binkley, D. Interprocedural slicing using dependence graphs. ACM Trans. Program. Lang. Syst. (TOPLAS)
1990, 12, 26–60. [CrossRef]
22. Bae, J.H.; Lee, K.; Chae, H.S. Modularization of the UML metamodel using model slicing. In Proceedings of the Fifth International
Conference on Information Technology: New Generations (ITNG 2008), Las Vegas, NV, USA, 7–9 April 2008; pp. 1253–1254.
23. Shaikh, A.; Wiil, U.K. UMLtoCSP (UOST) a tool for efficient verification of UML/OCL class diagrams through model slicing. In
Proceedings of the ACM SIGSOFT 20th International Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering, Cary, NC, USA,
11–16 November 2012; pp. 1–4.
24. Androutsopoulos, K.; Clark, D.; Harman, M.; Krinke, J.; Tratt, L. State-based model slicing: A survey. ACM Comput. Surv. (CSUR)
2013, 45, 1–36. [CrossRef]
25. Levashova, T.; Lundqvist, M.; Pashkin, M. Moving towards automatic generation of information demand contexts: An approach
based on enterprise models and ontology slicing. In Proceedings of the OTM Confederated International Conferences “On the
Move to Meaningful Internet Systems”, Rhodes, Greece, 21–25 October 2006; pp. 1012–1019.
26. Jacobs, D.; Kotzé, P.; Van Der Merwe, A. Towards an enterprise repository framework. In Proceedings of the Joint Workshop on
Advanced Technologies and Techniques for Enterprise Information Systems, Milan, Italy, 6–10 May 2009; pp. 77–89.
27. Hevner, A.R.; March, S.T.; Park, J.; Ram, S. Design science in information systems research. MIS Q. 2004, 28, 75–105. [CrossRef]
28. Tuunanen, T.; Gengler, C.E.; Rossi, M.; Hui, W.; Virtanen, V.; Bragge, J. The Design Science Research Process: A Model for
Producing and Presenting Information Systems Research. Available online: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/228650
671_The_design_science_research_process_A_model_for_producing_and_presenting_information_systems_research (accessed
on 7 August 2022).
29. Walls, J.G.; Widmeyer, G.R.; El Sawy, O.A. Building an information system design theory for vigilant EIS. Inf. Syst. Res. 1992,
3, 36–59. [CrossRef]
30. March, S.T.; Smith, G.F. Design and natural science research on information technology. Decis. Support Syst. 1995,
15, 251–266. [CrossRef]
31. The Open Group. ArchiSurance Case Study, Version 3.1. Available online: https://publications.opengroup.org/y194 (accessed
on 7 August 2022).
32. The Open Group. Available online: https://www.opengroup.org/about-us/who-we-are (accessed on 7 August 2022).

--- PAGE 16 ---
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 9604 16 of 16
33. The Open Group. ArchiSurance Case Study, Version 3.1, ArchiMate®Model Exchange File Format. 2020. Available online:
https://publications.opengroup.org/y194m (accessed on 7 August 2022).
34. The Open Group. ArchiMate®Model Exchange File Format for the ArchiMate Modeling Language, Version 3.1. Available online:
https://publications.opengroup.org/c19c (accessed on 7 August 2022).
35. Beauvoir, P. Archi ArchiMate Modeling. Available online: https://www.archimatetool.com/ (accessed on 7 August 2022).
36. Giudice, P.L.; Musarella, L.; Sofo, G.; Ursino, D. An approach to extracting complex knowledge patterns among concepts
belonging to structured, semi-structured and unstructured sources in a data lake. Inf. Sci. 2019, 478, 606–626. [CrossRef]
37. Diamantini, C.; Lo Giudice, P.; Potena, D.; Storti, E.; Ursino, D. An approach to extracting topic-guided views from the sources of
a data lake. Inf. Syst. Front. 2021, 23, 243–262. [CrossRef]