--- PAGE 1 ---
Exploring the relationship
between IT governance practices
and business/IT alignment
through extreme case analysis in
Belgian mid-to-large size ﬁnancial
enterprises
S. De Haes and W. Van Grembergen
Information Technology and Alignment Research Institute,
University of Antwerp Management School, Antwerp,
Belgium and University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium
Abstract
Purpose – Many thought leaders are promoting information technology (IT) governance and its
supporting practices as an approach to improve business/IT alignment. This paper aims to further
explore this assumed positive relationship between IT governance practices and business/IT alignment.
Design/methodology/approach – This paper explores the relationship between the use of IT
governance practices and business/IT alignment, by creating a business/IT alignment maturity
benchmark and qualitatively comparing the use of IT governance practices in the extreme cases.
Findings – The main conclusion of the research is that all extreme case organisations are leveraging
a broad set of IT governance practices, and that IT governance practices need to obtain at least a
maturity level 2 (on a scale of 5) to positively inﬂuence business/IT alignment. Also, a list of 11 key
enabling IT governance practices is identiﬁed.
Research limitations/implications – This research adheres to the process theory, implying a
limited deﬁnition of prediction. An important opportunity for future research lies in the domain of
complementary statistical correlation research.
Practical implications – This research identiﬁes key IT governance practices that organisations
can leverage to improve business/IT alignment.
Originality/value – This research contributes to new theory building in the IT governance and
alignment domain and provides practitioners with insight on how to implement IT governance in their
organisations.
Keywords Communication technologies, Governance, Case studies, Belgium
Paper type Research paper
Introduction
In many organisations, information technology (IT) has become crucial in the support,
sustainability and growth of the business. This pervasive use of technology has
The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available at
www.emeraldinsight.com/1741-0398.htm
This paper is based on the paper submitted by the authors to the European and Mediterranean
Conference on Information Systems EMCIS 2008, 25-26 May, Al Bostan Rotana, Dubai (ISVN
978-1-902316-58). For more details about EMCIS, please visit www.emcis.org
IT governance
practices and
alignment
615
Received 25 January 2008
Revised 19 March 2008,
6 January 2009
Accepted 18 February 2009
Journal of Enterprise Information
Management
Vol. 22 No. 5, 2009
pp. 615-637
q Emerald Group Publishing Limited
1741-0398
DOI 10.1108/17410390910993563
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jeim/article-pdf/22/5/615/2726897/17410390910993563.pdf by IU Internationale Hochschule user on 14 June 2026

--- PAGE 2 ---
created a critical dependency on IT that calls for a speciﬁc focus on IT governance. IT
governance consists of the leadership and organisational structures and processes that
ensure that the organisation’s IT sustains and extends the organisation’s strategy and
objectives. (IT Governance Institute, 2003; Palmer and Markus, 2000) Today, IT
governance is high on the agenda of many organisations, certainly of those that are
trying to improve the alignment between business and IT (Cumps et al. , 2006; IT
Governance Institute, 2003; Van Grembergen and De Haes, 2008). This research is
focused on further exploring this assumed positive relationship between IT
governance practices and business/IT alignment.
This practice-oriented research focus is relatively unexplored in the academic
literature. Many research projects have focused on the impact of speciﬁc contingencies
on, for example, centralised versus decentralised governance structures (e.g. Ahituv,
1989; Brown and Magill, 1994) and on how strategic alignment impacts business
performance (e.g. Akkermans et al. , 2003; Sabherwal and Chan, 2001). Less research
can be found on how organisations are effectively implementing IT governance in
day-to-day practice and what the impact of these IT governance implementations is on
business/IT alignment.
This research paper aims to be strongly practice-oriented while remaining
academically rigorously executed. This approach complies with the arguments made
by Benbasat and Zmud (1999) targeted at “IS academics who are committed to both
applying rigorously the methodology best suited to their research goals and better
accommodating practical relevance wit h their research endeavours”. Similar
arguments are made in the work of Robey and Markus (1998), who promote
consumable IS research that is both academically rigorous and relevant to practice.
Research question and model
As indicated in the Introduction, the general research question of this study is: “What
is the relationship between IT governance practices and business/IT alignment?”. It is,
however, recognised that in order to maintain a sufﬁcient level of internal validity
within this research project, the research scope needs to be narrowed down. This focus
on internal validity builds on the work of Cook and Campbell (1979), which states that
there is always a balancing act between different types of validity. They argue that “for
investigators with theoretical interests our estimate is that the types of validity, in
order of importance, are probably internal, construct, statistical conclusion, and
external validity [... ] The priority ordering for many applied researchers is something
like internal validity, external validity, construct validity of the effect, statistical
conclusion validity, and construct validity of the cause”. As this research can be
categorised as applied research, the focus is indeed on internal validity in the ﬁrst
place.
To ensure sufﬁcient internal validity, the research was therefore narrowed down on
multiple aspects. In the ﬁrst place, it is acknowledged that the use of IT governance
practices might be different in different types of industries. Organisations in the
ﬁnance industry are highly dependent upon IT, which probably requires the ﬁnance
industry to have a more solid and broad IT governance framework. Therefore, the
focus of this research is only on one sector, more speciﬁcally the ﬁnancial services
sector, to control the contingencies resulting from differences in industries. The choice
of the ﬁnancial services sector is made because, amongst different industries, ﬁnancial
JEIM
22,5
616
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jeim/article-pdf/22/5/615/2726897/17410390910993563.pdf by IU Internationale Hochschule user on 14 June 2026

--- PAGE 3 ---
services, together with manufacturing and retailing, was among ﬁrst industries to use
information technologies, and as such is already more mature in these domains,
making empirical research interesting (Chiasson and Davidson, 2005). Speciﬁcally for
IT governance, the latter is conﬁrmed by recent research from the IT Governance
Institute (2006), indicating that the ﬁnancial services sector is leading – with 31
percent – in having implemented IT governance compared to other sectors such as the
public sector, manufacturing, etc. The scope was also reduced in geographical terms
and regarding the size of organisations. To avoid cultural differences between regions
worldwide and contingencies related to the size of organisations, it was decided to
focus only on typical Belgian ﬁnancial services organisations with headcounts ranging
from 100 to over 1,000 employees.
The ﬁnal scope reduction focuses on the organisational level of IT governance
practices. As indicated by Van Grembergen (2003), IT governance is situated at
multiple layers in the organisation:
. at a strategic management level, where the board is involved;
. at senior/executive management level, within the C-suite and senior management
layer; and
. at the operational level, with IT and business operational management.
This implies that all these levels, business as well as IT, need to be involved in the IT
governance process and they have to understand their individual roles and
responsibilities within the framework. However, Peterson (2003) makes a clear
distinction between IT governance and IT management: IT management is focused on
the effective and efﬁcient internal supply of IT services and products and the
management of present IT operations. IT governance in turn is much broader, and
concentrates on performing and transforming IT to meet the present and future
demands of the business (internal focus) and business customers (external focus). This
higher-level focus of IT governance is conﬁrmed in deﬁnition of IT governance from
the IT Governance Institute (2005), which states that IT governance is the
responsibility of executives and the board of directors. Based on the considerations of
Peterson (2003) and the IT Governance Institute (2005), this research will discard the
operational-oriented level, which according to Peterson (2003) maps to IT management
instead of IT governance.
These limitations in scope of course reduce the generalisability or external validity
of this research. Focusing on other types of organisations would therefore be
interesting domains for further research. Based on the previous argumentation, the
more speciﬁed research question is, as visualised in Figure 1, “What is the relationship
between strategic and senior/executive management level IT governance practices and
business/IT alignment in Belgian mid-to-large size ﬁnancial services organisations?”.
Figure 1.
Research model
IT governance
practices and
alignment
617
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jeim/article-pdf/22/5/615/2726897/17410390910993563.pdf by IU Internationale Hochschule user on 14 June 2026

--- PAGE 4 ---
Research constructs
In previous section, the two main constructs where introduced: IT governance
practices and business/IT alignment. These constructs will now be deﬁned in more
detail.
IT governance practices
How can organisations effectively implement IT governance? As proposed by work by,
amongst others, Peterson (2003), Weill and Ross (2004), Peterson et al. (2002) and Van
Grembergen (2003), IT governance can be deployed using a mixture of various
practices, more speciﬁcally a mixture of structures, processes and relational
mechanisms. IT governance structures include “structural (formal) devices and
mechanisms for connecting and enabling horizontal, or liaison, contacts between
business and IT management (decision-making) functions” (Van Grembergen, 2003)
(e.g. steering committees). IT governance processes refer to “formalisation and
institutionalisation of strategic IT decision making or IT monitoring procedures” (Van
Grembergen, 2003) (e.g. IT balanced scorecard). The relational mechanisms ﬁnally are
about “the active participation of, and collaborative relationship among, corporate
executives, IT management, and business management” (Van Grembergen, 2003) (e.g.
training). Relational mechanisms are crucial in the IT governance framework and
paramount for attaining and sustaining business/IT alignment, even when the
appropriate structures and processes are in place (Keill et al. , 2002; Weill and
Broadbent, 1998; Henderson and Venkatraman, 1993; Callahan and Keyes, 2003).
In recent research reported at the EMCIS 2008 Conference (De Haes and Van
Grembergen, 2008), a detailed list of IT governance practices, speciﬁcally focused at
the Belgian ﬁnancial services sector, was validated by a group of 22 industry experts.
This research resulted in a list of 33 IT governance practices at strategic and
senior/executive management level, which will be a suitable basis for exploring the use
of IT governance structures, processes and relational mechanisms in the case
organisations in this research (see Table I).
Business/IT alignment
What does “alignment between the business and IT” mean exactly? Duffy (2002)
formulated the following deﬁnition: “the process and goal of achieving competitive
advantage through developing and sustaining a symbiotic relationship between
business and IT”. The idea behind strategic alignment is very comprehensive, but the
question is how organisations can achieve this ultimate goal. Henderson and
Venkatraman (1993) were the ﬁrst to clearly describe the inter-relationship between
business strategies and IT strategies and business and IT organisational structures
and processes in their well-known Strategic Alignment Model. Many authors have
used this model for further research, including Luftman and Brier (1999), Burn and
Szeto (2000), Maes (1999) and Smaczny (2001). An important challenge for researchers
in the alignment discussion is about how one can effectively measure alignment in an
organisation. As an answer to this challenge, Sledgianowski et al. (2006) developed a
validated instrument, which will be leveraged in this research as a basis to measure
alignment.
By examining the relationship between IT governance and alignment, we respond
to a need in this research ﬁeld that was reported by Chan and Reich (2007). In their
JEIM
22,5
618
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jeim/article-pdf/22/5/615/2726897/17410390910993563.pdf by IU Internationale Hochschule user on 14 June 2026

--- PAGE 5 ---
Domain Index IT governance practice Deﬁnition
IT governance
structures
S1 IT strategy committee at the level of the board of
directors
Committee at the level of the board of directors to
endure that IT is a regular agenda item and
reporting issue for the board of directors
S2 IT expertise at the level of the board of directors Members of the board of directors have expertise
and experience regarding the value and risk of IT
S3 (IT) audit committee at the level of the board of
directors
Independent committee at the level of the board of
directors overviewing (IT) assurance activities
S4 CIO on executive committee CIO is a full member of the executive committee
S5 CIO reporting to CEO and/or COO CIO has a direct reporting line to the CEO and/or
COO
S6 IT steering committee (IT investment evaluation/
prioritisation at executive/senior management level)
Steering committee at executive or senior
management level responsible for determining
business priorities in IT investments
S7 IT governance function/ofﬁcer Function in the organisation responsible for
promoting, driving and managing IT governance
processes
S8 Security/compliance/risk ofﬁcer Function responsible for security, compliance and/
or risk, which possibly impacts IT
S9 IT project steering committee Steering committee composed of business and IT
people focusing on prioritising and managing IT
projects
S10 IT security steering committee Steering committee composed of business and IT
people focusing on IT-related risks and security
issues
S11 Architecture steering committee Committee composed of business and IT people
providing architecture guidelines and advice on
their application
S12 Integration of governance/alignment tasks in roles
and responsibilities
Documented roles and responsibilities, include
governance/alignment tasks for business and IT
people (cf. Weill)
(continued)
Table I.
List of IT governance
practices for the Belgian
ﬁnancial services sector
IT governance
practices and
alignment
619
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jeim/article-pdf/22/5/615/2726897/17410390910993563.pdf by IU Internationale Hochschule user on 14 June 2026

--- PAGE 6 ---
Domain Index IT governance practice Deﬁnition
IT governance
processes
P1 Strategic information systems planning Formal process to deﬁne and update the IT strategy
P2 IT performance measurement (e.g. IT balanced
scorecard)
IT performance measurement in domains of
corporate contribution, user orientation, operational
excellence and future orientation
P3 Portfolio management (including business cases,
information economics, ROI, payback)
Prioritisation process for IT investments and
projects in which business and IT is involved
(including business cases)
P4 Charge back arrangements – total cost of ownership
(e.g. activity-based costing)
Methodology to charge IT costs back to business
units, to enable an understanding of the total cost of
ownership
P5 Service level agreements Formal agreements between business and IT about
IT development projects or IT operations
P6 IT governance framework COBIT Process-based IT governance and control
framework
P7 IT governance assurance and self-assessment Regular self-assessments or independent assurance
activities on the governance and control over IT
P8 Project governance/management methodologies Processes and methodologies to govern and
manage IT projects
P9 IT budget control and reporting Processes to control and report upon budgets of IT
investments and projects
P10 Beneﬁts management and reporting Processes to monitor the planned business beneﬁts
during and after implementation of the IT
investments/projects
P11 COSO/ERM Framework for internal control
(continued)
Table I.
JEIM
22,5
620
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jeim/article-pdf/22/5/615/2726897/17410390910993563.pdf by IU Internationale Hochschule user on 14 June 2026

--- PAGE 7 ---
Domain Index IT governance practice Deﬁnition
IT governance
relational
mechanisms
R1 Job-rotation IT staff working in the business units and business
people working in IT
R2 Co-location Physically locating business and IT people close to
each other
R3 Cross-training Training business people about IT and/or training
IT people about business
R4 Knowledge management Systems (intranet, etc.) to share and distribute
knowledge about IT governance framework,
responsibilities, tasks, etc.
R5 Business/IT account management Bridging the gap between business and IT by
means of account managers who acts as go-
betweens
R6 Executive/senior management giving a good
example
Senior business and IT management acting as
“partners”
R7 Informal meetings between business and IT
executive/senior management
Informal meetings, with no agenda, where business
and IT senior management talk about general
activities, directions, etc. (e.g. during informal
lunches)
R8 IT leadership Ability of CIO or similar role to articulate a vision
for IT’s role in the company and ensure that this
vision is clearly understood by managers
throughout the company
R9 Internal corporate communication addressing IT on
a regular basis
Internal corporate communication regularly
addressed general IT issues
R10 IT governance awareness campaigns Campaigns to explain to business and IT people the
need for IT governance
Source: De Haes and Van Grembergen (2008).
Table I.
IT governance
practices and
alignment
621
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jeim/article-pdf/22/5/615/2726897/17410390910993563.pdf by IU Internationale Hochschule user on 14 June 2026

--- PAGE 8 ---
research, they provide a literature review of the alignment domain until now, coming to
the conclusion that more research and exploration is required into the means or
antecedents of alignment. They also stress it is important not only to list potential
antecedents of alignment (as other research efforts did), but also to identify
relationships between them and towards alignment. One of the goals of this research is
indeed to identify a set of antecedents in terms of structures, processes and relational
mechanisms, to position these antecedents into a holistic system and to explore the
relationship towards alignment.
Research assumptions
When doing research, it is important to clarify what the researcher’s underlying views
are on human nature, organisational requisites, social processes, etc. These issues
“constitute the theory’s assumptions – the theoretical glue that welds the model
together” (Whetten, 1989). To address this issue, this research builds on the work of
Markus and Robey (1998) by categorising the theory building work according to three
dimensions of causal structure:
(1) causal agency;
(2) logical structure; and
(3) level of analysis.
Causal agency refers to the researcher’s beliefs of the nature of causality – whether
external forces cause chang e (technological imperat ive), whether people act
purposefully to accomplish certain objectives (organisational imperative) or whether
changes occur unpredictably from the interactions of people (emergent imperative).
This work is classiﬁed as being in the organisational imperative, implying that
“human actors design information systems to satisfy organisation needs for
information”. (Markus and Robey, 1998) This premise is consistent with our
assumption that organisations are purposefully setting up governance practices to
ensure that the information systems fulﬁl the organisation’s needs. This idea is closely
related to the resource-based view framework of Peppard and Ward (2004), which was
also used as a basis in similar research on IT governance and alignment by Cumpset al.
(2006). This framework distinguishes between resources, competences and capabilities.
Resources are stocks of available factors that are owned or controlled by the
organisation, including information, systems, technology, skills and knowledge.
Resources in themselves do not create business value and require organisational
competences. These competences refer to the capacity of the organisation to deploy
resources using processes, practices and structures to affect a desired end. Finally, a
capability refers to the strategic app lication of competences to accomplish
organisational goals (Peppard and Ward, 2004). Our research clearly focuses on
building up the required competences in the organisation by means of IT governance
processes, structures and relational mechanisms.
Logical structure refers to the temporal aspect of theory (static versus dynamic) and
the logical relationships between the causes and outcomes. On this dimension, Mohr
(1982) distinguishes between variance and process theories. The variance theory starts
from the premise that the cause is necessary and sufﬁcient for the outcome, while the
process theory more starts from the idea that outcomes may not occur, even when the
cause exists (cause was necessary but not sufﬁcient). As the research domain operates
JEIM
22,5
622
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jeim/article-pdf/22/5/615/2726897/17410390910993563.pdf by IU Internationale Hochschule user on 14 June 2026

--- PAGE 9 ---
in complex organisational and behavioural settings, variance theory is too stringent
and therefore this research adheres clearly to the process theory. This implies a more
limited deﬁnition of prediction and generalisability. In our case, our conclusions would
be stating that a high degree of business/IT alignment is likely to happen when an
organisation leverages a mix of IT governance practices and alignment in unlikely to
happen in other cases. However, we cannot make the correlation with absolute
certainty because of the complexity of the organisational and behavioural settings.
Finally, the level of analysis in our research is situated a macro-level, i.e. the level of
the organisation as a whole. However, as Coleman (1986) also proposes “not to remain
at the macro-social level but to move down to the level of individual actions and back
up again”, many of the data in our research will be gathered at the individual level.
This “mixed-level” strategy enables us to move across levels of analysis to capture rich
information on the phenomena taking place in a complex organisational setting.
Research approach
Because research in the domain of IT governance implementations and its relationship
with business/IT alignment is in its early stages and theoretical models are scarcely
available, the nature of this research is exploratory rather than hypothesis testing.
Indeed, the concept of IT governance, as it is understood now, only emerged in the late
1990s (De Haes and Van Grembergen, 2006; Weill and Ross, 2004) and there has been
little research material developed on which we can build. The latter is not only true
because it is a new research domain, but as denoted by Benbasat and Zmud (1999),
“generally, IS researchers have been less successful than their colleagues in other
business school disciplines in developing a cumulative research tradition. Without
such cumulative results, it becomes difﬁcult, if not impossible, to develop and assess
strong theoretical models such that prescriptive actions can conﬁdently be suggested
for practice”. By exploring this research domain in detail we do, however, want to
contribute to creating a basis for future research, by building theoretical models and
generating potential hypotheses to be tested. Our choice for exploratory research is
conﬁrmed by similar research published by Mahmood and Mann (1993), who were
investigating the relationship between investments in IT and economic performance.
Similar to our research domain, that subject was fairly new at that time and high on the
agenda in many organisations. However, based on the observation that theoretical
models were not available, they opted for exploratory research to build a basis for
future study.
Exploratory research often builds on secondary research, such as reviewing the
available literature and/or data, qualitative approaches such as informal discussions,
and more formal approaches through in-depth interviews, case studies or pilot studies
(Ryerson, 2007). Also for this research project, a triangulation of research methods was
applied. This triangulation enables us to obtain a richer insight in reality, as also
advocated by Mingers (2001): “different research methods focus on different aspects of
reality and therefore a richer understanding of a research topic will be gained by
combining several methods together in a single piece of research or research program”.
The research is composed of two major phases. The goal of phase one is to identify
extreme cases (low performers and high-performers) based on a benchmark of
business/IT alignment in Belgian mid-to-large size ﬁnancial services organisations. To
achieve this, CIOs of Belgian ﬁnancial services organisations were contacted via
IT governance
practices and
alignment
623
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jeim/article-pdf/22/5/615/2726897/17410390910993563.pdf by IU Internationale Hochschule user on 14 June 2026

--- PAGE 10 ---
existing CIO networks in Belgium such as CIONet, indicating that the creation of this
benchmark would be done in a fully anonymous way. Resulting from this request, ten
organisations committed to participation in the research, all having their main
home-market in Belgium, representing over 20 per cent of the total population in this
ﬁeld ( cf. Year Report 2006 , Belgian Commission of Banking, Finance and Assurance,
reference point “Finance organisations according to Belgian law”. This includes small,
medium and large organisations, while we only addressed mid-to-large size
organisations). This sample was not used for further statistical correlation research,
but only as a means to identify extreme cases within the sample and to analyse
qualitatively each of these extreme cases in more depth. In each organisation, it was
asked that ﬁve to ten senior business and IT managers completed a questionnaire
measuring business/IT alignment maturity, leading up to 100 data entry points. This
questionnaire was based on an instrument already used in previous research by
Luftman (2000) and Cumps et al. (2006) and later validated by Sledgianowski et al.
(2006). The latter validation work resulted in an assessment instrument based on a
model using multiple criteria and multiple levels to represent different degrees of
alignment, from less mature to more mature (Sledgianowski et al. , 2006). The
assessment instrument covers 22 questions in six domains:
(1) communication;
(2) competency and value measurement;
(3) governance;
(4) partnership;
(5) scope and architecture; and
(6) skills.
Each question has to be rated on a scale of six (from 0 to 5). Averaging the results over
all respondents of one organisation provides an alignment maturity score between 0
and 5. All the activities in phase one took place in the period November 2006 to
February 2007.
In this phase of the research, it was important to address the “mortality” threat
when evaluating internal validity (Trochim, 2001). It could have been the case that only
the high performers are willing to participate in the survey, as they are well aware of
the importance of IT governance, while low performers are simply not interested and
will not complete the survey. However, the results of the benchmark demonstrated an
equal spread between high, low and average performers, providing conﬁdence that we
did reach all types of organisations.
When the benchmark was created, some organisations were selected for further case
study investigation in phase two. When selecting an organisation for a case study,
researchers often use information-oriented sampling, during which speciﬁc cases are
deliberately selected based on predeﬁned criteria, as opposed to random sampling
(Flyvbjerg, 2006; Yin, 2002). This is because the typical or average case is often not the
richest in information. Extreme or atypical cases often reveal more information
because they activate more basic mechanisms. Extreme cases research is particularly
useful to obtain information on unusual cases, which can be especially problematic or
especially good in a more closely deﬁned sense (Flyvbjerg, 2006). Or in other words:
“Since all high-performing organisations are extreme cases, so one must study extreme
JEIM
22,5
624
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jeim/article-pdf/22/5/615/2726897/17410390910993563.pdf by IU Internationale Hochschule user on 14 June 2026

--- PAGE 11 ---
cases to understand excellence. [ ... ] Study of extreme cases can help researchers
counteract over-generalisation, narrow focus on averages, and static theories about
systems in equilibrium. Extreme cases help to expose a world ﬁlled with individuality,
complexity, variety, and change” (Starbuck, 2004). Based on these considerations, the
extreme cases were retained out of our sample of ten organisations, more speciﬁcally
those with the highest alignment maturity and those with the lowest alignment
maturity. To deﬁne the minimal set of extreme cases required to allow for in-depth
cross-case analysis, we build on the work of Eisenhardt (1989):
With fewer than four cases, it is often difﬁcult to generate theory with much complexity. [... ]
With more than ten cases, it quickly becomes difﬁcult to cope with the complexity and
volume of the data.
In our data set, there were two organisations clearly positioned towards to low-end of
alignment maturity and two organisations clearly positioned at the high-end of
alignment maturity. These four organisations were retained for analytic case research,
in this way complying with Eisenhardt’s minimum requirements in terms of number of
cases. Our idea for using analytic case study research in this phase in strengthened by
Benbasat and Zmud (1999), who argue that:
[... ] case study research is particularly appropriate for certain types of problems: those in
which research and theory are at their early, formative stages, and sticky practice-based
problems where the experiences of the actors of important and the context of action is critical.
This reasoning is very much applicable to our research, in which we want to capture
knowledge from practitioners and develop theories from it.
Within each of those extreme cases, an interview/workshop was organised (two to
three hours in duration) with a senior IT and senior business manager to investigate
the maturity of the individual IT governance practices used within the case
organisation. These interviews took place in the period February 2007 to April 2007
and were structured according to the list of 33 executive/senior management and
strategic level IT governance practices as deﬁned previously (see Table I). For each of
the practices, the interviewees were asked to assign a maturity score from 0 to 5, based
on a generic maturity model (Table II) as proposed by the IT Governance Institute
(2005). At the beginning of each interview, the researcher explained this maturity
model to ensure common understanding of the scales. After that, it was up to the
interviewees to assign maturity scores for each of the IT governance practices, during
which process the researcher only acted as observer and independent referee to ensure
that no organisation was structurally over- or under-estimated itself compared to the
other organisations.
For each of the assigned scores, evidence was captured during the interviews by
taking notes and tape-recording the interviews. This data was supplemented with data
captured during telephone and e-mail conversations after the interviews and extra
internal documentation that was shared (PowerPoint presentations, notes, minutes,
etc.). This approach allowed the researcher to build up a short narrative for each of the
assigned scores, as rationale. This approach is consistent with generally accepted
assurance practices as applied by auditors in real-life organisation to obtain an
objective and accurate view on how practices are effectively applied (IT Governance
Institute, 2007). All data received from the different sources was organised in a
structured way to allow for cross-case analysis.
IT governance
practices and
alignment
625
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jeim/article-pdf/22/5/615/2726897/17410390910993563.pdf by IU Internationale Hochschule user on 14 June 2026

--- PAGE 12 ---
Results and interpretations
This section reports and interprets the results of the two research phases as described
above. Firstly, the business/IT alignment maturity benchmark will be discussed. After
that, the results of the extreme cases analysis are presented.
Research phase 1: creating a business/IT alignment benchmark
To create a business/IT alignment benchmark, Belgian ﬁnancial services organisations
were invited to participate in the research, leveraging the channels of existing CIO
networks. From this request, ten organisations committed to participate under the
condition that anonymity was guaranteed. Table III gives an overview of the proﬁles of
each of those ten organisations. Three were mid-sized organisations (between 100 and
1,000 employees in Belgium) and seven were large-sized organisations (more than 1,000
employees in Belgium) and most covered both banking and insurance activities. One
organisation (D) had both banking and insurance activities, but the research only
focused on banking activities. The core business of organisation F was not in real
banking or insurance activities, but in supporting ﬁnancial transactions for other
ﬁnancial organisations.
Maturity level Description
0. Non-existent Complete lack of any recognisable processes. The enterprise has
not even recognised that there is an issue to be addressed
1. Initial/ad hoc There is evidence that the enterprise has recognised that the
issues exist and need to be addressed. There are, however, no
standardised processes; instead there are ad hoc approaches that
tend to be applied on an individual or case-by-case basis. The
overall approach to management is disorganised
2. Repeatable but intuitive Processes have developed to the stage where similar procedures
are followed by different people undertaking the same task.
There is no formal training or communication of standard
procedures, and responsibility is left to the individual. There is a
high degree of reliance on the knowledge of individuals, and
therefore errors are likely
3. Deﬁned process Procedures have been standardised and documented, and
communicated through training. It is mandated that these
processes should be followed; however, it is unlikely that
deviations will be detected. The procedures themselves are not
sophisticated, but are the formalisation of existing practices
4. Managed and measurable Management monitors and measures compliance with
procedures and takes action where processes appear not to be
working effectively. Processes are under constant improvement
and provide good practice. Automation and tools are used in a
limited or fragmented way
5. Optimised Processes have been reﬁned to a level of good practice, based on
the results of continuous improvement and maturity modelling
with other enterprises. IT is used in an integrated way to
automate the workﬂow, providing tools to improve quality and
effectiveness, making the enterprise quick to adapt
Source: ITGI (2005)
Table II.
Generic maturity model
JEIM
22,5
626
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jeim/article-pdf/22/5/615/2726897/17410390910993563.pdf by IU Internationale Hochschule user on 14 June 2026

--- PAGE 13 ---
In each of these organisations, the researchers managed to have ﬁve to ten business
and IT senior managers complete the validated alignment maturity survey. In total 44
senior IT managers and 40 senior business managers across the ten organisations
completed the survey. The results are shown in Figure 2.
The total business/IT alignment maturity average is 2.69 on scale of 0-5, with six
organisations (C, D, E, F, G, H) being relatively very close to the overall average.
Comparing the maturity scores assigned by business and IT per organisation reveals
that for most organisations the difference between the business and IT rating is not
large. Trochim (2001) refers to this as convergent validity, providing relative
conﬁdence in our measurement tool, as it shows that two totally independent groups
(business and IT) within one single organisation are coming up with very similar
appreciations for the business/IT alignment maturity. The largest deviations are found
in organisations D and F (respectively 0.64 and 0.69), but these organisations will not
be used for further investigation. This conﬁdence in the measurement instrument is
supported by work of Cumps et al. (2006), who used a very similar measurement
instrument based on Luftman’s (2000) maturity model, and found that the alignment
scoring was sufﬁciently robust for further analysis. Moreover, they came up with a
Organisation Number of employees in Belgium Main activities
A More than 1,000 Banking and insurance
B Between 100 and 1,000 Banking and insurance
C More than 1,000 Banking
D More than 1,000 Banking
E More than 1,000 Banking and insurance
F More than 1,000 Financial transaction services
G Between 100 and 1,000 Banking and insurance
H Between 100 and 1,000 Banking and insurance
I More than 1,000 Banking and insurance
J More than 1,000 Banking and insurance
Table III.
Proﬁles of case
organisations
Figure 2.
Business/IT alignment
maturity benchmark
IT governance
practices and
alignment
627
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jeim/article-pdf/22/5/615/2726897/17410390910993563.pdf by IU Internationale Hochschule user on 14 June 2026

--- PAGE 14 ---
bell-shaped distribution of alignment in 641 organisations, with most organisations
achieving an average alignment score and fewer organisation achieving a very positive
or low alignment score. This bell-shaped result is replicated and conﬁrmed in our
ten-organisation sample, with six out of ten organisations being very close to the
average, only two organisations being low in alignment maturity and only two
organisations being high in alignment maturity. Regarding the latter two
organisations, conﬁrmation of their high alignment score was found in the
McKinsey Annual European Banking IT Cost Benchmark Study , where it appeared
that these two organisations (I and J) also performed above average in their research (in
a European sample) on the question “What is the level of alignment between the IT
strategy and the business?” (McKinsey, 2006).
Assuming that this sample of ten organisations is representative of the Belgian
ﬁnancial services sector, the conclusion is that the average business/IT alignment
maturity in the whole Belgian ﬁnancial services sector is 2.69. Such a maturity score
only becomes meaningful when it can be compared against a target or against results
in for example other sectors. An interesting consideration here is what the desired
target would be for the ﬁnancial services sector. There is no literature available in this
domain, but taking the high-dependency on IT into account, one could argue that
maturity level of at least 3 would be required, which implies standardised and
documented processes and procedures. There is also not much data available to
compare this result against other sectors. However, reference can be made to the study
of Luftman (2003), who created a benchmark within 25 Fortune 500 organisations,
coming up with a total average of 2.17. This would imply that the Belgian ﬁnancial
services sector on average performs somewhat better on business/IT alignment
compared to the sample of Fortune 500 organisations, although these results have to be
interpreted with great care as the study of Luftman (2003) was based on an initial
version of the measurement instrument (not yet validated at that time). On the other
hand, this positive result is maybe not that surprising as the sample in this research is
only focused on the ﬁnancial services sector, for which one could expect an above
average alignment maturity compared to other industries, such as manufacturing,
because of the high dependency on IT and the strong impact of regulation.
Organisations A and B obtained the lowest alignment maturity scores, while
organisations I and J obtained the highest alignment scores. These four organisations
were retained for the extreme cases research executed in phase 2 and will be referred to
as “highly aligned organisations” (I, J) and “poorly aligned organisations” (A, B) in the
following sections.
Research phase 2: measuring and comparing IT governance practices maturity in
extreme cases
As mentioned above, the extreme cases research focused on the poorly aligned
organisations A and B and the highly aligned organisations I and J, as presented in
Figure 2. In each of these organisations, interviews/workshops took place to deﬁne the
maturity of each of the IT governance practices used (cf. Table I), on a scale from 0 to 6.
During each workshop, it was ensured that at least one senior representative from the
business and one senior representative from IT was present who had a view on how IT
governance was addressed in their environment. The proﬁles of the interviewees in
each of these organisations are visualised in Table IV. In organisation A, a separate
JEIM
22,5
628
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jeim/article-pdf/22/5/615/2726897/17410390910993563.pdf by IU Internationale Hochschule user on 14 June 2026

--- PAGE 15 ---
interview was done after the workshop with the Director of the Organisation
Department, which was recommended during the workshop by the two initial
interviewees, to get a full view of the IT governance practices.
The maturity levels for each of the IT governance practices, as assigned by the
interviewees, are provided in Table V. An example of how the evidence for supporting
these scores was captured is provided in the Appendix (example for organisation A).
From Table V, it is clear that all extreme cases, both the poorly and highly aligned
organisations, did have a lot of practices in place (i.e. above maturity level 0). However,
calculating the average maturity over all IT governance practices per organisation (see
also Figure 3), reveals that the average maturity of practices is clearly lower in the
poorly aligned organisations (A, B) compared to the highly aligned organisations (I, J).
This outcome indicates that organisations with more mature IT governance practices
probably obtain a higher degree of business/IT alignment maturity. Moreover, it
appears that the average maturity of IT governance practices in the poorly aligned
organisations is clearly below maturity level 2. This ﬁnding suggests that a maturity
level of at least 2 is required to positively inﬂuence business/IT alignment, implying
that at least repeatable structures and processes should be in place, leading to “similar
procedures being followed by different people undertaking the same task” (see the
generic maturity model of Table II). This result is supported by the work of Cumpset al.
(2006), who conclude in their research: “Typically, what we see is that organisations
with high alignment scores have more mature structures, practices and processes in
place for measuring and managing their ICT investments. So building routines into
your structures, practices and processes rather than ad-hoc management of ICT
investments contributes to an organisation’s alignment capability”.
When comparing the averages of IT governance practices maturity per domain of
structures, processes and relational mechanisms, it again appears that in general the
highly aligned organisations have clearly more mature IT governance structures and
processes, as shown in Figure 4. This ﬁgure also shows that that processes on average
where less mature compared to structures, indicating that it is probably more difﬁcult to
implement processes compared to structures. This ﬁnding is also supported by the
personal experiences of the researchers in running an IT Governance Business Game
amongst a group of business and IT professionals at their management school. The
participants in this game are confronted with a ﬁctitious organisation with low
business/IT alignment and the assignment is to deﬁne IT governance practices for the
organisation to improve that situation. Mostly, the participants are very fast in deﬁning
Organisation Interviewees
A Adjunct-Director, Organisation Department
Service Delivery Manager
Director, Organisation Department
B CEO
Change Manager
I Head of IT Governance
Head of IT Development
Head Project Management Ofﬁce
J CIO
Head of Accounting
Table IV.
Interviewees in the case
study
IT governance
practices and
alignment
629
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jeim/article-pdf/22/5/615/2726897/17410390910993563.pdf by IU Internationale Hochschule user on 14 June 2026

--- PAGE 16 ---
AB I J
S 1 0000
S 2 4101
S 3 3333
S 4 2520
S 5 2545
S 6 2244
S 7 2044
S 8 2345
S 9 2244
S 1 0 0004
S 1 1 0013
S 1 2 2125
P 1 1214
P 2 1244
P 3 1244
P 4 0025
P 5 0024
P 6 0014
P 7 1011
P 8 2334
P 9 1245
P 1 0 0113
P 1 1 0000
R 1 1012
R 2 5233
R 3 2021
R 4 3344
R 5 2004
R 6 2255
R 7 2000
0 R 8 1444
R 9 2023
R 1 0 1111
1.48 1.39 2.21 3.12
Table V.
Maturity of IT
governance practices in
extreme cases
Figure 3.
Average IT governance
maturity in extreme cases
JEIM
22,5
630
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jeim/article-pdf/22/5/615/2726897/17410390910993563.pdf by IU Internationale Hochschule user on 14 June 2026

--- PAGE 17 ---
structures such as steering committees, but it each time appears to be a much bigger
challenge to deﬁne supporting IT governance processes such as portfolio management.
Where in the literature the importance of relational mechanisms is stressed (see
section on “Research constructs”), this importance was not clearly demonstrated in this
research. Figure 5 plots the average maturity of structures, processes and relational
mechanisms on a scale per extreme case. Based on previous discussions that highly
aligned organisations on average have more mature IT governance practices, we would
expect a clearly increasing curve for structures, processes and relational mechanisms.
However, the relational mechanisms chart is not consistent with the expectation.
A possible explanation might be that the structures and processes applied in
organisations I and J, which had already been working on IT governance for more than
ﬁve years, were already thoroughly embedded in day-to-day practice and became part
of the organisation’s culture. This could explain that there was less need to manage the
relational aspects of IT governance. Organisations A and B were rather in the phase of
starting up their IT governance efforts, during which issues such as motivating people,
creating awareness, etc., all relational aspects, are relatively more important.
Referring back to Table V, it appears that some IT governance practices are not
used by any of the organisations. The ﬁrst example is “IT strategy committee at the
level of the board of directors”. This practice is promoted as a structure to ensure that
the board gets involved in a structured way in IT governance issues. During the
interviews, organisations B, I and J indicated that the level of board involvement is not
feasible and probably not required. The representatives of the shareholders at that
level are concerned with the core ﬁnancial services activities and less worried about
(operational) IT issues. The exception was organisation A, where the board of directors
was composed of the family owners (instead of shareholders), who are much closer to
the operational activities. “COSO”, a generic framework for internal control, was not
used by any of the organisations for IT governance purposes. Many interviewees were
not aware of the contents of this framework, and where some other interviewees
indicated they assumed it was used in the internal audit department, no speciﬁc links
were identiﬁed towards IT governance or business/IT alignment.
In trying to identify what the real differentiating factors are between poorly and
highly aligned organisations, it is useful to extract those practices that are clearly more
mature in the high performers compared to the low performers (at least one level
difference in maturity) and attain a maturity level equal to or above 2 in the high
performers (because we assume that practices with a maturity less than or equal to 2
Figure 4.
Average maturity of
structures, processes and
relational mechanisms in
extreme cases (1)
IT governance
practices and
alignment
631
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jeim/article-pdf/22/5/615/2726897/17410390910993563.pdf by IU Internationale Hochschule user on 14 June 2026

--- PAGE 18 ---
Figure 5.
Average maturity of
structures, processes and
relational mechanisms in
extreme cases (2)
JEIM
22,5
632
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jeim/article-pdf/22/5/615/2726897/17410390910993563.pdf by IU Internationale Hochschule user on 14 June 2026

--- PAGE 19 ---
will not impact the outcome, as indicated the discussion around Figure 3). This
extracting exercise results in following list:
. IT steering committee;
. IT governance function;
. security/risk/compliancy ofﬁcer;
. IT project steering committee;
. IT performance measurement;
. portfolio management;
. charge back arrangements;
. service level agreements;
. IT budget control and reporting;
. knowledge management; and
. executive/senior management giving a good example.
As a recommendation for practitioners, this list of practices could be regarded as a set
of critical success factors in enabling alignment in the organisation. Of course, it should
be acknowledged that this set of practices will not be a “necessary and sufﬁcient” set of
practices to create a full IT governance framework, but it is likely to be a very good
starting point that can be used as a basis to quick-start IT governance and improve the
governance framework starting from there.
Conclusions
The speciﬁc research question in the paper was: “What is the relationship between
strategic and executive/senior management level IT governance practices and
business/IT alignment maturity in Belgian mid-to-large size ﬁnancial services
organisations?”. To answer this question, a detailed business/IT alignment maturity
benchmark was created in the Belgian ﬁnancial services sector, and within that
benchmark extreme cases were analysed trying to ﬁnd a qualitative relationship
between the maturity of IT governance practices and business/IT alignment maturity.
From the benchmarking results, it appears that the overall business/IT alignment
maturity is 2.69 on a scale of 0-5 in the Belgian ﬁnancial services sector. The
benchmark contained two organisations with a relatively high business/IT alignment
maturity compared to the overall average and two organisations with a relatively low
business/IT alignment maturity compared to the benchmark. The other six
organisations were all situated around the overall average. An interesting
consideration here is what the desired target would be for the ﬁnancial services
sector. There is no literature available in this domain, but taking the high dependency
on IT into account, one could argue that a maturity level of at least 3 would be required,
which implies standardised and documented processes and procedures.
When comparing the use of IT governance practices (structures, processes and
relational mechanisms) in those extreme cases, in appears that in general the highly
aligned organisations have more mature IT governance structures and processes. This
could indicate that more mature IT governance structures and processes will lead to
better business/IT alignment maturity. It was also shown that organisations with a
low business/IT alignment maturity did have a lot of practices in place, but the average
IT governance
practices and
alignment
633
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jeim/article-pdf/22/5/615/2726897/17410390910993563.pdf by IU Internationale Hochschule user on 14 June 2026

--- PAGE 20 ---
maturity of these practices was below maturity level 2. This might indicate that the
impact on business/IT alignment of IT governance practices that have a maturity level
lower than 2 is limited. It also appears that processes on average were less mature as
compared to structures, indicating that it is more difﬁcult to implement processes
compared to structures.
The impact of relational mechanisms on business/IT alignment maturity was not
clearly demonstrated in this research. However, a ﬁnding was that the two highly
aligned organisations had started their IT governance implementation many years ago
and came to a point where many structures and processes were embedded in
day-to-day practice. At that time, the importance of relational mechanisms becomes
less important. The relational mechanisms are likely very important in the initiating
phase of IT governance, in which the two poorly aligned organisations were situated.
Analysing the high performers in more detail revealed that they distinguish
themselves by a set of IT governance practices that are clearly more mature compared
to the low performers: IT steering c ommittee, IT gover nance function,
security/risk/compliancy ofﬁcer, IT project steering committee, IT performance
measurement, portfolio management, charge back arrangements, service level
agreements, IT budget control and r eporting, knowledge management, and
executive/senior management giving a good example. As a recommendation
towards practitioners, these practices can be seen as critical success factors for
improving business/IT alignment.
Limitations and further research
As mentioned earlier, this research adheres to the process theory, implying a limited
deﬁnition of prediction. In our case, our conclusions are stating that a high degree of
business/IT alignment is likely to happen when an organisation leverages a deﬁned
mix of mature IT governance practices and alignment in unlikely to happen in other
cases. However, we cannot make the correlation with absolute certainty because of the
complexity of the organisational and behavioural settings and because of the
exploratory mode of the research. Therefore, an important opportunity for future
research lies in the domain of a complementary statistical correlation research. While
our research interpreted IT governance as a holistic set of practices and tried to
correlate the impact of this set on business/IT alignment, new research could focus on
trying to identify quantitatively correlations between the use of speciﬁc individual
practices and alignment. The results of that type of research would be very valuable in
better understanding the impact of the separate and groups of IT governance practices
on business/IT alignment. As an inspiration for more quantitative research, some
interesting potential hypothesis can be derived from this exploratory research, such as:
“IT governance practices should attain a maturity level above 2 (on a scale of 5) to have
an impact on business/IT alignment”
It was also explained at the beginning of this paper that the focus of this applied
research was on internal validity in the ﬁrst place. Starting from this internal validity
concern, this research focused on the Belgian ﬁnancial services sector only, negatively
impacting the external validity or generalisability of this research. However, it can be
expected that many conclusions might also apply to other sectors. Further research
could support that assumption.
JEIM
22,5
634
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jeim/article-pdf/22/5/615/2726897/17410390910993563.pdf by IU Internationale Hochschule user on 14 June 2026

--- PAGE 21 ---
References
Ahituv, N. (1989), “Factors affecting the policy for distributing computing resources”,
MIS Quarterly, Vol. 13 No. 4, pp. 389-401.
Akkermans, H.A., Bogerd, P., Yucesan, E. and van Wassenhove, L.N. (2003), “The impact of ERP
on supply chain management: exploratory ﬁndings from a European Delphi study”,
European Journal of Operational Research , Vol. 146, pp. 284-301.
Benbasat, I. and Zmud, R.W. (1999), “Empirical research in information systems: the practice of
relevance”, MIS Quarterly, Vol. 23 No. 1, pp. 3-16.
Brown, C.V. and Magill, S.L. (1994), “Alignment of the IS functions with the enterprise: towards a
model of antecedents”, MIS Quarterly, Vol. 18 No. 4, pp. 371-403.
Burn, J.M. and Szeto, C. (2000), “A comparison of the views of business and IT management on
success factors for strategic alignment”, Information & Management, Vol. 37, pp. 197-216.
Callahan, J. and Keyes, D. (2003), “The evolution of IT governance @ NB Power”,
in Van Grembergen, W. (Ed.), Strategies for Information Technology Governance , Idea
Group Publishing, Hershey, PA.
Chan, Y.E. and Reich, B.H. (2007), “IT alignment: what have we learned?”,Journal of Information
Technology, Vol. 22, pp. 297-315.
Chiasson, M.W. and Davidson, E. (2005), “Taking industry seriously in information systems
research”, MIS Quarterly, Vol. 29 No. 4, pp. 591-605.
Coleman, J.S. (1986), “Social theory, social research and a theory of action”, American Journal of
Sociology, Vol. 91 No. 6, pp. 1309-35.
Cook, T.D. and Campbell, D. (1979), Quasi-experimentation: Design and Analysis Issues for Field
Settings, Rand-McNally, Chicago, IL.
Cumps, B., Viaene, S., Dedene, G. and Vandenbulcke, J. (2006), “An empirical study on
business/ICT alignment in European organisations”, Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), Kauai, HI, 4-7 January .
De Haes, S. and Van Grembergen, W. (2006), “IT governance best practices in Belgian
organisations”, Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System
Sciences (HICSS), Kauai, HI, 4-7 January .
De Haes, S. and Van Grembergen, W. (2008), “Exploring the design of an IT governance
minimum baseline in the belgian ﬁnancial services sector”, Proceedings of the European
and Mediterranean Conference on Information Systems (EMCIS), Dubai, 25-26 May .
Duffy, J. (2002), “IT governance and business value part 1: IT governance – an issue of critical
importance”, IDC Document No. 27291.
Eisenhardt, K.M. (1989), “Building theories from case study research”, Academy of Management
Review, Vol. 14 No. 4, pp. 532-50.
Flyvbjerg, B. (2006), “Five misunderstandings about case study research”, Qualitative Inquiry ,
Vol. 12 No. 2, pp. 219-45.
Henderson, J.C., Venkatraman, N. and Oldach, S. (1993), “Continuous strategic alignment,
exploiting information technology capabilities for competitive success”, European
Management Journal, Vol. 11 No. 2, pp. 139-49.
IT Governance Institute (2003), “Board brieﬁng on IT governance”, available at: www.itgi.org
IT Governance Institute (2005), “COBIT”, available at: www.itgi.org
IT Governance Institute (2006), IT Governance Global Status Report , report published by ITGI
and PricewaterhouseCoopers, available at: www.itgi.org
IT Governance Institute (2007), “IT assurance guide”, available at: www.itgi.org
IT governance
practices and
alignment
635
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jeim/article-pdf/22/5/615/2726897/17410390910993563.pdf by IU Internationale Hochschule user on 14 June 2026

--- PAGE 22 ---
Keill, M., Tiwana, A. and Bush, A.A. (2002), “Reconciling user and project manager perceptions
of IT project risk: a delphi study”, Information Systems Journal , Vol. 12, pp. 103-19.
Luftman, J. (2000), “Assessing business-IT alignment maturity”, Communications of the AIS ,
Vol. 4, Article 14, pp. 1-50.
Luftman, J. (2003), “Assessing business-IT alignment maturity”, in Van Grembergen, W. (Ed.)
(Ed.), Strategies for Information Technology Governance , Idea Group Publishing, Hershey,
PA.
Luftman, J. and Brier, T. (1999), “Achieving and sustaining business-IT alignment”, California
Management Review, Vol. 42 No. 1, pp. 109-22.
McKinsey (2006), “Annual European banking IT cost benchmark study”, conﬁdential report,
McKinsey, Chicago, IL.
Maes, R. (1999), “Reconsidering information management through a generic framework”,
PrimaVera Series Working Papers, No. 99-15, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam.
Mahmood, M.A. and Mann, G.J. (1993), “Measuring the organizational impact of information
technology investment; an exploratory study”, Journal of Management Information
Systems, Vol. 10 No. 1, pp. 97-122.
Markus, M.L. and Robey, D. (1998), “Information technology and organisational change: causal
structure in theory and research”, Management Science, Vol. 34 No. 5, pp. 583-99.
Mingers, J. (2001), “Combining IT research methods: towards a pluralist methodology”,
Information Systems Research , Vol. 12 No. 3, pp. 240-59.
Mohr, L.B. (1982), Explaining Organisational Behaviour , Jossey-Bass, San Fransisco, CA.
Palmer, J.W. and Markus, M.L. (2000), “The performance impacts of quick response and strategic
alignment in speciality retailing”, Information Systems Research, Vol. 11 No. 3, pp. 241-59.
Peppard, J. and Ward, J. (2004), “Beyond strategic information systems: towards an IS
capability”, Journal of Strategic Information Systems , Vol. 13 No. 2, pp. 167-94.
Peterson, R. (2003), “Information strategies and tactics for information technology governance”,
in Van Grembergen, W. (Ed.), Strategies for Information Technology Governance , Idea
Group Publishing, Hershey, PA.
Peterson, R., Parker, M.M. and Ribbers, P. (2002), “Information technology governance processes
under environmental dynamism: investigating competing theories of decision making and
knowledge sharing”, Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Information
Systems.
Robey, D. and Markus, M.L. (1998), “Beyond rigor and relevance: producing consumable research
about information systems”, Information Resources Management Journal , Vol. 11 No. 1,
pp. 7-15.
Ryerson (2007), “Exploratory research”, available at: www.ryerson.ca/ , mjoppe/Research
Process/ExploratoryResearch.htm (accessed 15 June 2007).
Sabherwal, R. and Chan, Y. (2001), “Alignment between business and IS strategies: a study of
prospectors, analyzers and defenders”, Information Systems Research , Vol. 12 No. 1,
pp. 11-33.
Sledgianowski, D., Luftman, J. and Reilly, R.R. (2006), “Development and validation of an
instrument to measure maturity of it business strategic alignment mechanisms”,
Information Resources Management Journal , Vol. 19 No. 3, pp. 18-33.
Smaczny, T. (2001), “Is an alignment between business and information technology the
appropriate paradigm to manage it in today’s organizations?”, Management Decision ,
Vol. 39 No. 10, pp. 797-802.
JEIM
22,5
636
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jeim/article-pdf/22/5/615/2726897/17410390910993563.pdf by IU Internationale Hochschule user on 14 June 2026

--- PAGE 23 ---
Starbuck, B. (2004), “Learning from extreme cases”, Stern School of Business, available at: www.
lums.lancs.ac.uk/events/research/3061/
Trochim, W. (2001), The Research Methods Knowledge Base , 2nd ed., Atomic Dog Publishing,
Mason, OH.
Van Grembergen, W. (Ed.) (2003), Strategies for Information Technology Governance, Idea Group
Publishing, Hershey, PA.
Van Grembergen, W. and De Haes, S. (2008), Implementing Information Technology Governance:
Models, Practices and Cases , IGI Publishing, Hershey, PA.
Weill, P. and Broadbent, M. (1998), Leveraging the New Infrastructure: How Market Leaders
Capitalize on Information Technology , Harvard Business School Press, Cambridge, MA.
Weill, P. and Ross, J. (2004), Don’t Just Lead, Govern: Empowering Effective Enterprise Use of
Information Technology, Harvard Business School Press, Cambridge, MA.
Whetten, D.A. (1989), “What constitutes a theoretical contribution?”, Academy of Management
Review, Vol. 14 No. 4, pp. 490-5.
Yin, R.K. (2002), Case Study Research: Design and Methods, 3rd ed., Sage Publications, Thousand
Oaks, CA.
Appendix 1: An example (organisation A) of rationale captured for documenting the
IT governance practices maturity
Corresponding author
S. De Haes can be contacted at: steven.dehaes@ua.ac.be
Maturity Rationale
S1 IT strategy committee at level of
board of directors
0 1 2 3 4 5 No IT strategy committee
A family owned business:
representatives of the family (not
shareholders) compose the board,
which operates very close to the
operational activities (meets weekly)
S2 IT expertise at the level of the board of
directors
012 3 4 5 Speciﬁc members of the board are
closely involved in deciding on major
IT projects ( .150 person days) and
follow-up of operational issues such as
the management of speciﬁc incidents
S3 (IT) audit committee at level of board
of directors
012 3 4 5 There is a formal audit committee
IT is part of the yearly audit planning.
Examples from 2006: penetration
testing, internet banking, IT
outsourcing Table AI.
IT governance
practices and
alignment
637
To purchase reprints of this article please e-mail: reprints@emeraldinsight.com
Or visit our web site for further details: www.emeraldinsight.com/reprints
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jeim/article-pdf/22/5/615/2726897/17410390910993563.pdf by IU Internationale Hochschule user on 14 June 2026