--- PAGE 1 ---
Analysing the Relationship Between IT Governance and Business/IT Alignment
Maturity
Steven De Haes
University of Antwerp Management School
Steven.dehaes@ua.ac.be
Wim Van Grembergen
University of Antwerp
Wim.vangrembergen@ua.ac.be
Abstract
IT governance is one of these concepts that suddenly
emerged and became an important issue in the
information technology area. Some organisations started
with the implementation of IT governance in order to
achieve a better alignment between business and IT. This
paper interprets important existing theories, models and
practices in the IT governance domain and derives
research questions from it. Next, multiple research
strategies are triangulated in order to understand how
organisations are implementing IT governance in
practice and to analyse the relationship between these
implementations and business/IT alignment. Major
finding is that organisations with more mature IT
governance practices likely obtain a higher degree of
business/IT alignment maturity.
1. Introduction
In many organisations, information technology (IT) has
become crucial in the support, sustainability and growth
of the business. This pervasive use of technology has
created a critical dependency on IT that calls for a specific
focus on IT governance. IT governance consists of the
leadership and organisational structures and processes
that ensure that the organisation’s IT sustains and extends
the organisation’s strategy and objectives. [19],[42]
Today, IT governance is high on the agenda in many
organisations and high-level IT governance models are
being created. However, having developed a high-level IT
governance model does not imply that governance is
actually working in the organisation. Conceiving the IT
governance model is the first step, implementing it as a
sustainable solution is the next challenging step. Once a
specific IT governance model is chosen and implemented,
it should, as indicated in the above definition, enable that
IT sustains and extends the business goals, or in other
words, enable that IT is aligned to the business needs. The
IT governance implementation challenge and the
subsequent impact on business/IT alignment constitute
the core domain of this research.
This practice-oriented research focus is relatively
unexplored in academic literature. Many research projects
focused on the impact of specific contingencies on e.g.
centralised versus decentralised governance structures
(eg. [1],[7],[16]) and on how strategic alignment impacts
business performance (e.g. [5],[11],[40],[41]). However,
fewer research can be found on how organisations are
effectively implementing IT governance in day-to-day
practice and what the impact is of the IT governance
implementation on business/IT alignment. Via this
research, we want to contribute to new theory building in
the IT governance domain of knowledge and assist
practitioners by providing more guidance on how IT
governance can be effectively implemented.
2. General research framework
The general research question of this paper is: How are
organisations implementing IT governance to achieve a
better alignment between the business and IT? To answer
this above general research question, two more detailed
research questions can be analysed:
2.1. RQ1: how are organisations implementing IT
governance?
Having developed a high-level IT governance model
does not imply that governance is actually working in the
organisation. Conceiving the IT governance model is the
first step, implementing it into the organisation is the next
challenging step. As proposed by work from amongst
others Peterson [31], Weill and Ross [45], Peterson et al.
[32] and Van Grembergen et al. [43], IT governance can
be deployed using a mixture of various structures,
processes and relational mechanisms. IT governance
structures include “structural (formal) devices and
mechanisms for connecting and enabling horizontal, or
liaison, contacts between business and IT management
(decision-making) functions” [31] (e.g. steering
committees). IT governance processes refer to
“formalisation and institutionalisation of strategic IT
decision making or IT monitoring procedures” [31] (e.g.
IT balanced scorecard). The relational mechanisms finally
are about “the active participation of, and collaborative
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2008
1530-1605/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE 1 Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 10:24:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 2 ---
relationship among, corporate executives, IT
management, and business management” [31] (e.g.
training). Relational mechanisms are crucial in the IT
governance framework and paramount for attaining and
sustaining business/IT alignment, even when the
appropriate structures and processes are in place [20],
[44], [8],[18].
2.2 RQ 2: what is the relationship between IT
governance and business/IT alignment?
As discussed above, the goal of IT governance is
achieving a better alignment between the business and IT.
The ultimate question therefore is whether the
implemented processes, structures and relational
mechanisms enable the achievement of business/IT
alignment. Business/IT alignment is a complex construct
and the alignment discussion is certainly not new in
academic literature. Henderson and Venkatraman [18]
developed already in the early nineties their Strategic
Alignment Model (SAM), distinguishing between
strategic alignment and operational alignment, and many
authors have provided comments and additional insight to
this concept (e.g. [3],[6],[11],[17],[23],[22],[30],[40]). An
important extension to SAM was developed by Maes [24]
finetuning the model into more detailed levels and
distinguishing between strategic, structural and
operational alignment.
It is important to recognise that each of the applied
processes, structures and relational mechanisms serve
specific or multiple goals in the complex alignment
challenge. However, dividing the IT governance
framework into smaller pieces, and solve each problem
separately, does not always solve the complete problem
[31]. A holistic approach towards IT governance
acknowledges its complex and dynamic nature, consisting
of a set of interdependent subsystems (processes,
structures and relational mechanisms) that deliver a
powerful whole [35], [31]. Based on these considerations,
we do not focus on the impact of one specific structure,
process or relational mechanism on alignment, but prefer
to analyse the impact of a mix of practices on alignment.
3. From a general to a specific research
framework
It is recognised that, in order to maintain a sufficient
level of internal validity within this research project, the
research scope needs to be narrowed down. This focus on
internal validity builds on the work of Cook and
Campbell [10] who state that there is always a balancing
act between different types of validity. They argue that
“for investigators with theoretical interests our estimate is
that the types of validity, in order of importance, are
probably internal, construct, statistical conclusion, and
external validity… The priority ordering for many applied
researchers is something like internal validity, external
validity, construct validity of the effect, statistical
conclusion validity, and construct validity of the cause.”
As this research can be categorised as applied research,
the primary focus is on internal validity.
To ensure sufficient internal validity, the research was
therefore scoped down on multiple aspects. In the first
place, it is acknowledged that the use of IT governance
practices might be different in different types of
industries. Therefore, the main focus of this research is
only on one sector, more specifically the financial
services sector, to control the contingencies resulting
from differences in industries. The choice for the financial
services sector is made because, amongst different
industries, financial services, together with manufacturing
and retailing, is the first industry to use information
technologies and as such is already more matured in these
domains, making empirical research interesting [9]. The
scope was also reduced in geographic terms and regarding
size of organisations. To avoid cultural differences
between regions worldwide and contingencies related to
the size of the organisations, it was decided to only focus
on typical Belgian financial services organisations with
headcounts ranging from 100 (mid-size) to over 1000
(large-size) employees. The final scope reduction focuses
on the organisational level of IT governance practices. As
indicated by Van Grembergen [43], IT governance is
situated at multiple layers in the organisation: at strategic
level where the board is involved, at management level
within the C-suite and senior management layer and
finally at the operational level with operational IT and
business management. This implies that all these levels,
business as well as IT, need to be involved in the IT
governance process and they have to understand their
individual roles and responsibilities within the
framework. However, Peterson [31] makes a clear
distinction between IT governance and IT management.
He states that IT management is focused on the effective
and efficient internal supply of IT services and products
and the management of present IT operations. IT
governance in turn is much broader, and concentrates on
performing and transforming IT to meet present and
future demands of the business (internal focus) and
business customers (external focus). This “higher-level”
focus of IT governance is confirmed in the IT governance
definition of ITGI [19], which states that “IT governance
is the responsibility of executives and the board of
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2008
2 Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 10:24:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 3 ---
directors”. Based on the considerations, we will discard
the operational oriented level, which according to
Peterson [31] maps to IT management instead of IT
governance.
These limitations in scope of course reduce the
generalisability or external validity of this research.
Focusing on e.g. other types of organisations would
therefore be interesting domains for further research.
Based on the previous argumentation, the more specified
research question is, as visualised in the next figure: How
are Belgian mid-to-large size financial services
organisations implementing IT governance to achieve a
better alignment between the business and IT? The
detailed research questions put forward in previous
sections remain relevant, but are now contained in a more
narrow research scope, as visualised in Figure 1.
Figure 1: Specific research framework
Relational
mechanisms
Processes
Structures
RQ1: How are organisations
implementing IT governance?
Business/IT
alignment
RQ2: What is the relationship
between IT governance and
business/IT alignment?
Management and
strategic level
Belgian mid-to-large size financial services organisations
IT Governance
4. Research assumptions
An important assumption for this research is that it
adheres to the process theory as opposed to the variance
theory. The variance theory starts from the premise that
the cause is necessary and sufficient for the outcome
while the process theory more starts from the idea that
outcomes may not occur, even when the cause exists
(cause was necessary but not sufficient) [26]. As our
research domain operates in complex organisational and
behavioural settings, variance theory is too stringent and
therefore we adhere clearly to the process theory. This
implies a more limited definition of prediction and
generalisability, “one in which the analyst is able to say
only that the outcome is likely (but not certain) under
some conditions and unlikely under other…”. [26] In our
case, our conclusions would be stating that a high degree
of business/IT alignment is likely to happen when an
organisation leverages a defined mix of IT governance
practices (which results from the research) and alignment
in unlikely to happen in other cases. We can however not
make the correlation with absolute certainty because of
the complexity of organisational and behavioural settings.
5. Research methodology and approach
Because research in the domain of IT governance
implementations and its relationship with business/IT
alignment is in its early stages and theoretical models are
scarcely available, the nature of this research is
exploratory rather than hypothesis testing. Indeed, the
concept of IT governance, as it is understood now, only
emerged late nineties ([13],[45]), and there has been little
research material developed on which we can build. The
latter is not only true because it is a new research domain,
but as denoted by Benbasat and Zmud [4] , “generally, IS
researchers have been less successful than their
colleagues in other business school disciplines in
developing a cumulative research tradition. Without such
cumulative results, it becomes difficult, if not impossible,
to develop and assess strong theoretical models such that
prescriptive actions can confidently be suggested for
practice”. By exploring this research domain in detail, we
do however want to contribute to creating a basis for
future research, by building theoretical models and
generating potential hypotheses to be tested. Our choice
for exploratory research is confirmed by similar research
in the Journal of Management Information Systems, in
which Mahmood and Mann [25] were investigating the
relationship between investments in IT and economic
performance. Similar to our research domain, that subject
was fairly new at that time and high on the agenda in
many organisations. However, based on the observation
that theoretical models were not available, they opted for
exploratory research to build a basis for future study.
Exploratory research often builds on secondary
research, “such as reviewing available literature and/or
data, or qualitative approaches such as informal
discussions with consumers, employees, management or
competitors, and more formal approaches through in-
depth interviews, focus groups, projective methods, case
studies or pilot studies.” [33] Our research strategy
therefore also triangulates between multiple different
research methods: literature research, pilot case research,
delphi method research, benchmark research and extreme
case research. This triangulation enables us to obtain a
richer insight in reality, as also advocated by Mingers
[27]: “… different research methods focus on different
aspects of reality and therefore a richer understanding of a
research topic will be gained by combining several
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2008
3 Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 10:24:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 4 ---
methods together in a single piece of research or research
program”. The different research methods are applied in
parallel or sequentially, as visualised in Figure 2 and
described below. The results of the main research phases
are described in section 6.
Figure 2: Research process
Defining research
questions Exploring the research domain
Exploring how Belgian financial
services organisations implement
IT governance
Conclusions
Exploring the
relationship
between IT
governance and
business/IT
alignment
Based on:
-Literature research
-Pilot case research
Based on:
-Delphi research
Based on:
-Benchmarking research
-Extreme case research
5.1 Literature and pilot case research
The research process with exploring the research domain
and defining the research questions through a detailed
literature research in the domain of business/IT alignment
and IT governance. Papers and research reports of both
academic and professional journals were collected, read,
organised, analysed and summarised into one masterfile,
providing the researcher a complete and workable
overview of existing literature relevant to the research
domain. The focus was on defining and refining the
research questions and on finding an initial list of
structures, processes and relational mechanisms that
organisations can leverage to implement IT governance.
At this moment, the research was not yet scoped down to
only the Belgian financial services sector.
To complement the initial list of IT governance
practices, pilot cases were described. These cases
consisted of one in-depth case and five mini-cases. These
case studies are exploratory and based on multiple
interviews with both business and IT managers (Figure 3).
Figure 3: Exploratory pilot case studies
Company Industry # interviewees
KBC (in-depth case) Finance 6
Vanbreda (mini case) Insurance 3
Sidmar-Arcelor (mini case) Steel 2
CM (mini case) Insurance 3
AGF Belgium (mini case) Insurance 2
Huntsman (mini case) Chemicals 2
Two criteria are used to select the sample of pilot case
studies: local proximity to enable the researcher to
execute multiple in-depth interviews at site and diversity
to enable the gathering of as rich data as possible on used
structures, processes and relational mechanisms in
practice. Therefore, Belgian based organisations were
selected, both operating nationally and internationally in
different sectors (finance, insurance, chemicals, steel).
5.3 Delphi research
In exploring how Belgian financial services
organisations are implementing IT governance, the delphi
research methodology was leveraged. The delphi method
can be characterized “as a method for structuring a group
communication process so that the process is effective in
allowing a group of individuals, as a whole, to deal with a
complex problem.” ([21]) This method is particularly
suited as a research methodology for this research as “the
delphi method technique lends itself especially well to
exploratory theory building on complex, interdisciplinary
issues, often involving a number of new or future trends”
[2]. An expert panel was composed of 29 consultants,
senior IT and senior business professionals who are all
knowledgeable about organisations operating in the
Belgian financial services sector. From this group, 22
experts continued to be involved in the full delphi
research effort (25% drop off rate), with 6 senior
business/audit management, 8 senior IT management and
8 senior business/IT consultant.
Using the delphi method, these financial services sector
experts needed to complete questionnaires in three
consecutive rounds. Similar to the delphi research work of
Keill et al. [20], the delphi research started from a
predefined set of IT governance practices. This list was
operationalised based on findings of the literature
research and the in-depth exploratory case research (see
5.1). In the first round, the respondents were only asked to
provide their feedback on the predefined list of practices,
giving them the opportunity to make recommendations to
add, change, delete some of the practices. The focus of
this first round was on validating the predefined list of
practices specifically for the financial services sector, so
no other input or feedback was requested at this stage. In
the second round, the respondents were asked to rate on a
scale of 5, for each of the reviewed IT governance
practices, the "perceived effectiveness (0=not effective,
5=very effective) and the "perceived ease of
implementation" (0=not easy, 5=very easy). The
respondents were also asked to, taken the previous
attributes (effectiveness - easy of implementation) and
their personal experience into account, to provide the top
10 most important IT governance practices, which are in
their opinion crucial elements or a minimum baseline of
an optimal IT governance mix (the most important
practice score 1, the second most important score 2, ... the
10th most important score 10). In the third and final
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2008
4 Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 10:24:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 5 ---
round, the respondents were asked to re-evaluate their
own scores out of round 2, taken the group averages into
account. Goal of this round was primarily to come to a
greater consensus in the group. At the end of the third
round, the degree of consensus between the experts was
measured leveraging Kendall’s W coefficient [36],[37],
specifically for the question on the minimum baseline.
Schmidt [36] offers an interpretation of Kendall’s W,
indicating that the reached level of consensus in this
research of 0,53 can be considered moderate providing a
fair degree of confidence in the results.
5.4 Benchmarking and extreme case research
The following research step was aimed at exploring the
relationship between IT governance implementations and
business/IT alignment. This phase started with creating a
business/IT alignment benchmark for the Belgian
financial services sector based on a sample of 10 Belgian
financial services organisations. In each organisation, it
was asked that five to ten senior business and IT
managers completed a questionnaire measuring
business/IT alignment maturity. This questionnaire was
based on an instrument already used in previous research
of Luftman [23] and Cumps et al. [12] and later validated
by Sledgianowski, Luftman and Reilly [38]. The latter
validation work resulted in an “assessment instrument
based on a model using multiple criteria and multiple
levels to represent different degrees of alignment, from
less mature to more mature” [38]. In total, 84 managers
over 10 organisations participated. From the results of this
benchmark, four extreme case organisations were selected
(2 high performers and 2 low performers in terms of
business/IT alignment), in which a workshop was
organised (extreme case research) to measure the maturity
of the IT governance practices applied based on a generic
maturity scale from 0 (non-existent) to five (optimised).
The data collected allowed for detailed cross-case
analysis, looking for causes that could explain why some
organisations achieved a higher business/IT alignment
score compared to other organisations. Comparisons were
made between the high and low performers in terms of
the mix of IT governance practices applied and in terms
of the maturity of each of these practices.
Finally, a full report was produced providing
conclusions and discussions issues (section 6 and 7).
6. Research results and discussion
6.1 Exploratoring the research domain
From the pilot case studies, different drivers for
adopting IT governance were identified. An important
one was certainly the need to comply with Sarbanes-
Oxley requirements, which impacts heavily on the control
environment in IT. Other important drivers for IT
governance were the push to achieve economies of scales
after mergers and acquisitions and budget pressure,
resulting in a smaller budget for new projects. Challenge
of course is then to optimally assign the remaining budget
to projects and activities that are delivering value to the
business. Finally, some pilot case companies mentioned
that the IT governance project was more an effort of
formalizing and structuring existing mechanisms already
applied. Based on the findings of the literature research
and the pilot case research, an initial list of IT governance
practices was composed, as shown below. For each of
these practices, as short definition was developed based
on the literature, pilot cases and delphi expert input.
Figure 4: Initial list of IT governance practices
Cross-
references
from pilot
cases
IT governance practice
Some
references
from
literature
KBC
AGF
VanBreda
Huntsman
Sidmar
CM
Integration of
governance/alignment
tasks in
roles&responsibilities
[13][14][19]
[45]
x x x x
IT steering committee(s)
[13][14][19]
[22][45]
x x x x x x
IT strategy committee [13][19][28] x
CIO on Executive
Committee
[13][19] [45] x x
CIO reporting to CEO [19][45] x x x x x
Structures
Architecture Committee [19][45]
Strategic information
systems planning
[13][15] x x x
Balanced scorecard [13][19][43] x x x
Portfolio management [13][19] x x x x x x
Charge back
arrangements (ABC)
[13][43][45] x x
Service Level Agreements
[13][43][45]
x x x
Processes
COBIT [13][43][45] x
Job-rotation [13][22] x x x x
Co-location [13][22] x x x
Cross-training [13][22] x x
Knowledge management [13][22][45] x x x x
Business/IT account
managers
[13][22] x x
Senior management
giving the good example
[13] x
Informal meetings
between business and IT
senior management
[13] x
Relational Mechanisms
IT leadership [28][39]
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2008
5 Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 10:24:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 6 ---
6.2 Exploring how Belgian financial services
organisations are implementing IT governance
The delphi research revealed that, according to a group
of 22 industry experts, Belgian financial services
organisations can leverage a wide range of structures,
processes and relational mechanisms in order to
implement IT governance to support business/IT
alignment. This research reveals a list of 33 IT
governance practices at the level of strategic and
executive/senior business and IT management. It should
be noted that this list can not be exhaustive and the
practices at operational level are discarded in this
research. These practices are shown in the first two
columns of Figure 5, with Sx being the structures, Px
being the processes and Rx being the relational
mechanisms.
Figure 5: Validated list of IT governance structures,
processes and relational mechanisms
Effectiv
eness
(from 0-5)
Ease of
implem
entation
(from 0-5)
S1
IT strategy committee at level of board of
directors
3,67 3,40
S2 IT expertise at level of board of directors 3,14 2,18
S3
(IT) audit committee at level of board of
directors
3,22 3,40
S4 CIO on executive committee 4,38 3,56
S5
CIO (Chief Information Officer) reporting to
CEO (Chief Executive Officer) and/or COO
(Chief Operational Officer)
4,50 4,21
S6
IT steering committee (IT investment
evaluation / prioritisation at executive /
senior management level)
4,69 3,35
S7 IT governance function / officer 2,93 3,11
S8 Security / compliance / risk officer 3,28 4,06
S9 IT project steering committee 4,03 4,01
S10 IT security steering committee 2,82 3,61
S11 Architecture steering committee 3,04 3,14
S12
Integration of governance/alignment tasks
in roles&responsibilities
3,18 2,63
P1 Strategic information systems planning 3,82 2,82
P2
IT performance measurement (e.g. IT
balanced scorecard)
3,97 2,76
P3
Portfolio management (incl. business
cases, information economics, ROI,
payback)
4,13 2,67
P4
Charge back arrangements - total cost of
ownership (e.g. activity based costing)
3,28 2,40
P5 Service level agreements 3,47 3,13
P6 IT governance framework COBIT 3,36 2,42
P7
IT governance assurance and self-
assessment
2,79 2,54
P8
Project governance / management
methodologies
4,10 2,94
P9 IT budget control and reporting 4,13 4,00
P10 Benefits management and reporting 2,85 2,36
P11 COSO / ERM 2,39 2,04
R1 Job-rotation 2,35 2,36
R2 Co-location 2,79 3,01
R3 Cross-training 2,76 2,82
R4
Knowledge management (on IT
governance)
3,24 2,68
R5 Business/IT account management 3,79 3,36
R6
Executive / senior management giving the
good example
3,88 2,81
R7
Informal meetings between business and
IT executive/senior management
3,79 3,88
R8 IT leadership 3,89 2,82
R9
Corporate internal communication
addressing IT on a regular basis
3,43 3,69
R10 IT governance awareness campaigns 2,83 3,14
The research demonstrated that, according to the expert
group, some of the addressed practices are more effective
or easy to implement compared to others (see columns at
the right in Figure 5). The five practices being perceived
as to most effective for the Belgian financial services
sector are “IT steering committees”, “CIO reporting to the
CEO/COO”, “CIO on executive committee”, “IT budget
control and reporting” and “portfolio management”. All
these practices were also identified as being relatively
easy to implement. The least effective practices are “IT
governance assurance and self-assessment, “job-rotation”
and “COSO/ERM”.
Some practices were perceived as fairly effective but
not easy to implement. Good examples in this high-
effectiveness/low ease of implementation domain are
“benefits management and reporting” and “charge back
arrangements”. Another interesting case here is “COBIT”.
This framework is receiving a lot of attention in literature
and in the field, but did not come out very high in this
research. However, there are indications that COBIT is a
very solid framework to work with. COBIT is a
framework which has a higher level of abstraction
compared to other, more detailed, practices referred to in
this research. The good news for COBIT is that many of
these detailed practices are integral part of its framework,
certainly the ones that are indicated in this research as
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2008
6 Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 10:24:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 7 ---
being very effective. (such as “IT steering committee,
“portfolio management”, etc.)
An interesting finding to pinpoint is that many IT
governance definitions stress the prime responsibility of
the board of directors in IT governance, while these
results reveal that the mechanisms to achieve this (“IT
expertise at level of board of directors” and “IT strategy
committee”) are rated relatively low in terms of perceived
effectiveness. This can possibly be explained by the fact
that making the board of directors more IT literate is not
easy to achieve, which is confirmed by the second to last
score in term of ease of implementation of “IT expertise
at the level of the board of directors”. The results of this
research in any way raise questions on how financial
services organisations realise this board involvement in
practice.
If averages are calculated for effectiveness and ease of
implementation for all the structures, the processes and
the relational mechanisms (see Figure 6), it appears that
structures and processes are in general perceived as being
equally effective. However, it appears that IT governance
structures are perceived as being easier to implement
compared to IT governance processes, although in many
cases they are closely related. A good example here is the
“IT steering committee”, which is a crucial element to
build up a “portfolio management” process, but the
steering committee is perceived as much easier to
implement compared to the whole “portfolio
management” process. Relational mechanisms are also
perceived as being easier to implement compared to IT
governance processes, probably because some relational
mechanisms can have a very informal character (e.g. R7:
Informal meetings between business and IT
executive/senior management).
Figure 6: Average effectiveness and ease of
implementation
0
0,5
1
1,5
2
2,5
3
3,5
4
Perceived effectiviness Perceived ease of
implementation
Structures
Processes
Relational mechanisms
The delphi research also brought up a list of IT
governance practices, specifically for the Belgian
financial services sector, that can be regarded as a
minimum baseline to implement IT governance. This
suggests that, in implementing IT governance within a
specific financial services organisation, these minimum
baseline mechanisms may play an important role. These
practices are “IT steering committees”, “CIO on executive
committee”, “IT portfolio management”, “IT budget
control and reporting”, “IT strategy committee”,
“strategic information systems planning”, “IT leadership”,
“CIO reporting to the CEO or COO”, “IT project steering
committee” and “project management methodologies”.
It was surprising that only one relational mechanism
was reported in this minimum baseline (“IT leadership”),
while many authors in literature stress that the relational
mechanisms are crucial enablers for IT governance. A
possible explanation is that, just as in literature, less
detailed knowledge and expertise is available on
relational mechanisms which often have a more intangible
and informal character. On the other hand, it should be
noted that many other relational mechanism, such as
“business/IT account management”, “senior management
giving the good example” and “informal meeting between
business and IT executive/senior management”, attained
very positive scores in terms of effectiveness and ease of
implementation and should therefore certainly be
considered when complementing the minimum baseline.
It is also important to point out that the before
mentioned minimum baseline should be regarded as a
holistic set of practices, contributing as a whole to better
better/IT alignment. This insight explains that some of the
individual practices, such as the “IT strategy committee”,
received individually a lower score for effectiveness. Its
value however is constituted in it being part of the
minimum baseline, enabling the other practices to operate
and be effective.
6.3 Exploring the relationship between IT
governance and business/IT alignment
After measuring alignment in 10 Belgian financial
services organisations, it appears that the overall
business/IT alignment maturity is 2,69 on a scale of 5 in
the Belgian financial services sector (Figure 7).
The benchmark contained two organisations with a
relatively high business/IT alignment maturity compared
to the overall average (high performers, I-J) and two
organisations with a relatively low business/IT alignment
maturity compared to the benchmark (low performers, A-
B). The other six organisations were all situated around
the overall average. An interesting consideration here is
what the desired target or to-be situation would be for the
financial services sector. There is no literature available in
this domain, but taken the high-dependency on IT into
account, one could argue that at least a maturity level 3
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2008
7 Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 10:24:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 8 ---
would be required, which implies standardised and
documented processes and procedures.
Figure 7: Business/IT alignment maturity benchmark
Total number
of respondents
Number of IT
respondents
Number of
business
respondents
Total
Alignment
maturity Score
Deviation
from
average
A 9 5 4 2,10 -0,59
B 5 3 2 2,16 -0,52
C 9 3 6 2,56 -0,12
D 6 3 3 2,67 -0,02
E 9 5 4 2,71 0,03
F 8 3 5 2,72 0,04
G 10 5 5 2,74 0,06
H 9 6 2 2,91 0,22
I 8 5 4 3,11 0,43
J 11 6 5 3,17 0,48
Total Total Total Average
84 44 40 2,69
G
F
<< A B C D E H I J >>
1,8 1,9 2,0 2,1 2,2 2,3 2,4 2,5 2,6 2,7 2,8 2,9 3,0 3,1 3,2 3,3 3,4 3,5 3,6
In each of these extreme cases, it was assessed in which
maturity (on a scale from 0 – non-existent to 5 -
optimised) the organisation was applying each of the 33
IT governance practices discussed earlier. The results of
this assessment are shown in Figure 8.
Figure 8: Comparing extreme cases (1)
A B I J
S1 0 0 0 0
S2 4 1 0 1
S3 3 3 3 3
S4 2 5 2 0
S5 2 5 4 5
S6 2 2 4 4
S7 2 0 4 4
S8 2 3 4 5
S9 2 2 4 4
S10 0 0 0 4
S11 0 0 1 3
S12 2 1 2 5
P1 1 2 1 4
P2 1 2 4 4
P3 1 2 4 4
P4 0 0 2 5
P5 0 0 2 4
P6 0 0 1 4
P7 1 0 1 1
P8 2 3 3 4
P9 1 2 4 5
P10 0 1 1 3
P11 0 0 0 0
R1 1 0 1 2
R2 5 2 3 3
R3 2 0 2 1
R4 3 3 4 4
R5 2 0 0 4
R6 2 2 5 5
R7 2 0 0 0
R8 1 4 4 4
R9 2 0 2 3
R10 1 1 1 1
1,48 1,39 2,21 3,12
When comparing the averages of maturity of IT
governance practices (structures, processes and relational
mechanisms) in those extreme cases, in appears that in
general the high performers have more mature IT
governance structures and processes, as shown in Figure
9. This figure also shows that that processes on average
where less mature compared to structures, indicating that
it is more difficult to implement processes compared to
structures, which was also discussed in previous section.
Figure 9: Comparing extreme cases (1)
0,00
0,50
1,00
1,50
2,00
2,50
3,00
3,50
4,00
Structures Processes Relational Mech.
J
I
B
A
It was also shown that the organisations with low
business/alignment maturity did have a lot of practices in
place, but the average maturity of these practices was
below maturity level 2, as shown in Figure 10. This might
indicate that the impact on business/IT alignment of IT
governance practices that have a maturity level lower than
2, is limited.
Figure 10: Comparing extreme cases (2)
0
0,5
1
1,5
2
2,5
3
3,5
A B I J
The impact of relational mechanisms on business/IT
alignment maturity was not clearly demonstrated in this
research. (cf. Figure 9) However, a finding was that the
two high performers had started their IT governance
implementation many years ago and came to a point
where many structures and processes were embedded in
day to day practice. At that time, the importance of
relational mechanisms becomes less important. The
relational mechanisms are likely very important in the
initiating phase of IT governance, in which the two low
performers were situated.
Analysing the high-performers in more detail revealed
that they distinguish themselves by a set of IT governance
practices that were also proposed in the delphi research as
minimum baseline IT governance practices. From this
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2008
8 Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 10:24:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 9 ---
earlier defined set of ten mimimum baseline practices,
seven appear to be clearly present and mature (above
maturity level 2) in the high-performers. This reduced set
is called the key minimum baseline and constitutes of the
following practices: “IT steering committee”, “IT project
steering committee”, “portfolio management” and “IT
budget control and reporting”, “CIO reporting to the
CEO/COO”, “project governance/management
methodologies” and “IT leadership”.
An interesting IT governance practice that was not used
by any of the organisations, although being promoted by
experts and thought leaders as very important ([19],[28]) ,
is the “IT strategy committee at the level of the board of
directors”. This practice is promoted as a structure to
ensure that board gets involved in a structured way in IT
governance issues. During the interviews, three out of
four organisations stated that board involvement in IT
governance is not feasible and probably not required. The
representatives of the shareholders are more concerned
with the core financial services activities and less worried
about (operational) IT issues. Another IT governance
practices that was indicated as not being relevant for
alignment purpose was “COSO/ERM”. While this was
recognised as probably a very good framework for
general internal control, the value for governance or
impact on alignment did not appear at all.
7. Conclusions
As a general conclusion, this research revealed that IT
governance is indeed high on the agenda and that
organisations with a mature mix of structures, processes
and relational mechanisms indeed achieved a higher
degree of business / IT alignment maturity compared to
other organisations. However, as indicated earlier in this
paper, this research adheres to the process theory,
implying a limited definition of prediction. Therefore, our
conclusion here is limited to the statement that
business/IT alignment maturity is likely to be higher
when organisation are applying a mix of mature IT
governance practices and likely to be lower in
organisations with a more poor mix of IT governance
practices.
Some detailed conclusions were drawn regarding IT
governance structures, processes and relational
mechanisms. It was demonstrated that it is easier to
implement IT governance structures compared to IT
governance processes. It also appeared that relational
mechanisms are very important in the beginning stages of
an IT governance implementation project and become less
important when the IT governance framework gets
embedded into day-to-day operations. This research
provides a key minimum baseline of seven IT governance
practices that each organisation at least should have and
supplement with practices that are highly effective and
easy to implement. When an organisation wants to
implement these practices, it has to make sure that at least
of maturity level of 2 is obtained, to ensure that it
positively impacts business/IT alignment.
A recommendation to practitioners resulting from these
findings is that the best approach to implement IT
governance is to start with setting up these seven key
minimum baseline IT governance practices. This core set
of practices should be supplemented with other key
practices that are highly effective and relatively easy to
implement. At the initial stages of such IT governance
project, sufficient attention should be given to relational
mechanisms to ensure commitment of all the involved
people in the process. Once the “governance culture” is
embedded in the implemented structures and processes,
these relational mechanisms require less attention.
8. References
[1] Ahituv N., Neumann S., Zviran M.,1989, Factors affecting
the policy for distributing computing resources,MIS
Quarterly,vol.13,no.4
[2] Akkermans H.A. et al., 2003, The impact of ERP on supply
chain management: exploratory findings from a European delphi
study, European Journal of Operational Research, no. 146, pp.
284-301
[3] Avison et al., 2004, Using and validating the strategic
alignment model, Journal of Strategic Information Systems, vol.
13, pp. 223–246
[4] Benbasat I., Zmud R.W., 1999, Emperical research in
Information Systems: the practice of relevance, MIS Quarterly,
vol. 23, no. 1
[5] Bergeron, F., Raymond, L., & Rivard, S., 2003, Ideal
Patterns of Strategic Alignment and Business Performance.
Information & Management, Elsevier, 41(8), 1003-1020.
[6] Burn, J.M., & Szeto, C., 2000, A comparison of the views
of business and IT management on success factors for strategic
alignment. Information & Management, Elsevier, 37(4)
[7] Brown C.V., Magill S.L., 1994, Alignment of the IS
functions with the enterprise: towards of model of antecedents,
MIS Quarterly, vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 371-403
[8] Callahan, J., & Keyes, D., 2003,. The evolution of IT
Governance at NB Power. In Van Grembergen, W. (Ed.),
Strategies for Information Technology Governance. Hershey,
PA: Idea Group Publishing.
[9] Chiasson, Mike W.; Davidson, Elizabeth, 2005, Taking
industry seriously in Information Systems research, MIS
Quarterly, Vol. 29 Issue 4, p591-605, 15p;
[10] Cook T.D. and Campbell D., 1979 Quasi-experimentation:
design and analysis issues for field settings, Rand. Mcnally
College Publising Company
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2008
9 Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 10:24:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 10 ---
[11] Croteau, A.M., & Bergeron, F., 2001, An Information
Technology Trilogy: Business Strategy, Technological
Deployment and Organizational Performance. Journal of
Strategic Information Systems, vol. 10, 77-99.
[12] Cumps B.., S. Viaene, G. Dedene, J. Vandenbulcke, 2006,
An Empirical Study on Business/ICT Alignment in European
Organisations, in the proceedings of the Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences (HICSS)
[13] De Haes S., Van Grembergen W., 2006, IT Governance
best practices in Belgian Organisations, in the proceedings of
the Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences
[14] Duffy, J.,2002a, IT/Business alignment: is it an option or is
it mandatory?, IDC document # 26831, IT and Business
Alignment Advisory service.
[15] Earl, J.M., 1993, Experiences in Strategic Information
Systems Planning. MIS Quarterly, 17(1), 1-24.
[16] Ein-dor P. and Segev E., 1982, Organisational context and
MIS structure, MIS Quarterly, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 55-68
[17] Feurer, R., Chaharbaghi, K., Weber, M., & Wargin, J.,
2000, Aligning Strategies, Processes and IT: a Case Study.
Information Systems Management, winter, 23-34.
[18] Henderson, J.C., Venkatraman, N., & Oldach, S., 1993,
Continuous Strategic Alignment: Exploiting Information
Technology Capabilities for Competitive Success. European
Management Journal, 11(2), 139-149.
[19] ITGI, 2003, Board Briefing on IT Governance, Second
Edition. From www.itgi.org
[20] Keill M. et al., 2002, Reconsiling user and project manager
perceptions of IT project risk: a delphi study, Information
Systems Journal, no. 12, pp. 103-119
[21] Linstone H.A., Turoff M., 1975, The Delphi Method:
Techniques and Applications, Addison-Wesley Publishing
Company, 620 pp.
[22] Luftman, J., & Brier, T., 1999, Achieving and Sustaining
Business-IT alignment. California Management Review, 42(1),
109-122.
[23] Luftman, J., 2000, Assessing Business-IT alignment
Maturity. Communications of AIS, 4(14).
[24] Maes, 1999, Reconsidering Information Management
through a Generic Framework. PrimaVera Work. Paper 99-15.
[25] Mahmood MA., Mann G.J., 1993, Measuring the
organizational impact of information technology investment; an
exploratory study, Journal of Management Information Systems,
vol. 10, no1, pp. 97-122
[26] Markus M.L., Robey D.,1998, Information technology and
organisational change: causal structure in theory and research,
Management Science, vol. 34, no. 5
[27] Mingers J., 2001, Combining IT research methods: towards
a pluralist methodology”, Information Systems Research, vol.
12, no. 3
[28]Monnoyer, Willmott P, 2005, What IT leaders do:
Companies that rely on IT governance systems alone will come
up short., McKinsey Quarterly on IT
[29] Nolan, R., & McFarlan, F.W., 2005,. Information
Technology and the Board of Directors. Harvard Business
Review, 83(10), 96-106.
[30] Patel, N.V., 2003, An emerging strategy for e-business IT
Governance. In Van Grembergen, W. (Ed.), Strategies for
Information Technology Governance. Hershey, PA: Idea Group
Publishing.
[31] Peterson, R. R., 2003, Information Strategies and Tactics
for Information Technology Governance. In Van Grembergen,
W. (Ed.), Strategies for Information Technology Governance.
Hershey, PA: Idea Group Publishing.
[32] Peterson R., Parker M.M., Ribbers P., 2002, Information
Technology Governance Processes under environmental
dynamism: investigating competing theories of decision making
and knowledge sharing, 23 International Conference on
Information Systems
[33] Ryerson, 2007, Exploratory Research, accessed in June 07
at www.ryerson.ca/~mjoppe/ResearchProcess/ExploratoryResearch.htm
[34] Sabherwal, R., & Chan, Y., 2001, Alignment between
business and IS strategies: a study of prospectors, analyzers and
defenders. Information Systems Research, 12(1), 11-33.
[35] Sambamurthy, V., & Zmud, R.W., 1999, Arrangements for
Information Technology Governance: a theory of multiple
contingencies. MIS Quarterly, 23(2), 261-290.
[36] Schmidt, Roy C., 1997, Managing Delphi surveys using
nonparametric statistical techniques., Decision Sciences, Vol. 28
Number 3
[37] Siegel S., 1988, Nonparametric statistics for the
behavioural sciences, Mc.Graw-Hill, New York
[38] Sledgianowski D., J. Luftman, R.R. Reilly, 2006,
Development and Validation of an Instrument to Measure
Maturity of IT Business Strategic Alignment Mechanisms,
Information Resources Management Journal, 19(3), 18-33
[39] Smith G, 2006, Straight to the top - Becoming a world-
class CIO, John Wiley & Sons
[40] Smaczny, T., 2001, Is an alignment between business and
Information Technology the appropriate paradigm to manage IT
in today’s organizations? Management Decisions, 39(10)
[41] Teo T.S.H., King W.R., 1996, Assessing the impact of
integrating business planning and IS planning, Information &
Management, vol. 30 (6), pp. 309-321
[42] Van Grembergen, W., 2002, Introduction to the Minitrack:
IT Governance and its Mechanisms. In proceedings of the 35th
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS).
[43] Van Grembergen, W., De Haes, S., & Guldentops, E.,
2003, Structures, Processes and Relational Mechanisms for IT
Governance. In Van Grembergen, W. (Ed.), Strategies for
Information Technology Governance, Idea Group Publishing.
[44] Weill P. and Broadbent M., 1998, Leveraging the new
Infrastructure: how market leaders capitalize on information
technology, Harvard Business School Press
[45] Weill, P., & Ross, J., 2004), IT Governance: How Top
Performers Manage IT Decision Rights for Superior Results.
Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2008
10 Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 10:24:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.