--- PAGE 1 ---
I NFORMATION S YSTEMS C ONTROL J OURNAL ,V OLUME 1, 2004
Copyright © 2004 Information Systems Audit and Control Association. All rights reserved. www.isaca.org.
I NFORMATION S YSTEMS C ONTROL J OURNAL ,V OLUME 1, 2004
I
T governance is a concept that has suddenly emerged and
become an important issue in the information technology
field. Precisely when this new challenge began surfacing is
unknown, but it is now a discussion issue within most
organizations. Some corporations and government agencies
began with the implementation of IT governance to achieve a
fusion between business and IT and to obtain needed IT
involvement of senior management. In surveys, CIOs also
indicate IT governance as an important management priority.
For example, in Gartner’s Top Ten CIO Management Priorities
for 2003, “improving IT governance” is included for the first
time and is ranked third, and the related issue “providing
guidance for the board/executive” is ranked first. 
This article defines what IT governance is and explains its
relationship with enterprise governance. IT governance is
defined as the leadership and organizational structures,
processes and relational mechanisms that ensure that an
organization’s IT sustains and extends its strategy and
objectives. The article also provides an IT governance
framework containing supporting structures, processes and
relational mechanisms. The main objective of this article is to
contribute to the understanding of IT governance and how it
can be achieved in practice.
IT Governance Defined
While numerous definitions exist for IT governance, the
following two definitions will be used in this article. 1
IT governance is the responsibility of the Board of
Directors and executive management. 
It is an integral part of enterprise governance and
consists of the leadership and organizational
structures and processes that ensure that the
organization’s IT sustains and extends the
organization’s strategy and objectives.
2
IT governance is the organizational capacity
exercised by the Board, executive management and
IT management to control the formulation and
implementation of IT strategy and in this way
ensure the fusion of business and IT.
3
Although these definitions differ in some aspects, they
focus on the same issues: achieving the link between business
and IT, and the primary responsibility of the board of 
directors. Van Grembergen’s definition also indicates that IT
management must be involved in the IT governance processes.
However, there is a clear difference between IT governance
and IT management. IT management is focused on the
effective supply of IT services and products and the
management of IT operations. IT governance in turn is much
broader and concentrates on performing and transforming IT to
meet present and future demands of the business and its
customers.
4
The definition from the IT Governance Institute states that
IT governance is an integral part of enterprise or corporate
governance. Indeed, to make sure that corporate governance
matters are covered, IT first needs to be properly governed.
This relationship can be made more eloquent by translating the
corporate governance questions
5 into specific IT governance
questions (see figure 1).
IT Governance Structures,
Processes and Relational Mechanisms
The question is: how can enterprises pragmatically implement
IT governance? IT governance can be deployed using a mixture
of various structures, processes and relational mechanisms. When
designing IT governance for an organization, it is important to
recognize that it is contingent upon a variety of sometimes
conflicting internal and external factors. Determining the right
combination of mechanisms is, therefore, a complex endeavor
and it should be recognized that what works for one company
does not necessarily work for another. This means that different
organizations may need a combination of different structures,
processes and relational mechanisms.
IT Governance and Its Mechanisms
By Steven De Haes and Wim Van Grembergen, Ph.D.
Figure 1—IT Governance and 
Corporate Governance Questions
`Corporate Governance Questions ➯ IT Governance Questions
How do suppliers of finance get How does top 
managers to return some of the management get the 
profits to them? CIO and IT organization 
to return some business
value to it?
How do suppliers of finance 
➯ How does top
make sure that managers do management make
not steal the capital they sure that the CIO and
supply or invest it in bad IT organizations do not
projects? steal the capital it supplies
or invest it in bad projects?
How do suppliers of finance 
➯ How does top
control managers? management control
the CIO and IT
organization?
Adapted from “A Survey on Corporate Governance,” Journal of Finance, vol. 52, no.2

--- PAGE 2 ---
I NFORMATION S YSTEMS C ONTROL J OURNAL ,V OLUME 1, 2004
To be able to place IT governance structures, processes and
relational mechanisms in a comprehensible relationship to each
other, the framework displayed in figure 2 is proposed. Figure
2 is based on Peterson’s framework.
6 Structures involve the
existence of responsible functions such as IT executives and a
diversity of IT committees. Processes refer to strategic
decision-making and monitoring. The relational mechanisms
include business/IT participation, strategic dialogue, shared
learning and proper communication.
Roles and Responsibilities
Clear and unambiguous definitions of the roles and
responsibilities of the involved parties are crucial and
prerequisites for an effective IT governance framework. It is
the role of the board and executive management to
communicate these roles and responsibilities and to make sure
that they are clearly understood throughout the whole
organization. 
The board as well as the business and IT management have
to play an important role in assuring the governance of IT. The
CIO is an important, but certainly not the only, stakeholder in
the IT governance process. The CEO has singular
responsibility for carrying out the strategic plans and policies
that have been established by the board, and he/she should
ensure that the CIO is part of, and accepted in, the senior-level
decision-making process. The CIO and the CEO should report
on a regular basis to the board, which is the independent
overseer of business performance and compliance. The board
members should keep their knowledge of current business
models, management techniques, technologies and the
potential risks and benefits associated with each of them up-
to-date.
7
IT Organization Structure
Effective IT governance is also determined by the way the
IT function is organized and where the IT decision-making
authority is located within the organization. In the past, several
models were developed and implemented, such as centralized,
decentralized and federal IT organizations. A dominant model
in many contemporary enterprises is the federal structure that
is often a hybrid design of centralized infrastructure control
and decentralized application control. This model tries to
achieve both efficiency and standardization for the
infrastructure, and effectiveness and flexibility for the
development of applications. 
IT Strategy Committee and 
IT Steering Committee
IT governance should be an integral part of enterprise
governance and, in this respect, a primary concern of the board of
directors that is responsible for governing the enterprises. Boards
may carry out their governance duties through committees and by
considering the criticality of IT through an IT strategy
committee. The IT strategy committee, composed of board and
nonboard members, should assist the board in governing and
overseeing the enterprise’s IT-related matters. This committee
should ensure that IT is a regular item on the board’s agenda and
that it is addressed in a structured manner. 
The IT strategy committee should of course work in close
partnership with the other board committees and management
committees to guide, review and amend the aligned enterprise
and IT strategies.
8 The implementation of the IT strategy is the
responsibility of executive management, assisted by one or more
IT steering committees. Typically, such a steering committee has
the specific responsibility for overseeing major projects and
managing IT priorities, IT costs and IT resource allocation. While
the IT strategy committee operates at the board level, the IT
steering committee is situated at the executive level, which
implies that it has different membership and authority. 
Strategic Information Systems Planning
An important element of IT governance is the alignment of IT
with the business. J. Henderson and N. Venkatraman developed
their strategic alignment model (SAM) to conceptualize and
direct the area of strategic management of IT.
9 They were the first
to describe in a clear way the interrelationship between business
strategies and IT. The model is based on two building blocks:
strategic fit and functional integration (figure 3). Strategic fit
recognizes that the IT strategy should be articulated in terms of
an external domain (how the firm is positioned in the IT
marketplace) and an internal domain (how the IT infrastructure
should be configured and managed). Strategic fit is equally
relevant in the business domain, with similar attributes but
focused to the business. Two types of functional integration exist:
strategic and operational. Strategic integration is the link between
business strategy and IT strategy, reflecting the external
components, which is important because, for many companies,
IT has emerged as a source of strategic advantage. Operational
integration covers the internal domain and deals with the link
between organizational infrastructure and processes and IT
infrastructure and processes.
Figure 2—Structures, Processes and 
Relational Mechanisms for IT Governance
Structures Processes Relational
Mechanisms
IT executives
and accounts
Committees and
councils
Strategic IT
decision-making
Strategic IT
monitoring
Stakeholder
participation
Business/IT
partnerships
Strategic dialog
Shared learning
- Roles and
responsibilities
- IT organization
structure
- CIO on board
- IT strategy
committee
- IT steering
committee(s)
- Strategic
information
systems
planning
- Balanced (IT)
scorecards
- Information
economics
- Service level
agreements
- C
OBIT and ITIL
- IT alignment/
governance
maturity
models
- Active
participation
by principal
stakeholders
- Collaboration
between
principal
stakeholders
- Partnership
rewards and
incentives
- Business/IT
colocation
- Shared
understanding
of business/IT
objectives
- Active conflict
resolution
(nonavoidance)
- Cross-
functional
business/IT
training
-C ross-
functional
business/IT 
job rotation
Based on: “Information Strategies and Tactics for Information Technology
Governance,” Strategies for Information Technology Governance, Idea Group
Publishing, Pennsylvania, 
USA, 2003
Tactics
Mechan-
isms

--- PAGE 3 ---
I NFORMATION S YSTEMS C ONTROL J OURNAL ,V OLUME 1, 2004
Although the SAM model clearly recognizes the need for
continual alignment, it does not provide a practical framework
to implement this. However, over the years, many alignment
mechanisms have been developed and are used in
organizations to achieve the business/IT fusion: business
systems planning, critical success factors, the competitive
forces model and the value chain of M.E. Porter, and business
process reengineering. Recently, Porter adapted his models to
the e-business (e-commerce) phenomenon concluding that “the
Internet per se will rarely be a competitive advantage” and
“many of the companies that succeed will be ones that use the
Internet as a complement to traditional ways of competing, not
those that set their Internet initiatives apart from their
established operations.”
10
Balanced Scorecard
Another approach for the practical implementation of
strategic alignment is the balanced scorecard (BSC). Robert
Kaplan and David Norton introduced the BSC at the enterprise
level.
11 Their fundamental premise is that the evaluation of a
firm should not be restricted to a traditional evaluation but
should be supplemented with measures concerning customer
satisfaction, internal processes and the ability to innovate.
Results achieved within these additional perspective areas
should assure future financial results and drive the organization
toward its strategic goals while keeping all four perspectives in
balance. This concept has been applied to the IT function and
its processes. Recognizing that IT is an internal service
provider, the proposed perspectives of the balanced scorecard
should be changed accordingly, with corporate contribution,
user orientation, operational excellence and future orientation
as perspectives. By using a cascade or waterfall of balanced
scorecards, a method for business and IT fusion is provided to
senior management. To achieve this, an IT development
scorecard and an IT operational scorecard are defined as
enablers for the strategic IT balanced scorecard that in turn is
the enabler of a business balanced scorecard ( figure 4).
Linking the business BSC and the IT BSC is a supportive
mechanism for IT governance.
12
Information Economics
The information economics method developed by 
Robert J. Benson and Marilyn Parker can be used as an
alignment/governance technique, whereby both business and
IT people score IT projects and in this way prioritize and
select projects.
14 It departs from the return on investment (ROI)
of a project and different intangibles such as “strategic match
of the project” (business evaluation) and “match with the
strategic IT architecture” (IT evaluation). In essence,
information economics is a scoring technique resulting in a
weighted total score based on the scores for the ROI and the
intangibles (see figure 5). Typically, scores from 0 to 5 are
attributed, whereby 0 means no contribution and 5 refers to a
high contribution. The values obtain a positive score and the
risks a negative score.
Service Level Agreements
In a maturing IT governance environment, service level
agreements (SLAs) and their supporting service level
management (SLM) process need to play an important role. 
Functional Integration
Business Information Technology
Strategic Fit
ExternalInternal
Strategy
Business IT Strategy
Processes
IS Infrastructure and Organizational 
Infrastructure and 
Processes
Figure 3—Strategic Alignment Model
IT 
Development 
BSC
Business BSC
IT        
Strategic    
BSC
IT    
Operational 
BSC
Figure 4—Cascade of Balanced Scorecards
+ Value linking (+)
+ Value acceleration (+)
+ Value restructuring (+)
+ Innovation (+)
= Adjusted ROI
/square6Strategic match (+)
/square6Competitive advantage (+)
/square6Competitive response (+)
/square6Management information (+)
/square6Service and quality (+)
/square6Environmental quality (+)
/square6Empowerment (+)
/square6Cycle time (+)
/square6Mass customization (+)
/square6Strategic IT architecture (+)
- Business Risk - IT Risk
/square6Business strategy risk (-)
/square6Business organization risk ( -)
/square6IT strategy risk (-)
/square6Definitional uncertainty ( -)
/square6Technical risk (-)
/square6IT service delivery risk (-)
= VALUE (business contribution)
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
- Business Risk - IT Risk
■ -)
■ -)
■ -)
■ -)
■ -)
■ -)
= VALUE (business contribution)
 
Figure 5—Information Economics
Source: Henderson, J.; N. Venkatraman; “Strategic Alignment: Leveraging
Information Technology for Transforming Organizations,”IBM Systems
Journal, 1993
Source: “Aligning Business and Information Technology Through the
Balanced Scorecard at a Major Canadian Financial Group: Its Status
Measured with an IT BSC Maturity Model,” 34
th Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences (HICCS), 200113
Source: “Measuring and Improving Corporate Information Technology
Through the Balanced Scorecard Technique,” European Conference on the
Evaluation of Information Technology, Delft, The Netherlands, 1997
15

--- PAGE 4 ---
I NFORMATION S YSTEMS C ONTROL J OURNAL ,V OLUME 1, 2004
The functions of SLAs are:
• To define what levels of service are acceptable by users and
attainable by the service provider 
• To define the mutually acceptable and agreed-upon set of
indicators of the quality of service
The SLM process includes defining an SLA framework,
establishing SLAs including level of service and their
corresponding metrics, monitoring and reporting on the
achieved services and problems encountered, reviewing SLAs
and establishing improvement programs. The major
governance challenges are that the service levels are to be
expressed in business terms and the right SLM/SLA process
has to be put in place.
16
COBIT and ITIL
Control Objectives for Information and related Technology
(COBIT)17 provides for 34 identified IT processes their
corresponding high-level control objectives and management
Figure 6—Strategic Alignment Maturity Levels
Criteria Attribute Characteristics level 1 Characteristics level 5
Communications Understanding of business by IT Minimum Pervasive
Understanding of IT by business Minimum Pervasive
Inter/intraorganizational learning Casual, ad hoc Strong and structured
Protocol rigidity Command and control Informal
Knowledge sharing Ad hoc Extraenterprise
Liaison(s) breadth/effectiveness None or ad hoc Extraenterprise
Competency/value IT metrics Technical, not related to business Extended to external partners
measurement Business metrics Ad hoc, not related to IT Extended to external partners
Balanced metrics Ad hoc unlinked Business, partner and IT metrics
Service level agreements Sporadically present Extended to external partners
Benchmarking Not generally practiced Routinely performed with partners
Formal assessments/reviews None Routinely performed
Continuous improvement None Routinely performed
Governance Business strategic planning Ad hoc Integrated across, external
IT strategic planning Ad hoc Integrated across, external
Reporting/organization structure Central/decentral, CIO report to CFO CIO reports to CEO, federated
Budgetary control Cost center, erratic spending Investment center, profit center
IT investment management Cost-based, erratic spending Business value
Steering committee(s) Not formal/regular Partnership
Prioritization process Reactive Value-added partner
Partnership Business perception of IT value IT perceived as a cost of business IT coadapts with business
Role of IT in strategic business No seat at the business table Coadaptive with business
planning
Shared goals, risks, rewards/ IT takes risk with little reward Risks and rewards shared
penalties
IT program management Ad hoc Continuous improvement
Relationship/trust style Conflict/minimum Valued partnership
Business sponsor/champion None At the CEO level
Scope and architecture Traditional enabler/driver, external Traditional (e.g. accounting, email) External scope, business strategy
driver/enabler
Standards articulation None or ad hoc Interenterprise standards
Architectural integration No formal integration Evolve with partners
• Functional organization • Integrated
• Enterprise • Standard enterprise architecture
• Interenterprise • With all partners
Architectural transparency, flexibility None Across the infrastructure
Skills Innovation, entrepreneurship Discouraged The norm
Focus of power In the business All executives, including CIO
Management style Command and control Relationship-based
Change readiness Resistant to change High, focused
Career crossover None Across the enterprise
Education, cross-training None Across the enterprise
Attraction and retention of best talent No program Effective program for hiring and retaining
Source: Luftman, J.; “Assessing Business-IT Alignment Maturity,” Communications of AIS, vol. 4, 2000

--- PAGE 5 ---
I NFORMATION S YSTEMS C ONTROL J OURNAL ,V OLUME 1, 2004
guidelines (see www.isaca.org). COBIT’s Management
Guidelines includes the processes’ maturity models and their
scorecards in the form of key goal indicators and key
performance indicators. As illustrated in other paragraphs of this
article, maturity models and scorecards can assist organizations
in achieving IT governance. The control objectives can help
support IT governance within an enterprise. The control
objectives of the “assist and advise IT customers” process, for
example, consist of establishing a help desk, registering
customer queries, escalating customer query, monitoring
clearance, and analyzing and reporting trends. These high-level
control objectives can be implemented through the use of the IT
Infrastructure Library (ITIL) of the Central Computer and
Telecommunications Agency (UK). Its help desk module, for
Figure 7—IT Governance Maturity Model
0 Nonexistent 
There is a complete lack of any recognizable IT governance process. The
organization has not even recognized that there is an issue to be addressed
and hence there is no communication about the issue. 
Governance, such as it is, is predominantly centralized within the IT
organization, and IT budgets and decisions are made centrally. Business unit
input is informal and done on a project basis. In some cases, a steering
committee may be in place to help make resource decisions.
1 Initial/Ad Hoc
The organization has recognized that IT governance issues exist and need to
be addressed. There are, however, no standardized review processes, but
instead management considers IT management issues on an individual or
case-by-case basis. Management’s approach is unstructured and there is
inconsistent communication on issues and approaches to address the
problems that arise. Although it is recognized that the performance of the IT
function ought to be measured, there are no proper metrics in place—
reviews are based on individual managers’ requests. IT monitoring is
implemented only reactively to an incident that has caused some loss or
embarrassment to the organization. 
Governance is difficult to initiate and the central IT organization and business
units may even have an adversarial relationship. The organization is trying to
increase trust between IT and the business and there are normally periodic
joint meetings to review operational issues and new projects. Upper
management is involved only when there are major problems or successes.
2 Repeatable, but Intuitive 
There is awareness of IT governance objectives, and practices are developed
and applied by individual managers. IT governance activities are becoming
established within the organization’s change management process, with
active senior management involvement and oversight. Selected IT processes
have been identified for improvement that would impact key business
processes. IT management is beginning to define standards for processes
and technical architectures. Management has identified basic IT governance
measurements, assessment methods and techniques, but the process has
not been adopted across the organization. There is no formal training and
communication on governance standards, and responsibilities are left to the
individual. 
An IT steering committee has begun to formalize and establish its roles and
responsibilities. There is a draft governance charter (e.g., participants, roles,
responsibilities, delegated powers, retained powers, shared resources and
policy). Small and pilot governance projects are initiated to see what works
and what does not. General guidelines are emerging for standards and
architecture that make sense for the enterprise and a dialog has started to
sell the reasons for their need in the enterprise.
3 Defined Process
The need to act with respect to IT governance is understood and accepted. A
baseline set of IT governance indicators is developed, where linkages
between outcome measures and performance drivers are defined,
documented and integrated into strategic and operational planning and
monitoring processes. Procedures have been standardized, documented and
implemented. Management has communicated standardized procedures and
informal training is established. Performance indicators over all IT
governance activities are being recorded and tracked, leading to
enterprisewide improvements. Although measurable, procedures are not
sophisticated, but are the formalization of existing practices. Tools are
standardized, using currently available techniques. IT balanced business
scorecard ideas are being adopted by the organization. It is, however, left to
the individual to get training, to follow the standards and to apply them. Root
cause analysis is only occasionally applied. Most processes are monitored
against some (baseline) metrics, but any deviation, while mostly being acted
upon by individual initiative, would unlikely be detected by management.
Nevertheless, overall accountability of key process performance is clear and
management is rewarded based on key performance measures.
The IT steering committee is formalized and operational, with defined
participation and responsibilities agreed to by all stakeholders. The
governance charter and policy is also formalized and documented. The
governance organization beyond the IT steering committee is established 
and staffed.
4 Managed and Measurable 
There is full understanding of IT governance issues at all levels, supported by
formal training. There is a clear understanding of who the customer is and
responsibilities are defined and monitored through service level agreements.
Responsibilities are clear and process ownership is established. IT processes
are aligned with the enterprise and with the IT strategy. Improvement in IT
processes is based primarily upon a quantitative understanding and it is
possible to monitor and measure compliance with procedures and process
metrics. All process stakeholders are aware of risks, the importance of IT and
the opportunities it can offer. Management has defined tolerances under
which processes must operate. Action is taken in many, but not all, cases
where processes appear not to be working effectively or efficiently. Processes
are occasionally improved and best internal practices are enforced. Root
cause analysis is being standardized. Continuous improvement is beginning
to be addressed. There is limited, primarily tactical, use of technology, based
on mature techniques and enforced standard tools. There is involvement of
all required internal domain experts. IT governance is evolving into an
enterprisewide process. IT governance activities are becoming integrated with
the enterprise governance process.
There is a fully operational governance structure that addresses a consistent
architecture for reengineering and interoperation of business processes
across the enterprise, and ensures competition for enterprise resources and
ongoing incremental investments in the IT infrastructure. IT is not solely an
IT organizational responsibility but is shared with the business units.
5 Optimized 
There is advanced and forward-looking understanding of IT governance
issues and solutions. Training and communication are supported by leading-
edge concepts and techniques. Processes have been refined to a level of
external best practice, based on results of continuous improvement and
maturity modeling with other organizations. The implementation of these
policies has led to an organization, people and processes that are quick to
adapt and fully support IT governance requirements. All problems and
deviations are root cause analyzed and efficient action is expediently
identified and initiated. IT is used in an extensive, integrated and optimized
manner to automate the workflow and provide tools to improve quality and
effectiveness. The risks and returns of the IT processes are defined, balanced
and communicated across the enterprise. External experts are leveraged and
benchmarks are used for guidance. Monitoring, self-assessment and
communication about governance expectations are pervasive within the
organization and there is optimal use of technology to support measurement,
analysis, communication and training. Enterprise governance and IT
governance are strategically linked, leveraging technology and human and
financial resources to increase the competitive advantage of the enterprise.
The governance concept and structure form the core of the enterprise IT
governing body including provisions for amending the structure for changes
in enterprise strategy, organization or new technologies.
Source: “Control and Governance Maturity Survey: Establishing a Reference Benchmark and a Self-assessment Tool,” Information Systems Control Journal, 
vol. 6, 2002

--- PAGE 6 ---
I NFORMATION S YSTEMS C ONTROL J OURNAL ,V OLUME 1, 2004
example, complements and provides details on the help desk
process including the planning, implementation, post-
implementation, benefits and costs, and tools.
18 So, COBIT’s
control objectives tell what to do and ITIL explains how to do it.
IT Alignment/Governance Maturity Models
To be able to measure alignment and governance maturity,
organizations can use a maturity model. This is a method of
scoring that enables the organization to grade its maturity level
from nonexistent (0) to optimized (5). This tool offers an easy-
to-understand way to determine the “as is” and the “to be”
positions and enables the organization to benchmark itself
against best practices and standard guidelines. In this way,
gaps can be identified and specific actions can be defined to
move toward the desired level of strategic alignment/
governance maturity.
19 Good examples of IT maturity models
are developed by Luftman20 and the IT Governance Institute
(www.itgi.org). Both models use criteria composed of a variety
of attributes to build different levels of maturity. Luftman
defines five maturity levels using the criteria and attributes
described in the first two columns of figure 6. The last two
columns indicate the characteristics or values of each attribute
to obtain a level 1 or level 5. When performing a maturity
assessment, it is important to comply with the basic principles
of maturity measurement. One can move to a higher maturity
only when all conditions described in a certain maturity level
are fulfilled. This implies that to obtain maturity level 5, all
attributes must have the values described in the last column 
of figure 6.
C
OBIT’sManagement Guidelines includes the maturity
models for each of the 34 IT processes. The first process
identified by C
OBIT is “define a strategic information
technology plan.” This process plays a very important role in
the strategic alignment. Maturity level 1 entails that the need
for IT strategic planning is known by IT management, but
there is no structured decision process in place. To achieve the
highest level of 5, IT strategic planning should at least be a
documented and living process, continuously considered in
business goal setting, and resulting in discernable business
value through investments in IT. 
To benchmark against other organizations, a maturity survey
was conducted in 2002 asking the respondents to assign a
maturity score for 15 of the 34 IT processes.
21 The main result
of this survey was that, on the average, the self-assessed
maturity for these processes fluctuated between 2.0 and 2.5.
The average for IT strategic planning was also in this range.
The IT Governance Institute recently developed a specific
IT governance maturity model (figure 7). According to this
model, enterprises assessed at level 0 are characterized by a
complete lack of any recognizable IT governance process. To
move up to level 1, the organization at least needs to recognize
the importance of addressing IT governance issues. Maturity 5
implies an advanced and forward-looking understanding of IT
governance issues and solutions, supported by an established
framework and best practices of structures, processes and
relational mechanisms. It should be noted that the desired “to
be” position should be identified in function of the context
where one operates (industry, geography, size, etc.) and of the
enterprise strategy. When the “as is” and “to be” positions are
known, gaps can be determined, projects defined and specific
actions taken.
Relational Mechanisms
Relational mechanisms are very important. It is possible
that an organization has all the IT governance structures and
processes in place, but it does not work out because business
and IT do not understand each other and/or are not working
together. Or, it may be that there is little business awareness on
the part of IT or little IT appreciation from the business. So, to
reach effective IT governance, two-way communication and a
good participation/collaboration relationship between the
business and IT people are needed. Ensuring ongoing
knowledge sharing across departments and organizations is
paramount for attaining and sustaining business/IT alignment.
It is crucial to facilitate the sharing and the management of
knowledge by using mechanisms such as career crossover 
(IT staff working in the business units and business people
working in IT), continuous education, cross-training, etc.
Conclusion
The key element in IT governance is the alignment of the
business and IT to lead to the achievement of business value.
This high-level goal can be achieved by acknowledging IT
governance as a part of enterprise governance and by setting
up an IT governance framework with best practices. Such a
framework and practices should be composed of a variety of
structures, processes and relational mechanisms. What works
for one organization may not work for other organizations
(e.g.,the balanced scorecard method can be successful in some
organizations and not in others).
Endnotes
1 See also Van Grembergen, W.; S. De Haes; E. Guldentops;
“Structures, Processes and Relational Mechanisms for
Information Technology Governance: Theories and Practices,”
Strategies for Information Technology Governance, Idea
Group Publishing, Pennsylvania, USA, 2003
2 Board Briefing on IT Governance, IT Governance Institute,
2001, www.itgi.org
3 Van Grembergen, W.; Introduction to the Minitrack IT
Governance and Its Mechansims,P roceedings of the 35th
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences
(HICSS), 2002
4 Peterson, R.; “Information Strategies and Tactics for
Information Technology Governance,”Strategies for
Information Technology Governance, Idea Group
Publishing, Pennsylvania, USA, 2003
5 Shleifer, A.; W. Vishny; “A Survey on Corporate
Governance,”Journal of Finance,v ol. 52, no. 2, 1997
6 Op. cit., Peterson
7 Duffy, J., IT/Business Alignment: Is It an Option or Is It
Mandatory?, IDC document, #26831, 2002; Duffy, J.,
2002, IT Governance and Business Value Part I:
IT Governance— An Issue of Critical Importance, IDC
document, #27291, 2002; Duffy, J., 2002, IT Governance
and Business Value Part 2: Who’s Responsible for What?
IDC document, #27807, 2002

--- PAGE 7 ---
I NFORMATION S YSTEMS C ONTROL J OURNAL ,V OLUME 1, 2004
Copyright © 2004 Information Systems Audit and Control Association. All rights reserved. www.isaca.org.
I NFORMATION S YSTEMS C ONTROL J OURNAL ,V OLUME 1, 2004
8 IT Strategy Committee, IT Governance Institute, 2002,
www.itgi.org
9 Henderson, J.; N. Venkatraman; “Strategic Alignment:
Leveraging Information Technology for Transforming
Organizations,” IBM Systems Journal, 1993
10 Porter, M.E.; “Strategy and the Internet,” Harvard
Business Review, March/April 2001, pp.63-78
11 Kaplan, R.; D. Norton; “The Balanced Scorecard—
Measures That Drive Performance,” Harvard Business
Review, January/February 1992, pp. 71-79
12 Van Grembergen, W.; R. Saull; S. De Haes; “Linking the
IT Balanced Scorecard to the Business Objectives at a
Major Canadian Financial Group,” Journal of Information
Technology Cases and Applications,v ol. 5, no. 1, 2003,
pp. 23-50
13 Van Grembergen, W.; R. Saull; “Aligning Business and
Information Technology Through the Balanced Scorecard
at a Major Canadian Financial Group: Its Status Measured
with an IT BSC Maturity Model,” 34
th Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences (HICCS), CD-ROM,
Maui, 2001
14 Parker, M.; Strategic Transformation and Information
Technology,N ew Jersey, USA, 1996
15 Van Grembergen, W.; R. Van Bruggen; “Measuring and
Improving Corporate Information Technology Through the
Balanced Scorecard Technique,” European Conference on
the Evaluation of Information Technology, Delft, The
Netherlands, 1997
16 Van Grembergen, W.; S. De Haes; I. Amelinckx; “Using
COBIT and the Balanced Scorecard as Instruments for
Service Level Management,” Information Systems Control
Journal, ISACA, USA, vol. 4, 2003, pp. 56-62
17 Control Objectives for Information and related Technology
(COBIT), 3rd Edition, IT Governance Institute, 2000,
www.itgi.org
18 CCTA, Helpdesk: The Stationary Office, 1998
19 Guldentops, E.; Part and Parcel of Corporate Governance,
CIO Summit, European Financial Management and
Marketing Conference, Brussels, 2003
20 Luftman, J.; Assessing Business-IT Alignment Maturity,
Communications of AIS,v ol. 4, 2000
21 Guldentops, E.; W. Van Grembergen; S. De Haes; “Control
and Governance Maturity Survey: Establishing a
Reference Benchmark and a Self-assessment Tool,”
Information Systems Control Journal, ISACA, USA, vol.
6, 2002
Steven De Haes 
is responsible for the information systems management
executive programs at the University of Antwerp Management
School (UAMS), Belgium. He is engaged in research in the
domain of IT governance and in this capacity performs
research for ISACA. Currently, he is preparing a Ph.D. on the
practices and mechanisms of IT governance. He has several
publications on IT governance primarily in the Information
Systems Control Journal and the Journal of Information
Technology Cases and Applications (JITCA).
Wim Van Grembergen, Ph.D.
is professor and chair of the MIS department at the business
faculty of the University of Antwerp (UFSIA). He was
previously guest professor at the University of Leuven
(Belgium) and has taught at the University of Stellenbosch in
South Africa and the Institute of Business Studies in Moscow.
He teaches information systems at the undergraduate and
executive level, and researches business transformations
through information technology, audit of information systems,
IT balanced scorecard and IT governance. He served as
academic director of the MBA program of UFSIA (1989-1995)
and presently is academic coordinator of an IT audit master
program and an 
e-business master program. 
Information Systems Control Journal, formerly the IS Audit & Control Journal, is published by the Information Systems Audit and Control Association, Inc.. Membership in the association, a voluntary
organization of persons interested in information systems (IS) auditing, control and security, entitles one to receive an annual subscription to the Information Systems Control Journal.
Opinions expressed in the Information Systems Control Journal represent the views of the authors and advertisers. They may differ from policies and official statements of the Information Sys tems Audit
and Control Association and/or the IT Governance Institute® and their committees, and from opinions endorsed by authors' employe rs, or the editors of this Journal. Information Systems Control Journal
does not attest to the originality of authors' content.
© Copyright 2004 by Information Systems Audit and Control Association Inc., formerly the EDP Auditors Association. All rights reserved. ISCATM Information Systems Control AssociationTM
Instructors are permitted to photocopy isolated articles for noncommercial classroom use without fee. For other copying, reprint or republication, permission must be obtained in writing from the
association. Where necessary, permission is granted by the copyright owners for those registered with the Copyright Clearance Center (CCC), 27 Congress St., Salem, Mass. 01970, to photocopy articles
owned by the Information Systems Audit and Control Association Inc., for a flat fee of US $2.50 per article plus 25¢ per page. Se nd payment to the CCC stating the ISSN (1526-7407), date, volume,
and first and last page number of each article. Copying for other than personal use or internal reference, or of articles or colu mns not owned by the association without express permission of the
association or the copyright owner is expressly prohibited.
www.isaca.org