--- PAGE 1 ---
Enhancing digital transformation in SMEs: The dynamic
capabilities of innovation intermediaries within ecosystems
Shahid Hafeeza,b
, Khuram Shahzada,b,*
, Muthu De Silvab,c
a
School of Technology and Innovations, University of Vaasa, Finland
b
Innovation and Entrepreneurship InnoLab, University of Vaasa, Finland
c
Birkbeck, University of London, Malet Street, London, WC1E 7HX, UK
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Intermediaries
Dynamic capabilities
Digital transformation
SMEs
Co-creation
A B S T R A C T
While the dynamic capabilities framework discusses the sensing, seizing, and transformation
capabilities of organisations, we lack knowledge of the specific dynamic capabilities of in­
termediaries that support collaborations leading to the digital transformation of small and me­
dium enterprises (SMEs). The specific role of intermediaries supporting collaboration between
SMEs and the ecosystem, the unique barriers confronted by SMEs, and the long-term focus
required for digital transformation suggest that intermediaries should deploy specific dynamic
capabilities. By conducting in-depth interviews with innovation intermediaries, SMEs, and other
ecosystem actors in the Ostrobothnia region of Finland, we make three original contributions to
the dynamic capability framework. First, while the literature has discussed spotting opportunities
and bringing partners together as sensing dynamic capability, we make an original contribution by
demonstrating the ‘ancillary opportunity spotting capability’ of intermediaries. This includes in­
termediaries spotting opportunities to develop digital technologies to address business, envi­
ronmental, or social challenges of ecosystem actors (e.g. developing carbon-neutral solutions)
where SME digital transformation is only indirectly achieved: hence, this is described as an
ancillary opportunity. Second, while the literature has discussed that the seizing capability in­
volves exploiting opportunities by using resources, we identified that intermediaries leverage
‘business model co-creation capability’ for seizing. This predominantly consists of them co-creating –
with the stakeholders of SMEs (i.e. customers, suppliers, and competitors) – the business models
of SMEs for digital transformation. Third, as a transformation capability, intermediaries leverage
‘ecosystem revamping capability’ for continued and scaled-up SME digital transformation, the ca­
pabilities associated with which include altering opportunity and ecosystem structures, bridging
inter-ecosystem collaborations, and deploying international best practices. Our finding has im­
plications for intermediaries, SMEs, and policymakers keen to enhance SME digital trans­
formation by enabling intermediaries to develop required dynamic capabilities.
* Corresponding author. School of Technology and Innovations, University of Vaasa, Finland.
E-mail addresses: shahid.hafeez@uwasa.fi (S. Hafeez), khuram.shahzad@uwasa.fi (K. Shahzad), m.desilva@bbk.ac.uk (M. De Silva).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Long Range Planning
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/lrp
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lrp.2025.102525
Received 6 May 2024; Received in revised form 28 January 2025; Accepted 11 March 2025
Long Range Planning 58 (2025) 102525
Available online 12 March 2025
0024-6301/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

--- PAGE 2 ---
1. Introduction
Digital transformation has compelled ecosystem actors1
to deploy new digital technologies (e.g. blockchains, Internet of Things,
artificial intelligence,and robotics) toachieve operationalefficiency andrespond to changingmarket needs (Sestino et al.,2020;Imran
et al., 2021; Shahzad et al., 2024a,b; Shahzad and Hafeez, 2022). Innovation intermediaries – key actors supporting collaboration
among ecosystem actors – (De Silva et al., 2022; Howells, 2006; Kivimaa et al., 2019) increasingly offer support for the digital
transformation of ecosystem actors by way of supporting collaborations aimed at the development and adoption of new technologies
(Rossi et al., 2022). Compared with the rest of the ecosystem actors, small and medium enterprises (SMEs)2
struggle to keep up with
digital transformation since they lack internal R&D facilities, access to innovation networks, and cognitive abilities (Rossi et al., 2020,
2022) required for innovation. Therefore, collaborating with different actors in an ecosystem is perceived as crucial for SMEs to
develop and deploy innovative solutions (Järvi et al., 2018). Still, they need support to form collaborations and use the collaborative
output for SME digital transformation. Considering the role of intermediaries (Adner, 2017; Adner and Kapoor, 2010; Jacobides et al.,
2018; Lingens et al., 2021), they are better placed to support ecosystem collaborations (Garengo, 2019; Randhawa et al., 2022) that
would enable SMEs with their digital transformation. Such a role would require intermediaries to establish collaborations that
generate value for partners and enable SMEs in their digital transformation process.
Past research has indicated that to coordinate digital knowledge exchange processes and facilitate the digital transformation of
SMEs, intermediaries should leverage specific capabilities (Crupi et al., 2020), and different mechanisms (Sassanelli and Terzi, 2022;
Prodi et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023). The general literature about the capabilities of intermediaries has highlighted the importance of (a)
technological, marketing, and collaboration capabilities to enable clients’ open service innovation (Randhawa et al., 2018); (b)
innovation search process and technology transfer to build absorptive capacity of collaborators (Garengo, 2019); (c) knowledge-based
practices for long-term survival of intermediary function (De Silva et al., 2018); and managing resource inflow and outflow between
collaborating parties (De Silva et al., 2022; Järvi et al., 2018) to build purposeful innovations (Randhawa et al., 2016) and shape an
innovation ecosystem (Randhawa et al., 2022). Despite these efforts, there is a lack of understanding of the distinct capabilities in­
termediaries may leverage to mobilise resources and coordinate ecosystem collaborations to support the digital transformation of
SMEs.
The specific role of intermediaries supporting collaborations between SMEs and the ecosystem, the unique barriers confronted by
SMEs, and the long-term focus required for digital transformation suggest that intermediaries should deploy specific dynamic capa­
bilities (Crupi et al., 2020; Sassanelli and Terzi, 2022; Prodi et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023). Therefore, this paper builds on the dynamic
capability’s framework (i.e. higher-order idiosyncratic form of organisational and strategic capabilities) that discusses opportunity
spotting (sensing)-, integrating and building (seizing)-, and reconfiguring (transformation)- capabilities of organisations (Teece,
2007). The relevance of the dynamic capability’s framework is further justified by prior research on digital transformation, as these
studies (Warner and Wäger, 2019; Scuotto et al., 2021, 2023; Khurana et al., 2022; Soluk et al., 2023; Soluk and Kammerlander, 2021;
Teoh et al., 2023) have confirmed the importance of dynamic capabilities for the digital transformation. However, previous research
has given limited attention to the specific dynamic capabilities of innovation intermediaries that coordinate and facilitate collabo­
rations supporting the digital transformation of SMEs. Therefore, it is extremely important to study how the dynamic capabilities of
intermediaries enable them to form and support collaborations among ecosystem actors (Hernández-Chea et al., 2021) for the digital
transformation of SMEs.
Against this backdrop, we ask the following research question: “How do innovation intermediaries leverage their dynamic capabilities to
facilitate the digital transformation of SMEs within an ecosystem?” to answer the research questions, we conducted 33 in-depth interviews
with different ecosystem actors i.e., innovation intermediaries, SMEs (who are interested in digital transformation), and their
collaborating actors such as micro firms, and large firms located in the Ostrobothnia region of Finland. Such a qualitative research
design helped us to retrieve rich information on how intermediaries use their dynamic capabilities for collaborations leading to SMEs’
digital transformation.
We make three key original contributions to the dynamic capability framework (Teece, 2007) by identifying specific dynamic
capabilities of innovation intermediaries (Foss et al., 2023; Randhawa et al., 2022; Abi Saad et al., 2024; De Silva et al., 2022) required
to enable SME digital transformation. First, while the literature has discussed spotting opportunities and bringing partners together (i.
e. sensing) as a dynamic capability of organisations (Teece, 2007) and intermediaries (Randhawa et al., 2022), we make an original
contribution by demonstrating that to achieve SME digital transformation, intermediaries should leverage capabilities to spot op­
portunities to develop digital technologies that address business, environmental or social challenges of ecosystem actors (e.g.
developing carbon-neutral solutions). Even though the aim is to achieve SME digital transformation, the identified opportunities only
indirectly achieve the digital transformation of SMEs. Identifying such a common challenge of ecosystem actors as the primary
objective of the collaboration was important to make these actors collaborate with SMEs. It is through these collaborations; that SME
digital transformation is materialised. Hence, we name this capability of intermediaries required at the sensing stage as ‘ancillary
opportunity spotting capability’. Especially at the stage of spotting opportunities, intermediaries’ ability to secure public funding for such
projects is key due to the resource scarcities of SMEs, and identifying collaborators, who are likely to continue interactions with SMEs
beyond the project lifetime, is important since digital transformation is a long-term process. Second, we find that the capabilities of
1
A key feature of an ecosystem is interdependent actors connected for value creation, which we mean by the use of the term “ecosystem” in this
study (Adner, 2017; Scaringella and Radziwon, 2018).
2
SMEs are defined as those organisations with less than 250 employees (BEIS, 2023).
S. Hafeez et al. Long Range Planning 58 (2025) 102525
2

--- PAGE 3 ---
intermediaries to exploit the identified opportunities for SME digital transformation (seizing) predominantly consist of them
co-creating new SME business models in collaboration with stakeholders of SMEs (i.e. customers, suppliers and competitors). Thus, we
named this capability of intermediaries at the seizing stage ‘business model co-creation capability’. This finding extends the literature that
has discussed the capabilities of intermediaries to actively engage in collaborative projects (De Silva et al., 2022; Randhawa et al.,
2016) by outlining how they support SMEs to integrate the output of the collaboration by bringing together other relevant stakeholders
to achieve long-term digital transformation. Third, the paper contributes to the literature by identifying the capabilities of in­
termediaries that ensure continued and scaled-up SME digital transformation. These capabilities include altering opportunity and
ecosystem structures, bridging inter-ecosystem collaborations, and deploying international best practices that are crucial for SMEs to
scale up digital transformation. Therefore, we named this capability of intermediaries at the transformation stage ‘ecosystem revamping
capability’. As such, our paper contributes to the dynamic capability framework (Teece, 2007) by demonstrating the capabilities of
intermediaries – in terms of the stages of the SME digital transformation process – in spotting ancillary opportunities (i.e. sensing
capability), in co-creating SME business models (i.e. seizing capability) and in moving from organisational influence on ecosystem
influence (i.e. transformation capability), which ensures continuous and scaled-up SME digital transformation.
Our finding has implications for intermediaries, SMEs, and policymakers keen to enhance SME digital transformation by enabling
intermediaries to develop required dynamic capabilities. We recommend that intermediaries develop these capabilities, and SME
management shall engage in meaningful and strong collaborations with innovation intermediaries to access new knowledge and seize
opportunities. Our findings suggest that long-term collaborations with strategic goals can help SMEs to truly materialize collaboration
benefits. We recommend that policymakers support intermediaries in developing those capabilities, and projects and initiatives that
drive the co-creation of solutions, which indirectly leads to capacity building of collaborating actors.
The paper is structured as follows. In the following section, we briefly present the theoretical background and current state of the
literature on barriers to SME digital transformation and the roles and dynamic capabilities of innovation intermediaries. This is fol­
lowed by the methodology section including case introductions, data collection, and data analysis. Then the paper demonstrates the
results ofthe study,and the last sectiondiscussesthe theoretical, practical and policy implications of our results, limitations, and future
research directions.
2. Theoretical background
2.1. Barriers to SME digital transformation and intermediaries
Digital transformation is defined as the use of digital technologies to improve a business’s operations, products, services, and
business models (Soluk and Kammerlander, 2021). Digital transformation has introduced disruptive innovation in the contemporary
business landscape. As a result, businesses are compelled to deploy new digital technologies. However, most SMEs work hard to keep
up with rapid technological advancements, as they struggle to understand the paradigm of digital transformation and its requirements
to transform their activities. This phenomenon is linked to SMEs’ innovation dilemma of lacking internal R&D facilities and access to
innovation networks, limited cognitive abilities, and resource barriers in their innovation processes (Rossi et al., 2020, 2022). Besides
their traditional innovation challenges, SMEs also face additional challenges in configuring ways to implement and utilise digital
technologies in their business operations and processes (Kumar et al., 2023). For instance, SMEs in general lack the awareness and
knowledge resources required to implement Industry 4.0 technologies in their organisational processes (Benitez et al., 2020; Masood
and Sonntag, 2020; Stentoft et al., 2021). Their lack of awareness and knowledge of Industry 4.0 technologies can be partially
explained by their focus on cost-cutting and short-term benefits (Masood and Sonntag, 2020).
Moreover, digital transformation requires integrating different emerging technologies (e.g. Internet of Things, robotics and arti­
ficial intelligence), which necessitates expertise and knowledge of various domains and the possible merging of these with the
organisational settings to offer a complete solution (Benitez et al., 2020). Similarly, Cugno et al. (2021) have discussed that the
implementation and integration of Industry 4.0 technologies require organisations to upskill their employees and develop new
organisational capabilities, which are challenging for SMEs due to their limited resources. Research also suggests that SMEs have
limited ability to spot opportunities related to emerging technologies (Cugno et al., 2021). Other limitations and other barriers, such as
high cost and lack of resources, inhibit SMEs from engaging in digital transformation (Cugno et al., 2021; Stentoft et al., 2021).
Past research has suggested that SMEs form external collaborations to complement their existing knowledge bases, increase
awareness and knowledge of technology implementation and utilisation and spot business opportunities related to emerging tech­
nologies (Benitez et al., 2020; Ricci et al., 2021). However, the literature on SMEs’ external collaborations indicates that they struggle
to find relevant partners and engage in productive collaborations due to a lack of knowledge of industrial networks and a tendency to
engage in less successful transaction-based collaborations instead of building strategic, long-term collaborations. Also, many business
organisations are reluctant to share technological knowledge due to the fear of losing competitive advantage (Shahzad et al., 2024a,b).
Therefore, neutral actors such as intermediaries that connect SMEs to more extensive and productive networks and act as bridging
partners in overcoming hurdles play a key role (Blanka and Traunmüller, 2020). Innovation intermediaries are considered organi­
sations that create value for other actors in the ecosystem (Ritala et al., 2022). Prior research on innovation intermediaries, however,
has been focusing on the complex roles of such organisations in terms of facilitating technology transfer by developing absorptive
capacity (Garengo, 2019) and forming networks to exchange knowledge between collaborating parties within the ecosystem (De Silva
et al., 2022). However, for innovation intermediaries to perform their crucial role in the ecosystem, they are required to utilise their
embedded dynamic capabilities for the digital transformation of SMEs. Thus, the need to explore the capabilities of intermediaries
within an ecosystem to engage in collaborations contributing to SME digital transformation (Dąbrowska et al., 2022) has been an
S. Hafeez et al. Long Range Planning 58 (2025) 102525
3

--- PAGE 4 ---
emerging interest in recent literature (Hernández-Chea et al., 2021).
2.2. The role of intermediaries in an ecosystem in enabling SME digital transformation
The literature has discussed the general contributions of intermediaries such as orchestrators, hub firms, or ecosystem leaders in
designing and aligning structures of the ecosystem for joint value proposition (e.g. Adner, 2017; Jacobides et al., 2018; Lingens et al.,
2021). Intermediaries are considered significantly important organisations in an ecosystem: they support systemic and firm-level
collaborative innovation by developing connections between different organisations, helping parties to develop and adopt
emerging technologies, facilitating knowledge-intensive services, offering support in policymaking (Howells, 2006; Kivimaa et al.,
2019; Rossi et al., 2022) and creating value for other actors of the ecosystem (Randhawa et al., 2016; Ritala et al., 2022). The extant
literature also provides useful insights into varying roles and characteristics exhibited by innovation intermediaries in ecosystems
during different phases of the innovation process. For instance, Albats et al. (2022), Hayter et al. (2020), and O’Kane et al., 2021
consider research institutes, transfer offices (TTOs), and knowledge transfer offices (KTOs) as innovation intermediaries due to the
providing support in knowledge brokering, acting as innovation catalysts, and facilitating collaborations for innovations in the
ecosystem. Similarly, industry associations as innovation intermediaries stimulate and enable the production and circulation of
technological knowledge among different ecosystem actors (Geels and Deuten, 2006). Innovation consultants assist firms in scanning
and foresight technological opportunities and advise acquiring technological information and solutions (Albats et al., 2022). Such
intermediaries assist firm-level innovations by facilitating knowledge-intensive services and co-creation between different ecosystem
organisations, offering policy-making support (Howells, 2006).
In the context of SMEs, intermediaries facilitate collaboration by connecting different actors through matchmaking and facilitating
inter-organisational relations (Blanka and Traunmüller, 2020). They also help SMEs increase their innovation and influence regional
policies for supporting SMEs with localised open innovation (Leckel et al., 2020). Furthermore, intermediaries facilitate knowledge
development, dissemination and diffusion processes of SME’s ecosystem-based collaborations (Kivimaa et al., 2019). Therefore, in­
termediaries can help SMEs overcome resource and cognitive barriers by providing them with access to knowledge, networks and
resources.
Intermediaries’ support of SMEs in their digital transformation efforts would be extremely useful since digital transformation is a
complex and multidimensional concept (Warner and Wäger, 2019). Creating business and customer value through digital technologies
requires various kinds of configurations and new knowledge that may exist outside organisational boundaries (Scaringella and
Radziwon, 2018). In such a context, intermediaries become relevant for SME digital transformation as they can form ecosystem-based
collaborations and strategically mobilise resources to help SMEs in their digital transformation process.
2.3. Theoretical framework
2.3.1. Dynamic capabilities of intermediaries and SME digital transformation
The complex roles played by intermediaries in an ecosystem require them to leverage their high-order dynamic capabilities of
sensing (i.e. capabilities for spotting opportunities), seizing (i.e. capabilities for exploiting opportunities using resources to generate
value), and reconfiguring (i.e. capabilities for continuous renewal) (Randhawa et al., 2022). Yet, the dynamic capabilities of in­
termediaries have rarely been studied. There have only been a handful of studies that have discussed the dynamic capabilities of
intermediaries, and these have focused on specific contexts, such as the service ecosystem (e.g. Randhawa et al., 2022) and inter­
national social purpose organisations (De Silva et al., 2021). These findings might not be directly applicable to the context of in­
termediaries contributing to SME digital transformation owing to the uniqueness of SMEs and digital transformation (Kumar et al.,
2023), which may require intermediaries to use a specific set of dynamic capabilities. Similarly, the literature on the organisational
dynamic capabilities for digital transformation (Verhoef et al., 2021) might not be applicable since intermediaries play a unique
coordination role (De Silva et al., 2022; Järvi et al., 2018) concerning SME digital transformation. In particular, how one organiza­
tion’s dynamic capabilities (i.e. intermediaries’) enable the digital transformation of another organization (i.e. SMEs) has not been
discussed. Therefore, it is important to explore how intermediaries leverage their dynamic capabilities for the digital transformation of
SMEs, and this paper contributes to that exploration.
The literature places the dynamic capability framework at the core of helping organisations navigate through disruptive times
(Teece, 2007; Warner and Wäger, 2019). The dynamic capability framework introduced by David Teece (2007) in his seminal work
explained a set of three distinct capabilities: sensing, seizing, and reconfiguration. According to Teece, these capabilities enable or­
ganisations to sense and seek new opportunities, translate those opportunities into business offerings (new products, services, or
processes), and continuously align organisational structures and assets to capitalise on opportunities arising in their business envi­
ronment. The current business landscape is continuously evolving due to the implementation and utilisation of digital technologies.
Digital transformation involves enhancing customer experience, process, and operational efficiency (Hafeez et al., 2021), new revenue
streams, and competitive advantage (Warner and Wäger, 2019) by using digital channels (technologies), which can bring about
business model transformation (Dąbrowska et al., 2022; Khanagha et al., 2014). The biggest challenge organisations, especially SMEs,
face is the technological advancements that happen at a breakneck pace and create market and digital disruptions (Warner and Wäger,
2019).
Sensing capability allows organisations to scan, monitor, learn, and constantly seek new opportunities (Iansiti and Lakhani, 2014;
Teece, 2007). The sensing capability requires knowledge of organisational processes, changing environment, and ecosystem actors
(Wang and Ahmed, 2007; Teece, 2007) to sense, and react to, change (Soluk and Kammerlander, 2021). Intermediaries, as anchor
S. Hafeez et al. Long Range Planning 58 (2025) 102525
4

--- PAGE 5 ---
institutionsin an ecosystem, have a betterunderstanding and knowledgeof different actors in anecosystem, the evolving technological
landscape, and associated opportunities (De Silva et al., 2018). They are thus better prepared to identify the needs of SMEs for
technology adoption and entrepreneurialism, required for SME digital transformation. Therefore, intermediaries are likely to be better
equipped to sense opportunities for collaboration between SMEs and other ecosystem actors that would support SME digital
transformation.
The seizing capability relates to translating a recognized opportunity into a new product, service, or process by matching the
opportunity with resources (Iansiti and Lakhani, 2014; Teece, 2007; Wang and Ahmed, 2007). Seizing capabilities are integral for new
technological knowledge integration for the development of technological solutions, the value proposition from collaborative digital
innovations, and redesigning digital business model innovation through value creation (Teoh et al., 2023). Especially for SMEs the
integration of disruptive technologies within ecosystem-based business models (Scuotto et al., 2023) is key for the digital trans­
formation (Scuotto et al., 2021). Since intermediaries are well connected in an ecosystem, capable of knowledge integration, and have
experience in helping their clients with business model innovation (De Silva et al., 2018; Blanka and Traunmüller, 2020), they are
better able to source resources required to seize identified opportunities for collaborations leading to SME digital transformation. In
particular, considering the resource barriers confronted by SMEs (Benitez et al., 2020; Masood and Sonntag, 2020; Stentoft et al.,
2021), intermediaries can bring together a complementary set of actors with relevant resources required to seize opportunities for SME
digital transformation.
Transformation capability allows organisations to reconfigure established resources and operations (Iansiti and Lakhani, 2014;
Teece, 2007). The transformation capabilities of intermediaries could enhance the ecosystem value proposition by adding new
members, altering ecosystem configurations to align the goal with newly admitted actors, and figuring out the new governance
mechanisms (Randhawa et al., 2022). Especially concerning SME digital transformation, intermediaries are likely to be in a position to
alter the ecosystem in support of the scalping-up of SME digital transformation.
Despite the growing interest in this area, there is a notable lack of studies analysing the dynamic capabilities of key actors, such as
intermediaries. Understanding how these dynamic capabilities of intermediaries facilitate the digital transformation of other orga­
nisations, particularly SMEs, is a crucial area for exploration. This study aims to address this research gap by examining how in­
termediaries leverage their dynamic capabilities to support the digital transformation of SMEs. Specifically, we seek to contribute to
the literature by focusing on the unique roles of innovation intermediaries and the specific digital transformation needs of SMEs.
3. Methodology
3.1. Research design
We have adopted a qualitative research approach to understand how intermediaries use their dynamic capabilities for collabo­
rations leading to SME digital transformation. Such an approach becomes appropriate when scholars aim to study a real-world case to
frame a broader picture of the phenomenon under consideration (Graebner et al., 2012) and understand a context-specific, complex
experience (Phillips and Ritala, 2019). Furthermore, a qualitative approach is considered appropriate for theory building (Yin, 2009),
given the need to explore how the dynamic capabilities of intermediaries enable SME digital transformation. As a complex real-world
phenomenon is examined, the case of a specific ecosystem is beneficial (Eisenhardt, 1989). Our approach to studying collaborations
supported by intermediaries for SME digital transformation builds on prior seminal scholars (e.g. Garri, 2021; Penttilä et al., 2020;
Phillips and Ritala, 2019; Planko et al., 2017) who have studied collaborations in an ecosystem from different viewpoints.
3.2. Empirical base
Our selected research design helps to gather data from collaborating actors within an ecosystem in the Ostrobothnia region of
Finland, involving intermediaries, SMEs, micro firms, public-sector organisations and large firms working together on projects leading
to SME digital transformation. The selected ecosystem of the Ostrobothnia region of Finland serves well for a case study where
different ecosystem actors interact to develop innovative solutions, stimulate the sharing of knowledge and learning and promote new
ways of working. Therefore, it could be stated that the selected ecosystem is known for its collaborative and innovative nature and
represents a ‘strong case’ of engaging in collaboration (Dyer Jr and Wilkins, 1991). Additionally, the selected ecosystem can be
considered to be in line with the ‘conceptual dimension’ of the study design of an ecosystem presented by Phillips and Ritala (2019),
who argued that the conceptual dimension of an ecosystem is based on the boundaries and perspectives of the studied ecosystem. The
boundaries of the conceptual dimension of the ecosystem determine the ecosystem type (i.e. which, in this case, includes actors
working together and supported by innovation intermediaries) and scope (i.e. which, here, involves collaborative projects leading to
SME digital transformation), while perspectives of the conceptual dimension ask how to address differing perspectives of the actors,
ecosystem and environment (i.e. which, in this case, are the dynamic capabilities of intermediaries leading to SME digital trans­
formation) (Philips and Ritala, 2019: 3). Furthermore, the selected ecosystem as a case for this study becomes appropriate since it
enables accessibility and information richness (Voss et al., 2002) and the ability to identify this ecosystem purposefully, which sup­
ports replicating or extending emergent theory from the case, in which the process of interest is ‘transparently observable’ (Eisenhardt,
1989).
S. Hafeez et al. Long Range Planning 58 (2025) 102525
5

--- PAGE 6 ---
3.3. Study sample and data collection
The purposive sampling technique was employed to select innovation intermediaries, SMEs (Eisenhardt, 1989; Guest et al., 2006),
and their partner organisations involved in SME digital transformation (Yin, 2009). The study sample contains 34 interviews with
intermediaries (14), SMEs (10 interviews), and their collaborating micro firms (7 interviews), large firms (2 interviews), and
public-sectororganisations (1interview) that have been working together in different projectsleading to SME digital transformation.A
majority of SMEs operate in the service sector and some in the manufacturing sector. Intermediaries offer various support activities for
all collaborations in terms of coordination, technological development, internationalisation, and consultation for policymaking.
Interviewing the key actors in the ecosystem involved in projects leading to SME digital transformation offered a comprehensive
picture of how intermediaries use their dynamic capabilities in these projects.
With the help of key informants, we identified the potential respondents and sent personal emails which included a brief intro­
duction to the research project and an invitation to an interview. A similar process has been utilised by Scuotto et al. (2024) when
conducting direct elicitation interviews to find relevant interviewees. The use of key informants enabled us to gain access to different
perspectives and insights, thus limiting the risks of convergent retrospective sensemaking and impression management (Gioia et al.,
1994). The majority of the participants in our sample included top- and middle-level managers who possessed key strategic infor­
mation about the firm’s operations as well as their collaborations and interactions with intermediaries (see details in Table 1).
Similarly, the participants from intermediaries held top management positions in their respective organisations and had an in-depth
knowledge of how they used their dynamic capabilities when supporting collaborations leading to SME digital transformation (see
details in Table 2).
We developed two separate sets of semi-structured interview protocols to gain a rich understanding of the dynamic capabilities of
intermediaries from the perspectives of intermediaries (see Appendix 1) and SMEs and their collaborators (see Appendix 2), respec­
tively. The interviews with intermediaries were used to gather data on how they used their dynamic capabilities in facilitating col­
laborations leading to SME digital transformation. The intermediaries were asked about the capabilities, collaborations, interactions,
and support activities that they provided to SMEs and their collaborators. The interviews directed at SMEs and their collaborators were
mainly used to elicit information regarding the collaborations for the digital transformation of SMEs, and particularly their views on
how intermediaries used their dynamic capabilities in helping the collaboration, which also offered an opportunity for triangulation.
There was a greater consistency between the two types of participants concerning their views on intermediaries and how they used
different types of capabilities during the sensing, seizing, and transformation stages of the projects. The interview guide was piloted
and evaluated through internal testing within the research team (via commenting on questions back and forth), as suggested by Kallio
et al. (2016). The pilot test provided us with crucial information on the interview guide and helped us update the content of the
questions (e.g. removing any ambiguous wording) to circumvent redundancy and attain specific information about emerging findings
related to our core themes.
We conducted all the interviews online semi-structured interviews using Zoom and MS Teams during late 2021- early 2022, and
they lasted, on average, about 60 min. All interviews were recorded and yielded a total of 402 pages of transcription. Our approach of
conducting semi-structured interviews in innovation-related studies aligns with that of Forsman (2021) and Scuotto et al. (2024). For
each phase of interviews, we continued interviewing relevant experts until we reached the saturation point. Reaching and defining
Table 1
Description of interviews with ecosystem actors.
Interviews Position Experience (Years) Sector Products/services Gender
SMEs who were the recipients of digital transformation
1 CEO (CEO1) 30 Services Building maintenance Female
2 Head of Business Intelligence (HBI1) 4 Manufacturing Energy and district heating solutions Male
3 CEO (CEO5) 11 Services Games, software and user experience Male
4 Software Engineer (SE) 1 Services Educational consultancy Male
5 Project Manager (PM1) 4 Services Educational consultancy Male
6 Group Manager (GM) 8 Services Wind power consulting Male
7 CEO (CEO8) 5 Services Peer-to-peer service platform Male
8 Managing Director (MD1) 9 Manufacturing Metal supply Male
9 Chief Technology Officer (CTO) 15 Services IT services and consulting Male
10 CEO (CEO9) 12 Services IT services and consulting Male
Collaborating micro firms
1 CEO (CEO2) 14 Services Distributors Male
2 CEO (CEO6) 3 Services Marketing consultancy Female
3 CEO (CEO7) 12 Services Research and consultancy Female
4 CEO (CEO3) 5 Services Software solutions Male
5 Head of Business Development (HBD) 4 Manufacturers Lights manufacturers Male
6 Automation Engineer (AE) 2 Manufacturers Moveable power plants Male
7 CEO (CEO4) 5 Services Digital games Male
Collaborating large firms
1 Operations Centre Manager (OCM) 11 Manufacturing Energy production and distribution Male
2 CEO (CEO10) 4 Manufacturing Cruise interior design Male
Collaborating public-sector organization
1 Communication Manager (CM) 21 Manufacturers Environmental services Female
S. Hafeez et al. Long Range Planning 58 (2025) 102525
6

--- PAGE 7 ---
saturation in qualitative research is imperative (Eisenhardt, 1989), which was also the case in our study: in this research, we simul­
taneously conducted interviews and analysed data until we reached a saturation level, where respondents’ insights became repetitive
and no additional insights could be found (Guest et al., 2006). Our data collection strategy thus aimed at limiting bias by including
diverse informants who viewed the focal phenomena from different perspectives and by involving three researchers who indepen­
dently coded and subsequently discussed and agreed upon a coding structure (Mezger, 2014).
Finally, two validation events with the interview participants and a broader group of actors in the same ecosystem who were
involved in SME digital transformation projects were conducted to further verify the study findings (Gummesson, 2001). Each event
Table 2
Description of intermediaries.
Interviews Position Experience
(years)
Organization agenda and role Gender Nature of intermediaries
1 CEO (CEO11) 4 Focuses on small and medium companies and developing
their influence in the region and supports SMEs with relevant
information as well as connecting them with the relevant
businesses and educational institutions for specific niche
programmes
Male Private sector
-Consultants and
technology providers
2 Head of Digital
transformation (HD)
3 Offers a wide range of services and expertise to enhance
technology-based innovations, improves business processes
and productivity of SMEs and facilitates co-creation and open
innovation among business and other actors of region
Male Public-private sector
-Technology transfer
centre
3 Project Manager (PM2) 2 Offers a wide range of services and expertise to enhance
technology-based innovations, improve business processes
and productivity of SMEs and facilitate co-creation and open
innovation among business and other actors of region
Male Public-private sector -
Technology transfer
centre
4 Incubator Manager (IM) 3 Provides support activities to entrepreneurs, SMEs and micro
firms in their digital transformation and internationalisation
processes
Male Public sector -Incubation
centre
5 Project Manager (PM3) 10 Plays a greater role in providing operational and strategic
level support to all actors of regional business, develops and
facilitates mechanisms for enhancing regional growth and
innovations and facilitates technology transfer and open
innovation paradigm in SMEs
Male Public sector – Strategy
and market provider
6 Executive Director (ED) 8 Offers user-centric and cost-effective solutions to
collaborative partners and communicates and lobbies for
interests and growth of small firms at localand national levels
Female Private sector -
Cooperative association
7 Development and
Business Manager
(D&BM)
5 Offers policy-level guidelines, sets strategic directions and
facilitates co-creation among different stakeholders of the
region
Male Public sector- Govt
association
8 Senior Specialist (SS1) 1 Acts as a catalyst for innovation and the ecosystem,
strengthens innovation and commercialisation activities,
promotes the university’s innovation culture and supports
entrepreneurship and is an active player in regional
ecosystems
Male Public sector – Research
institute
9 Senior Specialist (SS2) 1 Acts as a catalyst for innovation and the ecosystem,
strengthens innovation and commercialisation activities,
promotes the university’s innovation culture, supports
entrepreneurship and is an active player in regional
ecosystems
Male Public sector – Research
institute
10 Senior Specialist (SS3) 1 Acts as a catalyst for innovation and the ecosystem,
strengthens innovation and commercialisation activities,
promotes the university’s innovation culture, supports
entrepreneurship and is an active player in regional
ecosystems.
Female Public sector – Research
institute
11 Director 1 8 Connects companies and researchers for joint innovation
projects, supports the identification of funding, provides
advice on patent applications and encourages aspiring
entrepreneurs.
Female Public sector - University
Technology Transfer
Centre
12 Director 2 14 Connects companies and researchers for joint innovation
projects, supports the identification of funding, provides
advice on patent applications and encourages aspiring
entrepreneurs.
Male Public sector - University
Technology Transfer
Centre
13 R&D Manager 13 Connects companies and researchers for joint innovation
projects, supports the identification of funding, provides
advice on patent applications and encourages aspiring
entrepreneurs.
Female Public sector - University
Technology Transfer
Centre
14 Dean 2 Connects companies and researchers for joint innovation
projects, supports the identification of funding, provides
advice on patent applications and encourages aspiring
entrepreneurs.
Male Public sector – University
Knowledge Transfer
Centre
S. Hafeez et al. Long Range Planning 58 (2025) 102525
7

--- PAGE 8 ---
lasted for about 1 h, and its purpose was to present and verify the initial findings and gather any additional contextually specific
relevant insights. The validity of the findings was evident, and more importantly, some important additional information was dis­
cussed, including how intermediaries collaborated with wider stakeholders of SMEs, such as competitors and suppliers, during the
seizing stage.
3.4. Data analysis
Data analysis began with thematic analysis, since the technique is most suitable for sorting and identifying trends embedded in
qualitative data (Braun and Clarke, 2006). We structured our coding process into three phases, as suggested by Gioia et al. (2013).
Initially, two researchers read the full transcripts of eight representative interviews (two manufacturing and two service sector SMEs;
two intermediaries and two micro firms) to become familiarised with the data. Subsequently, they independently read all the interview
transcripts line by line to develop a good understanding of the full set of interview transcripts. In the second step, both researchers
shared their insights on the interview data with each other to build a common understanding. We applied an iterative process to
identify key insights emerging from all interviews. For this purpose, we used NVivo 12, which facilitated coding and enabled us to keep
track of emerging concepts and their relationships. Initially, an open coding approach was used for the analysis and categorisation of
raw textual data but within the theoretical framing of the literature on dynamic capabilities. The first-order themes contained the
interviewees’ original thoughts. Additional codes were added to the NVivo coding scheme during this stage, as respondents cited new
ideas. In the second stage, we linked axial coding (first-order themes) to higher shared property-level themes (13 themes). We
redefined the labelling and categorisation of second-order themes based on the continuous search for new fragments of data, and we
consulted existing literature on the intermediaries and their associated dynamic capabilities (De Silva et al., 2021; Howells, 2006;
Randhawa et al., 2022; Rossi et al., 2020). We followed an iterative process to refine the second-order categories based on the insights
from the conceptual background and emerging data (Gioia et al., 2013). As these categories emerged, we further sought coherence
among the second-order categories. Additionally, the research team also discussed and reached an agreement on consistency and
coherence among second-order themes.
During the final stage, we structured these 13 s-order themes into 4 key aggregated themes: opportunity spotting (i.e. sensing),
integrating resources and building ecosystem collaborations (i.e. seizing), revamping ecosystem structure and scaling up digital op­
portunities (i.e. transformation), and contextual factors. We have used contextual factors to understand context-specific elements
influencing how intermediaries leverage dynamic capabilities for SME digital transformation. These factors include the barriers faced
by SMEs with their digital transformation efforts. When discussing findings, these contextual factors of barriers faced by SMEs enabled
us to make a stronger case as to why and how the use of dynamic capabilities by intermediaries enabled SME digital transformation.
These aggregated themes represent the abstract dimensions of the analysis. Table 3 demonstrates the data structure of our study and
illustrates the coding and the process of reasoning that we followed to derive the second-order and aggregate themes.
The reliability and validity of our results were ensured through triangulation. The authors individually reviewed the transcription
of primary data and workshop notes to verify the validity of information and reduce the risk of ambiguous interpretation. This was
followed by cross-verifying the analysis and findings among the authors to develop a shared understanding of the collected infor­
mation. In addition, a two-step procedure was followed to perform triangulation; we cross-verified our results with the notes taken
during the workshops and secondary data obtained from several sources, such as organisational webpages, blogs and organisational
reports, that supported refining the theoretical setting.
4. Results
4.1. Significance of intermediaries in collaborative projects leading to SME digital transformation
Our findings suggest that intermediaries provide various types of support across multiple projects related to the digital trans­
formation of SMEs. They have an extensive portfolio of projects and facilitate the technological and economic advancements of
regional businesses.
In relation to SMEs, it has been evident in our analysis that the key drivers for the digital transformation of SMEs is the changing
customer requirements and emerging digital technologies with proven financial and efficiency gains. Despite these triggers, SMEs and
their ecosystem have faced several barriers. Our findings suggested that SMEs had internal barriers of the lack of strategic thinking in
digital transformation due to their focus on short-term benefits and the expensive and complicated process of digital transformation.
Similarly, the ecosystem of SMEs has faced specific barriers that hinder SME digital transformation. First, there has been a lack of
ability for the ecosystem to spot opportunities for SME digital transformation and identify and bring together relevant competencies,
technologies, resources, and ecosystem actors. Second, there has been a lack of collaboration skills, knowledge, experience, network,
and resources benefiting SMEs digital transformation. Third, there was a lack of scaling up opportunities for ecosystem collaboration
for enhanced SME digital transformation.
Our findings suggest that intermediaries’ contribution to the ecosystem by way of SME digital transformation was of significant
value in overcoming these specific barriers. We found that intermediaries operate at the system level as well as at the organisational
level. At the system level, they facilitate collaborations and engage with different stakeholders to align the long-term developmental
goals of organisations. At the organisational level, they provide direct support (funding, skill development, guidance and consultation)
to organisations and promote collaborations to develop new technological solutions, innovative processes and products.
Table 4 illustrates some exemplary collaborative projects led by intermediaries that resulted in SME digital transformation. It is
S. Hafeez et al. Long Range Planning 58 (2025) 102525
8

--- PAGE 9 ---
Table 3
Data structure.
First-order themes Second-order themes Aggregated themes
• Spotting opportunities that would simultaneously achieve digital
transformation needs of SMEs and other business, environmental
and social needs of their collaborators
• Outlining technological and operational needs of SMEs
• Envisioning opportunities offered by digital technologies to SMEs
(e.g. enhancing process efficiency, competitive advantage and
customer satisfaction)
• Mapping and scanning digital competencies for SMEs
• Highlighting the benefits of disruptive technologies for SMEs
Capabilities to scan digital
opportunities, competencies and
technological trends for SMEs
Opportunity spotting for SME digital
transformation
• Spotting opportunities to develop digital technologies to meet
operational needs of ecosystem actors
• Identifying specific actors with technological knowledge and
resources for SMEs
• Collaborating with other ecosystem actors to identify expert and
knowledgeable partners on technical matters
• Determining the nature of activities to facilitate collaboration and
technological knowledge exchange process
• Envisioning collaboration activities that create long-term in­
terdependencies between actors
• Identifying needs, expectations and requirements of SMEs for
ecosystem collaboration
Capabilities to identify relevant
ecosystem actors and activities
• Identifying and sourcing human resource needs (i.e. skills and
competencies, talent and workforce) for SME-ecosystem collabora­
tion for digital transformation
• Searching for relevant funding instruments for such collaborations
Capabilities to search for financial/non-
financial resources
• Developing collaboration for co-creation and knowledge exchange
projects
• Connecting relevant stakeholders with mutually beneficial digital
technologies
• Demonstrating good practice casestudies ofcollaborating fordigital
transformation to generate digital awareness for less experienced
SMEs
Capabilities to enact identified digital
opportunities and technological trends
Integrating resources and building
ecosystem collaborations, leading to SME
digital transformation
• Connecting with technology providers and research experts to help
SMEs understand and process externally acquired technological
knowledge
• Maintaining close collaborations beyond the project life cycle to
support SMEs in absorbing digital transformation outcome
Capabilities to develop collaboration for
capacity building for SMEs
• Understanding the business model of closely collaborating SMEs
• Suggesting business model-level configurations to SMEs for
exploiting externally explored knowledge into digital trans­
formation and business opportunities
Capabilities to co-innovate business
models for SMEs
• Financing co-creation projects (providing in-house funding and
preparing for external funding applications)
• Providing training and consultation for leadership competencies
development for SME digital transformation
• Upskilling organisational workforce for digital transformation
through training, consultations and demonstrations
Capabilities to mobilise financial/non-
financial resources and knowledge
recombination
• Influencing technological disruption and needs to offer further
opportunities for SME digital transformation
• Reshaping the ecosystem structure and the underlying interactions
and activities of different actors enabling collaborations, leading to
SME digital transformation
Reconfiguring opportunity and
ecosystem structures
Revamping ecosystem structure and scaling
up digital opportunities for SME digital
transformation
• Connecting SMEs to other regional ecosystems to enhance their
learning and scale up co-creation opportunities to implement digital
technologies
Bridging inter-ecosystem collaborations
• Being an active member of international alliances, learning best
practices of international ecosystems and deploying them to
benchmark local ecosystem
• Redefining the strategic goals and directions of the ecosystem
Benchmarking international best
practices and ecosystem restructuring
• Lack of spotting opportunities, competencies, technologies,
resources and ecosystem actors and activities for SMEs digital
transformation
•Lack of collaboration skills, knowledge, experience, network and
resources benefiting SMEs digital transformation
• Lack of scaling up opportunities for collaboration for enhanced SME
digital transformation
Barriers in ecosystem collaboration Contextual factors
• Lack of strategic thinking due to the focus on short-term benefits
• Expensive and complicated process
SMEs’ internal barriers to digital
transformation
•Changing customer requirements
• Emerging digital technologies
Triggers for digital transformation
S. Hafeez et al. Long Range Planning 58 (2025) 102525
9

--- PAGE 10 ---
evident that the main aim of these projects was not SME digital transformation, but they did have a wide array of specific aims to
innovate digital technologies for the manufacturing industry, related to carbon-neutral energy solutions and for the circular economy.
It has been the case that, during such projects associated with the core expertise of SMEs, intermediaries have enabled SMEs’ digital
transformations. The following sections of the paper discuss how intermediaries – during these projects – leveraged their dynamic
capabilities to enable SMEs’ digital transformation.
4.2. Ancillary opportunity spotting capability
In response to the lackof abilities forthe ecosystem to spot opportunities for SME digital transformation, intermediaries utilise their
sensing capability to spot opportunities for their agenda and other collaborating actors (Randhawa et al., 2022; De Silva et al., 2022;
Rossi et al., 2020). While the literature suggests that the sensing capability allows organisations to scan, monitor, learn, and constantly
seek new opportunities (Iansiti and Lakhani, 2014; Teece, 2007), our findings have identified a unique sensing capability of in­
termediaries that enables SMEs’ digital transformation.
A core sensing capability of intermediaries identified in our study was to spot opportunities to develop digital technologies to
address business, environmental, or social challenges of ecosystem actors (e.g. developing carbon-neutral solutions). Yet, the main aim
of these opportunities is not SME digital transformation; however, through SME engagement in developing these digital technologies,
SMEs engage in their digital transformation process. Some exemplar opportunities, highlighted in Table 4, include collaboratively
Table 4
Innovation intermediaries’ role in illustrative project.
Project Project description Project opportunities Type of actors involved Project activities Digital transformation
outcomes
A Enhance innovation and
technological
implementation in
metal-supplying
companies
- Innovative products and
processes
- Exchange of
technological knowledge
and increase
technological learning
- Development of
technology solutions
Metal production
companies (SMEs, large
firms, and intermediary
organisations)
- Seminars, workshops, and
information sessions
- Arranging funding and
expertise for collaborations
- Prototyping (showing best
practices on technology
implementation)
- Co-creating technological
solutions
- Enhanced technological
learning
- Implementation and
utilisation of emerging
technologies in
collaborating SMEs
- Process efficiency
- Product innovations
B Open innovation
platform to develop
technological
innovations
- Increased managerial
awareness of industrial
networks for
collaborations
- Enhanced ability to meet
customer requirements
and environmentally
sustainable goals
- Co-creating
technological solutions
- Opportunity to learn
best industrial practices
on technology
implementation
Large companies, SMEs,
micro-firms,
intermediary
organisations and
technology solution
providers
- Finding the right partners
to facilitate the exchange
of technological
knowledge and enhance
- Managing coopetition in
the collaborations
- Configuring best
mechanisms to collaborate
one-to-one and ecosystem-
based collaborations
- Co-creation of solutions
development
- Enhanced technological
capability.
- Integration of new digital
solutions into company
systems
- Enhanced process
efficiency
- Improved sustainability
performance
C Develop carbon-neutral
energy solutions
- Co-creating
environmentally
friendly energy solutions
- Technological
development
- New business models
- New products and
services development-
related to carbon-neutral
energy solutions
Large companies, SMEs,
investment companies,
technology providers,
govt institutes, and
intermediary
organisations
- New knowledge generation
- Prototyping and
commercialisation of new
technologies in renewable
energy systems
- Finding out the best
collaborative models
- Ecosystem development
- Identifying new
stakeholders and
technology providers
during the process
- Knowledge and
technological learning on
emerging technologies in
renewable energy systems
- Utilising emerging
technologies in the co-
creation process of energy
solutions
D Emerging technologies
for circular economy
- Identification and
orientation on circular
business practices
- Business model-level
configurations
- Building a strategic
perspective on circular
business models
- Connecting actors and
companies with a
common interest
SMEs and intermediary
organisations
- Workshops, seminars, and
brainstorming sessions
- Showcasing best-case
examples
- Exchange of knowledge on
transformation towards
circular business models
- Technological knowledge
and learning on
implementing emerging
technologies for
sustainable business
models
- Identification of
opportunities offered by
emerging technologies for
circular business practices
S. Hafeez et al. Long Range Planning 58 (2025) 102525
10

--- PAGE 11 ---
innovating digital technologies for the manufacturing industry, for carbon-neutral energy production, and for a circular economy.
Such opportunities should also attract public funding, predominantly to overcome the financial constraints of SMEs. Therefore, these
projects often address sustainable development goals in order to increase access to funding. The capabilities of intermediaries to spot
partners with greater interdependence who are likely to collaborate beyond the funded life cycle of the project were found to be also
key. This specific nature of opportunity spotting in which SME digital transformation was only indirectly achieved while achieving
another shared key objective of partners was crucial to ensuring that the project satisfied the needs of all the partners and created long-
term relationships, which are essential for SME digital transformation. Therefore, we named this capability of intermediaries ‘ancillary
opportunity spotting capability’. Some exemplar quotations that indicate the nature of opportunities spotted by intermediaries are as
follows:
‘We are involved in larger projects to support companies in developing carbon-neutral energy solutions. These projects are not necessarily
directly created for SMEs’ digital transformation, but these days technologies are important specially for new solutions in the energy
sector, so we designed these projectsso that collaborating inthese projectsdefinitely increasestechnological learning of SMEs requiredfor
digital transformation’. (PM2)
‘We operate on the system level and work with different actors and projects to develop the environment and strategies for innovation
development. We always keep long-term strategic goals in our vision and support projects accordingly … supporting digital trans­
formation in small companies is one of our aims’. (HBI)
The capabilities of intermediaries to incorporate SME needs with opportunities were found to be crucial to ensuring SME digital
transformation. Therefore, the ancillary opportunity spotting capability of intermediaries also includes supporting SMEs in matching
their technological and operational needs with the digital technology development of the opportunity and clearly understanding how
to use the engagement for SME digital transformation. Due to their vast experience in collaboration and iterative interactions with
different regional actors (De Silva et al., 2018; Howells, 2006; Randhawa et al., 2022), intermediaries have a broader view of the
opportunities offered by emerging digital technologies to SMEs operating in diverse sectors. Furthermore, our results highlighted that
mapping and scanning digital technologies and competencies are complex processes requiring further collaboration between in­
termediaries and other ecosystem actors with expertise and knowledge on technical matters. As one respondent mentioned:
‘Our team at V**** [public sector market intermediary] mainly consists of expertise from business and the soft side of technology. So, to
map digital competencies, we worked with V** [public sector research organisation]. They have expertise in the technical side of
technology, and we have a good overview of the collaborations and companies, so we did a map and investigation into digital trans­
formation capabilities and opportunities, (particularly) in the SMEs context’. (PM3)
The ‘Ancillary opportunity spotting capability’ of intermediaries also included identifying actors who can provide technological
knowledge and resources and form interdependence with SMEs beyond the project lifetime. Therefore, the capabilities of in­
termediaries to satisfy multiple needs from a single project and provide relevant ecosystem actors were key. Interviewees mentioned
that knowledge of digital transformation remains within different ecosystem actors. We found that intermediaries utilise their ca­
pabilities to identify knowledgeable partners to determine activities such as complementing the collaboration process and facilitating
the technological learning of SMEs, as the interdependence between these partners leads to long-term collaboration. Once the actors
are identified, intermediaries collaboratively define the needs, expectations, and requirements of different ecosystem actors, leading to
the achievement of both the main objective of the project and digital transformation of SMEs. As one respondent noted:
‘For the digital transformation, we have engaged with SMEs that we think would be interested in learning about how V**** [large firm]
utilises robotics in their production to show them [SMEs] what benefits such technology could bring to them. So, we contacted 30 to 40
[SMEs] to get involved in collaborations with universities, large companies and other actors that we think work together beyond this
project’. (PM2)
Finally, in addition to identifying specific actors, we found, that intermediaries leverage their capabilities to assess the needs and
resources required for collaboration. They have assessed the SMEs’ internal barriers such as lack of skilful employees, competencies,
and financial resources to digital transformation (contextual factors) and bottlenecks in their collaborations such as lack of knowledge
on innovation networks, inability to find the right contacts in other organisations (contextual factors. Therefore, we found that the
‘ancillary opportunity spotting capability’ of intermediaries involves identifying and assessing sources that can particularly bring in
necessary financial and non-financial resources (e.g. human resource needs such as skills, competencies, talent, and workforce) to
support SMEs in their digital transformation. Three respondents explained it as follows:
‘Digital transformation is not an easy task for companies. Sometimes, it requires financial resources, and many other times, it requires
integration with universities to utilise external knowledge and integration of the digital solutions within the company’s bigger system,
especially to collect the data and make solutions out of it. Most SMEs cannot do this independently because of limitations. Finding the
right collaborators is difficult. In this case, we search for the right collaborators for them and the right person from the university side to
collaborate with, and also, we search for funding institutes.’ (HD)
‘We help companies in identifying human resource needs, skills and managerial capabilities required to stay competitive, especially in the
context of digital transformation, because digital transformation is changing everything in different industries. Since SMEs lack financial
resources, we should make sure that these projects, at least initial stages, are funded’. (CEO11)
S. Hafeez et al. Long Range Planning 58 (2025) 102525
11

--- PAGE 12 ---
In most projects, funding comes from the public sector, like regional, national and EU funding. However, if the projectis commercial, then
large companies also invest their money in it’. (HD)
Appendix 3.1 presents additional statements from respondents concerning the ‘ancillary opportunity spotting capability’ of
intermediaries.
4.3. Business model co-creation capability of intermediaries
In response to the lack of collaboration skills, knowledge, experience, network, and resources of the ecosystem benefiting SMEs
digital transformation, intermediaries use seizing dynamic capability. The dynamic capabilities enable organisations to seize the
spotted opportunities into concrete offerings (Teece, 2007; Soluk et al., 2023; Randhawa et al., 2022; De Silva et al., 2022). The seizing
capability relates to translating a recognized opportunity into a new product, service, or process by matching the opportunity with
resources (Iansiti and Lakhani, 2014; Teece, 2007; Wang and Ahmed, 2007).
Our findings demonstrate that after opportunity spotting, intermediaries utilised their ‘business model co-creation capability’ to
realise the SMEs’ digital transformation. In addition to the collaborations, they established in the previous stage to achieve the ob­
jectives of the main project, during this stage, intermediaries-built collaborations with competitors, customers, and suppliers of SMEs
to co-create new business models required for the SMEs’ digital transformation. Suppliers and customers had a direct interest in co-
creating SME business models due to the possibilities of achieving increased demand for their products/services and satisfaction
from the products/services of SMEs, respectively. However, co-creating with competitors was not straightforward. Therefore, the
‘business model co-creation capability’ of SMEs includes developing innovative ways to collaborate with competitors of SMEs. In­
termediaries have encouraged competitors to work with SMEs by outlining the ability to generate more value together, to have
different market positioning for the SME and their competitors through the new business model for less competition, and to help these
competitors achieve their own objectives through the other projects of intermediaries. One project manager stated:
‘We then identified customers, suppliers, and competitors of these SMEs to co-create new business models. Customers and suppliers have
direct interests, and thus, co-creation was easy. In relation to competitors, we had to find more innovative ways such as by outlining the
possibilities to together develop digital technologies and competencies.’ (PM2)
We found that the ‘business model co-creation capability’ of intermediaries also includes showcasing to SMEs how to progress new
business models. For instance, in project A (see Table 4), the intermediary initiated the collaborations to showcase actual case
demonstrations to less digitalised SMEs to increase their technological knowledge on implementing and utilising emerging technol­
ogies in business operations and processes. Since implementing emerging technologies due to a lack of knowledge on technological
implementation is found to be an internal barrier to digital transformation in most of our sample SMEs, such a case demonstration-
based knowledge exchange was found critical for them to generate the learning experience required to implement co-created busi­
ness models. To put it in one respondent’s words:
‘Many SME managers and owners realise the importance of digital technologies and are willing to implement them in their business. But
digital transformation is so complicated and complex that they do not know where to start’. (PM3)
Similarly, for example, another SME highlighted:
‘Digital transformation can bring many opportunities for our company, and we are looking into different possibilities. But the problem is
digital transformation is a horrible jungle for us, too much messy and complicated when it comes to implementing and integrating
emerging technologies with our existing systems’. (MD1)
Through such practices, intermediaries increase digital awareness among SMEs required to implement co-created business models.
For example, a respondent stated:
‘We try to help the low-digitalised SMEs by taking them to visit the companies who have successfully implemented technologies in their
processes. For example, our recent initiative is to take robotics with us to the production companies and illustrate how they can benefit by
utilising it’. (PM2)
‘We have seen after this showcase many companies contacted us and shown interest in knowing more about technologies and ask for
more help about customisation of those solutions to fit it in their organisational existing systems.’ (PM3)
Furthermore, our analysis shows that the ‘business model co-creation capability’ of intermediaries also involves them enhancing
the capacity of SMEs associated with the changesmade to the businessmodel. This capability of intermediaries involves them engaging
closely throughout the collaborative projects to enable SMEs to absorb the digital transformation outcomes and capacities required to
integrate these with the new business model. For instance, one respondent mentioned:
‘Ourmain motive is to supportcompaniesin their strategic and operational matters, and forthat reason, we connect them tocollaborative
projects to make them self-dependent on learning about the latest technological trends and market opportunities. However, some
companies struggle to understand how new knowledge can be integrated into their business models. Here, we help them understand how
they use external knowledge and if they need any business model-level changes … Of course, we do not do it with all regional companies.
Instead, this process goes with companies [SMEs and micro firms] collaborating closely and frequently on the projects, and we have a
good understanding of their business model and changes required for digital transformation’. (PM3)
S. Hafeez et al. Long Range Planning 58 (2025) 102525
12

--- PAGE 13 ---
The findings indicated that while the business models were co-created with SMEs’ customers, suppliers and competitors, SMEs
needed to develop additional capabilities to analyse, process and understand the technological knowledge required for the continu­
ation of these new business models, for which additional collaboration with technology providers and value chain actors was
necessary. Hence, the business model co-creation capability of intermediaries is also involved in connecting SMEs with the right
technology provider to assimilate technological knowledge and complement the organisational-level resources and skills required for
the continuation of their new business model. One respondent explained:
‘We work in two stages. The first part was making the SME managers aware of and connect them to bigger networks. We show them the
new robotic solution and their benefits implemented in P**** [company name]. SMEs learned and started thinking how they benefit
from these technologies and how to use them … This leads to thinking about changes required to their existing business models and
introducing new business models to be able to utilise digital transformation … During the second phase, each SME planned to have a
customised solution according to their system requirement. Here, we connected them with specific actors with the skills and expertise to
work on ideas practically and help them implement these technologies. As intermediary actors, we ensured the project completion and
tried to enhance SMEs’ digital transformation capabilities.’ (PM3)
We found that intermediaries systematically designed the collaborations that lasted beyond the project life cycle and contributed to
SMEs’ capacity development. Engaging SMEs in ecosystem-based collaborations helped them find the right partner fit and encouraged
them to acquire knowledge and develop their internal capabilities. As explained by one respondent:
‘Most companies face problems with digital transformation, which is integrating new digital solutions to the company’s existing big
systems, especially to collect data and make solutions out of it. We helped companies solve this technical issue through an open inno­
vation paradigm. We connected them to university technical experts [professors and leading researchers] and helped them find
external consultants with technical skills and knowledge. The university experts helped them start the process, and the consultant guided
them to implement it practically … this way, we aim at helping SMEs not only to look at current opportunities but build a way forward for
their future collaborations and capabilities.’ (HD)
Appendix 3.2 supports our findings on the ‘business model co-creation capability’ of intermediaries with additional statements
from different respondents.
4.4. Ecosystem revamping capability of intermediaries
In response to the lack of scaling-up opportunities for ecosystem collaborations for enhanced SME digital transformation, in­
termediaries use their transformation skills. While sensing and seizing capabilities enable intermediaries to spot and seize new op­
portunities through business model creation, scaling up of opportunities requires reconfigurations and revamping of ecosystem and
opportunity structures (Foss et al., 2023; Schmidt and Foss, 2023; Guerrero and Siegel, 2024).
Our findings show that intermediaries ensure continued and scaled-up SME digital transformation by using their ‘ecosystem
revamping capability.’ This capability of intermediaries includes utilising their capabilities to alter opportunity and ecosystem struc­
tures by bridging and connecting different ecosystems and benchmarking and restructuring ecosystems. While the literature has
discussed this capability (Iansiti and Lakhani, 2014; Teece, 2007; Randhawa et al., 2022), our findings shed light on the unique
features of this capability of intermediaries in relation to the scaling-up of SME digital transformation. Our sample indicates that the
mandate of intermediaries encourages them to increase regional competitiveness and economic growth through innovation and
commercialisation. They thus develop strategies and provide operational support for the continuous growth of the SMEs through their
digital transformation.
The results show that intermediaries actively search for new complementary actors, align their activities, and restructure the
ecosystem to ensure scaled-up and continued SME digital transformation. Especially unlike the other two capabilities, ‘ecosystem
revamping capability’ was something these intermediaries continuously developed through their international interactions. For
instance, we found that intermediaries were involved in international collaborations to further develop this capability and then
leveraged it for continued and scaled-up SME digital transformation in the local ecosystem. They used such newly acquired ‘ecosystem
revamping capabilities’ to benchmark the standards and best practices to revamp the local ecosystem structure as per international
standards. We found that intermediaries collaborate and participate in various ecosystems operating in the region where they extend
their role by facilitating inter-ecosystem collaborations. In doing so, intermediaries facilitated collaborations and connected actors of
different ecosystems to complement knowledge and resources. For instance, an intermediary that facilitated collaborations and
connected actors of the regional knowledge ecosystem to a large firm-led innovation ecosystem stated:
‘We also travelled to many countries and took part in different training programs where we learned about different best practices for
ecosystem collaborations and how to manage ecosystems … We did benchmarks and then applied learned knowledge to the local
ecosystem. This way we try to improve collaborations in local ecosystems.’ (SS3)
‘Since the collaborations are quite high in the region and so many actors are doing the same thing in their ecosystems, I think
communication and a holistic view were missing. There, we as intermediaries, tried to bridge between different ecosystems to avoid
reinventing the wheel and set a shared vision for most of the regional actors.’ (D&BM)
Furthermore, our results have identified that the ‘ecosystem revamping capability’ of intermediaries also resulted in them sup­
porting SMEs to reconfigure internal resource bases and skills to capitalise on the new business models as well as new opportunities
S. Hafeez et al. Long Range Planning 58 (2025) 102525
13

--- PAGE 14 ---
created by emerging technologies. One intermediary representative explained that they supported SMEs in strengthening their
organisational digital assets by finding new, skilled employees who can complement their capabilities to integrate externally explored
technological opportunities. It helped SMEs configure internal strategies, changes, and mechanisms necessary to scale up digital
opportunities. To put it in the respondent’s words:
‘Most of the time, these companies [SMEs] already have basic skills and competencies which can be enhanced and polished by training to
integrate new technologies into their existing systems. But if they need an external consultant or need to hire an expert with specific IT
skills, we also help them with finding employees with the right skillset and qualifications.’ (PM2)
Additionally, in projects where issues arise hindering the potential for continuation, intermediaries use their ‘ecosystem revamping
capability’ to restructure the collaboration to ensure continuation. For instance, we found that when some actors decided to exit the
collaboration due to secrecy issues, intermediaries utilised their capabilities to reconfigure the ecosystem structure and search for a
new actor to fill the vacuum created by the ones who left. As one respondent highlighted:
‘We initially built the project with an ecosystem approach where large companies were the main partners bringing knowledge and re­
sources for the co-creation. However, it turned out that some of the companies cannot work in the coopetition because of competitor’s
knowledge leakage, and they don’t want their competitors to know what are their plans … So, with the existing companies, we
reconfigured ways to continue SME digital transformation by especially bringing in other companies who are likely to continue the
collaboration due to the value it generates for them, and as a result, we could achieve continued SME digital transformation.’ (PM3)
Appendix 3.3 supports our findings on the ecosystem revamping capability of intermediaries with additional statements from
different respondents.
5. Discussion
This research analyses the dynamic capabilities of innovation intermediaries that enact ecosystem-based collaborations for the
digital transformation of SMEs. The paper, by conducting semi-structured interviews with intermediaries, and SMEs and their
collaborating ecosystem actors, answered the research question “How do innovation intermediaries leverage their dynamic capabilities to
facilitate the digital transformation of SMEs within an ecosystem?”. Our findings have identified three distinct dynamic capabilities of
innovation intermediaries, i.e., (a) Ancillary opportunity spotting capability (b) Business model co-creation capability, and (c)
Ecosystem revamping capability.
While the extant literature has outlined (A) dynamic capabilities of organisations (Teece, 2007; Warner and Wäger, 2019), (B)
dynamic capabilities of intermediaries (Abi Saad et al., 2024;Randhawa et al., 2022) and (C) dynamic capabilities of SMEs required for
digitalisation (Warner and Wäger, 2019; Scuotto et al., 2021, 2023), there’s a lack of our understanding of how the dynamic capa­
bilities of intermediaries enable SME digital transformation. Especially the barriers faced by SMEs (Rossi et al., 2020, 2022) suggest
that they are better able to achieve digital transformation through collaborations with ecosystem actors formed by intermediaries
(Järvi et al., 2018). Considering the role of intermediaries as core facilitators of ecosystem-based collaborations (Adner, 2017; Adner
and Kapoor, 2010; Jacobides et al., 2018; Lingens et al., 2021), they are better placed to support ecosystem collaborations (Garengo,
2019; Randhawa et al., 2022) leading to the digital transformation of SMEs. Intermediaries as neutral actors have a broader agenda to
address economic, social, and environmental challenges (Kivimaa et al., 2019). Therefore, the dynamic capabilities of intermediaries
should enable them to identify, seize, and transform opportunities for SME digital transformation by generating value for all the actors
involved in the collaboration but not just for SMEs. Therefore, our findings illustrate specific dynamic capabilities of intermediaries
that enable them to facilitate SME digital transformation.
The literature has discussed that the sensing capabilities (Teece, 2007) of intermediaries involve capabilities to map skills and
competencies gaps, identify actors with complementary skills (Randhawa et al., 2022), and conceptualise coordination mechanisms
along with addressing potential issues that can emerge in the process (Foss et al., 2023). Our findings extend these past studies by
demonstrating “ancillary opportunity-spotting capability” that enable intermediaries to identify opportunities that are predominantly
aimed at achieving the needs of ecosystem actors, in which the objective of SME digital transformation is secondary. This capability
thus enable intermediaries to ensure that they bring together right partners, whose objectives are achieved while also indirectly
achieving SME digital transformation.
The literature argues that intermediaries utilise their seizing capabilities (Teece, 2007) to realise the spotted opportunities by
matching these with resources. For this purpose, they enact collaborations by connecting different ecosystem actors (De Silva et al.,
2022; Baldwin et al., 2024), placing coordination and governance mechanisms, and integrating actor resources, knowledge, and
networks (Noviaristanti et al., 2023). Through seizing capability thus intermediaries practically form ecosystem collaborations and
execute co-creation-based projects (Randhawa et al., 2022) and resolve coordination and collaboration issues (Foss et al., 2023). Our
results extend this past research on the seizing capabilities of intermediaries by identifying specific ‘business model co-creation
capability’ of intermediaries, which is leveraged to co-create new business models for SMEs in collaboration with SME’s customers,
suppliers, competitors and technology providers. Intermediaries utilise business model co-creation capability to additionally facilitate
SMEs to build relevant capabilities to enact the business model innovation. It also involves outlining the possibilities to generate more
value together, and to have different market positioningfor the SME and theircompetitors through the new business modelfor reduced
competition.
Once the ecosystem collaborations are enacted and spotted opportunities have been realised collaborating actors need to adapt to
leverage emerging opportunities (Teece, 2007; Randhawa et al., 2022). Reconfiguration of ecosystem structure and scaling up of
S. Hafeez et al. Long Range Planning 58 (2025) 102525
14

--- PAGE 15 ---
opportunity structure are thus critical for the longevity and relevancy of ecosystems (Baldwin et al., 2024). Intermediaries can take up
the task of re-organising the ecosystem actors and reshaping governance structures (Randhawa et al., 2022), as they have system-level
knowledge and often act as leading organisations in knowledge-based ecosystems (Foss et al., 2023). Especially in relation to the
phenomenon of digital transformation, the advancement in new technologies happens at a breakneck pace, compelling organisations
toconstantly upgrade theirtechnologicalcapabilities and technology implementationstrategies (Soluket al.,2023). Our results extend
these arguments made in the literature on the transformation capability (Teece, 2007) by introducing the ‘ecosystem revamping
capability’ of intermediaries, which they leverage to simultaneously restructure ecosystem collaborations and scale up the digital
transformation of SMEs. They utilise this identified capability to alter ecosystem structure and spot emerging technological oppor­
tunities. Considering the fast pace of technological change in relation to the digital transformation, such a capability is developed by
participating and learning from international collaborations, particularly engaging in the learning process with successful interna­
tional ecosystems. The ecosystem restructuring also includes establishing collaboration and possible mergers of activities between
different regional ecosystems to align set strategic directions, avoid reinventing the wheel, and bring in learning from each other. Such
learning is then leveraged for continued and scaled-up SME digital transformation in the local ecosystem.
6. Conclusions
6.1. Theoretical implications
The significance of digital transformation has become evident, and intermediaries play a crucial role in helping less advantageous
players such as SMEs in their digital transformation. We make an original contribution to the dynamic capability framework (Teece,
2007) by identifying distinct dynamic capabilities of innovation intermediaries enabling SME digital transformation. In particular,
demonstrating how one organization’s dynamic capabilities (i.e. intermediaries) allows another organization (i.e. SMEs) to achieve
digital transformation is a key contribution that we make.
While past research has discussed the capabilities of intermediaries (De Silva et al., 2018; Howells and Thomas, 2022; Kivimaa
et al., 2019; Randhawa et al., 2022; Rossi et al., 2020), there is a lack of focus on understanding the specific capabilities of in­
termediaries that support collaborations leading to SME digital transformations. The specific role of intermediaries supporting
collaboration between SMEs and the ecosystem, the unique barriers confronted by SMEs, and the long-term focus required for digital
transformation suggest that intermediaries should deploy specific dynamic capabilities (Crupi et al., 2020; Sassanelli and Terzi, 2022;
Prodi et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023). Thus, we make an original contribution by identifying three novel and specific capabilities of in­
termediaries at different stages of the process, as differentiated by Teece (2007): sensing, seizing, and transforming. While our findings
confirm the proposition offered by Teece (2007) of the significance of dynamic capabilities for sensing, seizing and transformation, we
extend the findings of Teece’s (2007) study by demonstrating that innovation intermediaries (as important actors) in SMEs’ external
environment, can support business organisations (such as SMEs) in their innovation and digital transformation process, by deploying
certain dynamic capabilities. These three novel and specific capabilities of intermediaries introduced by our study include spotting
ancillary opportunities (i.e. sensing capability), co-creating SME business models (i.e. seizing capability), and transitioning from
organisational influence to ecosystem influence, which ensures continuous and scaled-up SME digital transformation (i.e. trans­
formation capability). First, at the initial sensing stage, the ‘ancillary opportunity spotting capability’ of intermediaries enables them to
identify opportunities that simultaneously achieve the needs of ecosystem actors and SME digital transformation. More importantly,
the main aim of the identified opportunity is to address a common goal of ecosystem actors, whereas SME digital transformation is
indirectly achieved. The ‘ancillary opportunity spotting capability’ of intermediaries includes: (A) identifying opportunities to develop
digital technologies to address sustainable development goals that would increase access to public funding and attract resourceful
partners with whom SMEs could collaborate and learn (i.e. to overcome financial and non-financial constraints of SMEs); and (B)
supporting SMEs in identifying the needs, technologies, resources and additional partners required to develop the additional capa­
bilities and technologies required for SME digital transformation through their involvement in the project. While the literature has
discussed spotting opportunities and bringing partners together as a sensing capability Teece (2007) of intermediaries (Garengo, 2019;
Järvi et al., 2018; Randhawa et al., 2022; Abi Saad et al., 2024), we make an original contribution by introducing “ancillary oppor­
tunity spotting capability” of intermediaries, in which intermediaries should leverage capabilities to spot opportunities to develop
digital technologies that address business, environmental or social challenges of ecosystem actors (e.g. developing carbon-neutral
solutions), and SME digital transformation should be an ancillary objective linked to this key objective.
During the next seizing stage (Teece, 2007), intermediaries leverage ‘business model co-creation capability’ to establish new col­
laborations with suppliers, customers, and competitors of SMEs to co-create new business models for SMEs required for digital
transformation. Since SME digital transformation is only ancillary in the initial collaboration opportunity, ‘business model co-creation
capability’ is crucial for intermediaries to help SMEs incorporate the output of the project to achieve digital transformation. This
capability involves actions by intermediaries that include (A) collaborating with SME stakeholders (e.g. customers, suppliers, and
competitors): to develop new business models; (B) showcasing good practice case studies to raise awareness; (C) capacity building of
SMEs associated with the changes made to the business model; and (D) developing further collaborations with technology providers
and value chain actors in order to ensure that newly formed business models continue beyond the life cycle of the project. This finding
extends the literature that has discussed the seizing capabilities (Teece, 2007) of intermediaries to actively engage in collaborative
projects (De Silva et al., 2022; Randhawa et al., 2016; Baldwin et al., 2024) by outlining how they co-create new business models with
SMEs and their stakeholders to integrate the output of the collaboration to achieve long-term digital transformation.
During the final transformation stage (Teece, 2007), intermediaries further develop and use ‘ecosystem revamping capability’ to alter
S. Hafeez et al. Long Range Planning 58 (2025) 102525
15

--- PAGE 16 ---
opportunity and ecosystem structures,create links with internationalecosystems, and benchmark and restructure ecosystems to ensure
continued and scaled-up SME digital transformation. Unlike the other two capabilities, ecosystem revamping capability is something
intermediaries continuously develop through their international interactions, especially to understand international best practices and
develop new useful international networks supporting scaled-up SME digital transformation. This finding makes an original contri­
bution to the literature that has discussed the capabilities of intermediaries to shape innovation ecosystems (Randhawa et al., 2022) by
showcasing how intermediaries develop their interactions with international ecosystems to further develop ecosystem revamping
capability and leverage the capability in support of scaled-up and continued digital transformation of SMEs.
6.2. Practical and policy implications
We offer several important practical and policy insights in this research. Our findings suggest a set of dynamic capabilities of
intermediaries for SME digital transformation. In particular, the ‘ancillary opportunity spotting capability’, ‘business model co-
creation capability’, and ‘ecosystem revamping capability’ of intermediaries during the sensing, seizing, and transformation stages
(Teece, 2007) of the SME digital transformation process outline unique and original capabilities that intermediaries should strive to
develop and leverage. Their strategic approach of bringing in different stakeholders at different stages using three different capabilities
is instrumental. For instance, first, intermediaries should use ‘ancillary opportunity spotting capability’ to bring together potential
collaborators and work with them to develop digital technologies to address common economic and social environmental challenges
that could result in SMEs learning and developing digital transformation skills and technologies. Second, intermediaries should
leverage ‘business model co-creation capability’ to bring together customers, suppliers, and competitors of SMEs to specially co-create
business models required to incorporate developed digital technologies for SME digital transformation. Third, intermediaries should
use ‘ecosystem revamping capability’ to develop interactions with international ecosystems for continued and scaled-up SME digital
transformation. Additionally, we have highlighted several other sub-capabilities covering these three main capabilities, which in­
termediaries could aim to develop and leverage for SME digital transformation. As suggested by Teece (2007) environmental con­
ditions, such as the presence of supportive innovation intermediaries can boost the knowledge assets of SMEs, therefore, we
recommend that top management of SMEs interact with intermediaries to develop strategic collaborations and actively look for
ecosystem actors who can support them in forming and sustaining these collaborations.
Government and policymakers aimed at supporting SME digital transformation could play a crucial role in helping intermediaries
develop specific dynamic capabilities identified in our study. These capabilities, as outlined by Teece (2007), are essential for sus­
taining superior enterprise performance in rapidly changing environments. Hence, governments fostering the development of these,
intermediaries can enhance their ability to innovate and adapt when enabling SME digital transformation, thereby driving more
significant impacts from public funding.Our findings onthe nature of the specific stagesof the collaborations formed by intermediaries
for SME digital transformation (i.e. initially with ecosystem collaborators, then with the stakeholders of SMEs, and finally with in­
ternational collaborators) will be useful when public funders deciding to fund projects among intermediaries, SMEs, and other
ecosystem actors. In particular, at the sensing stage government funding the intermediary-led collaboration aimed at developing
digital technologies to address business, environmental, or social challenges of ecosystem actors (e.g. developing carbon-neutral so­
lutions) where SME digital transformation is only indirectly achieved is required. At the seizing stage, we identified that intermediaries
co-create – with the stakeholders of SMEs (i.e. customers, suppliers, and competitors) – the business models of SMEs for digital
transformation. At the transformation stage, intermediaries engage in continued and scaled-up SME digital transformation, by also
bridging inter-ecosystem collaborations. Since dynamic capabilities enable long-term sustainable growth (Teece, 2007) government
policy and funding offering support to intermediaries to engage in these relevant collaborations at different stages of the process would
result in ecosystem-wide sustainable economic growth. In particular, this strategic alignment ensures that public funds are directed
towards initiatives that not only achieve digital transformation but also contribute to broader sustainable development goals.
6.3. Limitations of the study and future research
We acknowledge that our research is subject to some limitations, which offer avenues for future research. We conducted an
exploratory study in a specific ecosystem. Future research could replicate this study in different other ecosystems and include different
types of SMEs and digital transformation areas to offer a more nuanced understanding of the capabilities of intermediaries supporting
SME digital transformation. Our study predominantly focused on the intermediary’s side, and thus, future studies could focus on SMEs’
perspective to better understand this process of SME–intermediary interactions and the specific capabilities of SMEs leading to SME
digital transformation through ecosystem-based collaborations. Although researchers followed research protocol, two research
members of the team independently analysed interview data, and then the research team reached a common agreement about results
through the coding process, yet our results can be subjective to the bias of researchers’ subjectivity since we utilised thematic analysis,
that can potentially limit the reliability of the results. Our findings are based on cross-sectional data collected through semi-structured
interviews in 2021–2022. Future research should consider investigating how our findings may have evolved with the time-sensitive
changes. As such, future research could conduct a longitudinal study to further understand the development of these different ca­
pabilities. Additionally, future research could conduct a wider quantitative study to improve the generalisability of the findings of this
study.
S. Hafeez et al. Long Range Planning 58 (2025) 102525
16

--- PAGE 17 ---
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Shahid Hafeez: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Data curation,
Conceptualization. Khuram Shahzad: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Validation, Supervision, Methodology,
Funding acquisition, Data curation, Conceptualization. Muthu De Silva: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Su­
pervision, Conceptualization.
Acknowledgement
This research is a part of the InnoDigi project funded by The Foundation for Economic Education (Liikesivistysrahasto) under grant
numbers 190283 and 230398. Also, we thank Vaasan Aktiasäätiö for granting funding to enable the research presented in this pub­
lication. The funding provided by the funders is greatly acknowledged.
Appendix 1. Interview Guide: Intermediaries
General questions:
• Can you briefly tell us about your organization?
• And your role in the organization?
Sensing related questions:
• How do you see the urgency for digital transformation in SMEs you have collaborated/worked with?
• What is your organization’s role in realizing the urgency for digital transformation among SMEs?
• Does your organization provide support to SMEs in their digital transformation process? If yes how?
• Did the collaborating SME approach your organization, or did you approach them? If (SMEs) were
approached, what would be their main challenge regarding their digital transformation?
Seizing related questions:
• Can you please explain the process of solving the challenge? (How are the best action plans chosen
from a different set of actions? What is your organization’s role in this process)?
• Which technologies are implemented during this digital transformation process?
• What is the purpose of digital transformation from an SME perspective? What benefits do you think
digital transformation brings to SMEs?
• What kind of resource integration is required to implement digital technologies? How did your
organization help them in implementing digital technologies?
• How do you involve other actors in the ecosystem in facilitating the digital transformation of SMEs?
• What value and benefits do different actors bring in the process? Also, what do they achieve by
participating in collaboration?
• Did the collaboration involve any competitors (what kind of challenges were faced due to having
competitors in the same collaboration?) What was your role in managing the tensions among
competitors?
Reconfiguration related questions:
• What kind of changes were made during the collaboration as compared to the initial plan? What
kind of changes were made to realign collaboration goals?
• Were there any new collaborators identified during the co-creation phase?
• How the learned knowledge from a specific collaborative project is shared and transferred to other
relevant actors?
Appendix 2. Interview Guide: SMEs and their Collaborators
Introduction questions • Can you briefly tell us about your organization?
• And your role in the organization?
Collaboration with intermediary
organisations
• Do you collaborate with intermediary organisations? If yes, how can your organization be more active in this
collaboration to achieve your digital transformation goals?
• What kind of challenges and benefits do you see in this collaboration? What kind of support do you get from
intermediaries to achieve your digital transformation goals?
• How much does your organization collaborate with intermediary organisations on the following resources/projects?
o Co-creation
o Research facilities
o Workshops
o Training and seminars
Collaboration with other partners • With what ecosystem actors do you collaborate regularly?
• What kind of challenges and benefits do you perceive in collaboration with your ecosystem partners to learn about and
implement emerging technologies?
• How much do you collaborate with ecosystem partners to share lessons learned in emerging technological trends?
• Do you think ecosystem collaboration increases your organization’s competitive advantage? What are the obstacles and
facilitators of such collaborations?
(continued on next page)
S. Hafeez et al. Long Range Planning 58 (2025) 102525
17

--- PAGE 18 ---
(continued)
• How emerging technologies (e.g. IoT, AI, robotics, additive manufacturing, etc.) are challenging current business
practices and business models in your industry?
• What are the key factors that facilitate your organization to enhance its digital transformation?
Appendix 3. Additional quotations for three types of dynamic capabilities of intermediaries
Appendix 3.1. Ancillary opportunity spotting capability
Sensing Representative statement
Capabilities to spot opportunities that will generate economic and
environmental value for ecosystem actors while also enabling SMEs to
engage in digital transformation
‘Sustainability and environment-related standards are increasingly making
companies think outside the box and collaborate. For instance, in a recent
project, we have been part of a project where companies worked together to find
out opportunities offered by emerging technologies for the circular economy.’
(PM3)
Capabilities to scan digital opportunities, competencies, and technological
trends for SMEs in order to ensure that the project enables SMEs to engage
in digital transformation
‘One of our key strategic areas is to help SMEs in their digital transformation by
forecasting their digital transformation needs, and technologies available and
provide funding for [such] collaborative projects. We thus wanted to make sure
that SMEs achieve digital transformation while achieving the main objective of
the project.’ (D&BM)
‘We are continuously in touch with a network of companies [both micro firms
and SMEs] that we feel are relevant and need help with digital transformation.
We provide support to them in assessing their current level of digital
transformation, and if theyneed to upgrade their existing technologies or need to
implement a new [technological] system … In addition, we also contact other
companies that we feel are most promising and relevant to the digital
transformation options we are proposing … this is very important for SME digital
transformation. ‘(PM2)
‘There is a need to improve digital competencies. It is always good to know what
new technologies provide opportunities. However, to improve digital
transformation capabilities, more collaborations are required from a third party
[intermediaries].’ (CM)
Capabilities to identify relevant ecosystem actors and activities ‘Morecooperation would beuseful forthe SMEs’ digitaltransformation. Through
digital transformation, [SMEs] can become competitive. But doing digital
transformation is complicated and hard for some companies. Only cooperation
among SMEs is not enough. Having a pool of experts would help find good
solutions related to SME digital transformation.’ (SME representative, Workshop
1)
‘We look for projects to fund which can bring benefits and solve issues of the
companies. Universities and different research consortiums are the ones who
apply funds from us, but we try to choose projects that enhance collaborations,
business competitiveness, digital transformation and provide an innovation
environment.’ (D&BM)
‘Everyone [all ecosystem actors] has a very important role, but we must specify
those roles because one actor cannot doeverything. Also,it does not always work
that an actor’s role is always to give and receive nothing … We have taken huge
leaps in developing how the ecosystem can collaborate.’ (PM3)
‘We have a long history of collaborations which makes us foresee which actors
will fit a specific project. Most importantly, how can the collaboration go beyond
the project lifetime because it is important to find natural collaborations among
companies [SMEs].’ (HDI)
Capabilities to search for financial/non-financial resources ‘When it comes to thinking about resources generally, we try to find a resourced
person (expert on the issue) who can cooperate with the relevant company and
have the necessary skills and knowledge. So, this way, we already know many
from existing networks, but we also search for experts if they are not in our
existing list of experts.’ (PM2)
‘Regarding funding, we do not directly provide funding for the projects, but we
have good information about different funding sources, especially regional,
national, and EU funding agencies. So, we also help them [SMEs] in preparing
their funding application.’ (PM3)
S. Hafeez et al. Long Range Planning 58 (2025) 102525
18

--- PAGE 19 ---
Appendix 3.2. Business model co-creation capability of intermediaries
Seizing Representative statement
Capabilities to co-create new business models for SMEs ‘We discussed with companies to understand their problems and then identified the relevant actors
from companies and universities having expertise, skills, and knowledge to solve the problem.
Together with companies, they worked on co-creation and bringing business model-level changes.
(PM3)
‘The collaboration between companies and universities in our ecosystem is great, and they collaborate
on co-creating technological solutions, innovation and business value creation … Recently, we have
tried to connect SMEs on similar collaborations to help them jointly explore new business
opportunities and work on their business models to stay competitive. (PM2)
Capabilities to enact identified digital opportunities and
technological trends
‘Digital transformation is one of the important practical matters for the companies and us
[intermediary]. We are helping companies in increasing their competencies to implement new
technologies and develop products, or increase process efficiency in their production systems to
remain competitive’ (HD)
‘We [as an intermediary] do not offer immediate solutions to the companies [SMEs]. Instead, we
contact and attract the SMEs to join the collaborations and follow the whole program. In this program,
companies collaborate and exchange knowledge on their digital transformation success and failure
journey. This not only gives them an overview of the technological opportunities available but also the
knowledge on implementing emerging technologies in their business processes and operations.
However, innovation and invention happen in their own individual capacity and depends on many
internal factors.’ (HD)
‘We list the companies with good practices on digital transformation, for example, any company
utilising automation and robotics in their production facility. We show those good examples to
entrepreneurs or the manager [s] of SMEs so that they find practical information and know-how on the
possibilities to implement in their organisations. The problem is every company has its different
existing systems, so one ready-made solution is not feasible … Therefore, our main aim is to equip
companies with knowledge and skills on understanding the digital transformation process, which they
use in finding multiple solutions to their digital transformation problem’. (PM3)
‘The co-creation and open innovation are the cost-effective way to utilise digital technologies in our
business processes. For example, in augmented reality-based projects, the technology is not developed
within the company, but it is augmented and utilised from the outside of the company’. (GM)
Capabilities to develop collaboration for capacity
building for SMEs
‘Our main work is to provide strategical guidelines for the development of regional economic actors
and SMEs are one of them important actors … We look for the long-term developments which require
capacity building of regional actors. So, basically, in our projects we focus on capacity building and
making companies self-sufficient to carry out their innovation journey.’ (D&BM)
‘One of our learnings in the process of forming and supporting the collaborations has been to look for
partners that are interested in bringing real changes and innovations. So, we connected like-minded
companies to collaborations which give us good examples where companies kept collaborating after
the official duration of the project. By doing so, companies were able to co-create solutions and
develop capabilities important for innovation and technology development’. (SS2)
Capabilities to mobilisefinancial/non-financial resources
and knowledge recombination
‘Majority of SMEs struggle with skills required for digital transformation … we arrange training and
consultations on the building of managerial and employees’ skills and capabilities related to digital
technologies and automation’. (PM3)
‘We help SMEs and start-ups [this term is used by interviewee to denote micro firms] in prototyping
and connect them with different companies to build collaboration. Also, they offer visualisation
services to companies which help companies in overcoming their challenge’. (IM)
‘We provide consulting services on planning the digital marketing strategy to micro firms and SMEs,
and guidance on implementing digital technologies in different processes, for example, in
manufacturing and logistics, if they are production companies.’ (CEO11)
Appendix 3.3. Ecosystem revamping capability of intermediaries
Concept Quotations
Reconfiguring opportunity and ecosystem
structure
‘There are so many things that live throughout the collaboration process. There are new opportunities that
arise during the ecosystem collaborations, and then we reidentify the actors that need to be added, or some
actors want to exit because they cannot share such knowledge or information because of their secrecy that
needs to be maintained for competitive advantage.’ (PM2)
‘In the collaboration process, we found that some technologies were missing, and owners of those technologies
were then contacted to be part of collaborations. The identification of such actors is not entirely our
responsibility, so we do it together with other actors.’ (PM3)
Bridging inter-ecosystem collaborations ‘As a part of a wider strategy to support SMEs and regional businesses, we remain in contact with different
ecosystems and their actors … A recent big development that happened is W***S******P***** [large firm-led
ecosystem name]. This is a really big initiative and drastically changes the way collaboration in regional
ecosystems is done, especially in the SME situation … So we are part of this new initiative, and we connect
interested SMEs having good collaboration experience to this newly established ecosystem
[W****S****P*****]. This is one of the examples of how collaborations are changing, which means we are
involved and connected to different ecosystems of the region.’ (PM2)
(continued on next page)
S. Hafeez et al. Long Range Planning 58 (2025) 102525
19

--- PAGE 20 ---
(continued)
Concept Quotations
‘I think that everyone has realised that theyhave a bigger role besides their daily businessroutine and alsothat
the business world has changed in that direction [collaboration models]. This aspect is essential and can be
seen from the initiative of the new management of W***** to take a bigger and more important role for the
energy utility company in collaborations. Now they are thinking big and taking SMEs under their wings as
well. This change in thinking iscreating opportunities for SMEs to take part in different ecosystems and benefit
greatly by getting to know about business opportunities, and technologies and meet sustainability challenges.’
(PM3)
‘Our team tries to help small companies and entrepreneurs in commercialisation of innovative ideas and to
utilise technologies for innovation. But we also meet large companies and try to take big companies on
university-led projects. This role helps us to have a good view of collaborations and know about actors’
technologies and skills. Most often, we try to connect companies from one ecosystem to another. For example,
recently we took small companies from a university-based ecosystem and set their meeting with A***
[company name]-led innovation ecosystem. This way we are working to increase regional growth and
competitiveness.’ (SS1)
Benchmarking international best practices and
ecosystem restructuring
‘We also learn from international collaborations, and we with other stakeholders and actors participated in
International G****T*** A****** [name of alliance] for developing ecosystems, and it was done together with
I**** [name of country] and a N****M***** [name of country’s alliance]. So, it was all about how to develop
the ecosystem mapping of the stakeholders included in the ecosystem and finding their role and what they can
give and take. How they can support the ecosystem, so this learning has also provided ways for benchmarking
international ecosystem standards. So, we see that everyone has a very important role, and we kind of help
companies to specify the role that they have and what [value and resources] they can receive and give.’ (PM3)
Data availability
The authors do not have permission to share data.
References
Abi Saad, E., Tremblay, N., Agogué, M., 2024. A multi-level perspective on innovation intermediaries: the case of the diffusion of digital technologies in healthcare.
Technovation 129, 102899.
Adner, R., 2017. Ecosystem as structure: an actionable construct for strategy. J. Manag. 43 (1), 39–58.
Adner, R., Kapoor, R., 2010. Value creation in innovation ecosystems: how the structure of technological interdependence affects firm performance in new technology
generations. Strateg. Manag. J. 31 (3), 306–333.
Albats, E., Alexander, A.T., Cunningham, J.A., 2022. Traditional, virtual, and digital intermediaries in university-industry collaboration: exploring institutional logics
and bounded rationality. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 177, 121470.
Baldwin, C.Y., Bogers, M.L., Kapoor, R., West, J., 2024. Focusing the ecosystem lens on innovation studies. Res. Pol. 53 (3), 104949.
Benitez, G.B., Ayala, N.F., Frank, A.G., 2020. Industry 4.0 innovation ecosystems: an evolutionary perspective on value cocreation. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 228, 107735.
Blanka, C., Traunmüller, V., 2020. Blind date? Intermediaries as matchmakers on the way to start-up—industry coopetition. Ind. Mark. Manag. 90, 1–13.
Braun, V., Clarke, V., 2006. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual. Res. Psychol. 3 (2), 77–101.
Crupi, A., Del Sarto, N., Di Minin, A., Gregori, G.L., Lepore, D., Marinelli, L., Spigarelli, F., 2020. The digital transformation of SMEs–a new knowledge broker called
the digital innovation hub. J. Knowl. Manag. 24 (6), 1263–1288.
Cugno, M., Castagnoli, R., Büchi, G., 2021. Openness to Industry 4.0 and performance: the impact of barriers and incentives. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 168,
120756.
Dąbrowska, J., Almpanopoulou, A., Brem, A., Chesbrough, H., Cucino, V., Di Minin, A., et al., 2022. Digital transformation, for better or worse: a critical multi-level
research agenda. R. Manag. 52 (5), 930–954.
De Silva, M., Al-Tabbaa, O., Khan, Z., 2021. Business model innovation by international social purpose organisations: the role of dynamic capabilities. J. Bus. Res. 125,
733–749.
De Silva, M., Howells, J., Meyer, M., 2018. Intermediaries and collaboration: knowledge–based practices and internal value creation. Res. Pol. 47 (1), 70–87.
De Silva, M., Howells, J., Khan, Z., Meyer, M., 2022. Innovation ambidexterity and public innovation Intermediaries: the mediating role of capabilities. J. Bus. Res.
149, 14–29.
Dyer Jr, W.G., Wilkins, A.L., 1991. Better stories, not better constructs, to generate better theory: a rejoinder to Eisenhardt. Acad. Manag. Rev. 16 (3), 613–619.
Eisenhardt, K.M., 1989. Building theories from case study research. Acad. Manag. Rev. 14 (4), 532–550.
Forsman, H., 2021. Innovation failure in SMEs: a narrative approach to understand failed innovations and failed innovators. Int. J. Innovat. Manag. 25 (9), 2150104.
Foss, N.J., Schmidt, J., Teece, D.J., 2023. Ecosystem leadership as a dynamic capability. Long. Range Plan. 56 (1), 102270.
Garengo, P., 2019. How bridging organisations manage technology transfer in SMEs: an empirical investigation. Technol. Anal. Strat. Manag. 31 (4), 477–491.
Garri, M., 2021. Coopetition, value co-creation, and knowledge-enhancement in the UK alpaca industry: a multi-level mechanism. Eur. Manag. J. 39 (5), 545–557.
Geels, F., Deuten, J.J., 2006. Local and global dynamics in technological development: a socio-cognitive perspective on knowledge flows and lessons from reinforced
concrete. Sci. Publ. Pol. 33 (4), 265–275.
Gioia, C. Hamilton, , et al.Gioia, D.A., Corley, K.G., Hamilton, A.L., 2013. Seeking qualitative rigor in inductive research: Notes on the Gioia methodology.
Organisational Research Methods 16 (1), 15–31.
Gioia, D.A., Thomas, J.B., Clark, S.M., Chittipeddi, K., 1994. Symbolism and strategic change in academia: the dynamics of sensemaking and influence. Organisation
Science 5 (3), 363–383.
Graebner, M.E., Martin, J.A., Roundy, P.T., 2012. Qualitative data: cooking without a recipe. Strategic Organisation 10 (3), 276–284.
Guerrero, M., Siegel, D.S., 2024. Schumpeter meets Teece: proposed metrics for assessing entrepreneurial innovation and dynamic capabilities in entrepreneurial
ecosystems in an emerging economy. Res. Pol. 53 (5), 104984.
Guest, G., Bunce, A., Johnson, L., 2006. How many interviews are enough? An experiment with data saturation and variability. Field Methods 18 (1), 59–82.
Gummesson, E., 2001. Are current research approaches in marketing leading us astray? Mark. Theor. 1 (1), 27–48.
Hafeez, S., Juszczyk, O., Takala, J., 2021. A Roadmap for successful IoT implementation: empirical evidence from the energy industry. Issues in Information Systems
22 (1), 92–113.
S. Hafeez et al. Long Range Planning 58 (2025) 102525
20

--- PAGE 21 ---
Hayter, C.S., Rasmussen, E., Rooksby, J.H., 2020. Beyond formal university technology transfer: innovative pathways for knowledge exchange. J. Technol. Tran. 45,
1–8.
Hernández-Chea, R., Mahdad, M., Minh, T.T., Hjortsø, C.N., 2021. Moving beyond intermediation: how intermediary organisations shape collaboration dynamics in
entrepreneurial ecosystems. Technovation 108, 102332.
Howells, J., 2006. Intermediation and the role of intermediaries in innovation. Res. Pol. 35 (5), 715–728.
Howells, J., Thomas, E., 2022. Innovation search: the role of innovation intermediaries in the search process. R. Manag. 52 (5), 992–1008.
Iansiti, M., Lakhani, K.R., 2014. Digital ubiquity: how connections, sensors, and data are revolutionizing business. Harv. Bus. Rev. 92 (11), 19.
Imran, F., Shahzad, K., Butt, A., Kantola, J., 2021. Digital transformation of industrial organizations: toward an integrated framework. J. Change Manag. 21 (4),
451–479.
Jacobides, M.G., Cennamo, C., Gawer, A., 2018. Towards a theory of ecosystems. Strateg. Manag. J. 39 (8), 2255–2276.
Järvi, K., Almpanopoulou, A., Ritala, P., 2018. Organisation of knowledge ecosystems: prefigurative and partial forms. Res. Pol. 47 (8), 1523–1537.
Kallio, H., Pietilä, A.M., Johnson, M., Kangasniemi, M., 2016. Systematic methodological review: developing a framework for a qualitative semi-structured interview
guide. J. Adv. Nurs. 72 (12), 2954–2965.
Khanagha, S., Volberda, H., Oshri, I., 2014. Business model renewal and ambidexterity: structural alteration and strategy formation process during transformation to a
C loud business model. R. Manag. 44 (3), 322–340.
Khurana, I., Dutta, D.K., Ghura, A.S., 2022. SMEs and digital transformation during a crisis: the emergence of resilience as a second-order dynamic capability in an
entrepreneurial ecosystem. J. Bus. Res. 150, 623–641.
Kivimaa, P., Boon, W., Hyysalo, S., Klerkx, L., 2019. Towards a typology of intermediaries in sustainability transformations: a systematic review and a research
agenda. Res. Pol. 48 (4), 1062–1075.
Kumar, S., Raut, R.D., Aktas, E., Narkhede, B.E., Gedam, V.V., 2023. Barriers to adoption of industry 4.0 and sustainability: a case study with SMEs. Int. J. Comput.
Integrated Manuf. 36 (5), 657–677.
Leckel, Anja, Veilleux, Sophie, Paul Dana, Leo, 2020. Local Open Innovation: a means for public policy to increase collaboration for innovation in SMEs. Technol.
Forecast. Soc. Change 153, 119891.
Li, H., Yang, Z., Jin, C., Wang, J., 2023. How an industrial internet platform empowers the digital transformation of SMEs: theoretical mechanism and business model.
J. Knowl. Manag. 27 (1), 105–120.
Lingens, B., Miehé, L., Gassmann, O., 2021. The ecosystem blueprint: how firms shape the design of an ecosystem according to the surrounding conditions. Long.
Range Plan. 54 (2), 102043.
Masood, T., Sonntag, P., 2020. Industry 4.0: adoption challenges and benefits for SMEs. Comput. Ind. 121, 103261.
Mezger, F., 2014. Toward a capability-based conceptualization of business model innovation: insights from an explorative study. R. Manag. 44 (5), 429–449.
Noviaristanti, S., Acur, N., Mendibil, K., 2023. The different roles of innovation intermediaries to generate value. Manag. Rev. Quarterly 1–33.
O’Kane, C., Cunningham, J.A., Menter, M., Walton, S., 2021. The brokering role of technology transfer offices within entrepreneurial ecosystems: an investigation of
macro–meso–micro factors. J. Technol. Tran. 46, 1814–1844.
Penttilä, K., Ravald, A., Dahl, J., Björk, P., 2020. Managerial sensemaking in a transforming business ecosystem: conditioning forces, moderating frames, and
strategizing options. Ind. Mark. Manag. 91, 209–222.
Phillips, M.A., Ritala, P., 2019. A complex adaptive systems agenda for ecosystem research methodology. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 148, 119739.
Planko, J., Chappin, M.M., Cramer, J.M., Hekkert, M.P., 2017. Managing strategic system-building networks in emerging business fields: a case study of the Dutch
smart grid sector. Ind. Mark. Manag. 67, 37–51.
Prodi, E., Tassinari, M., Ferrannini, A., Rubini, L., 2022. Industry 4.0 policy from a sociotechnical perspective: the case of German competence centres. Technol.
Forecast. Soc. Change 175, 121341.
Randhawa, K., Wilden, R., Akaka, M.A., 2022. Intermediaries as collaborators in shaping service ecosystems: the importance of dynamic capabilities. Ind. Mark.
Manag. 103, 183–197.
Randhawa, K., Wilden, R., Gudergan, S., 2018. Open service innovation: the role of intermediary capabilities. J. Prod. Innovat. Manag. 35 (5), 808–838.
Randhawa, K., Wilden, R., Hohberger, J., 2016. A bibliometric review of open innovation: setting a research agenda. J. Prod. Innovat. Manag. 33 (6), 750–772.
Ricci, R., Battaglia, D., Neirotti, P., 2021. External knowledge search, opportunity recognition and industry 4.0 adoption in SMEs. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 240, 108234.
Ritala, P., De Kort, C., Gailly, B., 2022. Orchestrating knowledge networks: alter-oriented brokering. J. Manag., 01492063221086247
Rossi, F., Caloffi, A., Colovic, A., Russo, M., 2020. Public intermediaries and digital co-creation. Research contribution to the OECD TIP Co-creation project. Accessible
online [as of 9/12/2020]. https://stip.oecd.org/stip/knowledge-transfer/case-studies.
Rossi, F., Caloffi, A., Colovic, A., Russo, M., 2022. New business models for public innovation intermediaries supporting emerging innovation systems: the case of the
Internet of Things. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 175, 121357.
Sassanelli, C., Terzi, S., 2022. The D-BEST reference model: a flexible and sustainable support for the digital transformation of small and medium enterprises. Global J.
Flex. Syst. Manag. 23 (3), 345–370.
Scaringella, L., Radziwon, A., 2018. Innovation, entrepreneurial, knowledge, and business ecosystems: old wine in new bottles? Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 136,
59–87.
Schmidt, J., Foss, N.J., 2023. Modularity, adaptation problems, and the governance and problem-solving capabilities of core firms in ecosystems. J. Manag. 0 (0).
Scuotto, V., Crammond, R.J., Murray, A., Del Giudice, M., 2023. Achieving Global Convergence? Integrating disruptive technologies within evolving SME business
models: a micro-level lens. J. Int. Manag. 29 (6), 101095.
Scuotto, V., Magni, D., Garcia-Perez, A., Pironti, M., 2024. The impact of innovation failure: Entrepreneurship adversity or opportunity? Technovation 131, 102944.
Scuotto, V., Nicotra, M., Del Giudice, M., Krueger, N., Gregori, G.L., 2021. A microfoundational perspective on SMEs’ growth in the digital transformation era. J. Bus.
Res. 129, 382–392.
Sestino, A., Prete, M.I., Piper, L., Guido, G., 2020. Internet of Things and Big Data as enablers for business digitalization strategies. Technovation 98, 102173.
Shahzad, K., Hafeez, S., 2022. Digital trust in business ecosystem collaboration: leveraging digital technologies to develop a framework. In: Trust, Digital Business and
Technology. Routledge, pp. 242–254.
Shahzad, K., Dan, S., Imran, F., Holtkamp, P., Niemi, M.K., Meyer, M., 2024a. Limits of open innovation during the organizational change: a case study of a Partner
Campus. R. Manag. 54, 1063–1086.
Shahzad, K., Helo, P., Ranta, M., Nousiainen, E., 2024b. Blockchain technology for operational excellence and supply chain resilience: a framework based on use cases
and an architecture demonstration. Technol. Anal. Strat. Manag. 1–18.
Soluk, J., Kammerlander, N., 2021. Digital transformation in family-owned Mittelstand firms: a dynamic capabilities perspective. Eur. J. Inf. Syst. 30 (6), 676–711.
Soluk, J., Decker-Lange, C., Hack, A., 2023. Small steps for the big hit: a dynamic capabilities perspective on business networks and non-disruptive digital technologies
in SMEs. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 191, 122490.
Stentoft, J., Adsbøll Wickstrøm, K., Philipsen, K., Haug, A., 2021. Drivers and barriers for Industry 4.0 readiness and practice: empirical evidence from small and
medium-sized manufacturers. Prod. Plann. Control 32 (10), 811–828.
Teece, D.J., 2007. Explicating dynamic capabilities: the nature and microfoundations of (sustainable) enterprise performance. Strateg. Manag. J. 28 (13), 1319–1350.
Teoh, M.F., Ahmad, N.H., Abdul-Halim, H., Kan, W.H., 2023. Digital business model innovation among small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). Global Business
and Organisational Excellence 42 (6), 5–18.
Verhoef, P.C., Broekhuizen, T., Bart, Y., Bhattacharya, A., Dong, J.Q., Fabian, N., Haenlein, M., 2021. Digital transformation: a multidisciplinary reflection and
research agenda. J. Bus. Res. 122, 889–901.
Voss, C., Tsikriktsis, N., Frohlich, M., 2002. Operations management case research. Int. J. Oper. Prod. Manag. 22 (2), 195–219.
S. Hafeez et al. Long Range Planning 58 (2025) 102525
21

--- PAGE 22 ---
Wang, C.L., Ahmed, P.K., 2007. Dynamic capabilities: a review and research agenda. Int. J. Manag. Rev. 9 (1), 31–51.
Warner, K.S., Wäger, M., 2019. Building dynamic capabilities for digital transformation: an ongoing process of strategic renewal. Long. Range Plan. 52 (3), 326–349.
Yin, R.K., 2009. Case Study Research: Design and Methods, vol. 5. sage.
Shahid Hafeez (Msc. Industrial Management) is a Grant Funded Researcher and a Doctoral Candidate at the School of Technology and Innovations, University of Vaasa.
His research interests include ecosystem collaborations, co-innovation, open innovation, knowledge exchange, digital innovations, and technology implementation and
utilisation for business innovations and growth. He has presented his research work at several national and international conferences and published his research in
reputable journals.
Khuram Shahzad is an Assistant Professor of digital innovation at the University of Vaasa, Finland. Building on the core of B2B relationship governance research in
supply chains, Dr. Shahzad currently focuses on research areas such as digital innovation management, blockchain technology, entrepreneurial and knowledge
ecosystem, digital transformation, energy transition and open innovation. His research has been published in several journals and books of international repute
including Industrial Marketing Management, R&D Management, Journal of Business and Industrial Marketing, International Business Review, Technology Analysis &
Strategic Management, Journal of Change Management, Palgrave Macmillan and Routledge and International Journal of Procurement Management.
Muthu De Silva is a Professor of Innovation and Entrepreneurship and Head of Research, Innovation and knowledge Exchange, Faculty of Business and Law, at
Birkbeck, University of London, UK. Her research contributes to our knowledge of co-creation. She has published in world-leading journals such as Research Policy,
Journal of Organisational Behaviour, British Journal of Management, Technovation, and R&D Management etc.
She has secured major grants from UKRI, ESRC, Innovate UK, Intellectual Property Office, EU and British Academy/Leverhulme, OECD, and British Academy of
Management.
Her research simultaneously generates theoretically rigorous and practically impactful output. She is a co-investigator of the Innovation and Research Caucus, a £7
million investment by UKRI to establish a world leading centre of excellence in research and innovation funding.
She is a fellow of Royal Society for the encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce. She is on the Editorial Board of the British Journal of Management and
the Journal of Business Research.
S. Hafeez et al. Long Range Planning 58 (2025) 102525
22