--- PAGE 1 ---
123
LNBIP 387
21stInternationalConference,BPMDS2020
25thInternationalConference,EMMSAD2020
HeldatCAiSE2020,Grenoble,France,June8–9,2020,Proceedings
Enterprise,Business-Process
andInformationSystems
Modeling
Selmin Nurcan
Iris Reinhartz-Berger
Pnina Soffer
Jelena Zdravkovic (Eds.)

--- PAGE 2 ---
Lecture Notes
in Business Information Processing 387
Series Editors
Wil van der Aalst
RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany
John Mylopoulos
University of Trento, Trento, Italy
Michael Rosemann
Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, QLD, Australia
Michael J. Shaw
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA
Clemens Szyperski
Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA, USA

--- PAGE 3 ---
More information about this series at http://www.springer.com/series/7911

--- PAGE 4 ---
Selmin Nurcan • Iris Reinhartz-Berger •
Pnina Soffer • Jelena Zdravkovic (Eds.)
Enterprise, Business-Process
and Information Systems
Modeling
21st International Conference, BPMDS 2020
25th International Conference, EMMSAD 2020
Held at CAiSE 2020, Grenoble, France, June 8–9, 2020
Proceedings
123

--- PAGE 5 ---
Editors
Selmin Nurcan
University Paris 1
Paris, France
Iris Reinhartz-Berger
University of Haifa
Haifa, Israel
Pnina Soffer
University of Haifa
Haifa, Israel
Jelena Zdravkovic
Stockholm University
Kista, Sweden
ISSN 1865-1348 ISSN 1865-1356 (electronic)
Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing
ISBN 978-3-030-49417-9 ISBN 978-3-030-49418-6 (eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49418-6
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of the
material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation,
broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information
storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now
known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication
does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book are
believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or the editors
give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any errors or
omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

--- PAGE 6 ---
Preface
This book contains the proceedings of two long-running events held along with the
CAiSE conference relating to the areas of enterprise, business-process and information
systems modeling: the 21st International Conference on Business Process Modeling,
Development and Support (BPMDS 2020) and the 25th International Conference on
Exploring Modeling Methods for Systems Analysis and Development (EMMSAD
2020). The two working conferences had a joint keynote on “Automated Process
Improvement: Status, Challenges, and Perspectives” given by Marlon Dumas, Pro-
fessor of Information Systems at Institute of Computer Science, University of Tartu.
More information on the individual events and their selection processes can be found
below.
BPMDS 2020
BPMDS has been held as a series of workshops devoted to business process modeling,
development, and support since 1998. During this period, business process analysis and
design has been recognized as a central issue in the area of information systems
(IS) engineering. The continued interest in these topics on behalf of the IS community
is reflected by the success of the last BPMDS events and the recent emergence of new
conferences and workshops devoted to the theme. In 2011, BPMDS became a two-day
working conference attached to CAiSE (Conference on Advanced Information Systems
Engineering). The goals, format, and history of BPMDS can be found on the website
http://www.bpmds.org/.
In 2020, BPMDS took place virtually as an online event, keeping the general spirit
and principles of BPMDS.
The intention of BPMDS is to solicit papers related to business process modeling,
development, and support (BPMDS) in general, using quality as a main selection
criterion. As a working conference, we aim to attract papers describing mature
research, but we still give place to industrial reports and visionary idea papers. To
encourage new and emerging challenges and research directions in the area of business
process modeling, development, and support, we have a unique focus theme every
year. Papers submitted as idea papers are required to be of relevance to the focus theme,
thus providing a mass of new ideas around a relatively narrow but emerging research
area. Full research papers and experience reports do not necessarily need to be directly
connected to this theme (they still needed to be explicitly relevant to BPMDS though).
The focus theme for BPMDS 2020 idea papers was “BPM meets data.” For the 21st
edition of the BPMDS conference, we invited the interested authors to address, through
their idea papers and the online discussions held during the two days of BPMDS 2020,

--- PAGE 7 ---
issues related to the intersection between business processes and data. These relations
can be viewed along the business process life-cycle:
– Designing and modeling data-aware processes
– Integrating and incorporating different kinds and sources of data in process exe-
cution environments (IoT, blockchain, network trafﬁc)
– Monitoring, assessing performance and conformance, and predicting the outcomes
of running processes using the data they generate
– Creating process models from various sources of data through process discovery
BPMDS 2020 received 30 submissions from 19 countries (Australia, Austria, Brazil,
Canada, Estonia, France, Germany, Iraq, Italy, Paraguay, Portugal, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Switzerland, Tunisia, Ukraine, Uruguay, and the USA). The manage-
ment of paper submission and reviews was supported by the EasyChair conference
system. Each paper received at least three reviews. Eventually, 13 high-quality full
papers and 1 short paper were selected. These include two idea papers and one
experience report.
The accepted papers cover a wide spectrum of issues related to business process
modeling, development, and support. They are organized under the following section
headings:
• Business process execution and monitoring
• BPM applications in industry and practice
• Planning and scheduling in business processes
• Process mining
• Process models and visualizations
We wish to thank all the people who submitted papers to BPMDS 2020 for having
shared their work with us, as well as the members of the BPMDS 2020 Program
Committee, who made a remarkable effort in reviewing submissions.
We also thank the organizers of CAiSE 2020 for their help with the organization
of the event, particularly adjusting to the changing circumstances during the global
crisis and facilitating the transformation to a virtual event. We also thank IFIP WG8.1
for the support, and Springer and OCS for their kind assistance for the production
of the proceedings.
April 2020 Selmin Nurcan
Pnina Soffer
vi Preface

--- PAGE 8 ---
EMMSAD 2020
The objective of the EMMSAD conference series is to provide a forum for researchers
and practitioners interested in modeling methods for Systems Analysis and Develop-
ment (SA&D) to meet and exchange research ideas and results. The conference aims to
provide home for a rich heritage of modeling paradigms, including software modeling,
business process modeling, enterprise modeling, capability modeling, ontology mod-
eling, and domain-speciﬁc modeling. These important paradigms, and speciﬁc methods
following them, continue to be enriched with extensions, reﬁnements, and even new
languages, to address new challenges. Even with some attempts to standardize, new
modeling methods are constantly being introduced, especially in order to deal with
emerging trends and challenges. Ongoing changes signiﬁcantly impact the way systems
are being analyzed and designed in practice. Moreover, they challenge the empirical
and analytical evaluation of the modeling methods, which aims to contribute to the
knowledge and understanding of their strengths and weaknesses. This knowledge may
guide researchers towards the development of the next generation of modeling methods
and help practitioners select the modeling methods most appropriate to their needs.
This year, EMMSAD 2020 took a virtual form. We continued with the ﬁve tracks
which emphasize the variety of EMMSAD topics:
1. Foundations of modeling & method engineering – chaired by Jolita Ralyté and Janis
Stirna
2. Enterprise, business process & capability modeling – chaired by Jãnis Grabis and
Paul Grefen
3. Information systems & requirements modeling – chaired by Oscar Pastor and
Marcela Ruiz
4. Domain-speciﬁc & ontology modeling – chaired by Dimitris Karagiannis and
Arnon Sturm
5. Evaluation of modeling approaches – chaired by Agnes Koschmider and Geert
Poels
More details can be found at http://www.emmsad.org/.
29 submissions were received from 20 countries (Algeria, Austria, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Canada, China, Estonia, France, Israel, Germany, Latvia, The
Netherlands, Pakistan, Portugal, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey,
and the USA). The division of submissions among tracks was as follows (a single paper
could be categorized into multi tracks): 5 submissions related to foundations of
modeling & method engineering; 10 to enterprise, business process & capability
modeling; 15 to information systems & requirements modeling; to domain-speciﬁc &
ontology modeling; and 5 to evaluation of modeling approaches. After a rigorous
review process, which included 3 or 4 reviews per submission, 15 high-quality (11 long
and 4 short) papers were selected. They were divided into 5 sections as follows:

--- PAGE 9 ---
1. Requirements & method engineering:
• Onat Ege Adali, Oktay Turetken, Baris Ozkan, Rick Gilsing, and Paul Grefen:
“A Multi-Concern Method for Identifying Business Services: A Situational
Method Engineering Study”
• Prince Singh, Luuk Veelenturf, and Tom van Woensel: “Modeling Complex
Business Environments for Context Aware Systems”
• Sara Perez-Soler, Gwendal Daniel, Jordi Cabot, Esther Guerra, and Juan De
Lara: “Towards Automating the Synthesis of Chatbots for Conversational Model
Query” (short paper)
2. Enterprise & business modeling:
• Georgios Koutsopoulos, Martin Henkel, and Janis Stirna: “Conceptualizing
Capability Change”
• Kurt Sandkuhl and Janis Stirna: “Supporting Early Phases of Digital Twin
Development with Enterprise Modeling and Capability Management: Require-
ments from Two Industrial Cases”
• Jānis Grabis: “Integrated On-demand Modeling for Conﬁguration of
Trusted ICT Supply Chains” (short paper)
3. Software-related modeling:
• Florian Rademacher, Sabine Sachweh, and Albert Zündorf: “A Modeling
Method for Systematic Architecture Reconstruction of Microservice-Based
Software Systems”
• Marcela Ruiz and Björn Hasselman: “Can We Design Software as We Talk?”
(short paper)
• Luiz Marcio Cysneiros and Julio Cesar Leite: “Non-Functional Requirements
Orienting the Development of Socially Responsible Software” (short paper)
4. Domain-speciﬁc modeling:
• Roman Lukyanenko: “A journey to BSO: Evaluating Earlier and More Recent
Ideas of Mario Bunge as a Foundation for Information and Software
Development”
• Thomas Gray, Dominik Bork, and Marne De Vries: “A New DEMO Modelling
Tool that Facilitates Model Transformations”
• Sabine Molenaar, Laura Schiphorst, Metehan Doyran, Albert Salah, Fabiano
Dalpiaz, and Sjaak Brinkkemper: “Reference Method for the Development of
Domain Action Recognition Classiﬁers: the Case of Medical Consultations”
5. Evaluation-related research:
• Ben Roelens and Dominik Bork: “An Evaluation of the Intuitiveness of the PGA
Modeling Language Notation”
• Mouaad Hafsi and Said Assar: “Does Enterprise Architecture support Customer
Experience Improvement? Towards a Conceptualization in Digital Transfor-
mation Context”
viii EMMSAD 2020

--- PAGE 10 ---
• Rick Gilsing, Anna Wilbik, Paul Grefen, Oktay Turetken, and Baris Ozkan: “A
Formal Basis for Business Model Evaluation with Linguistic Summaries”
We wish to thank EMMSAD 2020 authors for having shared their work with us, as
well as the members of EMMSAD 2020 Program Committee for their valuable reviews
in the difﬁcult times of COVID-19 epidemic. Special thanks go to the track chairs for
their help in EMMSAD advertising and submission attraction. Finally, we thank the
organizers of CAiSE 2020 for their help with the organization of the event, IFIP
WG8.1 for its support, and Springer staff (especially Ralf Gerstner, Christine Reiss, and
OCS support).
April 2020 Iris Reinhartz-Berger
Jelena Zdravkovic
EMMSAD 2020 ix

--- PAGE 11 ---
BPMDS 2020 Organization
Program Chairs
Selmin Nurcan Université Paris 1 Panthéon Sorbonne, France
Pnina Soffer University of Haifa, Israel
Steering Committee
Ilia Bider Stockholm University, IbisSoft, Sweden
Selmin Nurcan Université Paris 1 Panthéon Sorbonne, France
Rainer Schmidt Munich University of Applied Sciences, Germany
Pnina Soffer University of Haifa, Israel
Industrial Advisory Board
Ilia Bider Stockholm University, IbisSoft, Sweden
Pascal Negros Arch4IE, France
Gil Regev EPFL, Itecor, Switzerland
Program Committee
João Paulo A. Almeida Federal University of Espírito Santo, Brazil
Eric Andonoff Université Toulouse 1, France
Saïd Assar Institut-Mines, Télécom Business School, France
Judith Barrios Albornoz University de Los Andes, Venezuela
Ilia Bider Stockholm University, IbisSoft, Sweden
Karsten Boehm FH KufsteinTirol, Austria
Cristina Cabanillas Vienna University of Economics and Business, Austria
Claudio di Ciccio Vienna University of Economics and Business, Austria
Dirk Fahland Eindhoven University of Technology, The Netherlands
Claude Godard Université de Lorraine, France
Renata Guizzardi Federal University of Espírito Santo, Brazil
Jens Gulden Utrecht University, The Netherlands
Amin Jalali Stockholm University, Sweden
Marite Kirikova Riga Technical University, Latvia
Agnes Koschmider Kiel University, Germany
Henrik Leopold Kühne Logistics University, Germany
Jan Mendling Vienna University of Economics and Business, Austria
Michael Möhring Munich University of Applied Sciences, Germany
Pascal Negros Arch4IE, France
Oscar Pastor Universitat Polytechnica de Valencia, Spain
Gil Regev EPFL, Itecor, Switzerland

--- PAGE 12 ---
Manfred Reichert Ulm University, Germany
Hajo Reijers Utrecht University, The Netherlands
Iris Reinhartz-Berger University of Haifa, Israel
Colette Rolland Université Paris 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne, France
Michael Rosemann Queensland University of Technology, Australia
Marcella Ruiz Zurich University of Applied Sciences, Switzerland
Rainer Schmidt Munich University of Applied Sciences, Germany
Stefan Schönig University of Bayreuth, Germany
Samira Si-Said Cherﬁ CNAM, France
Irene Vanderfeesten Eindhoven University, The Netherlands
Han van der Aa Humboldt University of Berlin, Germany
Barbara Weber Technical University of Denmark, Denmark
Jelena Zdravkovic Stockholm University, Sweden
Alfred Zimmermann Reutlingen University, Germany
Additional Reviewers
Inge van de Weerd Utrecht University, The Netherlands
Jan Martijn van der Werf Utrecht University, The Netherlands
Dominik Janssen Kiel University, Germany
Sebastian Steinau Ulm University, Germany
xii BPMDS 2020 Organization

--- PAGE 13 ---
EMMSAD 2020 Organization
Program Chairs
Iris Reinhartz-Berger University of Haifa, Israel
Jelena Zdravkovic Stockholm University, Sweden
Track Chairs
Janis Grabis Riga Technical University, Latvia
Paul Grefen Eindhoven University of Technology, The Netherlands
Dimitris Karagiannis University of Vienna, Austria
Agnes Koschmider Kiel University, Germany
Oscar Pastor Lopez Universitat Politècnica de València, Spain
Geert Poels Ghent University, Belgium
Jolita Ralyté University of Geneva, Switzerland
Marcela Ruiz Zurich University of Applied Sciences, Switzerland
Janis Stirna Stockholm University, Sweden
Arnon Sturm Ben-Gurion University, Israel
Program Committee
Giuseppe Berio Université de Bretagne Sud, France
Ghassan Beydoun University of Technology Sydney, Australia
Dominik Bork University of Vienna, Austria
Drazen Brdjanin University of Banja Luka, Bosnia and Herzegovina
Tony Clark Aston University, UK
Nelly Condori-Fernández Universidade da Coruña, Spain
Sergio de Cesare University of Westminster, UK
Mahdi Fahmideh University of Wollongong, Australia
Michael Fellmann University of Rostock, Germany
Christophe Feltus Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology,
Luxembourg
Peter Fettke Saarland University, Germany
Hans-Georg Fill University of Fribourg, France
Ulrich Frank Universität Duisburg-Essen, Germany
Frederik Gailly Ghent University, Belgium
Mohamad Gharib University of Florence, Italy
Asif Qumer Gill University of Technology Sydney, Australia
Cesar Gonzalez-Perez Spanish National Research Council, Spain
Sérgio Guerreiro University of Lisbon, Portugal
Renata Guizzardi Universidade Federal do Espirito Santo, Brazil
Martin Henkel Stockholm University, Sweden

--- PAGE 14 ---
Jennifer Horkoff Chalmers and the University of Gothenburg, Sweden
Ivan Jureta University of Namur, Belgium
Jānis Kampars Riga Technical University, Latvia
Evangelia Kavakli University of the Aegean, Greece
Marite Kirikova Riga Technical University, Latvia
Dimitris Kiritsis EPFL, Switzerland
Elena Kornyshova CNAM, France
Thomas Kuehne Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand
Birger Lantow University of Rostock, Germany
Tong Li Beijing University of Technology, China
Raimundas Matulevicius University of Tartu, Estonia
John Mylopoulos University of Toronto, Canada
Andreas L. Opdahl University of Bergen, Norway
Elda Paja IT University of Copenhagen, Denmark
Klaus Pohl Paluno, University of Duisburg-Essen, Germany
Irina Rychkova University of Paris 1 Pantheon-Sorbonne, France
Mattia Salnitri Politecnico di Milano, Italy
Kurt Sandkuhl University of Rostock, Germany
Monique Snoeck Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Belgium
Steven van Kervel Formetis BV, The Netherlands
Yves Wautelet Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Belgium
Hans Weigand Tilburg University, The Netherlands
Carson Woo The University of British Columbia, Canada
Anna Zamansky University of Haifa, Israel
Didar Zowghi University of Technology Sydney, Australia
Additional Reviewers
Michael Poppe University of Rostock, Germany
Fabienne Lambusch University of Rostock, Germany
Felix Härer University of Fribourg, France
Florian Johannsen University of Regensburg, Germany
xiv EMMSAD 2020 Organization

--- PAGE 15 ---
Automated Process Improvement:
Status, Challenges, and Perspectives
(Keynote Abstract)
Marlon Dumas
University of Tartu, Estonia
marlon.dumas@ut.ee
Business processes are the operational backbone of modern organizations. Their
continuous management and improvement is key to the achievement of business
objectives. Accordingly, a common task for managers and analysts is to discover,
assess, and exploit process improvement opportunities. Current approaches to discover
process improvement opportunities are expert-driven. In these approaches, data are
used to assess opportunities derived from experience and intuition rather than to dis-
cover them in the ﬁrst place. Moreover, as the assessment of opportunities is manual,
analysts can only explore a fraction of the overall space of improvement opportunities.
Recent advances in machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence are making it
possible to move from manual to automated (or semi-automated) approaches to busi-
ness process improvement. This talk will present a vision for the emerging ﬁeld of
AI-driven automated process improvement. The talk will focus on three families of
methods: (1) predictive process monitoring; (2) robotic process mining; and
(3) search-based process optimization.
Predictive process monitoring methods allow us to analyze ongoing executions of a
process in order to predict future states and undesirable outcomes at runtime. These
predictions can be used to trigger interventions in order to maximize a given reward
function, for example by generating alerts or making recommendations to process
workers. The talk will provide a taxonomy of the state of the art in this ﬁeld, as well as
open questions and possible research directions.
Robotic process mining seeks to analyze logs generated by user interactions in
order to discover repetitive routines (e.g. clerical routines) that are fully deterministic
and can therefore be automated via Robotic Process Automation (RPA) scripts. These
scripts are executed by software bots, with minimal user supervision, thus relieving
workers from tedious and error-prone work. The talk will present initial results in the
ﬁeld of robotic process mining and discuss challenges and opportunities.
Finally, the talk will introduce a gestating family of methods for search-based
process optimization. These techniques rely on multi-objective optimization algorithms
in conjunction with data-driven process simulation, in order to discover sets of changes
to one or more business processes, which maximize one or more performance mea-
sures. The talk will present a framework for search-based process optimization and will
sketch approaches that could be explored to realize the vision of a recommender system
for process improvement.

--- PAGE 16 ---
Short Bio of the Speaker
Marlon Dumas is Professor of Information Systems at University of Tartu, Estonia and
Co-Founder of Apromore Pty Ltd - a company dedicated to developing and com-
mercialising an open-source process mining solution. He is recipient of an Advanced
Grant from the European Research Council with the mission of developing algorithms
for automated discovery of business process improvement opportunities. His research
in the ﬁeld of business process management and process mining has led to over 300
research publications, 10 best paper awards, 10 US/EU patents, and a textbook
(Fundamentals of Business Process Management) used in close to 300 universities
worldwide.
xvi M. Dumas

--- PAGE 17 ---
Contents
Business Process Execution and Monitoring (BPMDS 2020)
Dynamically Switching Execution Context in Data-Centric
BPM Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Kevin Andrews, Sebastian Steinau, and Manfred Reichert
Exception Handling in the Context of Fragment-Based Case Management . . . 20
Kerstin Andree, Sven Ihde, and Luise Pufahl
Business Process Monitoring on Blockchains: Potentials and Challenges . . . . 36
Claudio Di Ciccio, Giovanni Meroni, and Pierluigi Plebani
BPM Applications in Industry and Practice (BPMDS 2020)
Factors Impacting Successful BPMS Adoption and Use: A South African
Financial Services Case Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
Ashley Koopman and Lisa F. Seymour
Chatting About Processes in Digital Factories: A Model-Based Approach. . . . 70
Donya Rooein, Devis Bianchini, Francesco Leotta, Massimo Mecella,
Paolo Paolini, and Barbara Pernici
Enforcing a Cross-Organizational Workflow: An Experience Report . . . . . . . 85
Susanne Stahnke, Klym Shumaiev, Jorge Cuellar,
and Prabhakaran Kasinathan
Planning and Scheduling in Business Processes (BPMDS 2020)
Automated Planning for Supporting Knowledge-Intensive Processes . . . . . . . 101
Sheila Katherine Venero, Bradley Schmerl, Leonardo Montecchi,
Julio Cesar dos Reis, and Cecília Mary Fischer Rubira
Scheduling Processes Without Sudden Termination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
Johann Eder, Marco Franceschetti, and Josef Lubas
Process Mining (BPMDS 2020)
Cherry-Picking from Spaghetti: Multi-range Filtering of Event Logs . . . . . . . 135
Maxim Vidgof, Djordje Djurica, Saimir Bala, and Jan Mendling

--- PAGE 18 ---
Truncated Trace Classifier. Removal of Incomplete Traces
from Event Logs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 150
Gaël Bernard and Periklis Andritsos
Secure Multi-party Computation for Inter-organizational Process Mining . . . . 166
Gamal Elkoumy, Stephan A. Fahrenkrog-Petersen, Marlon Dumas,
Peeter Laud, Alisa Pankova, and Matthias Weidlich
Process Models and Visualizations (BPMDS 2020)
Visualizing Business Process Evolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 185
Anton Yeshchenko, Dina Bayomie, Steven Gross, and Jan Mendling
Mining BPMN Processes on GitHub for Tool Validation
and Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 193
Thomas S. Heinze, Viktor Stefanko, and Wolfram Amme
An Empirical Investigation of the Intuitiveness of Process
Landscape Designs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 209
Gregor Polančič, Pavlo Brin, Lucineia Heloisa Thom, Encarna Sosa,
and Mateja Kocbek Bule
Requirements and Method Engineering (EMMSAD 2020)
A Multi-concern Method for Identifying Business Services:
A Situational Method Engineering Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 227
O. Ege Adali, Oktay Türetken, Baris Ozkan, Rick Gilsing,
and Paul Grefen
Modeling Complex Business Environments for Context Aware Systems . . . . 242
P. M. Singh, L. P. Veelenturf, and T. van Woensel
Towards Automating the Synthesis of Chatbots for Conversational
Model Query . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 257
Sara Pérez-Soler, Gwendal Daniel, Jordi Cabot, Esther Guerra,
and Juan de Lara
Enterprise and Business Modeling (EMMSAD 2020)
Conceptualizing Capability Change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 269
Georgios Koutsopoulos, Martin Henkel, and Janis Stirna
Supporting Early Phases of Digital Twin Development with Enterprise
Modeling and Capability Management: Requirements from Two
Industrial Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 284
Kurt Sandkuhl and Janis Stirna
xviii Contents

--- PAGE 19 ---
Integrated On-demand Modeling for Configuration of Trusted ICT
Supply Chains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 300
Jānis Grabis
Software-Related Modeling (EMMSAD 2020)
A Modeling Method for Systematic Architecture Reconstruction
of Microservice-Based Software Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 311
Florian Rademacher, Sabine Sachweh, and Albert Zündorf
Can We Design Software as We Talk? A Research Idea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 327
Marcela Ruiz and Björn Hasselman
Non-Functional Requirements Orienting the Development of Socially
Responsible Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 335
Luiz Marcio Cysneiros and Julio Cesar Sampaio do Prado Leite
Domain-Specific Modeling (EMMSAD 2020)
A Journey to BSO: Evaluating Earlier and More Recent Ideas
of Mario Bunge as a Foundation for Information Systems
and Software Development. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 345
Roman Lukyanenko
A New DEMO Modelling Tool that Facilitates Model Transformations . . . . . 359
Thomas Gray, Dominik Bork, and Marné De Vries
Reference Method for the Development of Domain Action Recognition
Classifiers: The Case of Medical Consultations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 375
Sabine Molenaar, Laura Schiphorst, Metehan Doyran, Albert Ali Salah,
Fabiano Dalpiaz, and Sjaak Brinkkemper
Evaluation-Related Research (EMMSAD 2020)
An Evaluation of the Intuitiveness of the PGA Modeling Language
Notation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 395
Ben Roelens and Dominik Bork
Does Enterprise Architecture Support Customer Experience Improvement?
Towards a Conceptualization in Digital Transformation Context . . . . . . . . . . 411
Mouaad Hafsi and Saïd Assar
Contents xix

--- PAGE 20 ---
A Formal Basis for Business Model Evaluation with Linguistic Summaries:
(Work-in-Progress Paper). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 428
Rick Gilsing, Anna Wilbik, Paul Grefen, Oktay Turetken,
and Baris Ozkan
Author Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 443
xx Contents

--- PAGE 21 ---
Business Process Execution and
Monitoring (BPMDS 2020)

--- PAGE 22 ---
Dynamically Switching Execution
Context in Data-Centric BPM
Approaches
Kevin Andrews(B)
, Sebastian Steinau, and Manfred Reichert
Institute of Databases and Information Systems, Ulm University, Ulm, Germany
{kevin.andrews,sebastian.steinau,manfred.reichert}@uni-ulm.de
Abstract. In contemporary business process management software, the
context in which a process is executed is largely static. While the execu-
tion of the process itself may be ﬂexible, on-the-ﬂy changes to the con-
text, i.e., physical or logical surroundings, are either limited or impos-
sible. This paper presents concepts for enabling context switching at
runtime for the object-aware process management paradigm. Such con-
text switches are enabled at various granularity levels, such as shifting
entire process instances to diﬀerent systems, or migrating sub-processes
between diﬀerent parent processes. We further contribute the algorithms
employed in our proof-of-concept implementation and discuss use cases in
which context switching capabilities can be utilized. Implementing these
advanced concepts helps showcase the maturity of data-centric BPM.
Keywords: Object-aware processes · BPM · Process context switching
1 Introduction
The context in which a process is executed determines essential factors at run-
time. These range from trivial ones, e.g. whether or not a process may be
executed, to complex factors, such as the selection of sub-process variants at
runtime. Making business process management systems (BPMS) context-aware
increases the ﬂexibility of processes they execute by supporting business rules
that are enforced based on the context [1]. Informally, process context is deﬁned
as “the minimum set of variables containing all relevant information that impacts
the design and execution of a business process” [2], which emphasizes the impor-
tance of context for process execution. However, contemporary BPMS do not
allow changing the execution context of running process instances, even though
this would increase ﬂexibility. Consider a recruitment process from the HR
domain, in which applicants apply for a job oﬀer, as an example in which ﬂexibil-
ity could be increased by allowing for process context switches at runtime. More
speciﬁcally, the context of a job application process corresponds to the job oﬀer
an applicant applies to, as well as meta information such as the department the
respective job is allocated to. Furthermore, consider an unsolicited application.
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. Nurcan et al. (Eds.): BPMDS 2020/EMMSAD 2020, LNBIP 387, pp. 3–19, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49418-6_1

--- PAGE 23 ---
4 K. Andrews et al.
In the ﬁrst case, while the context of the application process seems to be clear
at the beginning, during the course of a job interview, it might be decided that
the applicant would better ﬁt a diﬀerent job at another department. In the sec-
ond case, parts of the context, such as a concrete job oﬀer, are missing entirely
and can only be determined after the process starts. Although both cases can
be partially handled in an activity-centric BPMS by adding gateways and loops
into the process model, this would make the process model unnecessarily com-
plex. Therefore, most companies handle cases like these by forcing applicants to
resubmit their application to a diﬀerent job oﬀer, which, in future, might cause
confusion due to multiple applications from the same person.
This paper presents solutions to these issues for object-aware BPM, a data-
centric process management paradigm, by enabling dynamic process context
switches without requiring process model changes. The paper builds upon previ-
ous work that led to the development of the PHILharmonicFlows process engine
and contributes fundamental research into the notion of process context in data-
centric BPM paradigms. The fundamentals of object-aware BPM are explained
in Sect.2. The notion of process context in object-aware processes is examined
in Sect.3. The concepts and algorithms for enabling context switching are pre-
sented in Sect.4. An overview of our prototype implementation is given in Sect.5.
Section6 discusses related work and Sect.7 summarizes the paper.
2 Backgrounds
The PHILharmonicFlows implementation of object-aware BPM, a data-centric
BPM paradigm, has been under development for many years and serves as a test-
bed for the concepts presented in this paper [3,4]. PHILharmonicFlows takes
the idea of a data-driven BPMS and enhances it with the concept of objects. An
object describes the structure of its contained data and process logic at design-
time whereas an object instance holds concrete data values and executes the
process logic at runtime. This may be compared to the concept of a table and
its rows in a relational database. For each business object present in a real-
world business process one such object exists. We further examine the concept
of objects utilizing an Application object from the HR domain. As can be seen
in Fig.1, the object consists of data, in the form of attributes, and a state-based
process model describing the data-driven object lifecycle.
As object-aware BPM is data-driven, the lifecycle execution of an instance
of the Application object is as follows: The initial state is Created. Once an
Applicant has entered data for attributes Job Oﬀer, Applicant, and CV, he or
she may trigger the transition to the Sent state. This causes the Application to
change its state to Sent, in which it waits until the reviewing period is over,

--- PAGE 24 ---
Dynamically Switching Execution Context in Data-Centric BPM Approaches 5
Accepted: Boolean Accepted: Boolean Accepted: Boolean Feedback: String Feedback: String Feedback: String CV: File CV: File CV: File
Created Checked
Accepted
Rejected
Job Offer Job Offer Applicant Applicant
Accepted Accepted
Accepted == True
Accepted == False
Application
Lifecycle
Attributes
Assignment: Applicant Assignment: PersonellOfficer
CV CV
Sent
Job Offer: Relation Job Offer: Relation Job Offer: Relation Applicant: Relation Applicant: Relation Applicant: Relation
State
Step
Object
Fig.1. Example object including lifecycle process (Application)
after which it automatically enters state Checked. As Checked is assigned to
a Personnel Oﬃcer, a user with that role must input data for the Accepted
attribute. Based on the value of Accepted, the state either changes to Accepted
or Rejected.
Application – Checked Application – Checked
API Programmer
applicantA@example.com
CV_ApplicantA.pdf
true
Job Offer
Applicant
CV
Accepted*
Fig.2. Form
This ﬁne-grained approach to modeling the process-
ing of a single business object increases complexity com-
pared to the activity-centric paradigm, where the min-
imum granularity of a user action corresponds to one
atomic “black box” activity, instead of an individual
data attribute. However, as one of the major beneﬁts,
the object-aware approach allows for automated form
generation at runtime. This is facilitated by the lifecy-
cle process of an object, which dictates the attributes to be ﬁlled out before
the object may switch states. This information is combined with permissions,
resulting in a personalized form with interaction logic. An example of such a
form, derived from the Application object from Fig.1, is shown in Fig.2.
Review
Person
Application
Employee
Job Offer
Interview
1:n
1:n
1:n 1:n
1:n
1:n
User Objects Objects
Fig.3. Data model (Color
ﬁgure online)
Note that a single object and its resulting forms
are only part of a complete business process. To
allow for more complex business processes, many dif-
ferent objects and users may have to be involved
[3]. It is noteworthy that users are simply special
objects in the object-aware paradigm. The entire
set of objects present in a PHILharmonicFlows pro-
cess is the data model, an example of which can be
seen in Fig.3, with objects representing users, e.g.
Employee, marked in green.

--- PAGE 25 ---
6 K. Andrews et al.
a@exa.com –
Programmer
API
Programmer
(Job Offer)
a@exa.com
b@exa.com
b@exa.com –
Programmer
a@exa.com –
po2@comp.it b@exa.com –
po2@comp.it a@exa.com –
po1@comp.it c@exa.com –
po1@comp.it
(Review)
c@exa.com
(Person)
c@exa.com –
Programmer
(Application)
po1@comp.it
po2@comp.it
(Employee)
a@exa.com –
Programmer c@exa.com –
Programmer
(Interview)
Fig.4. Data model
instance
In addition to the objects and users, the data model
contains information about the relations existing between
them. A relation constitutes a logical association between
two objects, e.g., a Job Oﬀer and an Application. At
runtime, each of the objects may be instantiated many
times as object instances. Note that the lifecycle processes
present in the various object instances may be executed
concurrently at runtime, thereby improving overall sys-
tem performance. Relations may also be instantiated at
runtime, e.g., between an instance of a Review and an
Application, thereby associating the two object instances
with each other. The resulting meta information, express-
ing that the Review in question belongs to the Application,
can be used to coordinate the processing of the two object
instances with each other at runtime [3]. Figure4 shows
an example of a data model instance at runtime.
The coordination of object instances is necessary as business processes often
consist of hundreds or thousands of interacting business objects [5], whose con-
current processing needs to be synchronized at certain states. As object instances
publicly advertise their state information, the current state of an object instance
(e.g. Sent or Checked) can be used for coordinating its processing (i.e., execu-
tion) with other object instances corresponding to the same business process
through a set of constraints and rules, deﬁned in a separate coordination process
[3]. As an example, consider a simple subset of constraints stating the following:
1. An Application must be in state Sent for Reviews to be Prepared for it.
2. An Application may only be Checked once its corresponding Reviews are
either in state Reject Proposed or Invite Proposed.
A coordination process with these constraints is shown in Fig.5. The tran-
sitions describe the kind of relation that exists between the objects referenced
by the steps on either side. For example, between steps Review - Reject Pro-
posed and Application - Checked, a bottom-up coordination exists, as there is a
bottom-up many-to-one relation between Review and Application in the data
model (cf. Fig.3). This enables advanced coordinations, based on the informa-
tion delivered by relations at runtime, e.g. that at least 5 Reviews must be either
in states Reject Proposed or Invite Proposed for an Application to enter state
Checked [3].
3 Determining Object-Aware Process Context
This section examines the concepts we developed for enabling process context
switching. To reiterate, an object-aware process instance consists of a data
model instance that comprises many object instances. Further, there are relation
instances between associated object instances. Finally, the coordination process

--- PAGE 26 ---
Dynamically Switching Execution Context in Data-Centric BPM Approaches 7
Job Offer
Prepared
Job Offer
Prepared
Job Offer
Published
Job Offer
Published
Application
Created
Application
Created
Application
Sent
Application
Sent
Job Offer
Closed
Job Offer
Closed
Review
Prepared
Review
Prepared
Review
Reject Proposed
Review
Reject Proposed
Review
Invite Proposed
Review
Invite Proposed
Interview
Prepared
Interview
Prepared
Interview
Hire Proposed
Interview
Hire Proposed
Interview
Reject Proposed
Interview
Reject Proposed
Application
Accepted
Application
Accepted
Job Offer
Position Filled
Job Offer
Position Filled
Application
Rejected
Application
Rejected
Job Offer
Position Vacant
Job Offer
Position Vacant
Top-Down Self Self
Bottom-Up
Top-Down
Self
Self
Transverse
Bottom-Up
Bottom-Up
Bottom-Up
Self-Transverse Self
Self Bottom-Up
Bottom-Up
Bottom-Up
Bottom-Up
Self
Application
Checked
Application
Checked
Fig.5. Coordination process (Recruitment - Job Oﬀer)
instance monitors the object instances and coordinates their execution. Con-
sequently, in an object-aware process instance, many diﬀerent processes, such
as lifecycle processes and the coordination process, are executed concurrently.
As one can not simply determine a single process context for this collection of
largely independent processes, this section presents four points of view, or scopes,
one may use to examine the combined process context.
3.1 Process Context in the Scope of a Lifecycle Process
When examining process context, the notion of scope becomes important. In the
scope of a lifecycle process, the context is the object instance the lifecycle process
is executed in, or, more speciﬁcally, the set containing all current attribute values
present in the object instance. This complies with the deﬁnition in [2]. As an
object-aware lifecycle process is entirely data-driven, the process context, i.e., the
object instance, contains all necessary execution information, i.e., the attribute
values. As an example, take the lifecycle process instance shown in Fig.6.
Accepted: False Accepted: False Accepted: False
Feedback:
“No Experience”
Feedback:
“No Experience”
Feedback:
“No Experience”
CV: CV_ApplicantA.pdf CV: CV_ApplicantA.pdf CV: CV_ApplicantA.pdf
Created Checked
Accepted
Rejected
Job Oﬀer Job Oﬀer Applicant Applicant
Accepted Accepted
Accepted == True
Accepted == False
Applica on#3
Lifecycle
A ributes
Assignment: Applicant Assignment: PersonellOﬃcer
CV CV
Sent
Job Oﬀer:
API Programmer
Job Oﬀer:
API Programmer
Job Oﬀer:
API Programmer
Applicant:
applicantA@example.com
Applicant:
applicantA@example.com
Applicant:
applicantA@example.com
Fig.6. Lifecycle process of an Application object instance
The lifecycle process is currently in state Rejected, as all attribute values from
the previous states have already been written. This includes attribute Accepted
with its value False, which forced the corresponding decision step in Checked to
trigger the transition to Rejected. In turn, this led to the current state of the

--- PAGE 27 ---
8 K. Andrews et al.
object instance being Rejected. Note that these attribute values always lead to
the same state if the lifecycle process is re-executed. In summary, if the scope
of the process context is limited to a lifecycle process, the context will solely
consist of attribute values. However, this scope is too limited for most purposes.
3.2 Process Context in the Scope of a Single Object Instance
The value of the Accepted attribute of Application#3, shown in Fig.6, is set
to False. While a personnel oﬃcer may immediately accept or reject an appli-
cant, it is more realistic that the application is ﬁrst reviewed and applicants
are invited for an interview before making a decision. In the data model of the
recruitment example (cf. Fig.3), these reviews and interviews are represented
by objects, Review and Interview, with their own lifecycle processes. Note that
Review and Interview constitute so-called lower-level objects of Application, as
level-wise they are below Application in the data model due to the layouting of
the graph that is based on incoming and outgoing relations. This layout makes
the parent/child relations between objects evident, e.g., it becomes obvious from
Fig.3 that Reviews belong to Applications. These relations, together with the
notion of scope, are crucial when determining process context.
As stated before, the smallest scope is given by a single lifecycle process, for
which the process context is the object it is associated with. The next larger
scope is the scope of an object instance, e.g., one instance of a Review object.
Clearly, a Review is always conducted by an Employee for a speciﬁc Application,
which can be deduced by examining the relations to the higher-level objects of
Review (cf. Fig.3). Therefore, the process context of a Review object instance
is given by the Employee and Application object instances it is related to, i.e.,
all higher-level object instances of the Review. Taking the example from Fig.4,
the process context of one of the Reviews is shown in Fig.7a.
a@exa.com –
Programmer
(Application)
a@exa.com –
po1@comp.it
(Review)
po1@comp.it
(Employee)
(a) Direct Context
(Review)
a@exa.com –
Programmer
(Application)
API
Programmer
(Job Offer)
a@exa.com
(Person)
a@exa.com –
po1@comp.it
(Review)
po1@comp.it
(Employee)
po2@comp.it
(Employee)
Transitive Relation
(b) Transitive Context
(Review)
a@exa.com –
Programmer
(Application)
API
Programmer
(Job Offer)
a@exa.com
(Person)
a@exa.com –
po2@comp.it
a@exa.com –
po1@comp.it
(Review)
po1@comp.it
po2@comp.it
(Employee)
a@exa.com –
Programmer
(Interview)
Transverse Relation
(c) Coordination Context
(Interview)
Fig.7. Process contexts

--- PAGE 28 ---
Dynamically Switching Execution Context in Data-Centric BPM Approaches 9
Note that Fig.7a is captioned “Direct Context”, as opposed to the “Tran-
sitive Context” shown in Fig.7b. The diﬀerence between these notions is that
the transitive context includes all object instances that are higher-level object
instances of the review object instance, not just those that are directly related.
Note that even the transitive context of an object instance does not cover the
complete process context in the scope of a single object instance, as not all object
instances are contained that can have an impact on the execution of the object
instance in question.
Speciﬁcally, the coordination process, which determines the interactions
between object instances at runtime, provides additional context for object
instances. (cf. Fig.5). In particular, the coordination process allows process mod-
elers to deﬁne constraints, such as that an Interview may only be Prepared if
there are Reviews in state Invite Proposed, which are transversely related to
them, i.e., via the same Application (cf. Fig.5). The existence of such a constraint
means that the execution of an Interview object instance may be impacted by
a Review object instance, which is not be part of the transitive context of the
Interview, as Review is not a higher-level object of Interview. Therefore, the
coordination context is the most complete context in the scope of an object
instance, as it contains all other object instances that may impact this instance.
Figure7c shows an example of the coordination context of an Interview object
instance.
3.3 Process Context in the Scope of Multiple Object Instances
This section examines process context in the scope of multiple related objects.
Note, for instance, that the process context of, e.g., an instance of the Appli-
cation object, would be comprised of (1) the higher-level object instances it
is related to (e.g., a Job Oﬀer) as well as (2) other objects that may impact
the execution of the Application, as deﬁned in the coordination process (e.g.,
Reviews). However, when switching this process context to a completely diﬀer-
ent one, we need to consider that an Application is not an independent entity in
a data model instance. Simply deleting all relation instances from an Applica-
tion object instance, e.g. Application#3, and attaching it to a diﬀerent Job Oﬀer
object instance, e.g. from Job Oﬀer API Programmer to Job Oﬀer UI Program-
mer, would leave all the Review and Interview object instances as orphans in
the current data model instance. Therefore, concepts for switching the process
context of object instances must always consider the context of all dependent
object instances as well.

--- PAGE 29 ---
10 K. Andrews et al.
a@exa.com –
Programmer
(Applica on)
a@exa.com –
po2@comp.it
a@exa.com –
po1@comp.it
(Review)
a@exa.com –
Programmer
(Interview)
Fig.8. Dependent
object instances
The set of dependent object instances can be deﬁned as
all transitively related lower-level object instances. Note
that this is an inversion of the logic for ﬁnding transitive
process context (cf. Fig.7b). As an example, the aggre-
gation of the dependent object instances of an Applica-
tion object instance may be algorithmically determined by
recursively evaluating incoming relations from lower-level
object instances, the result of which is shown in Fig.8.
In summary, the process context of an individual
object must always include its dependent object instances,
as switching the context of an individual object instance
with lower-level instances attached to it would lead to
orphaned object instances. In essence, this means recur-
sively calling the functions that determine the dependent object instances and
the coordination process context of all identiﬁed instances, which, in most cases,
leads to the entire data model instance (cf. Fig.4) being identiﬁed as the pro-
cess context of an object instance. Consequently, we must examine the notion of
process context in the scope of a data model instance.
3.4 Process Context in the Scope of the Data Model Instance
In contrast to the concept of a “process instance” from the realm of activity-
centric BPMSs, an object-aware data model instance does not have any input
parameters or meta information it holds at runtime, apart from the object
instances, relation instances, and coordination process instances it comprises.
Consequently, as opposed to an activity-centric process instance, whose con-
text would include the input parameters provided to the process instance upon
its creation, a data model instance possesses no process context information.
Returning to the recruitment management process example, there might be mul-
tiple instances of the recruitment data model running at the same time across
diﬀerent departments in a company. The context in which they are executed,
such as the department, is not captured in the data model. However, this also
means that there is no conceptual challenge in changing the context of a data
model instance. Speciﬁcally, moving the data model instance from one server to
another is merely an administrative challenge.
4 Enabling Dynamic Process Context Switching
In Sect.3, we presented the scopes one has to consider when determining what
constitutes process context in an object-aware process. There is no simple way
of taking a single object instance or other conceptual element and determining
its process context in a general fashion, as, when including all constraints and
relations, the process context of a single object instance consists of all object
instances present in a data model instance. Without additional concepts, there
is no way to remove an object instance from its process context and re-insert

--- PAGE 30 ---
Dynamically Switching Execution Context in Data-Centric BPM Approaches 11
Algorithm 1. Re-Execute Lifecycle with altered Attribute Values
Require: oi,newAttributes[]  object instance, new attribute values
1: o ← getObject(oi)  get underlying object of oi
2: oitemp ← instantiate(o)  create an empty instance of o
3: for all a in oi.attributes[] do  copy O by change log replay
4: if a not in newAttributes[] then  if a is not being replaced
5: newAttributes[] ← a  append attribute values from oi
6: end if
7: end for
8: c ← getCoordinationProcess(oi)
9: for all a in newAttributes[] do  insert attribute values from O
10: oitemp.changeAttributeV alue(a)  each value advances the lifecycle, re-executing it step
by step
11: c.update(oi)  notify coord. process if state changes
12: end for
13: delete(oi)
14: oi ← oitemp  replace all pointers to original instance
it into another, as this would also change the context of other object instances,
causing inconsistencies. This section presents concepts to enable changing or
switching only parts of the process context of one or more object instances. We
facilitate this with (a) the help of algorithms that perform the actual context
changes, and (b) the inherent execution ﬂexibility of object-aware BPM, which
allows ﬁxing inconsistent processes at runtime with dynamically generated forms.
4.1 Enabling Changes to the Context of a Lifecycle Process
The basic building block for enabling process context changes in object-aware
process management is to enable context changes at the smallest scope possible,
i.e., the process context of a lifecycle process (cf. Sect.3.1). To reiterate, the
process context of the lifecycle process being executed in an object instance cor-
responds to the supplied attribute values. As the lifecycle process is data-driven,
its execution is advanced when certain data becomes available. The context of
a lifecycle process, therefore, changes continuously, which drives process execu-
tion. This data-driven approach allows for the re-execution of a lifecycle process
instance based on a replay algorithm. To be more precise, the data-driven nature
of lifecycle processes ensures that the lifecycle process is re-executed in an iden-
tical fashion if the attribute values, i.e., the process context, remains unchanged.
However, as we want to be able to change attribute values and then re-execute
the lifecycle process, we extended the algorithm for re-executing a lifecycle pro-
cess instance with the ability to alter attribute values (cf. Algorithm1).
Note that it is not necessary to allow users to trigger this kind of process
context change, as it is merely considered a building block for the higher-level
user-facing context changes. Algorithm1 is essential as it allows the lifecycle
process to be re-executed when the object instance it belongs to switches its
process context.

--- PAGE 31 ---
12 K. Andrews et al.
4.2 Enabling Changes to the Context of an Object Instance
The context of an object instance can be considered to be the data model
instance itself. However, it is possible to alter only speciﬁc parts of the process
context identiﬁed in Sect.3.2, i.e., direct context, transitive context, and coor-
dination context. Starting with the direct context, we developed a concept for
enabling the exchange of directly related higher-level object instances, thereby
altering or even entirely switching process context. As an example consider an
Application related to a Job Oﬀer. During a job interview, it turns out that
Applicant a@exa.com is better qualiﬁed for a diﬀerent Job Oﬀer, e.g. UI Pro-
grammer. The personnel oﬃcer po2@comp.it may want to switch the context of
the Application object instance from API Programmer to UI Programmer as
shown in Fig.9.
po1@comp.it
a@exa.com –
Programmer
(Applica on)
API
Programmer
(Job Oﬀer)
a@exa.com
(Person) po2@comp.it
(Employee)
UI
Programmer
(Job Oﬀer)
- Remove
+ Add
a@exa.com –
po2@comp.it
(Review)
a@exa.com –
po1@comp.it
(Review)
a@exa.com –
Programmer
(Interview)
Fig.9. Direct process con-
text switch
The changes necessary for switching the direct
process context of the Application object instance
shown in Fig.9 are (a) removing the relation between
the Application object instance and the API Pro-
grammer Job Oﬀer object instance and (b) adding
a new relation between the orphaned Application
object instance and the UI Programmer object
instance.
These changes are inherently supported by
object-aware processes. However, an impact anal-
ysis becomes necessary to determine which steps
are required to restore consistency. As, up until
now, we only take the direct context of the sin-
gle object instance into account, the analysis must
merely check that the new relation to UI Program-
mer is instantiatable, adhering to any cardinality
or coordination constraints the data model may
impose. An example of a cardinality constraint could
be that each Job Oﬀer object instance may have at most ﬁve Application object
instances attached to it. Furthermore, a coordination constraint preventing the
creation of the new relation could be that the UI Programmer object instance
is not in state Published yet, which is necessary for Applications to be attached
to it, according to the coordination process shown in Fig.5. If none of these
constraints is violated by the new relation, it may be created, causing the direct
context of the Application to be switched to the UI Programmer object instance.
Algorithm2 ensures that the context switch adheres to the constraints
imposed on relations between, e.g., Job Oﬀers and Applications, i.e., the
object instances aﬀecting the direct context of the Application object instance.
Although Algorithm2 is not overly complex, it is an important foundation that
ensures that the direct context may be switched, thereby ensuring consistency
of the data model instance after the process context change. If the algorithm
ﬁnds a violation, the process context of the Application must not be switched.

--- PAGE 32 ---
Dynamically Switching Execution Context in Data-Centric BPM Approaches 13
Algorithm 2. Check Direct Context Constraints
Require: ois,oit  source and target of new relation
1: os ← getObject(ois)  get underlying object of ois
2: ot ← getObject(oit)  get underlying object of oit
3: r ← getRelation(os,ot)  get relation between os and ot
4: if count(oit.incomingRelations) >= r.maxCard then
5: return false  violated relation cardinality
6: end if
7: c ← getCoordinationProcess(oit)
8: for all s in c.steps do
9: if s.object = os and s.state = ois.currState then
10: if constraintPreventsRelation(s,ois,oit) then
11: return false  violated coordination constraint
12: end if
13: end if
14: end for
15: return true  allow relation instance between ois and oit
Application
Accepted
Application
Accepted
Job Offer
Position Filled
Job Offer
Position Filled
Bottom-Up Bottom-Up
Fig.10. Coordination process
(cf. Fig.5)
The direct process context change shown in
Fig.9 may be also viewed from a diﬀerent angle.
The change clearly impacts the context of the
Application object instance, but it impacts the
coordination context of both Job Oﬀer instances
as well. Assuming that the lifecycle process of the
Application object instance is in state Accepted
when the context switch occurs, the excerpt of
the coordination process shown in Fig.10 would
force changes to the Job Oﬀers UI Programmer and API Programmer. The
new context, i.e., Job Oﬀer UI Programmer, then has a lower-level Application
object instance in state Accepted, which allows it to transition to state Position
Filled as shown in the coordination process excerpt in Fig.10. This causes the
coordination process to inform the UI Programmer object instance that it may
advance to state Position Filled as soon as the context change creating the new
relation instance occurs.
Conversely, the old context, i.e., Job Oﬀer API Programmer, no longer has
an Application in state Accepted related to it. Therefore, if it is already in state
Position Filled, this switch would introduce an inconsistency that needs to be
resolved. This can be facilitated by re-executing the lifecycle process instance
of the API Programmer object instance. As shown in Algorithm1, a lifecycle
process instance must always notify the coordination process when a state change
occurs. This is, however, just part of the regular execution of a lifecycle process.
Furthermore, this is explicitly done when re-executing a lifecycle process as part
of a coordination context change, to ensure that state transitions, which were
allowed in the old coordination context, are still valid in the new one. To be more
precise, for the example of the Accepted Application being removed from Job
Oﬀer API Programmer, the re-execution of the Job Oﬀer would be blocked in a
state before Position Filled, as the coordination process no longer has knowledge
of an Accepted Application attached to Job Oﬀer API Programmer. Once the
coordination process has been notiﬁed and all aﬀected object instances were

--- PAGE 33 ---
14 K. Andrews et al.
advanced or reverted into the appropriate states according to the process context
changes, they were impacted by, process consistency is restored. Note that a
change to the context of one object instance might have a cascading impact on
others, requiring a re-execution or lifecycle advancement to restore consistency.
4.3 Enabling Context Changes to Multiple Object Instances
The ﬁnal, and most complete, case of process context change is switching the pro-
cess context of multiple object instances at the same time. We re-use the example
of moving an Application object instance from one Job Oﬀer to another. How-
ever, this time we assume that the new process context for the Application is a
Job Oﬀer in a diﬀerent data model instance, albeit instantiated from the same
data model. Furthermore, we employ the concept of dependent object instances
presented in Sect.3.3 to move the applicant, i.e. Person a@exa.com, his Appli-
cation, and all other dependent object instances (Reviews, Interviews) in one
atomic operation. Figure11 shows the concrete example of moving a@exa.com
to a diﬀerent data model instance containing Job Oﬀer C++ Programmer.
b@exa.com –
Programmer
API
Programmer
(Job Offer)
b@exa.com
a@exa.com
(Person)
b@exa.com –
po2@comp.it a@exa.com –
po2@comp.it
a@exa.com –
po1@comp.it
(Review)
po1@comp.it
po2@comp.it
(Employee)
a@exa.com –
Programmer
(Interview)
C++
Programmer
(Job Offer)
c@exa.com –
po3@comp.it
(Review)
c@exa.com
(Person)
c@exa.com –
Programmer
(Application)
po3@comp.it
(Employee)
c@exa.com –
Programmer
(Interview)
a@exa.com –
Programmer
(Application)
Fig.11. Switching context of multiple object instances
While the process context changes in the previous examples were rather small
in scope, e.g., consisting of the replacement of a single relation to a parent object
instance by another, the above change is conducted in the scope of multiple
object instances at the same time. Ensuring consistency before the change would
require the user to determine replacement relations for all relation instances to
objects not existing in the new data model instance. As an example, consider the
relation between one of the Review object instances and the Employee assigned
as a reviewer, e.g. po2@comp.it (cf. Fig.11). In the new data model instance (i.e.
the other department), po2@comp.it does not exist, causing the relation instance

--- PAGE 34 ---
Dynamically Switching Execution Context in Data-Centric BPM Approaches 15
between the Review and the Employee to be deleted. One way to solve this is to
require the determination of replacement relations for each deleted relation, as
previously suggested. Instead, once again, we leverage the ﬂexible (re-)execution
supported by object-aware lifecycle processes to elegantly solve this problem.
To be precise, we delete the relations to all objects not present in the new
data model instance. Furthermore, we delete the attribute values referencing
the relations, e.g. the Job Oﬀer attribute in the Application object (cf. Fig.6).
Moreover, due to the presence of the Job Oﬀer relation attribute as a step in
the lifecycle process, an instance of the Application object must not progress
past state Created without a value for Job Oﬀer being provided. Coincidentally,
a value for an attribute with the data type “relation” is provided by creating
a relation to another object and vice versa. However, deleting the value of an
attribute, once execution has progressed past the state it is required in, causes
a lifecycle inconsistency. For example this happens when the Applications and
Reviews are moved between the two data model instances, causing the relations
to the no longer existing Employees and Job Oﬀers to be deleted. If we trigger
a re-execution of the lifecycle process instance of all object instances with now
deleted relation instances (cf. Algorithm 1), the data-driven lifecycle process
reacts by executing, for example, the Application object instance until the end
of the Created state, and then waiting for user input.
Application – Created Application – Created
applicantA@example.com
CV_ApplicantA.pdf
Job Offer*
Applicant
CV
Accepted
Fig.12. Application after
context switch
Here, the dynamic form generation capabili-
ties (cf. Sect.2) are utilized. After changing the
process context, the Application is missing a Job
Oﬀer. The form shown in Fig.12 is generated and
added to the worklist of a personnel oﬃcer, allowing
him to select the C++ Programmer. Once the Job
Oﬀer is selected, the data-driven lifecycle execution
advances the Application object to its previous state.
Similar forms are generated for both Reviews, and
once all three forms are completed, process consistency is restored.
5 Prototypical Implementation and Real-World
Use-Cases
In the PHILharmonicFlows implementation of object-aware process manage-
ment, the higher level conceptual elements are implemented as microservices.
For each object instance, relation instance, or coordination process instance, one
microservice instance is created at runtime, turning the implementation into a
fully distributed object-aware process management system.

--- PAGE 35 ---
16 K. Andrews et al.
Fig.13. PHILharmonicFlows UI
Note that all the information from
the various microservices can be uti-
lized at runtime to generate an entire
user interface, complete with naviga-
tion and form elements for a speciﬁc
data model – a goal of the object-
aware process management paradigm
from the very beginning. A screen-
shot of the current user interface
for end-users (with demo data) is
shown in Fig.13. The engine and
user interface are currently evaluated
in a large scale real-world deploy-
ment in the context of a course
with hundreds of students, utilizing
an object-aware process representing
an e-learning platform called PHoo-
dle (PHILharmonicFlows Moodle)1
.
This study enables us to evaluate scalability, usability, and advanced concepts
such as dynamic context switching. While, for the sake of brevity, we solely
oﬀered examples in the context of the recruitment data model, there are numer-
ous scenarios from diﬀerent domains in which the concepts from object-aware
process management can be useful. We found multiple use-cases in our various
data models, such as the re-assignment of a transport job from a robot to a
human worker in our logistics research2
, or a student assigned to the wrong
lecture in PHoodle, both powered by the PHILharmonicFlows engine.
In the context of the real-world PHoodle deployment, we had cases of students
wishing to switch their tutorials, while retaining access to completed worksheet
submissions. As we had not thought of this possibility at design-time, it is a
perfect use-case for context switching, as it may be employed to move an Atten-
dance (representing a student), with all related Submissions, from one Tutorial
to another. Our experience has shown that supporting this additional dimen-
sion of ﬂexibility empowers users by oﬀering them additional actions without
increasing model complexity. For example, in PHoodle, we hide the complexity
of reassigning a Student from one Tutorial to another by oﬀering an Employee
viewing object instance representing the Student a simple drop-down menu gen-
erated by the PHILharmonicFlows form logic for selecting a diﬀerent Tutorial.
When a Tutorial is selected, PHILharmonicFlows completes the process context
change on all dependent object instances, deleting and creating relations, re-
executing lifecycle processes, and updating the coordination process, in a single
click.
1
Feel free to log in to the live instance at https://phoodle.dbis.info
Username: edoc.demo@uni-ulm.de Password: edoc.demo.
2
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oGKjK7K76Ck.

--- PAGE 36 ---
Dynamically Switching Execution Context in Data-Centric BPM Approaches 17
6 Related Work
LateVa [6], enables automated late selection of process fragments based on pro-
cess context. In essence, a process model does not deﬁne all possible variations
but contains variation points that are replaced with process fragments at run-
time depending on the process context. The actual replacement is done by the
“fragment recommender”, based on data mined from historical process instances.
The inclusion of “pockets of ﬂexibility” into workﬂow models is proposed
in [7]. Each pocket contains multiple individual process fragments that can be
rearranged at runtime according to the needs of the process context, allowing
for greater ﬂexibility at certain points. CaPI (context-aware process injection)
[8] analyses process context and allows injecting process fragments into exten-
sion areas. These fragments and the context in which they may be injected are
determined at design-time using a sophisticated modeling tool.
The approaches presented in [6–8] follow a similar approach, limiting process
context ﬂexibility to predeﬁned regions of a process model. Our approach aims
to remove this limitation through relaxation. Instead of deﬁning regions in which
ﬂexibility is possible, we allow for context changes except for in some situations.
Controlled evolution of process choreographies are examined in [9]. A process
choreography describes the interactions of business processes with partner pro-
cesses in a cross-organizational setting. [9] examines ways to gauge the impact
of changes to processes with respect to their partner processes. This is a similar
problem to the one examined in this paper, determining how to understand the
impact that process context changes have on other object instances that are part
of the same data model instance.
The concept of batch regions is introduced in [10]. A batch region is a part of
a process model that may be executed in a single batch if there are other process
instances available corresponding to the same context. Similar capabilities may
be introduced to object-aware process management by extending the context
switching concepts detailed in this paper to aggregate diﬀerent object instances
with similar contexts and executing them in batches.
Finally, [11] presents the context-oriented programming (COP) paradigm,
which introduces a number of interesting aspects that could be incorporated
into our future research. Combining our contribution with COP, which allows
for objects in a programming language to behave diﬀerently depending on the
context they are executed in, would be an interesting research direction. COP
introduces layering for grouping behavioral variants of code with selectors that
choose the correct variant after a context switch occurs at runtime. Similar
notions could be used to extend the research presented in this paper.

--- PAGE 37 ---
18 K. Andrews et al.
7 Summary and Outlook
This paper used the running example of a recruitment data model to examine
how process context can be freely switched and changed in object-aware pro-
cesses. We presented a detailed examination of the notion of process context
in object-aware processes, as well as the concepts and algorithms we developed
to enable process context changes in our proof-of-concept implementation of
an object-aware process management system – PHILharmonicFlows. In essence,
we leverage the highly ﬂexible execution provided by the object-aware process
management paradigm to adapt running process instances to incurred process
context changes. Some issues are still open, such as ﬁnding a generic solution
for cases in which external services (e.g. payment services or e-mails) are used.
Nonetheless, the presented concept constitutes an advancement for data-centric
BPM. Together with our work on ad-hoc changes [4], the presented research
brings us a step closer to a fully ﬂedged data-centric process engine with which
we can demonstrate the many ﬂexibility advantages that data-centric processes
have, thereby increasing the perceived maturity of data-centric BPM.
Acknowledgments. This work is part of the ZAFH Intralogistik, funded by the Euro-
pean Regional Development Fund and the Ministry of Science, Research and the Arts
of Baden-Wuerttemberg, Germany (F.No. 32-7545.24-17/3/1).
References
1. Saidani, O., Nurcan, S.: Context-awareness for business process modelling. In: 3rd
International Conference on Research Challenges in Information Science, pp. 177–
186. IEEE (2009)
2. Rosemann, M., Recker, J.C.: Context-aware process design. In: 18th International
Conference on Advanced Information Systems Engineering (CAiSE) Workshops,
pp. 149–158 (2006)
3. Steinau, S., Andrews, K., Reichert, M.: The relational process structure. In:
Krogstie, J., Reijers, H.A. (eds.) CAiSE 2018. LNCS, vol. 10816, pp. 53–67.
Springer, Cham (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-91563-0 4
4. Andrews, K., Steinau, S., Reichert, M.: Enabling runtime ﬂexibility in data-centric
and data-driven process execution engines. Inf. Syst. (2019)
5. Müller, D., Reichert, M., Herbst, J.: Flexibility of data-driven process structures.
In: Eder, J., Dustdar, S. (eds.) BPM 2006. LNCS, vol. 4103, pp. 181–192. Springer,
Heidelberg (2006). https://doi.org/10.1007/11837862 19
6. Murguzur, A., Sagardui, G., Intxausti, K., Trujillo, S.: Process variability through
automated late selection of fragments. In: Franch, X., Soﬀer, P. (eds.) CAiSE 2013.
LNBIP, vol. 148, pp. 371–385. Springer, Heidelberg (2013). https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-642-38490-5 35
7. Sadiq, S., Sadiq, W., Orlowska, M.: Pockets of ﬂexibility in workﬂow speciﬁcation.
In: S.Kunii, H., Jajodia, S., Sølvberg, A. (eds.) ER 2001. LNCS, vol. 2224, pp.
513–526. Springer, Heidelberg (2001). https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-45581-7 38
8. Mundbrod, N., Grambow, G., Kolb, J., Reichert, M.: Context-aware process injec-
tion. In: Debruyne, C., et al. (eds.) OTM 2015. LNCS, vol. 9415, pp. 127–145.
Springer, Cham (2015). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-26148-5 8

--- PAGE 38 ---
Dynamically Switching Execution Context in Data-Centric BPM Approaches 19
9. Rinderle, S., Wombacher, A., Reichert, M.: On the controlled evolution of pro-
cess choreographies. In: 22nd International Conference on Data Engineering, ICDE
2006, p. 124. IEEE (2006)
10. Pufahl, L., Meyer, A., Weske, M.: Batch regions: process instance synchronization
based on data. In: 18th International Enterprise Distributed Object Computing
Conference, pp. 150–159. IEEE (2014)
11. Hirschfeld, R., Costanza, P., Nierstrasz, O.M.: Context-oriented programming. J.
Object Technol. 7(3), 125–151 (2008)

--- PAGE 39 ---
Exception Handling in the Context
of Fragment-Based Case Management
Kerstin Andree1(B)
, Sven Ihde1
, and Luise Pufahl2
1
Hasso Plattner Institute, University of Potsdam, 14482 Potsdam, Germany
kerstin.andree@student.hpi.de, sven.ihde@hpi.de
2
Software and Business Engineering, Technische Universitaet Berlin,
Berlin, Germany
luise.pufahl@tu-berlin.de
Abstract. Case Management supports knowledge workers in deﬁning,
executing, and monitoring the handling of their cases, e.g. in healthcare
or logistics. Fragment-based case management (fCM) allows to deﬁne
a case model with the help of several process fragments, which can be
ﬂexible combined at run-time based on case characteristics and the case
worker’s intuition. Cases are often inﬂuenced by unknown exception,
e.g., the sudden change of patient condition’s or a storm delaying trans-
ports. So far, fCM only reacts to known circumstances. In this paper,
we want to extend fCM by an exception handling approach. Thereby,
existing exception patterns for workﬂow systems are used and extended
by the fragment-level for handling unknown events. In order to enable
direct integration and avoid a duplication of semantics, precise rules are
speciﬁed in order to clarify how to extend which pattern in detail. The
applicability of the developed exception handling technique is exempli-
ﬁed on a last mile delivery for parcels.
Keywords: Case management · Exception handling · Business process
modeling · Flexible process automation
1 Introduction
Business Process Management (BPM) enables companies to optimize their pro-
cesses in such a way that an overall business goal is achieved. The main artifact
of BPM are business process models [3]. Traditional control-ﬂow oriented process
models represent all possible execution paths of a business process and provide
a complete description of possible alternatives.
The discrepancy of a business process between the planned ﬂow and the
reality is called an exception [12]. For a successful process execution, excep-
tions occurring during run-time (e.g., weather changes, missing data) need to
be handled. Standard process modeling languages, such as Business Process
Model and Notation (BPMN) [17], oﬀers concepts to capture and handle excep-
tion. However, they often lead to diﬃculties to read complex process models [6].
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. Nurcan et al. (Eds.): BPMDS 2020/EMMSAD 2020, LNBIP 387, pp. 20–35, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49418-6_2

--- PAGE 40 ---
Exception Handling in the Context of Fragment-Based Case Management 21
A structured overview on the capabilities of event handling in existing business
process management systems (BPMSs) was oﬀered by Russell et al. [20].
Another more ﬂexible approach for process execution is Case Management,
in which so-called knowledge workers determine the exact process path by their
decisions at run-time and enable a non-deterministic process execution [10,14].
It supports variant-rich business processes, such as healthcare or logistic pro-
cesses, and should by its nature already support known exceptions. Motahari-
Nezhad and Swenson [16] distinguish between adaptive and production case
management; whereas the ﬁrst one assumes that knowledge workers work very
independently based on their knowledge which can quickly change, in the latter
certain structure in the work exists which can be also deﬁned at design time.
Fragment-based Case Management (fCM) oﬀers one way of implementing the
Case Management approach as a hybrid variant between the two paradigms
[8,9]. Nevertheless, it keeps the control-ﬂow-based approach of process models
in parts to ensure that certain processes are executed correctly. A case of a fCM
application consists of several smaller processes, the so-called fragments, which
are designed in advance. Only within these fragments, the sequential ﬂow of indi-
vidual activities is relevant. Knowledge workers can then ﬂexibly combine those
during case execution in the fCM engine1
and thereby determine the concrete
process path. So, it is not predictable how the process will look like in detail at
run-time and this can lead to unexpected behaviour during execution.
Already today, exceptions can be handled by adding new fragments [9], how-
ever, a structured Exception Handling approach, such as the exception patterns
for BPMSs [20] does not yet exist for the fCM engine. There are no instructions
or support to which knowledge workers can refer back when unexpected or even
unknown events occur. A delay during the handling of cases due to incorrect
data or missing information leads to unnecessary costs for organizations. That
makes a good Exception Handling very important for business processes. This
work provides a structured approach for handling exceptions in a fCM appli-
cation which can be used to implement an user interface (UI) for supporting
knowledge workers to react fast and structured to an unexpected event. Based
on the exception pattern of Russell et al. [20] which ﬁts very well for workﬂow
systems, it provides a suitable extension of those to make them applicable to
fCM.
For better understanding, the explained approach is illustrated by an appli-
cation example from the last mile delivery, an alternative delivery approach of
parcels with a pickup place infrastructure researched in the SMile2
project. In
the remainder, this example is used to explain the concepts of fCM and further
motivation in Sect.2. The background on exception handling as well as used
abbreviations of Russell et al. [20] are summarized in Sect.3. The fourth section
of this paper explains the concept of exception handling approach for fCM at
run-time. Finally, we provide an application of the explained concept to the last
mile scenario and give an example of a possible UI.
1
https://github.com/bptlab/chimera.
2
http://smile-project.de/smile-projekt/.

--- PAGE 41 ---
22 K. Andree et al.
2 Fragment-Based Case Management and Motivation
To better understand the concept of fCM as well as its advantages and disad-
vantages in the context of exception handling, the last mile delivery scenario
researched in SMile project [18] is explained brieﬂy in this section by using a
simpliﬁed fCM model. fCM reuses a subset of BPMN modeling concepts [17].
SMile tackles the problem of the last mile delivery which is deﬁned as the
movement of parcels from a high-capacity freight station or port to their ﬁnal
destination. The last mile takes up to 28% of the total delivery costs [19] because
recipients are often not at home during delivery time, such that increased deliv-
ery tries or additional storage of deliveries are necessary. With a pick-up place
infrastructure near to recipients, where parcels are delivered ﬁrst, SMiles explores
the last mile for parcels more eﬃcient and user friendly [18]. Either, recipients
can collect their parcels themselves or use the service of parcel delivery at a
desired time frame by a local carrier, whereby the focus of the project is the
latter one.
(a) Fragment 1: Collecting Parcel
Data
(b) Fragment 2: Plan Tour
(c) Fragment 3: Pickup by the
Customer
(d) Fragment 4: Deliver Parcel
Fig.1. Simpliﬁed fCM model of SMile use case
Fragment-based case management consists of four basic concepts [6,8]: pro-
cess fragments describing the ﬂow of a case, the goal state describing when a
case is ﬁnished, a data class diagram describing relevant data for a case and
their structure, and ﬁnally, the object-life cycles for each data type describing
the allowed changes on them.

--- PAGE 42 ---
Exception Handling in the Context of Fragment-Based Case Management 23
In Fig.1(a), we have visualized four fragments, in which the last mile pro-
cess is split. The fragments are either triggered by external events (shown as
message events) or by certain available data. The ﬁrst fragment is triggered by
an event called New Parcel registered, which is sent by the sender of the parcel.
For registered parcels, the recipients are notiﬁed and asked when they want to
receive their parcel. This is what happens in the activity Collect Parcel Data,
which transfers the data object Parcel from its state registered to enriched. As
soon as the information is received that the parcel has arrived at the depot (i.e.
the pick-up place, e.g., a gas station or a greengrocer just around the corner),
the parcel can be planned (cf. Fig.1(b)), if it is enriched, into a delivery tour for
a local carrier. The activity Plan Tour calls a complex planning service. This
service collects at a certain point in time all parcels requesting a planning with
the same postal code and looks for a suitable carrier who delivers in this area.
It plans a route which ensures that each parcel will be delivered in its speciﬁc
time slot. If a planned tour is allocated to a carrier, the parcel can be collected
at the depot by the carrier. Alternatively, recipients can pick up their parcel in
person as soon as the parcel has arrived at the depot but was not yet planned
for a tour. Then, the third fragment Fig.1(c) is executed instead of fragment
2 and 4. The process ends when the parcel is in state delivered (Fig.1(d)), the
goal state of this case model.
In fCM, not all of the fragments have to be used for the execution of a
certain case to achieve the deﬁned goal of the parcel delivery. Because fCM is
both data-driven and event-driven, it is very important to have a valid Object-
Lifecycle (OLC) which is consistent with the modeled fragments [8]. It describes
the state transitions of each data object as shown in Fig.2.
Fig.2. OLC of data object Parcel
Predictable situations at design time, e.g., recipients get parcel in person,
can be easily captured by designing fragments to cope with them. Unknown
exceptions can be also solved, e.g. for misreadings of the recipient’s address
on the parcel by the scanner. The fCM engine allows knowledge workers to add
fragments at runtime. So far, knowledge workers have to solve exceptions without
any structured support in fCM and this is what we want to change. Given that
the process fragments in fCM are small workﬂows, we want to reuse the exception
handling patterns by Russell et al. [20] originally designed for workﬂow systems.

--- PAGE 43 ---
24 K. Andree et al.
3 Background on Exception Handling
After introducing fCM, we provide in this section the background on exception
handling. First, a precise deﬁnition of the term exception is given by classifying it
into diﬀerent exception types, each illustrated with an example of the introduced
use case. Related work is discussed afterwards and the remaining text introduces
the work of Russell et al. [20] as a fundamental basis for this paper.
3.1 Exceptions
Usually, we describe a discrepancy of a business process between the planned
ﬂow and the reality as an exception. Nevertheless, a discrepancy does not always
have to be an exception. Therefore, Lohmeyer [12] distinguishes between in suc-
cess and failure regarding the goal of a business process. If the goal is achieved
although there is a deviation, we talk about a special variation which is already
known by the process and pre-deﬁned. However, if a deviation leads to failure,
Lohmeyer talks about a real exception. It is a deviation which is unknown by
the process.
The diﬀerence between known and unknown exceptions traces back to Luo
et al. [13]: A deviation is unknown if it cannot be resolved with the rules of a
Table 1. Exception types according to [20]
Type Explanation Example from last mile delivery
Activity failure Activity is not able to
continue its execution [20]
Due to an ambiguous address, the
activity Plan Tour (Fig.1(b)) fails
because the system cannot include
it into the tour
Resource allocation
a) Non-availability Non-availability of
resources causes
non-execution of
corresponding activity
No carrier can be found for a
speciﬁc zip code In this context the
carrier is the resource to which a
parcel is allocated
b) Depleted capacity Due to exhausted capacity
of the resource during
execution, the activity
cannot be completed
successfully
Parcel volume is bigger than space
of transport vehicle, e.g. a cargo
bike. Fragment 4 (Fig.1(d)) can
not be executed anymore
c) Wrong allocation Resource is identiﬁed as
incorrect after successful
assignment
Scanner misreads the address. This
causes wrong linking of parcel to
recipient
External Trigger Required information to
start a fragment is missing
Database is not reachable. The
activity Plan Tour does not start
because of missing information
(Fig.1(b))

--- PAGE 44 ---
Exception Handling in the Context of Fragment-Based Case Management 25
system that have been deﬁned in advance. This means there is no alternative
path in the process model. Moreover, an unknown and therefore unexpected
exception cannot be handled according to [13].
Russell et al. [20] specify, additional to the distinction into known and
unknown exceptions, diﬀerent exception types. This paper is based on this group-
ing and works with exceptions as a clearly identiﬁable event which occurs at run-
time of a business process. Three of those ﬁve types are exempliﬁed in Table1.
3.2 Related Work
Many authors have addressed the need of ﬂexibility in business processes to
enable reliability and support of static and dynamic changes [1,2,20]. Whereas
adaptability is a key factor in the context of exception handling, it is also still
a major challenge in Case Management [7]. Pattern like Rollback which are
mentioned by [20] often address just an instance of a case and this does not
suﬃce for all types of exceptions. Needed changes concerning the structure of a
whole case are not covered [21].
Kurz et al. [11] diﬀerentiates between three types of exceptions: (1) routine,
(2) minor, and (3) major exceptions. Whereas, routine ones can be handled
with standard BPM techniques, such as boundary events in BPMN, the han-
dling minor (predictable) and major (not predictable) needs ﬂexibility to handle
them at run-time. For handling the minor exceptions, Kurz et al. [11] propose
a template-based strategy with best practices and guidelines to handle them,
but unpredictable are handled outside of the case management system. Simi-
larly, Fahland and Woith [5] proposes a ﬂexible process execution system based
on small Petrinets fragments similar to fCM – called Oclets –, which can be
dynamically combined at runtime, and additional Oclets can be deﬁned to han-
dle predictable exceptions. Furthermore, unpredictable exceptions can be han-
dled by adapting the case model while running, which are also veriﬁed [4]. A
systematization is not given.
For predictable exceptions for which a handling can be deﬁned in advance,
there are lots of strategies of handling these. All of them are based on a system-
atization “in form of exception handling patterns” [15]. We use a similar concept
in this paper and show how to adapt known workﬂow-based handling strategies
for handling unpredictable exceptions in a fCM applications.
3.3 Pattern for Exception Handling in Workflow Systems
This section explains the pattern of Russell et al. [20] on which this paper is based
on. After introducing the life cycle of an activity, an example of the pattern is
used to explain the general structure of the exception handling strategies.
Business process activities can adopt diﬀerent states, from the initial oﬀering
until ﬁnal termination. To capture these states, life cycles as shown in Fig.3 are
useful for a detailed analysis of an activity during process execution. States are
illustrated by boxes. Their abbreviations which are used in this paper are shown
in brackets. Each activity can change its state via state transitions, which are

--- PAGE 45 ---
26 K. Andree et al.
Fig.3. Simpliﬁed life cycle of an activity according to [20]
represented as solid arrows. This is the case, for example, when an exception is
triggered in state started. As a consequence, the activity changes into its state
failed. The diﬀerence to the dashed arrows, which also represent state transitions,
is that the transition is executed automatically whereas the transition using the
dashed arrows is deliberately enforced from the outside. A state of an activity
can change from started to failed by two diﬀerent ways, the natural one or the
enforced one. In this paper, we concentrate on activities which are already in
state started3
. Therefore Fig.3 only shows the possible handling strategies for
activities which are halted due to an exception.
Like the example pattern SFF-CWC-COM, each pattern of Russel et al. [20]
is divided into three parts, each marked by an abbreviation which represents one
of the three main aspects of exception handling in workﬂow systems which are
deﬁned as follows:
1. Handling of the activity which provoked the exception;
2. Handling of the following activities of the whole case; and
3. Recovery measures which are needed to remove the eﬀects.
The handling of the activity which provoked the exception is summarized by
the ﬁrst part of the pattern. In the example this corresponds to the abbreviation
SFF. The ﬁrst three letters of each pattern has to be read separately, i.e. Started
Force-Fail, because the ﬁrst letter explains in which state an activity is (cf.
Fig.3) when an unknown exception occurred and an automatic state transition
can not be executed. The other two letters describe the status to which the
activity is manually transferred. So SFF = Started Force-Fail means that an
activity is halted in state started and transferred to state failed.
Whereas the ﬁrst part of a 3-tuple pattern handles one activity, the second
part deals with the best strategy for handling on case-level, i.e. all of the fol-
lowing activities after the one which provoked the exception. This is necessary
because the occurred exception could aﬀect some or all following activities. The
abbreviation by three letters describes one out of three possibilities for it:
1. Continue Current Case (CWC) - Every activity following will be executed
without any interruptions, the workﬂow still exists.
3
An overview of all possible state transitions can be found in [20].

--- PAGE 46 ---
Exception Handling in the Context of Fragment-Based Case Management 27
2. Remove Current Case (RCC) - Either a selection or all of the activities are
deleted.
3. Remove All Cases (RAC) - All cases of the same process model are deleted.
The last part of each pattern deals with recovery. Recovery describes the
action performed in order to remove any aftereﬀects of an exception to ensure
the possibility of still achieving the business goal. Three methods which are
presented in [20] can be used:
1. Do nothing (NIL)
2. Rollback (RBK) - The eﬀects of the exception are reversed, i.e. the state of
the case is reset shortly before the time at which the exception occurred.
3. Compensate (COM) - The damage caused by the exception that has occurred
will be compensated.
The introductory example pattern SFF-CWC-COM can therefore be inter-
preted as a strategy that transfers the activity, of which the exception occurred,
into the status failed (SFF). The case as well as the following activities are con-
tinued in execution without making any special changes (CWC). Any damage
that the exception caused is compensated (COM).
4 Exception Handling for fCM
Because an exception is not only linked to a single activity and/or case but also
to a fragment, it is no longer suﬃcient to handle exceptions only on the activity-
and case-level. Therefore, a new level of abstraction is needed: the fragment-level.
There are two possible consequences when an exception occurs in a fragment.
Either it leads to an inability of a fragment to start or it impedes the successful
execution of the fragment. As a direct eﬀect of the latter, needed state transi-
tions, which are trigger for further fragments, cannot be fulﬁlled.
Since there is no predeﬁned order how fragments are going to be executed, it
does not suﬃce to just look at subsequent activities as we do in the patterns for
workﬂow systems. In the fCM approach, all case fragments have to be considered.
Their handling goes hand in hand with the handling of the case (second part
of the 3-tuple explained in Sect.3.3). Nevertheless, an extension of the workﬂow
pattern is needed to cover the fragment-level. This section explains how this can
be done by adding a fourth tuple element to the existing pattern of Russell et
al. [20]. Whereas the ﬁrst part discusses the possibilities of recovery measures on
fragment-level, the second part focuses on the concrete extension by deﬁning a
notation and speciﬁc rules. The last section suggests how an integration of the
provided exception handling pattern could look like.
4.1 Compensation and Rollback
The main component of a good exception handling is the compensation and
rollback of eﬀects. A fCM application oﬀers knowledge workers the opportunity

--- PAGE 47 ---
28 K. Andree et al.
to actively intervene the process by manipulating data and modeling new frag-
ments. So there are diﬀerent varieties to handle a fragment in which an exception
has occurred. On the one hand, knowledge workers can start fragments manu-
ally and on the other hand, they can terminate them on purpose. It is up to the
knowledge worker whether the termination condition is evaluated as successful
or failed. Moreover, it is very important that the rules given by the model are
strictly adhered to. This means, a knowledge worker has the obligation to com-
pensate or withdraw the eﬀects of an exception to ensure a correct execution to
achieve the business process goal. There are four options to do so:
1. Create new fragments
Creating new fragments can be helpful if an exception occurs and there is
no alternative path in the process model, an extra fragment can be modeled.
Nevertheless, it is important to check all of the following fragments to make
sure everything can be executed afterwards e.g. through a compliance check
explained in [10].
2. Delete existing fragments
If a selection of fragments may no longer be executed, they can be removed
by the knowledge worker. Note that a fragment is only removed in the current
case so that it is not lost across the whole instance.
3. Manipulation of states
There is a correlation between manipulation and the ﬁrst two options. For
both, adding a new fragment and remove one, state transitions have to be
consistent. That is the reason why a continuous veriﬁcation of the object live
cycle is necessary. Therefore, it is important that knowledge workers have the
right to put a data object in every state which is deﬁned in the OLC. This
means they can also adapt the OLC itself. Moreover, this option is important
if you want to set back the execution of a fragment because you have to make
sure that the data objects have the right state.
4. Do nothing
This option should be chosen carefully and only if the eﬀects of an exception
have no inﬂuence on other fragments.
A strict diﬀerentiation in compensation and rollback as proposed in tradi-
tional exception handling is not possible anymore. Knowledge workers have to
react situational. They have to decide for each exception individually if a roll-
back does make sense or not. So, the success of achieving a business goal lies
with the knowledge workers. Due to the complexity of a fCM business process
model, knowledge workers have to be more qualiﬁed in modeling skills than a
ACM-User and has to have more rights than a PCM-User to be able to add new
fragments or change states of data objects.
4.2 Notation
Exception handling on fragment-level is directly connected with the handling
of the activity which has provoked the exception and the handling on case-
level. That is the reason why an extension of the existent pattern for workﬂow

--- PAGE 48 ---
Exception Handling in the Context of Fragment-Based Case Management 29
systems is best suitable for a good exception handling in the context of fCM.
These pattern already suggest a strategy on how to handle an activity and the
following ones.
Our idea is to modify the given notation of Russell et al. [20] by adding
a fourth tuple element to the existing 3-tuple pattern. Amongst handling the
activity which triggers the exception, the case-level and the concrete recovery
measures, the notation is extended by exception handling on fragment-level.
This section explains the extension by deﬁning speciﬁc rules because not every
extended pattern leads to meaningful exception handling strategies.
Like the ﬁrst part of the given notation (i.e. the activity handling), the fourth
part is also an abbreviation consisting of three letters which have to be read
separately. The ﬁrst letter speciﬁes the further execution of the fragment in
which the exception has occurred. Suggested recovery measures are covered by
the last two letters. While the ﬁrst aspect correlates directly with the handling
of the activity (ﬁrst tuple element), the second topic is connected to the recovery
component which is the third part of the strategy tuple. This relation to the ﬁrst
and third element of the tuple is the general rule of how to extend an existing
workﬂow pattern to fCM.
Whenever an exception occurs, it is important to decide whether a fragment
should be continued (C) or terminated (T) in its execution. This decision relates
to the handling of the activity which has provoked the exception. If the activity
is forced to state failed (e.g. SFF = Started Force-Fail), the fragment has to be
terminated manually by knowledge workers. Any further execution would endan-
ger a correct execution path regarding OLCs because any failed activity do not
trigger following activities within the same fragment. In contrast to that, there
are methods which still allow a continuation of the fragment. For example, SCE
(Started Continue-Execution) does not terminate any activity because there is
not state transition to failed (cf. Fig.3) as an eﬀect of the exception. Following
activities can therefore still be triggered. Table2 shows this correlation of han-
dling an activity and a fragment for exceptions which has occurred in activity
state started.
Table 2. Correlation of handling an activity and a fragment
Termination (terminate T) Continuation (continue C)
SFF (force failing) SCE (continue execution)
SRS (restart)
SRA (reallocate)
SFC (force completion)
SRO (reoﬀer)
There are diﬀerent ways to implement the presented recovery measures of
compensation, rollback and faineance on fragment-level. Each method has an
abbreviation by two letters which is used for the second part of the extension:

--- PAGE 49 ---
30 K. Andree et al.
• NE - Adding a new fragment
• DE - Delete an existing fragment
• MA - Manipulation of states
• NT - Do nothing
This results in eight possible combinations (cf. Table3). However, the nota-
tion of a pattern is always interpreted in the overall context. That means, a free
combination of the presented possibilities with the patterns of Russell et al. [20]
is not wise, but it is dedicated to some rules. Here comes the direct correlation
of the handling of an activity and the recovery measures into play.
Table 3. Possibilities of handling exceptions on fragment-level
State of fragment Recovery measures
Add Remove Manipulate Do nothing
Terminate (T) TNE TDE TMA TNT
Continue (C) CNE CDE CMA CNT
For recovery measures, Fig.4 gives an overview of the diﬀerent rules. It is
assumed that the compensation (COM) presented by Russell et al. [20] implies
a manipulation of object states. This means that a pattern that relies on com-
pensation as a recovery measure cannot contain state manipulation (MA) as
the fourth tuple element. For the option of a rollback (RBK), i.e. the return
of the process for a new execution, it is assumed that the object state must
be manipulated too. If knowledge workers re-execute a fragment with diﬀerent
parameters, they have to ensure that the data conditions are consistent with the
process model. For this reason, a rollback only speciﬁes whether a change was
made to the process model or whether the fragment is executed again without
an active intervention by knowledge workers. If the exception does not have any
serious consequences, in most cases no recovery action is needed (NIL). Knowl-
edge workers can now consider whether to keep the process model as it is or
whether it makes sense to add a fragment (NE) or remove an existing one (DE)
for future executions of the process.
In combination with the rules speciﬁed for the ﬁrst letter of the extension,
each pattern of Russell et al. [20] can be extended by looking at the ﬁrst and
third element of the tuple. For example, the pattern SFF-CWC-COM can be
extended to SFF-CWC-COM-TNE because the considered activity was forced to
state failed due to SFF = Started Force-Fail. Therefore, the fragment has to be
terminated (ﬁrst letter of fourth element is T). As a compensation method (third
element COM) the strategy pattern suggests the creation of a new fragment (last
two letters of fourth element are NE).
There is more than one possibility to extend a pattern for workﬂow systems to
make it suitable for fCM. The pattern SFF-CWC-COM from above has another
extended version which is SFF-CWC-COM-TDE because a deletion of existing

--- PAGE 50 ---
Exception Handling in the Context of Fragment-Based Case Management 31
Fig.4. Possibilities for implementing recovery measures
Table 4. Extension of exception patterns for workﬂow systems
Workﬂow system fCM application
SFF-CWC-COM SFF-CWC-COM-TNE
SFF-CWC-COM-TDE
SRS-CWC-RBK SRS-CWC-RBK-CNE
SRS-CWC-RBK-CDE
SRS-CWC-RBK-CNT
SRA-CWC-NIL SRA-CWC-NIL-CNE
SRA-CWC-NIL-CDE
SRA-CWC-NIL-CNT
SFF-RCC-COM SFF-RCC-COM-TNE
SFF-RCC-COM-TDE
SCE-CWC-NIL SCE-CWC-NIL-CNE
SCE-CWC-NIL-CDE
SCE-CWC-NIL-CNT
fragments can also be considered as a compensation method. Table4 illustrates
this aspect for the workﬂow pattern where the activity was in state started when
an exception occurred.
4.3 Integration into a fCM Application
Knowledge workers often have to design own fragments or modify existing ones to
implement the presented pattern. This has a huge implications on their process
modeling knowledge, but also on the veriﬁcation of fCM at run-time. They have
to be adept in the area of the certain process to choose the best suitable pattern
for handling an exception if there are more than one possible strategies. These
enormously high demands on knowledge workers require a tool support to enable
the feasibility of the presented concept of exception handling in fCM.

--- PAGE 51 ---
32 K. Andree et al.
For implementation, the listing of possible pattern has to be automated.
This can be done by analysing in which activity state an exception occurs and
what exception type it relates to. The platform, e.g. an UI, has to have (a)
a notification function to alert knowledge workers immediately whenever an
exception occurs, (b) an overview of all possible pattern with their costs and
consequences, (c) a modeling space to design new fragments or modify existing
ones, (d) a simulation option to verify the changes of the process model and
(e) a compiling option to integrate the changes to the process model. In the
next chapter, we are going to show how a possible implementation, following
our criteria, could look like on the example of an use case.
5 Application to Use Case
The concepts for exception handling in fCM described in the previous section
are exempliﬁed in this section with the help of the last mile delivery fCM model
introduced in Sect.2 as well as the exceptions described in Sect.3.1.
First of all, the handling for the failure of an activity is discussed. This
may be the case when a recipient’s address does not exist. The algorithm for
optimizing the delivery tour cannot be executed because it cannot identify the
stop on a map. The activity Plan tour (Fig.1(b)) is set to state failed and
while the case continues in execution the fragment which includes the failed
activity is terminated manually. Because there is no handling on the part of
the process model, knowledge workers would be notiﬁed. The mock-up in Fig.5
shows how this could look like. The interface provides an overview of what
exception occurred and how it can be handled. Here, it is important that the
case itself continues in executing to ensure a successful delivery of all other
parcels. The parcel with the non existent address has to be scanned again or
transferred to a human who can then correct the address in the system. This
strategy conforms to the pattern SFF-CWC-RBK-TNT and SFF-CWC-COM-
TNE. Both ensure the continuation of the case, but while the ﬁrst one suggests a
rollback by terminating the fragment and restart it, the second one recommends
compensation by creating a new fragment e.g. for manual input of the address.
Secondly, an exception of type Resource not available is discussed: the case
that no carrier can be found to deliver a given parcel. The third fragment can not
terminate successfully because the allocation of the planned tour failed. In this
case, the concept explained above suggests the pattern SFF-CWC-COM-TNE.
The case has to continue (CWC) because the parcel has to be delivered to achieve
the process goal. So, the best strategy to handle the situation is to compensate
the eﬀects (COM), e.g. through modeling new fragments which allow parking
of parcels until a carrier is available. As an alternative, a new carrier could be
employed. Although this handling would work, the strategy is expensive because
ensuring a delivery within a two hour time slot can cost very much.
If the database is not reachable temporarily and does not receive any requests,
many fragments will not be triggered. For handling, the patterns SRS-CWC-
RBK-CNT and SRS-CWC-RBK-CNE are both possible. It is very useful, to

--- PAGE 52 ---
Exception Handling in the Context of Fragment-Based Case Management 33
Fig.5. Mock-up of UI showing occurrence of activity failure
restart the activity once it failed and moreover, there is no reason to stop the
case. A rollback is necessary to ensure the correct state of the needed data
objects, but on fragment-level a knowledge worker can either do nothing or add
a new fragment notifying an engineer to ﬁx the problem.
6 Conclusion
The topic of exception handling in context of fragment-based Case Management
(fCM) during run-time is complex and requires a deep understanding of both, the
technical context and advanced skills in process modeling. This paper explains
a concept of how the strategies of Russell et al. [20] can be used for exception
handling in fCM by introducing the fragment-level. Due to an extension of the
notation by a fourth element, the handling of the fragment in which the exception
occurred can be deﬁned as well as the handling of subsequent fragments can be
deﬁned within one pattern. Each handling method for fCM can be mapped as
a quadruple. Special rules avoid duplication of semantics of the patterns [20]
and ensure direct integration into them. For each original exception handling
strategy, there are at least two extensions that can be used in a fCM application.
That is why exception handling in fCM is more powerful than in a control-ﬂow
based system.
This paper provides a foundation that knowledge workers and developers of
an fCM application can use and build on to ensure eﬃcient exception handling.
In the future, we want evaluate the usability of our approach by checking the
given requirements (see Sect.4.3) with knowledge workers, as this is essential to
guarantee the eﬀectiveness of our future implementation.
Acknowledgement. The research leading to these results has been partly funded by
the BMWi under grant agreement 01MD18012C, Project SMile. http://smile-project.
de.

--- PAGE 53 ---
34 K. Andree et al.
References
1. van der Aalst, W.M.P., Berens, P.J.S.: Beyond workﬂow management: product-
driven case handling. In: Proceedings of the 2001 International ACM SIGGROUP
Conference on Supporting Group Work, GROUP 2001, pp. 42–51. Association for
Computing Machinery, New York (2001)
2. Agostini, A., De Michelis, G.: Improving ﬂexibility of workﬂow management sys-
tems. In: van der Aalst, W., Desel, J., Oberweis, A. (eds.) Business Process Man-
agement. LNCS, vol. 1806, pp. 218–234. Springer, Heidelberg (2000). https://doi.
org/10.1007/3-540-45594-9 14
3. Dumas, M., La Rosa, M., Mendling, J., Reijers, H.A.: Fundamentals of Business
Process Management. Springer, Heidelberg (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-662-56509-4
4. Fahland, D.: From scenarios to components. Ph.D. thesis, Humboldt University of
Berlin (2010)
5. Fahland, D., Woith, H.: Towards process models for disaster response. In: Ardagna,
D., Mecella, M., Yang, J. (eds.) BPM 2008. LNBIP, vol. 17, pp. 254–265. Springer,
Heidelberg (2009). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-00328-8 25
6. Gonzalez-Lopez, F., Pufahl, L.: A landscape for case models. In: Reinhartz-
Berger, I., Zdravkovic, J., Gulden, J., Schmidt, R. (eds.) BPMDS/EMMSAD -2019.
LNBIP, vol. 352, pp. 87–102. Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-030-20618-5 6
7. Hauder, M., Pigat, S., Matthes, F.: Research challenges in adaptive case man-
agement: a literature review. In: 2014 IEEE 18th International Enterprise Dis-
tributed Object Computing Conference Workshops and Demonstrations, pp. 98–
107, September 2014
8. Hewelt, M., Pufahl, L., Mandal, S., Wolﬀ, F., Weske, M.: Toward a methodology
for case modeling. Softw. Syst. Model. 2019, 1–27 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10270-019-00766-5
9. Hewelt, M., Weske, M.: A hybrid approach for ﬂexible case modeling and execution.
In: La Rosa, M., Loos, P., Pastor, O. (eds.) BPM 2016. LNBIP, vol. 260, pp. 38–54.
Springer, Cham (2016). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-45468-9 3
10. Holfter, A., Haarmann, S., Pufahl, L., Weske, M.: Checking compliance in data-
driven case management. In: Di Francescomarino, C., Dijkman, R., Zdun, U. (eds.)
BPM 2019. LNBIP, vol. 362, pp. 400–411. Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-030-37453-2 33
11. Kurz, M., Fleischmann, A., Lederer, M., Huber, S.: Planning for the unexpected:
exception handling and BPM. In: Fischer, H., Schneeberger, J. (eds.) S-BPM ONE
2013. CCIS, vol. 360, pp. 123–149. Springer, Heidelberg (2013). https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-642-36754-0 8
12. Lohmeyer, B.: Writing Use Cases: Exception or Alternate Flow? Lohmeyer Busi-
ness UX (2013). https://www.lohmy.de/2013/03/06/writing-use-cases-exception-
or-alternate-ﬂow/. Accessed 28 Feb 2020
13. Luo, Z., Sheth, A., Kochut, K., Miller, J.: Exception handling in workﬂow systems.
Appl. Intell. 13, 125–147 (2000). https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1008388412284
14. de Man, H.: Case management: a review of modeling approaches. Technical report,
BPTrends (2009)
15. Marin, M.A., Hauder, M., Matthes, F.: Case management: an evaluation of existing
approaches for knowledge-intensive processes. In: Reichert, M., Reijers, H.A. (eds.)
BPM 2015. LNBIP, vol. 256, pp. 5–16. Springer, Cham (2016). https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-319-42887-1 1

--- PAGE 54 ---
Exception Handling in the Context of Fragment-Based Case Management 35
16. Motahari-Nezhad, H.R., Swenson, K.D.: Adaptive case management: overview and
research challenges. In: 2013 IEEE 15th Conference on Business Informatics (CBI),
pp. 264–269. IEEE (2013)
17. OMG: Notation BPMN Version 2.0. OMG Speciﬁcation, Object Management
Group, pp. 22–31 (2011)
18. Pufahl, L., Ihde, S., Glöckner, M., Franczyk, B., Paulus, B., Weske, M.: Countering
congestion: a white-label platform for the last mile parcel delivery. In: Business
Information Systems 2020. Springer, Cham (to be published)
19. Ranieri, L., Digiesi, S., Silvestri, B., Roccotelli, M.: A review of last mile logis-
tics innovations in an externalities cost reduction vision. Sustainability 10(3), 782
(2018)
20. Russell, N., van der Aast, W., ter Hofstede, A.: Exception handling patterns in
process-aware information systems. Technical report. Queensland University of
Technology/Eindhoven University of Technology(2006)
21. Weber, B., Reichert, M., Rinderle-Ma, S.: Change patterns and change support
features - enhancing ﬂexibility in process-aware information systems. Data Knowl.
Eng. 66(3), 438–466 (2008)

--- PAGE 55 ---
Business Process Monitoring
on Blockchains: Potentials and Challenges
Claudio Di Ciccio1
, Giovanni Meroni2(B)
, and Pierluigi Plebani2
1
Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy
diciccio@di.uniroma1.it
2
Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy
{giovanni.meroni,pierluigi.plebani}@polimi.it
Abstract. The ability to enable a tamper-proof distribution of
immutable data has boosted the studies around the adoption of
blockchains also in Business Process Management. In this direction, cur-
rent research work primarily focuses on blockchain-based business pro-
cess design, or on execution engines able to enact processes through
smart contracts. Although very relevant, less studies have been devoted
so far on how the adoption of blockchains can be beneﬁcial to business
process monitoring. This work goes into this direction by providing an
insightful analysis to understand the beneﬁts as well as the hurdles of
blockchain-enabled business process monitoring. In particular, this work
considers the adoption of programmable blockchain platforms to manage
the generation, distribution, and analysis of business process monitoring
data.
Keywords: Blockchain · Business process monitoring · Business
Process Management
1 Introduction
Blockchains are gaining momentum in Business Process Management (BPM)
research as the infrastructural platform of choice on which collaborative, multi-
party business processes are conducted [12]. Thanks to their guarantee of persis-
tence and immutability of the recorded transactions, not only can they operate as
a solid backbone for the storage of data and actions, but they are also promising
aids for the monitoring of processes that run atop [16].
Research towards the adoption of blockchains for the monitoring of processes
is, however, still at its early stages. Thus far, most of the attempts have focused
on the generation of readily usable data for the application of existing process
mining techniques [5,8,14] and the creation of networks highlighting the most
common patterns of exchange of information and assets among peers [6,7,16]. A
comprehensive analysis of the aspects of blockchains that may favour or encum-
ber the monitoring of processes is, to the best of our knowledge, still missing.
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. Nurcan et al. (Eds.): BPMDS 2020/EMMSAD 2020, LNBIP 387, pp. 36–51, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49418-6_3

--- PAGE 56 ---
Business Process Monitoring on Blockchains: Potentials and Challenges 37
The goal of this paper is to clarify to what extent a blockchain can be bene-
ﬁcial for business process monitoring. On this basis, the paper identiﬁes a set of
research challenges that are worth to be addressed by the research community
for the design and realization of blockchain-based process monitoring platforms.
The remainder of this paper is as follows. Section2 describes the fundamen-
tal elements of process monitoring. Section3 describes the concepts on which
blockchain platforms are based and illustrates the main research conducted so
far for the process-oriented analysis of blockchain data. Section4 examines the
challenges and opportunities we envision for a blockchain-based process moni-
toring architecture. Finally, Sect.5 concludes the paper.
Manufacturer Manufacturer Shipper Shipper Customer Customer
Manufacturer portion
started
Fill in
container
Truckreached
manufacturer
Containerattached
totruck
Shipper portion
ended
Manufacturer portion
ended
Attach
container to
truck
Shipper portion
started
Drive to
manufacturer
Truckreached
manufacturer
Containerattached
totruck
Truckreached
Inlandterminal
Container
delivered
Detach
container
fromtruck
Container
delivered
Truckreached
customer
Terminal portion
ended
Ship
container
Container
[open,detached]
Container
[closed,detached]
Container
[open,attached]
Truck
[carrier,moving]
Truck
[manufacturer,still]
Truck
[manufacturer,moving]
Truck
[customer,still]
Inspect
container
Container
[closed,attached]
Customer portion
started
24h Notify delay
Fig.1. Motivating example.
2 Business Process Monitoring
Business process monitoring aims at identifying how well running processes are
performing with respect to performance measures and objectives. Depending on
the available tools and data, a business process platform can report on the run-
ning processes, from the sole tracking of the running instances to the checking of
deviations with respect to the expected behaviour and the identiﬁcation of other
anomalies. This section brieﬂy introduces the main characteristics of business

--- PAGE 57 ---
38 C. Di Ciccio et al.
process monitoring platforms in terms of the possible objectives of the monitor-
ing (i.e., the why), the available techniques (i.e., the how), and the subject of
monitoring (i.e., the what).
To better explain these aspects, we use an example taken from the logis-
tics domain. Figure1 shows the Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN)
model of a shipment process in particular. The example involves a manufacturer,
M, who receives an order from one of its customers, C, and a shipper, S, on
whom M relies for the delivery of the goods to C. At ﬁrst, M starts ﬁlling a
shipping container with the goods requested by C. Meanwhile, S starts driving
one of its trucks to M’s production facility. Once the truck arrives, M ﬁrstly
attaches the container to the truck, then inspects the container to verify if all
the goods requested by C are present. Such an inspection should be performed
only at this stage, and the container should not be opened again until it reaches
the premises of C. Once the inspection completes, S ships the container to C,
which detaches it from the truck. In case the shipping activity takes longer that
24h, S must justify the delay.
Why to Monitor. There are several reasons why a monitoring platform should
be introduced. As a general need, the process owner and the recipients are inter-
ested in verifying and demonstrating that the process is behaving correctly. A
monitoring platform can be a passive element that merely records the performed
actions, or it can actively contribute to handle the occurring deviations.
Moreover, the objectives of a business process monitoring platform can be
various: to determine if activities take longer than expected to complete, if there
are bottlenecks in the process, if resources are under- or over-utilized, and if
there are violations in the process execution, among other things. Depending
on the needs of the process owner, all – or a subset – of these aspects can be
considered.
How to Monitor. According to the classiﬁcation proposed by [1] and [17],
process monitoring techniques can be classiﬁed in ﬁve main groups: event data
logging, Business Activity Monitoring, runtime performance analysis, confor-
mance checking, and compliance checking.
Event data logging is the generation of sequences of events related to a spe-
ciﬁc process instance being executed. Events can provide notiﬁcations on the
activities being executed, or on the artifacts (i.e., the physical or virtual objects
manipulated by the process) and the resources (i.e., the human operators or
software components responsible for executing activities) participating in the
process. Once collected, events are typically stored in so-called event logs. Since
several other monitoring techniques require event data to work, this technique
is often seen as a prerequisite for them.
Business Activity Monitoring (BAM) and Runtime Performance Analysis: Also
known as “monitoring” [1], BAM analyzes real-time information on the activ-
ities being executed (e.g., response time and failure rate). With this technique

--- PAGE 58 ---
Business Process Monitoring on Blockchains: Potentials and Challenges 39
it is possible to measure Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) relevant for the
process, thus determining how well activities are performed. Given event data,
BAM produces measurements for KPIs. Instead, runtime performance analy-
sis focuses on the data analysis of performance information on the processes
being executed to identify bottlenecks or resource allocation problems. Unlike
BAM, which focuses on single activities, Runtime performance analysis focuses
on process runs, thus accounting for dependencies among activities. Given a pro-
cess model and event data, runtime performance analysis produces performance-
related diagnostic information.
By resorting on BAM, and runtime performance analysis, it is possible to
measure KPIs and identify other issues not directly related to the process struc-
ture. For instance, it is possible to determine if activity Attach container to
truck is causing a bottleneck, or if Drive to manufacturer consumes too many
resources (e.g., if M is located in a poorly connected area). Based on the agree-
ments between organizations, these techniques may be conﬁned only to activities
belonging to each organization, or they may be applied to all the activities.
Conformance checking consists in the techniques that compare the modeled pro-
cess behavior with the one evidenced by execution data. To this end, the gathered
event data are replayed on the process model, so as to detect deviations from
the expected behaviour. Given a process model and event data, Conformance
checking produces conformance-related diagnostic information.
With conformance checking, the stakeholders can verify if the execution is
in line with the process description. In particular, the nature of the model plays
an important role in deﬁning the degrees of freedom that are left to the process
executors. A collaboration diagram (e.g., the complete collaboration diagram
in Fig.1) will force the whole process to strictly adhere to the speciﬁcations.
A process diagram (e.g., only the portion of the process inside a speciﬁc pool)
will force the process portion belonging to that stakeholder to adhere to the
speciﬁcations. Finally, a choreography diagram will force only the interactions
among stakeholders to adhere to the speciﬁcations, leaving the stakeholders free
to alter their internal processes.
Compliance checking encompasses the techniques aimed at verifying that con-
straints representing regulations, guidelines, policies and laws, are fulﬁlled by
the process. It diﬀers from conformance checking because constraints focus on
process rules, rather than on entire process runs.
Through compliance checking techniques, it is possible to deﬁne complex
constraints on the process that predicate both on the structure and on non func-
tional aspects. Instead of relying on a process model, compliance checking relies
on compliance rules that describe only the elements of the process that are useful
to assess the constraint. For instance, it is possible to monitor if the container
is delivered to C within two days since when M ﬁnished preparing it. Likewise,
it is possible to monitor if less than 1% of the shipments were carried out with-
out inspecting the container. To this aim, according to [10], several compliance
checking techniques and languages exist. Since constraints predicate on speciﬁc

--- PAGE 59 ---
40 C. Di Ciccio et al.
portions of the process, rather than on the process as a whole, it is much easier
for stakeholders to agree on monitoring them. In fact, only activities required
for the assessment of such constraints have to be disclosed, thus overcoming one
of the issues of conformance checking.
What to Monitor. Depending on the monitoring technique and on the under-
lying representation of the process to monitor, diﬀerent kinds of events have to
be logged for the monitoring to be reliable. Conformance checking techniques
typically require events notifying the start or termination of activities, or the
transmission and receipt of messages among participants. BAM, runtime perfor-
mance analysis and compliance checking techniques usually require more com-
plex events, also indicating when artifacts were manipulated or who performed
a task (e.g., starting an activity or modifying an artifact).
Typically, if the reference model adopted for process monitoring is a process
diagram, only events belonging to the owner of the process are collected and
analyzed. When the process consists only of either automated activities or form-
based ones, obtaining events is a relatively easy task. In fact, event logs can be
retrieved from the Business Process Management System (BPMS) in charge of
executing the process. Also, since users are required to interact with the BPMS
to perform business activities, event logs contain accurate information on who
performed which task, when the task was performed, and which artifacts were
involved during its execution. However, when the process also involves manual
activities, that is, activities that are performed by users without interacting with
the BPMS (e.g., shipping the container), collecting reliable event logs becomes
challenging. In fact, users may forget to notify to the BPMS when they perform
activities, they may incorrectly indicate in the notiﬁcations when the activities
were performed, they may indicate that they performed an activity which was
not done or which was done by another user. These issues can be partially solved
with Internet of Things (IoT)-based solutions, such as artifact-driven monitoring
[13] or Unicorn [2], which autonomously collect events from the artifacts being
manipulated, to be then analyzed to infer which activity was executed.
If the process to monitor is represented as a collaboration diagram, events
belonging to all the involved organizations have to be logged and shared among
participants. This is a challenging task both from the organizational and tech-
nical standpoint. However, from an organizational viewpoint, the participants
may be reluctant to share events on the activities being performed, as it may
allow competitors to uncover their operations. In case of BAM and runtime
performance analysis, sharing such events may even violate privacy regulations,
such as the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), since information on
the employees performing activities may be shared to the other organizations.
Technical-wise, sharing events typically requires either individual information
systems to be federated, or a centralized cross-organizational information sys-
tem to be deployed and adopted by all the participants. To partially overcome
these issues, organizations can autonomously monitor their own portions, and
then share aggregated monitoring data to the other participants. However, this

--- PAGE 60 ---
Business Process Monitoring on Blockchains: Potentials and Challenges 41
approach reintroduces the problem of trust between organizations, moving it
from the execution to the monitoring of the processes. In fact, for this approach
to hold, organizations are required to trust each other, assuming that monitoring
data reﬂect the actual behavior of the process.
In case the process is represented as a choreography diagram, events related
to the transmission and reception of messages between organizations have to
be logged. From the technical standpoint, as long as the message exchanges are
performed digitally (e.g., email, web service invocations), it is relatively easy
to log and distribute events. In fact, it is suﬃcient to passively monitor the
communication channels, generating events whenever communication activity is
detected. On the other hand, if physical objects are exchanged, generating event
logs is a more complex task. In fact, an active agent is required to observe the
real world and produce an event whenever some physical object is either received
or sent. Originally, this was done by relying on human operators, but it suﬀered
from the same limitations as the ones outlined for manual activities. Therefore,
IoT-based solutions to track physical objects are adopted as long as the contents
of the messages are kept conﬁdential, and only events relevant for the process
being monitored are disclosed.
Finally, in case compliance rules have to be monitored, depending on the lan-
guage and technique adopted, events related to messages, activities, or artifacts
have to be logged. Consequently, compliance checking has the same technical lim-
itations as all the conformance checking techniques. However, not every event
related to the process has to be logged, but only the ones required for verifying
the compliance rules. Therefore, monitoring has a much lower footprint on the
organizations. Also, since organizations can selectively choose which events to
be logged and made available to the other participants, they can agree on not
to share information that discloses their know-how.
3 Monitoring with the Blockchain: State of the Art
In this section, we summarize the fundamental notions on which blockchain
platforms are based and the research conducted thus far that aims at analysing
blockchain data for process execution and analysis.
3.1 Elements of Blockchains
A blockchain is a protocol for the decentralized storage of a tamper-proof
sequence of transactions, maintained and veriﬁed by the nodes participating
in the network. A ledger is an append-only list of data units named transac-
tions. Every transaction records a transfer of value (digital assets, cryptocurren-
cies, information bits, etc.) between two accounts. The sender cryptographically
signs the transaction to provide evidence that it is not counterfeit. Blockchains
such as Bitcoin [15] and Ethereum [21] collate transactions into so-called blocks.
Blocks are thus used as the messages to be broadcast to every node. The order
among blocks (and, a fortiori, the transactions therein) is kept by a hash-based

--- PAGE 61 ---
42 C. Di Ciccio et al.
backward linking: every block keeps the digest of a hashing function applied to
the previous block. All together, the links generate a chain-like structure: hence
the name blockchain. Locally to a node, transactions are subject to a total order-
ing relation: the evolution of the state of the parties’ accounts depend on the
sequence of operations recorded in the ledger. Blocks are, in fact, a measure of
time as their addition to the chain determines the passage to the next global
system state. To pay back the eﬀort of nodes, an economic incentive is pro-
posed that distributes so-called cryptocurrencies to the nodes that publish the
accepted blocks. Nodes participating in the network guarantee that transactions
and blocks are valid and thus prevent the data structure to be tampered with.
Also, the replication of the ledger makes it possible to have the stored informa-
tion always available locally to every node. However, the ledger may diﬀer from
node to node: the nodes reach eventual consensus on the correct sequence in the
ledger. Temporary divergences between the local images of the ledger are called
forks. The way in which access and right to write are granted, determine two
main categorisations of the blockchain platform in use: private blockchains are
accessible only to a restricted number of peers, as opposed to the public ones; if a
selected number of participants only is allowed to decide on the next blocks, the
blockchain is permissioned, otherwise it is permissionless. Natively, Bitcoin and
Ethereum are natively public permissionless blockchain, although for the latter
private networks can be created that operate within conortia, allowing only a
subset of nodes to mine blocks. Hyperledger Fabric,1
instead, is conceived as a
consortium (private) permissioned blockchain.
Second-generation blockchains such as Ethereum and Hyperledger Fabric
support the so-called smart contracts [18], that is, executable code expressing
how business is to be conducted among contracting parties (e.g., transfer digital
assets after a condition is fulﬁlled). In this paper, we will focus on this kind of
blockchains operating as distributed programmable platforms. Smart contracts
often require data from the world outside the blockchain sphere (e.g., ﬁnan-
cial data, weather-related information, random numbers, sensors from hardware
devices). However, they cannot directly invoke external APIs. Therefore, smart
contracts need software adaptors that play that interfacing role. Those arte-
facts are named oracles [22]. Oracles can be further classiﬁed as software or
hardware oracles. Software oracles aim to extract information from programmed
applications (e.g., web services), whereas hardware oracles extract data from the
physical world (e.g., IoT devices).
3.2 Current Approaches
To date, preliminary attempts have been proposed that can be the basis to be
built upon for process monitoring in the blockchain. Smart contracts allow for
the codiﬁcation of business process logic on the blockchain, as shown in the
seminal work of Weber et al. [20]. Later, a similar approach has been applied
within the Caterpillar [9] and Lorikeet [19] tools, as well as by Madsen et al.
1
https://www.hyperledger.org/projects/fabric.

--- PAGE 62 ---
Business Process Monitoring on Blockchains: Potentials and Challenges 43
[11]. As several modern Business Process Management Systems (BPMSs) do,
those approaches adopt a Model-Driven Engineering (MDE) paradigm to let the
process analysts provide graphical representations of the process and turn it into
executable code enacting it [4].
From the monitoring perspective, the eﬀorts have been mostly devoted to
event data logging thus far: the main rationale is to extract and process the pay-
load of transactions to turn them into event logs that are readily available for
process mining tools. The ordering of events is based upon the ordering of the
transactions in the ledger, whereas the attributes of the event (activity name,
timestamp, resource, and the like) are identiﬁed based on the signature of the
invoked function on the smart contract [14], a user-deﬁned descriptor (manifest)
[8], or the change of the smart contract’s attribute value [5]. Thereupon, pro-
cess mining techniques (including conformance checking) are held to analyse the
generated event logs.
Other approaches have been applied to analyse blockchain-mediated commu-
nications among peers, such as GraphSense [7]. Filtz et al. [6] studied the graph
of addresses in Bitcoin and thereby examined the transaction behavior of users,
taking into consideration exchange rates between virtual and ﬁat currencies.
Prybila et al. [16] focus in particular on the transposition of handovers of tasks
in a process to Bitcoin transactions. With their software prototype, they are
thus able to verify the execution ﬂow of a process by tracking the transactions
exchanged among peers.
The research conducted thus far constitutes a clear advancement towards
future architectures for business processes monitoring that are based on the
blockchain. In the following section, we discuss challenges and opportunities
that come along with their design and adoption.
4 Monitoring with Blockchain:
Challenges and Opportunities
Due to its properties, a blockchain can be adopted as a distributed infrastructure
on top of which a new type of business process monitoring platforms can be built.
These platforms can exploit the properties of data immutability, trust among the
parties, and data distribution oﬀered by design by blockchains. Owing to their
programmability, we focus in particular on second-generation blockchains in the
remainder of this paper.
To properly describe the potentials of introducing blockchains to this end,
Fig.2 shows a reference architecture that couples the typical BPMS monitoring
subsystem with a blockchain. Without focusing on one of the speciﬁc monitoring
approaches discussed in Sect.2, we can generalize the input of the monitoring
platform with the status of the process instances and the ongoing activities (pro-
cess status), and of the artifacts managed thereby (artifact status). Depending
on the adopted technique, the logic implemented by the monitoring platform
transforms this information about the status. The produced output, generally
referred as monitoring data, can be a collection of event logs, or a transformation

--- PAGE 63 ---
44 C. Di Ciccio et al.
Legend
Public
monitoring
data
BPMSMonitoring System
Blockchain client Private
monitoring
data
Process
status
Smart
contract
ArƟfacts
status
Smart
contract
Other party’s BPMS
Monitoring System
Blockchain client
blockchain
Oracle
Grey Module within the blockchain
White Module outside the blockchain
Fig.2. Blockchain-enhanced BPMS monitoring reference architecture
of the obtained input data into aggregated information that is more meaningful
to the analysis (e.g., at a higher level of abstraction than low-level events). A por-
tion of this output can be kept private (private monitoring data) or made public
(public monitoring data), to let other interested parties to check, for instance,
the compliance of the process.
When enriching the monitoring platform with a blockchain, the monitoring
logic may be encoded in one or more smart contracts. First of all, this requires
that the monitoring system includes a blockchain client which enables the com-
munication with the rest of the blockchain infrastructure. Secondly, as the output
of a smart contract is published as a transaction payload on the blockchain, the
resulting monitoring data produced by the smart contract is automatically avail-
able to anyone allowed to access the blockchain. This implies that the monitoring
logic implemented as smart contract must be limited to the part producing public
monitoring data. On the one hand, this opportunity increases the transparency
of the monitoring and the possibility for external actors to evaluate the behaviour
of the process, as the smart contract is immutable and executed on all the nodes
in the blockchain network. On the other hand, since the publication of data on
the blockchain has an impact in terms of cost and performance, it becomes of
utmost importance to establish which monitoring data can be included in the
blockchain (i.e., on-chain thus trusted by deﬁnition), and which one can be left
oﬀ-chain as typical public monitoring data (i.e., only under the control of the
party producing them).
The distinction between data on- and oﬀ-chain is relevant not only when
considering the output of the monitoring platform, but also concerning the input
of a smart contract as they can natively operate only on data published on the
blockchain. To overcome this limitation, blockchains oﬀer oracles to extend the
smart contract accessibility to oﬀ-chain data. For this reason, it is required that
any dataset to which a smart contract requires access for its computation, needs

--- PAGE 64 ---
Business Process Monitoring on Blockchains: Potentials and Challenges 45
to be coupled with an oracle. Since coupling a dataset with an oracle means
making those data visible to all the members of the blockchain, this implies that
the data set should be properly partitioned into public (i.e., accessible through
the oracle) and private parts.
Table 1. Challenges in monitoring with the blockchain
Aspect Challenge Perspective
Design
rationale
Lack of
capability
Trust
management
Smart contracts Monitoring transparency X X
Observability X
Lack of reactivity X X
Oracles Time management X X
Reliability X X
Flexibility X X
Data management Data quality X X
Data size X
Side eﬀects X
In light of the above discussion, we observe that, to improve the business
process monitoring via blockchain, a thorough blueprint is required in terms of
the smart contracts (reﬂecting the monitoring capabilities), the oracles (identify-
ing the data sources), and the monitoring data (balancing between on-chain and
oﬀ-chain data). Table1 illustrates the research challenges related to those three
aspects and categorizes them according to three main perspectives: the need
for a thorough design rationale behind the realisation of the monitoring infras-
tructure; the necessity to tackle the lack of capabilities that the infrastructural
usage of the blockchain brings; the demand for a policy of trust management
with information and actors. Each of the following subsections discusses in fur-
ther detail those aspects and the related challenges, emphasizing the perspectives
from which the issues are analyzed.
4.1 Challenges About Smart Contracts
Monitoring Transparency. To improve the transparency of compliance check-
ing, especially in case of multi-party business processes, a smart contract holds
a crucial role. In fact, based on the information that can be made accessible
through oracles and the relevant transactions mined in the blockchain, a smart
contract can analyse the current status of the process enactment and verify if the
control ﬂow – in the case of orchestrated processes – or the message exchange –
in the case of a choreographed process – are behaving as expected. As the code
composing the smart contract is immutably stored on the blockchain, and it is

--- PAGE 65 ---
46 C. Di Ciccio et al.
executed on all the blockchain clients to reach consensus, it is extremely hard
for a single party to alter it in order to counterfeit the result. As a consequence,
when a single party is involved in the business process, being the smart contract
published on the blockchain, the logic that drives compliance becomes publicly
available to all the parties interested in the soundness of the process, even if
they are not directly involved in the enactment (e.g., auditors). Conversely, in
multi-party business processes, information about the obligations involving the
parties can be produced and observed with smart contracts. For example, by
turning the process model in Fig.1 into a smart contract, M, S and C agree on
how the process should be carried out. As the constraints become public, none
of them can complain that they expected the process to be executed diﬀerently.
If, on the one hand, such a transparency oﬀered by smart contracts increases
the trust in the process execution, on the other hand, it requires smart contracts
to be properly designed in order to expose only the information that should be
made available to external actors. Moreover, the ability for a smart contract
to verify possible deviations in the process enactment is strictly related to the
monitoring data that are available through the oracles. As a consequence, the
availability of proper data sources that can be accessed by the smart contract is
fundamental. With single-party business processes, this issue is not so critical as
the party is responsible for designing the smart contract as well as for designing
the oracles and choosing the data sources. Conversely, when talking about multi-
party business processes, an agreement among parties must include also the
possibility to make available some of the data about the process and artifact
status to other parties. This opens an additional issue about the accessibility of
those data. For instance, to determine if the process portion carried out by S is
correctly performed, S must expose the information on the position and speed
of its trucks.
In a blockchain, the transactions of mined blocks are available to all partici-
pants. Consequently, additional mechanisms must be implemented on top of the
blockchain (e.g., based on encryption) to limit the visibility of this data only to
the subset of clients that are actually allowed to see them, so as to enable trust.
For example, S may agree on sharing information on its trucks with M, but may
refuse to make this information publicly available, as competitors may exploit it
(e.g., by ﬁnding areas that are not well covered by S).
Observability. Although both the smart contracts and the invocations of its
methods are stored in the blockchain, and their execution can be performed
and analyzed by any participant, most blockchains require smart contracts to
explicitly deﬁne methods to retrieve their information. In other words, variables
that are used by smart contracts are accessible only by the smart contract itself,
unless methods to make their contents available are explicitly deﬁned in the
smart contracts design. As a consequence, before putting in place a blockchain-
based monitoring platform, care should be taken deﬁning which information can
be retrieved from the smart contract. For example, suppose that, to monitor the
process in Fig.1, a smart contract is implemented that has an internal represen-
tation of the process and of the status of each activity. That smart contract may

--- PAGE 66 ---
Business Process Monitoring on Blockchains: Potentials and Challenges 47
expose a function to check whether the process conforms to the model or not,
without providing information on the activities. As a consequence, although the
smart contract internally knows that, e.g., Ship container is running and Attach
container to truck is complete, it would lack a way to communicate this infor-
mation to other smart contracts or other participants, which cannot rely on it
to determine the status of the process and its activities.
To mitigate this issue, one could “debug” a smart contract by tracing the exe-
cution of each transaction since when the deployment took place, thus identifying
the variables and how they change over time, similarly to the approach of Duch-
mann and Koschmider [5]. However, if the discovered information is required
by another smart contract, this information should be provided oﬀ-chain even
though it originated on-chain, with consequent trust issues and the need, once
again, to rely on an oracle.
Lack of Reactivity. A smart contract lacks the capability of independently making
calls or invocations to endpoints outside the blockchain upon the veriﬁcation
of certain conditions. This is a limitation for business process monitoring, as
in case of deviations, the process owner or the parties involved in the process
wish they were informed in order to properly react. For example, if the smart
contract monitoring the process in Fig.1 detects that activity Inspect container
was performed while the container was being shipped, it cannot autonomously
contact S oﬀ-chain to request a justiﬁcation for that action.
To solve this issue, a smart contract has to be designed so as to either expose
public methods that can be periodically called by the interested parties to check
if some deviations occurred, or emit events and require parties to constantly
monitor the blockchain in order to catch them as soon as they ﬁre. In both
cases, e.g., it is S’s duty to constantly check for events notifying an anomaly in
its own process and promptly react to them.
4.2 Challenges About Oracles
Time Management. Among the several aspects that are interesting to monitor
about a business process, one of the most pivotal is checking if an activity, or a
group of them, is performed on time. Nevertheless, implementing a smart con-
tract able to verify this condition could be cumbersome as a blockchain lacks
a notion of time aside from the coarse-grained block time [14]. More in detail,
although a blockchain sorts the transactions, it cannot deal with timers. This
is due to the fact that the expiration of a timer, or more simply a clock-ticking
event, would be an action that originates from the smart contract itself. How-
ever, as a smart contract can only perform actions that are externally invoked,
such actions cannot be performed without the help of an external entity. For
example, suppose that a smart contract is adopted to check whether activity
Ship container is executed on time. That smart contract cannot determine that
activity Ship container took longer than 24h until it receives a notiﬁcation that
the activity was completed, unless it is actively polled by an external entity.

--- PAGE 67 ---
48 C. Di Ciccio et al.
For this reason, time must be managed externally to the blockchain by means
of speciﬁc oracles which must be conﬁgured by the smart contract to send a
trigger whenever a timeout expires. It is also important to consider that those
oracles are external to the blockchain by deﬁnition, hence outside the chain of
trust managed by the blockchain. For this reason, when designing a time oracle,
the situation in which the oracle experiences a failure or produces fake data
(e.g., it goes out of sync) must be taken into consideration. To mitigate this
issue, oracles may integrate time synchronization protocols.
Reliability. The goal of an oracle is to allow the smart contracts to acquire
information from the real world. Thus, oracles must guarantee the correctness
of the data they emit. However, this may not occur for two reasons. Firstly, the
oracle may deliver data that are intentionally wrong or – because of a man-in-the-
middle attack – data are forged before being sent to the smart contract. Secondly,
the oracle may not be reliable and the data produced could be accidentally
wrong. For example, if the truck’s GPS receiver is breached, the related oracle
could send incorrect information on its location.
Both circumstances hamper the trust in the gathered data. The solution is to
rely not on a single oracle to obtain information about a phenomenon occurring
in the real world, but to have a set of oracles, possibly managed by diﬀerent
actors. With such a design, the eﬀort to cheat on the smart contract becomes
signiﬁcant as it requires to forge several oracles. Moreover, the smart contract
can query several oracles and – assuming that problems may occur only on a
minority of them – compare the data being sent to determine which ones cannot
be trusted. For instance, the smart contract may rely on information coming
from the truck’s GPS receiver, the truck driver’s smartphone, and the highway
tollbooths, to know the location of a truck. Although this approach could solve
the problem, having a set of oracles for the same phenomena is not always feasible
or aﬀordable, especially when monitoring human-based activities.
A possible solution to the problem of trust is to certify the oracles. In this
sense, approaches similar to the Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) can be adopted
to introduce authentication and authorization mechanisms.
Flexibility. Adopting oracles to allow smart contracts to check the behaviour
of a process implies that all the phenomena relevant for the monitoring should
be exposed through oracles. Since the smart contract should know in advance
which are the oracles providing the needed data, this could result in a lack of
ﬂexibility. In fact, adding new oracles after the monitoring has been designed
could be useless, as there is no possibility to inform the smart contract about
their existence. For example, suppose that the monitoring platform relied ini-
tially on manual notiﬁcations to determine when the container was ﬁlled in, and
references to that oracle were hardcoded in the platform’s smart contracts. If
later on containers are equipped with scales to automatically infer if they are full
or empty, it is not possible for the platform to rely on that information, unless
smart contracts are redesigned and deployed anew.

--- PAGE 68 ---
Business Process Monitoring on Blockchains: Potentials and Challenges 49
Mechanisms for enabling late binding of oracles to smart contracts are thus
desirable for a proper design. Notice that late binding would also tackle prob-
lems of reliability. Without that mechanism in place, an oracle that is no longer
available cannot be replaced.
4.3 Challenges About Monitoring Data Management
Data Quality. In addition to the problems discussed in the previous section
related to the possibility that the oracles are not able to provide reliable data,
there is also the possibility that the data provider used by the oracle itself is not
trustworthy. For instance, in the case of a manual activity, it might happen that
the oracle is not connected to any sensor, as it is not possible to automatically get
the information, but the change in the status of the activity is personally done by
the operator. Consequently, the operator could cheat the system declaring, for
instance, that an activity is concluded even though it is not the case. Although
this is a well-known problem in business process monitoring, we are conﬁdent
that also the adoption of blockchains may not be beneﬁcial to solve it.
Furthermore, if erroneous data are stored in the blockchain, they can be
amended only by appending the correct information, as the blockchain does not
allow for the alteration of data in a mined block. Therefore, eﬀective mechanisms
to assess the quality of monitoring data during the consensus phase are key [3].
Data Size. In a blockchain, the larger the amount of stored data is, the more
expensive the transaction gets. This simple rule has a signiﬁcant impact on
monitoring costs. Indeed, in the initial approaches [8,14], all the data that could
be useful for monitoring were supposed to be stored on-chain. Nevertheless, to
reduce these costs, care should be taken in the design of the smart contract to
minimize the amount of on-chain information to the sole data that are required
to perform monitoring [8]. To this aim, distributed ﬁle systems such as IPFS2
can be adopted to store the entire monitoring data set. Then, the transaction
only includes a link to externally stored data, and a hash value computed to
guarantee immutability. However, as smart contracts cannot natively retrieve
and process oﬀ-chain data, this could imply that oracle-mediated operations are
required again.
Side Eﬀects. Most blockchains are prone to soft forks, i.e., branches in the chain
of blocks caused by two or more blocks pointing to the same predecessor. To solve
ambiguities, blockchain clients consider as valid the longest chain, that is, the
one having the highest number of subsequent blocks originating from the point of
forking. From a monitoring standpoint, this lack of information consistency is an
issue, since valid monitoring data may not be considered as the block containing
them happen to lie on a discarded post-fork branch.
Aside from soft forks, public blockchains such as Ethereum are also prone
to so-called hard forks. In case a change in the consensus protocol is made
2
Interplanetary File System (IPFS), https://ipfs.io.

--- PAGE 69 ---
50 C. Di Ciccio et al.
– for either technical or political reasons – some participants may not accept
it. Unlike soft forks, hard forks cause a split in the blockchain network, which
hampers interoperability. From the monitoring standpoint, hard forks may break
the platform if some participants decide not to migrate to the new protocol.
5 Conclusion
Throughout this paper, we have discussed the advantages and challenges that
come along the interplay between blockchain data and process analysis for mon-
itoring. Despite the growing interest in the adoption of blockchain technologies
for process execution environments, research in that direction is still at its early
stages. Considering a reference architecture for the realisation of blockchain-
based process monitoring, we have focused on the role that smart contracts,
oracles and data management strategies play, in pursuit of a fruitful discussion
in the community that drives the adoption of blockchain in process monitoring.
Acknowledgements. The work of Claudio Di Ciccio was partly supported by the
MIUR under grant “Dipartimenti di eccellenza 2018–2022” of the Department of Com-
puter Science at Sapienza University of Rome.
References
1. van der Aalst, W.M.P.: Business process management: a comprehensive survey.
ISRN Softw. Eng. 2013(507984), 37 (2013)
2. Beyer, J., Kuhn, P., Hewelt, M., Mandal, S., Weske, M.: Unicorn meets Chimera:
integrating external events into case management. In: Proceedings of the BPM
Demo Track, pp. 67–72 (2016)
3. Cappiello, C., Comuzzi, M., Daniel, F., Meroni, G.: Data quality control in
blockchain applications. In: BPM (Blockchain and CEE Forum), pp. 166–181
(2019)
4. Di Ciccio, C., et al.: Blockchain support for collaborative business processes. Infor-
matik Spektrum 42, 182–190 (2019)
5. Duchmann, F., Koschmider, A.: Validation of smart contracts using process mining.
In: ZEUS, pp. 13–16 (2019)
6. Filtz, E., Polleres, A., Karl, R., Haslhofer, B.: Evolution of the bitcoin address
graph. In: Haber, P., Lampoltshammer, T., Mayr, M. (eds.) Data Science - Ana-
lytics and Applications, pp. 77–82. Springer, Wiesbaden (2017). https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-658-19287-7 11
7. Haslhofer, B., Karl, R., Filtz, E.: O bitcoin where art thou? Insight into large-scale
transaction graphs. In: SEMANTiCS (Posters, Demos) (2016)
8. Klinkmüller, C., Ponomarev, A., Tran, A.B., Weber, I., van der Aalst, W.: Mining
blockchain processes: extracting process mining data from blockchain applications.
In: BPM (Blockchain and CEE Forum), pp. 71–86 (2019)
9. López-Pintado, O., Garcı́a-Bañuelos, L., Dumas, M., Weber, I., Ponomarev, A.:
Caterpillar: a business process execution engine on the Ethereum blockchain. Sofw.
Pract. Exp. 49(7), 1162–1193 (2019)

--- PAGE 70 ---
Business Process Monitoring on Blockchains: Potentials and Challenges 51
10. Ly, L.T., Maggi, F.M., Montali, M., Rinderle-Ma, S., van der Aalst, W.M.P.:
Compliance monitoring in business processes: functionalities, application, and tool-
support. Inf. Syst. 54, 209–234 (2015)
11. Madsen, M.F., Gaub, M., Høgnason, T., Kirkbro, M.E., Slaats, T., Debois, S.:
Collaboration among adversaries: distributed workﬂow execution on a blockchain.
In: FAB, pp. 8–15 (2018)
12. Mendling, J., et al.: Blockchains for business process management - challenges and
opportunities. ACM Trans. Manag. Inf. Syst. 9(1), 4:1–4:16 (2018)
13. Meroni, G., Baresi, L., Montali, M., Plebani, P.: Multi-party business process com-
pliance monitoring through IoT-enabled artifacts. Inf. Syst. 73, 61–78 (2018)
14. Mühlberger, R., Bachhofner, S., Di Ciccio, C., Garcı́a-Bañuelos, L., López-Pintado,
O.: Extracting event logs for process mining from data stored on the blockchain.
In: Di Francescomarino, C., Dijkman, R., Zdun, U. (eds.) BPM 2019. LNBIP,
vol. 362, pp. 690–703. Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
37453-2 55
15. Nakamoto, S.: Bitcoin: a peer-to-peer electronic cash system (2008). https://
bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf
16. Prybila, C., Schulte, S., Hochreiner, C., Weber, I.: Runtime veriﬁcation for business
processes utilizing the bitcoin blockchain. In: FGCS (2017)
17. Reichert, M., Weber, B.: Enabling Flexibility in Process-Aware Information Sys-
tems - Challenges, Methods, Technologies. Springer, Heidelberg (2012). https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-30409-5
18. Szabo, N.: Formalizing and securing relationships on public networks. First Monday
2(9) (1997). https://ﬁrstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/548
19. Tran, A.B., Lu, Q., Weber, I.: Lorikeet: a model-driven engineering tool for
blockchain-based business process execution and asset management. In: BPM
Demos, pp. 56–60 (2018)
20. Weber, I., Xu, X., Riveret, R., Governatori, G., Ponomarev, A., Mendling, J.:
Untrusted business process monitoring and execution using blockchain. In: La
Rosa, M., Loos, P., Pastor, O. (eds.) BPM 2016. LNCS, vol. 9850, pp. 329–347.
Springer, Cham (2016). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-45348-4 19
21. Wood, G.: Ethereum: a secure decentralised generalised transaction ledger (2018).
https://ethereum.github.io/yellowpaper/paper.pdf
22. Xu, X., Weber, I., Staples, M.: Architecture for Blockchain Applications. Springer,
Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-03035-3

--- PAGE 71 ---
BPM Applications in Industry and
Practice (BPMDS 2020)

--- PAGE 72 ---
Factors Impacting Successful BPMS Adoption
and Use: A South African Financial Services
Case Study
Ashley Koopman and Lisa F. Seymour(B)
University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa
lisa.seymour@uct.ac.za
Abstract. Business Process Management Suites (BPMS) are being adopted in
organisations to increase business process agility across a diverse application
landscape. Yet many organisations struggle to achieve agile business processes
when using a BPMS. This South African financial services case study explains
factors found to negatively impact successful BPMS adoption and use. The Alter
worksystem’sframeworkandtheRosemannandvomBrockecoreBPMelements
were used as theoretical lenses to understand the case. The paper describes frus-
trations of an IT team trying to increase process agility with a BPMS in a large
legacy application landscape. The main factors driving this frustration were the
difficulty of integrating with other applications and staff bypassing design and
code approval procedures. The impact of BPM strategy, culture and governance
on BPM methods, resourcing and technology is explained. The paper presents
an explanatory model which should be useful for practitioners wanting to adopt a
BPMS.TheBPMliteraturelacksempiricalqualitativecasestudiesandtheoretical
models and this paper aimed to contribute to both.
Keywords: Business Process Management · Business Process Management
Suites · BPM adoption
1 Introduction
Business process (BP) agility is defined as the organisation’s ability to swiftly alter their
BPs in response to changes in the market [1], and is important for competitiveness. Yet,
BP agility is challenged by rapidly evolving technologies and business environments [2,
3]. To achieve BP agility, BP management software, also referred to as BP Management
Suites(BPMS)isoftencombinedwithvariousinformationtechnology(IT)architectures,
such as service oriented architecture (SOA) [4, 5].
BPMS solutions, packaged as a single solution, are collections of software such as
graphical modelling tools, process analysis tools, orchestration engines and integration
platforms [6]. Software tools earlier described as workflow, business intelligence, rules
engines, or enterprise application integration tools are now integrated into BPMS prod-
ucts.BPMSandSOAareseenastwosidesofthesamecoin[7].In2012,Gartnerdefined
the BPMS market as one of the most rapid growing markets within the IT industry [8].
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. Nurcan et al. (Eds.): BPMDS 2020/EMMSAD 2020, LNBIP 387, pp. 55–69, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49418-6_4

--- PAGE 73 ---
56 A. Koopman and L. F. Seymour
BPMS growth accelerated in 2018, attributed to cloud-native capabilities and robotic
process automation [9].
Agile BPs have become important in financial services due to regulations relating to
financial institutionsbeing extremely dynamic [10], and lessons from the financial crisis
of 2008. In this crisis many financial service organisations were unable to react swiftly
[11]. Banks changed quickly from having sufficient cash reserves to being desperately
in need of financial support from their governments [11].
While achieving BP agility is the primary goal of implementing and using a BPMS,
achieving agile BPs is not guaranteed. In certain instances, organisations struggle to
attain the level of agility they set out to achieve. It is for this reason that the adoption
and use of BPMS needs to be better understood. Recker and Reijers at the BPM 2019
conference noted that there is a lack of empirical qualitative BP case studies and they
statedthat“weneedtoidentifyissuesorganizationsarefacing”[12].TheBPMliterature
has also been labelled as theoretically weak [13]. This study hoped to address these
concerns and set out to answer the research question “How do organisational factors
affect successful adoption and usage of a BPMS in a South African financial service
organisation?” To answer the question, this paper first reviews the relevant literature on
BPMSadoptionanduse.Thecasestudyresearchapproachisdescribedandthefinancial
services organization and its BPMS project is then described. The factors which were
foundtoaffectsuccessfulBPMSadoptionanduseinthecasearedescribedanddiscussed,
and an explanatory model is presented before the paper concludes.
2 Literature Review
Innovation adoption is defined as the decision of an individual or organization to use
an innovation. Hence, organisational adoption of a technology, includes but is much
broader than individual technology adoption [14]. Usage of the technology follows the
adoptiondecision.Therehasbeenacallfromresearchersforamoreholisticapproachto
studying adoption which is shown in the call for papers of the ECIS 2019 IS innovation
and adoption track [15]. The predominant research approach focuses on variables that
contribute to individual adoption and is said to distance researchers from practitioners
[15]. A more holistic approach is the Alter systems theory of IT innovation, adoption
and adaption [16], referred to as the work system approach.
A work system is seen as a natural unit of analyzing the adoption of socio-technical
systems in organisations [15] and comprises four elements: processes and activities;
participants; information; and technology. Furthermore, the work system needs to be
considered in terms of the products and services it produces; the customers it serves; the
organizational environment, strategies and infrastructure. Alter notes that often orga-
nizational IT is mandated, but there are post-adoption environments where employees
might not comply with prescribed business processes and/or IT usage patterns. It is also
noted that this area of research although highly relevant is under-researched. A systems
approach sees the entity being adopted as not the technology but the information system
or work system which comprises the people, processes and information, in addition to
the technology [15, 16]. Hence when looking at successful BPMS adoption and use, one
needstolookmorebroader,intermsofadoptionanduseoftherelevantBPmanagement
(BPM) practices and processes that support adoption and use of the BPMS technology.

--- PAGE 74 ---
Factors Impacting Successful BPMS Adoption and Use 57
BPM is defined as management practice integrating technology and BP knowledge
and harnessing BPs as exploitable assets [17]. BPM practice incorporates many prior
approaches to BP change [7]. Earlier BPM research in South African financial services
categorised the enablers of BPM as strategic, cultural, people, IT and methodological
[18]. More recently, the six core elements of BPM have been identified as strategic
alignment, governance, methods, IT, people, and culture [19].
Another relevant model in this context is the Lyytinen and Newman, socio-technical
change model which is used to describe when a new technical system is designed,
adopted and modified. The socio-technical model has four components: technology,
which includes development tools and the technical platform; structure, which includes
theprojectorganizationandinstitutionalarrangements;actors,includingusers,managers
and designers; and tasks [20]. The alignment of the elements from these three models is
shown in Table 1. We chose the Core BPM element model as a classification framework
for this study’s findings. Firstly, as it is more comprehensive than the socio-technical
change model, secondly, because we didn’t believe information, products and services
will dominate in BPMS adoption, and finally because it is specialized for the BPM
context. Hence, we argue that the core BPM elements are important not only for BPM
but also for BPMS adoption and use.
Table 1. Mapping Core BPM, work system framework and socio-technical change elements.
Core BPM elements Socio-technical change elements Work system framework elements
Strategic alignment Strategies
Methods Task Processes and activities
Information, products and
services
IT Technology Technologies and infrastructure
People Actors Participants and customers
Governance and culture Structure Environment
ThecoreBPMelementshavebeenconfirmedinsomeempiricalstudies.Forexample,
one study noted that to achieve effective BPM solution implementation, the following
needs to be achieved: the organisation should have adequate IT infrastructure to sup-
port a process orientated architecture; individuals within the organisation should have
a comprehensive understanding of process orientated frameworks; and the organisation
should have an effective change management process regarding software changes [21].
Successful BPM has been found to depend on employees’ attitudes towards embracing
BPchange[22],peoplechangemanagementcanbeextremelychallenging[23]andBPM
projectsfrequentlyfailduetoculturalissues[24].ItisalsosuggestedthatITcapabilities
need to ensure BP efficiency as opposed to rudimentary BP automation [25]. Ensuring
that the appropriate tools and IT infrastructure is in place for BPM has also been seen to
be critical [17, 26]. While adopting a BPMS is intended to produce agile BPs, it needs to
be acknowledged that IT can be both an enabler and a disabler for business agility [3].

--- PAGE 75 ---
58 A. Koopman and L. F. Seymour
FactorsthatcontributetoinflexibleITsolutionsinclude:insufficientcapacityandproject
priorities of IT staff members, traditional architectures and the complexity of integrat-
ing with legacy applications within the organization, and poor interfacing capabilities
of legacy applications [3].
3 Research Method and Case Description
This study presents an interpretive descriptive case study. The unit of analysis was the
adoption and usage of a BPMS by a BPM team within the IT cluster of a financial
institution, which we will refer to as BigFin. The team is responsible for providing
support for the BPMS and engaging in IT projects that involve enhancements to the
tool. Prior to collecting data, organizational permission was secured as well as ethics
approval from the University’s ethics committee. One of the researchers was working
for the BigFin IT cluster at the time of the study but not in the BPM team. The interview
protocol developed asked open ended questions loosely based on the different elements
of a work system, namely strategy, infrastructure, environment, processes, participants,
information and technology.
Eight semi structured interviews, each approximately forty-five minutes long, were
conducted, and three BigFin documents (D1–D3) were secured. A judgement sample
strategy, where the most knowledgeable individuals that can add the most value are cho-
sentobeinterviewed[27],wasemployed.TheintervieweeswerefromtheBPMITteam
(codedasI1–I4)aswellasITarchitectureteams(codedasA1–A4).Theinterviewswere
transcribed, and then thematic analysis was performed on the documents and interview
data using NVivo. Table 2 lists all 11 data sources. To ensure anonymity of BigFin and
interviewees, the relevant codes are not listed in the table and the BPMS software is
simply referred to as the BPMS.
Table 2. List of interviews and documents analysed.
Data sources analysed
Meeting Minutes – Design and Governance Walkthrough Session
Project Retrospection Report – BPM Workflow Migration Project
BPMS Positioning Document – IT Architecture
Project Manager Interview Business Architect Interview
Senior Business Analyst Interview Solution Architect Interview
Solution Designer Interview Enterprise IT Architect Interview
Development Manager Interview Senior IT Architect Interview
Data was analysed using as soon as collected and prior to conducting further inter-
views. This allowed questions to be amended based on the themes that emerged. As data
was iteratively analysed, new themes emerged. The Attride-Stirling [28] six step induc-
tivemethodofthematicanalysiswasfollowed:1)Codingthetext;2)Identifyingthemes;

--- PAGE 76 ---
Factors Impacting Successful BPMS Adoption and Use 59
3) Developing the thematic network; 4) Describing and exploring the network; 5) Sum-
marising the network; 6) Interpreting patterns emerging from the data. The core BPM
element framework was used during thematic analysis as a lens to classify the themes
that emerged from the case study. The thematic network and themes are presented in the
findings section.
BigFin is a well-established organisation operating in the investment and insurance
industry, listed on various stock exchanges and a constituent of the Financial Times
Stock Exchange (FTSE) 100 index. BigFin was selected as it has an established BPM
IT team supporting a BPMS. As BigFin was established many decades ago it has a very
largelegacyITestate.BigFinconsistsofvariousbusinessunitswiththeirownstrategies,
budgets and visions and has multiple projects that run concurrently. The BPMS was first
implemented during 2014 with the assistance of the vendor, and was implemented on
Microsoft .NET and Microsoft SQL platforms using the native interfaces of the BPMS
tool. This allows multiple integration points to other applications within BigFin via the
SOA layer. An architectural review noted that the BPMS has the capabilities to be used
as a strategic solution within BigFin to improve BP agility, scale their infrastructure
and accommodate high user concurrency (D3). Management believed that the BPMS
is a vital enabler for attaining a more client centric and process-oriented approach to
business (D2). Improved reporting, segregation of duties and a clear audit trail were also
cited benefits (D2). The main purpose of the BPMS was to model business processes,
automate process steps, integrate with applications and manage workflow, mainly for
enterprisewideprocesses(D3).TheBPMSwasalsoexpectedtoimproveBigFin’sBPM
maturity.
4 Findings and Discussion
The main aim of this research is to explain factors that affect the successful adoption
and use of the BPMS by the IT team. As the intent of the BPMS implementation was
to improve BP agility, we defined successful adoption and use as achieving BP agility.
However, it became apparent that agile BPs were not achieved at BigFin. The relevant
themes will now be discussed and this will be followed by the thematic network and
explanatory model.
4.1 Strategic Alignment
Strategy can apply to the organisation, the department and the work system itself. The
work system framework stresses the importance of these being aligned [29]. The work
system strategies should support departmental strategies and ultimately organisational
strategies. Three strategic alignment themes emerged.
BPM and Business as Usual are not Strategic Priorities. Strategic priorities of
BigFin were impacting budget allocation. I1 highlighted that legislative requirements
in BigFin take the highest priority, followed by strategic projects and then business as
usual and other BPM IT projects. D1 and D2 noted that key resources are utilised by
strategic projects, leaving few resources available for BPM migration projects. I4 noted

--- PAGE 77 ---
60 A. Koopman and L. F. Seymour
that the current strategic priority is delivering a new product into the market which is
at the expense of setting up a BPM centre of excellence that would govern processes
implemented on the BPMS. I2 reiterated this as he stated, “One of the challenges is
when we have these strategic initiatives the business as usual improvements and agility
fall by the wayside.”
Legacy System Strategy Misaligned with BPM Strategy. It was noted that the strat-
egyforlegacysystemswasmisalignedwiththeBPMstrategy.A2notedthatthestrategy
clearly defines the core IT architectures that BigFin requires to become an agile enter-
prise. This entails defining where the enterprise is now, what the roadmap is to their
desired strategy outcome and what the potential hurdles are from achieving the desired
outcome. These hurdles come in the form of licences for software products the BPMS
integrates with which have been bought for a defined period. As a result, decisions have
been made by senior management to utilize these software products until the licences
expire as they have already been paid for. This creates obstacles to achieving agility
within business processes as alternative solutions cannot be implemented until software
licences have expired.
Lack of BPM Strategic Vision. Lack of BPM strategic vision was identified by three
oftheintervieweesasafactorcontributingtothelackofBPagility.I3notedthattherewas
nocentraldirectivewithinBigFinregarding theBPMstrategyalthoughaBPMcentreof
excellencewouldassistinformalisingtheBPMvisionwithinBigFintoprovideefficient
andeffectiveBPMwhichwouldsupportBPagility.OrganisationsthatimplementaBPM
centre of excellence offer consistent and cost-effective BPM services and can adopt a
project portfolio management approach to BPM enabling IT teams to implement agile
BPs [30].
4.2 Governance and Culture
Governance and Culture concerns impacting BPM include support obtained from top
management, the culture that exists within the organisation and various complexities at
different levels of management [31]. BPM Governance elements include BP standards,
BProlesandresponsibility,BPobjectives,controlmethods,assessmentmethods,gover-
nance structures, architecture, and infrastructure [32] and BPM culture has been defined
as collective values and beliefs that shape BP attitudes and behaviour to improve BPs
[19]. Four governance and culture themes emerged.
Legacy and Standardization Decisions Made by Management. These decisions
refer to organisational decisions made by top management regarding the BPMS, two
types of decisions were hampering the use of the BPMS; firstly, choosing to retain
legacy applications, and secondly, choosing niche processes. Decisions regarding the
decommissioning of legacy workflow applications by BigFin was found to impact the
rate of change of BPM solutions as they had too many applications. I1 stated “This is
theproblemwiththisorganisation,wedon’tdecommissionoldlegacy stuffandwekeep
incurring the respective costs.” Literature notes that organisations are unclear regarding
the correct time to implement a solution, modify it or stop using it altogether [33]. With

--- PAGE 78 ---
Factors Impacting Successful BPMS Adoption and Use 61
respect to niche processes, A4 explained that one business unit had five different prod-
uct lines but seventy-eight different implementations on the BPMS because every time
a new line of business or a new type of customer came on board, they developed niche
for that scenario. These decisions were seen to be driven by a lack of alignment between
the BPM and legacy system strategies.
Misalignment Between Business and BPM IT Teams. The participants of the inter-
view process addressed issues such as overdesign of solutions, silos within BigFin that
operate in isolation and business units not willing to change the way they conduct their
business processes. Alter highlights that all components within a work system should
be aligned [29]. A1 noted that there was misalignment between the different develop-
ment teams and business in terms of what they were expected to deliver. Change on the
business unit side of the process resulted in IT staff having to work differently and think
differently and, in this case, there was a lack of process thinking in the IT teams. I2 reit-
eratedthisbystating,“Arguablythebiggestchallengeisthebusinesschangeinthinking.
Don’t just own your users’ tasks, own a process end to end.” Not having a BPM centre
of excellence or process architects that govern process design and implementation was
another factor that contributed to the misalignment between business teams and BPM
IT teams. It seemed that this lack of alignment was being driven by the lack of a central
BPM strategy and BPM not being a strategic priority.
Budget Allocation for BPM Business As Usual Initiatives. While BigFin appeared
to support strategic projects well, it was noted that as soon as a project shifts from
the build phase into the support or business as usual phase after implementation, the
funding for that solution is no longer available. A2 note that, “The problem within
BigFin is when a project is in a project phase there is money available but as soon as it
flipsovertotheBAUphasethere’snomoney.Whatthatmeansisthatjustenoughmoney
is supplied to the project to keep it running. There is no additional funding supplied to
grow it. So that is probably the single biggest challenge that we have.” As no addi-
tional funding is suppled for continuous process improvement, agility within business
processes are sacrificed. Hence while the BPM IT team sees the potential benefits that
solution changes will provide, they cannot implement them as no funds are available.
The budget allocation was clearly being impacted by the lack of a central BPM strategy
and BPM not being a strategic priority.
Business is Resistant to Change. A4 noted that a core impediment to BP agility is
individuals’ attitudes towards change. This can be summarised by the culture that exists
within BigFin. D2 validated this by reporting that the lack of a change mind-set in
business units is an inhibiting factor for process change. A4 further highlighted that as
individuals become familiar with BPs, they become resistant to change within those
processes. Resistance to change can be overcome strategically and an organisational
culturecanbedevelopedtobesupportiveofBPM[34].IntheabsenceofaBPMstrategic
vision this culture of change resistance persisted.

--- PAGE 79 ---
62 A. Koopman and L. F. Seymour
4.3 Information Technology
Under IT impacts one dominant theme emerged and that was the lack of agility due to
integratingwithlegacyandexternalsoftwareapplications.Integrationisthepredominant
theme that emerged as it was addressed by seven of the eight interviewees. Integration
complexitiesrangefrominteractionswithlegacyapplicationswhichcan’tbechangedor
haveincompletedata,thetightlycouplednatureofthelegacyapplicationintegrationand
complexities regarding integration outside BigFin’s secure network. Changes to appli-
cations or web services that are consumed by the BPMS impact the time to deliver a
process implemented on the BPMS. D3 confirmed that the BPMS solution has multiple
integration points via BigFin’s web service integration layer. If a change is required for
a web service that is consumed by several other applications, extensive impact analysis
needs to be performed in order to determine if the required change for the BPM project
poses a risk to the other applications. I4 referred to the increase in required analysis,
design, governance and testing when altering processes integrated with other applica-
tions. A3 stated that a problem with integrating with legacy applications is that some of
them do not have REST and SOAP capabilities. They only offer point to point tight inte-
gration which creates tightly coupled solutions. The literature confirms that with tightly
coupled IT solutions that integrate business processes across various disparate software
applications even the smallest of changes become time consuming with a degree of risk
[35]. “Being so highly integrated sometimes I worry it is not necessarily enabling us to
change quickly” (I4).
Integrationisalsoimpactedbydataincompletenessandaninabilitytochangelegacy
applications and security concerns with external applications. A1 highlighted that data
governance was limited when many legacy applications were developed which impacts
the accuracy and completeness of the data. This has agility implications if certain data
validations need to be introduced within a process. I2 noted BigFin’s resistance to invest
funds in aging legacy applications which the BPMS integrated with impacted use of
the BPMS and diminished process agility as legacy solutions will not be changed. A3
notedthatwhenintegratingwithapplicationsoutsideofBigFin’ssecurenetwork,various
considerations need to be made in terms of establishing secure communication channels
and if an external party changes the application, the process of implementing secure
integration channels needs to be repeated.
4.4 People
The BP people category refers to the individuals and groups that improve BPs [19]. The
dominant theme was found to be resourcing constraints for BPM initiatives. Resourcing
constraints in this study refers to the limited time that IT staff from application teams,
theBPMITteamandarchitectureteamscanspendontheBPMprojectsandtheinability
to staff the BPM IT team. This is an area of concern within BigFin as five out of the
eight interviewees raised staff resourcing as a challenge for the BPM IT team.
The BigFin BPM IT team appeared to be constantly understaffed. I2 confirmed that
finding high calibre resources that are technically capable and who possess the business
understanding proved to be a challenge for the BPM IT team. A2 noted that developers
donotfindBPMdevelopmentappealingastheskillisperceivedtobeanichetechnology

--- PAGE 80 ---
Factors Impacting Successful BPMS Adoption and Use 63
skill not broadly utilized. These developers would rather work on pure object orientated
languages like java or C#.
Key resources within the BPM IT team face similar situations in terms of resource
constraints. Training and on-boarding of new staff is fundamental to ensure knowledge
sharing and continuity when key resources leave. I4 stated that senior staff members
are responsible for all new staff on-boarding within the BPM IT team and are also
responsible for all BPMS design documentation and their review. because of high staff
turnover, they have very little time to maintain existing processes to ensure agility is
retained.
A3 also indicated that it is extremely difficult to deliver BPM processes in an inte-
grated environment without constant interaction with the various application teams.
These interactions involve consulting with the various teams to ensure they are aware
of how to integrate with the BPMS. These consultations are not just from a techni-
cal perspective but also relate to standards and governance. This is a further resource
drain on the IT resources within the BPM IT team. The resource constraints of other
teams ultimately affect delivery for the BPM IT team. I4 highlighted that project and
hence resourcing priorities of the IT teams that support applications that integrate with
the BPMS may not be aligned and therefore BP change cannot be implemented until
resources are allocated.
People are known to be assigned to roles and project teams based on manager’s
experience of people, their availability and the required skills [36]. Often projects tend
to draw on a common resource pool within the organisation [37]. As large organisations
run multiple projects concurrently, obtaining time from the most valuable resources is
challenging. A2 noted that he is often one of the resources whose time is debated over.
He is allocated to BigFin’s number one strategic project where he needs to provide input
in terms of the overall program architecture. However, there are also other strategic
projects that require his attention. As a result, he does not have much time to spend with
the BPM IT team or on continuous process improvement hence BPMS usage suffers.
4.5 Methods
The BPM method category refers to methods specific to the BP lifecycle [19]. Two
themes emerged under the method category.
Lengthy Project Initiation Processes. Five of the eight interviewees referred to
lengthy project initiation procedures for BPM projects. A2 referred to business archi-
tecture and enterprise architecture documentation required prior to project sign-off and
the involvement of business analysts and solution architects for requirements gather-
ing and solution design. Project initiation documentation ensures that the BP change is
appropriately scoped and that resource availability is considered. Literature highlights
the importance of the project initiation phase to define the problem and opportunities
and reduce the risk of project failure and acknowledges that this can be lengthy [38].
Bypassing Design and Code Approval Procedures. Inadditiontothepre-projectini-
tiation processes, approval is needed for the artefacts that are produced. It appeared
that these approval procedures were being bypassed and this concern was referred to

--- PAGE 81 ---
64 A. Koopman and L. F. Seymour
the most by interviewees (14 mentions). I1 stated that problems arise when developers
or project managers try and rush projects into the production environments by trying
to bypass sign-off procedures resulting in inflexible and niche BPs. It seemed that the
desire for niche BPs in many cases was driven by the culture which was resistant to
change. Sign-off processes could also have been implemented more efficiently if proper
governance had been completed. Pre-production approval processes come in the form
of security sign-off and code review sign-off and ensure that final approval is obtained
from a design, technology, quality assurance, architecture, risk and security perspective.
Although these processes are necessary for implementing efficient and agile BPs in the
long term, the interviewees noted that these processes also hamper quick delivery of BP
changes in the short term.
4.6 Model of Factors Impacting Successful BPMS Adoption and Use
This research aimed to identify factors that affect the successful adoption and use of the
BPMS by the IT team and success was defined as achieving BP agility. While the BPMS
was adopted and in use, agile BPs were not achieved at BigFin. Hence as the interviews
progressed, it was noted that the major factors identified were all negatively impacting
success. The eleven dominant factors are presented in Table 3 and the interlinked factors
are shown in Fig. 1.
Table 3. BPM themes with Sources (S) and References (R).
Core BPM elements Themes S R
Strategic alignment BPM and business as usual are not strategic priorities 3 3
Legacy system strategy misaligned with BPM strategy 2 2
Lack of BPM strategic vision 5 10
Governance and culture Business is resistant to change 2 2
Legacy and standardization decisions made by management 5 11
Misalignment between business and BPM IT teams 4 7
Budget allocation for BPM business as usual initiatives 4 7
Methods Lengthy project initiation processes 5 7
Bypassing design and code approval procedures 7 14
IT BPMS and legacy system integration implications 7 14
People Resourcing constraints for BPM initiatives 7 12
The sources column represents the number of interviewees that made statements
related to each theme and the references column represents the numbers of statements
made by the interviewees. While the respondents referred to concerns with the BPMS
worksystemitself(itsmethods,technologyandparticipants),theseconcernswerebeing

--- PAGE 82 ---
Factors Impacting Successful BPMS Adoption and Use 65
Fig. 1. Explanatory model of factors negatively impacting successful BPMS adoption and use.
driven by governance and cultural concerns and these in turn were driven by strate-
gic alignment concerns. Together these factors negatively impacted successful BPMS
adoption and use and BP agility.
While the organisation wanted to improve their BPM maturity, they did not have
a BPM strategic vision and the “business as usual” nature of process improvement
and BPM were not seen as strategic priorities. This resulted in misalignment between
business and IT teams and insufficient budget allocation for BPM. Both factors drove
resourcing constraints for BPM initiatives.
The organisation had a large legacy estate and this impacted the lack of agility
becauseoftechnicalintegrationimplicationsandbecauseofgovernancedecisionsmade
regardingchanginglegacyapplications.Theseinturnweredrivenbytheirlegacysystem
strategy being misaligned with the BPM strategy for agility. Software development
methods had been put in place to ensure long term BP agility but these resulted in
slowing software development in the short term. This and the reluctance of business to
change and standardise resulted in bypassing some of these methods. Without a BPM
strategic vision, the culture of the organisation could not be changed.
Considering the factors negatively impacting BPMS adoption and use at BigFin
allowedustoproposeatentativeexplanatorymodelwhichtheorganisationcouldfollow
to improve BPMS adoption and use. This more generalisable model is presented as a
framework in Fig. 2. While the Rosemann and vom Brocke core BPM model lists the
components needed for BPM success this model provides an explanatory contribution

--- PAGE 83 ---
66 A. Koopman and L. F. Seymour
to understanding improved BPMS success. The model notes that a clear BPM vision is
neededanditneedstobealignedwiththeorganisation’slegacyapplicationstrategy.This
is needed to enable better budget and resource alignment for BPM; a BPM culture [19];
appropriate BPM governance structures and BPM aligned legacy and standardization
decisions. These four factors, in turn, will influence an improved BPMS work system.
Fig. 2. Framework for successful BPMS adoption and use.
5 Conclusion
While organisations adopt BPMS and SOA technology primarily to achieve BP agility,
in many cases this agility is not achieved. There has been a call by BP researchers for
studies highlighting issues organisations are facing. Hence this research took a systems
approach to looking at the adoption and use of a BPMS in a South African financial
services organisation that was struggling to achieve BP agility. The systems approach
to technology adoption sees technology adoption as a work system change. Hence a
BPMS is seen as merely a technology in the BPMS work system trying to achieve agile
business processes for the organisation’s customers. Researchers Rosemann and vom
Brocke have identified the six core elements of BPM and their framework was used as
a lens in classifying the factors found impacting successful BPMS adoption and use in
the organisation studied.
This case study described the frustrations the IT team was facing using the BPMS
solution. While standalone applications can be implemented quickly, as soon as integra-
tionwithotherapplicationsincreases,thelevelofagilitywithinthoseprocesswasfound
to decrease. The inherent integrative nature of the BPMS solution and rigid nature of

--- PAGE 84 ---
Factors Impacting Successful BPMS Adoption and Use 67
integration with legacy applications made changing applications very time consuming.
Having insufficient resources and a user base that did not want to standardise or change
processes increased their frustrations. A work system’s view of the factors impacting
this frustration is shown in Fig. 2 and these also pointed to a generic explanatory model.
Implementing a BPMS without considering the strategic priorities and alignment as
well as governance and culture will result in frustration and a lack of agility. Hence the
usefulness of this framework to practitioners considering implementing a BPMS.
While this framework offers an explanatory model of how some factors negatively
impact successful BPMS adoption and use, it does have limitations. Firstly, the model
is not complete, interviewees were working in the IT function and a richer picture
and more factors could have been obtained if employees from business functions were
interviewed. Secondly, the study was cross sectional and a longitudinal study looking
at the stages the organisation went through would be much richer. Thirdly, in terms of
context generalisation, the case organisation was in financial services and therefore was
riskaverseandhadalargelegacyestate.Hencetheframeworkhasafocusonconsidering
legacy applications and their strategy and a younger or more risk tolerant organisation
with more modern applications will experience less frustration and hence parts of the
model might not be relevant. Also, this model might not include factors important to an
organisation which has other complexities or contextual factors.
Therefore, we note that this model is incomplete and contextual and further studies,
particularly longitudinal studies, with other organisations and a broader user base will
be able to further refine it. The framework could also be tested quantitatively to confirm
the importance of the relevant factors.
References
1. Chen, Y., Wang, Y., Nevo, S., Jin, J.F., Wang, L.N., Chow, W.S.: IT capability and organi-
zational performance: the roles of business process agility and environmental factors. Eur. J.
Inf. Syst. 23, 326–342 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1057/ejis.2013.4
2. Kryvinska, N.: Building consistent formal specification for the service enterprise agility
foundation. J. Serv. Sci. Res. 4, 235–269 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1007/s12927-012-0010-5
3. van Oosterhout, M., Waarts, E., van Hillegersberg, J.: Change factors requiring agility and
implications for IT. Eur. J. Inf. Syst. 15, 132–145 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.
ejis.3000601
4. Abramowicz, W., Filipowska, A., Kaczmarek, M., Kaczmarek, T.: Semantically Enhanced
Business Process Modeling Notation: Semantic Technologies for Business and Information
Systems Engineering, pp. 259–275. IGI Global, Hershey (2012)
5. Tallon,P.P.:Insidetheadaptiveenterprise:aninformationtechnologycapabilitiesperspective
on business process agility. Inf. Technol. Manage. 9(1), 21–36 (2008)
6. Hill,J.B.,Cantara,M.,Kerremans,M.,Plummer,B.C.:MagicQuadrantforBusinessProcess
Management Suites. Gartner RAS Core Research Note G152906 (2007)
7. Harmon, P.: The scope and evolution of business process management. In: Brocke, J.,
Rosemann, M. (eds.) Handbook on Business Process Management 1, pp. 37–80. Springer,
Heidelberg (2015). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-00416-2_3
8. Heininger, R.: Requirements for business process management systems supporting business
process agility. In: Oppl, S., Fleischmann, A. (eds.) S-BPM ONE 2012. CCIS, vol. 284,
pp. 168–180. Springer, Heidelberg (2012). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-29294-1_12

--- PAGE 85 ---
68 A. Koopman and L. F. Seymour
9. Kerremans, M., Miers, D., Dunie, R., Wong, J., Iijima, K., Vincent, P.: Magic Quadrant for
Business Process Management Suites. Gartner G00345694 (2019)
10. Kidwell, D.S., Blackwell, D.W., Sias, R.W., Whidbee, D.A.: Financial Institutions, Markets,
and Money. Wiley, New Jersey (2016)
11. Nijssen, M., Paauwe, J.: HRM in turbulent times: how to achieve organizational agility? Int.
J. Hum. Resour. Manage. 23, 3315–3335 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1080/09585192.2012.
689160
12. Di Francescomarino, C., Dijkman, R., Zdun, U. (eds.): BPM 2019. LNBIP, vol. 362, pp.
VII–X. Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-37453-2
13. Trkman, P.: The critical success factors of business process management. Int. J. Inf. Manage.
30, 125–134 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2009.07.003
14. Frambach, R.T., Schillewaert, N.: Organizational innovation adoption: a multi-level frame-
work of determinants and opportunities for future research. J. Bus. Res. 55, 163–176 (2002).
https://doi.org/10.1016/s0148-2963(00)00152-1
15. Davison,R.M.W.,Louie,H.M.,Alter,S.,Ou,C.:Adoptedgloballybutunusablelocally:what
workarounds reveal about adoption, resistance, compliance and non-compliance. Presented
at the ECIS (2019). https://aisel.aisnet.org/ecis2019_rp/19/
16. Alter, S.: A systems theory of IT innovation, adoption, and adaptation. In: ECIS (2018).
https://aisel.aisnet.org/ecis2018_rp/26
17. Niehaves,B.,Poeppelbuss,J.,Plattfaut,R.,Becker,J.:BPMcapabilitydevelopment–amatter
of contingencies. Bus. Process Manag. J. 20, 90–106 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1108/bpmj-
07-2012-0068
18. Thompson,G.,Seymour,L.F.,O’Donovan, B.:Towards aBPMsuccessmodel:ananalysisin
SouthAfricanfinancialservicesorganisations.In:Halpin,T.,etal.(eds.)BPMDS/EMMSAD
2009. LNBIP, vol. 29, pp. 1–13. Springer, Heidelberg (2009). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
642-01862-6_1
19. Rosemann, M., vom Brocke, J.: The six core elements of business process management. In:
vom Brocke, J., Rosemann, M. (eds.) Handbook on Business Process Management 1. IHIS,
pp. 105–122. Springer, Heidelberg (2015). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-45100-3_5
20. Lyytinen, K., Newman, M.: Explaining information systems change: a punctuated socio-
technical change model. Eur. J. Inf. Syst. 17, 589–613 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1057/ejis.
2008.50
21. Imanipour, N., Talebi, K., Rezazadeh, S.: Obstacles in business process management (BPM)
implementation and adoption in SMEs. SSRN Electron. J. (2012). https://doi.org/10.2139/
ssrn.1990609
22. vom Brocke, J., Petry, M., Schmiedel, T., Sonnenberg, C.: How organizational culture facili-
tates a global BPM project: the case of Hilti. In: vom Brocke, J., Rosemann, M. (eds.) Hand-
book on Business Process Management. IHIS, pp. 693–713. Springer, Heidelberg (2015).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-45103-4_29
23. Kirchmer, M.: People enablement for process execution. In: High Performance Through
Business Process Management, pp. 67–80. Springer, Cham (2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-319-51259-4_4
24. Schmiedel, T., vom Brocke, J., Recker, J.: Culture in business process management: how
cultural values determine BPM success. In: vom Brocke, J., Rosemann, M. (eds.) Handbook
on Business Process Management 2. IHIS, pp. 649–663. Springer, Heidelberg (2015). https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-45103-4_27
25. Bandara, W., Alibabaei, A., Aghdasi, M.: Means of achieving business process management
successfactors.In:Proceedingsofthe4thMediterraneanConferenceonInformationSystems.
Athens University of Economics and Business, Athens (2009)
26. Von Rosing,M.,von Scheel, J.,Gill, A.Q.: Applying Agile Principles to BPM.The Complete
Business Process Handbook. Morgan Kaufmann, Waltham (2015)

--- PAGE 86 ---
Factors Impacting Successful BPMS Adoption and Use 69
27. Marshall, M.N.: Sampling for qualitative research. Fam. Pract. 13, 522–526 (1996). https://
doi.org/10.1093/fampra/13.6.522
28. Attride-Stirling, J.: Thematic networks: an analytic tool for qualitative research. Qual. Res.
1, 385–405 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1177/146879410100100307
29. Alter, S.: Work system theory: overview of core concepts, extensions, and challenges for the
future. J. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 14, 72–121 (2013). https://doi.org/10.17705/1jais.00323
30. Rosemann, M.: The service portfolio of a BPM center of excellence. In: vom Brocke, J.,
Rosemann, M. (eds.) Handbook on Business Process Management 2, pp. 381–398. Springer,
Heidelberg (2010). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-01982-1_13
31. Awa, H.O., Ojiabo, O.U., Emecheta, B.C.: Integrating TAM, TPB and TOE frameworks and
expanding their characteristic constructs for e-commerce adoption by SMEs. J. Sci. Technol.
Policy 6, 76–94 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1108/jstpm-04-2014-0012
32. Santana,A.F.L.,Alves,C.F.,Santos,H.R.M.,deLimaCavalcantiFelix,A.:BPMgovernance:
an exploratory study in public organizations. In: Halpin, T., et al. (eds.) BPMDS/EMMSAD
-2011. LNBIP, vol. 81, pp. 46–60. Springer, Heidelberg (2011). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-642-21759-3_4
33. Taudes, A., Feurstein, M., Mild, A.: Options analysis of software platform decisions: a case
study. MIS Q. 24, 227–243 (2000). https://doi.org/10.2307/3250937
34. Tumbas, S., Schmiedel, T.: Developing an organizational culture supportive of business
process management. In: Wirtschaftsinformatik, p. 115 (2013)
35. Tanriverdi,H.,Konana,P.,Ge,L.:Thechoiceofsourcingmechanismsforbusinessprocesses.
Inf. Syst. Res. 18, 280–299 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.1070.0129
36. Andre, M., Baldoquin, M.G., Acuna, S.T.: Formal model for assigning human resources to
teamsinsoftwareprojects.Inform.Softw.Tech.53,259–275(2011).https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.infsof.2010.11.011
37. Engwall, M., Jerbrant, A.: The resource allocation syndrome: the prime challenge of multi-
project management? Int. J. Project Manage. 21, 403–409 (2003). https://doi.org/10.1016/
s0263-7863(02)00113-8
38. Westland, J.: The Project Management Life Cycle: A Complete Step-by-step Methodology
for Initiating Planning Executing and Closing the Project. Kogan Page Publishers, London
(2007)

--- PAGE 87 ---
Chatting About Processes in Digital
Factories: A Model-Based Approach
Donya Rooein1(B)
, Devis Bianchini2
, Francesco Leotta3
, Massimo Mecella3
,
Paolo Paolini1
, and Barbara Pernici1
1
Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy
{donya.rooein,paolo.paolini,barbara.pernici}@polimi.it
2
Università di Brescia, Brescia, Italy
devis.bianchini@unibs.it
3
Sapienza Università di Roma, Rome, Italy
{leotta,mecella}@diag.uniroma1.it
Abstract. Using chatbots in digital factories, to interact with devices
through instant messages and voice commands, can make the under-
standing of underlying manufacturing, logistic and business processes
easier for workers. Intelligent chatbots can provide ﬂexible conversations
and tailor them to the speciﬁc users who are interacting. The iCHAT
framework conceptually represents all the aspects related to a conver-
sation, with diﬀerent facets for the user, the conversation ﬂow, and the
conversation contents, and combining them to obtain a ﬂexible inter-
action with the user. In digital factories, ﬂexible production is driven
by processes combining diﬀerent services. In this paper, we present an
original approach extending iCHAT to be able to chat about processes,
aiming at instructing a worker about a process.
Keywords: Conversational user interface · Chatbot modelling ·
Digital factory · Industry 4.0
1 Introduction
Given the dynamic nature of today’s business world, organizations should quickly
respond to a wide range of possible changes in their environment. The changes
can have either short-term eﬀects, like disruptions in the supply or production
chain, or long-term eﬀects, like changes in one part of the production system
that aﬀect other subsystems and processes. Changes may also have an impact
on controlling and monitoring essential parameters, that refer to the situation in
which a production process is being executed. The introduction of data-driven
solutions and enabling technologies, to transform collected data into actionable
insights, has raised the complexity of monitoring and controlling activities. In
addition, diﬀerent roles, including business managers, data analysts, machine
operators and designers, need to be informed on the processes and their changes
to perform their job. These workers: (a) need tools to ﬁnd the right information
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. Nurcan et al. (Eds.): BPMDS 2020/EMMSAD 2020, LNBIP 387, pp. 70–84, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49418-6_5

--- PAGE 88 ---
Chatting About Processes in Digital Factories 71
within a complex ecosystem of information, conﬁgurations, workﬂows, sensors
and devices; (b) should be enabled to use their own language, that is far from
the technical notation used to store and manage these kinds of information; (c)
might have diﬀerent levels of knowledge about the processes.
Conversational interfaces, such as the ones implemented by chatbots, might
adapt to the new structure(s) and behavior(s) of the production processes. They
may help workers, who have not exactly in mind what they are searching for
or have partial knowledge about the process, to properly reﬁne and focus ques-
tions, moving across many pathways in the production process. Using chatbots
can mitigate the gap between a worker’s language and formal notation used to
model processes and data. Moreover, when the production is running, and some
activities have already been carried out, a conversational interface like a chatbot
may support a worker in learning the process, by making explicit for worker’s
the current context.
The goal of this paper is to present a ﬂexible approach to generate conver-
sations with a chatbot taking into account the structure of the process.
In this paper, we focus on the adoption of chatbots to teach a worker about
the process structure. The present work is based on a conversational approach to
generic education [3], proposing new general conversational structures for pro-
cess teaching. The proposed approach is able to adapt to the context of the
interaction and the context of the environment as it evolves during the process
execution, going beyond the traditional question-answering mechanisms used for
chatbots. The chatbot helps a learner in a possibly complex learning pathway
for navigation over the process tasks. We aim to support the changing role of
human beings in the digital factory landscape, according to the human-in-the-
loop paradigm [8], where workers are expected to enjoy greater responsibility,
to act as decision makers and to take on supervising tasks, while relying on
chatbots for more operative levels (product quality control, process control and
productivity, anomaly detection and health assessment). To make our contri-
bution clear in the paper, we use an example of MyMuﬃn factory from [2],
providing a conversational interface in a small factory to support the digital
transformation.
The paper is structured as follows. In Sect.2, we introduce challenges and
motivations about using chatbots in digital factories. In Sect.3, we introduce
the iCHAT framework which is the basis for the rest of the paper and how the
generic domain conversations by chatbots are managed, based on a data-driven
approach. In Sect.4 we discuss how diﬀerent types of pathway structures about
a process can be represented. In Sect.5, we describe the process in MyMuﬃn
factory and present an example of conversation showing how it can be dynami-
cally generated by our data-driven approach. In Sect.6, we discuss the state of
the art in chatbots and in process- and service-based digital factories.
2 Challenges for Chatbots in Digital Factories
The introduction of a chatbot in digital factories aims to address the following
challenges.

--- PAGE 89 ---
72 D. Rooein et al.
Adaptation to the Users’ Language. Formal process modeling notation
might not be suitable or understandable for all the users who are interested
in learning about the business process. Chatbots using natural language, possi-
bly adopting general-purpose and domain-speciﬁc terminology, may mitigate the
gap between the business process notation and the users’ language. The chatbot
can also act as a mediator between raw data coming from sensors and the users,
presenting information in such a way to ease the decision making about process
instances.
Iterative Questions About the Process. The conversation style of the chat-
bot might enable a progressive reﬁnement of the information to be provided to
users, also proposing diﬀerent options to users and relying on their choices to
infer their skill about the business process. This also allows skipping undesired
details and proposing dialogue pathways that are more suitable for users and
their operating context.
Incomplete Knowledge About the Process. The level of user’s knowledge
about the business process might be unknown, nevertheless it is of paramount
importance to focus the process exploration on the relevant activities, ﬂows and
data, also targeting the right level of detail. The conversational structure of
chatbots and AI models behind them might enable to infer this information
from the interactions with the users, thus improving the exploration experience.
Managing Data and Process Complexity. A human being is mainly unable
to perceive and collect massive streaming data about processes and to create
the best insights and actionable decisions. For example, considering the multiple
conﬁgurations and product personalisation on the MyMuﬃn production process,
how can users select the best solution with minimum cost? How do some data
correlate to other data? In a digital factory based on digital twins [6], what is
the cause-and-eﬀect relating to the twin data diﬀerently from the real sensors
data? According to the Human-In-the-Loop Data Analysis [8], experts must act
as decision makers, while relying on chatbots for more repetitive and operative
operations due to the data complexity and volume.
3 The iCHAT Framework
The iCHAT framework is our foundation for applying chatbots in digital facto-
ries. We ﬁrst introduce the previous version of iCHAT, developed targeting edu-
cational chatbots (iChat-v1), then we illustrate the main extensions proposed in
this paper (iCHAT-v2), that will be presented in detail in next sections.
3.1 Background: iChat-v1
The goal of iCHAT is to create “ﬂexible and adaptive” conversational inter-
faces, capable of supporting complex tasks and going beyond Question Answer-
ing paradigms. Designing a conversation application in iCHAT (besides a more or
less standard interface component) is committed to three separate main engines

--- PAGE 90 ---
Chatting About Processes in Digital Factories 73
that are embedded inside a chatbot. These engines interact with each other to
deliver an engaging conversation with the user via control tables. The engines are
the Conversation Engine, the Interpretation Engine, and the Transition Engine,
and all of them are table-driven, following a data-driven approach [3].
The Conversation Engine allows a user “to speak to” (“to be spoken by”)
an application, taking into account the user’s proﬁle to tailor the conversation.
The role of the Transition Engine is to control the progress on a pathway, i.e., a
sequence of content items for teaching. When a request is received, the Transition
Engine takes care of the transitions across content items, i.e., determining which
one is the most suitable “next item”. It is driven by a database (storing the
content items) and tables describing the “pathways” (deﬁned by the author
of the contents) that allow traversing the content. A conversational interface
interacts with the user through diﬀerent devices (e.g., mobile phone, tablet,
Alexa device) through a variety of media (e.g., text and videos).
The Interpretation Engine is responsible to maintain a number of parameters
describing the dynamic situation of the user (from cognitive, emotional, psycho-
logical points of view) and, more importantly, to interpret them properly. Using
the parameters, in fact, the engine should “interpret” the situation and instruct
the Transition Engine about what to do at the next step. The Interpretation
Engine is controlled via a set of rules stored in “interpretation tables”.
In addition, the Interface Component is responsible for technical jobs, like
managing the various input/output devices, managing possible media conver-
sions (e.g., text-to-speech, speech-to-text), transferring user turns to the conver-
sation engine, transferring “content items” and chatbot turns to the user.
3.2 New Features Introduced in iCHAT for Digital Factories
In this paper, we propose a new architecture for iCHAT and a modiﬁed state
transition machine for the chatbot, to develop it in the broader scope of processes
in digital factories and tailor it to speciﬁc users who want to use a chatbot as
an interaction interface to learn about a process. The overall architecture of this
new version of iCHAT (iCHAT-v2) is shown in Fig.1.
To re-design the Conversation Engine, it is crucial to separate chatbot’s dia-
logues in two domains: the generic domain and the speciﬁc application domain.
The generic domain is responsible for the chitchat of the chatbot to peruse the
conversation in a natural way. Besides, this chatbot should be domain-speciﬁc
to deliver those conversations which are tailored for the speciﬁc purpose. For
instance, if the chatbot is used in the production process, it needs to support a
speciﬁc conversation on each component in the production process. These two
domains are managed by the dialog manager component in the conversation
engine through controlling tables and conﬁguration data. The dialogue manager
is a “decision-maker” in the conversation engine. It can take one of the following
decisions: i) the chatbot has to say something; ii) the chatbot must wait for
the user to say something; iii) the learning process should move on based on
the state machine. In case “i” it passes control (and parameters) to the chatbot
controller to continue the general conversation; in case “ii” it passes control to

--- PAGE 91 ---
74 D. Rooein et al.
Fig.1. The extended architecture of iCHAT.
the user controller to manage speciﬁc domain conversation; in case “iii” it passes
control and parameters to the interpretation engine for any further actions on
both state machine and learning path.
3.3 Generating Dialogues
Starting from the reference state diagram in iCHAT [3], we built a new state
diagram in Fig.2 to consider more situations in the conversation between a
human and a chatbot. The state diagram allows controlling the utterances that
the chatbot produces when reaching each state. This graph consists of a set
of states and transitions between them. The transition from one state to the
next depends on the user’s utterance. The state diagram allows controlling the
utterances that the chatbot produces when reaching each transition or a state.
This ﬁnite state machine is deﬁned as a tuple, (Q,Σ,τ,q0,F) consisting of
a ﬁnite set of states Q, a ﬁnite set of input messages Σ, a transition function
τ : Q × Σ → Q, an initial state q0 ∈ Q, and ﬁnal states F ⊆ Q. The transition
function here is a set of predeﬁned data-driven rules in the conversation table
(Fig.3a1
) that activate a message for the chatbot.
A conversation goes on as a sequence of “turns” by the chatbot and the user.
According to the state machine in Fig.2, a conversation can be paused (for a
short break and later resumed), suspended (for a long break and later resumed),
stopped (leaving the conversation), or completed (at the end of the pathway).
1
‘*’ in message ID and ‘?’ before the category name indicate enquiring from the user.
For readability, states and related transitions are separated by lines.

--- PAGE 92 ---
Chatting About Processes in Digital Factories 75
Fig.2. The state transitions for the generic domain of conversation.
The number of consecutive turns and other chatbot’s behaviours2
are controlled
by tables.
The dialogue of the chatbot is designed by a set of categories. For each
state in Fig.2, diﬀerent sequences of categories are associated. There are some
dialogues associated to each state and transition. The dialogues are generated
by considering diﬀerent categories regarding the situation. The sentence(s) for
each turn belongs to one out of seven diﬀerent categories: ‘greetings, support,
preview (of content), summary (of what has been done), forecast (of what is
needed to complete the pathway), action (asking the user for taking action),
and reinforcement messages.
For example, in state “S00”, the chatbot performs a dialog from “greetings”
category; in transition “T3.1” the chatbot ﬁrst says a “summary” message of
what is done by user and a “forecast” message for what the user has to learn next.
All information for generating the chatbot dialogues is derived from controlling
tables.
2
The behaviour can be customized on the basis of the user’s proﬁle or context infor-
mation. The chatbot, for example, could take several turns or a few ones; the chatbot
could take long verbose turns, or could speak very briskly; the chatbot could use
diﬀerent wording styles (e.g., “professional”, “friendly”, “soft”).

--- PAGE 93 ---
76 D. Rooein et al.
In iCHAT-v2, an acceptable conversation to teach a production process, is the
one leading the learner to complete a learning pathway in a proactive way. As it is
illustrated in the following, beyond the state transition graph to manage a generic
conversation, we introduce a new transition graph to handle the conversation on
the diﬀerent learning pathways deﬁned to teach about processes. We develop a
new structure for pathways beyond the sequential one originally used in iCHAT,
to be able to deal with the complex structure of processes and, in addition,
we develop conceptual models for transition graphs for teaching processes. The
dialogue graph for this chatbot provides the structure for generating sentences,
while the contents depends on the conversation tables. In Fig.3b, we show part
of a simulator for our chatbot to generate chatbot’s messages in the states and
transitions that are deﬁned in Fig.3a. This is a sustainable solution to empower
the instruction designers to build an adaptive learning process and adaptive
learning conversation via chatbot and It is important to depict that the workers
in the process do not need any additional background more than what is required
for online learners to get trained by this chatbot.
(a) Conversation table (b) Simulator for conversation tables
Fig.3. Data-driven simulator for generating dialogues from tables for the chatbot
4 Chatbot as a General Process “Navigator”
A chatbot as a general process “navigator” is a ﬁnite state machine. It is driven
by a graph, describing the current pathway. Given the “current position” it
determines which is the most suitable next item for the learner. Nodes and arcs
of the graph are enriched by colors and metadata to semantically recognize the
characteristics of the items. Colors and metadata are basically used to “preview”
what is coming or (more important) to help the user with “adaptivity in the
small”, i.e., skipping unwanted items of the pathway, or looking for speciﬁc
ones. For instance, in order to demonstrate the adaptivity in the small, nodes in
the pathway are labeled by colors (blue for mandatory items in the path, green

--- PAGE 94 ---
Chatting About Processes in Digital Factories 77
for optional ones, and purple for additional materials). These content items are
stored in table “Item DB” and organized in the learning pathways. Besides, users
can select the pathway topology most suitable in a given context, which is called
“adaptivity in the large”.
4.1 Conversations for Teaching About a Process
To teach a process, three learning pathways structures have been deﬁned:
(a) Straight pathway
(b) Straight pathway with optional items
(c) Straight pathway with additional material
Fig.4. Pathway structures
– Quick overview. The learner can go through the overview items of the
process. The goal is to improve the quality time of an employee to perceive
the outline of the production process. In this regard, just items with proper
metadata and tags are used to create a conversation on the highest abstrac-
tion of the process. The learning topology regarding to this pathway can be
expressed as a straight pathway as shown in Fig.4a. A straight pathway con-
tains a list of items that have the nodes with “Overview” ﬂavor type and the
role is “Core” that is demonstrated by blue color in the graph. The user can
go next through items to complete the learning path. Jumping back through
items is not possible in this pathway. The Transition Engine keeps a list of
items for each pathway in the straight pathway.
– Full learning. The full learning pathway shows more details about the pro-
cess by considering all optional nodes for each activity. Figure4b is a straight
pathway with optional items and users have control to select optional items
or skip them. All blue items in the pathway are coming from “Core” role and
they are mandatory for the user to follow. The optional items are depicted
with green node color and the Transition Engine informs the chatbot if the
next item is optional and the chatbot gives the user a choice to select the

--- PAGE 95 ---
78 D. Rooein et al.
optional item or not during her learning path. If the user takes the items, the
Transition Engine marks that item “visited” otherwise “skipped”.
– Advanced learning. Advanced learning pathways declare a straight path-
way with core, optional and additional material items, which include all infor-
mation (e.g., process, sub-processes, and variables related to each process).
An example of this topology is shown in Fig.4c. Additional material in item
DB are tagged by “Recommended” and they are purple in the graph. If a user
wants go deep on one item, this pathway structure is applicable. From the
learning path viewpoint, these recommended materials are for an advanced
learning experience. In a process, these additional materials can be inserted
by the author which is designing the pathway to add information about the
gateways, ﬂow conditions, task data, and so on.
Fig.5. State transitions for teaching on a process
4.2 State Transitions for Teaching a Process
Figure5 displays the state diagram for accessing an item in teaching a process.
When a user selects process training, the chatbot goes in the initial “Train a
process” state. From this state, it is possible to go deep in one of the possible
topologies. As it is shown, items are tagged in three diﬀerent roles (Core: CO,
Optional: OP, and Recommended: RE). From the “Quick Overview” state, the

--- PAGE 96 ---
Chatting About Processes in Digital Factories 79
Transition Engine derives core items from “Item DB”. From the “Full Learning”
state, going to core or optional items is achievable, based on the underlying
structure of the pathway. From the “Advanced Learning” state, users can also
go further to a component of the process to retrieve recommended information
for available sub-processes and variables in a component.
5 The Chatbot in the MyMuﬃn Factory
It is important to consider two criteria for using iCHAT in your application
scenario. Firstly, the content must be managable by “pathways” to be followed of
some complexity. Secondly, the user should accept a “constrained” conversation
within the limit of the application domain.
Now we describe how we proceed by using a chatbot in a teaching a process in
a factory, as the key contribution of this work, based on an example of a produc-
tion factory ﬁrst described in [2]. The overall production process in MyMuﬃn is
shown in Fig.6. The client orders box(es) (each one containing 4 muﬃns) online,
by choosing among diﬀerent possible variants, such as: (a) chocolate chips vs.
blueberry vs. apricot bits vs. carrot bits vs. nothing as additional ingredient;
(b) butter cream vs. hazelnut cream vs. icing sugar vs. nothing as topping; (c)
yogurt vs. honey vs. nothing in the dough. The client can also customize the
colors of the baking paper (wrapping the single muﬃn) as well as the colors of
the box. The MyMuﬃn factory collects orders and organizes batches of muf-
ﬁn dough for production. As an example, if a client asks for 3 boxes of carrot
Fig.6. The process at MyMuﬃn factory, BPMN diagram [2]

--- PAGE 97 ---
80 D. Rooein et al.
muﬃns with yogurt, icing sugar on top, pink baking paper, and another client for
2 boxes of carrot muﬃns with yogurt, nothing on top, yellow baking paper, the
same dough can be used for both orders. Clearly, this scheduling service is based
on the number of (and capacity of each) dough mixers, the stream of received
orders, etc. The factory has a pool of dough mixers, of diﬀerent capacity. The
fact that the number of diﬀerent combinations is ﬁnite guarantees that such a
scheduling can be performed. When an order is received, in parallel to the dough
preparation, the baking paper should be set up as well. In addition to prepare a
set of the requested paper baking cases, a QR-code should be printed on each of
them and used as a unique identiﬁer of the speciﬁc order. The identiﬁcation of
the single muﬃn is crucial for customization. After the dough has been prepared,
the muﬃns are placed in the baking paper cases and sent to the oven (connected
to a QR code reader) for cooking. Muﬃns are cooked in batches of about 1,000
items and the length of this step is equal for all of them. After the baking has
been performed, the cart is operated in order to route the diﬀerent muﬃns to
the right boxes, after putting the right topping, and then to the proper delivery
station. Depending on the order, diﬀerent delivery agents can be used.
The objective of introducing the chatbot here is to create a conversation to
teach the process. As soon as a new employee arrives in the MyMuﬃn factory, the
chatbot takes care of the initial orientation brieﬁng about the company process
components and all necessary information. Once the information regarding the
initial training, operational knowledge, and other processes are handled by the
chatbot, neither the employees and the trainer have to depend on each other. In
the MyMuﬃn use case, the semantic tag related to each learning item is deﬁned
by four ﬂavors (“Overview”, “Deﬁnition”, “Subdivision”, and “FAQ”) that are
dependent to the speciﬁc process domain and three roles (“Core”, “Optional”,
and “Recommended”) which they are general for any learning content related
to process navigation.
The conversation is driven by tables governing how the chatbot speaks and
how it understands the user’s utterances (Fig.7). Below the tables a simple
example of a conversation between chatbot and user is shown. As shown in
Fig.7, in state “S13” in the state machine, there are predeﬁned categories for
the chatbot turn when resuming a suspended conversation. Each sentence from
the conversation table calls contents from “Item DB” table to create chatbot’s
dialogues, selecting items for the categories speciﬁed for the “S13” to create a
complete dialogue.

--- PAGE 98 ---
Chatting About Processes in Digital Factories 81
Fig.7. Conversation simulation for the MyMuﬃn use case
6 Related Work
During the last years, some attempts were made to ease the creation of chatbots,
aiming at querying data available in unstructured and structured formats.
Romero et al. [18] explored a set of application domains that can support
human to supervise cyber-physical systems in digital factories. According to the
authors in [16], these possible domains can be supported by using chatbots.
They introduced many use case scenarios, where softbots can bring proactive
insights over the production planners to optimize and support all operational
demands. The authors mentioned that in smart supply network softbots provide
monitoring (e.g., track and trace) to empower companies against any disruption
in a supply network. In [7], a chatbot was developed to aid new hires through
their onboarding process and reach related information needs as if it were a
human assistant.

--- PAGE 99 ---
82 D. Rooein et al.
In [15], a chatbot was constructed on top of some open data. Here the ﬁrst
step is to extract plain text from documents stored as PDF ﬁles by employing
an optical character recognition (OCR) software. At this point, a set of possible
questions about the extracted contents were constructed using a “Overgenerating
Transformations and Rankings” algorithm, which was implemented using the
question generation framework presented in [9]. Finally, the matching patterns,
essential to the chatbot’s answering capability, are deﬁned through Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Markup Language (AIML).
OntBot [1] employs a mapping technique to transform an ontology into a
relational database and then uses that knowledge to construct answers. The
main drawback of traditional chatbots, implemented for example through AIML
language, is the fact that the knowledge base has to be constructed ad-hoc
by handwriting thousands of possible responses. Instead of providing answers
by looking for a matching one inside a database, OntBot retrieves information
from the database, which will be then used to build up the response. Therefore,
likewise our solution, OntBot does not need to handwrite all the knowledge base
that stands behind the system.
In [10] authors declare that chatbots are the proper solution to provide per-
sonalized learning in MOOCs (Massive Open Online Courses). iMOOC [5] is a
novel methodology for designing customizable MOOCs that brings adaptivity
into the learning experience. iMOOC supports that various users of MOOCs
may have diﬀerent purposes, some learners may want to get personalized con-
tent, not learning the entire material. Here a chatbot is introduced to support
the learner in choosing the most appropriate path. In the TEL (Technology-
Enhanced Learning) literature, since several years Intelligent Pedagogical Agents
(IPAs) are proposed as embodied intelligent agents designed for pedagogical pur-
poses to support learning. Chatbots as those ones proposed in this paper are
basically a form of IPA, and here we demonstrate their applicability to learning
manufacturing processes.
The dialogue management component of the chatbot is one of the key parts
in designing a conversational interface. In [14], dialogue management design and
management in industry is discussed. A dialogue manager for a goal-oriented
chatbot to conduct a proper conversation with user is illustrated in [11]. In [17],
a model based on a Finite-State Turn Taking Machine is introduced in order to
select an action any time.
Our aim is to propose a framework to query and teach processes. The interest
in the employment of chatbots in the context of Business Process Management
(BPM) is quite recent. Authors in [12] propose a way to take a business process
ﬂow as input and to produce a Watson conversation model as output. Diﬀerently
from our approach, here authors focus on the execution of the process instead of
teaching or monitoring it. In [4] an approach is proposed to use chatbots to learn
business processes from input data. Here the focus is not on process participants.
Instead the ﬁnal users are data analysts in charge of mining business processes.
In [13] the use of chatbots to help a process actor via conversation to perform
tasks of a process model is presented.

--- PAGE 100 ---
Chatting About Processes in Digital Factories 83
7 Concluding Remarks and Future Work
In this work, we have introduced a framework to represent conversations to
support instruction about manufacturing/production processes.
In future work, we will develop further the idea of connecting a conversation
with a service-based process in a factory, in order to be able to control ﬂexible
process executions, with the chatbot as an interface for monitoring and control-
ling a running process in a digital factory using the same structures we presented
for teaching as a basis for controlling conversations.
A robust validation in industrial settings is also foreseen, to measure the
acceptability of the approach by workers and its eﬀectiveness over current pro-
duction processes.
Acknowledgements. The work of Donya Rooein has been supported by EIT Digital
and IBM. The work of Francesco Leotta and Massimo Mecella has been supported by
the EU H2020-RISE project FIRST. The work of Devis Bianchini has been supported
by Smart4CPPS Lombardy Region project. This work expresses the opinions of the
authors and not necessarily those of the funding agencies and companies.
References
1. Al-Zubaide, H., Issa, A.A.: OntBot: ontology based chatbot. In: International Sym-
posium on Innovations in Information and Communications Technology, pp. 7–12.
IEEE (2011)
2. Bicocchi, N., Cabri, G., Mandreoli, F., Mecella, M.: Dynamic digital factories for
agile supply chains: an architectural approach. J. Ind. Inf. Integr. 15, 111–121
(2019)
3. Di Blas, N., Lodi, L., Paolini, P., Pernici, B., Renzi, F., Rooein, D.: A new approach
to conversational applications. In: SEBD, Data Driven Chatbots (2019)
4. Burattin, A.: Integrated, ubiquitous and collaborative process mining with chat
bots. In: 17th International Conference on Business Process Management, BPM
Demo Track, Vienna, Austria, pp. 144–148. CEUR-WS (2019)
5. Casola, S., Di Blas, N., Paolini, P., Pelagatti, G.: Designing and delivering MOOCs
that ﬁt all sizes. In: Society for Information Technology & Teacher Education
International Conference, pp. 110–117. (AACE) (2018)
6. Catarci, T., Firmani, D., Leotta, F., Mandreoli, F., Mecella, M., Sapio, F.: A
conceptual architecture and model for smart manufacturing relying on service-
based digital twins. In: IEEE International Conference on Web Services, ICWS,
Milan, Italy, pp. 229–236 (2019)
7. Chandar, P., et al.: Leveraging conversational systems to assists new hires during
onboarding. In: Bernhaupt, R., Dalvi, G., Joshi, A., Balkrishan, D.K., O’Neill, J.,
Winckler, M. (eds.) INTERACT 2017. LNCS, vol. 10514, pp. 381–391. Springer,
Cham (2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-67684-5 23
8. Doan, A.: Human-in-the-loop data analysis: a personal perspective. In: ACM Inter-
national Workshop on Human-In-the-Loop Data Analysis (HILDA 2018), pp. 1–6
(2018)
9. Heilman, M., Smith, N.A.: Question generation via overgenerating transforma-
tions and ranking. Technical report, Carnegie Mellon University Pittsburgh PA
Language Technologies Institute (2009)

--- PAGE 101 ---
84 D. Rooein et al.
10. Holotescu, C.: MOOCbuddy: a chatbot for personalized learning with MOOCs. In:
Iftene, A., Vanderdonckt, J. (eds.) RoCHI-International Conference on Human-
Computer Interaction, pp. 91–94, Bucarest (2016)
11. Ilievski, V., Musat, C., Hossmann, A., Baeriswyl, M.: Goal-oriented chat-
bot dialog management bootstrapping with transfer learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1802.00500 (2018)
12. Kalia, A.K., Telang, P.R., Xiao, J., Vukovic, M.: Quark: a methodology to trans-
form people-driven processes to chatbot services. In: Maximilien, M., Vallecillo, A.,
Wang, J., Oriol, M. (eds.) ICSOC 2017. LNCS, vol. 10601, pp. 53–61. Springer,
Cham (2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-69035-3 4
13. López, A., Sànchez-Ferreres, J., Carmona, J., Padró, L.: From process models to
chatbots. In: Giorgini, P., Weber, B. (eds.) CAiSE 2019. LNCS, vol. 11483, pp.
383–398. Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-21290-2 24
14. Paek, T., Pieraccini, R.: Automating spoken dialogue management design using
machine learning: an industry perspective. Speech Commun. 50(8–9), 716–729
(2008)
15. Pichponreay, L., Kim, J.-H., Choi, C.-H., Lee, K.-H., Cho, W.-S.: Smart answering
chatbot based on OCR and overgenerating transformations and ranking. In: 8th
International Conference on Ubiquitous and Future Networks (ICUFN), pp. 1002–
1005. IEEE (2016)
16. Rabelo, R.J., Romero, D., Zambiasi, S.P.: Softbots supporting the operator 4.0 at
smart factory environments. In: Moon, I., Lee, G.M., Park, J., Kiritsis, D., von
Cieminski, G. (eds.) APMS 2018. IAICT, vol. 536, pp. 456–464. Springer, Cham
(2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-99707-0 57
17. Raux, A., Eskenazi, M.: A ﬁnite-state turn-taking model for spoken dialog systems.
In: Proceedings of Human Language Technologies: The 2009 Annual Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pp. 629–637 (2009)
18. Romero, D., et al.: Towards an operator 4.0 typology: a human-centric perspective
on the fourth industrial revolution technologies. In: International Conference on
Computers and Industrial Engineering (CIE46) (2016)

--- PAGE 102 ---
Enforcing a Cross-Organizational
Workflow: An Experience Report
Susanne Stahnke(B)
, Klym Shumaiev, Jorge Cuellar,
and Prabhakaran Kasinathan
Siemens AG - Corporate Technology, Otto-Hahn-Ring 6, 81739 Munich, Germany
{susanne.stahnke,klym.shumaiev,jorge.cuellar,
prabhakaran.kasinathan}@siemens.com
Abstract. Today business processes often exceed organizational bound-
aries and the participants may not fully trust each other. In the past, this
trust was guaranteed solely through legal contracts. To digitally estab-
lish trust without requiring a trusted third party, Blockchain technology
together with Smart Contracts is used to ensure that involved organiza-
tions can not break their agreements. This experience report introduces a
workflow enforcement method for a particular use case, the certification
of the construction of industrial plants. The method comprises the mod-
elling of the workflow, the verification of the models and the translation
into Smart Contracts.
Keywords: Business process modelling · Cross-organizational
processes · Workflow enforcement · Blockchain · Smart Contracts ·
Experience report
1 Introduction
Globalization, novel technologies, fast-changing environments, the need for cost
reduction, and the rapid evolution of information and communication tech-
nologies introduce challenges for enterprises, which are tackled by the cross-
organizational collaboration between organizations, as stated in [9]. Establish-
ing such cross-organizational collaboration requires the involved enterprises to
specify the diﬀerent interoperations and a common goal beforehand. This can
be done by modelling these cooperative processes.
Already in 1998, before emergence of mature business process modelling stan-
dards, like BPMN, van der Aalst suggested how inter-organizational workﬂows
could be modelled and veriﬁed. In [18], he describes the concept of loosely cou-
pled workﬂow processes, which use asynchronous communication. A workﬂow
consists of one or more processes, each one assigned to a given organization. The
processes operate independently from each other but synchronize at speciﬁed
points to ensure the correct execution of the whole workﬂow. However, in the
same paper van der Aalst did not provide any details on how such an approach
can be implemented in practice.
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. Nurcan et al. (Eds.): BPMDS 2020/EMMSAD 2020, LNBIP 387, pp. 85–98, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49418-6_6

--- PAGE 103 ---
86 S. Stahnke et al.
Inter-organizational business processes require a certain level of trust between
the participating organizations. This trust is traditionally guaranteed solely
through legal contracts, which specify a collection of responsibilities and obli-
gations agreed upon all participating parties. With emergence of Blockchain,
Smart Contracts assure that involved organizations cannot break their agree-
ments and therefore, serve as a machine enforceable and veriﬁable protocol for
inter-organizational workﬂows. This establishes trust between the participating
parties without requiring a trusted third party.
This experience report demonstrates how to digitalize a cross-organizational
business process on the basis of the use case “Certiﬁcation of the Construction of
Industrial Plants”. Coloured Petri Net modelling notation is used to capture and
verify inter-organizational business processes. It serves as a base for the imple-
mentation of Smart Contracts running in the Hyperledger Fabric environment.
Petri Nets are easy to understand and use, and oﬀer formal semantics and anal-
ysis techniques. Therefore, diﬀerent behavioural properties can be analysed and
veriﬁed. Implementing the business process as Smart Contracts on a Blockchain
enforces all involved parties to execute the workﬂow correctly. Since we require
that the identity of the participants is known and secured, a private permissioned
Blockchain is used to implement the use case. In this experience report we dis-
cuss an approach on how to enforce cross-organizational business processes, and
we present the lessons learned to be considered by the practitioners in the future.
The report is structured as follows. In Sect.2, the use case is described.
Section3 presents the background to this work: we compare diﬀerent Workﬂow
Modelling Languages and introduce private permissioned Blockchain networks.
The workﬂow enforcement method, comprising the modelling of the use case,
the veriﬁcation of the models, the translation into Smart Contracts and the
evaluation of the Smart Contracts, is described in Sect.4. In Sect.5, encountered
problems and best practices are discussed. Related work is presented in Sect.6
and conclusions drawn from this experience report and an outlook to future work
are described in Sect.7.
2 Use Case: Certification of the Construction of
Industrial Plants
Particular industrial plants, designed and built under the global supervision
of a company called the EPC (abbreviation for Engineering, Procurement and
Construction), require a certiﬁcation by a governmental entity. In this report we
take a detailed look at the certiﬁcation process for a power plant, which is also
valid in other types of industrial construction. The certiﬁcation process requires
the governmental body to issue approvals throughout the diﬀerent stages of
the power plant functional safety life cycle (consisting of design, fabrication,
mounting, commissioning and test approval). In Fig.1 we illustrate high-level
phases of the life cycle.
In each step of the process, multiple documents are sent to the governmental
body, that checks the documents, if needed asks for revisions and eventually

--- PAGE 104 ---
Enforcing a Cross-Organizational Workflow: An Experience Report 87
Fig.1. High-level phases of the industrial plant functional safety life cycle
issues a certiﬁcate with its statement. This process includes diﬀerent parties
with diﬀerent goals. Therefore, various steps of the process should be secured, to
assure to all parties that the others execute the workﬂow correctly, and therefore,
certain invariants (safety properties in the sense of temporal logic) hold. In case
one of those invariants does not hold, all parties should be able to ascertain the
responsible entity. Digitalizing this certiﬁcation process results in an acceleration
of the overall certiﬁcation process, a secure management of all versions of the
published documents, an easy search through the documents, a clear overview
of all requirements and tasks during the entire plant life cycle, and ﬁnally, a
paperwork reduction.
The following stakeholders are involved in the certiﬁcation process. The
Owner issues the plant, checks that the participating parties proceed correctly,
and gives its approval throughout the entire life cycle. EPC1
represents the ser-
vice provider, which designs and builds the industrial plant. In our case, the
EPC was represented by Siemens AG. NOBO, short for Notified Body, is a gov-
ernmental agency responsible for examining and eventually approving the result
of diﬀerent stages of the construction of the industrial plant throughout the
overall plant life cycle. In our case, the participating NOBO was TÜV Rhein-
land. Manufacturer produces parts of a component and delivers them to EPC.
The certiﬁcation process, described in this experience report, is an industrial
standard.
1
https://www.marquard-bahls.com/de/news-info/glossar/detail/term/epc-engineer
ing-procurement-and-construction.html.

--- PAGE 105 ---
88 S. Stahnke et al.
3 Background
3.1 Modelling Inter-organizational Workflows
A workflow can be deﬁned as a set of activities or tasks, which is executed by
certain entities, see [8]. The participating entities execute the workﬂow according
to a deﬁned set of rules to achieve, or contribute to an overall goal, as described
in [6]. If the workﬂow is constructed to achieve business goals, it is also called
business process. An inter-organizational business process is a workﬂow which
involves multiple diﬀerent, untrusted parties. To deﬁne such a business process
Workﬂow Modelling Languages (WML) can be used. WMLs give the opportunity
to not only deﬁne a workﬂow, but verify its correctness. A workﬂow is called
correct, when it achieves its pre-deﬁned goals by executing the deﬁned partially
ordered set of activities.
YAWL, BPMN, UML activity diagrams and Petri Nets are four WMLs, which
are evaluated in this section. YAWL2
(Yet Another Workﬂow Language, see [16]),
inspired by Petri Nets, oﬀers various workﬂow patterns, like basic control ﬂow
patterns, advanced branching and synchronization patterns, structural patterns
and cancellation patterns. Since YAWL does not support PNML (Petri Net
Markup Language), the possibility to export and import nets from/into diﬀer-
ent tools is very restricted. Since BPMN3
(Business Process Modelling Nota-
tion) and UML activity diagrams lack a complete formal semantics and analysis
techniques, the papers [3,12,13] suggest mapping workﬂow modelling languages,
which lack rigorous semantics, to Petri Nets.
An ordinary Petri Net (P/T-Net) is a directed graph, in which the nodes are
places or transitions, and the arcs connect places to transitions or vice versa.
Informally, places can be seen as local states and transitions as local activities.
Additionally, tokens mark the current state of the Net. A Coloured Petri Net
(CPN) is a combination of a Petri Net and a programming language, called
Standard ML. Petri Nets allow the deﬁnition of concurrency, control structures,
synchronization and communication. The addition of Standard ML extends this
deﬁnition with the ability to specify colour sets (data types) and markings,
arc expressions and guards. For further deﬁnition and a concrete example see
[7]. Petri Nets are easy to understand and use, and oﬀer formal semantics and
analysis techniques. Therefore, diﬀerent behavioural properties can be analysed
and veriﬁed. That is the main reason why Petri Nets are preferred to other
modelling languages. Petri Nets are general, easy and abstract models, but on
the same time very clean semantics.
3.2 Private Permissioned Blockchain Networks
Distributed Ledger Technologies (DLTs) enable a veriﬁable and transparent way
to enforce an inter-organizational business process. It implements a decentralized
2
http://yawlfoundation.org/.
3
http://yoann.nogues.free.fr/IMG/pdf/07-04 WP Intro to BPMN - White-2.pdf.

--- PAGE 106 ---
Enforcing a Cross-Organizational Workflow: An Experience Report 89
record of transactions. Blockchain is a particular type of DLTs. A blockchain is
a replicated and distributed data structure, called ledger, that veriﬁes and stores
transactions occurring in a peer-to-peer network, as deﬁned in [14]. The ledger
is a timestamped list of blocks. Each block contains multiple transactions, is
identiﬁed by its cryptographic hash and has a reference to the previous block’s
hash. This results in a linear, chronological chain of blocks. Each change on
a block results in a change of the block’s hash. This results in an immutable
ledger, which allows the storage of transactions/assets in a tamper-proof way.
Since each node holds a copy of the ledger, all nodes are able to verify all prior
transactions. This decentralization grants transparency about every transaction
for all participants of the network. Private permissioned Blockchain technologies,
which restrict the participation in the network and the access to assets within
the network, enforce access control. This enables a trustless network, conceding
a transaction between parties, who do not trust each other, described in [2].
4 Workflow Enforcement Method
In order to digitalize the certiﬁcation process for the construction of power plants,
the following steps are performed (Fig.2). First, the use case is modelled using
a Workﬂow Modelling Language. In the second step, the derived models are
translated into one coherent model to verify its correctness. Third, the model is
translated into Smart Contracts in Hyperledger Fabric, and in the fourth and
last step, the Smart Contract functionality is validated in regard to the model,
which was veriﬁed in the second step.
Fig.2. Overview of our method
4.1 Modelling of the Workflow
The ﬁrst step for the digitalization of the certiﬁcation process was modelling
the workﬂow. Four workshops each with three representatives from the involved
organizations are performed; two domain experts from the company, in charge
of the design and construction of the power plant, and one expert from a govern-
mental authority. We, as researchers and facilitators, analysed several aspects of
the process together with the domain experts: the diﬀerent stages of the safety
life cycle, the involved parties, the documents to be certiﬁed by the governmental

--- PAGE 107 ---
90 S. Stahnke et al.
entity, and the overall workﬂow. Since this initial modelling phase required par-
ticipation of domain experts, who are not IT experts, ordinary P/T-Nets were
used to make sure the models are easy to understand and adapt.
Dealing with an inter-organizational business process, van der Aalst’s method
was used for modelling and verifying this type of workﬂows; the concept of
loosely coupled processes, which use asynchronous communication. This method
is described in [18], and explained in more detail in [5]. Using this concept, shared
places were introduced to the P/T-Nets. This can be seen as an assumption-
commitment speciﬁcation of a contract, which deﬁnes the interfaces between the
participating parties. In the later implementation only those interfaces are known
by everyone, internal business logic stays secret. Therefore, the conﬁdentiality of
internal states and processes by all participants is guaranteed, but nevertheless
there is an understanding that a certain activity has been done but not how
it has been done. Additionally, special operators (i.e. XOR-Joins/Splits) were
added to enable decision-making in the Net.
Since the tasks of the certiﬁcation process of a power plant are bound to doc-
uments, only the publication of the so-called documentation packages were mod-
elled. The tool WoPeD was used to model the diﬀerent stages of the certiﬁcation
process in ordinary P/T-Nets with special operators and shared places exten-
sion. After two workshops with the domain experts two meta-models emerged.
Those meta-models were applied to all models of the diﬀerent stages of the
life cycle. This resulted in 7 models (Plant Design, System Design, Component
Design, Fabrication, Mounting, Commissioning, Test Approval), 200 places and
83 transitions. Since a plant consists of multiple systems, which consist of mul-
tiple components, and each component is composed of several parts, an overall
model was introduced to represent the parallel execution of designing the systems
and components, manufacturing the diﬀerent parts of a component, mounting
the components, running each system, and ﬁnally combining the systems and
running the whole plant.
4.2 Workflow Verification
Extending the ordinary P/T-Nets with shared places and special operators, the
Petri Nets could not be veriﬁed by the tool WoPeD. Therefore, the Petri Nets,
resulting from the initial modelling process, were translated to Coloured Petri
Nets and veriﬁed in CPN Tools supporting these two extensions (special oper-
ators and shared places). During the translation from P/T-Nets to a CPN, the
Net was veriﬁed for its behavioural correctness through the token game (sim-
ulation), which already eliminated several errors. To verify the resulted CPN,
the state space (reachability graph) of the Net was calculated in CPN Tools. A
report was generated from the calculated state space in CPN Tools and analysed
in regard to the following properties:
1. Termination: The report contains at least one dead marking, which is also a
home marking. (A marking is called dead if it does not enable any transition
in the Net. A home marking is reachable from each marking of the reachability
graph.)

--- PAGE 108 ---
Enforcing a Cross-Organizational Workflow: An Experience Report 91
2. Deadlock-freeness: The overall state space is ﬁnite.
3. Boundness and Safeness: The upper bound of each place is 1.
4. Soundness: The report contains only one dead marking.
The ﬁrst state space, calculated from the ﬁnished CPN, was inﬁnite and there-
fore, only the partial state space was presented in the ﬁrst report (Fig.4). The
state space was calculated for ten minutes, which resulted in a state space with
almost 300000 nodes. Four unbound places (Fig.3) and over 500 dead-markings
existed.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
Unbound places
CAT'IniƟal_state EPC'EPC_wait
NOBO'Wait_NOBO NOBO'Wait_for_documentaƟon
Fig.3. Statistics about unbound places
Fixing the discovered unbound places, resulted in a ﬁnite state space with
186 nodes, 225 arcs and two dead markings (final report in Fig.4). Analyzing the
generated state space for the before deﬁned properties resulted in the following:
the CPN model terminates, is deadlock-free, holds no unbound places, and is
therefore bound. The Net is not sound, since the state space contains two dead
markings. Since both markings are valid end states, only distinguished by the
placement of tokens in the ﬁnal places, no further adjustments were made to the
model.
4.3 Implementation of the Solution Using Hyperledger Fabric
Cross-organizational business processes require a certain level of trust between
the involved organizations. This trust, traditionally guaranteed solely through
legal contracts, can be established through the use of Blockchain, together with
Smart Contracts. Smart Contracts assure that involved organizations cannot

--- PAGE 109 ---
92 S. Stahnke et al.
Dead markings
Nodes
Arcs
0
50000
100000
150000
200000
250000
300000
First report Final report
5394 2
229798
186
269866
225
Dead markings Nodes Arcs
Fig.4. Statistics about first and final report
break their agreements and therefore, serve as a machine enforceable and ver-
iﬁable protocol for inter-organizational workﬂows. Implementing the business
process as Smart Contracts on a Blockchain enforces all involved parties to exe-
cute the workﬂow correctly and therefore, establishes trust between all workﬂow
participants without requiring a trusted third party. The following requirements
were considered in the choice of a suitable Blockchain platform. All partici-
pants of the network must be identiﬁable at any time. Unauthorized access of
non-involved organizations must be prevented. Privacy and conﬁdentiality of
transactions and data must be guaranteed at all times. The private permis-
sioned Blockchain platform Hyperledger Fabric supports all before mentioned
requirements, and is therefore used to implement the use case.
The CPN model was manually translated into Chaincode using Golang and
the IBM Blockchain Platform4
extension in Visual Studio Code. Interfaces,
involving the publication of documents, were extracted from the CPN model
and the surrounding transitions were examined. Internal places and transitions,
framing the interfaces, were merged to one transition. Figure5 displays the orig-
inal part of the CPN model covering the publication of the Plant Design docu-
mentation package by EPC.
The internal places and transitions (creating, processing and publishing the
documentation package) were merged to one atomic transition (Fig.6). This
transition is only representing the publication of the documentation package
itself. This ensures that the internal processes and states of each participant
in the workﬂow, and later in the Blockchain, are kept secret. The transition
is surrounded by incoming/outgoing places, constituting the before extracted
interfaces. The incoming places are named preconditions, whereas the outgoing
4
https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=IBMBlockchain.ibm-block
chain-platform.

--- PAGE 110 ---
Enforcing a Cross-Organizational Workflow: An Experience Report 93
Fig.5. Part of the CPN model covering the publication of the plant design
places are postconditions, see Fig.6. All pre- and postconditions are represented
as interfaces in the CPN model. In the end, all interfaces constituting pub-
lished documents were represented in the Smart Contracts, which determined a
sequence of tasks.
Fig.6. Simplification of the publication of the plant design
For simplicity, LevelDB, a simple key-value store, was used. Additional to
LevelDB, composite keys were created to be able to improve the search through
the database. Only a Document structure was stored in the ledger; the actual
documentation packages were stored oﬀ-chain, in a separate database. The Doc-
ument structure contained a hash of the published documentation package, as
well as a link to the actual documents.
The IBM Blockchain Platform extension provides a fast way to write, debug
and test Chaincode in Hyperledger Fabric without the requirement of an elabo-
rate network setup.

--- PAGE 111 ---
94 S. Stahnke et al.
4.4 Validation of the Solution
To evaluate that the Smart Contracts implement the workﬂow correctly, the
token game was run on the model, which resulted in a set of executed tasks,
together with their initial and current, local markings. These tuples were put
into logical orders:
– Prerequisites:
publish(FeasibilityStudy) → SUCCESS
– Positive test case:
published(FeasibilityStudy),
publish(PlantDesign) → SUCCESS
– Negative test case:
¬published(FeasibilityStudy),
publish(PlantDesign) → ERROR
The resulting orders were manually translated into unit tests, which were
run against the Smart Contracts. The partial state of the Net should be equal
to the current state of the ledger.
Formulating unit tests from the extracted logic resulted in 87 tests with a
test coverage of 44.4%. To cover also simple checks for wrongly inserted (num-
ber of) arguments, additional unit tests were formulated. A regression test was
written to cover the overall execution. The written tests cover 56.6% of all state-
ments. Certain error cases (i.e. JSON encoding/decoding failures, errors while
getting/putting Document structures from/on the ledger) were not considered
in the unit tests, which explains the low test coverage.
5 Results and Discussion
The introduced method is a new approach of digitalizing cross-organizational
business processes, displayed in Fig.7. In the ﬁrst step of digitalizing the “Certi-
ﬁcation of the Construction of Industrial Plants”, the workﬂow of the certiﬁca-
tion of a power plant was modelled as a simple P/T-Net with extensions that are
required for this process. This ﬁrst modelling process included domain experts
from multiple participating organizations. Using ordinary P/T-nets, together
with the tool WoPeD, during the initial modelling phase was well-received by all
participating entities. With their simplicity on the one hand and formal seman-
tics on the other, Petri Nets were accepted from all involved stakeholders. We
explained the semantics of Petri Nets to the domain experts while running the
token game. Consequently, the domain experts described Petri Nets as “easy to
understand and adjust”.
In the second step, the resulting P/T-Nets were translated to CPN and ver-
iﬁed in CPN Tools. During the process of translating the simple P/T-Nets into
a CPN, the model was veriﬁed by simulation (token game) and calculation of
the partial state space (reachability graph). The ﬁnished Net was then veri-
ﬁed by calculating and analysing the whole state space. Behavioural properties

--- PAGE 112 ---
Enforcing a Cross-Organizational Workflow: An Experience Report 95
Coloured Petri
Net
Smart Contract
Token game Logic Unit tests
Current marking
Current state of
the ledger
is translated into
is run on is run on
formulating
translating
into
results in result in
equal to
Software
engineer
Domain
experts
Sub-
contractors/
Governmental
authorities
Software
engineer
Step 1: Modelling process Step 2: Smart contract and unit test implementation
Step 3: Workflow monitoring
Fig.7. Suggested development approach
(i.e. termination, deadlock-freeness, boundness and soundness), which should
be fulﬁlled by the Net, were speciﬁed beforehand. Since the speciﬁed proper-
ties were not fulﬁlled, the CPN was adapted accordingly. Using Petri Nets as a
modelling language for cross-organizational business processes, enables a formal
veriﬁcation of the workﬂow from early stages of the modelling process on.
In this experience report, application speciﬁc properties for the models were
not considered in the veriﬁcation process. This should be done in future work
to guarantee not only behavioural properties, but make sure that the business
process is modelled in the intended way. In our case, an application speciﬁc
property would look like the following: “the system design phase can only be
entered after the plant design is ﬁnished and accepted by NOBO”.
After the Net fulﬁlled all properties, a suitable Blockchain platform was cho-
sen and the CPN model was translated into Smart Contracts. To evaluate that
the Smart Contracts implement the workﬂow correctly, the token game was run
on the model and the resulted current markings were translated into logical
orders, which were then translated into unit tests. These unit tests were run
against the Smart Contracts. It was checked that the partial state of the Net
was equal to the current state of the ledger. Translating the extracted logic into
unit tests and running them against the Smart Contracts, resulted in a low test
coverage, since edge and error cases are not considered in the calculated state
space. Therefore, additional unit and regression tests were formulated.
Running the resulted Smart Contracts on Hyperledger Fabric ensures that all
participating stakeholders execute the workﬂow correctly and therefore, estab-
lishes trust between the participants.
Although this method, including the elaborate modelling process takes time
and contains multiple revisions, the method, introduced in this report, supports
a correct implementation of the cross-organizational business process. Unfortu-

--- PAGE 113 ---
96 S. Stahnke et al.
nately, a model often cannot represent every detail of the workﬂow. Therefore,
information that is not captured by the model has to be recorded in textual
form, can not be veriﬁed and has to be considered in the implementation and
testing phase additionally.
In case of a change in the model, the Smart Contracts are easily adaptable.
Backwards compatibility is not guaranteed. Also, once the Smart Contracts are
running, they can’t be updated, since in our case keys to get earlier performed
transactions from the ledger are saved locally by each node in the Blockchain
network and depend on the currently running Smart Contracts. This approach
does not force all participants to use the same SDK, but gives each stakeholder
the ﬂexibility to use any technology they want behind the API.
6 Related Work
In [4], the authors demonstrate the use of Blockchain technology in the context
of inter-organizational business processes for the use case of a documentary letter
of credit. Unfortunately, no method was introduced to specify a workﬂow. Since
we are dealing with a large workﬂow, a method to specify the workﬂow and
translate this speciﬁcation into Smart Contracts is necessary. Routis investigates
the use of Case Management Modelling and Notation for collaborative processes
[15]. A method on how to translate the deﬁned processes in Smart Contracts
is not given. The authors in [11] introduce the notion of Enforceable Business
Processes (EBP), a cooperative stable process, managed by multiple mutually
independent organizations with a common goal. Challenges regarding running
EBPs as Smart Contracts are analysed. A method on how to map such processes
onto Smart Contracts is not introduced.
Caterpillar [10] and Lorikeet [17] translate BPMN to Solidity. Caterpillar
is an open-source Business Process Management System running on Ethereum.
Models in BPMN are translated to Solidity with the compilation tools provided
by Caterpillar. Furthermore, the execution engine enables the deployment of
the generated Smart Contract by the compilation tools, as stated in [10]. Lori-
keet is a model-driven engineering tool to implement business processes on a
Blockchain, described in [17]. The tools create Solidity Smart Contract code
from BPMN speciﬁcations, which is demonstrated by an industrial use case.
These tools restrict the modelling of the business process to BPMN. Since we
use Petri Nets to model our use case, because of the above mentioned advantages,
those systems are not applicable.
Nakamura presents in [1] a similar approach to ours. Deﬁning the cross-
organizational business processes in statecharts, applying statechart reduction
algorithms to optimize the size of the statechart and generating software arti-
facts, Smart Contracts, running on Blockchain. Since we are dealing with an
inter-organizational business process that comprises obligations which are agreed
upon by all parties beforehand, a reduction of the size of the speciﬁed workﬂow,
and therefore, a possible loss of information, is not permitted. Furthermore, stat-
echarts lack formal semantics and therefore, can not be formally veriﬁed. The
proposed solution in [1] does not include a veriﬁcation of the statecharts.

--- PAGE 114 ---
Enforcing a Cross-Organizational Workflow: An Experience Report 97
7 Conclusion
Today business processes often exceed organizational boundaries and therefore,
trust between the organizations that participate in this process has to be estab-
lished. In the past, this trust was guaranteed solely through legal contracts. To
digitally establish trust without requiring a trust third party, Blockchain tech-
nology together with Smart Contracts is used to ensure that involved organiza-
tions can not break their agreements. Smart Contracts can serve as a machine
enforceable and veriﬁable protocol for inter-organizational workﬂows. This expe-
rience report introduced a solution on how to model, verify and implement an
enforcement of cross-organizational business processes. This was done on the
basis of the use case “Certiﬁcation of the Construction of Industrial Plants”.
Using diﬀerent types of Petri Nets and verifying the resulted models in CPN
Tools, assured the correct representation of the workﬂow. The veriﬁed models
were then translated into Smart Contracts, which were evaluated based on the
simulation and reachability graph of the models.
To enhance the outcome of this report, the following points could be consid-
ered in the future. Building a generator that generates Smart Contracts from
Petri Nets, Coloured Petri Nets in particular, could improve the cost for the
method introduced in this report. Furthermore, versioning and updating the
Smart Contracts have to be improved, and the admissibility of the ledger and
the published documents as evidence in a court of law should be researched.
Acknowledgement. - This research work has been partially funded by the Euro-
pean Union’s H2020 Programme under the Grant Agreement No. 830929 (Cyber-
Sec4Europe). Also, we would like to thank our colleagues from Siemens and TÜV
who were involved.
References
1. B, S.M.G., Yakhchi, S., Beheshti, A.: Inter-organizational Business Processes
Managed by Blockchain, pp. 161–177 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
02922-7, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-02922-7 11
2. Christidis, K., Devetsikiotis, M.: Blockchains and smart contracts for the Internet
of Things. IEEE Access 4, 2292–2303 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.
2016.2566339
3. Dijkman, R.M., Dumas, M., Ouyang, C.: Formal semantics and analysis of BPMN
process models using petri nets. Technical Report, Prepr. 7115, 1–30 (2007). http://
eprints.qut.edu.au/7115/
4. Fridgen, G., Radszuwill, S., Urbach, N., Utz, L.: Cross-organizational workflow
management using blockchain technology - towards applicability, auditability, and
automation. In: Proceedings of 51st Hawaii International Conference System Sci-
ence, vol. 4801 (2018). https://doi.org/10.24251/hicss.2018.444
5. Heckel, R.: Open petri nets as semantic model for workflow integration. In:
Ehrig, H., Reisig, W., Rozenberg, G., Weber, H. (eds.) Petri Net Technology for
Communication-Based Systems. LNCS, vol. 2472, pp. 281–294. Springer, Heidel-
berg (2003). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-40022-6 14

--- PAGE 115 ---
98 S. Stahnke et al.
6. Hollingsworth, D.: Workflow management coalition: the workflow reference model.
Work. Manag. Coalit. 59(10), 904–913 (1993). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00101-
010-1752-4
7. Jensen, K., Kristensen, L.M., Wells, L.: Coloured Petri Nets and CPN tools for
modelling and validation of concurrent systems. Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol.
Transf. 9(3–4), 213–254 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10009-007-0038-x
8. Kasinathan, P., Cuellar, J.: Securing the integrity of workflows in IoT. In: Inter-
national Conference on Embedded Wireless Systems and Networks, pp. 252–257
(2018)
9. Leal, G., Guédria, W., Panetto, H., Proper, E.: Towards a meta-model for net-
worked enterprise. In: Schmidt, R., Guédria, W., Bider, I., Guerreiro, S. (eds.)
BPMDS/EMMSAD -2016. LNBIP, vol. 248, pp. 417–431. Springer, Cham (2016).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-39429-9 26
10. López-Pintado, O., Garcı́a-Bañuelos, L., Dumas, M., Weber, I.: Caterpillar: a
blockchain-based business process management system. In: CEUR Workshop Pro-
ceedings, vol. 1920, pp. 1–5 (2017)
11. Migliorini, S., Gambini, M., Combi, C., La Rosa, M.: The rise of enforceable busi-
ness processes from the hashes of blockchain-based smart contracts. In: Reinhartz-
Berger, I., Zdravkovic, J., Gulden, J., Schmidt, R. (eds.) BPMDS/EMMSAD -
2019. LNBIP, vol. 352, pp. 130–138. Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-030-20618-5 9
12. Raedts, I., Petković, M., Usenko, Y.S., Van Der Werf, J.M., Groote, J.F., Somers,
L.: Transformation of BPMN models for behaviour analysis. In: Proceedings of
5th International Workshop on Modeling Simulation, Verification and Validation
Enterprise Information Systems - MSVVEIS 2007; Conjunction with ICEIS 2007,
pp. 126–137 (2007)
13. Ramadan, M., Elmongui; H., Hassan, R.: BPMN formalisation using Coloured
Petri Nets. In: Proceedings of the 2nd GSTF Annual International Conference on
Software Engineering and Application (2011)
14. Rimba, P., Tran, A.B., Weber, I., Staples, M., Ponomarev, A., Xu, X.: Comparing
blockchain and cloud services for business process execution. In: Proceedings of
2017 IEEE International Conference on Software Architecture ICSA 2017 (Section
III), pp. 257–260 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSA.2017.44
15. Routis, I., Nikolaidou, M., Anagnostopoulos, D.: Modeling collaborative pro-
cesses with CMMN: success or failure? An experience report. In: Gulden, J.,
Reinhartz-Berger, I., Schmidt, R., Guerreiro, S., Guédria, W., Bera, P. (eds.)
BPMDS/EMMSAD -2018. LNBIP, vol. 318, pp. 199–210. Springer, Cham (2018).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-91704-7 13
16. Ter Hofstede, A., van der Aalst, W.M.P.: YAWL: yet another workflow language.
Inf. Syst. 30(4), 245–275 (2005)
17. Tran, A.B., Lu, Q., Weber, I.: Lorikeet: a model-driven engineering tool for
blockchain-based business process execution and asset management. In: CEUR
Workshop Proceedings, vol. 2196, pp. 56–60 (2018)
18. Van Der Aalst, W.: Loosely coupled interorganizational workflows: modeling and
analyzing workflows crossing organizational boundaries. Inf. Manag. 37(2), 67–75
(2000). https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-7206(99)00038-5

--- PAGE 116 ---
Planning and Scheduling in Business
Processes (BPMDS 2020)

--- PAGE 117 ---
Automated Planning for Supporting
Knowledge-Intensive Processes
Sheila Katherine Venero1(B)
, Bradley Schmerl2
, Leonardo Montecchi1
,
Julio Cesar dos Reis1
, and Cecı́lia Mary Fischer Rubira1
1
University of Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil
2
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Abstract. Knowledge-intensive Processes (KiPs) are processes charac-
terized by high levels of unpredictability and dynamism. Their process
structure may not be known before their execution. One way to cope
with this uncertainty is to defer decisions regarding the process structure
until run time. In this paper, we consider the deﬁnition of the process
structure as a planning problem. Our approach uses automated plan-
ning techniques to generate plans that deﬁne process models according
to the current context. The generated plan model relies on a metamodel
called METAKIP that represents the basic elements of KiPs. Our solu-
tion explores Markov Decision Processes (MDP) to generate plan mod-
els. This technique allows uncertainty representation by deﬁning state
transition probabilities, which gives us more ﬂexibility than traditional
approaches. We construct an MDP model and solve it with the help
of the PRISM model-checker. The solution is evaluated by means of a
proof of concept in the medical domain which reveals the feasibility of
our approach.
Keywords: Knowledge-intensive process · Business process modeling ·
Case management · Automated planning · Markov Decision Process ·
Business process management systems
1 Introduction
In the last decades, the business process management (BPM) community has
established approaches and tools to design, enact, control, and analyze business
processes. Most process management systems follow predeﬁned process models
that capture diﬀerent ways to coordinate their tasks to achieve their business
goals. However, not all types of processes can be predeﬁned at design time—
some of them can only be speciﬁed at run time because of their high degree of
uncertainty [18]. This is the case with Knowledge-intensive Processes (KiPs).
This work is partially supported by CAPES and CNPq scholarships, by the Mobility
Program of the Santander Bank, and by the São Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP)
with grants #2017/21773-9 and #2019/02144-6. The opinions expressed in this work
do not necessarily reﬂect those of the funding agencies.
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. Nurcan et al. (Eds.): BPMDS 2020/EMMSAD 2020, LNBIP 387, pp. 101–116, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49418-6_7

--- PAGE 118 ---
102 S. K. Venero et al.
KiPs are business processes with critical decision-making tasks that involve
domain-speciﬁc knowledge, information, and data [4]. KiPs can be found in
domains like healthcare, emergency management, project coordination, and case
management, among others. KiP structure depends on the current situation and
new emergent events that are unpredictable and vary in every process instance
[4]. Thus, a KiP’s structure is deﬁned step by step as the process executes, by a
series of decisions made by process participants considering the current speciﬁc
situations and contexts [13]. In this sense, it is not possible to entirely deﬁne
beforehand which activities will execute or their ordering and, indeed, it is nec-
essary to reﬁne them as soon as new information becomes available or whenever
new goals are set.
These kinds of processes heavily rely on highly qualiﬁed and trained profes-
sionals called knowledge workers. Knowledge workers use their own experience
and expertise to make complex decisions to model the process and achieve busi-
ness goals [3]. Despite their expertise, it is often the case that knowledge workers
become overwhelmed with the number of cases, the diﬀerences between cases,
rapidly changing contexts, and the need to integrate new information. They
therefore require computer-aided support to help them manage these diﬃcult
and error-prone tasks.
In this paper, we explore how to provide this support by considering the pro-
cess modeling problem as an automated planning problem. Automated planning,
a branch of artiﬁcial intelligence, investigates how to search through a space of
possible actions and environment conditions to produce a sequence of actions
to achieve some goal over time [10]. Our work investigates an automated way
to generate process models for KiPs by mapping an artifact-centric case model
into a planning model at run time. To encode the planning domain and planning
problem, we use a case model deﬁned according to the METAKIP metamodel
[20] that encloses data and process logic into domain artifacts. It deﬁnes data-
driven activities in the form of tactic templates. Each tactic aims to achieve a
goal and the planning model is derived from it.
In our approach, we use Markov decision processes (MDP) because they allow
us to model dynamic systems under uncertainty [7], although our deﬁnition of
the planning problem model enables using diﬀerent planning algorithms and
techniques. MDP ﬁnds optimal solutions to sequential and stochastic decision
problems. As the system model evolves probabilistically, an action is taken based
on the observed condition or state and a reward or cost is gained [7,10]. Thus,
an MDP model allows us to identify decision alternatives for structuring KiPs
at run time. We use PRISM [11], a probabilistic model checker, to implement
the solution for the MDP model.
We present a proof of concept by applying our method in a medical treatment
scenario, which is a typical example of a non-deterministic process. Medical
treatments can be seen as sequential decisions in an uncertain environment.
Medical decisions not only depend on the current state of the patient, but they
are aﬀected by the evolution of the states as well. The evolution of the patient
state is unpredictable, since it depends on factors such as preexisting patient

--- PAGE 119 ---
Automated Planning for Supporting Knowledge-Intensive Processes 103
illnesses or patient-speciﬁc characteristics of the diseases. In addition, medical
treatment decisions involve complex trade-oﬀs between the risks and beneﬁts of
various treatment options.
We show that it is possible to generate diﬀerent optimal treatment plans
according to the current patient state and a target goal state, assuming that
we have enough data to accurately estimate the transition probabilities to the
next patient state. The resulting process models could help knowledge workers
to make complex decisions and structure execution paths at run time with more
probability of success and optimizing constraints, such as cost and time.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Sect.2 presents a moti-
vating medical scenario. Section3 introduces the theoretical and methodological
background. Section4 describes the proposed method to encode a case model
as a planning model. Section5 reports on the application of the methodology in
a scenario. Section6 discusses the obtained ﬁndings and related work. Finally,
Sect.7 wraps up the paper with the concluding remarks.
2 Motivating Example
This section presents a motivating medical case scenario. Suppose we have the
following medical scenario in the oncology department stored in the Electronic
Medical Record (EMR).
Mary, 58 years old, married, two children. She was diagnosed with a lymphoma non-
Hodgkin admitted on 20/07/2019 and is receiving R-ICE Chemotherapy. R-ICE is
named after the initials of the drugs used: rituximab, ifosfamide, carboplatin, etopo-
side. R-ICE is applied as a course of several sessions (cycles) of treatment over a
few months. On 02/10/2019, Mary is supposed to receive the second cycle of R-ICE.
However, on admission, she is febrile at 38◦
C and presents severe nausea (Level 4).
In order to receive the second cycle of R-ICE, it is necessary to stabilize
Mary’s health status as soon as possible. Thus, at this time the goal is to decrease
her body temperature to 36.5◦
C ≤ Temp ≤ 37.2◦
C and reduce the level of
nausea to zero LN = 0. For that, physicians need to choose from vast treatment
strategies to decide which procedures are the best for Mary, in her speciﬁc current
context.
Assume that we have statistical data about two possible tactics for achiev-
ing the desired goal: fever (Fvr) and nausea (Nausea) management, shown in
Table1 adapted from [2]. Each of these tactics can be fulﬁlled through multiple
activities that have diﬀerent interactions and constraints with each other, as
well as to the speciﬁcs of the patient being treated. For example, (a) treating
nausea with a particular drug may aﬀect the fever, (b) administration of the
drug may depend on the drugs that the patient is taking, (c) drug eﬀective-
ness may depend on the patient history with the drug, or (d) giving the drug
may depend on whether the drug has already been administered and how much
time has elapsed since the last dose. These issues make manual combination of
even this simple case challenging, and it becomes much harder for more complex

--- PAGE 120 ---
104 S. K. Venero et al.
treatments and patient histories. Support is therefore needed that can take into
account patient data, constraints, dependencies, and patient/doctor preferences
to help advise the doctor on viable and eﬀective courses of treatment.
Table 1. Tactics templates for fever (Fvr) and nausea (Nausea) management
Tactic: Fever Management (FVR) Tactic: Nausea Management (Nausea)
Deﬁnition: Management of a
patient with hyperpyrexia caused by
non-environmental factors
Deﬁnition: Prevention and alleviation of
nausea
Goal: Thermoregulation
(36.5◦
C ≤ Temp ≤ 37.2◦
C)
Goal: Stop Nausea (LoN = 0)
Metric: Temperature (Temp) Metric: Level of Nausea (LoN)
Preconditions: Temp > 37.2◦
C Preconditions: LoN >0
Activities: Activities:
A1. Administer ORAL antipyretic
medication,as appropriate
A2. Administer INTRAVENOUS
antipyretic medication, as
appropriate
A3. Administer medications to treat
the cause of fever, as appropriate
A4.Encourage increased intake of
oral ﬂuids, as appropriate
A5. Administer oxygen, as
appropriate
B1. Ensure that eﬀective antiemetic drugs
are given to prevent nausea when possible
(except for nausea related to pregnancy)
B2. Control environmental factors that may
evoke nausea (e.g., aversive smells, sound
and unpleasant visual stimulation
B3. Give cold, clear liquid and odorless and
colorless food, as appropriate
3 Background
This section presents the underlying concepts in our proposal. Section3.1 pro-
vides an overview of the METAKIP metamodel; Sect.3.2 introduces basic con-
cepts of automated planning; Sect.3.3 explains Markov decision process (MDP).
Section3.4 describes the PRISM tool and language.
3.1 METAKIP: A Metamodel for KiPs Definition
Our previous work proposed an artifact-centric metamodel [20] for the deﬁni-
tion of KiPs, aiming to support knowledge workers during the decision-making
process. The metamodel supports data-centric process management, which is
based on the availability and values of data rather than completion of activities.

--- PAGE 121 ---
Automated Planning for Supporting Knowledge-Intensive Processes 105
In data-centric processes, data values drive decisions and decisions dynamically
drive the course of the process [18]. The metamodel is divided into four major
packages: case, control-ﬂow, knowledge, and decision, in such a way that there is
an explicit integration of the data, domain, and organizational knowledge, rules,
goals, and activities.
The Case Package deﬁnes the base structure of the metamodel, a Case. A
case model deﬁnition represents an integrated view of the context and environ-
ment data of a case, following the artifact-centric paradigm. This package is
composed of a set of interconnected artifacts representing the logical structure
of the business process. An artifact is a data object composed of a set of items,
attributes, and data values, deﬁned at run time.
The Knowledge Package captures explicit organizational knowledge, which
is encoded through tactic templates, goals, and metrics that are directly inﬂu-
enced by business rules. Tactics templates represent best practices and guide-
lines. Usually, they have semi-structured sequences of activities or unstructured
loose alternative activities pursuing a goal.
The Control-ﬂow Package deﬁnes the behavior of a case. It is composed of
a set of data-driven activities to handle diﬀerent cases. Activity deﬁnitions are
made in a declarative way and have pre- and post-conditions. The metamodel
reﬁnes the granularity of an activity that could be a step or a task. A task is
logically divided into steps, which allows better management of data entry on
the artifacts. Step deﬁnitions are associated with a single attribute of an artifact,
a resource, and a role type at most. This deﬁnition gives us a tight integration
between data, steps and resources.
These packages are used to model alternative plans to answer emergent cir-
cumstances, reﬂecting environmental changes or unexpected outcomes during the
execution of a KiP. The Decision Package represents the structure of a collab-
orative decision-making process performed by knowledge workers. We proposed
a representation of how decisions can be made by using the principles of strate-
gic management, such as, looking towards goals and objectives and embracing
uncertainty by formulating strategies for the future and correct them if neces-
sary. The strategic plan is structured at run time by goals, objectives, metrics
and tactic templates.
3.2 Automated Planning
Planning is the explicit and rational deliberation of actions to be performed to
achieve a goal [7]. The process of deliberation consists of choosing and organizing
actions considering their expected outcomes in the best possible way. Usually,
planning is required when an activity involves new or less familiar situations,
complex tasks and objectives, or when the adaptation of actions is constrained
by critical factors such as high risk. Automated planning studies the deliberation
process computationally [7].
A conceptual model for planning can be represented by a state-transition
system, which formally is a 4-tuple Σ = (S,A,E,γ), where S = {s1,s2,....} is
a ﬁnite or recursively enumerable set of states; A = {a1,a2,...} is a ﬁnite or

--- PAGE 122 ---
106 S. K. Venero et al.
recursively enumerable set of actions; E = {e1,e2,...} is a ﬁnite or recursively
enumerable set of events; and γ : S ×A×E → 2S
is a state-transition function.
Actions are transitions controlled by a plan executor. Events are unforeseen
transitions that correspond to the internal dynamics of the system and cannot
be controlled by the plan executor. Both events and actions contribute to the
evolution of the system. Given a state transition system Σ, the purpose of plan-
ning is to deliberate which actions to apply into which states to achieve some
goal from a given state. A plan is a structure that gives the appropriate actions.
3.3 Markov Decision Process (MDP)
A Markov decision process (MDP) is a discrete-time stochastic control process.
It is a popular framework designed to make decisions under uncertainty, dealing
with nondeterminism, probabilities, partial observability, and extended goals [7].
In MDPs, an agent chooses action a based on observing state s and receives
a reward r for that action [10]. The state evolves probabilistically based on the
current state and the action taken by the agent.
Figure1(a) presents a decision network [10], used to represent a MDP. The
state transition function T(s
|s,a) represents the probability of transitioning
from state s to s
after executing action a. The reward function R(s,a) represents
the expected reward received when executing action a from state s. We assume
that the reward function is a deterministic function of s and a.
Fig.1. (a) MDP representation [10] and (b) Example syntax of mdp PRISM [11]
module and rewards
An MDP treats planning as an optimization problem in which an agent needs
to plan a sequence of actions that maximizes the chances of reaching the goal.
Action outcomes are modeled with a probability distribution function. Goals
are represented as utility functions that can express preferences on the entire
execution path of a plan, rather than just desired ﬁnal states. For example,
ﬁnding the optimal choice of treatment optimizing the life expectancy of the
patient or optimizing cost and resources.

--- PAGE 123 ---
Automated Planning for Supporting Knowledge-Intensive Processes 107
3.4 PRISM
PRISM [11] is a probabilistic model checker that allows the modeling and
analysis of systems that exhibit probabilistic behavior. The PRISM tool pro-
vides support for modeling and construction of many types of probabilistic
models: discrete-time Markov chains (DTMCs), continuous-time Markov chains
(CTMCs), Markov decision processes (MDPs), and probabilistic timed automata
(PTAs). The tool supports statistical model checking, conﬁdence-level approx-
imation, and acceptance sampling with its discrete-event simulator. For non-
deterministic models it can generate an optimal adversary/strategy to reach a
certain state.
Models are described using the PRISM language, a simple, state-based lan-
guage based on the reactive modules formalism [1]. Figure1(b) presents an exam-
ple of the syntax of a PRISM module and rewards. The fundamental compo-
nents of the PRISM language are modules. A module has two parts: variables
and commands. Variables describe the possible states that the module can be
in at a given time. Commands describe the behavior of a module, how the state
changes over time. A command comprises a guard and one or more updates. The
guard is a predicate over all the variables in the model. Each update describes
a transition that the module can take if the guard is true. A transition is speci-
ﬁed by giving the new values of the variables in the module. Each update has a
probability which will be assigned to the corresponding transition. Commands
can be labeled with actions. These actions are used for synchronization between
modules. Cost and rewards are expressed as real values associated with certain
states or transitions of the model.
4 Dynamic Plan Generation for KiPs Execution
In our approach, plans are fragments of process models that are frequently cre-
ated and modiﬁed during process execution. Plans may change as new informa-
tion arrives and/or when a new goal is set. We advocate the creation of a planner
to structure process models at run time based on a knowledge base. The planner
synthesizes plans on-the-ﬂy according to ongoing circumstances. The generated
plans should be revised and re-planned as soon as new information becomes
available. Thereby, it involves both computer agents and knowledge workers in
a constant interleaving of planning, execution (conﬁguration and enactment),
plan supervision, plan revision, and re-planning. An interactive software tool
might assist human experts during planning. This tool should allow deﬁning
planning goals and verifying emerging events, states, availability of activities
and resources, as well as preferences.
4.1 Model Formulation
The run-time generation of planning models according to a speciﬁc situation
in a case instance requires the deﬁnition of the planning domain and then the
planning problem itself.

--- PAGE 124 ---
108 S. K. Venero et al.
Definition 1. Let the case model be represented according to the METAKIP
metamodel. The planning domain is derived from the case model that can be
described using a state-transition system deﬁned as a 5-tuple Σ = (S,A,E,γ,C)
such as that: S is the set of possible case states. A is the set of actions that
are represented by activities inside tactics that an actor may perform. E is the
set of events in the context or in the environment. γ : S × A × E → 2S
, is
the state-transition function, so the system evolves according to the actions and
events that it receives. C : S×A → [0,∞) is the cost function that may represent
monetary cost, time, risk or something that can be minimized or maximized.
The state of a case is the set of values (available data) of the attributes con-
tained in artifacts of the context and the environment. However, since the number
of attributes of the artifacts is very large, it is necessary to limit the number of
attributes to only the most relevant ones, which determines the current state of
the case at a given time t.
Definition 2. A state st is the set of values corresponding to a set of relevant
attributes {v1,v2,...vr}, with r ≥ 1, contained in the business artifacts at a
given time t.
Actions in the METAKIP metamodel are represented by the activities within
a tactic. Tactics represent best practices and guidelines used by the knowledge
workers to make decisions. In METAKIP, they serve as tactic templates to be
instantiated to deal with some situations during the execution of a case instance.
Tactics are composed of a ﬁnite set of activities pursuing a goal. A tactic can
be structured or unstructured. A tactic is a 4-tuple T = (G,PC,M,A), where:
G is a set of variables representing the pursuing goal state, PC is a ﬁnite set of
preconditions representing a state required for applying the tactic, M is a set
of metrics to track and assess the pursuing goal state, and A is a ﬁnite set of
activities.
In METAKIP, an activity could be a single step or a set of steps (called a
task). An activity has some preconditions and post-conditions (eﬀects). We map
activities into executable actions. An executable action is an activity in which
their eﬀects can modify the values of the attributes inside business artifacts.
These eﬀects can be deterministic or non-deterministic.
Definition 3. An action is a 4-tuple a = (Pr,Eﬀ ,Pb,c) where: Pr is a ﬁnite
set of preconditions. Eﬀ is a ﬁnite set of eﬀects. Pb is a probability distribu-
tion on the eﬀects, such that, Pef(i) is the probability of eﬀect ef ∈ Eﬀ and 
ef∈Eﬀ Pef(i) = 1. c is the number which represents the cost (monetary, time,
etc.) of performing a.
As the state-transition function γ is too large to be explicitly speciﬁed, it is
necessary to represent it in a generative way. For that, we use the planning oper-
ators from which it is possible to compute γ. Thus, γ can be speciﬁed through
a set of planning operators O. A planning operator is instantiated by an action.

--- PAGE 125 ---
Automated Planning for Supporting Knowledge-Intensive Processes 109
Definition 4. A planning operator O is a pair (id,a) where a is an action and
id is a unique identiﬁer of action a.
At this point, we are able to deﬁne the planning problem to generate a plan
as a process model.
Definition 5. The planning problem for generating a process model at a given
time t is deﬁned as a triple P = (OSt,GSt,ROt), where: OSt is the observable
situation of a case state at time t. GSt is the goal state at time t, a set of
attributes with expected output values. ROt represents a subset of the O that
represents only available and relevant actions for a speciﬁc situation during the
execution of a case instance at a given time t.
Definition 6. The observable situation of a case instance C state at a given
time t is a set of attributes OSt = {v1,v2,...,vm}, with m ≥ 1, such that
vi ∈ St ∪It for each 1 ≤ i ≤ m, where the state of C is St and the set issues in
the situation of C is It.
Definition 7. The goal state of an observable situation of case instance C at
a given time t is the set of attributes GSt = {v1,v2,...,vm}, with m ≥ 1, such
that, for 1 ≤ i ≤ m, vi is an attribute with an expected output value, vi belongs
to an artifact of C. These attributes are selected by the knowledge workers. Some
metrics required to asses some goals inside tactics can be added to the goal. GSt
represents the expected reality of C.
GSt serves as an input for searching an execution path for a speciﬁc situation.
Diﬀerent goal states can be deﬁned over time.
Definition 8. Let P = (OSt,GSt,ROt) be the planning problem. A plan π is
a solution for P. The state produced by applying π to a state OSt in the order
given is the state GSt. A plan is any sequence of actions π = (a1,...,ak), where
k ≥ 1. The plan π represents the process model.
Our problem deﬁnition enables the use of diﬀerent planning algorithms and
the application of automatic planning tools to generate alternatives plans. As
we are interested in KiPs, which are highly unpredictable processes, we use
Markov Decision Processes for formulating the model for the planner. MDPs
allows us to represent uncertainty with a probability distribution. MDP makes
sequential decision making and reasons about the future sequence of actions
and obstructions, which provides us with high levels of ﬂexibility in the process
models. In the following, we show how to derive an MDP model expressed in the
PRISM language from a METAKIP model automatically.
4.2 PRISM Model Composition
Algorithm 1 shows the procedure to automatically generate the MDP model
for the PRISM tool, where the input parameters are: OSt, GSt, set of domain

--- PAGE 126 ---
110 S. K. Venero et al.
Tactics, t is the given time, PP minimum percentage of preconditions satis-
faction, and PG minimum percentage of goal satisfaction, both PP and PG
are according to the rules of the domain. As described in Sect.3.4, a module
is composed of variables and commands. Variables of the module are the set of
attributes from the case artifacts that belong to OSt ∪GSt. Commands are rep-
resented for the relevant planning operators ROt. The name of the command is
the identiﬁer of the action, the guards are the preconditions PC and the eﬀects
Eﬀ are the updates with associated probabilities. Rewards are represented by
the cost of actions c and are outside of the module of PRISM.
Algorithm 1. PRISM Model Generator
Require: OSt, GSt, Tactics, t, PP, PG
V ← OSt ∪ GSt  Attributes of OSt and GSt correspond to PRISM variables
for all T ∈ Tactics do  For each tactic
p1 ← |T.PC ∩ OSt|/|T.PC|  Percentage of satisfied preconditions
p2 ← |GSt ∩ T.G|/|GSt|  Percentage of achievable target goal
if p1 ≥ PP and p2 ≥ PG then  If percentages are acceptable
ST ← ST ∪ T  Add to the set of selected tactics
end if
end for
RT ← SelectRevevantTactics(ST)  Relevant tactics for the current situation OSt
At ← CheckAvailableActivities(RT,t)  Select available activities at time t
ROt ← CreatePlanningOperators(At)
C ← CreateCommands(ROt)
R ← CreateRewards(ROt)
V ← V ∪ {T.M : T ∈ RT}  Add necessary metrics to evaluate
CreatePRISMModel(V,C,R)
For ﬁnding the set of relevant planning operators ROt, ﬁrst, we select tactics
whose preconditions must be satisﬁed by the current situation OSt and whose
goal is related to the target state GSt. This can be done by calculating the
percentages of both the satisﬁed preconditions and achievable goals. If these
percentages are within an acceptable range according to the rules of the domain,
the tactics are selected. Second, this ﬁrst set of tactics is shown to the knowledge
workers who select the most relevant tactics. The set of the selected relevant
tactics is denoted as RT. From this set of tactics, we verify which activities
inside the tactics are available at time t. Thus, the set of available actions at
time t is denoted by At = a1,a2,...,an. Finally, the relevant planning operators,
ROt, are created by means of At.
4.3 Plan Generation
To generate plans in PRISM, it is necessary to deﬁne a property ﬁle that contains
properties that deﬁne goals as utility functions. PRISM evaluates properties over
an MDP model and generates all possible resolutions of non-determinism in the
model, state graphs, and gives us the optimal state graph. The state graph
describes a series of possible states that can occur while choosing actions aiming
to achieve a goal state. It maximizes the probability to reach the goal state

--- PAGE 127 ---
Automated Planning for Supporting Knowledge-Intensive Processes 111
taking into consideration rewards computed, that is maximizing or minimizing
rewards and costs.
In our context, a property represents the goal state GSt to be achieved while
trying to optimize some criteria. Then, PRISM calculates how desirable an exe-
cuting path is according to one criterion. Thus, plans can be customized accord-
ing to knowledge workers’ preferences (costs and rewards). To generate a plan,
we need to evaluate a property. The generated plan is a state graph that rep-
resents a process model to be executed at time t. The generated process model
shows case states as nodes and states transitions as arcs labeled with actions
which outcomes follow probability distribution function. According to this state
graph, the knowledge worker could choose which action to execute in a particular
state. This helps knowledge workers to make decisions during KiPs execution.
5 Proof of Concept
This section formulates a patient-speciﬁc MDP model in PRISM for the medical
scenario presented in Sect.2. In the area of health care, medical decisions can
be modeled with Markov Decisions Processes (MDP) [5,17]. Although MDP is
more suitable for certain types of problems involving complex decisions, such
as liver transplants, HIV, diabetes, and others, almost every medical decision
can be modeled as an MDP [5]. We generate the PRISM model by deﬁning
the observable situation OSt, Goal state GSt, and the set of relevant planning
operators ROt.
Table 2. Activity modeling
Activity A1: Administer Oral
antipyretic medication, as
appropriate
Activity B1: Ensure that eﬀective
antiemetic drugs are given to
prevent nausea when possible
Pre-condition: ((Temp > 37.2) and
(LN=0 or LN=1)) and (allergic =
false) and (conﬂict with current
medications = false) and (medication is
available = true)
Pre-condition: Pregnancy(FALSE)
and (LN > 2) and (allergic = false)
and (conﬂict with current medications
= false)
Eﬀects: Eﬀects:
E1: p=0.6 Respond to treatment
(Temp=37)
E1: p=0.7 Respond to treatment
(LN=0)
E2: p=0.3 Partial Respond to
treatment (Temp=Temp − 0.5)
E2: p=0.2 Partially respond to
treatment (LN=LN −1)
E3: p=0.1 Not Responding to
treatment (Temp=Temp + 0.5)
E3: p=0.1 Not Responding to
treatment (LN=LN +1))
Task execution time : 5min Task execution time : 5min
Cost: 0.08 Cost: 0.08

--- PAGE 128 ---
112 S. K. Venero et al.
Taking in consideration the medical scenario, the observable situation is
OS0 = {Temp0 = 38◦
,LN0 = 4} and the goal state is GS0 = {36◦
C ≤ Temp ≤
37.2◦
C,LN = 0} where: Temp is the temperature of the patient and LN is the
level of nausea, both attributes of the Health Status artifact. We assume that the
set of relevant tactics RT according to the current health status of the patient
are fever and nausea management, presented in Sect.2.
Table2 shows the speciﬁcation of one activity of each tactic, showing their
preconditions, eﬀects with their probability, time, and cost of execution. We
modeled the activity eﬀects with probabilities related to the probability of the
patient to respond to the treatment. For example, the possible eﬀects of apply-
ing the activity Administer ORAL antipyretic medication are: (E1) the patient
successfully responds to treatment, occurring with a probability 0.6; (E2) 30%
of the time the patient partially responds to treatment where their temperature
decreases by 0.5◦
or more fails to reach the goal level; and (E3) the patient does
not respond at all to treatment or gets worse (occurring with a probability of
0.1). The other activities are similarly modeled according to the response of the
patient. Assuming that all activities from both tactics are available, the set of
executable actions is At = {A1,A2,A3,A4,A5,B1,B2,B3}. Then, it is possible
to model the set of relevant planning operators ROt. Having OSt, GSt and ROt,
it is possible to generate the MDP model in the language PRISM.
Once we created the MDP model, the following utility functions were evalu-
ated: minimize time and cost while reaching the target state. The optimal plan
to achieve the goal state GSt while minimizing the cost shows that reachabil-
ity is eight iterations. The resulting model has 13 states, 35 transitions, and 13
choices. The time for the model construction was 0.056s.
Fig.2. Plan for reaching the goal state optimizing the cost
Figure2 presents only a fragment of the model generated, highlighting the
most probable path from the initial state to the goal state. The ﬁrst suggested
action is B1 (labeled arc) with possible outcome states with their probabilities.
If the most probable next state is achieved, the next action to perform is A1
which has a probability of 0.6 to reach the goal state. Knowledge workers can
use this generated plan to decide which is the next activity they should perform
in a particular state. To make the plan readable to knowledge workers, they
could be presented with only the most probable path, and this could be updated

--- PAGE 129 ---
Automated Planning for Supporting Knowledge-Intensive Processes 113
according to the state actually reached after activity execution. Further studies
are necessary to help guiding knowledge workers in interpreting and following
the model.
6 Discussion and Related Work
In the last decades, there has been a growing interest in highly dynamic process
management, with diﬀerent types of approaches that deal with the variability,
ﬂexibility, and customization of processes at design time and at run time. Most
approaches start from the premise that there is a process model to which diﬀerent
changes have to be made, such as adding or deleting fragments according to a
domain model or to generate an alternative sequence of activities due to some
customization option. A few approaches use automated planning for synthesizing
execution plans. Laurent et al. [12] explored a declarative modeling language
called Alloy to create the planning model and generate the plans. This approach
seems to be very promising for activity-centric processes, but not eﬀective enough
for data-centric processes, as data is not well-enough treated to be the driver of
the process as required in KiPs.
SmartPM [16] investigated the problem of coordinating heterogeneous com-
ponents inside cyber-physical systems. They used a PDDL (Planning Domain
Deﬁnition Language) planner that evaluates the physical reality and the expected
reality, and synthesize a recovery process. Similarly, Marrella and Lespérance
proposed an approach [15] to dynamically generate process templates from a
representation of the contextual domain described in PDDL, an initial state,
and a goal condition. However, for the generation of the process templates, it is
assumed that tasks are black boxes with just deterministic eﬀects. On the other
hand, Henneberger et al. [8] explored an ontology for generating process mod-
els. The generated process models are action state graphs (ASG). Although this
work uses a very interesting semantic approach, they did not consider important
aspects such as resources and cost for the planning model.
There has been an increasing interest in introducing cognitive techniques for
supporting the business process cycle. Ferreira et. al. [6] proposed a new life cycle
for workﬂow management based on continuous learning and planning. It uses a
planner to generate a process model as a sequence of actions that comply with
activity rules and achieve the intended goal. Hull and Nezhad [9] proposed a
new cycle Plan-Act-Learn for cognitively-enabled processes that can be carried
out by humans and machines, where plans and decisions deﬁne actions, and
it is possible to learn from it. Recently, Marrella [14] showed how automatic
planning techniques can improve diﬀerent research challenges in the BPM area.
This approach explored a set of steps for encoding a concrete problem as a PDDL
planning problem with deterministics eﬀects.
In this paper we introduced the notion of the state of a case regarding data-
values in the artifacts of a case instance. From this state, we can plan diﬀer-
ent trajectories towards a goal state using automated planning techniques. Our
solution generates action plans considering the non-deterministic eﬀects of the

--- PAGE 130 ---
114 S. K. Venero et al.
actions, new emerging goals and information, which provides high levels of ﬂex-
ibility and adaptation. As we describe a generic planning model, it is possible
to use diﬀerent planning algorithms or combine other planning models, such as
the classical planning model or the hierarchical task network (HTN), accord-
ing to the structuring level of the processes at diﬀerent moments. Thereby, we
could apply this methodology to other types of processes, from well-structured
processes to loosely or unstructured processes.
Our approach relies on MDP, which requires deﬁning transition probabilities,
which in some situations can be very diﬃcult and expensive to get. Nowadays a
huge amount of data is produced by many sensors, machines, software systems,
etc, which might facilitate the acquisition of data to estimate these transition
probabilities. In the medical domain, the increasing use of electronic medical
record systems shall provide the medical data from thousands of patients, which
can be exploited to derive these probabilities. A limitation in MDPs refers to the
size of the problem because the size of the state-space explodes, and it becomes
more diﬃcult to solve. In this context, several techniques for ﬁnding approximate
solutions to MDPs can be applied in addition to taking advantage of the rapid
increase of processing power in the last years.
Flexible processes could be easily designed if we replan after an activity exe-
cution. In fact, our approach suggests a system that has a constant interleaving of
planning, execution, and monitoring. In this way, it will help knowledge workers
during the decision-making process.
7 Conclusion
Process modeling is usually conducted by process designers in a manual way.
They deﬁne the activities to be executed to accomplish business goals. This
task is very diﬃcult and prone to human errors. In some cases (e.g., for KiPs),
it is impossible due to uncertainty, context-dependency, and speciﬁcity. In this
paper, we devised an approach to continually generate run-time process models
for a case instance using an artifact-centric case model, data-driven activities,
and automatic planning techniques, even for such loosely-structured processes
as KiPs.
Our approach deﬁned how to synthesize a planning model from an artifact-
oriented case model deﬁned according to the METAKIP metamodel. The for-
mulation of the planning domain and the planning problem rely on the current
state of a case instance, context and environment, target goals, and tactic tem-
plates from which we can represent actions, states, and goals. As our focus is
KiPs management, we chose to use the MDP framework that allows represent-
ing uncertainty, which is one of KiPs essential characteristics. To automatically
generate the action plan, we used the tool PRISM, which solves the MDP model
and provides optimal solutions.
Future work involve devising a user-friendly software application for knowl-
edge workers to interact with the planner and improve the presentation of plans
in such a way that it is more understandable to them. Our goal is to develop

--- PAGE 131 ---
Automated Planning for Supporting Knowledge-Intensive Processes 115
a planner which combines diﬀerent types of planning algorithms to satisfy dif-
ferent requirements in business processes, especially regarding the structuring
level. This planner will be incorporated into a fully infrastructure for managing
Knowledge-intensive processes that will be based on the DW-SAArch reference
architecture [19].
References
1. Alur, R., Henzinger, T.A.: Reactive modules. Form. Methods Syst. Des. 15(1),
7–48 (1999)
2. Butcher, H.K., Bulechek, G.M., Dochterman, J.M.M., Wagner, C.: Nursing Inter-
ventions classiﬁcation (NIC)-E-Book. Elsevier Health Sciences (2018)
3. Davenport, T.: Thinking for a Living. How to Get Better Performance and Results.
Harvard Business School Press, Boston (2005)
4. Di Ciccio, C., Marrella, A., Russo, A.: Knowledge-intensive processes: characteris-
tics, requirements and analysis of contemporary approaches. J. Data Semant. 4(1),
29–57 (2015)
5. Dıez, F., Palacios, M., Arias, M.: MDPs in medicine: opportunities and challenges.
In: Decision Making in Partially Observable, Uncertain Worlds: Exploring Insights
from Multiple Communities (IJCAI Workshop), vol. 9, p. 14 (2011)
6. Ferreira, H.M., Ferreira, D.R.: An integrated life cycle for workﬂow management
based on learning and planning. Int. J. Cooper. Inf. Syst. 15(04), 485–505 (2006)
7. Ghallab, M., Nau, D., Traverso, P.: Automated Planning: Theory and Practice.
Elsevier (2004)
8. Henneberger, M., Heinrich, B., Lautenbacher, F., Bauer, B.: Semantic-based plan-
ning of process models. In: Multikonferenz Wirtschaftsinformatik (MKWI). GITO-
Verlag (2008)
9. Hull, R., Motahari Nezhad, H.R.: Rethinking BPM in a cognitive world: trans-
forming how we learn and perform business processes. In: La Rosa, M., Loos, P.,
Pastor, O. (eds.) BPM 2016. LNCS, vol. 9850, pp. 3–19. Springer, Cham (2016).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-45348-4 1
10. Kochenderfer, M.J.: Decision Making Under Uncertainty: Theory and Application.
MIT press, Cambridge (2015)
11. Kwiatkowska, M., Norman, G., Parker, D.: PRISM 4.0: veriﬁcation of probabilistic
real-time systems. In: Gopalakrishnan, G., Qadeer, S. (eds.) CAV 2011. LNCS,
vol. 6806, pp. 585–591. Springer, Heidelberg (2011). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-642-22110-1 47
12. Laurent, Y., Bendraou, R., Baarir, S., Gervais, M.P.: Planning for declarative pro-
cesses. In: Proceedings of the 29th Annual ACM Symposium on Applied Comput-
ing, pp. 1126–1133. ACM (2014)
13. Marjanovic, O.: Towards is supported coordination in emergent business processes.
Bus. Process Manag. J. 11(5), 476–487 (2005)
14. Marrella, A.: Automated planning for business process management. J. Data
Seman. 8(2), 79–98 (2019)
15. Marrella, A., Lespérance, Y.: A planning approach to the automated synthesis of
template-based process models. SOCA 11(4), 367–392 (2017)
16. Marrella, A., Mecella, M., Sardina, S.: SmartPM: an adaptive process management
system through situation calculus, IndiGolog, and classical planning. In: Proceed-
ings of the Fourteenth International Conference on Principles of Knowledge Rep-
resentation and Reasoning (KR 2014), pp. 518–527 (2014)

--- PAGE 132 ---
116 S. K. Venero et al.
17. Mattila, R., Siika, A., Roy, J., Wahlberg, B.: A Markov decision process model
to guide treatment of abdominal aortic aneurysms. In: 2016 IEEE Conference on
Control Applications (CCA), pp. 436–441. IEEE (2016)
18. Reichert, M., Weber, B.: Enabling Flexibility in Process-Aware Information Sys-
tems: Challenges, Methods Technologies. Springer, Heidelberg (2012)
19. Venero, S.K.: DW-SAAArch: a reference architecture for dynamic self-adaptation
in workﬂows. Master’s Thesis, UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil (2015)
20. Venero, S.K., Dos Reis, J.C., Montecchi, L., Rubira, C.M.F.: Towards a metamodel
for supporting decisions in knowledge-intensive processes. In: Proceedings of the
34th ACM/SIGAPP Symposium on Applied Computing, pp. 75–84. ACM (2019)

--- PAGE 133 ---
Scheduling Processes Without Sudden
Termination
Johann Eder(B)
, Marco Franceschetti , and Josef Lubas
Department of Informatics-Systems, Universität Klagenfurt, Klagenfurt, Austria
{johann.eder,marco.franceschetti,josef.lubas}@aau.at
Abstract. Dynamic controllability is the most general criterion to guar-
antee that a process can be executed without time failures. However,
it admits schedules with an undesirable property: starting an activity
without knowing its deadline. We analyze the speciﬁc constellations of
temporal constraints causing such a sudden termination. Consequently,
we introduce the somewhat stricter notion of semi-dynamic controllabil-
ity, and present necessary and suﬃcient conditions to guarantee that a
process can be executed without time failures and without sudden termi-
nation. A sound and complete algorithm for checking whether a process
is semi-dynamically controllable complements the approach.
Keywords: Process scheduling · Contingent durations · Sudden
termination · Controllability
1 Introduction
Modeling and veriﬁcation of the temporal aspects of a business process are crucial
for process management. Modeling temporal aspects includes deﬁning deadlines,
durations, and other temporal constraints [5]. Veriﬁcation of the temporal qual-
ities aims at determining, whether a given process model meets certain quality
criteria, in particular, whether time failures can be avoided by deﬁning adequate
schedules for the dispatching of activities.
In recent years, there has been increasing awareness on the distinction
between activities whose duration is under the control of an agent, and activi-
ties whose duration cannot be controlled, but merely observed at run time [22].
These uncontrollable durations are called contingent. A good example for activi-
ties with contingent durations is bank money transfers within the EU, which are
guaranteed to take between 1 and 4 working days, but the client cannot control
the actual duration. In a similar way, a service contract might covenant a visit
by a technician within 24 hours but it is not controllable by the client when the
technician will actually appear.
The existence of contingent activities in processes led to the formulation of
dynamic controllability [7,19,22] as preferred criterion for temporal correctness
of processes. Dynamic controllability requires the existence of a dynamic schedule
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. Nurcan et al. (Eds.): BPMDS 2020/EMMSAD 2020, LNBIP 387, pp. 117–132, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49418-6_8

--- PAGE 134 ---
118 J. Eder et al.
(execution strategy), which assigns timestamps for starting and ﬁnishing activ-
ities in a reactive manner in response to the observation of the actual durations
of contingent activities at run time. Dynamic controllability is the most relaxed
notion for guaranteeing that a process controller is able to steer the execution
satisfying all temporal constraints. Consequently, several techniques have been
developed to check the dynamic controllability of a process [3,19].
Nevertheless, dynamic controllability might admit processes where each
admissible dynamic schedule requires some activities to start, without knowing
yet, when they need to complete. This leads to the subsequent sudden termina-
tion scheduling of their end-event. In Sect.2 we give a precise demonstration and
an example of this phenomenon. While for some activities this poses no problem
(e.g. for waiting tasks), for other non-contingent activities a sudden termination
is highly undesirable, unacceptable, or even impossible, in particular, for activi-
ties involving human actors or invoking uninterruptible external services [10,12].
We call such activities semi-contingent, i.e. their duration between minimum and
maximum duration can be chosen by the process controller but only until the
activity starts. In Sect.2 we give some examples for semi-contingent activities
and the sudden termination problem.
The research question we address here is: how to determine, whether a given
process can be scheduled without the risk of a sudden termination of a task?
Here we show that sudden termination can be identiﬁed by the presence
of speciﬁc constraint patterns, and propose a technique to check, whether it is
possible to (dynamically) schedule a process with the guarantee that no sudden
termination will be forced at run time.
The contributions of this paper are the following:
– The discovery and characterization of the problem of sudden termination,
which might arise in dynamically controllable processes
– The introduction of the notion of semi-contingent activities to model relevant
temporal characteristics of activities
– The identiﬁcation and characterization of patterns of temporal constraints
and conditions, which are suﬃcient and necessary for the problem of sudden
termination
– The deﬁnition of semi-dynamic controllability, which specializes the tradi-
tional notion of dynamic controllability to address semi-contingent activities
and sudden termination
– A procedure to check semi-dynamic controllability
These results contribute to the development of a comprehensive framework
to support the design, modeling, and analysis of business processes at design
time and to monitor the time-aware execution of business processes at run-time.
The reminder of this paper is structured as follows: in Sect.2 we illustrate
the problem with the help of examples. In Sect.3 we introduce a lean process
model which allows the formulation of the problem, show how a speciﬁc pattern
can induce the problem, and show how to solve it. In Sect.4 we provide an
implementation of a checking procedure. In Sect.5 we discuss related works, and
in Sect.6 we draw conclusions.

--- PAGE 135 ---
Scheduling Processes Without Sudden Termination 119
2 Semi-contingent Activities and the Sudden Termination
Problem
Dynamic controllability of processes distinguishes two kinds of activities: con-
tingent and non-contingent activities. A process controller striving to meet all
temporal constraints can control the duration of non-contingent activities but
can only observe and not inﬂuence the duration of contingent activities. Dynamic
controllability implicitly assumes that a non-contingent activity can be termi-
nated spontaneously at any time (between minimum and maximum duration)
without any earlier notice. We nickname this phenomenon as sudden termina-
tion. Such a behavior may be undesirable, unacceptable, or even impossible.
Frequently, one can control the duration of an activity only until this activity
starts. We call such activities semi-contingent. For an example, we could deliver
a talk on temporal constraints for any time between 10min and 2 hours. But we
need to know beforehand for how long we can talk otherwise we would have to
stop maybe right after the introduction. Other examples include:
– Ship products with express delivery or regular delivery
– Prepare a meal: from quick lunch to 4 course gourmet dinner
– Apply an expensive quick test or a budget slow test
– Assign more or less people to ﬁnish a task earlier or later
– etc. etc.
We explain the sudden termination problem with a small example. Figure1
shows a simpliﬁed procurement process. The controller may choose the duration
of semi-contingent task A for arranging shipment of goods between 5 and 7 days.
A is bound to a contingent task R of receiving payment which lasts between 3
and 5 days. A lower-bound constraint demands that the end of A is at least 3
days after the end of R to allow a customer to cancel the order. The upper-
bound constraint states that A has to ﬁnish within 4 days after R to guarantee
timely delivery. Now, lets assume R should start at time point 10 and hence ends
anytime between 13 and 15. Is there a choice for the start time and duration of
A satisfying the constraints? After some trials you see: no! A might e.g. start at
12 and end between 17 and 19, but 19 is too late, if R ends at 13, and 17 is too
early, if R ends at 15. And at 12 the end of R is unknown.
Process Order
[1, 2] non-cont.
Arrange Shipment
[5, 7] semi-cont.
Receive Payment
[3, 5] contingent
Deliver Goods
[2, 7] non-cont.
ubc(R.e, A.e, 4)
lbc(R.e, A.e, 3)
Fig.1. Example process with a sudden termination problem

--- PAGE 136 ---
120 J. Eder et al.
It is easy to see that it is not possible to determine a duration for A such
that for all possible durations of R the constraints are satisﬁed. The end of the
ongoing activity A can only be scheduled, when the end of R has been observed.
How should we treat semi-contingent activities for checking dynamic control-
lability? If we treat them as non-contingent activities, we risk sudden termina-
tion. If we treat them as contingent activities, we are unnecessarily strict and
reject processes, which could be scheduled without sudden termination. There-
fore, we introduce the notions of semi-contingent activities and semi-dynamic
controllability to adequately deal with such activities.
3 Process Model and Semi-dynamic Controllability
3.1 Process Model with Temporal Constraints
For most general applicability, here we introduce a minimal process model, which
is suﬃcient to capture the patterns for which sudden termination may occur.
We consider the most common control ﬂow patterns: sequence, inclusive and
disjunctive splits, and the corresponding joins. To avoid design ﬂaws, and accord-
ing to the current state-of-the-art in this ﬁeld, we assume that processes are
acyclic and block-structured [6].
We consider activity durations, process deadline, and upper- and lower-bound
constraints between events (start and end of activities). We measure time in
chronons, representing, e.g., hours, days, ..., which have domain the set of natural
numbers and are on an increasing time axis starting at zero. A duration is deﬁned
as the distance between two time points on the time axis.
Finally, we distinguish between non-contingent, semi-contingent, and contin-
gent activities. The duration of contingent activities, by their nature, cannot
be controlled, thus it cannot be known, when they will actually terminate. The
process controller may however control the duration of non-contingent activities
at any time. This means in particular, that they are allowed to start with no
knowledge about the time when they have to end, thus conceding to be sud-
denly terminated. Semi-contingent activities, in contrast, require to know, at
their start time, when they must terminate: this means the process controller
can set their duration until the activity starts.
Definition 1 (Process Model). A process P is a tuple (N,E,C,Ω), where:
– N is a set of nodes n with n.type ∈ {start,activity,xor − split,xor −
join,par−split,par−join,end}. Each n ∈ N is associated with n.s and n.e,
the start and end event of n. From N we derive Ne
=

{n.s,n.e|n ∈ N}.
– E is a set of edges e = (n1,n2) deﬁning precedence constraints.
– C is a set of temporal constraints:
• duration constraints d(n,nmin,nmax,dur) ∀n ∈ N, where nmin,nmax ∈
N, dur ∈ {c,sc,nc}, stating that n takes some time in [nmin,nmax]. n
can be contingent (dur = c), semi-contingent (dur = sc), non-contingent
(dur = nc);

--- PAGE 137 ---
Scheduling Processes Without Sudden Termination 121
• upper-bound constraints ubc(a,b,δ), where a,b ∈ Ne
, δ ∈ N, requiring
that b ≤ a + δ;
• lower-bound constraints lbc(a,b,δ), where a,b ∈ Ne
, δ ∈ N, requiring that
b ≥ a + δ.
– Ω ∈ N is the process deadline.
We now deﬁne the temporal semantics of the process model.
3.2 Temporal Semantics
We deﬁne the temporal semantics of temporally constrained process deﬁnitions
by deﬁning which scenarios are valid. A scenario is a run of the process (a process
instance) with timestamps, when each event (starting and ending of process
steps) occurred. A scenario is valid, if it satisﬁes all temporal constraints.
Definition 2 (Valid Scenario). Let P(N,E,C,Ω) be a process model. Let σ
be a scenario for P, assigning to each time point t a timestamp t. σ is a valid
scenario for P iﬀ:
1. ∀(n1,n2) ∈ E, n1.e ≤ n2.s;
2. ∀d(n,nmin,nmax,[c|sc|nc]) ∈ C, n.s + nmin ≤ n.e ≤ n.s + nmax;
3. ∀ubc(a,b,δ) ∈ C, b ≤ a + δ;
4. ∀lbc(a,b,δ) ∈ C, a + δ ≤ b;
5. end.e ≤ start.s + Ω.
A schedule for a process states when each activity should be started and
terminated. If a schedule exists, we call the process controllable. Controllability is
often considered too strict, as it would not admit situations where, e.g. the time-
point for the start of an activity depends on the observed duration of preceding
contingent activities.
Dynamic controllability requires the existence of a dynamic schedule (or
dynamic execution strategy), where the decision about starting and ending activ-
ities can be made based on the timestamp of all earlier events.
There are several techniques for checking the dynamic controllability of pro-
cesses. We use here the technique of mapping a process model to a Simple
Temporal Network with Uncertainty (STNU) and apply constraint propagation
techniques which are proven to be sound and complete for checking dynamic
controllability [3]. We present this technique in Sect.4.
In Sect.2 we gave an example of a process which is dynamically controllable,
but suﬀers from the problem of sudden termination of a semi-contingent activity.
In the next section we explore a pattern of constraints, which may lead to the
sudden termination of an activity. We use this pattern to formulate a new notion
of controllability, which is somewhat stricter than dynamic controllability, and
introduce a technique to verify a process model for such a notion.

--- PAGE 138 ---
122 J. Eder et al.
3.3 Constellations for a Sudden Termination Problem
For the following considerations we assume, that a process is dynamically con-
trollable, i.e. there is a dynamic schedule, such that no constraint is violated.
We use the term condition or constraint in a process model P in the sense that
such a constraint is either explicitly stated in P or that it can be derived from
the constraints in P (see Sect.4 for techniques to derive implicit constraints).
We use Φ as the set of all implicit and explicit constraints valid in P.
We now characterize precisely what constitutes a sudden termination prob-
lem for a semi-contingent activity, and observe which conditions have to be
satisﬁed, such that a sudden termination problem might occur. We distinguish
between a sudden termination constellation (STC) and a sudden termination
pattern (STP). In a STP, constraints can only be satisﬁed with sudden termina-
tion, while in the more general STC, it might depend on the controller, whether
a sudden termination actually occurs. In a STP, sudden termination needs to
happen, while in a STC which is not a STP sudden termination is avoidable.
A STC requires (at least) 2 constraints. So let us consider two activities, one
contingent (C) and one semi-contingent (S). A sudden termination means that
the admissible times for ending S depend on the observation of the end of C
and this is not known, when S starts. This requires that there is a constraint
between the end events of C and S.
A sudden termination only occurs, if C and S have to be executed concur-
rently, i.e. it is not possible that they are executed sequentially. This requires an
additional constraint. When S.e can always be executed before C.e, it cannot
depend on the observed duration of C. In a similar way, if S can always start
after C has ended, the duration of C is already known at the start of S.
Definition 3 (Sudden Termination Constellation and Pattern). Let P
be a dynamically controllable process. Let S and C be activities in P, with the
duration constraints d(S,S.dmin,S.dmax,sc) and d(C,C.dmin,C.dmax,c). Let Φ
be the set of constraints in P.
S and C are in a sudden termination constellation (STC) iﬀ
∀C.s∃S.s ∀S.dmin ≤ S.d ≤ S.dmax ∃C.dmin ≤ C.d ≤ C.dmax : ¬Φ
S and C are in a sudden termination pattern (STP) iﬀ
∀S.s,C.s ∀S.dmin ≤ S.d ≤ S.dmax ∃C.dmin ≤ C.d ≤ C.dmax : ¬Φ
We use the notation STCS,C to indicate that S and C are in a sudden ter-
mination constellation, and STPS,C for a sudden termination pattern.
If there is a STP in a process, sudden termination cannot be avoided, without
changing the process. If there is a STC but not an STP, the execution of a process
can be (dynamically) scheduled in a way to both observe all constraints and avoid
sudden termination. We are now interested, whether it is possible for a process
controller to schedule without sudden termination, i.e. whether it is possible to
avoid that a STC becomes a STP.

--- PAGE 139 ---
Scheduling Processes Without Sudden Termination 123
3.4 Semi-dynamic Controllability
The constellation of constraints which renders two activities in a sudden termina-
tion pattern is compatible with the dynamic controllability of a process, i.e. there
exist processes which are dc but have a pair of activities in a STP. So dynamic
controllability is not strict enough, in the sense that it allows semi-contingent
activities to start without knowing when to end. We deﬁne a specialization of
dynamic controllability which recognizes the need to know the required end time
for a semi-contingent activity at its start time.
Definition 4 (Semi-dynamic Controllability). Let P be a process. P is
semi-dynamically controllable (sdc) iﬀ P is dc, and  S,C ∈ P.N: STPS,C.
Semi-dynamic controllability is stricter than dynamic controllability, but not
as strict as controllability. With semi-dynamic controllability we require a pro-
cess to be dynamically controllable, and no semi-contingent activity is involved
in a sudden termination pattern.
3.5 Basic Sudden Termination Pattern
First we consider and discuss the most fundamental constellation for a sud-
den termination problem: the end events of a contingent activity C and and a
semi-contingent activity S are connected with one upper- and one lower-bound
constraint: ubc(C.e,S.e,w), and lbc(C.e,S.e,v).
In this constellation, there is only one uncertainty, which cannot be con-
trolled: the actual duration of C. The constraint ubc(C.e,S.e,w) requires that
S.e ≤ C.e+w. For actual durations S.d, resp. C.d, this requires that S.s+S.d ≤
C.s + C.d + w. The constraint lbc(C.e,S.e,v) requires that C.e + v ≤ S.e.
A Sudden Termination Pattern 1 (STP-1) is deﬁned as follows: A contingent
activity C and a semi-contingent activity S, with constraints ubc(C.e,S.e,w)
and lbc(C.e,S.e,v) as above are in a STP-1, iﬀ there is no way to schedule the
start of S and the start of C, such that the value for the end of S can be ﬁxed,
when S starts.
Definition 5 (Sudden Termination Pattern: STP-1). Let P be a dynam-
ically controllable process. Let S and C be activities in P, with the duration
constraints d(S,S.dmin,S.dmax,sc) and d(C,C.dmin,C.dmax,c).
Let ubc(C.e,S.e,w) and lbc(C.e,S.e,v) be constraints in P.
S and C are in STP-1, iﬀ
∀S.s,C.s ∀S.dmin ≤ S.d ≤ S.dmax ∃C.dmin ≤ C.d ≤ C.dmax :
S.s + S.d > C.s + C.d + w, or S.s + S.d < C.s + C.d + v.
3.6 Characterization of STP
In the following, we derive conditions to check, whether a STP might occur for
a given pair of activities S and C.
General preconditions for the existence of a sudden termination problem is
that the following constraints do not hold in P: S.s > C.e,C.s > S.e.

--- PAGE 140 ---
124 J. Eder et al.
Theorem 1. Let P be a dynamically controllable process. Let S be a semi-
contingent activity, and C be a contingent activity in P, with duration con-
straints d(S,S.dmin,S.dmax,sc) and d(C,C.dmin,C.dmax,c). Let ubc(C.e,S.e,w)
and lbc(C.e,S.e,v) be constraints in P.
A sudden termination of S cannot occur, iﬀ
C.dmax + v ≤ S.e − C.s ≤ C.dmin + w holds in P.
Proof. We show that C.dmax + v < S.e − C.s ≤ C.dmin + w is a necessary and
suﬃcient condition that the activities S and C are not in a STP.
Necessary condition: we show that if the condition does not hold, a sudden
termination might occur. If the condition does not hold then S.s,S.d,C.s with
C.dmax + v < S.e − C.s ≤ C.dmin + w. This is only possible, if C.dmax + v >
C.dmin + w.
We now assume that C and S are in a STP. This means that ∀C.s,S.s there
is no S.d such that ∀C.d the constraints hold: S.s + S.d ≤ C.s + C.d + w and
S.s + S.d ≥ C.s + C.d + v. Hence S.d such that ∀C.d: C.d + v ≤ S.s + S.d −
C.s ≤ C.d + w. Which requires in particular, that S.d to satisfy C.dmax + v ≤
S.e − C.s ≤ C.dmin + w.
Suﬃcient condition: We show that if the inequality holds, sudden termination
does not occur. We show that ∃C.s,S.s,S.d such that ∀C.dmin ≤ C.d ≤ C.dmax
the constraints are satisﬁed, i.e. C.s+C.d+v ≤ S.s+S.d ≤ C.s+C.d+w, which
holds since ∀C.dmin ≤ C.d ≤ C.dmax: C.d+v ≤ C.dmax +v ≤ S.s+S.d−C.s ≤
C.dmin + w ≤ C.d + w.  
This theorem can now be used to establish conditions that a process model
has to fulﬁll, such that it is dynamically controllable and a STP cannot
occur. In particular, we can show that a STP cannot occur, when the process
model includes a particular lower-bound constraint resp. upper-bound constraint
between the start of S and the start of C.
Theorem 2. Let P be a process. Let S be a semi-contingent activity, and C be
a contingent activity in P with duration constraints d(S,S.dmin,S.dmax,sc) and
d(C,C.dmin,C.dmax,c). Let ubc(C.e,S.e,w) be a constraint in P.
A sudden termination of S cannot occur, iﬀ constraints lbc(C.s,S.e,C.dmax+
v) and ubc(C.s,S.e,C.dmin + w) hold in P.
Proof. The constraints express exactly the condition in Theorem1. Hence in a
process model P including these constraints S and C cannot be in a STP.  
This theorem helps us to develop a procedure to check whether a process
is semi-dynamically controllable, resp. transforming a process with a STC such
that it avoids a STP.
3.7 Checking Semi-dynamic Controllability
We are now ready to apply this result for checking, whether a sudden termination
problem can be avoided in the execution of a process. For each ST-constellation

--- PAGE 141 ---
Scheduling Processes Without Sudden Termination 125
in a process P (a semi-contingent activity S, and a contingent activity C with
duration constraints d(S,S.dmin,S.dmax,sc) and d(C,C.dmin,C.dmax,c), and
the constraints ubc(C.e,S.e,w) and lbc(C.e,S.e,v)) we include 2 additional con-
straints: lbc(C.s,S.e,C.dmax + v) and ubc(C.s,S.e,C.dmin + w). Then we check
the resulting process for dynamic controllability. If it is dynamically controllable,
then (with Theorem2) it is also semi-dynamically controllable.
3.8 Further STP Constellations
After a detailed characterization of the basic constellation, we enumerate in
Table1 all possible constellations between a contingent and a semi-contingent
activity which could cause a sudden termination problem.
The ﬁrst column shows the constraints specifying the constellation, the sec-
ond column states the necessary and suﬃcient condition which has to be fulﬁlled
such that a sudden termination does not occur, and the third column the con-
straints to add for checking the process for semi-dynamic controllability. The
proofs for these conditions and constraints follow the structure of the proofs for
the basic constellation but for space reasons they cannot be repeated here.
Table 1. Sudden termination constellations, with conditions to avoid sudden termina-
tion, and constraints to add to check for semi-dynamic controllability.
Constraints Condition to avoid sudden termination Constraints to add
ubc(C.e, S.e, w) C.dmax + v ≤ S.e − C.s ≤ C.dmin + w lbc(C.s, S.e, C.dmax + v)
lbc(C.e, S.e, v) ubc(C.s, S.e, C.dmin + w)
ubc(C.e, S.e, w) v < S.e − C.s ≤ C.dmin + w lbc(C.s, S.e, v)
lbc(C.s, S.e, v) ubc(C.s, S.e, C.dmin + w)
ubc(C.s, S.e, w) C.dmax + v < S.e − C.s ≤ w lbc(C.s, S.e, C.dmax + v)
lbc(C.e, S.e, v)
ubc(C.e, S.e, w) S.dmin + v < S.e − C.s ≤ C.dmin + w lbc(C.s, S.s, S.dmin + v)
lbc(C.s, S.s, v) ubc(C.s, S.e, C.dmin + w)
ubc(C.e, S.e, w) C.dmax + S.dmin − v < S.e − C.s ≤ C.dmin + w lbc(C.s, S.e, C.dmax + S.dmin − v)
ubc(S.s, C.e, v) ubc(C.s, S.e, C.dmin + w)
ubc(C.e, S.e, w) S.dmin − v < S.e − C.s ≤ C.dmin + w lbc(C.s, S.e, S.dmin − v)
ubc(S.s, C.s, v) ubc(C.s, S.e, C.dmin + w)
4 Checking Semi-dynamic Controllability with STNUs
In this section we show how we can kill two birds with one stone, and meet
the two requirements of (1) deriving all implicit constraints, and (2) checking
whether a process is semi-dynamically controllable, by mapping process models
into temporal networks.
(1) The temporal constraints causing a STC or STP need not necessarily
to be explicitly stated in the process model, but may be implicitly induced by
the explicit temporal constraints in the process model. Therefore, we need to
compute the set of all (implicit) constraints for identifying all possible STCs.

--- PAGE 142 ---
126 J. Eder et al.
(2) Checking whether a process model is semi-dynamically controllable,
requires applying some dynamic controllability checking procedure, as per The-
orem2 and Sect.3.7.
4.1 Mapping to STNUs
In previous works [9] we showed how to check whether a process model, such as
the process in Fig.1, is dynamically controllable by mapping it into a equivalent
STNU (Simple Temporal Network with Uncertainty) [19].
In a nutshell, a STNU is a directed graph, in which nodes represent time
points and edges represent constraints between time points. A special time point
zero marks the reference in time, after which all other time points occur. Edges
can be non-contingent or contingent. Non-contingent edges represent constraints
which can be enforced by the execution environment by assigning appropriate
values to the time points. Contingent edges (also called links) represent con-
straints which are guaranteed to hold, but the corresponding time point assign-
ments cannot be controlled, only observed.
We use the notation (A,B,δ) for non-contingent edges from A to B with
weight δ, which require that B ≤ A + δ; and (AC
,l,u,C) for contingent links
between AC
and C, which state that C occurs some time between l and u after
AC
. For a detailed formalization on STNUs, we refer to [19].
Figure2 shows the STNU derived by mapping the process model of Fig.1.
Note that in Fig.2 we adopted the usual STNU notation with contingent edges
dashed, inverted w.r.t. non-contingent edges, and labeled with the contingent
time point name. For a more compact presentation, in the ﬁgure we did not
include nodes resulting from the mapping of the par-split and par-join.
4.2 Checking Dynamic Controllability
Several techniques have been developed to check the dynamic controllability of
STNUs. Most of these techniques, such as [3], build on deriving implicit con-
straints from the existing ones. In particular, they work by propagating the
existing constraints based on certain sets of propagation rules.
Constraint propagation can be applied until: (1) no new implicit edges can
be derived, or (2) a negative cycle (in the usual sense of graph theory) is found.
If constraint propagation stops in case (1), then the STNU, hence its originating
process, is dynamically controllable. In case (2), instead, a constellation of con-
tradicting constraints exists, and the STNU is not dynamically controllable. As
an example, one can verify, by applying constraint propagation, that the STNU
in Fig.2 is dynamically controllable, since no negative cycle can be derived.
The eﬀect of applying a constraint propagation procedure is twofold. First,
the procedure derives all implicit constraints which hold if the explict constraints
hold. Second, it determines whether a STNU is dynamically controllable. We use
these results, in combination with the results of Sect.3, to design a procedure
for checking, whether a given process model is semi-dynamically controllable.

--- PAGE 143 ---
Scheduling Processes Without Sudden Termination 127
Z
start P.s P.e
A.s A.e
R.s R.e
D.s D.e end
2
−1 7
−5
re : 3
RE : −5 de : 2
DE : −7 0 0
0
0
0
0
0
4 −3
21
Fig.2. STNU derived from the example process shown in Fig.1.
4.3 Checking Semi-dynamic Controllability
Algorithm1 shows the procedure we propose for checking the semi-dynamic con-
trollability. A process model P is mapped into a STNU T. Additionally, we keep
a data structure ST containing STNU nodes representing semi-contingent activ-
ities, which is needed for identifying sudden termination patterns.
First, T is checked for dynamic controllability by applying a constraint prop-
agation procedure check dc(T), which as a side eﬀect computes the closure of
the set of constraints. If the procedure returns True, the process is dc. Then
find stp(T,ST ) searches and returns all STPs. Then there is a loop (repeated
as long as the network is dc and there are unresolved STPs) with three steps:
(i) For each STP p found, edges corresponding to the constraints to resolve p to
avoid a sudden termination problem are added to T. (ii) check for dynamic con-
trollability and derive additional implicit constraints. (iii) search for unresolved
STPs. If at the end of the iteration T remains dc, then it is also sdc and True
is returned. One can verify (see the negative cycle introduced in Fig.3 between
R.s and A.e) that the process of the running example is not sdc.
The correctness of the procedure trivially follows from the correctness of the
existing constraint propagation procedures, and from the Theorems of Sect.3.
5 Implementation and Evaluation
We implemented Algorithm1, and performed experiments to evaluate its scala-
bility.
We ran our experiments on a Windows 10 machine with an i7 CPU and
16GB of RAM. For the experiments we randomly generated a set 30 processes
of diﬀerent sizes in terms of number of process steps. We structured the test set
into 5 subsets of processes: one for processes of size 10, one for 20, one for 30, one
for 40, and one for 50. Each subset contained 10 processes. The smallest process
contained 10 activities and 2 constraints, resulting in a STNU with 20 nodes. The
largest process contained 50 activities and 10 constraints, resulting in a STNU
with 100 nodes. We regard the range of process sizes used for the experiments
as representative of most of the cases found in practical applications.

--- PAGE 144 ---
128 J. Eder et al.
Z
start P.s P.e
A.s A.e
R.s R.e
D.s D.e end
2
−1 7
−5
re : 3
RE : −5 de : 2
DE : −7 0 0
0
0
0
0
0
4 −3
−8
7
21
Fig.3. STNU resulting from the application of Algorithm1 to the process of Fig.1.
We report the average measured execution times for the various process sizes
in Fig.4. On average, executing Algorithm1 for a process of size 10 required
0.13s; for size 20, 0.83s; for size 30, 6.29s; for size 40, 18.94s; for size 50, 41.00s.
Our experiments showed that, despite the addition of new constraints to solve
the STP, and the repeated execution of the dynamic controllability checking
procedure, the required computation times are still acceptable for a design time
check. Thus, we regard the proposed approach applicable for most practical
applications which require design time checking for semi-dynamic controllability.
Algorithm 1. Check semi-dynamic controllability
1: Input: Process P
2: T := map to STNU(P)
3: ST := get semicontingent nodes(P,T)
4: if (¬check dc(T)) then
5: return False
6: else
7: STP := find stp(T,ST )
8: while (STP = ∅) do
9: p := extract first(STP)
10: T := T ∪ compute resolving constraints(p)
11: if (¬check dc(T)) then
12: return False
13: else
14: STP := STP ∪ find stp(T,ST )
15: end if
16: end while
17: end if
18: return True

--- PAGE 145 ---
Scheduling Processes Without Sudden Termination 129
0.00
5.00
10.00
15.00
20.00
25.00
30.00
35.00
40.00
45.00
10 20 30 40 50
Time [s]
Process size [number of nodes]
Fig.4. Results of the evaluation.
6 Related Work
To the best of our knowledge, semi-contingent activities and hence semi-dynamic
controllability have never been studied before. Related work, therefore, comprises
of (a) formulation of temporal constraints in process models and (b) checking
consistency and controllability of temporally constrained process models and (c)
scheduling and monitoring of process execution.
General overviews of time management for business processes are provided in
[5,8,11]. [16] presents a formalization of time patterns and their semantics, based
on the analysis of recurring temporal constraints in process models, however,
without considering semi-contingent activities.
Veriﬁcation of deadlines and temporal constraints was subject of several pre-
vious works, such as [1,4,13,18]. Similarly to our proposed approach based on
STNUs, these approaches are based on network analysis, scheduling, and con-
straint networks. None of these works, however, addressed the problem of induced
sudden termination of tasks.
More recent works combine the temporal aspects of a process deﬁnition with
other constraining dimensions such as resource availability [23,24]. While with
our work we currently focus only on the temporal dimension, these works oﬀer
interesting possibilities to further investigate the problem of sudden termination
with a holistic view on process models.
While we address the design time veriﬁcation of process qualities here, con-
siderable research (e.g., [14,17,20]) explored the pro-active monitoring of the
compliance of process instances to their process model. However, to the best of
our knowledge, all approaches to monitoring and compliance checking address
the notion of satisﬁability rather than dynamic controllability and do not con-
sider the problem of sudden termination.
In contrast to all these approaches, process mining techniques [21] rely on the
existence of a large number of cases (process logs) before they are able to provide
scheduling and monitoring information. Thus they are not adequate for new or
frequently changing processes, or processes with small number of instances [2].
For the implementation of our approach we map process deﬁnitions to Sim-
ple Temporal Networks with Uncertainty (STNUs) [19]. Considerable research

--- PAGE 146 ---
130 J. Eder et al.
eﬀorts have been devoted in the last decades both to developing diﬀerent notions
of controllability for temporal constraint networks, and to developing more
expressive network models [15,19,22,25]. With this work, we contribute to this
ﬁeld of research introducing a specialization of dynamic controllability to avoid
a class of unwanted behaviors.
7 Conclusions
The presence of activities with uncontrollable duration requires a dynamic sched-
ule to ensure that all temporal constraints are met. Dynamic scheduling, how-
ever, may entail not knowing, at activity start time, when an activity has to
terminate. This leads to the sudden termination of an activity. Such a behavior
is undesirable for a large number of activities.
With this paper we proposed semi-dynamic controllability as a new notion for
temporal correctness. It requires a process to be dynamically controllable, and
that the end time of activities, which cannot be interrupted, is known at their
start time. We have shown how to verify whether a process is semi-dynamically
controllable, based on patterns of temporal constraints. Our implementation of
a veriﬁcation procedure demonstrated that semi-dynamic controllability can be
eﬃciently checked at design time. We regard semi-dynamic controllability as a
desirable quality for process models, which process designers may easily check.
The results of the research reported here contribute to the development of
a comprehensive set of tools supporting the design of business processes by
checking relevant properties of process models at design time. The notions and
techniques also provide the basis for monitoring of temporal properties of the
process execution at run-time, enabling pro-active avoidance of time failures.
References
1. Bettini, C., Wang, X., Jajodia, S.: Temporal reasoning in workﬂow systems. Dis-
trib. Parallel Databases 11(3), 269–306 (2002)
2. Breu, R., et al.: Towards living inter-organizational processes. In: 15th IEEE Con-
ference on Business Informatics, pp. 363–366. IEEE (2013)
3. Cairo, M., Rizzi, R.: Dynamic controllability made simple. In: 24th International
Symposium on Temporal Representation and Reasoning (TIME 2017), vol. 90 of
LIPIcs, pp. 8:1–8:16 (2017)
4. Cardoso, J., Sheth, A., Miller, J., Arnold, J., Kochut, K.: Quality of service for
workﬂows and web service processes. J. Web Semant. 1(3), 281–308 (2004)
5. Cheikhrouhou, S., Kallel, S., Guermouche, N., Jmaiel, M.: The temporal perspec-
tive in business process modeling: a survey and research challenges. SOCA 9(1),
75–85 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11761-014-0170-x
6. Combi, C., Gambini, M.: Flaws in the ﬂow: the weakness of unstructured busi-
ness process modeling languages dealing with data. In: Meersman, R., Dillon, T.,
Herrero, P. (eds.) OTM 2009. LNCS, vol. 5870, pp. 42–59. Springer, Heidelberg
(2009). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-05148-7 6

--- PAGE 147 ---
Scheduling Processes Without Sudden Termination 131
7. Combi, C., Posenato, R.: Controllability in temporal conceptual workﬂow
schemata. In: Dayal, U., Eder, J., Koehler, J., Reijers, H.A. (eds.) BPM 2009.
LNCS, vol. 5701, pp. 64–79. Springer, Heidelberg (2009). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-642-03848-8 6
8. Combi, C., Pozzi, G.: Temporal conceptual modelling of workﬂows. In: Song, I.-Y.,
Liddle, S.W., Ling, T.-W., Scheuermann, P. (eds.) ER 2003. LNCS, vol. 2813, pp.
59–76. Springer, Heidelberg (2003). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-39648-2 8
9. Eder, J., Franceschetti, M., Köpke, J.: Controllability of business processes with
temporal variables. In: Proceedings of the 34th ACM/SIGAPP Symposium on
Applied Computing, pp. 40–47. ACM (2019)
10. Eder, J., Liebhart, W.: Workﬂow transactions. In: Workﬂow Handbook 1997, pp.
195–202. Wiley (1997)
11. Eder, J., Panagos, E., Rabinovich, M.: Workﬂow time management revisited. Sem-
inal Contributions to Information Systems Engineering, pp. 207–213. Springer,
Heidelberg (2013). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-36926-1 16
12. Franceschetti, M., Eder, J.: Dynamic service binding for time-aware service compo-
sitions. In: 2019 IEEE 23rd International Enterprise Distributed Object Computing
Workshop (EDOCW), pp. 146–151. IEEE (2019)
13. Guermouche, N., Godart, C.: Timed model checking based approach for web ser-
vices analysis. In: ICWS 2009. IEEE International Conference on Web Services,
pp. 213–221. IEEE (2009)
14. Hashmi, M., Governatori, G., Lam, H.-P., Wynn, M.T.: Are we done with business
process compliance: state of the art and challenges ahead. Knowl. Inf. Syst. 57,
1–55 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10115-017-1142-1
15. Lanz, A., Posenato, R., Combi, C., Reichert, M.: Controlling time-awareness in
modularized processes. In: Schmidt, R., Guédria, W., Bider, I., Guerreiro, S. (eds.)
BPMDS/EMMSAD -2016. LNBIP, vol. 248, pp. 157–172. Springer, Cham (2016).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-39429-9 11
16. Lanz, A., Reichert, M., Weber, B.: Process time patterns: a formal foundation. Inf.
Syst. 57, 38–68 (2016)
17. Ly, L.T., Maggi, F.M., Montali, M., Rinderle-Ma, S., van der Aalst, W.M.: Com-
pliance monitoring in business processes: functionalities, application, and tool-
support. Inf. Syst. 54, 209–234 (2015)
18. Marjanovic, O., Orlowska, M.E.: On modeling and veriﬁcation of temporal con-
straints in production workﬂows. Knowl. Inf. Syst. 1(2), 157–192 (1999). https://
doi.org/10.1007/BF03325097
19. Morris, P.H., Muscettola, N.: Temporal dynamic controllability revisited. In: Pro-
ceedings of AAAI, pp. 1193–1198 (2005)
20. Pichler, H., Wenger, M., Eder, J.: Composing time-aware web service orchestra-
tions. In: van Eck, P., Gordijn, J., Wieringa, R. (eds.) CAiSE 2009. LNCS, vol.
5565, pp. 349–363. Springer, Heidelberg (2009). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
642-02144-2 29
21. van der Aalst, W.M., Schonenberg, M., Song, M.: Time prediction based on process
mining. Inf. Syst. 36(2), 450–475 (2011)
22. Vidal, T.: Handling contingency in temporal constraint networks: from consistency
to controllabilities. J. Exp. Theor. Artif. Intell. 11(1), 23–45 (1999)
23. Watahiki, K., Ishikawa, F., Hiraishi, K.: Formal veriﬁcation of business processes
with temporal and resource constraints. In: 2011 IEEE International Conference
on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC), pp. 1173–1180. IEEE (2011)

--- PAGE 148 ---
132 J. Eder et al.
24. Zavatteri, M., Combi, C., Viganò, L.: Resource controllability of workﬂows under
conditional uncertainty. In: Di Francescomarino, C., Dijkman, R., Zdun, U. (eds.)
BPM 2019. LNBIP, vol. 362, pp. 68–80. Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-030-37453-2 7
25. Zavatteri, M., Viganò, L.: Conditional simple temporal networks with uncertainty
and decisions. Theoret. Comput. Sci. 797, 77–101 (2019)

--- PAGE 149 ---
Process Mining (BPMDS 2020)

--- PAGE 150 ---
Cherry-Picking from Spaghetti:
Multi-range Filtering of Event Logs
Maxim Vidgof(B)
, Djordje Djurica, Saimir Bala, and Jan Mendling
Institute for Information Business, Vienna University of Economics
and Business (WU), Vienna, Austria
maxim.vidgof@wu.ac.at
Abstract. Mining real-life event logs results into process models which
provide little value to the process analyst without support for handling
complexity. Filtering techniques are specifically helpful to tackle this
problem. These techniques have been focusing on leaving out infrequent
aspects of the process which are considered outliers. However, it is exactly
in these outliers where it is possible to gather important insights on the
process. This paper addresses this problem by defining multi-range fil-
tering. Our technique not only allows to combine both frequent and non-
frequent aspects of the process but it supports any user-defined intervals
of frequency of activities and variants. We evaluate our approach through
a prototype based on the PM4Py library and show the benefits in com-
parison to existing filtering techniques.
Keywords: Multi-range filter · Filtering event logs · Infrequent
behavior · Process mining
1 Introduction
The goal of process mining is extracting actionable process knowledge using
event logs of IT systems that are available in the organizations [1]. Process
discovery is one of the areas of interest of process mining that is concerned with
the extracting the process models from logs. With the development of process
mining, a number of automated process discovery algorithms that address this
problem has appeared.
The problem with automated process discovery of process models from event
logs is that despite the variety of diﬀerent algorithms, automated process dis-
covery methods all suﬀer from joint deﬁciencies when used for real-life event
logs [1]: they produce large spaghetti-like models and they produce models with
either low level of ﬁtness to the event log, or have low precision or generalization.
Managing to correct these shortcomings proved to be a diﬃcult task. Research
by Augusto et al. [2] states that for complex event logs it is highly recommended
to use ﬁltering of the logs before automated process discovery techniques and
that without this type of ﬁltering precision of the resulting models is close to
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. Nurcan et al. (Eds.): BPMDS 2020/EMMSAD 2020, LNBIP 387, pp. 135–149, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49418-6_9

--- PAGE 151 ---
136 M. Vidgof et al.
zero. The authors also highlight a research gap that is necessary to be closed
suggesting the need to develop a ﬁlter which will can be tuned at will to deal
with complex logs.
Therefore, the purpose of our study was to rectify this research gap by imple-
menting a new ﬁlter, able to capture both most frequent behavior and the rare
one. We created a prototype based on the PM4Py, process mining toolkit for
Python [3]. Our prototype is fully customizable in which the user deﬁne an
arbitrary number of ranges for both activities and variants of the process that
user wants to analyze. In this research, we demonstrate how our technique helps
to unveil new insights into the process using an illustrative example from the
real-world event log.
This paper is structured as follows. Section2 describes the problem set-
ting and discusses common process mining techniques that rely on ﬁltering
of the logs in order to simplify models. Further, we present diﬀerent types of
ﬁlters and compare them. Finally, we derive requirements for new ﬁlter type.
Section3 presents a conceptual description of our ﬁlter with the formal deﬁ-
nitions, while Sect.4 presents an example that emphasizes the beneﬁts of this
technique. Section5 shows the beneﬁts of our technique against existing process
mining tools. Section6 concludes the paper and discusses future work.
2 Theoretical Background
This section describes the problem and provides an overview on related literature
before deriving three requirements for a ﬁltering technique.
2.1 Motivation and Problem Description
Data analysis plays a fundamental part in Business Process Management (BPM)
and allows to improve processes based on facts. Process mining is the main
technique to analyze processes using data which stem from event logs. These
event logs keep track of the history of the various runs of the business process
execute over time. Real world event logs typically contain a high number of cases,
which may or may not diﬀer from one another in the way they were handled.
Mining such event logs usually results in models which contain an overwhelming
amount of behavior (i.e., process variants). These models are also referred to as
Spaghetti models as they make it hard to identify speciﬁc paths in their chaotic
layout.
Spaghetti models provide little value as they are hard to understand. Litera-
ture has deﬁned several techniques to overcome this problem, such as reducing
complexity on a log level [11] and reducing complexity on a model level [6]. A
main technique for reducing complexity oﬀered by many of the process mining
techniques is ﬁltering. Usually process mining techniques show their results in
visual interfaces which oﬀer sliders to set up custom parameters for ﬁltering. By
moving these sliders the user are able to focus on speciﬁc aspects of the process.
What makes spaghetti models so complex is the fact that they show all possi-
ble behaviour, including paths that were seldom taken in the process. Therefore,

--- PAGE 152 ---
Cherry-Picking from Spaghetti 137
the focus of existing techniques from both academia and practice has been on
ﬁltering out this infrequent behaviour. We argue that in some cases, it is the
infrequent behaviour that gives us better important insights on problems in the
process, thus helping improvement. Indeed, existing tools such as ProM1
, Disco2
and Celonis3
are able to ﬁlter for speciﬁc behaviour. However, there is no way
to set these ﬁlters in such a way that multiple variants or activities are shown
together. This way of ﬁltering leaves out important information, which might be
seen for instance by a combination of the most and the least frequent cases.
Let us illustrate the problem through a running example. Figure1 shows a
simple complaint handling process adapted from [5]. The process works as fol-
lows. After a client ﬁles a complaint, (s)he immediately receives an automated
conﬁrmation message. Next, an employee brings the application to a meeting
with colleagues in order to discuss a solution. The same employee is in charge
of contacting back the customer with an apology and proposes a solution. The
solution may be accepted or rejected by the client. In case of acceptance, the
solution is executed right away. In case of rejection, the employee contacts the
client to investigate on alternatives. As long as a reasonable alternative is found,
the employee has a new meeting with colleagues to discuss the solution and pro-
ceed as usual. If no alternative solutions can be found, the complaint is brought
to court and the process fails.
Complaint
received
Send automatic
reply to
customer
Discuss solution Send apology Propose solution
negative
response
Complaint
addressed
Evaluate
acceptable
alternative
Execute solution
positive
response
Positive response
received
Negative
response received
Go to court
No alternative
solutions
Alternative
solution exists
Complaint not
addressed
Fig.1. Running example (adapted from [5])
There are several ways in which instances of the process may traverse the
depicted process model. The sunny case scenario, is the one in which an agree-
ment with the client is found right away. In a good process this case should occur
frequently. On the opposite, the rainy case scenario consists of the cases which
result in no agreement and the company is brought to court. In this case, the
costs sustained from the company may be much higher than settling for a solu-
tion. An intermediate scenario is the one in which a customer does not accept
the ﬁrst proposed solution, but some iterations are done.
In order to improve the process, the company is interested to compare the
sunny case scenario in order to understand which were the decisions and the
proposed solutions that lead to the respective outcomes. Table1a lists the activ-
ities involved in the process as well as their short labels for better readability.
1
www.promtools.org.
2
fluxicon.com/disco.
3
www.celonis.com.

--- PAGE 153 ---
138 M. Vidgof et al.
Typical process mining techniques retrieve variants as shows in Table1b (i.e.,
sorted by frequency). Each variant represents one path in the output process
model. In order to simplify the model, ﬁltering must be used. However, if we
ﬁlter out the least frequent behavior, we lose the information on the rainy case,
which is the one that bears higher costs for the company. Some process mining
tools like Celonis, would allow to select exactly the variant corresponding to the
rainy case scenario. Unfortunately, this would leave out the sunny case scenario,
which is also of interest of the company as this is the scenario in which the best
decisions were taken.
Table 1. Process activities and variants
Activity or Event Label
Complaint received A
Send automatic reply to customer B
Discuss solution C
Send apology D
Propose solution E
Positive response received F
Execute solution G
Complaint addressed H
Negative response received I
Evaluate acceptable alternative J
Go to court K
Complaint not addressed L
(a) Activities of the process
Variant Count
〈A,B,C,D,E,F,G,H 〉 807
〈A,B,C,D,E,I,J,C,D,E,F,G,H 〉 132
〈A,B,C,D,E,I,J,K,L 〉 30
〈A,B,C,D,E,I,J,C,D,E,I,J,C,D,E,F,G,H 〉 21
〈A,B,C,D,E,I,J,C,D,E,I,K,L 〉 6
〈A,B,C,D,E,I,J,C,D,E,I,J,C,D,E,I,J,C,D,E,F,G,H 〉 2
〈A,B,C,D,E,I,J,C,D,E,I,J,C,D,E,I,J,K,L 〉 2
(b) Process variants ordered by trace frequency
The same consideration also holds for events and activities. Indeed, the com-
pany might be interested in activities or events which occur within a speciﬁc
range of frequencies. For instance, the top 10 most frequent and the top 10 most
infrequent activities can play a role into guiding process redesign. In other words,
frequency of traces and activities do not necessarily reﬂect importance. There
may be extremely infrequent variants or activities which have a very high impact
on the process (e.g., Black Swans [10]). Hence, it is crucial that ﬁltering does
not compromise this information.
2.2 Filtering Techniques
According to Dumas et al. [5], process mining tools use two approaches to sim-
plify event logs: abstraction and event log ﬁltering. Abstraction is used to remove
the subset of the nodes from the process map, producing a smaller dependency
graph of the given event log. This way of simplifying process models is often
beneﬁcial because it enables model viewers to aggregate paths or activities of
a given Spaghetti model and provides them with a better understanding about
how the process functions on a macro level. However, while abstraction can visu-
alize large event logs, it lacks the eﬃciency of coping with the full complexity of
real-life event logs [6].

--- PAGE 154 ---
Cherry-Picking from Spaghetti 139
Consequently, process mining oﬀers another type of event log simpliﬁcation
called event log ﬁltering. Filtering an event log can be achieved with the use of
three types of ﬁlters that remove a subset of the traces, events, or event pairs
intending to produce a simpler log. Event ﬁlters allow users to remove or to keep
all the events that satisfy a predeﬁned condition set by the user. They allow users
to focus only on a particular activity. Event pair ﬁlter, allow users to remove or
keep all the pairs of events that fulﬁll a speciﬁc condition. This type of event log
ﬁltering is used to show a relation between two events and gather more insight
into, for instance, situations where event A is followed by event B. Finally, using
trace ﬁlters enables users to remove or retain all the traces from the log that ﬁt
the deﬁned criteria. This ﬁlter can be used to, for example, show all the traces
that occur with a deﬁned level of frequency, or all traces that have a speciﬁc
duration of cycle time [6].
In their paper on ﬁltering out infrequent behaviour from event logs, Conforti
et al. [4] mention more types of event ﬁlters mainly used in process mining tool
ProM. First such ﬁlter is Filter Log by Attribute which removes all the events
where the value of the attribute is not equal to the value deﬁned by the user. It
can also remove all the events that do not contain a certain selected attribute.
Next, Filter on Timeframe serves to ﬁlter out all the events which fall into the
desired timeframe. Some ﬁlters serve to ﬁlter out infrequent behaviour. One such
instance is a Filter Log using Simple Heuristics which can remove all the traces
that do not start and/or end with a particular event. It also can remove all
the events related to the speciﬁc process task by calculating frequencies of event
occurrence. Another example of the infrequent behaviour ﬁlter is Filter Log using
Preﬁx-Close Language. This ﬁlter eliminates all the traces that are not a preﬁx
of another preﬁx in the log by using a frequency threshold deﬁned by the user.
While both abstraction and event log ﬁltering techniques work well with
structured processes but have problems visualizing and discovering less struc-
tured ones, recently, new techniques have been emerging that try to bridge this
gap [9,12]. Trace clustering is a technique where the event log is divided into
homogeneous subsets which are then used to create separate process models.
This approach is able to cope with real ﬂexible environments and improve pro-
cess mining results. However, trace clustering is shown to suﬀer from a signiﬁcant
diﬀerence between clustering and the evaluation biases. The technique that tack-
les this problem, and manages to bridge this diﬀerence is Active Trace Cluster-
ing [12] inspired by principles of active learning. This approach borrows elements
from machine learning and utilizes selective sampling strategy which enables an
active learner to decide which instances to select based on their informativeness.
Most frequently used informativeness measure is the frequency of the trace.
Several process discovery algorithms deal with noise in the logs are developed.
The most well-known ones are Heuristics Miner [13], Inductive Miner [7], and
Fuzzy Miner [6]. Heuristics miner deals with noise by introducing frequency-
based metrics, while Inductive Miner uses two types of ﬁlters that accomplish
this. The ﬁrst ﬁlter applies a similar approach to Heuristics Miner and removes all
the edges from the directly-follows graphs. In contrast, the second ﬁlter removes

--- PAGE 155 ---
140 M. Vidgof et al.
edges that the ﬁrst ﬁlter did not remove by using eventually-follows graphs.
However, process models mined using Inductive miner are often oversimpliﬁed.
A diﬀerent approach to the previous two is Fuzzy Miner. This algorithm ﬁlters
noise directly on the discovered model using the desired level of signiﬁcance and
correlation thresholds deﬁned by users.
As we can see, there are numerous techniques and algorithms which can
be used to simplify event logs and models to help users understand the core
process better. However, all of them are achieving this by ﬁltering out infrequent
behaviour, considering it to be the noise in the event logs [1]. We argue that this
is a substantial limitation that needs to be addressed since infrequent behaviour
can carry important information which is lost by ﬁltering it out of the log. For
example, having an insight into rare cases can help companies detect errors in
the process or even detect fraud. Furthermore, none of the presented techniques
considers that users might want to observe a process model that comprises both
the most frequent and infrequent traces of the process.
2.3 Requirements for a Filtering Technique
Against this background, we derive the following requirements for a ﬁltering
technique.
RQ1. (Select variants). A ﬁltering technique must allow the user to slice
the log. That is, it must oﬀer a way of selecting process variants relevant to
the user.
RQ2. (Select activities). A ﬁltering technique must be able to dice the log.
That is, it must oﬀer a way of selecting the most relevant activities for the
user.
RQ3. (Multi-range filtering). A ﬁltering technique must be able to slice
and dice on multiple ranges. That is, it must oﬀer a way of selecting relevant
information form several frequency intervals.
3 Technique for Multi-range Filtering
In this section we describe our ﬁltering technique that allows to learn process
models without ruling out infrequent behaviour. We show an overview of the
technique, provide the necessary deﬁnitions and then describe the technique in
detail.
3.1 Overview of the Technique
Our technique is summarized in Fig.2. It takes as input an event log and two
user deﬁned multi-ranges. A multi-range is a set of intervals of frequencies. As we
use frequencies, interval boundaries are from 0 to 1, where [0,0] means that we
get the least frequent variant or activity, and [0,1] means that that we consider
all possible behavior. The aforementioned multi-ranges are used respectively by

--- PAGE 156 ---
Cherry-Picking from Spaghetti 141
two ﬁlter types: i) variants ﬁlter; and ii) activities ﬁlter. These two ﬁlters can be
used independently or consecutively. In the latter case, their application must
follow the order: variants ﬁlter ﬁrst. The output of each ﬁlter is a simpliﬁed event
log, complying with ﬁltering criteria. This event log can be used by any process
mining technique to generate a process model which allows the user to analyze
the data.
Fig.2. Overview of the approach
3.2 Preliminaries
Definition 1 (Event, activity). Let A be the universe of events. Each event
has attributes. Let ANbe the set of attribute names. For any event e ∈ A and
name n ∈ AN, #n(e) is the value of the attribute n for event e. An activity is
a speciﬁc attribute of an event, i.e., #activity(e) is the activity associated to the
event.
For example, #activity(e) = ‘Discuss solution’.
Definition 2 (Trace, variant, event log). A trace t = e1,...,en is a ﬁnite
sequence of events. An event log L ⊆ {t}∗
is a multi-set of traces, i.e. A process
variant is a subset of traces V ⊆ L. Variants group together traces which have
similarities to one another and diﬀerences to traces in other variants.
An example of trace is t = a,b,c,d,e,f,g,h. An example of log is
L = [a,b,c,d,e,f,g,h20
,a,b,c,d,e,i,j,k,l5
]. In this event log, the ﬁrst trace
occurs 20 times whereas the second one occurs 5 times.
Definition 3 (Variant frequency, Activity frequency). Variant frequency
vf(V ) is deﬁned as the frequency occurrence of its constituting traces t ∈ V .
Activity frequency af(a) is deﬁned as the sum of the number of times activity a
in the event log L.
For example, given L = [a,b,c,d,e,f,g,h20
,a,b,c,d,e,i,j,k,l5
], then
vf(a,b,c,d,e,f,g,h) = 20 and af(a) = 25.
A ﬁltering technique is a function f : L → L
which transforms an event log
L into a simpler event log L
. Next, we use the given deﬁnitions to describe the
algorithms used by our technique.

--- PAGE 157 ---
142 M. Vidgof et al.
3.3 Implementation
Our implementation provides two ﬁlters: the variants ﬁlter and the activities
ﬁlter. These two ﬁlters are composable but their application is not commutative,
i.e. it has to be performed in strictly deﬁned order. Namely, ﬁrst the variants ﬁlter
is applied and then the activities ﬁlter is applied on the results of the variants
ﬁlter. In case the former one ﬁltered out some variants, only the activities present
in the remaining variants can be used in the latter one.
We are interested in ﬁltering at multiple ranges in the event log. These ranges
represent frequencies expressed by the user in the form of sets of intervals. That
is, R = {[min0,max0],[min1,max1],...[minn,maxn]} with mini <= maxi,
i = 1,...,n signiﬁes that the user want to retain from the log an amount of
information that falls into either of the intervals [min0,max0], ..., [minn,maxn].
Ranges can be applied to both ﬁltering on the variants level - referred to as Rv -
and ﬁltering on the activities level - Ra. Since the range boundaries are speciﬁed
as frequency percentages, the minimum value of mini is 0, and the maximum
value of maxi is 1. We also establish that [min,max] means that the boundaries
of the interval are included and (min,max) means the boundaries are excluded.
With this deﬁnition we can express the non-overlaps condition on the ranges
speciﬁed by the user as ∀i,j ∈ [0...n] ⇒ [mini,maxi] ∩ [minj,maxj] = ∅. This
is a precondition for applying both the activity and the variants ﬁlters. In other
words, ranges may share boundaries but they must not overlap.
Our implementation consists of three main blocks. First, the ranges speciﬁed
by the user for each of the applied ﬁlters are checked for overlaps. If the ranges
are incorrect, an error is produced and the ﬁltering is not applied.
Second, if the ranges are correct, the variants ﬁlter can be applied. The
variants are ﬁltered according to Algorithm1.
Third, we can apply Algorithm2 on the resulting log. First, it builds a list
of activities sorted by their frequency, analogous to Algorithm1. Then, a range
ﬁlter is applied in the same manner. Finally, we iterate over all traces in the
input log and rebuild them in such a way that only ﬁltered activities remain in
the trace. The new trace is appended to the output log only in case it is not
empty, i.e. it contains at least one of the activities that should remain.
Algorithm 1. Filter variants
Input: Event log L. Ranges V = {(min0,max0)...(minm,maxm)}, m ∈ N0
Result: A new event log L
⊆ L
1 variants ← ∀ variants ∈ L;
2 variants ← sort variants by vfL(variant);
3 nr variants ← |variants|;
4 indices ←
m 
i=0
{n ∈ N0|n ∈
[round(mini × nr variants),round(maxi × nr variants)]};
5 filtered variants ←

i∈indices
variantsi;
6 L
← ∀trace ∈ L ∩ filtered variants;

--- PAGE 158 ---
Cherry-Picking from Spaghetti 143
Algorithm 2. Filter activities
Input: Event log L
. Ranges A = {(min0,max0),...,(minp,maxp)},
p ∈ N0
Result: A new event log L
⊆ L
1 activities ← dict(key = activity,value = afL(activity));
2 forall variant ∈ L
do
3 forall activity ∈ variant do
4 if activity / ∈ activities then
5 activities = activities ∪ {activity};
6 afL(activity) ← vfL(variant);
7 else
8 afL(activity) ← afL(activity) + vfL(variant)
9 end
10 end
11 end
12 activities ← sort activities by afL(activity);
13 nr activities ← |activities|;
14 indices ←
p 
i=0
{n ∈ N0|n ∈
[round(mini × nr activities),round(maxi × nr activities)]};
15 filtered activities ←

i∈indices
activitiesi;
16 L
← [];
17 forall trace ∈ L
do
18 new trace ← [];
19 forall activity ∈ trace do
20 if activity ∈ filtered activities then
21 new trace = new trace ∪ {activity};
22 end
23 end
24 if new trace = ∅ then
25 L
← L
∪ {new trace};
26 end
27 end
4 Results
Next, we built a prototype to evaluate our technique. This section presents the
results. First, we describe the experimental setup. Then we demonstrate that
our technique addresses all the requirements by applying our technique to the
running example we provided in Sect.2.1. Last, we show the usefulness of our
technique in a real-life log.

--- PAGE 159 ---
144 M. Vidgof et al.
4.1 Experimental Setup
We implemented our technique as a prototype. We built our prototype using the
PM4Py [3] library. It is a library for process mining implemented in the Python
programming language. We used Jupyter notebook for our implementation. We
tested on a laptop with Intel®Core ™ i7-8565U CPU @ 4.60 GHz x 4 machine
with 16 GB of DDR4 RAM and Linux kernel 4.15.0-88-generic 64-bit version.
By default, our tool takes an event log in XES format as input but it can be
also conﬁgured to accept event log in CSV format. The output is a ﬁltered log,
again, in XES or CSV format. The output of our tool can be used with any other
process process mining tool. Apart from mining the resulting log in PM4Py, the
user can export it and work on it with other tools like ProM, Disco, Celonis, etc.
We used PM4Py and ProM in our evaluation. Our prototype is publicly available
as open source software on GitHub4
.
4.2 Results on Artificial Log
We generated a log of our example process in Fig.1 using BIMP5
. The log con-
tains 1000 cases and was built with the following rules: i) positive response is
received with 80% probability; ii) negative response is received with 20% prob-
ability; iii) alternative solution exists with 80% probability; iv) no alternative
solutions exist with 20% probability.
In order to evaluate our technique, let us apply our prototype on this artiﬁ-
cial log. As already mentioned, the two ﬁlters can be used both separately and
combined. First, we can use the variants ﬁlter to keep process behaviour that is
of interest to us. Let us say, we are interested in the most frequent and the least
frequent variants. To do that, we apply Algorithm1 and specify two ranges for
the ﬁlter: Rv = {[0,0.15],[0.9,1]}. It means we want to keep the 15% least fre-
quent paths as well as 10% most frequent ones. It is very important to interpret
these ranges correctly: by saying we take 15% most infrequent paths we do not
mean taking 15% of the cases. Instead, we mean here paths that are between
the 0th and the 15th percentile in a list of all variants in the input log sorted by
their frequency.
We do not want to ﬁlter out any activities at this point, thus we specify
one range Ra = [0,1] for the activities ﬁlter, meaning we want to keep 100%
of activities. This gives us a ﬁltered log L
that we can use further either in
PM4Py or in any other tool. Figure3 shows a Petri net resulting from applying
Heuristics miner in ProM on the ﬁltered log and adapted for better readability.
However, we may also want to ﬁlter activities at this point. Note that as
we already applied the ﬁrst ﬁlter on our log, only the activities present in the
selected variants will be available for us to pick from. Let us say, we want to
see the least frequent activities as well as the ones of medium frequency but
not the most frequent ones. In order to do that, we can set multiple ranges for
4
https://github.com/MaxVidgof/cherry-picker.
5
http://bimp.cs.ut.ee.

--- PAGE 160 ---
Cherry-Picking from Spaghetti 145
Fig.3. Model from the artificial log in Table1 with variants ranges Rv =
{[0,0.15],[0.9,1]} produced by heuristics miner and transformed into a Petri net.
the activities ﬁlter: Ra = {[0,0.1],[0.1,0.3],[0.4,0.6]}. You can also see that the
range boundaries are allowed to be the same but an overlap between ranges is
not allowed.
Figure4 shows the resulting model, again, adapted to improve readability.
As we can see, it only includes the activities that are in the speciﬁed range: 40%
least frequent activities and some activities with medium frequency. However,
the new model does not contain the most frequent activities as they are outside
of the speciﬁed range. This allows the user to concentrate on the less frequent
and presumably more interesting activities.
Fig.4. Model from the artificial log in Table1 with variants ranges Rv =
{[0,0.15],[0.9,1]} and activities ranges Ra = {[0,0.1],[0.1,0.3],[0.4,0.6]} produced by
heuristics miner and transformed into a Petri net.
In conclusion, the proposed technique fulﬁlls the requirements for an
information-preserving ﬁltering technique. More speciﬁcally, the requirements
identiﬁed in Sect.2.3 are addressed as follows.
RQ1. (Select variants) is addressed as the resulting model only shows the
least frequent behaviour and the most frequent one.
RQ2. (Select activities) is addressed by the activities ﬁlter. Here the less
frequent activities such as Evaluate acceptable alternative (J), Go to court (K)
as well as the ones with medium frequency like Complaint received are present
whereas the most frequent ones like Discuss solution (C) and Send apology (D)
are ﬁltered out.
RQ3. (Multi-range filtering) is addressed by our novel range speciﬁca-
tion approach. Instead of only selecting one threshold or manually picking some
variants, the user can now specify multiple non-overlapping frequency ranges,
and the union of sets of entities (variants or activities, depending on the ﬁlter) is
written to the ﬁltered log. The models above not only contain the least frequent
traces like 〈A,B,C,D,E,I,J,C,D,E,I,J,C,D,E,I,J,K,L〉 but also the most frequent
one such as 〈A,B,C,D,E,F,G,H〉. However, the traces with medium frequency are
not included in the ﬁltered log L
.

--- PAGE 161 ---
146 M. Vidgof et al.
4.3 Results on Real-Life Logs
Next, we applied our technique on a real-life event log of sepsis cases [8]. This
is a publicly available log containing more than 1000 traces and 15000 events,
each trace corresponding to a pathway through the hospital.
By exploring the log, we can ﬁnd out that there are 846 diﬀerent variants,
the most frequent of which includes only 35 cases that corresponds to slightly
more than 3% of all traces in the log. There are also 784 variants having only a
single conforming trace in the log. This means that the term frequent variant is
not applicable to this log. Thus, it makes little sense to apply the variants ﬁlter
on the log so we can set the range of the ﬁrst ﬁlter to [0,1].
What is really of interest to us is the activities ﬁlter. While the ﬁlters of the
traditional process mining tools only allow to keep the most frequent activities,
which we will discuss in more detail in Sect.5, our ﬁlter gives us more oppor-
tunities. Fir instance, we can decide to take a deeper look only into the least
frequent activities. For this, we would set the activities ﬁlter to a range of [0,
0.25]. But we can also add additional ranges to these ﬁlter. Let us say, apart
from the least frequent activities we are also interested in the one activity lying
at the 65th percentile of frequency. This is also possible, for this we just set the
second range to [0.65,0.65].
Fig.5. Model from the real-life log with activities ranges [0,0.25] and [0.65,0.65] pro-
duced by heuristics miner and transformed into a Petri net
Now, if we apply the Heuristics miner on the ﬁltered log and convert it to
a Petri net, we will get a model in Fig.5. Again, here we only see the activities
that are in the speciﬁed range of frequency, and this picture cannot be achieved
by any other process mining tool.

--- PAGE 162 ---
Cherry-Picking from Spaghetti 147
5 Discussion
Process mining allows the users to turn event logs into process models. However,
real-life behaviour captured in these event logs of the process may be complex
and exhibit notable variability. This leads to so-called spaghetti models (Fig.6a)
that are diﬃcult to comprehend. Filtering reduces the complexity of such models
by limiting the number of traces used to produce the model or the number of
activities shown in the resulting model.
However, the users have little options to decide what information stays in the
model and what can be left out for the moment, since existing process mining
tools treat frequency as an ultimate measure of importance of a variant or an
activity. Due to this, they only oﬀer the user to keep the most frequent activities
or paths. We claim, however, that a process can contain activities that are still
very important despite infrequency but the tools provide virtually no possibility
to include them and reduce complexity at the same time. Some of the tools
provide the option to focus on any single path - also possibly an infrequent
one - but then the big picture is lost and the process analyst has to manually
incorporate this path in the model in case it is important. Moreover, no tool
oﬀers an option to focus on infrequent activities.
Our novel technique increases the utility of ﬁltering event logs for the process
analysts by allowing to set multiple ranges of frequency both for ﬁltering variants
and activities. Let us provide an illustrative example. Figure6b shows a model
produced by PM4Py heuristics miner from the real-life log about sepsis cases that
we used in the previous section. Here, we used single-range ﬁltering with Rv =
[0.65,1] for the variants ﬁlter and Ra = [0.6,1] for the activities ﬁlter. Figure6c
is generated from a log where multi-range ﬁltering was applied. In fact, only
a slight modiﬁcation was done to the activities ﬁlter: Ra = {[0.3,0.3],[0.6,1]}.
This modiﬁcation leads to the new activity Return ER - the patient returning
to the hospital - appearing in the model. This activity, judging from the name,
may be extremely important for the domain expert, although it does not happen
frequently.
As this example shows, our ﬁltering technique ﬁlls the gap that other tech-
niques cannot ﬁll. It does so by allowing the user to set multiple frequency ranges
for both variants and activities, which in turn makes it possible to focus on previ-
ously disregarded behaviour and gain insights about the process behaviour that
no other tool can provide. This can be beneﬁcial in scenarios like monitoring
of safety-critical processes, or controlling for possible fraudulent behaviour in
companies. In such cases, it is of utmost importance that a ﬁltering technique
does not leave out information about potentially harmful cases.

--- PAGE 163 ---
148 M. Vidgof et al.
(a) No filtering resulting in Spaghetti model
(b) single-range filtering (c) multi-range filtering
Fig.6. Impact of filtering on the resulting process models
6 Conclusion
In this paper we provide a novel ﬁltering technique which sacriﬁces infrequent
occurrence neither of process variants nor of process activities. We leveraged the
PM4Py libraries to build a prototype which can work with multiple event logs
formats. As well, the result of our technique can be input to several process
mining algorithms. We tested our technique both on a synthetic log generated
from a well known process model as well as with real-world event logs. Our
evaluation shows that we can obtain new insights which were either too hard to
implement or not oﬀered by existing process mining tools.
Our work has limitations. At current stage, intervals are deﬁned as lists of
tuples in Jupyter notebooks. This does not target end users with limited pro-
gramming skills. In future work, we plan to implement a user-friendly interface.
Furthermore, we plan to apply our technique in real-world scenarios, such as
auditing, in which multi-range ﬁltering may unveil possible pattern of fraud or
non-compliance. Finally, we plan to extend state of the art techniques by enrich-
ing them with multi-range capabilities.

--- PAGE 164 ---
Cherry-Picking from Spaghetti 149
References
1. van der Aalst, W.M.P.: Process Mining - Data Science in Action, 2nd edn. Springer,
Heidelberg (2016). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-49851-4
2. Augusto, A., et al.: Automated discovery of process models from event logs: review
and benchmark. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 31(4), 686–705 (2019)
3. Berti, A., van Zelst, S.J., van der Aalst, W.M.P.: Process mining for python
(PM4PY): bridging the gap between process - and data science. CoRR
abs/1905.06169 (2019)
4. Conforti, R., La Rosa, M., ter Hofstede, A.H.M.: Filtering out infrequent behavior
from business process event logs. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 29(2), 300–314
(2017)
5. Dumas, M., La Rosa, M., Mendling, J., Reijers, H.A.: Fundamentals of Business
Process Management, 2nd edn. Springer, Heidelberg (2018). https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-642-33143-5
6. Günther, C.W., van der Aalst, W.M.P.: Fuzzy mining – adaptive process simplifi-
cation based on multi-perspective metrics. In: Alonso, G., Dadam, P., Rosemann,
M. (eds.) BPM 2007. LNCS, vol. 4714, pp. 328–343. Springer, Heidelberg (2007).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-75183-0 24
7. Leemans, S.J.J., Fahland, D., van der Aalst, W.M.P.: Discovering block-structured
process models from event logs - a constructive approach. In: Colom, J.-M., Desel,
J. (eds.) PETRI NETS 2013. LNCS, vol. 7927, pp. 311–329. Springer, Heidelberg
(2013). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-38697-8 17
8. Mannhardt, F.: Eindhoven University of Technology. Dataset. Sepsis Cases - Event
Log (2016). https://doi.org/10.4121/uuid:915d2bfb-7e84-49ad-a286-dc35f063a460
9. Song, M., Günther, C.W., van der Aalst, W.M.P.: Trace clustering in process
mining. In: Ardagna, D., Mecella, M., Yang, J. (eds.) BPM 2008. LNBIP, vol.
17, pp. 109–120. Springer, Heidelberg (2009). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-
00328-8 11
10. Taleb, N.N.: The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable, vol. 2. Ran-
dom house, New York (2007)
11. Veiga, G.M., Ferreira, D.R.: Understanding spaghetti models with sequence clus-
tering for ProM. In: Rinderle-Ma, S., Sadiq, S., Leymann, F. (eds.) BPM 2009.
LNBIP, vol. 43, pp. 92–103. Springer, Heidelberg (2010). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-642-12186-9 10
12. Weerdt, J.D., vanden Broucke, S.K.L.M., Vanthienen, J., Baesens, B.: Active trace
clustering for improved process discovery. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 25(12),
2708–2720 (2013)
13. Weijters, A.J.M.M., Ribeiro, J.T.S.: Flexible Heuristics Miner (FHM). In: CIDM,
pp. 310–317. IEEE (2011)

--- PAGE 165 ---
Truncated Trace Classifier. Removal
of Incomplete Traces from Event Logs
Gaël Bernard1(B)
and Periklis Andritsos2
1
Faculty of Business and Economics (HEC), University of Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland
gael.bernard@unil.ch
2
Faculty of Information, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
periklis.andritsos@utoronto.ca
Abstract. We consider truncated traces, which are incomplete
sequences of events. This typically happens when dealing with streaming
data or when the event log extraction process cuts the end of the trace.
The existence of truncated traces in event logs and their negative impacts
on process mining outcomes have been widely acknowledged in the lit-
erature. Still, there is a lack of research on algorithms to detect them.
We propose the Truncated Trace Classiﬁer (TTC), an algorithm that
distinguishes truncated traces from the ones that are not truncated. We
benchmark 5 TTC implementations that use either LSTM or XGBOOST
on 13 real-life event logs. Accurate TTCs have great potential. In fact,
ﬁltering truncated traces before applying a process discovery algorithm
greatly improves the precision of the discovered process models, by 9.1%.
Moreover, we show that TTCs increase the accuracy of a next event pre-
diction algorithm by up to 7.5%.
Keywords: Process mining · Predictive process monitoring ·
Predictive analytics · Truncated trace classiﬁer
1 Introduction
The execution of a business process often leaves trails in information systems
called event logs. Using these event logs, process mining techniques can extract
data-driven insights about business processes. For example, it is possible to dis-
cover process models from event logs [1], to predict the next event [2,3], or to
assess whether an ongoing process will fulﬁll a time constraint [4].
A truncated trace is a trace where the last events are missing. In fact, these
events happened or will happen, but they are not available at the time of the
analysis. The presence of truncated traces in event logs is acknowledged by
researchers [5–8]. Interestingly, organizers of the latest edition of the Process
Discovery Contest [9]–a contest where participants have to infer process models
from event logs–have included truncated traces to make the synthetic event logs
more realistic.
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. Nurcan et al. (Eds.): BPMDS 2020/EMMSAD 2020, LNBIP 387, pp. 150–165, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49418-6_10

--- PAGE 166 ---
Truncated Trace Classiﬁer 151
We propose a Truncated Trace Classiﬁer (TTC) that distinguishes truncated
traces from the ones that are not truncated. We refer to the latter as the ‘com-
plete trace’. We foresee three beneﬁts of using a TTC. First, a TTC can ﬁl-
ter truncated traces. This is important because the success of process mining
depends on the quality of the input event logs [10–13]. Second, a TTC helps
to increase operational eﬃciency. For instance, a ticket in a call center might
stay open for several days because an agent forgot to close it or because the
customer did not follow up on a requested action. Using a TTC, we could avoid
the manual task of closing them by doing it in an automated manner. Third, a
TTC has potential that goes beyond ﬁltering techniques. For instance, we show
in this work that a TTC can improve the accuracy of predicting the next event.
It is not uncommon to read that truncated traces can be ﬁltered out by
looking at the very last event [5–8]. For example, a ticket is complete only when
the activity ‘closing the ticket’ happens. However, such a closing event might not
exist. Instead, a recurring one might occur [14]. For instance, the event ‘delivering
package’ might be a good indicator to predict that an order is fulﬁlled, but it
might reoccur if some items are being shipped separately. In such a case, relying
on the very last event will result in a poorly performing TTC. This observation
is in line with the conclusion drawn by Conforti et al. that existing techniques
to ﬁlter traces are often simplistic [11].
To the best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst work focusing on building an
accurate TTC. Our contributions are the following: (1) We propose ﬁve machine
learning-based TTC implementations. (2) We benchmark these ﬁve implemen-
tations and a baseline approach using 13 event logs. (3) We highlight the beneﬁt
of using a TTC for two process mining tasks, that of process discovery and next
event prediction.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Sect.2, we provide an
overview of process mining and deﬁne truncated traces. In Sect.3, we propose
several approaches to building a TTC, which we benchmark in Sect.4. Sections5
and 6 demonstrate the value of a TTC by showing how it can increase the pro-
cess model precision and next event prediction, respectively. In Sect.7, we discuss
related work and we conclude the paper in Sect.8.
2 Preliminaries
In this section, we brieﬂy introduce the process mining discipline. Then, we
deﬁne truncated traces.
2.1 Process Mining
Process mining brings data science and business process management closer
together [6]. As stated in the process mining manifesto, the starting point of
process mining is an event log [12]. An event log contains traces, which are
sequences of events. Event logs often contain additional information such as a
timestamp or the resource. We will use the simple event log deﬁnition introduced

--- PAGE 167 ---
152 G. Bernard and P. Andritsos
in [6]. A simple trace σ is a sequence of events. A simple event log L is a multi-set
of traces. For example, L = [abc3
,ab2
] is an event log containing 5 traces and
13 events. Taking an event log as input, several process mining techniques are
available. Typically, a process discovery algorithm such as the inductive miner,
[15], can infer the most likely business process model behind an event log. To
ensure that process mining works well, event logs need to be noise-free [10–12].
Truncation is one type of noise [16], which we introduce in the next section.
2.2 Truncated Traces
A truncated trace is an ongoing trace where the end of the process is missing.
Truncated traces are sometimes referred to as ‘incomplete cases’ [7,8], ‘incom-
plete traces’ [5], or ‘missing heads’ [10]. We favor the term truncated over the
term incomplete as the latter is often used for the concept of ‘event log incom-
pleteness’, referring to the fact that an event log will most likely not contain all
the combinations of behaviors that are possible because there are too many of
them [12]. For instance, when there is a loop in the process model, the number of
unique combinations is inﬁnite. Event logs will most likely be incomplete while
they may not contain truncated traces.
There are several reasons to explain the existence of incomplete traces. They
might exist because of a ﬂawed event log extraction process that cuts the traces
at a ﬁxed date, leaving the traces that ﬁnish after truncated. This issue–named
‘the snapshots challenge’–has been identiﬁed by van der Aalst as one of the ﬁve
challenges that occurs when extracting event logs [6, chapter 5.3]. This type
of truncated trace could be avoided by extracting only the traces where no
event happens after the extraction date. However, once the data is extracted, we
cannot know which traces are truncated. As another example, incomplete traces
can exist because the events have not happened yet. This is especially relevant
when working with streaming data. Finally, truncated traces can result from a
wrong execution (e.g., the ticket was supposed to be closed but the agent forgot
to do it) or when the information system fails. In the next section, we introduce
a classiﬁer to automatically detect truncated traces.
3 Truncated Trace Classifier
A TTC inputs the current execution of a trace and predicts whether it is trun-
cated. As shown in Table1, we generate one input sample and one target for
each preﬁx length of each trace. The input sample represents the current state
of the process on which we apply a TTC. The target is a binary label that is
‘true’ when the trace is truncated or ‘false’ otherwise.
This setting implies that ‘real’ truncated traces that we would like to iden-
tify as such using the TTC would be labeled as complete. However, our intuition
is that the model will also learn from similar complete traces where the trun-
cated parts will be labeled as ‘truncated’. For illustration purposes, let us deﬁne
the following event logs: abc3
,ab. During the training phase, the sequence ab

--- PAGE 168 ---
Truncated Trace Classiﬁer 153
appears three times as ‘truncated’ and once as ‘complete’. Hence, during the
prediction phase, the sequence ab would most likely be predicted as ‘truncated’.
Fig.1. The traces abc and acadd result in eight samples.
To build a classiﬁer, we need to map the input sample to a feature space.
There are several options to do so, covered in depth in [8,17–19]. We provide
non-exhaustive examples that are illustrated in Fig.2.
Fig.2. Illustration of the feature spaces for the input samples aca and acad.
Last Event. Relying only on the last event to predict that a trace is truncated
is one option often mentioned in the literature [5–8]. For example, the input for
sample #3 from Fig.1 would be ‘c’.
Frequency. The ‘frequency’ feature space counts the occurrences of each event.
As shown in Fig.2, aca becomes {a:2,b:0,c:1,d:0}. This feature space does not
record the order in which the events appear.
Sequence Tensor. A sequence tensor contains an extra ‘timestep’ dimension.
Each timestep is a matrix similar to the ‘last event’; i.e., it describes which event
happens. The extra dimension allows to describe the full sequence of timesteps
in a lossless way. The number of timesteps is equal to the longest sequence in
the event logs.
Once the input samples have been mapped into a feature space, it can be fed
together with the target to a classiﬁer. We propose ﬁve TTC implementations
depicted in Fig.3. As can be seen in Fig.3, We also add a few base features: (1)
the number of activities in the preﬁx, (2) the number of seconds since the ﬁrst
event in the trace, and (3) the number of seconds since the previous event in

--- PAGE 169 ---
154 G. Bernard and P. Andritsos
Fig.3. Five implemented TTCs.
the trace. Such extra features were also added in the predictive business process
monitoring proposed by Tax et al. [3]. The ﬁve TTCs are described below.
1 LA (Last Activity). This TTC relies on the last activity to predict that
the trace is truncated.
2 FB (Frequency Based). This TTC uses the ‘frequency’ feature space
described in Sect.3.
3 FB&LA. This TTC concatenates the TTCs ‘1 LA’ and ‘2 FB’ because
they both convey complementary information.
4 Soft (Softmax). This TTC corresponds to a next event prediction algo-
rithm. In fact, the implementation is similar to the predictive business process
monitoring from Tax et al. [3]. Predicting which event will occur is a multi-class
prediction problem. Thus, we rely on the Softmax function because it transforms
the output to a probability distribution. The end of the process is treated as any
other event. If the latter is predicted as the most likely next event, we predict
that the trace is complete. If not, we predict that the trace is truncated.
5 Sig (Sigmoid). The TTC ‘5 Sig’ turns the multi-class problem into a binary
one by using a one-vs-all strategy with the special ‘end’ event. We implemented
both TTCs to compare the accuracy when the neural network is specially trained
to recognize truncated traces (‘5 Sig’) or when the task is to predict the next
event (‘4 Soft’).
TTCs 1 to 3 use XGBoost1
[20], which stands for eXtreme Gradient Boosting.
It relies on an ensemble of decision trees to predict the target. This technique
is widely used among the winning solutions in machine learning challenges [20].
For the main settings, we set the number of trees to 200 and the maximum
depth of the trees to 8. The last two TTCs rely on a neural network imple-
mented in Keras [21]. As shown in Fig.3, the architecture has two inputs. First,
the sequence tensor is passed to a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) network.
LSTM is a special type of Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) introduced in [22].
Compared to RNN, LSTM possesses a more advanced memory cell that gives
LSTM powerful modeling capabilities for long-term dependencies [3]. The out-
put of the LSTM network and the base features are provided to a fully connected
1
Available at https://github.com/dmlc/xgboost/tree/master/python-package.

--- PAGE 170 ---
Truncated Trace Classiﬁer 155
layer. Both the LSTM network and the fully connected layer have 16 cells. We
use Adam [23] as an optimizer and we set the number of epochs to 100.
4 Benchmark
In this section, we benchmark the ﬁve TTCs described in the previous section,
in addition to a baseline approach.
4.1 Datasets
We used 13 event logs2
well known in the process mining literature. The event
logs come from “real-life” systems, oﬀering the advantage of containing complex
traces and a wide range of characteristics visible in Table1.
To the best of our knowledge, these event logs do not contain truncated
traces. However, this is diﬃcult to conﬁrm. For instance, exceptional events
might happen several months after the event log extraction date. In general,
without having a deep expertise of the domain under analysis and direct access
to the person in charge of the dataset extraction, it is not possible to guarantee
that all traces are complete. We use the term ‘false complete’ to refer to traces
that we wrongly consider complete during the training phase but that are in
fact truncated because more events will happen. We claim that a TTC should
be resilient to ‘false complete’. In other words, a TTC should not overﬁt on a
single ‘false complete’ and wrongly classify all similar traces as complete.
To test the resilience of the TTCs, we generated 0%, 10%, and 20% of ‘false
complete’ traces by randomly cutting them. The setting with 0% of ‘false com-
plete’ reﬂects how the TTC should be used with a real dataset, i.e., considering
all the traces as complete. For the two other settings, we kept track of the traces
that are truncated and refer to them as ‘ground truth’. To benchmark the var-
ious TTCs, we use the ground truth. For instance, let us deﬁne that abc is a
complete trace that we randomly cut to become the following ‘false complete’:
ab. During the training phase, we train the classiﬁer to consider ab as a com-
plete trace, while during the evaluation ab should be classiﬁed as truncated to
be well classiﬁed.
4.2 Baseline: Decreasing Factor
Standard process mining tools and libraries such as the plugin ‘Filter Log
using Simple Heuristics’ in ProM3
, the software Disco4
or the Python library
PM4Py [24] oﬀer some options to remove truncated traces. Typically, a set of
ending activities is selected by the end-user and the traces that do terminate
with the ending activities are considered truncated and removed. It is also pos-
sible to automatically determine the set of ending activities. Let S be the set of
2
Downloaded from https://data.4tu.nl/repository/collection:event logs real.
3
http://www.promtools.org.
4
https://ﬂuxicon.com/disco/.

--- PAGE 171 ---
156 G. Bernard and P. Andritsos
Table 1. Characteristics of the 13 datasets.
Dataset #σ # activities Unique
activities
Max
length (σ)
Min
length (σ)
Mean
length (σ)
BPI 12 13.1K 164.5k 23 96 3 12.6
BPI 13 CP 1.5K 6.7K 7 35 1 4.5
BPI 13 i 7.6K 65.5k 13 123 1 8.7
BPI 15 1 1.2K 52.2K 398 101 2 43.6
BPI 15 2 0.8K 44.4K 410 132 1 53.3
BPI 15 3 1.4K 59.7K 383 124 3 42.4
BPI 15 4 1.1K 47.3K 356 116 1 44.9
BPI 15 5 1.2K 59.1K 389 154 5 51.1
BPI 17 31.5K 561.7K 26 61 8 17.8
BPI 18 2.0K 123.3K 129 680 35 61.9
BPI 19 251.7K 1.6M 42 990 1 6.3
Env permit 0.9K 38.9K 381 95 2 41.6
Helpdesk 3.8K 13.7K 9 14 1 3.6
ending activities that we will use to ﬁlter the truncated traces. As a baseline,
we use the method implemented in PM4Py which works as follows: First, the
number of occurrences of each activity as a last activity is counted. Let Ci be
the count of the ith
most frequent end activity. We start by adding the most
frequent end activity, C1, to S. Then, we calculate the decreasing factor of the
next most frequent activity using the following formula: Ci/Ci−1. If the decreas-
ing factor is above a deﬁned threshold we add Ci to S and move to next most
frequent activity. If the threshold is not met, we stop the process. We tried the
following thresholds: 0.40, 0.45, 0.50, 0.55, 0.60, 0.65, and 0.70. We report the
results obtained using a threshold of 0.60 as it is the one that yields the best
accuracy to detect truncated traces. Interestingly, it is also the default value in
PM4Py.
4.3 Evaluation
The ﬁrst 80% of the traces were used to train the model, and the evaluation was
done on the remaining 20%. Out of the 80% of training data, 20% was used to
validate the parameters. To compare the ground truth with the output of the
TTC, we used the Matthews Correlation Coeﬃcient (MCC) [25]. The MCC has
the nice property of using all the quantities of the confusion matrix, i.e., True
Positive (TP), True Negative (TN), False Positive (FP), and False Negative
(FN). Its value lies between −1 and 1, where 0 represents a random prediction,
1 a perfect score, and −1 an inverse prediction. It is deﬁned as:
MCC(σ) =
TP · TN − FP · FN

(TP + FN)(FP + FN)(TN + FP)(TN + FN)

--- PAGE 172 ---
Truncated Trace Classiﬁer 157
Figure4 aggregates the results per TTC, while Fig.5 contains the detailed
results. In Fig.5, we can see a large MCC score gap per dataset. This gap high-
lights the various levels of complexity involved in detecting truncated traces.
Also, none of the techniques always outperforms the others. This is in line with
a similar conclusion that was drawn from large predictive business process moni-
toring experiments [26]. Nonetheless, when looking at Fig.4, we observe that the
TTC ‘3 FB&LA’ has the highest median MCC score. Interestingly, the perfor-
mance of the baseline is comparable to the best implementations for the following
ﬁve datasets: BPI 13 CP, BPI 13 i, BPI 18, Env permit, Helpdesk (see Fig.5).
For the other eight datasets, there is a clear drop in performance between the
baseline and more sophisticated methods. Looking at Table1, we do not see any
clear dataset characteristics to explain the performance gap. We conclude that
looking at the last activity might work well, but for some datasets it is better to
use a more sophisticated TTC.
We also tested the null hypothesis that the results from diﬀerent TTCs come
from the same distribution. To do this, we ran a permutation test with 100,000
random permutations and a p-value of 0.05. The results are visible in Fig.6. As
can be seen, ‘3 FB&LA’ outperforms the baseline approach with strong statistical
signiﬁcance. We also observe that transforming a multi-class problem into a
binary classiﬁer–using the ‘4 Soft’ instead of the ‘5 Sig’–does not seem to improve
the ability of the TTC to detect truncated traces, as the MCC scores of Fig.4
are comparable.
Figure7 compares the execution time per TTC. The baseline takes in the
order of milliseconds to run. TTCs that are based on XGboost take in the order
of seconds or minutes to run, while approaches that rely on neural networks take
from minutes to hours to run. In fact, the ‘4 Soft’ and ‘5 Sig’ are on average 112
times slower than the other TTCs that rely on XGBoost.
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0 Baseline
1 LA
0.49
<
2 FB
0.45
<
3 FB&LA
0.55
<
4 Soft
0.43
<
5 Sig
0.44
<
median: 0.30
<
Fig.4. Boxplot showing the MCC scores per technique. Each dot depicts an individual
value. The median is written on top.

--- PAGE 173 ---
158 G. Bernard and P. Andritsos
Fig.5. Detailed MCC score.
Fig.6. P-values of the permutation tests between the MCC scores per techniques.

--- PAGE 174 ---
Truncated Trace Classiﬁer 159
Fig.7. Execution time for the ﬁve TTCs. The vertical axis uses a logarithmic scale.
The full benchmark implementations, the parameters, and the event logs, as
well as the results are available online5
. The machine used for the experiment
has 61GB of RAM, 4 CPUs, and a GPU that speeds up the neural network
training phase.
5 Improving Discovered Process Models with a TTC
A process discovery algorithm discovers a process model from an event log [6].
Because the discovered process model is based on event logs, it oﬀers the advan-
tage of being a data-driven approach that shows how the process is really exe-
cuted. However, discovering a process model from an event log is a challeng-
ing task. Typically, process discovery algorithms are sensitive to noise [10–13].
Applying process mining techniques on traces that must supposedly be complete
but are instead truncated is no exception. The quality of a process model is com-
monly measured using four competing metrics [12]: (1) The precision measures
to what extent behaviors that were not observed can be replayed on the process
model. (2) The fitness measures to what extent the traces from the event logs
can be replayed on the model. (3) The generalization ensures that the model
does not overﬁt. Finally, (4) the simplicity measures the complexity involved to
read the process model. When facing truncated traces, a process discovery algo-
rithm will wrongly infer that the process can be stopped in the middle. This will
negatively impact the precision of the discovered process model. To solve this
issue, researchers advocate removing truncated traces [5,6,8]. As highlighted by
Conforti et al., “[t]he presence of noise tends to lower precision as this noise
introduces spurious connections between event labels” [11].
We ran an experiment to measure the impact of removing truncated traces
on the quality of the process models using PM4Py [24], a process mining library
in Python. We used the default metrics in PM4Py which are described in the
following papers: precision [27], ﬁtness [6, p. 250], generalization [28], and sim-
plicity [29]. To start, we randomly generated 100 process models with the PM4py
5
https://github.com/gaelbernard/truncated-trace-classiﬁer.

--- PAGE 175 ---
160 G. Bernard and P. Andritsos
implementation of PTandLogGenerator [30], using the default parameters6
. For
each process model, we produced an event log containing 1,000 traces. We pro-
duced 20 variations of each event log with a level of noise ranging from 0 to
1, where 0 means that no traces were truncated and 0.05 means that 5% of
the traces were truncated, and so on. Altogether, this process produced 20,000
event logs. For each of the 20,000 event logs, we ran the following experiment:
(1) We applied the Inductive Miner [15] on the event logs to discover a process
model, and (2) then we replayed the original event log–that did not contain the
truncated traces–on the process model to measure the quality of the discovered
process models. This was the experiment without a TTC. For the experiment
with a TTC, we applied the exact same steps, but, beforehand, we automatically
removed the truncated traces with the TTC ‘3 FB&LA’ described in Sect.3.
Fig.8. Impact of the truncated traces on the process model qualities.
Table 2. Mean process quality of the discovered pro-
cess models with and without the TTC.
Without ttc With ttc Increase
Precision 0.4829 0.5267 9.10%
Generalization 0.7413 0.8112 9.40%
Fitness 0.9687 0.9523 −1.70%
Simplicity 0.6328 0.5833 −7.80%
Average 0.7064 0.7184 1.70%
In Fig.8, the results are
averaged. As can be seen,
the precision and the gener-
alization metrics are greatly
improved, while the simplicity
and the ﬁtness dimensions are
negatively impacted. Table2
shows that the average pro-
cess quality is improved by
1.7%. Figure8 shows the link
between the ratio of truncated traces in the event logs and the quality of the
resulting process models. The average process quality visible at the top of Fig.8
shows that when there are some truncated traces in the event logs, applying the
TTC is always beneﬁcial. In the next section, we show that a TTC can also
increase the prediction of the next events.
6
Visible at: https://pm4py.ﬁt.fraunhofer.de/documentation#process-tree-generation.

--- PAGE 176 ---
Truncated Trace Classiﬁer 161
6 Improving Next Event Prediction with a TTC
The goal of a next event algorithm is to predict the most likely event that will
follow a truncated trace. As shown with the ‘4 Soft’ TTC, we can turn a next
event algorithm into a TTC. Looking at the benchmark in Fig.4, we show that
the TTC ‘3 FB&LA’ outperforms the TTC ‘4 Soft’. We have the intuition that
combining the best TTC with a next event algorithm will increase the prediction
accuracy. The rationale is that we will more accurately predict the end of the
process with a TTC because it has been trained for this purpose. Hence, we ﬁrst
rely on the TTC to predict if more events are expected. If not, we do not need
to call the next event algorithm. Overall, we should improve the results as we
avoid predicting a next event when the trace is not truncated. The goal of this
section is to validate this hypothesis.
As it is initially a next event prediction algorithm, we use the TTC ‘4 Soft’
for the prediction of the next event. In the setting without a TTC, it is the only
algorithm involved. In the version with a TTC, we complement the architecture
with the TTC ‘3 FB&LA’ in the following way. First, we assess if the trace is
truncated using the TTC. If the trace is truncated, we predict the next event.
Conversely, if the trace is already complete, we do not need to predict the next
event. The results are visible in Table3. Including a TTC improves the accuracy
by up to 7.5% and on average by 1.4%. In the experiment, building the TTC
took an extra 2.4% of duration. We claim that including a TTC is beneﬁcial
for the accuracy while having a limited negative execution time impact. A TTC
solves one problem noted by Tax et al.: “We found that LSTMs have problems
[...] to predict overly long sequences of the same activity, resulting in predicted
suﬃxes that are much longer than the ground truth suﬃxes” [3].
7 Related Work
To the best of our knowledge we are the ﬁrst to focus on the task of distinguishing
truncated from complete traces. Still, existing works—especially in the area of
predictive process monitoring—are relevant to uncover truncated traces.
Predictive process monitoring anticipates whether a running process instance
will comply with a predicate [4]. For instance, a predicate might be about the
process execution time, the execution of a speciﬁc event, or the total amount of
sales. As highlighted by Verenich et al., techniques in this space diﬀer according
to their object of prediction [18]. A TTC is a speciﬁc type of predictive process
monitoring task where the predicate is whether we will observe more events.
In [31], Maggi et al. propose a generic predictive process monitoring approach.
Once the predicate is set, the most similar preﬁxes are selected based on the
edit distance. Finally, a classiﬁer is used to correlate the goal with the data asso-
ciated with the process execution. Insights are then provided to the end-user
to optimize the fulﬁllment of the goal while the process is being executed. It
was later extended with a clustering step to decrease the prediction time [4].
Tax et al. propose a neural network that leverages LSTM that could serve as

--- PAGE 177 ---
162 G. Bernard and P. Andritsos
Table 3. Comparing the accuracy of predicting the next event and the execution time,
without and with a TTC.
Dataset Accuracy Execution time (in seconds)
Without ttc With ttc Increase Without ttc With ttc Increase
BPI 12 0.6899 0.6896 – 1060 1066 0.6%
BPI 13 CP 0.5559 0.5559 – 172 172 –
BPI 13 i 0.6478 0.6486 0.1% 519 521 0.4%
BPI 15 1 0.0851 0.0915 7.5% 324 347 6.6%
BPI 15 2 0.1509 0.1584 5.0% 606 628 3.5%
BPI 15 3 0.1364 0.1364 – 851 873 2.5%
BPI 15 4 0.1385 0.1394 0.6% 366 383 4.4%
BPI 15 5 0.0873 0.0884 1.3% 634 663 4.4%
BPI 17 0.7642 0.7689 0.6% 2318 2342 1.0%
BPI 18 0.6277 0.6323 0.7% 786 804 2.2%
BPI 19 0.4755 0.4855 2.1% 8674 8797 1.4%
Env permit 0.2325 0.2324 – 373 388 3.9%
Helpdesk 0.8226 0.8226 – 116 116 –
another generic predictive process monitoring algorithm capable of ﬁtting dif-
ferent predicates [3]. In our work, we use the approach from Tax et al. as a
baseline (i.e., TTC ‘4 Soft’). Despite the advantage of being generic, we show
that a tailor-made algorithm to detect a TTC outperforms such an approach.
The goal of a business process deviance mining algorithm is to assign a binary
class–normal or deviant–to a trace. In this sense, it shares similarities with pre-
dictive process monitoring. This is especially true because of their overlapping
inputs and feature extraction methods [32]. However, deviance mining works on
completed instances and focuses on the why [32].
Finally, Bertoli et al. propose a reasoning-based approach to recover missing
information from event logs [33]. Ultimately, it would allow us to turn a truncated
trace into a complete one. To work, this technique requires a reference process
model as input. Therefore, it is not applicable if the task at hand is to discover
a process model.
8 Conclusion
Event logs are often noisy, which makes the application of process mining some-
times diﬃcult in a real setting [13]. Typically, the existence of truncated traces
is known. Still, there is a research gap in systematically detecting them. In this
work, we treat the identiﬁcation of truncated traces as a predictive process mon-
itoring task and we benchmark several TTCs using 13 complex event logs. We
show that building a TTC that consistently achieves high accuracy is challeng-
ing. This ﬁnding highlights the importance of conducting further research to

--- PAGE 178 ---
Truncated Trace Classiﬁer 163
build an eﬃcient TTC. Typically, for some event logs, using a baseline approach
that relies solely on the last activity works well. Still, we show that the TTC ‘3
FB&LA’ outperforms such baseline approach with strong statistical signiﬁcance.
We also measure the process model quality impact when a process discovery
algorithm is run on event logs that contain truncated traces. We show that only
a few truncated traces can greatly decrease the process model quality and that
a TTC can alleviate this problem by automatically removing truncated traces.
Finally, we highlight the unexplored potential of a TTC to increase the accuracy
of predicting the next event. We expect that more beneﬁts of TTCs are yet to
be discovered, especially in the predictive business process monitoring area.
In this work, we use the sequence of activities as well as some timing infor-
mation. Using more information such as the name of the resource, the day of
the week or any other event attributes could further improve the accuracy of the
TTCs. Higher accuracy could also be achieved by using diﬀerent classiﬁers, try-
ing new neural network architecture, or implementing alternative feature spaces.
This is an area for future research where our work can serve as a baseline.
References
1. Leemans, S.J.J., Fahland, D., van der Aalst, W.M.P.: Discovering block-structured
process models from incomplete event logs. In: Ciardo, G., Kindler, E. (eds.)
PETRI NETS 2014. LNCS, vol. 8489, pp. 91–110. Springer, Cham (2014). https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-07734-5 6
2. Bernard, G., Andritsos, P.: Accurate and transparent path prediction using process
mining. In: Welzer, T., Eder, J., Podgorelec, V., Kamišalić Latiﬁć, A. (eds.) ADBIS
2019. LNCS, vol. 11695, pp. 235–250. Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-030-28730-6 15
3. Tax, N., Verenich, I., La Rosa, M., Dumas, M.: Predictive business process mon-
itoring with LSTM neural networks. In: Dubois, E., Pohl, K. (eds.) CAiSE 2017.
LNCS, vol. 10253, pp. 477–492. Springer, Cham (2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-319-59536-8 30
4. Di Francescomarino, C., Dumas, M., Maggi, F.M., Teinemaa, I.: Clustering-based
predictive process monitoring. IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput. 12, 896–909 (2016)
5. Bezerra, F., Wainer, J., van der Aalst, W.M.P.: Anomaly detection using process
mining. In: Halpin, T., Krogstie, J., Nurcan, S., Proper, E., Schmidt, R., Soﬀer, P.,
Ukor, R. (eds.) BPMDS/EMMSAD -2009. LNBIP, vol. 29, pp. 149–161. Springer,
Heidelberg (2009). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-01862-6 13
6. Aalst, W.: Data science in action. Process Mining, pp. 3–23. Springer, Heidelberg
(2016). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-49851-4 1
7. Fluxicon: Deal with incomplete cases, process mining in practice, disco 2.1 docu-
mentation. http://processminingbook.com/incompletecases.html
8. Verenich, I.: Explainable predictive monitoring of temporal measures of business
processes. Ph.D. thesis, Queensland University of Technology (2018)
9. Carmona, J., de Leoni, M., Depaire, B.: Process discovery contest. In: International
Conference on Process Mining 2019 (2019)
10. Suriadi, S., Andrews, R., ter Hofstede, A.H., Wynn, M.T.: Event log imperfection
patterns for process mining: towards a systematic approach to cleaning event logs.
Inf. Syst. 64, 132–150 (2017)

--- PAGE 179 ---
164 G. Bernard and P. Andritsos
11. Conforti, R., La Rosa, M., ter Hofstede, A.H.: Filtering out infrequent behavior
from business process event logs. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 29(2), 300–314
(2016)
12. van der Aalst, W., et al.: Process mining manifesto. In: Daniel, F., Barkaoui, K.,
Dustdar, S. (eds.) BPM 2011. LNBIP, vol. 99, pp. 169–194. Springer, Heidelberg
(2012). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-28108-2 19
13. Bose, R.J.C., Mans, R.S., van der Aalst, W.M.: Wanna improve process mining
results? In: 2013 IEEE Symposium on Computational Intelligence and Data Mining
(CIDM), pp. 127–134. IEEE (2013)
14. Selig, H.: Continuous event log extraction for process mining (2017)
15. Leemans, S.J.J., Fahland, D., van der Aalst, W.M.P.: Discovering block-structured
process models from event logs containing infrequent behaviour. In: Lohmann, N.,
Song, M., Wohed, P. (eds.) BPM 2013. LNBIP, vol. 171, pp. 66–78. Springer, Cham
(2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-06257-0 6
16. de Medeiros, A.K.A., Weijters, A.J., van der Aalst, W.M.: Genetic process min-
ing: an experimental evaluation. Data Min. Knowl. Disc. 14(2), 245–304 (2007).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10618-006-0061-7
17. Verenich, I., Dumas, M., La Rosa, M., Maggi, F.M., Di Francescomarino, C.: Com-
plex symbolic sequence clustering and multiple classiﬁers for predictive process
monitoring. In: Reichert, M., Reijers, H.A. (eds.) BPM 2015. LNBIP, vol. 256, pp.
218–229. Springer, Cham (2016). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-42887-1 18
18. Verenich, I., Dumas, M., La Rosa, M., Maggi, F.M., Chasovskyi, D., Rozumnyi, A.:
Tell me what’s ahead? Predicting remaining activity sequences of business process
instances (2016)
19. Leontjeva, A., Conforti, R., Di Francescomarino, C., Dumas, M., Maggi, F.M.:
Complex symbolic sequence encodings for predictive monitoring of business pro-
cesses. In: Motahari-Nezhad, H.R., Recker, J., Weidlich, M. (eds.) BPM 2015.
LNCS, vol. 9253, pp. 297–313. Springer, Cham (2015). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-319-23063-4 21
20. Chen, T., Guestrin, C.: Xgboost: a scalable tree boosting system. In: Proceedings
of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining, pp. 785–794. ACM (2016)
21. Chollet, F.: Keras (2015). https://github.com/fchollet/keras
22. Hochreiter, S., Schmidhuber, J.: Long short-term memory. Neural Comput. 9(8),
1735–1780 (1997)
23. Kingma, D.P., Ba, J.: Adam: a method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.6980 (2014)
24. Berti, A., van Zelst, S.J., van der Aalst, W.: Process mining for python
(PM4PY): bridging the gap between process-and data science. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1905.06169 (2019)
25. Matthews, B.W.: Comparison of the predicted and observed secondary structure of
t4 phage lysozyme. Biochimica et Biophysica (BBA)-Acta Protein Struct. 405(2),
442–451 (1975)
26. Di Francescomarino, C., et al.: Genetic algorithms for hyperparameter optimization
in predictive business process monitoring. Inf. Syst. 74, 67–83 (2018)
27. Muñoz-Gama, J., Carmona, J.: A fresh look at precision in process conformance.
In: Hull, R., Mendling, J., Tai, S. (eds.) BPM 2010. LNCS, vol. 6336, pp. 211–226.
Springer, Heidelberg (2010). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-15618-2 16
28. Buijs, J.C., van Dongen, B.F., van der Aalst, W.M.: Quality dimensions in process
discovery: the importance of ﬁtness, precision, generalization and simplicity. Int.
J. Coop. Inf. Syst. 23(01), 1440001 (2014)

--- PAGE 180 ---
Truncated Trace Classiﬁer 165
29. Blum, F.: Metrics in process discovery. Technical report, TR/DCC. 1–21 (2015)
30. Jouck, T., Depaire, B.: Ptandloggenerator: a generator for artiﬁcial event data
(2016)
31. Maggi, F.M., Di Francescomarino, C., Dumas, M., Ghidini, C.: Predictive monitor-
ing of business processes. In: Jarke, M., et al. (eds.) CAiSE 2014. LNCS, vol. 8484,
pp. 457–472. Springer, Cham (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-07881-
6 31
32. Nguyen, H., Dumas, M., La Rosa, M., Maggi, F.M., Suriadi, S.: Business process
deviance mining: review and evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.08252 (2016)
33. Bertoli, P., Di Francescomarino, C., Dragoni, M., Ghidini, C.: Reasoning-based
techniques for dealing with incomplete business process execution traces. In: Bal-
doni, M., Baroglio, C., Boella, G., Micalizio, R. (eds.) AI*IA 2013. LNCS (LNAI),
vol. 8249, pp. 469–480. Springer, Cham (2013). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
03524-6 40

--- PAGE 181 ---
Secure Multi-party Computation for
Inter-organizational Process Mining
Gamal Elkoumy1
, Stephan A. Fahrenkrog-Petersen2
, Marlon Dumas1(B)
,
Peeter Laud3
, Alisa Pankova3
, and Matthias Weidlich2
1
University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia
{gamal.elkoumy,marlon.dumas}@ut.ee
2
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany
{fahrenks,weidlima}@hu-berlin.de
3
Cybernetica, Tartu, Estonia
{peeter.laud,alisa.pankova}@cyber.ee
Abstract. Process mining is a family of techniques for analyzing busi-
ness processes based on event logs extracted from information systems.
Mainstream process mining tools are designed for intra-organizational
settings, insofar as they assume that an event log is available for pro-
cessing as a whole. The use of such tools for inter-organizational process
analysis is hampered by the fact that such processes involve indepen-
dent parties who are unwilling to, or sometimes legally prevented from,
sharing detailed event logs with each other. In this setting, this paper pro-
poses an approach for constructing and querying a common artifact used
for process mining, namely the frequency and time-annotated Directly-
Follows Graph (DFG), over multiple event logs belonging to diﬀerent
parties, in such a way that the parties do not share the event logs with
each other. The proposal leverages an existing platform for secure multi-
party computation, namely Sharemind. Since a direct implementation of
DFG construction in Sharemind suﬀers from scalability issues, we pro-
pose to rely on vectorization of event logs and to employ a divide-and-
conquer scheme for parallel processing of sub-logs. The paper reports
on experiments that evaluate the scalability of the approach on real-life
logs.
Keywords: Process mining · Privacy · Secure multi-party
computation
1 Introduction
Contemporary process mining techniques enable users to analyze business pro-
cesses based on event logs extracted from information systems [1]. The out-
puts of process mining techniques can be used, for example, to identify per-
formance bottlenecks, waste, or compliance violations. Existing process mining
techniques require access to the entire event log of a business process. Usu-
ally, this requirement can be fulﬁlled when the event log is collected from one
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. Nurcan et al. (Eds.): BPMDS 2020/EMMSAD 2020, LNBIP 387, pp. 166–181, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49418-6_11

--- PAGE 182 ---
Secure Multi-party Computation for Inter-organizational Process Mining 167
or multiple systems within the same organization. In practice, though, many
business processes involve multiple independent organizations. We call such pro-
cesses inter-organizational business processes. An example of such process is the
process for ground handling of an aircraft, as illustrated in Fig.1. This process
involves two parties: the airline and the ground handler (called “airport” in the
model).
Fig.1. Aircraft ground handling process.
Due to conﬁdentiality concerns as well as privacy regulations, such as GDPR1
and HIPAA2
, it is not always possible for organizations to share process exe-
cution data with each other. Exchanging execution data may reveal personal
information of customers or it may expose business secrets. As a result, com-
mon techniques for process mining cannot be employed for inter-organizational
business processes. Yet, analyzing these processes is often crucial for improv-
ing operational performance. With reference to the above scenario, the eﬀective
coordination of ground handling activities is crucial for both involved parties.
It determines the number of ﬂights an airport can operate and the number of
ﬂights an airline can oﬀer. At the same time, each of the parties needs to protect
their conﬁdential data.
In this paper, we focus on the question of how to enable process mining
for inter-organizational business processes without requiring the involved par-
ties to share their private event logs or trust a third party. To this end, we
propose an architecture for process mining based on secure multi-party compu-
tation (MPC) [25]. In essence, MPC aims at the realization of some computation
over data from multiple parties, while exposing only the result of the compu-
tation, but keeping the input data private. We consider the setting of an MPC
platform where the involved parties upload their event logs to a network of
compute nodes. Before the upload, secret sharing algorithms locally split each
single data value into diﬀerent parts (i.e., shares) that are then stored at diﬀer-
ent nodes. Since each share does not provide any information about the original
1
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2016/679/oj.
2
https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/.

--- PAGE 183 ---
168 G. Elkoumy et al.
data, the uploaded event log is encrypted and exposed neither to the platform
operator nor other involved parties. Nonetheless, the MPC platform enables the
computation over the encrypted data through protocols for result sharing among
the nodes.
We realize the above architecture to answer analysis queries that are common
in process mining. Speciﬁcally, we show how to construct a frequency and time-
annotated Directly-Follows Graph (DFG), which is a starting point for process
discovery algorithms and performance analysis. While keeping the computed
DFG private, we are revealing only the output of performance analysis queries
such as ﬁnding the top-k bottlenecks (i.e. activities with longer cycle time) or the
top-k most frequent hand-oﬀs. We implement our proposed architecture using
the Sharemind platform [7]. In order to tackle scalability issues that would be
imposed by a naive implementation, we employ vectorization of event logs and
propose a divide-and-conquer scheme for parallel processing of sub-logs. We test
the eﬀectiveness of these optimizations in experiments with real-world event logs.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section2 lays out related
work and the background for this work. Section3 introduces our architecture
for privacy-preserving inter-organizational process mining along with the opti-
mizations needed for eﬃcient implementation. An experimental evaluation is
presented in Sect.4, before Sect.5 concludes the paper.
2 Background and Related Work
In this section, we review work on privacy-preserving process mining, inter-
organizational process mining, and secure multi-party computation.
2.1 Privacy-Preserving Process Mining
The necessity of privacy-preserving process mining, due to legal developments
such as the GDPR, was recently discussed in [18,19]. In general, two approaches
have been established [11]: (i) anonymizing the event data to apply standard
techniques to it, and (ii) directly incorporating privacy considerations in pro-
cess mining techniques. The anonymization of event logs from one organiza-
tion may be done using algorithms, like PRETSA [12], that provide privacy
guarantees such as k-anonymity [23]. These notions, based on data similarity,
are widely adopted and oﬀer protection against certain attacks like the disclo-
sure of the identity of individuals involved in the dataset. Approaches based
on cryptography [10,20] have also been proposed. Following the idea to incor-
porate privacy guarantees directly in process mining techniques, algorithms for
privacy-preserving process discovery [17,24] have been proposed. Recently, tech-
niques for privacy-preserving process mining, following either of the aforemen-
tioned paradigms, have been made available for a large audience with the tool
ELPaaS [5].
All of the above techniques, with the exception of [24], concern process mining
for a single organization and have not yet been adopted or evaluated for an

--- PAGE 184 ---
Secure Multi-party Computation for Inter-organizational Process Mining 169
inter-organizational setting. While the focus of [24] is on an inter-organizational
setting, the approach targets solely the creation of a process model, while we
aim at answering a wide range of analysis queries about business processes.
2.2 Inter-organizational Process Mining
The problem of automated discovery of process models in an inter-organizational
setting has been considered in [21,26]. However, these approaches do not address
privacy concerns. Similarly, another line of related research proposes techniques
to compare executions of the same process across multiple organizations [2,9],
but without considering privacy requirements.
The problem of ensuring privacy in inter-organizational process mining has
been addressed by Liu et al. [16]. They provide a process mining framework based
on the assumption that the parties in the process are willing to share conﬁdential
information with a third (trusted) party. This assumption is unrealistic in many
situations. In this paper, we address the problem of inter-organizational process
mining in the context where the parties in the process are unwilling to share any
execution data with each other or with a third party. In one of the embodiments
of our proposal, a third party is involved for computation purposes, but this
third party does not get access to any information during this computation.
2.3 Secure Multi-party Computation
Secure Multi-party Computation (MPC) [13] is a cryptographic functionality
that allows n parties to cooperatively evaluate (y1,...,yn) = f(x1,...,xn) for
some function f, with the i-th party contributing the input xi and learning
the output yi, and no party or an allowed coalition of parties learning nothing
besides their own inputs and outputs. There exist a few approaches for con-
structing MPC protocols. Homomorphic secret sharing [22] is a common basis
for MPC protocols. In such protocols, the arithmetic or Boolean circuit repre-
senting f is evaluated gate-by-gate, constructing secret-shared outputs of gates
from their secret-shared inputs. Each evaluation requires some communication
between parties (except for addition gates), hence the depth of the circuit deter-
mines the round complexity of the protocol. On the other hand, there exist
protocols with low communication complexity [3], allowing the secure computa-
tion of quite complex functions f, as long as the circuit implementing it has a
low multiplicative depth.
The complexity of MPC protocols is dependent on the number of parties
jointly performing the computations. Hence the typical deployment of MPC
has a small number of compute nodes, also known as computation parties, which
execute the protocols for evaluating gates, while an unbounded number of parties
may contribute the inputs and/or receive the outputs of the computation. Several
frameworks support such deployments of MPC and provide APIs to simplify
the development of privacy-preserving applications [4]. One of such frameworks
is Sharemind [7], whose main protocol set is based on secret-sharing among

--- PAGE 185 ---
170 G. Elkoumy et al.
three computing parties. In this paper, we build on top of Sharemind, but our
techniques are also applicable to other secret sharing-based MPC systems.
In Sharemind, a party can play diﬀerent roles: an input party, a computation
party, and/or an output party. In the case where only two parties are involved in
an inter-organizational process, these two parties play the role of input parties
and also that of computing parties. To fulﬁll the requirements of Sharemind,
they need to enroll a third computing node, which merely performs computations
using secret shares from which it can infer no information.3
The Sharemind framework provides its own programming language, namely
the SecreC language [6], for programming privacy-preserving applications.
SecreC allows us to abstract away certain details of cryptographic protocols.
3 Multi-party Computation Based Process Mining
This section introduces our techniques for process mining based on secure multi-
party computation. Section3.1 ﬁrst clariﬁes our model for inter-organizational
process mining including the required input data and the obtained analysis
results. We then introduce our architecture for realizing the respective analy-
sis using secure multi-party computation in Sect.3.2. In Sect.3.3, we elaborate
on vectorization and parallelization to improve the eﬃciency of our approach.
3.1 Model for Inter-organizational Process Mining
We consider a model in which an event log L = {e1,...,en} is deﬁned as a set
of events e = (i,a,ts), each capturing a single execution of an activity a at time
ts, as part of a single instance i of the business process. Grouping events by the
latter and ordering them according to their timestamp enables the construction
of traces t = e1,...,em, i.e., single executions of the process, so that we refer
to i also as the trace identiﬁer.
For an inter-organizational business process, an event log that records the
process execution from start to end is commonly not available. Rather, diﬀerent
parties record sub-logs, built of events that denote activity executions at the
respective party. To keep the notation concise, we consider a setting in which
two parties, Ia and Ib, execute an inter-organizational process, e.g., the airport
and the airline in our motivating example. Then, each of the two parties records
an event log, denoted by La and Lb. Each of these logs is the projection of L
on the events that denote activity executions at the respective parties Ia and
Ib. We assume that each activity can only be executed by one of the parties, so
that this projection is deﬁned unambiguously.
For the above setting, we consider the scenario that the parties Ia and Ib
want to answer some analysis queries Q over the inter-organizational event log
L, yet without sharing their logs La and Lb with each other. More speciﬁcally, we
focus on analysis queries that can be answered on a frequency or time-annotated
3
When three or more parties are involved in a process, no external party is required.

--- PAGE 186 ---
Secure Multi-party Computation for Inter-organizational Process Mining 171
DFG of the inter-organizational process. The basic DFG captures the frequencies
with which the executions of two activities have been observed to directly follow
each other in a trace. Moreover, we consider temporal annotations of the directly-
follows dependencies in terms of time between the respective activity executions.
Queries over the frequency and time-annotated DFGs allow us to analyze the
main paths of the process, the rarely executed paths, as well as the activities
that most contribute to delays in a process. Note though that only query answers
are to be revealed whereas the actual DFG shall be kept private.
Formally, the time-annotated DFG is captured by an |A|×|A| matrix, where
A is the set of all possible activities of the process. Each cell contains a tuple
(c,Δ). The counter c represents the frequency with which a directly-follows
dependency has been observed in L, i.e., for the cell (a1,a2) it is the num-
ber of times that two events e1 = (i1,a1,ts1) and e2 = (i2,a2,ts2) follow each
other directly in some trace (i.e., i1 = i2) of L. Also, Δ is the total sum of the
time passed by between all occurrences of the respective events, i.e., ts2 − ts1
for the above events.
In inter-organizational process mining, the above time-annotated DFG can-
not be computed directly, as this would require the parties to share their sub-logs.
3.2 MPC Architecture for Process Mining
To enable inter-organizational process mining without requiring parties to share
their event logs with each other, we propose an architecture based on secure
multi-party computation (MPC). As outlined in Fig.2, we rely on a platform for
MPC (in our case Sharemind [7]) that takes the event logs of the participating
parties, i.e., La and Lb, as secret-shared input. Inside the MPC platform, the
respective data is processed in a privacy-preserving way in order to answer anal-
ysis queries over the time-annotated DFG computed from that data. In Fig.3,
we present a running example of the processing steps of the system.
Secure Processing
Using Secret Shares
Party
A
Party
B
Import
CSV
Top K most frequent.
Average Waiting Time
between the handover
events in the two parties.
Top K handovers between
parties.
Parallel Sort
DFG Matrix
Calculation
Query Engine
Combine
Revealing
Query Results
Import
CSV
Cooperating Parties
Fig.2. Overview of the proposed approach

--- PAGE 187 ---
172 G. Elkoumy et al.
Below we summarize the functionality enbodied in the proposed MPC plat-
form for inter-organizational process mining.
Preprocessing. Each party performs the preparation of its log at its own site. The
parties share the number of unique activities and the maximum number of events
per trace. In Fig.3a, we show an example with two traces. In the preprocessing
step, all traces are padded to the same length, as illustrated with the blue event
in Fig.3a. The activities are transformed into a one-hot encoding that is used
for masking at the DFG calculation step, as will be explained later. The logs are
sorted by traces.
Combination. The parties upload their event logs La and Lb to the MPC
platform in a secret-shared manner. That is, the values (i,a,ts) of each event
(encoded as integers) are split into shares, which do not provide any information
on the original values and are stored at diﬀerent nodes of the platform. This way,
each party can only see the total number of records uploaded by each party, but
not the particular data. Subsequently, the logs are uniﬁed, creating a single log
of events L. The combination is performed in a manner to divide the logs into
processing chunks. As long as we are making the number of events per trace is
ﬁxed, that is possible by dividing the index by the number of traces for each
event and assigning data from the same trace to the same chunk. In Fig.3a, the
system processes one trace with its own chunk.
Sorting. To calculate the annotated DFG, we have to determine which events
follow each other in a trace by grouping the events by their trace identiﬁer and
ordering them by their timestamp. Since the trace identiﬁer is secret-shared,
we cannot group events directly. Instead, we use a privacy-preserving quicksort
algorithm [14] as implemented in Sharemind to sort the events by their trace
identiﬁer. Applying the same algorithm also to the secret-shared timestamps
ensures that the events of the same trace follow each other in the order of their
timestamps, which is illustrated as the last step in Fig.3a.
DFG Matrix Calculation. Next, we construct the DFG matrix inside the MPC
platform, keeping it secret. Since the information on the activity of an event is
secret-shared, we cannot simply process the events of traces sequentially as the
matrix cell to update would not be known. Hence, we adopt a one-hot encoding
for activities, so that each possible activity is represented by a binary vector of
length |A|. To mask the actual number of possible activities, the set over which
the vector is deﬁned may further include some padding, i.e., the vector length
can be chosen to be larger than |A|. Now, if we compute the outer product of such
vectors for activities a1 and a2, we get a mask matrix M such that M[a1,a2] = 1,
while all other entries are 0. An example of such masks is given in Fig.3b. The
ﬁrst mask represents the directly-follows dependency from activity A to B of
our running example. The second mask encodes the directly-follows dependency
from activity A to C. For all sequential pairs of events in the sorted log, we sum
up these matrices to get the frequency count c of the directly-follows dependency

--- PAGE 188 ---
Secure Multi-party Computation for Inter-organizational Process Mining 173
T1, A, 1
T1, D, 4
T2, A, 3
T2, E, 6
La
T1, B, 2
T1, C, 3
T2, B, 5
Lb
T1, 00001, 1
T1, 01000, 4
T2, 00001, 3
T2, 10000, 6
La
T1, 00010, 2
T1, 00100, 3
T2, 00010, 5
T2, 00000, 0
Lb T2, 00001, 3
T2, 10000, 6
T2, 00010, 5
T2, 00000, 0
T1, 00001, 1
T1, 01000, 4
T1, 00010, 2
T1, 00100, 3
T2, 00000, 0
T2, 00001, 3
T2, 00010, 5
T2, 10000, 6
T1, 00001, 1
T1, 00010, 2
T1, 00100, 3
T1, 01000, 4
L[0,:,:]
L[1,:,:]
Preprocessing Combine
One Each Party side Secure Processing inside the System
Parallel
Sort
L[0,:,:]
L[1,:,:]
(a) Illustration of the preprocessing, combine and parallel sort steps
0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 1
0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 1
0
0
0
1
0
0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 1
0
0
1
0
0
Mask#1 Mask#2
(b) Example of two masks
T1, 00001, 1
T1, 00010, 2
T1, 00100, 3
T1, 01000, 4
T2, 00000, 0
T2, 00001, 3
T2, 00010, 5
T2, 10000, 6
T1, 00010, 2
T1, 00100, 3
T1, 01000, 4
T2, 00000, 0
T2, 00001, 3
T2, 00010, 5
T2, 10000, 6
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
Data Shifted Data
Same
Trace Flag
(c) DFG Calculation using shift
and a flag
A B C D E
A 0 0 0 0 0
B 2 0 0 0 0
C 0 1 0 0 0
D 0 0 1 0 0
E 0 1 0 0 0
(d) The DFG ma-
trix with counts
Fig.3. Example of two event logs and their processing steps inside the system
for (a1,a2). Multiplying M by the duration between two events further enables
us to derive the total sum duration passed, i.e., Δ, of the directly-follows-relation.
The duration operation is performed between every two consecutive events of
the same trace. We can perform the duration calculation by using an element-
wise vector subtraction by duplicating the dataset and then shifting its events
by one as in Fig.3c. Technically, the outer product is a function that is realized
as a protocol over secret-shared data in Sharemind, and its runtime complexity
is linear in |A| [15].
However, the above approach could mix up events of diﬀerent traces. We
therefore also compute a ﬂag b that is 1, if the trace identiﬁers of two events
are equivalent, and 0 otherwise, which is illustrated as the “Same Trace Flag”
column in Fig.3c. Then, we multiply the mask matrix M by b, so that the
values of M are ignored, if b = 0. Again, the functionality for comparison and
multiplication can be traced back to predeﬁned protocols in Sharemind. We show
the DFG matrix with counts of our running example in Fig.3d.
Algorithm1 summarizes the computation of the annotated DFG from the
sorted, combined log L, where [[·]] denotes a secret-shared data value.
Query Answering. A query Q deﬁnes a subset S of the annotated DFG, which
is generated by the MPC platform and revealed to the participating parties.
Through sharing the S solely, but not the complete annotated DFG, we are able
to limit the amount of information each party can learn about the process. As
an example, consider the query to derive the average waiting time between the

--- PAGE 189 ---
174 G. Elkoumy et al.
Algorithm 1. Calculating the combined, annotated DFG([[L]])
INPUT: The sorted, combined event log [[L]] of length n.
OUTPUT: Annotated DFG comprising a count matrix [[G]] and a time matrix [[W]].
1: Initialize [[G]] = 0, [[W]] = 0
2: for all j ∈ {1,...,n − 1} do
3: [[b]] ← ([[L[j − 1].i]] = [[L[j].i]]); //compute the ﬂag for traces
4: [[M]] ← [[b]] · ([[L[j − 1].a]] ⊗ [[L[j].a]]); //compute the outer product
5: [[G]] ← [[G]] + [[M]]; //incorporate the current dependency
6: [[W]] ← [[W]] + [[M]] · ([[L[j].ts]] − [[L[j − 1].ts]]); //Incorporate the time lag
7: return [[G]], [[W]]
handover events between the two parties. Based on the secret-shared DFG, the
respective activities may be identiﬁed through grouping and sorting the events,
similar to the procedure outlined above, which is again based on the predeﬁned
protocols of an MPC platform such as Sharemind.
3.3 Performance Optimizations
Inter-organizational process mining using the above general architecture might
suﬀer from scalability issues. The reason is that privacy-preserving computa-
tion through protocols over secret-shared data is inevitably less eﬃcient than
plain computation. Hence, even for functions that have a generally low runtime
complexity (O(n) for the combination, O(nlog(n)) for the sorting, O(nm2
) for
the calculation of the annotated DFG, where n is the log length and m is the
number of activities), there is a non-negligible overhead induced by MPC. For
instance, a naive realization of the quicksort algorithm to sort events would
require O(nlog(n)) rounds of communication between the nodes and O(nlog(n))
value comparisons per round [14]. We therefore consider two angles to improve
the eﬃciency of the analysis, namely vectorization and parallelization.
Vectorization. A computation that adopts a single-instruction multiple-data
(SIMD) approach is highly recommended in MPC applications. Since MPC
assumes continuous interaction between distributed nodes, the number of com-
munication rounds shall be reduced as much as possible. For instance, while
computing n multiplications sequentially would result in n rounds of commu-
nication, one may alternatively multiply element-wise two vectors of length n,
for which one round of network communication is suﬃcient. Sharemind oﬀers
eﬃcient protocols for such vector-based functions [15].
Parallelization. Further runtime improvements are obtained by parallelizing the
algorithm itself. Again, our goal is to reduce the number of rounds of commu-
nication among the nodes of the MPC platform. We, therefore, split the input
data into chunks, such that all chunks can be processed independently from each
other. In our scenario, this is done by grouping the party logs by trace, or by a

--- PAGE 190 ---
Secure Multi-party Computation for Inter-organizational Process Mining 175
group of traces, generating an annotated DFG per group, and ﬁnally integrating
the diﬀerent DFGs. Since events of the same trace will never occur in diﬀerent
chunks, instead of sorting one log of length n, we will need to sort c chunks of
length n/c each. Since the communication complexity of a privacy-preserving
quicksort is O(n · logn) [14], this improves eﬃciency.
The above approach raises the question of determining the size of the chunks.
Separating each trace reveals the total number of events of that trace provided
by a party, which may be critical from a privacy perspective. On the other hand,
a small chunk size reduces the overhead of sorting. This leads to a trade-oﬀ
between runtime performance and privacy considerations.
However, in our current implementation, all chunks must have the same
length, as Sharemind allows parallel sorting only for equal-length vectors. There-
fore, we apply padding to the traces in the log, adding dummy events (for which
an empty vector in the one-hot encoding represents the activity so that the
events are ignored for the DFG calculation) until the number of events of the
longest trace is reached. Such padding may be employed locally, by each party,
and also has the beneﬁt that the length of individual traces is not revealed.
4 Evaluation
We implemented the proposed approach on top of the Sharemind multi-party
computation platform.4
The source code of our implementation is available at
https://github.com/Elkoumy/shareprom. The implementation is written using
the SecreC programming language supported by Sharemind.
Using this implementation, we conducted feasibility and scalability experi-
ments, speciﬁcally to address the following research questions:
RQ1: How do the characteristics of the input event logs inﬂuence the perfor-
mance of the secure multi-party computation of the DFG?
RQ2: What is the eﬀect of increasing the number of parallel chunks on the
performance of the multi-party computation of the DFG?
4.1 Datasets
The proposed approach is designed to compute the DFG of an inter-
organizational process where the event log is distributed across multiple parties,
and each party is responsible for executing a subset of the activities (i.e. event
types) of the process. We are not aware of publicly available real-life datasets
with this property. We identiﬁed a collection of synthetic inter-organizational
business process event logs [8]. However, these logs are too small to allow us
to conduct performance experiments (a few dozen traces per log). On the other
hand, there is a collection of real-life event logs of intra-organizational processes
comprising logs of varying sizes and characteristics5
. From this collection, we
selected three logs with diﬀerent size and complexity (cf. Table1):
4
https://sharemind-sdk.github.io.
5
https://data.4tu.nl/repository/collection:event logs real.

--- PAGE 191 ---
176 G. Elkoumy et al.
BPIC 2013 This event log captures incident and problem management process
at an IT department of a car production company.
Credit Requirement This event log comes from a process for background
checking for the purpose of granting credit at a Dutch bank. It has a simple
control-ﬂow structure: All traces follow the same sequence of activities.
Traﬃc Fines This event log comes from a process to collect payment of ﬁnes
from traﬃc law violations at a local police oﬃce in Italy.
Table 1. Event logs for evaluation
Event Log # Events # Cases # Activities # Events in Case
Avg Max Min
BPIC 2013 6,660 1,432 6 4.478 35 1
Credit Requirement 50,525 10,034 8 15 15 15
Traﬃc Fines 561,470 150,370 11 3.73 20 2
To simulate an inter-organizational setting, we use a round-robin approach
to assign each event type (activity) in the log to one of two parties. Hence, each
party executes half of the event types.
4.2 Experimental Setup
To answer the above questions, we use the following performance measures:
◦ Runtime. We deﬁne runtime as the amount of time needed to transform the
event logs of the two parties securely into an annotated DFG. We also report
the throughput, the number of events processed by the system per second, to
provide a complementary perspective.
◦ Communication Overhead. We deﬁne the communication overhead as the
amount of data transferred between the computing parties during the multi-
party computation. We measure this overhead as the volume of the data sent
and received. The communication overhead gives insights into how much the
performance of the multi-party computation would degrade if the computing
nodes of the parties were distributed across a wide-area network.
We performed ﬁve runs per dataset per experiment. We report the average
maximum values for latency and the average value for both throughput and
communication overhead, across the ﬁve runs. We used Nethogs6
to measure the
communication overhead, and we report the average value per compute node.
The experiments were run in an environment with three physical servers as com-
pute nodes with Sharemind installed on them. Each server has an AMD Proces-
sor 6276 and 192 GB RAM. The servers are connected using a 1GB Ethernet
switch.
6
https://github.com/raboof/nethogs.

--- PAGE 192 ---
Secure Multi-party Computation for Inter-organizational Process Mining 177
The experiments focus on the time needed to construct the annotated DFG,
since it is the most sophisticated and time-consuming portion of the proposed
analysis pipeline, due to the communication required between the compute
nodes. Once the annotated DFG is available, stored in a secret-shared manner,
the calculation of the actual queries has a lower complexity.
4.3 Results
Runtime Experiment. In Fig.4a, we illustrate the observed execution time when
varying the number of chunks used in the parallelization. We plot a bar for
each chunk size. Each bar represents the runtime of the parallel sort in blue
and the run time of the DFG calculation in orange. From Fig.4a, we conclude
that the runtime decreases with an increasing number of chunks, due to the
parallel sorting of chunks. We also note that the runtime for the DFG calculation
stays constant. In Fig.4b, we report the number of processed events per second
when varying the number of chunks. We ﬁnd a consistent improvement for the
throughput across all event logs.
Regarding RQ1, we summarise that the proportion of runtime between sort-
ing and DFG calculation diﬀers based on the event log characteristics. For the
log with the largest number of event types, the DFG calculation makes up the
most substantial proportion of the total runtime. In contrast, the proportion is
signiﬁcantly lower for the logs with a smaller number of event types. A possible
explanation for this ﬁnding is the increasing size of the vectors required to rep-
resent each activity due to our bit-vector representation. Such increase results in
more computational heavy calculations. Regarding RQ2, we conclude that the
runtime decreases for event logs with an increasing number of chunks.
Communication Overhead. In Fig.4c, we present the amount of data transferred
to each server, again also varying the number of chunks. We observe that the
communication overhead decreases with an increase in the number of chunks.
These ﬁndings conﬁrm our earlier ﬁndings regarding RQ2. In summary, a higher
number of chunks leads to improved performance across all three measures.
Threats to Validity. The evaluation reported above has two limitations. First, the
event logs used in the evaluation, while coming from real-life systems, are intra-
organizational event logs, which we have split into separate logs to simulate an
inter-organizational setting. It is possible that these logs do not capture the com-
munication patterns found in inter-organizational processes. Second, the number
of event logs is reduced, which limits the generalizability of the conclusions. The
results suggest that the proposed technique can handle small-to-medium-sized
logs, with relatively short traces, but there may be other characteristics of event
logs that aﬀect the performance of the proposed approach.

--- PAGE 193 ---
178 G. Elkoumy et al.
BPIC 2013 Credit Requirement Traffic Fines
1 10 100 1000 10000 1 10 100 1000 10000 1 10 100 1000 10000
1
10
100
1000
10000
No. of Chunks
Time ( Log minutes)
DFG calculation
Parallel Sort
(a) Runtime Experiment: Execution Time (Log) vs no. of Chunks.
5
10
15
20
25
1 10 100 1000 10000 70000
No. of Chunks
Events Per Second
dataset
Credit Requirement
Traffic Fines
BPIC 2013
(b) Throughput Experiment: Events per Second vs no. of
Chunks.
BPIC 2013 Credit Requirement Traffic Fines
1 10 100 1000 10000 1 10 100 1000 10000 1 10 100 1000 10000
1e+01
1e+03
1e+05
1e+07
No. of Chunks
Data Transfered Over the network ( log MB)
server
server1
server2
server3
(c) Communication Overhead Experiment: Data Transferred (Log) vs no. of
Chunks.
Fig.4. Experimental evaluation of the proposed approach
5 Conclusion
This paper introduced a framework for inter-organizational process mining based
on secure multi-party computation. The framework enables two or more parties
to perform basic process mining operations over the partial logs of an inter-
organizational process held by each party, without any information being shared
besides: (i) the output of the queries that the parties opt to disclose; and (ii)
three high-level log statistics: the number of traces per log, the number of event
types, and the maximum trace length. The paper speciﬁcally focuses on the com-
putation of the DFG, annotated with frequency and temporal information. This
is a basic structure used by process mining tools to perform various operations,

--- PAGE 194 ---
Secure Multi-party Computation for Inter-organizational Process Mining 179
including automated process discovery and various performance analysis queries
(e.g. top-k bottlenecks and least-frequent and most-frequent ﬂow dependencies).
To mitigate the high-performance overhead commonly observed for secure
multi-party computation, we introduced two optimizations over the basic DFG
computation algorithm: one based on vectorization of the event log and the other
based on a divide-and-conquer strategy, where the log is processed in chunks.
An evaluation using real world event logs shows that with these optimiza-
tions, it is possible to compute the DFG of real-life logs with execution times that
make this technique usable in practice. The divide-and-conquer approach pro-
vides opportunities to scale up the proposed technique by using a map-reduce
execution-style, however not to a suﬃcient level to enable interactive process
mining (which requires execution times in the order of seconds). Also, the app-
roach is not able to handle logs with thousands of traces.
In future work, we will explore further optimizations to address these limi-
tations, for example, by taking into account metadata about the event types in
the event log where hand-oﬀs occur between participants. Usually, such event
types are known as they correspond to message exchange. Therefore, it becomes
possible to split the logs into a “private” part and a “public” part (the latter
being the points where hand-oﬀs occur), and to process them separately using
diﬀerent approaches.
Another avenue for future work is to combine the proposed approach with
approaches that provide complementary guarantees such as diﬀerential privacy
techniques. The latter techniques allow us to noisify the DFG or the outputs
from the queries of the DFG to limit the information leaked by these outputs.
Acknowledgments. This research is partly funded by ERDF via the Estonian Centre
of Excellence in ICT (EXCITE) and the IT Academy programme.
References
1. van der Aalst, W.M.P.: Process Mining - Data Science in Action, Second edn.
Springer, Heidelberg (2016). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-49851-4
2. Aksu, Ü., Schunselaar, D.M., Reijers, H.A.: A cross-organizational process min-
ing framework for obtaining insights from software products: accurate comparison
challenges. In: 2016 IEEE 18th Conference on Business Informatics (CBI), vol. 1,
pp. 153–162. IEEE (2016)
3. Araki, T., Furukawa, J., Lindell, Y., Nof, A., Ohara, K.: High-throughput semi-
honest secure three-party computation with an honest majority. In: Proceedings of
the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security,
Vienna, Austria, 24–28 October 2016, pp. 805–817 (2016)
4. Archer, D.W., et al.: From keys to databases—real-world applications of secure
multi-party computation. Comput. J. 61(12), 1749–1771 (2018)
5. Bauer, M., Fahrenkrog-Petersen, S.A., Koschmider, A., Mannhardt, F., van der
Aa, H., Weidlich, M.: Elpaas: event log privacy as a service. In: Proceedings of the
Dissertation Award, Doctoral Consortium, and Demonstration Track at BPM 2019
co-located with 17th International Conference on Business Process Management,
BPM 2019, Vienna, Austria, 1–6 September 2019, pp. 159–163 (2019)

--- PAGE 195 ---
180 G. Elkoumy et al.
6. Bogdanov, D., Laud, P., Randmets, J.: Domain-polymorphic programming of
privacy-preserving applications. In: Proceedings of the Ninth Workshop on Pro-
gramming Languages and Analysis for Security, p. 53. ACM (2014)
7. Bogdanov, D., Laur, S., Willemson, J.: Sharemind: a framework for fast privacy-
preserving computations. In: Jajodia, S., Lopez, J. (eds.) ESORICS 2008. LNCS,
vol. 5283, pp. 192–206. Springer, Heidelberg (2008). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-540-88313-5 13
8. Borkowski, M., Fdhila, W., Nardelli, M., Rinderle-Ma, S., Schulte, S.: Event-based
failure prediction in distributed business processes. Inf. Syst. (2017)
9. Buijs, J.C., van Dongen, B.F., van der Aalst, W.M.: Towards cross-organizational
process mining in collections of process models and their executions. In: Daniel,
F., Barkaoui, K., Dustdar, S. (eds.) International Conference on Business Process
Management, pp. 2–13. Springer, Heidelberg (2011). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-642-28115-0 2
10. Burattin, A., Conti, M., Turato, D.: Toward an anonymous process mining. In:
2015 3rd International Conference on Future Internet of Things and Cloud, pp.
58–63. IEEE (2015)
11. Fahrenkrog-Petersen, S.A.: Providing privacy guarantees in process mining. In:
(CAiSE Doctoral Consortium 2019), Rome, Italy, 3–7 June 2019, pp. 23–30 (2019)
12. Fahrenkrog-Petersen, S.A., van der Aa, H., Weidlich, M.: PRETSA: event log san-
itization for privacy-aware process discovery. In: International Conference on Pro-
cess Mining, ICPM 2019, Aachen, Germany, 24–26 June 2019, pp. 1–8 (2019)
13. Goldreich, O., Micali, S., Wigderson, A.: How to play any mental game or a com-
pleteness theorem for protocols with honest majority. In: Aho, A.V. (ed.) Proceed-
ings of the 19th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pp. 218–229.
ACM (1987)
14. Hamada, K., Kikuchi, R., Ikarashi, D., Chida, K., Takahashi, K.: Practically eﬃ-
cient multi-party sorting protocols from comparison sort algorithms. In: Kwon, T.,
Lee, M.-K., Kwon, D. (eds.) ICISC 2012. LNCS, vol. 7839, pp. 202–216. Springer,
Heidelberg (2013). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-37682-5 15
15. Laud, P., Pankova, A.: Privacy-preserving frequent itemset mining for sparse and
dense data. In: Lipmaa, H., Mitrokotsa, A., Matulevičius, R. (eds.) NordSec 2017.
LNCS, vol. 10674, pp. 139–155. Springer, Cham (2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-319-70290-2 9
16. Liu, C., Duan, H., Zeng, Q., Zhou, M., Lu, F., Cheng, J.: Towards comprehensive
support for privacy preservation cross-organization business process mining. IEEE
Trans. Serv. Comput. 12(4), 639–653 (2019)
17. Mannhardt, F., Koschmider, A., Baracaldo, N., Weidlich, M., Michael, J.: Privacy-
preserving process mining - diﬀerential privacy for event logs. Bus. Inf. Syst. Eng.
61(5), 595–614 (2019)
18. Mannhardt, F., Petersen, S.A., Oliveira, M.F.: Privacy challenges for process min-
ing in human-centered industrial environments. In: 2018 14th International Con-
ference on Intelligent Environments (IE), pp. 64–71. IEEE (2018)
19. Pika, A., Wynn, M.T., Budiono, S., ter Hofstede, A.H., van der Aalst, W.M., Rei-
jers, H.A.: Towards privacy-preserving process mining in healthcare. In: Proceed-
ings of the Workshop on Process-Oriented Data Science in Healthcare (PODS4H)
(2019)
20. Raﬁei, M., von Waldthausen, L., van der Aalst, W.M.P.: Ensuring conﬁdentiality in
process mining. In: Proceedings of the 8th International Symposium on Data-driven
Process Discovery and Analysis (SIMPDA 2018), Seville, Spain, 13–14 December
2018, pp. 3–17 (2018)

--- PAGE 196 ---
Secure Multi-party Computation for Inter-organizational Process Mining 181
21. Schulz, K.A., Orlowska, M.E.: Facilitating cross-organisational workﬂows with a
workﬂow view approach. Data Knowl. Eng. 51(1), 109–147 (2004)
22. Shamir, A.: How to share a secret. Commun. ACM 22(11), 612–613 (1979)
23. Sweeney, L.: k-anonymity: a model for protecting privacy. Int. J. Uncertainty Fuzzi-
ness Knowl.-Based Syst. 10(05), 557–570 (2002)
24. Tillem, G., Erkin, Z., Lagendijk, R.L.: Mining encrypted software logs using alpha
algorithm. In: SECRYPT, pp. 267–274 (2017)
25. Yao, A.C.: Protocols for secure computations. In: 23rd Annual Symposium on
Foundations of Computer Science (SFCS 1982), pp. 160–164. IEEE (1982)
26. Zeng, Q., Sun, S.X., Duan, H., Liu, C., Wang, H.: Cross-organizational collabora-
tive workﬂow mining from a multi-source log. Decis. Support Syst. 54(3), 1280–
1301 (2013)

--- PAGE 197 ---
Process Models and Visualizations
(BPMDS 2020)

--- PAGE 198 ---
Visualizing Business Process Evolution
Anton Yeshchenko(B) , Dina Bayomie , Steven Gross, and Jan Mendling
Vienna University of Economics and Business, Vienna, Austria
{anton.yeshchenko,dina.sayed.bayomie.sobh,steven.gross,
jan.mendling}@wu.ac.at
Abstract. Literature in business process research has recognized that process
execution adjusts dynamically to the environment, both intentionally and unin-
tentionally. This dynamic change of frequently followed actions is called process
drift. Existing process drift approaches focus to a great extent on drift point detec-
tion, i.e., on points in time when a process execution changes significantly. What
is largely neglected by process drift approaches is the identification of temporal
dynamics of different clusters of process execution, how they interrelate, and how
they change in dominance over time. In this paper, we introduce process evolu-
tion analysis (PEA) as a technique that aims to support the exploration of process
cluster interrelations over time. This approach builds on and synthesizes existing
approaches from the process drift, trace clustering, and process visualization lit-
erature. Based on the process evolution analysis, we visualize the interrelation of
trace clusters over time for descriptive and prescriptive purposes.
Keywords: Process drift · Process change · Process evolution · Process trace
clustering
1 Introduction
Business process management (BPM) has long researched business processes through a
prescriptivelens.Thisperspectiveemphasizesthestaticnatureofprocesses,theirdesign,
and their execution. The descriptive perspective, on the other hand, acknowledges the
dynamicnatureofprocessesandtheirintentionalandunintentionaladjustmentovertime
due to changes in the environment, technological capabilities, seasonal differences, and
other factors [1, 2]. Similarly, literature in routine research has increasingly recognized
the dynamic change of routine executions over time [3, 4].
To address this dynamism, recent research aims to identify changes in processes
over time. Most prominently, process drift uses event logs to detect points in time when
changes take place [1, 5]. While process drift offers insights into when changes in the
process happen, it does not provide information on how different executions of the
same process interrelate with each other, in particular, when and how similar process
executions occur and dominate. Thus, the meaningful interpretation of process evolu-
tion over time, i.e., the changes in the process execution over time, remains a research
challenge. Evolution is defined as a recurring variation, selection, and retention among
entities of a designated population [6]. We build on this concept by declaring all traces
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. Nurcan et al. (Eds.): BPMDS 2020/EMMSAD 2020, LNBIP 387, pp. 185–192, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49418-6_12

--- PAGE 199 ---
186 A. Yeshchenko et al.
generated during the execution of a process as the designated population, while the
variation, selection, and retention (i.e. the appearance, disappearance, and change) hap-
pens among sub-groups of these traces. This is due to scarce environmental resources
[6] which correspond to the organizational resources available for the execution of the
process.
In order to advance our understanding of business process evolution, this research
aims to answer the following research question: How can temporal dynamics of differ-
ent process executions be analyzed? To approach this question, we propose a process
evolution analysis (PEA) method that uses process execution clustering and time-series
lineplotstostudytheevolutionoftheprocessexecutionclustersovertime.PEAthereby
aims to show insights on how clusters of process executions are interrelated overtime on
a process evolution graph.
This paper proceeds as follows. Section two discusses the main concepts. Section
three describes our research method. Section four presents the results of applying PEA.
Section five concludes with a discussion of the results, limitations of the approach, and
future research directions.
2 Background
In this section, we describe the main concepts used in this paper. First, we describe
and emphasize the difference in our approach to process drift. Next, we outline the
process mining method to find trace clustering. It is used to reduce the complexity of
processminingproblemsbygroupingtheprocessinstancesbasedontheirsimilarity,i.e.,
trace fitness, execution time, etc. Lastly, we summarize the state of the art of different
visualization techniques that influenced our technique.
2.1 Process Drift
Process drift refers to a change in processes executions and is known as a key challenge
inprocessmining[7].Processdriftisextensivelystudiedintheprocessminingliterature
[1, 5, 8, 9] with a focus on drift points, drift types [1, 8], and drift visualizations [5, 9].
Seeliger et al. [10] define process drift as a significant behavioral change during the
execution of a process that has occurred over time. A drift in a process, according to
theirdefinition, occurs when almostalltracesareinfluenced by thatdrift[10].Similarly,
Maaradji et al. [1] focus on the detection of process drifts by identifying statistically
significant differences between the observed process behavior of different intervals in
time. Yeshchenko et al. [5] focus on the detection of separate behavioral drifts within a
process that are simultaneously present in the event log.
Most existing process drift research interprets process change as a change of the
underlying control flow (implicit process model change). However, changes in the pro-
cesscanalsobeviewedthroughvariousprocessperformancemeasuresthatareimportant
for the analysis of the process executions [11]. These measures show how the process
characteristics (such as cycle time, cost per instance, etc.) change over time. Existing
process drift approaches thereby focus on the discovery of behavioral change within
the event log, ignoring the impact on process measures. That creates a process overview

--- PAGE 200 ---
Visualizing Business Process Evolution 187
wheretheanalystmightbeincapableofinferringwhatchangeintheprocessisimportant
enoughtomanage.OurmethodallowsfortrackingtheprocessKPIswithcorrespondence
to the change.
2.2 Trace Clustering
Trace clustering techniques aim to reduce the complexity of process mining problems
[12–15]. These techniques simplify an event log by creating groups of traces based on
some trace similarity metric. The clustering procedure ensures that the clusters have
minimal in-cluster distance between traces based on that metric. The metrics used in
trace clustering range from the structural similarity between traces (i.e., based on fitness
[12]) and performance-related, such as the cost per instance and the cycle time [15].
One use case of trace clustering algorithms is to simplify the problem of process
discoveryonsparseevent logstoprovidemoreaccurateandcomprehensive results[12].
Process mining literature emphasizes the use of trace clustering for the discovery of
models which are based on the clusters. Instead, our approach directly explores the
interrelations of different clusters using visualization techniques.
2.3 Visualization of Change
Process mining research focuses on discovering precise process models rather than
exploring the change in processes. On the other hand, the visualization field is rich with
approaches to analyze such data [16]. The canonical example of visualizing change is
line plotting, where the x-axis corresponds to a time, and the y-axis displays the selected
measure. More recently, developments on these types of graphs are visualization of
opinion change in social media [17–22]. These approaches are built upon the plots that
emphasize the change of variables with time and include line plots [18, 20, 21], theme
river [19, 21], and Sankey diagram [17–20] representations. Our approach is influenced
by the ideas from the field to represents the change of several time-series.
3 Process Evolution Analysis Technique
Figure1showsanoverviewofourproposedprocessevolutionanalysis(PEA)technique,
which visualizes the change of the process execution behavior over time. PEA takes an
event log as input and produces a time series line chart as output. PEA has three steps to
generate the required visualization. The first step is using trace clustering to partitioning
the log, then compute some process metric over the clusters (e.g., the number of cases
for each cluster). Finally, PEA visualizes the clusters and their process metric values to
show the process evolved.
Trace clustering – an event log is clustered into several clusters in order to find
distinct regions in the process behavior. There are different techniques used to cluster
an event log [14]. A simple cluster technique is partitioning the log based on time
window interval. For instance, cases that occurred in the first quarter of the year are in
the same cluster. Although, cases that occurred in the last quarter are in another cluster.
One established clustering technique is based on trace similarity to achieve high fitness

--- PAGE 201 ---
188 A. Yeshchenko et al.
Fig. 1. Overview of the proposed approach
between the cases within the same cluster [12, 13]. Another technique to cluster the log
is using the cycle time to distribute the cases over the clusters [15]. Thus, all the cases
that have a long cycle time are in the same cluster, while cases with a short cycle time
are in another cluster.
Process evolution graphs – We use the time-series line plot [18, 20, 21] and theme
river [19, 22] visualization in order to analyze the change in the behavior between the
different clusters. The graph shows the change of a process metric over time for each
trace cluster. Different process execution characteristics can be measured; for instance,
the number of executed cases per day, the average cycle time of cases per month, or the
average resource workload per day.
By combining trace clustering with the computation of process metrics and visual-
izing the result on a time-series plot, behavioral changes in the process execution can be
made visible.
4 Findings
Experiment setup – We conduct two experiments on two datasets and visualize process
evolution using different trace clustering techniques. The first experiment uses the log
from the help desk of an Italian software company1. The traces are clustered based on
the cycle time per trace with the python script, made available on GitHub2. The clusters
areusedtovisualizeprocessevolutionusingatheme-riverschart.Eachgeneratedcluster
represents a different cycle time behavior. The second experiment uses the traffic logs
from BPIC3. We applied a trace clustering based on trace fitness using ActiTrace ProM
plugin [12] with the following settings: target ICS fitness 0.9, the maximal number
of clusters is 6, and add the remaining traces to other clusters. Each generated cluster
represents a different process behavior. Moreover, we visualize process evolution using
a time-series line chart.
For the first experiment, Fig. 2 shows the number of cases for each cluster over 50
months. The x-axis depicts the months within this timespan, while the y-axis represents
the number of active cases. As has been described before, the traces were clustered
according to the cycle time of each case. The 25% of cases with the slowest cycle time
1 https://data.4tu.nl/repository/uuid:0c60edf1-6f83-4e75-9367-4c63b3e9d5bb.
2 https://github.com/yesanton/Visualizing-Business-Process-Evolution.
3 https://data.4tu.nl/repository/uuid:270fd440-1057-4fb9-89a9-b699b47990f5.

--- PAGE 202 ---
Visualizing Business Process Evolution 189
Fig. 2. Number of cases for each cluster over time for help desk event log
are in Cluster 1. Cluster 2 and 3 follow to cluster 1 in steps of 25%. Cluster 4 contains
25% of cases, which were the fastest.
The graph can be analyzed in several ways. First, the cluster containing the most
active cases at a certain point in time can be identified. For instance, cluster 1 (25%
slowest cases in the process) contains the most active cases in the first five months. In
the sixth month, however, cluster 2 is dominating the other clusters, until most cases can
be found in cluster 1 from month 15 to 26. Second, the discrepancy in case distributions
between the different clusters can be observed. One example is the timespan from the
7th to 20th month, in which there is a substantial discrepancy of active cases for the
clusters (i.e., the number of cases in each cluster differ considerably) compared to the
timespan between the 24th and 28th month (i.e., the clusters contain a similar amount of
cases). Third, it can be seen whether the number of cases for the clusters correlates over
time. For instance, all clusters in the timespan between the 33rd and 36th month decrease
similarly in number. However, between the 27th and 32nd month, cluster 3 and cluster
4 negatively correlate. Fourth, quick changes in a cluster can be spotted. For instance,
cluster 2 is more than doubled its active cases within a quarter of a year from month 7
onwards.
For the second experiment, Fig. 3 shows the number of cases for each cluster over
56 months. Differently to the previous experiment, the clusters were not generated by
grouping traces with similar cycle time but based on their trace fitness (ICS-fitness).
Six clusters were generated. It can be seen that cluster 1 dominated all other clusters
in terms of active cases until month 41. From this point in time, the cluster does not
contain enough active cases to be visible on the graphical representation. Until the 41st
month, cluster 1 also seems to correlate with cluster 2, while the magnitude of changes
for cluster 1 is much bigger. Sudden changes are also visible. In month and 28, cluster
1 increases substantially in the number of active cases within one month by the factor 3
to 4. Clusters 3, 4, 5, and 6 are having fewer cases than 250 for most of the time; thus,
they are not paying a significant role during the execution of the process.
Cluster 3 is dominating clusters 4, 5, and 6 in the period between the 1st to 7th and
53rd to 55th. Aside from that period, no clear dominance can be found within these four
clusters. Cluster 5 seems to be inactive for most of the time.

--- PAGE 203 ---
190 A. Yeshchenko et al.
Fig. 3. Number of cases for each cluster overtime for traffic fines event log
5 Discussion and Conclusion
In this paper, we described the process evolution analysis (PEA) method, which visual-
izesdifferentclustersofprocessexecutionsandtheirinterrelationovertime.PEAbuilds
on the concepts of trace clustering, process drift, and process visualization.
PEA has several practical and theoretical implications. From a practical viewpoint,
PEA can be used as a technique to analyze process executions and to identify undesired
behaviors that emerge. For instance, if the clusters are generated by categorizing cases
basedontheircyclingtime,ariseofcaseswithalongcyclingtimecanbeidentified,and
take the required actions. Thereby, PEA can be used for real-time analysis of process
executiontointervenedirectly,orasaretrospect,analysistoidentifyrecurringpatternsof
undesiredprocessbehaviors.Thesameappliestoclusters,whichweregeneratedbytheir
tracefitness.Theunderlyingprocessmodelsfromtheseclusterscanbegeneratedthrough
process discovery (e.g., by the use of a process mining tool) and thereby unwanted
processexecutionsdiscovered.Theevolutionoftheseclusterscanagainbemadeexplicit
through PEA.
From a theoretical point, this is a first step towards synthesizing research on trace
clustering, process drift, and process visualization into one technique. By doing so, we
enabled the identification and analysis of changes within the different clusters of traces
over time. While process drift focuses mainly on points in time in which the general
process behavior changes [10], PEA shows how these underlying behavioral changes
interrelate over time. It also extends existing research on process clustering, which has
mainlyfocusedondiscoveringtheunderlyingprocessmodelsoftheseclustersforfurther
analysis.
Werecommendconductingfutureresearchinthefollowingdirections.First,alterna-
tiveformsofvisualizationcouldbeinvestigated.Onesuchpromisingvisualizationisthe
stacked graphs, which is designed to facilitate the identification of patterns, trends, and
unexpected occurrences [23]. Future research should investigate which forms of visu-
alization for PEA are useful, taking into consideration different application scenarios.
Second, different information besides the number of active cases within a cluster could
be plotted on the graph. For instance, the y-axis could depict the average cycle time for
active cases, which start at a specific time. Third, other forms of clustering the traces
could be explored. In this paper, we clustered the traces according to their trace fitness

--- PAGE 204 ---
Visualizing Business Process Evolution 191
and the cycle time of the cases. One alternative could be to cluster the traces according
to the costs or revenue of the cases to investigate the evolution of these clusters.
References
1. Maaradji,A.,Dumas,M.,LaRosa,M.,Ostovar,A.:FastandAccurateBusinessProcessDrift
Detection. Springer, Cham (2015). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-23063-4
2. Pentland,B.,Recker,J.,Kim,I.:Capturingrealityinflight?Empiricaltoolsforstrongprocess
theory. In: Thirty Eighth International Conference on Information Systems, pp. 1–12, Seoul
(2017)
3. Feldman, M.S., Pentland, B.T.: Reconceptualizing organizational routines as a source of
flexibility and change. Adm. Sci. Q. 48, 94 (2003). https://doi.org/10.2307/3556620
4. Pentland, B.T., Feldman, M.S., Becker, M.C., Liu, P.: Dynamics of organizational routines:
a generative model. J. Manag. Stud. 49, 1484–1508 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-
6486.2012.01064.x
5. Yeshchenko, A., Di Ciccio, C., Mendling, J., Polyvyanyy, A.: Comprehensive process drift
detectionwithvisualanalytics.In:Laender,A.H.F.,Pernici,B.,Lim,E.-P.,deOliveira,J.P.M.
(eds.) ER 2019. LNCS, vol. 11788, pp. 119–135. Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-030-33223-5_11
6. van de Ven, A.H., Poole, M.S.: Explaining development and change in organizations. Acad.
Manag. Rev. 20, 510–540 (1995). https://doi.org/10.2307/258786
7. van der Aalst, W., et al.: Process mining manifesto. In: Daniel, F., Barkaoui, K., Dustdar, S.
(eds.) BPM 2011. LNBIP, vol. 99, pp. 169–194. Springer, Heidelberg (2012). https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-642-28108-2_19
8. Maaradji, A., Dumas, M., Rosa, M.La, Ostovar, A.: Detecting sudden and gradual drifts in
business processes from execution traces. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 29, 2140–2154
(2017). https://doi.org/10.1109/TKDE.2017.2720601
9. Denisov, V., Belkina, E., Fahland, D., Van Der Aalst, W.M.P.: The performance spec-
trum miner: visual analytics for fine-grained performance analysis of processes. In: CEUR
Workshop Proceedings, vol. 2196, pp. 96–100 (2018)
10. Seeliger, A., Nolle, T., Mühlhäuser, M.: Detecting concept drift in processes using graph
metrics on process graphs. In: ACM International Conference Proceeding Series Part F1271
(2017). https://doi.org/10.1145/3040565.3040566
11. Dumas, M., La Rosa, M., Mendling, J., Reijers, H.A.: Fundamentals of Business Process
Management. Springer, Heidelberg (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-33143-5
12. De Weerdt, J., Vanden Broucke, S., Vanthienen, J., Baesens, B.: Active trace clustering for
improved process discovery. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 25, 2708–2720 (2013). https://
doi.org/10.1109/TKDE.2013.64
13. De Leoni, M., Van Der Aalst, W.M.P., Dees, M.: A general process mining framework for
correlating, predicting and clustering dynamic behavior based on event logs. Inf. Syst. 56,
235–257 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.is.2015.07.003
14. Song, M., Günther, C.W., van der Aalst, W.M.P.: Trace clustering in process mining. In:
Ardagna, D., Mecella, M., Yang, J. (eds.) BPM 2008. LNBIP, vol. 17, pp. 109–120. Springer,
Heidelberg (2009). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-00328-8_11
15. Bose, R.P.J.C., van der Aalst, W.M.P.: Trace clustering based on conserved patterns: towards
achieving better process models. In: Rinderle-Ma, S., Sadiq, S., Leymann, F. (eds.) BPM
2009. LNBIP, vol. 43, pp. 170–181. Springer, Heidelberg (2010). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-642-12186-9_16

--- PAGE 205 ---
192 A. Yeshchenko et al.
16. Aigner, W., Miksch, S., Schumann, H., Tominski, C.: Visualization of Time-Oriented Data.
Springer, London (2011). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-85729-079-3
17. Liu, S., Wu, Y., Wei, E., Liu, M., Liu, Y.: StoryFlow: tracking the evolution of stories. IEEE
Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. 19, 2436–2445 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2013.196
18. Cui, W., Liu, S., Wu, Z., Wei, H.: How hierarchical topics evolve in large text corpora.
IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. 20, 2281–2290 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.
2014.2346433
19. Sung, C.Y., Huang, X.Y., Shen, Y., Cherng, F.Y., Lin, W.C., Wang, H.C.: Exploring online
learners’interactivedynamicsbyvisuallyanalyzingtheirtime-anchoredcomments.Comput.
Graph. Forum. 36, 145–155 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1111/cgf.13280
20. Liu, S., Yin, J., Wang, X., Cui, W., Cao, K., Pei, J.: Online visual analytics of text streams.
IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. 22, 2451–2466 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.
2015.2509990
21. Wu, Y., Liu, S., Yan, K., Liu, M., Wu, F.: OpinionFlow: visual analysis of opinion diffusion
on social media. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. 20, 1763–1772 (2014). https://doi.org/10.
1109/TVCG.2014.2346920
22. Havre, S., Hetzler, B., Nowell, L.: ThemeRiver: visualizing theme changes over time. In:
Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization, pp. 115–123 (2000). https://
doi.org/10.1109/infvis.2000.885098
23. Byron,L.,Wattenberg,M.:Stackedgraphs–geometry&aesthetics.IEEETrans.Vis.Comput.
Graph. 14, 1245–1252 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2008.166

--- PAGE 206 ---
Mining BPMN Processes on GitHub
for Tool Validation and Development
Thomas S. Heinze1(B)
, Viktor Stefanko2
, and Wolfram Amme2
1
Institute of Data Science, German Aerospace Center (DLR), Jena, Germany
thomas.heinze@dlr.de
2
Institute of Computer Science, Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Jena, Germany
{viktor.stefanko,wolfram.amme}@uni-jena.de
Abstract. Today, business process designers can choose from an increas-
ing number of analysis tools to check their process model with respect
to defects or ﬂaws, before, e.g., deploying the model in a process engine.
Answering questions about the tools’ eﬀectiveness though is diﬃcult, as
their validation often lacks empirical evidence. In particular, for a mod-
eling language like BPMN, where the process is the product, tools are
validated by means of case studies or even artiﬁcial process examples.
We here advocate instead an approach to systematically mine software
repositories on GitHub.com for a large corpus of BPMN business process
models and discuss how it can be used for tool validation and guiding
tool development, using the example of the linting tool BPMNspector.
1 Introduction
Mining software repositories, i.e., the systematic retrieval, processing and anal-
ysis of data about software artifacts and software development from software
forges and repositories, has drawn considerable attention in recent years. On the
one hand, the increasing popularity and usage of platforms like GitLab.com,
Bitbucket.org, SourceForge.net or GitHub.com for collaborative software
development provide a tremendous source of data, encompassing software from
a rich and heterogeneous spectrum of domains. On the other hand, the data
mining techniques available today have made it possible to start to seize this
treasure, and thus allow to answer research questions and empirically validate
hypotheses on the development and usage of IT and software systems based upon
real-world data. While the research ﬁeld is mainly focused on source code of con-
ventional programming languages, mining software repositories can as well help
to understand more about the use of other artifacts in software development [12].
In particular the area of modeling languages, such as the Unified Modeling
Language (UML) or the Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN) [4], can
beneﬁt from a data-driven approach like mining software repositories. There is a
common lack of larger datasets with real-world models, which hinders empirical
research in this area [20,28,30]. Retrieving systematically a corpus of models
by mining software repositories promises to overcome this lack. For instance,
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. Nurcan et al. (Eds.): BPMDS 2020/EMMSAD 2020, LNBIP 387, pp. 193–208, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49418-6_13

--- PAGE 207 ---
194 T. S. Heinze et al.
research questions on how modeling languages are used in practice can be inves-
tigated based on the mined corpus, in order to distinguish the more frequently
used and important parts of a language from unimportant parts and thus guide
language and tool development. Analyzing the diﬀerent modeling styles in the
corpus allows for identifying best practices and guidelines to help model design-
ers. Furthermore, best practices and tools proposed by academic research or by
industry can be validated in a more realistic manner. Currently, there are often
case studies, including only a small and homogeneous set of models, or artiﬁ-
cial examples used when evaluating new tools and methods, with consequences
for an evaluation’s validity. Instead using a large set of real-world models as
retrieved by mining software repositories allows for increasing validity. In this
respect, the prior work on the creation of the Lindholmen dataset with UML
models mined from software repositories on GitHub.com was an inspiration for
this paper [12,28].
Empirical research is limited by the access to primary sources. Especially in
case of modeling languages used for business processes, like BPMN, where the
model is usually the product and thus subject to strict nondisclosure restric-
tions [30], this can pose an insurmountable challenge. Previous empirical studies
on business process modeling and BPMN were using methods like experiments,
surveys or case studies, each implying limitations to their generalizability [23]. In
an experiment, a certain aspect, e.g., a modeling practice, is typically researched
by diﬀerentiating two groups based on the aspect. The need to provide a large
population and to strictly control the experiment’s environment for all other
variables, however, restricts the applicability of this method to narrow research
problems. Surveys allow for more general problems, but are subject to bias, intro-
duced, e.g., by the selection of survey participants or by inaccurate responses
from the participants. Case studies are frequently used and in particular allow
for insights into real-world practices and constraints. Compared to experiments,
there is though no control of environment and inﬂuencing variables. Further-
more, reproducibility and comparability is usually not given. Due to the often
homogeneous origin of business process models included in case studies, their
ﬁndings also need to be validated by other research to increase generalizabil-
ity [20,23]. Most of the empirical research focused on conceptual process models
and omitted implemented and executable process models [23]. This also applies
to community eﬀorts to assemble collections of business process models like the
BPM Academic Initiative [20], which mostly covers educational process models.
Mining software repositories for business process models, as introduced in the
following can be seen as another empirical approach, complementing established
methods.
In this paper, we present our eﬀorts to create a corpus of BPMN process
models by mining software repositories hosted on GitHub.com. Due to the sheer
amount of repositories and the bottleneck caused by the GitHub API’s rate
limit, we limited our search to a random subset of 6,163,217 repositories, or
10% of all repositories on GitHub.com in November 2018. As a result, we were
able to identify 1,251 repositories with at least one potential BPMN artifact

--- PAGE 208 ---
Mining BPMN Processes on GitHub for Tool Validation and Development 195
and overall 21,306 potential artifacts. We thereby discovered a wide range of
ﬁle formats, indicating the various uses of BPMN, e.g., modeling conceptual
process models or implementing executable processes. Further narrowing our
search to business process models in the BPMN 2.0 XML serialization format
and removing duplicates, we eventually gained a corpus of 8,904 distinct BPMN
process models, conjoined with corresponding repository metadata. Based on this
data, we studied descriptive questions on the usage of BPMN on GitHub.com.
We also ran the analysis tool BPMNspector [10] for all the collected business
process models to exemplify the use of the corpus for tool validation. Notably,
the tool reported at least one violation of BPMN’s syntax and semantic rules for
7,365 business process models or 83% of our corpus, which indicates the need
for linting tools like BPMNspector. In summary, our contributions are:
– To the authors’ knowledge, we provide the ﬁrst corpus of BPMN, comprising
8,904 unique business process models in the BPMN 2.0 serialization format,
which is retrieved by mining software repositories on GitHub.com.
– In doing so, we conﬁrm the feasibility of the mining software repositories app-
roach for BPMN, which can therefore also be used by others to complement
their empirical research on business process models.
– We conﬁrm results on the frequency of violations of BPMN’s syntax and
semantic rules, which have already been reported for a case study in [10], and
thus demonstrate the usefulness of linting tools like BPMNspector.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: We ﬁrst provide a brief overview
of BPMN and available analysis tools in Sect.2. Our methodology, i.e., the
systematic retrieval and analysis of BPMN process models on GitHub.com is
described in Sect.3. In Sect.4, we present our ﬁndings with respect to the usage
of BPMN on GitHub.com and the eﬀectiveness of the analysis tool BPMNspector.
Section5 contains a discussion of related work. We conclude the paper in Sect.6.
2 BPMN and Static Process Analysis
In the following, we shortly sketch the use of the BPMN process modeling lan-
guage for business processes and provide a brief overview of the several static
analysis tools, which are available for helping process designers in identifying
modeling ﬂaws and errors prior to process deployment and execution.
The Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN) [4] deﬁnes a industrial
standard for the IT support of business processes and business process manage-
ment. The language in its current version 2.0 provides a notation for deﬁning the
central artifact of a business process lifecycle [8], i.e., the process model, support-
ing process modeling on a conceptual level as conduced by domain experts as
well as the fully-automated deployment and execution of implemented business
process models in process engines like Activiti1
, Camunda2
, or jBPM3
. To this
1
https://www.activiti.org.
2
https://camunda.com.
3
https://www.jbpm.org.

--- PAGE 209 ---
196 T. S. Heinze et al.
Fig.1. Graphical modeling notation and process interchange format of BPMN.
end, the BPMN standard not only includes a graphical modeling notation, but
also a machine-processable serialization format for process model interchange
and the natural language deﬁnition of an execution semantics. In Fig.1, a sim-
ple sample BPMN process model, consisting of a single human task, is shown in
its graphical modeling notation as well as in the XML-based interchange format.
Process modeling with BPMN is known to be error-prone, in particular when
it comes to executable business processes [9,10,22]. This is due to deliberate deci-
sions on the language’s design, e.g., unstructured vs structured process modeling
and implied control ﬂow errors, and to the complexity of applications and under-
lying technologies [29]. To illustrate the latter, consider an executable process
package deployed on a process engine like Camunda, which not only includes
the BPMN process model, but also XML schema ﬁles, Groovy or JavaScript
code snippets, Java classes, and various conﬁguration scripts. Accordingly, there
exists a large body of work on process analysis tools, both from industry and
academic research, to help process designers to detect modeling errors as early
as possible.
Proposed tools span the whole spectrum of static analysis, i.e., automated
rule-based inspection of process models for ﬁnding modeling errors or ﬂaws. Lint-
ing tools, like bpmnlint4
or BPMNspector [10] can be used to check business
process models for suspicious and non-portable modeling styles, mostly on the
syntactical level. More elaborate tools allow for checking conformance to best
practices, e.g., Signavio5
, or identifying control and data ﬂow anomalies, e.g.,
deadlocks [31], processing of undeﬁned data [29], and support even more speciﬁc
analysis problems like data leak detection [13,16]. Eventually, full-ﬂedged model
checking and veriﬁcation tools can prove the compliance of a process model to
certain desirable properties, e.g., proper termination known as soundness [9], by
mapping the process model to a formalism like Petri nets [7,14]. Recapitulating
4
https://github.com/bpmn-io/bpmnlint.
5
https://www.signavio.com.

--- PAGE 210 ---
Mining BPMN Processes on GitHub for Tool Validation and Development 197
the tool evaluations in the literature, we observe the frequent use of case studies,
where the most thorough evaluation in [9] comprises 735 process models.
3 Mining Software Repositories for BPMN
In this section, we introduce the approach of mining software repositories and
discuss the several ways for retrieving software artifacts and metadata from
software repositories hosted on GitHub.com. Based upon this, we present our
implemented mining process for creating a corpus of BPMN processes models.
Systematically mining software repositories can be seen as a traditional data
mining task, including steps for deﬁning a research objective, selecting and
extracting data, data preparation and cleansing, data analysis and eventually
interpreting the analysis results. The most important data sources for reposi-
tory mining are public software forges, where in particular GitHub.com plays
a prominent role due to the sheer number of its hosted repositories. There are
several ways for extracting data from software repositories on GitHub.com:
GitHub API. GitHub.com provides the public REST-based GitHub API v36
,
which allows for extracting repository metadata, e.g., speciﬁc commits, number
of repository contributors or main programming language, as well as informa-
tion on the repository structure and the repository contents. The API can be
accessed without or with authentication, supporting up to 60 or 5.000 queries
per hour, respectively. Repository mining using the API is therefore often imple-
mented using authenticated access with a smaller or larger set of diﬀerent user
credentials [11,12]. Note that there also exists the GitHub API v47
, which allows
for queries based on the GraphQL language. There apply similar rate limits.
GHTorrent. The GHTorrent8
project provides an alternative way for extracting
repository data from GitHub.com, thereby avoiding any rate limits. It basically
consists of two databases, one for mirroring the stream of events (push events,
pull requests, etc.) for software repositories on GitHub.com and one for repository
metadata, populated by interlinking and analyzing the events’ contents [11]. The
resulting databases can be accessed via web services or by using the provided
dumps to set up local database instances. However, as only repository meta-
data and events are included, neither the repository structure nor the repository
contents can be directly accessed. As a project similar in nature, GHArchive9
provides a database with the repositories raw event data only.
Google BigQuery. In recent years, several datasets containing data on
GitHub.com software repositories are provided via Google’s BigQuery10
service,
6
https://developer.github.com/v3.
7
https://developer.github.com/v4.
8
http://ghtorrent.org.
9
http://gharchive.org.
10
https://cloud.google.com/bigquery.

--- PAGE 211 ---
198 T. S. Heinze et al.
Fig.2. Schematic illustration of the mining process.
including GHTorrent and GHArchive. There is as well a dedicated dataset11
for
GitHub.com including repository contents for a signiﬁcant fraction of its repos-
itories, though not all. Using the BigQuery service allows for querying massive
datasets like the above-mentioned with SQL queries in a scalable manner. How-
ever, as in case of GitHub API v3, rate limits apply. Notably, 1TB per month can
be accessed freely, which is instantly consumed when querying on tables with
repository contents.
Web Scraping and Git. Since GitHub.com implements a web interface for man-
aging and accessing hosted software repositories, conventional web scraping can
also be used for extracting repository data out of the websites’ HTML code.
Eventually, knowing the URL of a software repository allows for cloning the
repository using the standard git tooling. However, as cloning a repository is
time-consuming due to downloading its complete history and all its contents,
this may not scale in the presence of thousands or even millions of repositories.
Our approach of mining software repositories for BPMN 2.0 process models
uses a combination of the methods discussed above, inspired by previous work on
the creation of the Lindholmen dataset with UML models from GitHub.com [12,
28]. The approach consists of four steps, which we conducted in the beginning
of 2019, see also Fig.2: (1) Get a list of repositories hosted on GitHub.com and
select a proper subset thereof, (2) Find and extract potential BPMN process
model artifacts as well as associated metadata, (3) Examine the artifacts to
identify BPMN 2.0 process models and clean up the resulting data, (4) Analyze
the resulting set of process models for answering our research questions:
Repository Selection. In the ﬁrst step, we used the GHTorrent database
to get a list of all software repositories on GitHub.com. To this end, a local
copy of the MySQL database was setup downloading the most recent database
dump (mysql-2018-11-01, 85GB). Querying table projects allowed for randomly
11
https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/public-data (table github repos.contents).

--- PAGE 212 ---
Mining BPMN Processes on GitHub for Tool Validation and Development 199
selecting a set of 6,163,217 repositories, which comprises 10% of all non-forked
and non-deleted repositories on GitHub.com in November 2018.
Data Extraction. All 6,163,217 repositories have been examined for BPMN
process model artifacts, using three steps for each repository. Similar to [12],
the default branch of the repository (master in most cases, though not always)
and its latest commit is identiﬁed ﬁrst, using up to three queries to the GitHub
API. Afterwards, the repository structure is accessed for this commit, in order
to generate the list of ﬁles for the repository, again querying the GitHub API.
We reused and adapted the Python scripts12
from [12,28] for implementing this
step. Note that alone this step would require more than 100 days for our repos-
itory subset using the credentials of a single user due to the rate limit imposed
by the GitHub API. In order to increase throughput, we therefore conducted
data extraction using several user credentials, which were donated, in parallel.
However, this step was still the bottleneck of our approach and lasted 31 days.
Based on the resulting lists, we then scanned for potential BPMN process
model artifacts. Having tried several heuristics, we opted for simply including
all ﬁles with the term "bpmn" in their name or ﬁle extension. As a result, we
found 1,251 repositories with at least one potential artifact and overall 21,306
potential artifacts. Each of the identiﬁed repositories was then cloned locally
with the standard git tooling. Metadata was extracted from the downloaded
repositories using Code Maat13
. Information about the repository, its metadata
and the identiﬁed artifacts were stored in a relational database for later analysis.
Filtering and Cleansing. We expect to ﬁnd a wide range of ﬁle formats,
including images with graphical process models and source code of various pro-
gramming languages as included in process packages deployed on process engines.
Nonetheless, BPMN deﬁnes a standard XML-based interchange format, and
most tools support to import and export using this format. For our corpus of
BPMN process models, we focused on this format and ﬁltered for XML ﬁles con-
taining a schema reference matching the BPMN 2.0 serialization standard [4], i.e.,
http://www.omg.org/spec/BPMN/20100524/MODEL. Furthermore, we looked for
duplicates using the tooling Duplicate Files Finder14
and only kept distinct ﬁles
in the resulting corpus of 8,904 BPMN process models.
Analysis. In the ﬁnal step, we analyzed the retrieved metadata and the iden-
tiﬁed BPMN process models. The former analysis was mainly implemented by
querying a relational database. For the latter analysis, we processed the models
and ran the tool BPMNspector15
[10] for them. The tool’s reports were fed back
into the database and afterwards analyzed and aggregated using SQL queries.
12
https://github.com/LibreSoftTeam/2016-uml-miner.
13
https://github.com/adamtornhill/code-maat.
14
http://doubles.sourceforge.net.
15
https://github.com/uniba-dsg/BPMNspector.

--- PAGE 213 ---
200 T. S. Heinze et al.
4 Results and Discussion
The results of our mining process are presented and discussed in this section. In
general, the generated corpus of BPMN process models allows for addressing a
multitude of research questions and for validating various hypotheses. Due to
space constraints, we here focus on the following research questions:
Research Question 1: Are there projects which use BPMN on GitHub.com?
This ﬁrst questions is used to study the feasibility of the mining repositories
approach. Obviously, if there are no BPMN models on GitHub.com, the app-
roach can not be used for empirical studies on BPMN. An answer to this ques-
tion also helps in understanding BPMN’s state of practice on GitHub.com.
Research Question 2: How diverse is the corpus of BPMN process models?
As mentioned in Sect.1, the generalizability of an empirical study is inﬂuenced
by the availability of heterogeneous and comprehensive data. We here do not
address this question directly. Instead, we analyze indicators as the number
of original models, the geographical origin of repositories, the models’ age,
size, and frequency of changes. Deeper analysis is prospect to future work.
Research Question 3: How common are violations of BPMN’s syntax and
semantic rules as identified by BPMNspector?
With this question, we want to understand, if there is the need for tools like
BPMNspector with respect to the compliance of process models to the BPMN
standard. An answer to this question could guide the development of process
modeling tools, e.g., through the integration of respective linting tools, or
help in classifying certain rules of the BPMN language as obsolete.
The corpus of BPMN process models and more information, including the list of
identiﬁed repositories and their metadata, is available online [15]16
. The scripts
used to implement the mining process can be obtained from the same source.
4.1 Usage of BPMN on GitHub.com
We have found 21,306 potential BPMN process model artifacts, included in
1,251 repositories on GitHub.com, which represents a 0.02% share of the overall
6,163,217 analyzed software repositories. Filtering for ﬁle formats, we identiﬁed
serialized BPMN 2.0 process models to be the largest fraction among all the
artifacts, counting for more than two thirds as shown in the following table:
File XML XML Images Other
format (BPMN 2.0) (other) (*.png, *.jpg, etc.) (*.jar, *js, etc.)
Number of 16,907 384 1,635 2,380
artifacts (79.3%) (1.8%) (7.7%) (11.2%)
When just considering the serialized BPMN 2.0 process models, the identiﬁed
artifacts where distributed over 928 software repositories.
16
https://github.com/ViktorStefanko/BPMN Crawler.

--- PAGE 214 ---
Mining BPMN Processes on GitHub for Tool Validation and Development 201
While we apparently used a very simple heuristic for identifying BPMN pro-
cess models and therefore may have missed many BPMN models hosted on
GitHub.com, we nevertheless found a substantial number of artifacts and also of
serialized BPMN 2.0 ﬁles. The resulting number of BPMN process models clearly
exceeds the numbers used in case studies (compare with Sect.2), but is smaller
than the numbers reported for UML models (21,316 in [12] and 93,596 in [28]).
The share of 0.02% of repositories with at least one potential BPMN process
model artifact is also smaller than the share of 2.8% reported for UML in [12].
The results can be well explained by UML being a family of general-purpose
modeling languages, while BPMN is a domain-speciﬁc modeling language. Note
that UML is also older than BPMN. The reports on UML also present a larger
fraction of images among the identiﬁed UML models (51.7% in [12] and 61.8%
in [28]), which may be reasoned by their more permissive heuristic to consider
ﬁles with terms like "diagram" or "design" in their name as UML models.
Answer to Research Question 1: There have been 1,251 repositories
with at least one potential BPMN process model artifact, containing
21,306 potential artifacts and 16,907 serialized BPMN 2.0 models.
4.2 Properties of Identiﬁed BPMN Artifacts
The next question concerns the diversity of identiﬁed BPMN process models. A
ﬁrst hint for an answer is given by the diﬀerent types of ﬁles. As already noted
above, found ﬁle formats range from XML, over image formats, to source code of
programming languages. Assuming that images are used for conceptual models
and source code may indicate executable process models, the formats reﬂect the
diﬀerent uses of BPMN along the business process lifecycle.
Age. We also looked at the age of the identiﬁed potential BPMN process model
artifacts, i.e., the time passed since their last modiﬁcation in a repository. Unsur-
prisingly, most artifacts are recent. More than each third artifact was modiﬁed
in the last year at the time of conducting the study in the beginning of 2019:
Age in years < 1 1 2 3 4 > 4 n.a.
Number of 7,656 5,154 3,291 2,344 712 2,079 70
artifacts (36.0%) (24.2%) (15.4%) (11.0%) (3.3%) (9.8%) (0.3%)
We though sporadically found artifacts older than 8 years, which thus do not
reference the BPMN 2.0 standard. The results can be well explained by the
exponential growth of the number of software repositories on GitHub.com.
Updates. The number of updates, i.e., commits implying changes on a given
artifact, excluding artifact creation, was also analyzed. We found that 16,285 or
over two third of the potential BPMN process model artifacts are never updated.
For the remaining artifacts, the number of updates is low, such that only 7.6%
of the artifacts are updated more than once, as shown in the following table:

--- PAGE 215 ---
202 T. S. Heinze et al.
Number of updates 0 1 2 3 > 3 n.a.
Number of 16,285 3,378 620 572 427 24
artifacts (76.4%) (15.9%) (2.9%) (2.7%) (2.0%) (0.1%)
BPMN process models thus seem to be rather static contents of software reposi-
tories on GitHub.com. These results are in line with the ﬁndings for UML in [12],
where they found that only 26% of the UML models are updated at least once.
Geographical Location. Information on the geographical distribution of potential
BPMN process model artifacts was investigated using location information for
contributors to a software repository, if available. Unfortunately, we were only
able to retrieve the locations of 627 contributors for 395 repositories, or 31.6% of
all analyzed 1,251 repositories. Furthermore, a contributor of a repository may
not necessary contribute to a process model. However, our ﬁndings, as shown
below, at least indicate that the artifacts originate from several regions:
Location China Germany USA Switzerland France Other
Number of 92 90 90 24 22 309
contributors (14.7%) (14.4%) (14.4%) (3.8%) (3.5%) (49.2%)
Duplicates. Furthermore, we analyzed whether the identiﬁed potential BPMN
process model artifacts are distinct or if there are any duplicates. We found
surprisingly many duplicates, almost one half of all artifacts are duplicates of
other artifacts, either in the same or in another repository, lowering the number
of distinct artifacts to 10,707 or 50.3%. In the following table, we show how often
duplicates occur among the identiﬁed BPMN process model artifacts:
Number of occurences 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 > 8
Number of artifacts 8,030 852 571 193 110 219 272 342 118
As can be seen, all duplicates can be traced back to 2,677 unique artifacts or
12.6% of all artifacts. In the majority of cases, there are no more than 5 duplicates
of a unique artifact, though we also found artifacts with up to 89 duplicates. Just
considering serialized BPMN 2.0 process models, we made the same observation,
with 8,904 distinct process models and 8,003 duplicates thereof. Why there are
so many duplicates is an open question. Possible reasons may be found in the
reuse of process models, which are part of platforms like the Camunda process
engine, in several software repositories, or repositories that are manually derived
from other software repositories avoiding GitHub.com’s forking mechanism [12].
Size. Analyzing process model size was conducted for the 8,904 distinct process
models in the BPMN 2.0 serialization format. The XML-based format includes
the XML node <process>, which deﬁnes a process’ logical structure [4]. To get
a simple measure for the size of a model, we thus simply counted the number of
children elements for the <process> node. As can be seen in the following table,
the corpus of BPMN 2.0 process models includes a range of diﬀerent model sizes:

--- PAGE 216 ---
Mining BPMN Processes on GitHub for Tool Validation and Development 203
Number of nodes 1 − 10 11 − 20 21 − 50 51 − 100 > 100 n.a.
Number of 1,881 2,714 2,346 978 878 107
artifacts (21.1%) (30.5%) (26.3%) (11.0%) (9.9%) (1.2%)
While half of the process models are small and contain no more than 20 XML
element nodes, we ﬁnd a substantial share of medium-sized models. There are
also larger models in the corpus. Notably, 57 process models contain more than
1,000 nodes. The largest model even contains 4,096 nodes. In [20], they report
similar results for BPMN process models collected by the BPM Academic Ini-
tiative. The average number of nodes there is 16 and the largest model contains
156 nodes. Note that the numbers can though not be directly compared, since
we count element nodes in the XML serialization format of a process, which is
larger than the sum of its activities and gateways reported in [20].
Answer to Research Question 2: While the majority of identiﬁed
artifacts are static and recent contents of a software repository, we
also found artifacts which are older than 8 years, updated more than
once and come from diﬀerent geographical regions. At least half of
the potential BPMN process model artifacts and half of the serialized
process models are distinct, yielding a corpus of 8,904 unique BPMN
2.0 process models. The corpus contains models of various sizes.
4.3 BPMNspector Analysis Results
The third research question concerns the frequency of violations against BPMN’s
syntax and semantic rules, as reported when applying the linter BPMNspector to
the 8,904 BPMN 2.0 process models. BPMNspector has been designed to check
models for compliance with the BPMN standard [4]. Checks include BPMN’s
schema validation, referential integrity, and more sophisticated constraints [10].
Violations against the rules imposed by the standard, on the one hand, impede
the portability of process models between diﬀerent tools and vendors and, on
the other hand, can cause unexpected behavior when process models are exe-
cuted [21].
Results of the analysis revealed issues for almost all the process models. While
we were not able to run the analysis for 57 process models, we identiﬁed only
1,471 process models or 16.5% of all 8,904 models to be compliant with respect
to the standard. All other 7,376 models, a share of 82,8%, were analyzed to have
at least one violation of rules of the BPMN standard. Overall, BPMNspector
reported 150,168 rule violations for our corpus of BPMN 2.0 process models. We
also took a closer look into the reported issues and found a large fraction to
be violations of rules Ext.023, Ext.101 and Ext.107, as can be seen in the
following tables, showing the Top-5 rule violations with respect to the number
of models with at least one violation and the absolute number of violations:
Rule Ext.101 Ext.023 Ext.107 Ext.150 Ext.151
Models with 5,299 5,206 5,112 1,846 1,796
violation (59.5%) (58.5%) (57.4%) (20.7%) (20.2%)

--- PAGE 217 ---
204 T. S. Heinze et al.
Rule Ext.023 XsdCheck Ext.107 Ext.092 Ext.101
Absolute 58,015 43,516 7,398 6,788 6,699
Number (38.6%) (29.0%) (4.9%) (4.5%) (4.5%)
Rules Ext.023, Ext.101, Ext.107 refer to the non-compliant deﬁnition of
sequence ﬂows in the BPMN 2.0 serialization format17
. According to the stan-
dard, a sequence ﬂow must be redundantly deﬁned using a node <sequenceFlow>
and nodes <incoming> and <outgoing> for the ﬂow’s source and target nodes,
respectively (also compare with Fig.1). If one is missing, BPMNspector reports
an issue. The other shown rules denote violations of BPMN’s XML schema
(XsdCheck), missing or ambiguous sources of data associations (Ext.092),
or missing incoming sequence ﬂow (Ext.150) and missing outgoing sequence
ﬂow (Ext.151). We additionally repaired violations of rules Ext.023, Ext.101,
Ext.107 in the process models using a tool18
provided alongside with BPMN-
spector. As a result, the number of models with at least one rule violation shrank
to 4,106, still constituting a share of 46.1%, and the absolute number of violations
to 64,652.
The authors of BPMNspector found similar results when evaluating their tool
using a case study of 66 BPMN process models. Though, they reported only a
share of 42 models or 63.6% to be non-compliant to the standard’s rules. They
also identiﬁed the largest fraction of violations referring to the wrong use of
sequence ﬂows. The high frequency of rule violations can be reasoned by missing
tool support, as discussed in [21]. However, as most process engines tolerate the
violations reported by BPMNspector, the results may also indicate that at least
some rules of the BPMN standard are obsolete [10]. In summary, our corpus of
BPMN process models conﬁrmed the results of the case study in [10] and there-
fore provided further empirical evidence for the usefulness of BPMNspector.
Answer to Research Question 3: Violations of BPMN’s syntax and
semantic rules as reported by BPMNspector are frequent in the
corpus of BPMN process models, aﬀecting 82,8% of the models.
5 Related Work
Most related to our work is the creation and research on the Lindholmen
dataset19
, which was also the inspiration for our approach. The creators of
the dataset describe the used mining software repositories approach [12], intro-
duce the dataset [28], and report on insights gained about the use of UML on
GitHub.com by analyzing the dataset, e.g., in [5,18]. Their main research ques-
tion was though on the usage of UML in conventional software development,
while we were mainly interested in using our corpus to validate analysis tools for
17
http://bpmnspector.org/ConstraintList EXT.html.
18
https://github.com/matthiasgeiger/BPMNspector-ﬁxSeqFlow.
19
http://oss.models-db.com/.

--- PAGE 218 ---
Mining BPMN Processes on GitHub for Tool Validation and Development 205
BPMN process modeling. The Lindholmen dataset is considerably larger than
our corpus, currently counting 93,596 UML models [28]. Note again, that UML
is a family of general-purpose modeling languages while BPMN is one domain-
speciﬁc modeling language. They also put more eﬀort into the identiﬁcation of
graphical models, using machine learning in order to identify images which con-
tain UML. Due to our research objective, we were more interested in BPMN’s
XML-based serialization format. The authors are not aware of any other work,
which systematically mines software repositories to create a corpus of BPMN
business process models. There though exists approaches in BPM research, which
mine software repositories for other purposes. The authors in [3] argue to use
repository metadata to mine software development processes. According to their
approach, metadata can be for example used to create GANTT charts based
on the contributors activities [2] or to classify repository contributors into roles,
e.g., developers or testers [1].
As mentioned in Sect.1, most empirical research on BPMN is based on exper-
iments, surveys or case studies. Notable tool evaluations, going beyond the usual
number of included process models, are [9] with 735 customized UML process
models and [22] with 585 BPMN models. There have also been several commu-
nity eﬀorts to create open model collections [17]. For business process modeling,
the BPM Academic Initiative provides a platform to create and share process
models for academic teaching. The authors report on 1,903 diﬀerent process
models in [20], including BPMN, created by 4,500 users and spanning diﬀerent
model size and complexity. The recent number of models is 29,285, but data col-
lection has stopped and the focus is on conceptual business process models [17].
Also note the need for executable process models and their diﬀerence to concep-
tual models [23]. A similar platform was presented by the name RePROSitory [6],
currently including 174 business process models. Another initiative is the Bench-
Flow project [30], where process models were collected from industrial partners
and used for process engine benchmarking. The authors claim to have collected
8,363 models, with a share of 64% of BPMN [30]. Unfortunately, the collection
is not public.
Another line of empirical research focuses on the quality of business process
models and modeling practices [24]. In [25], process metrics like modularity or
complexity are used for predicting modeling errors based on the analysis of
a collection of 2000 conceptual models. Experiments where used in [26,27] to
investigate on modeling styles in order to better understand and support process
designers. More recent work investigated on best practices for BPMN modeling
by inspecting practices in industrial process models [22]. Analyzing similarities
and diﬀerences of these analyses and our corpus is a prospect of future work.
6 Conclusion
In this paper, we describe our eﬀorts to systematically extract a corpus of BPMN
business process models from software repositories hosted on GitHub.com. Min-
ing 10% of all repositories yielded 21,306 potential BPMN process model arti-

--- PAGE 219 ---
206 T. S. Heinze et al.
facts, originating from 1,251 repositories, which after further ﬁltering and cleans-
ing constituted a corpus of 8,904 distinct serialized BPMN 2.0 process models.
The corpus can be used to answer various empirical research questions on the use
of business process models. We here demonstrate, how to complement an exist-
ing case study for the linting tool BPMNspector with an evaluation on a much
larger scale. Doing so, we can conﬁrm results on the frequency of violations of
the BPMN standard, thus showing the need for analysis tools like BPMNspector.
Threats to Validity. There are a number of threats that aﬀect the validity of
our approach. For a general discussion on the threats of mining software reposi-
tories, we refer the reader to [19]. Process modeling in software repositories may
not resemble industrial practice and our results may thus not generalize beyond
open software development and academia [19,23]. This is a common threat to
external validity, which we also ﬁnd for other studies, e.g. [20]. Analyzing the
transferability of empirical results about software repositories and academia to
an industrial context is an open research question. We therefore advocate the
complimentary use of our approach with other empirical research methods. Fur-
thermore, we just mined GitHub.com and did not consider other software forges.
Since GitHub.com counts the largest number of hosted repositories, we though
believe that our results apply for most open software development. Due to the
heuristics used for the identiﬁcation of BPMN models, we also have missed pro-
cess models and thus may underestimate certain eﬀects [12], e.g., model dupli-
cation or the frequency of graphical process models. We therefore only provide
a descriptive analysis of the use of BPMN on GitHub.com and do not use our
corpus for inferential statistics and prediction. Finally, due to GitHub.com being
a dynamic environment, repositories may change or be removed over time.
References
1. Agrawal, K., Aschauer, M., Thonhofer, T., Bala, S., Rogge-Solti, A., Tomsich, N.:
Resource classiﬁcation from version control system logs. In: EDOC Workshops
2016, pp. 1–10. IEEE (2016)
2. Bala, S., Cabanillas, C., Mendling, J., Rogge-Solti, A., Polleres, A.: Mining project-
oriented business processes. In: Motahari-Nezhad, H.R., Recker, J., Weidlich, M.
(eds.) BPM 2015. LNCS, vol. 9253, pp. 425–440. Springer, Cham (2015). https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-23063-4 28
3. Bala, S., Mendling, J.: Monitoring the software development process with process
mining. In: Shishkov, B. (ed.) BMSD 2018. LNBIP, vol. 319, pp. 432–442. Springer,
Cham (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-94214-8 34
4. Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN), Version 2.0. Object Management
Group (OMG) Standard (2011). https://www.omg.org/spec/BPMN/2.0/PDF
5. Chaudron, M.R.V., Fernandes-Saez, A., Hebig, R., Ho-Quang, T., Jolak, R.: Diver-
sity in UML modeling explained: observations, classiﬁcations and theorizations. In:
Tjoa, A.M., Bellatreche, L., Biﬄ, S., van Leeuwen, J., Wiedermann, J. (eds.) SOF-
SEM 2018. LNCS, vol. 10706, pp. 47–66. Springer, Cham (2018). https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-319-73117-9 4

--- PAGE 220 ---
Mining BPMN Processes on GitHub for Tool Validation and Development 207
6. Corradini, F., Fornari, F., Polini, A., Re, B., Tiezzi, F.: RePROSitory: a repository
platform for sharing business PROcess modelS. In: BPM PhD/Demos 2019, pp.
149–153. CEUR (2019)
7. Dijkman, R.M., Dumas, M., Ouyang, C.: Semantics and analysis of business process
models in BPMN. Inf. Softw. Techn. 50(12), 1281–1294 (2008)
8. Dumas, M., Rosa, M.L., Mendling, J., Reijers, H.A.: Fundamentals of Business
Process Management, 2 edn. Springer, Heidelberg (2018)
9. Fahland, D., Favre, C., Jobstmann, B., Koehler, J., Lohmann, N., Völzer, H.,
Wolf, K.: Instantaneous soundness checking of industrial business process mod-
els. In: Dayal, U., Eder, J., Koehler, J., Reijers, H.A. (eds.) BPM 2009. LNCS,
vol. 5701, pp. 278–293. Springer, Heidelberg (2009). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-642-03848-8 19
10. Geiger, M., Neugebauer, P., Vorndran, A.: Automatic standard compliance assess-
ment of BPMN 2.0 process models. In: ZEUS 2017, pp. 4–10. CEUR (2017)
11. Gousios, G.: The GHTorent dataset and tool suite. In: MSR 2013, pp. 233–236.
IEEE (2013)
12. Hebig, R., Quang, T.H., Chaudron, M., Robles, G., Fernandez, M.A.: The quest
for open source projects that use UML: mining GitHub. In: MODELS 2016, pp.
173–183. ACM (2016)
13. Heinze, T.S., Amme, W., Moser, S.: Process restructuring in the presence of
message-dependent variables. In: Maximilien, E.M., Rossi, G., Yuan, S.-T., Lud-
wig, H., Fantinato, M. (eds.) ICSOC 2010. LNCS, vol. 6568, pp. 121–132. Springer,
Heidelberg (2011). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-19394-1 13
14. Heinze, T.S., Amme, W., Moser, S.: Static analysis and process model transforma-
tion for an advanced business process to Petri net mapping. Softw.: Pract. Exp.
48(1), 161–195 (2018)
15. Heinze, T.S., Stefanko, V., Amme, W.: Mining von BPMN-Prozessartefakten auf
GitHub. In: KPS 2019, pp. 111–120 (2019). https://www.hb.dhbw-stuttgart.de/
kps2019/kps2019 Tagungsband.pdf
16. Heinze, T.S., Türker, J.: Certiﬁed information ﬂow analysis of service implementa-
tions. In: SOCA 2018, pp. 177–184. IEEE (2018)
17. Ho-Quang, T., Chaudron, M.R.V., Robles, G., Herwanto, G.B.: Towards an infras-
tructure for empirical research into software architecture: challenges and directions.
In: ECASE@ICSE 2019, pp. 34–41. IEEE (2019)
18. Ho-Quang, T., Hebig, R., Robles, G., Chaudron, M.R.V., Fernandez, M.A.: Prac-
tices and perceptions of UML use in open source projects. In: ICSE-SEIP 2017, pp.
203–212. IEEE (2017)
19. Kalliamvakou, E., Gousios, G., Blincoe, K., Singer, L., German, D.M., Damian,
D.E.: The promises and perils of mining GitHub. In: MSR 2014, pp. 92–101. ACM
(2014)
20. Kunze, M., Luebbe, A., Weidlich, M., Weske, M.: Towards understanding process
modeling – the case of the BPM academic initiative. In: Dijkman, R., Hofstetter,
J., Koehler, J. (eds.) BPMN 2011. LNBIP, vol. 95, pp. 44–58. Springer, Heidelberg
(2011). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-25160-3 4
21. Lenhard, J., Ferme, V., Harrer, S., Geiger, M., Pautasso, C.: Lessons learned from
evaluating workﬂow management systems. In: Braubach, L., et al. (eds.) ICSOC
2017. LNCS, vol. 10797, pp. 215–227. Springer, Cham (2018). https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-319-91764-1 17
22. Leopold, H., Mendling, J., Günther, O.: Learning from quality issues of BPMN
models from industry. IEEE Softw. 33(4), 26–33 (2016)

--- PAGE 221 ---
208 T. S. Heinze et al.
23. Lübke, D., Pautasso, C.: Empirical research in executable process models. Empir-
ical Studies on the Development of Executable Business Processes, pp. 3–12.
Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-17666-2 1
24. Mendling, J.: Empirical studies in process model veriﬁcation. In: Jensen, K., van der
Aalst, W.M.P. (eds.) Transactions on Petri Nets and Other Models of Concurrency
II. LNCS, vol. 5460, pp. 208–224. Springer, Heidelberg (2009). https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-642-00899-3 12
25. Mendling, J., Sánchez-González, L., Garcı́a, F., Rosa, M.L.: Thresholds for error
probability measures of business process models. J. Syst. Softw. 85(5), 1188–1197
(2012)
26. Pinggera, J., et al.: Styles in business process modeling: an exploration and a model.
Softw. Syst. Model. 14(3), 1055–1080 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10270-013-
0349-1
27. Pinggera, J., et al.: Tracing the process of process modeling with modeling phase
diagrams. In: Daniel, F., Barkaoui, K., Dustdar, S. (eds.) BPM 2011. LNBIP, vol.
99, pp. 370–382. Springer, Heidelberg (2012). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-
28108-2 36
28. Robles, G., Ho-Quang, T., Hebig, R., Chaudron, M., Fernandez, M.A.: An extensive
dataset of UML models in GitHub. In: MSR 2017, pp. 519–522. IEEE (2017)
29. Schneid, K., Usener, C.A., Thöne, S., Kuchen, H., Tophinke, C.: Static analysis of
BPMN-based process-driven applications. In: SAC 2019, pp. 66–74. ACM (2019)
30. Skouradaki, M., Roller, D., Leymann, F., Ferme, V., Pautasso, C.: On the road
to benchmarking BPMN 2.0 workﬂow engines. In: ICPE 2015, pp. 301–304. ACM
(2015)
31. Vanhatalo, J., Völzer, H., Leymann, F.: Faster and more focused control-ﬂow analy-
sis for business process models through SESE decomposition. In: Krämer, B.J., Lin,
K.-J., Narasimhan, P. (eds.) ICSOC 2007. LNCS, vol. 4749, pp. 43–55. Springer,
Heidelberg (2007). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-74974-5 4

--- PAGE 222 ---
An Empirical Investigation of the Intuitiveness
of Process Landscape Designs
Gregor Polančič1(B), Pavlo Brin2, Lucineia Heloisa Thom3, Encarna Sosa4,
and Mateja Kocbek Bule1
1 Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
University of Maribor, Koroška cesta 46, 2000 Maribor, Slovenia
{gregor.polancic,mateja.kocbek}@um.si
2 National Technical University “Kharkiv Polytechnic Institute”,
2 Kirpicheva Street, Kharkiv 61002, Ukraine
pavelbrin@ukr.net
3 Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Av. Bento Gonçalves, 9500,
Porto Alegre, RS 91501-970, Brazil
lucineia@inf.ufrgs.br
4 Universidad de Extremadura, Cáceres, Spain
esosa@unex.es
Abstract. Processlandscapesdefinethescopeandrelationshipsbetweenanorga-
nization’s business processes and are therefore essential for their management.
However, in contrast to business process diagrams, where nowadays BPMN pre-
vails,processlandscapediagramslackstandardization,whichresultsinnumerous
process landscape designs. Accordingly, our goal was to investigate how intuitive
are current landscape designs to users with low expertise, as well as users having
expertise in BPMN and landscape modeling. A total of 302 subjects participated
in the research showing that previous expertise impacts the interpretation of land-
scapeelementsanddesignswhereas,inthecaseofhavingcontextualinformation,
subjects responded more consistently. The results also show that the basic rela-
tionships between processes are intuitive to users, also in the case when only
proximity between shapes is facilitated. Our findings may imply future designs of
languages for process landscapes. They also may be useful for those who actually
model process landscape diagrams and search for suitable notations.
Keywords: Process landscape · Diagram · Semantic transparency · BPMN
1 Introduction
A process landscape diagram represents the top-level part of a process architecture,
which stands for “an organized overview of business processes that specifies their rela-
tions, which can be accompanied by guidelines that determine how these processes
must be organized” [1]. The specification of a process landscape model is the most
important challenge for the establishment of a process architecture [2]. For example, a
high amount of organizations’ services requires an efficient representation of the entire
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. Nurcan et al. (Eds.): BPMDS 2020/EMMSAD 2020, LNBIP 387, pp. 209–223, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49418-6_14

--- PAGE 223 ---
210 G. Polančič et al.
process landscape in order to measure the overall organization’s potential [3]. A pro-
cesslandscaperepresentsprocessesas‘black-boxes’andsofocusesoninterrelationships
betweenprocessesandexternalparticipants.Inthismanner,aprocesslandscapeenables
an organization to maintain an overview of processes, which simplifies process-related
communication and may represent a starting point for process discovery.
Accordingly, a process landscape model has to be comprehensible by all major
stakeholders of an organization [2, 3]. This implies the usage of a common, compact,
and intuitive language for the creation of process landscape diagrams. However, no
standardized languages for creating process landscapes exist [4], whereas BPMN 2.0
does not cover the wide landscapes and complexities that exist in the process-modeling
domain [5, 6]. Consequently, organizations, as well as process modeling tool vendors
(e.g., ARIS Express, Visual Paradigm, Vizi Modeler and Signavio), define their own
‘overviews of processes’ most commonly by imitating ‘value chain’ diagrams.
As a result, landscape diagrams differ from each other, and while there is no com-
monlandscapemodelinglanguage,aninexperiencedusercouldinferadifferentmeaning
from the appearance of a language element, which could negatively impact the compre-
hension of a diagram and the corresponding decisions made. And while the graphical
representation significantly impacts the cognitive effectiveness of a diagram [7–9], it
is important to specify a common palette of comprehensible symbols fitting with the
process landscapes domain.
According to these challenges, the main goal of our work was to investigate the intu-
itiveness of the representations of process landscape designs as found in academia and
industry, i.e., to test if representations of landscape concepts are intuitive (i.e. semanti-
cally transparent, clear) to people with ‘near-to-zero’ knowledge of a process landscape
design. In this light, we defined the following research questions which could be tested
empirically:
– RQ1: Are common landscape designs semantically transparent to ‘novice users’?
– RQ2: How does the previous knowledge impacts the comprehension of process
landscape designs?
Accordingly, the paper is organized as follows. The introduction chapter already
identified the problem and motivation for the research, whereas the second chapter
contains background on process landscapes, semiotics, and semantic transparency. The
thirdchapter introducesempiricalresearch,whichwasapplied toprovide answerstothe
stated research questions. The fourth chapter presents and discusses the results of our
research. The last chapter brings conclusions and limitations of our approach as well as
implications and future research directions.
2 Research Background
2.1 Process Landscapes
A high-level model of an organization that represents an overall structure of business
processes and their relationships, emerged as a tool to aid process-oriented companies
in managing large business process collections [10]. With roots in the early 1980s,

--- PAGE 224 ---
An Empirical Investigation of the Intuitiveness of Process Landscape Designs 211
when Porter [11] introduced the value chain model, the concept is commonly specified
as a ‘process landscape’ and represents a set of interconnected processes within an
organizationalsystem.Alternativetermsinuseare‘processoverview’[12],and‘process
map’. However, according to the findings of Poels et al. [13], the term ‘process map’
may either represent a model of a business process architecture or an entry-level model
of a business process model architecture.
A process landscape model (Fig. 1) shows the structure, grouping, modularity, func-
tionality,andtechnologyofchainprocesses,businessprocesses,andworkingprocesses.
In contrast to business process models, processes on the landscape level are modeled as
‘black-boxes’ whose internal complexity is hidden for the sake of simplicity and clarity.
Fig. 1. Examples of process landscape diagrams [15, 16]
Process landscape diagrams may be used in numerous ways, addressing the con-
cerns of business-oriented users as well as technically-oriented ones [12]. While being
specified on the macro level, they provide a comprehensive understanding and high-
light different types of relationships or dependencies with other processes and artifacts
[14]. Process landscape diagrams help process owners, quality managers, and other
process-related stakeholders to ease the maintenance of their processes by offering a
quick overview of processes. Afterward, in detailed process diagrams, individual busi-
ness processes may be decomposed into finer levels of detail (i.e., sub-processes and
tasks).Insummary,likemodelingindividualprocessesisastartingpointforanyprocess
improvementeffort,modelingthearchitectureofanorganization’scollectionofbusiness
processes is required for any analysis, design or improvement effort that transcends the
level of individual processes [13].
Figure 1 represents two common process landscape diagrams, with processes
depictedaschevronarrows(left)orrectangles(right),whereasarrowsrepresentbetween-
process relationships. The left diagram in Fig. 1 additionally connects organizational
processes with the environment by specifying connections to external participants (i.e.,
stakeholders).
2.2 Modeling Process Landscapes with BPMN 2.0
The evidence from academia and practice show that BPMN is used for modeling of
processlandscapesinaninformalway[17,18].Inourpreviouswork[18],threedifferent
BPMN-based approaches for modeling of process landscaped have been investigated:
(1) use of black-box Pools and Message flows for modeling of BPMN Collaboration

--- PAGE 225 ---
212 G. Polančič et al.
diagrams with hidden details; (2) use of BPMN Collaboration diagrams and (3) use of
Enterprise-wide BPMN Process diagrams.
An analysis performed in [18] demonstrates that none of the BPMN approaches
results in diagrams with a graphical similarity to common landscape diagrams (e.g.,
value chains). Analytically, this was confirmed by Malinova et al. [19], who performed
a semantical mapping between BPMN and ‘Process maps’. Their results show that
BPMN in its current form is not appropriate for process landscape design.
2.3 Semiotics
The theoretical foundation on how a visual vocabulary of a notation is defined can be
explained by semiotics [20], i.e. a study of signs, an investigation into how the meaning
is created and communicated. According to semiotics, a sign consists of a signifier (i.e.
any material thing that is signified, be it an object, words on a page, or an image) and
signified (i.e. the concept which the signifier refers to) (Fig. 2, left).
Sign
Signifier Signified
The mental concept
The physical object
(object, word, image)
Anything that conveys meaning
Landscape element
Depiction Definition
(specification ofa BPMN element)
(e.g. circle, dotted line, letter)
(e.g. user task, message event,
exclusivegateway)
Fig. 2. Main concepts as specified in semiotics (left) and OMG’s namespace (right)
Based on the relation between the signifier and signified, semiotics defines three
types of signs: (1) icon, where a signifier physically resembles the signified (i.e. person
sign on Fig. 2); (2) symbol, where the signifier presents the signified with an arbitrary
or conventional relation; and (3) index, where the signifier is related to the signified
by an associative relation (i.e. Fig. 2, right – the darker symbol supports the lighter
one (from below), which is analogous to common real-life situations). In the process
languages’ space (e.g. BPMN, CMMN, DMN), a sign is commonly referred to as an
element,whereasthesignifieriscommonly referredtoasadepictionofanelement[21].
The definition of a process element has an equal meaning as a ‘signified’ in semiotics,
meaningthespecificationofalanguageconcept.Sincethefocusofourinvestigationison
processlanguages, wewillusethetermsaccording totheprocesslanguages namespace,
i.e. a ‘process element consists of its definition and depiction’.
2.4 Semantic Transparency
Caireetal.[22]statedthat“Thekeytodesigningvisualnotationsthatareunderstandable
to naïve users is a property called semantic transparency”, which means that the mean-
ing (semantics) of a sign is clear (i.e. intuitive, transparent) from its appearance alone

--- PAGE 226 ---
An Empirical Investigation of the Intuitiveness of Process Landscape Designs 213
(as in the case of onomatopoeia in spoken languages). Therefore, addressing semantic
transparency is recognized as one of the most powerful approaches for improving the
understandability, especially for novice users [22].
Semantic transparency of a sign is a continuous function with two endpoints. On
the positive side, a sign may be semantic transparent, which means that a novice reader
could accurately deduce the meaning of a sign from its appearance (e.g., a drawn tree
representingatree).Semanticallytransparentsignstendtobedefinedeitherbysimilarity
oranassociativerelationship(index).Incontrast,semanticperversitymeansthatanovice
reader would likely deduct an incorrect meaning from the sign’s appearance (e.g., an
arrow directed in an opposite way to an actual flow). On the midpoint, a sign may
be defined as semantically opaque, which means that it is defined by a convention
[22]. Semantically transparent signs reduce cognitive load because they have built-in
mnemonics: as a result, their meaning can be either perceived directly or easily learned
[23]. Such representations speed up recognition and improve intelligibility to naïve
users [24, 25]. Indeed, one of the main challenges of modeling languages is to model
the diagram in a precise and user-friendly way, where each applied graphical element
should be intuitive for users [26], which positively implies the acceptance of a modeling
technique [27].
3 Empirical Research
3.1 Research Model and Process
In respect to RQ1, we identified two independent variables, namely ‘depiction of a land-
scape concept’ and ‘contextual information’. In the case of the former, we searched for
the levels of the independent variable among the various sources of process landscape
diagramswhereasthevisualvocabulariesofthecorrespondingnotationshavebeeniden-
tified(i.e.levelsrepresentedcommonlandscapesymbols).The‘contextualinformation’
variable was additionally introduced, since the meaning of an individual element may
be more precisely identified when putting it into the context (element level and diagram
level).Thedependent variablewasdefined as‘semantictransparency’, whichrepresents
the extent to which the meaning of a symbol can be inferred from its appearance. We
operationalized the ‘semantic transparency’ as the number of correctly identified mean-
ings of the investigated elements, i.e. comprehension. Higher values were preferred,
representing semantic immediate symbols (i.e. a novice reader can infer the meaning
from its appearance alone).
InrespecttoRQ2,twotypesofpreviousknowledge(i.e.expertise)havebeenconsid-
ered as independent variables: ‘BPMN expertise’ and ‘Landscape modeling expertise’.
‘BPMN expertise’ was considered since BPMN represents ISO and the de-facto stan-
dardforprocessmodeling,wheresomeattemptsinacademiaandpracticeactuallyapply
BPMN for landscape modeling [28]. Accordingly, we presume that BPMN expertise
may impact the subjects on how they perceive landscape elements. In a similar manner,
‘Landscape modeling expertise’ may impact the subjects’ answers. In both cases, the
‘expertise’ was investigated on a 7-point Likert scale from highest to lowest degree of
disagreement, with items adapted from Recker [29].

--- PAGE 227 ---
214 G. Polančič et al.
Toprovideanswerstothestatedresearchquestions,weperformedempiricalresearch
as follows. To test to what extent ‘novice users’ would be likely to infer the correct
meaning for the common landscape designs, subjects were introduced with different
landscape elements and (partial) diagrams, where their task was to identify the mean-
ing for the provided depictions. The applied research protocol may correspond to pre-
experimental designs, more specifically ‘one group posttest only design’ [30]. In our
case, the treatments were associated with the instructions, provided to subjects, whereas
the observations are associated with the subject’s responses.
3.2 Subjects and Sampling
Since we investigated intuitiveness, the ideal candidate for the research would be an
individual who (1) understands the meaning of the concepts, which are used in land-
scape modeling, yet has (2) no experiences with the corresponding landscape modeling
notations. According to this, IT and business students of the same degree were selected
as suitable candidates for the research.
3.3 Research Instrument
The focal research instrument was an online questionnaire, which was categorized into
the following parts. In the first part, subjects were asked to provide basic demographic
information (age, gender), and their experiences in BPMN as well as in landscape mod-
eling (both measured on a 7-point Likert scale from lowest to the highest degree of
experience,andself-reportednumberofmodeleddiagrams).Inthesecondpart,subjects
wereintroducedbyalternativedepictionsofcommonlandscapeelements(i.e.landscape
elementsasusedinacademiaandindustry,includingBPMNandArchimate),wherethey
wereaskedtoassociatethemostappropriatemeaningtothem(includingthe‘undecided’
answer). In addition, partial diagrams were presented to subjects to test if they would
more effectively infer the meaning if using a diagram’s contextual information. To min-
imize learning effects, the individual items as well the answers were randomized. In the
third part of the questionnaire, a “two-treatments” alike design was applied to test the
alternative notations used in landscaped modeling. Due to the paper’s length limitations,
this part was excluded from this paper. The instrument was prepared in Slovenian and
English version and was completely anonymized. The actual research was performed
in January 2019. In total, 588 subjects were invited to participate, 347 subjects actually
opened the questionnaire or partially completed it, whereas 302 subjects successfully
completed the questionnaire. Out of them, 65% of the subject came from Slovenia,
whereas 35% came from Ukraine.
4 Results
The results were collected and partially analyzed in 1KA (https://www.1ka.si/d/en), an
advanced open-source application that enables services for online surveys. Afterward,
the data was exported into MS Excel as well as SPSS, to perform additional analysis.

--- PAGE 228 ---
An Empirical Investigation of the Intuitiveness of Process Landscape Designs 215
4.1 Descriptive Statistics
Aspreviouslymentioned,302subjectssuccessfullycompletedthequestionnaire,161of
them male (53%) and 141 female (47%). In average subjects were 21.3 years old when
completing the questionnaire. 197 subjects (65%) come from Slovenia, whereas 105
subjects(35%)camefromUkraineandsocompletedthesurveyintheEnglishlanguage.
On average, it took eight minutes and four seconds to complete the questionnaire. Based
on subjects’ expertise with BPMN and landscapes modeling, subjects were classified
into the following levels of expertise (Table 1): (1) inexperienced - the subjects who
partially or fully disagreed on having any experience in BPMN or landscapes modeling
(inallLikertitems);(2)BPMNexperts-subjectswhopartiallytofullyagreedonhaving
expertise in BPMN (in all Likert items); (3) landscape modeling experts - subjects who
partially to fully agreed on having expertise in landscape modeling (in all Likert items).
Table 1. Descriptive statistics with respect to subjects’ expertise
Expertise Male Female Slovenia Ukraine Total T. [%]
Inexperienced 80 68 102 46 148 49%
BPMN expertise 34 18 44 8 52 17%
Landscape modeling expertise 7 9 10 6 16 5%
All 161 141 197 105 302 100%
AsevidentfromTable1,thesumofalllevelsofexpertisedoesnotmatchallsubjects,
since those subjects who specified ‘undecided’ on their level of expertise were not
classified into any level of expertise.
4.2 Comprehension of Process Landscape Elements
In order to investigate the comprehension of the depictions of common landscape ele-
ments,subjectswereaskedtoassociatethecorrectmeaningtothestatedsymbols,where
they had an additional ‘undecided’ option to answer. In total 291 subjects completely
answered this question, choosing ‘undecided’ at an average of 25% of the answers.
Table 2 summarizes these results by showing the percentage of answers associated with
individualdefinitions.Weboldedthehighest(preferred)valuesforindividualdepictions
and highlighted (in the gray background) the correct definitions (i.e. as specified or use
d in praxis). As evident from Table 2, subjects associated the symbols to the correct
definitions, consistently and at all levels of expertise in the cases of all process elements
(depictions D1, D2, D3, and D5) as well in the cases of ‘data elements’ (depictions D8,
and D9). In the remaining cases, the associations of definitions of the stated symbols
depend on the level of expertise as follows. The rectangle (D4) was recognized either
as a process or as a participant, which may have roots in BPMN’s specification of the
concept of a Pool. A BPMN Pool may either be treated as a participant or as a process
in case it references one.

--- PAGE 229 ---
216 G. Polančič et al.
Table 2. Comprehension of landscape elements

--- PAGE 230 ---
An Empirical Investigation of the Intuitiveness of Process Landscape Designs 217
The symbol for the collapsed processes collection (D6) was correctly identified by
BPMN experts, which may have roots in an analogous representation of a collapsed
BPMN subprocess. Expanded collections of processes (D9 and D10) haven’t been iden-
tified correctly. However, this may have roots in the research instrument since subjects
focused on the relationships between processes present on the collection instead of the
collection itself.
Individuallandscapeelements,aswellastherelationshipsbetweenthem,wereaddi-
tionally investigated by considering contextual information, i.e. by putting elements
into (partial diagrams). Initially, subjects were asked to identify the type of process by
providing them a simple value chain-based landscape diagram (Fig. 3).
Fig. 3. Common depictions of process types in a value chain model
In this case, subjects recognized the core process correctly in 73%, whereas the
supporting process was recognized correctly by 68% of subjects. This is a significant
increase when compared to the individually investigated symbols (17%, Table2, D3). In
thecaseofthemanagementprocess,thesuccessratewas59%,whereasintheindividual
investigation it was 14% (Table 2, D5).
4.3 Comprehension of Between-Processes Relationships
The explicit relationships between processes in a process landscape diagram were
investigated individually and by providing subjects the following two diagrams (Fig. 4).
Fig. 4. Investigation of relationships between processes (part 1, left; part 2, right)

--- PAGE 231 ---
218 G. Polančič et al.
The focus of the left diagram in Fig. 4 was to investigate the relationships between
processes as specified by Eid Sabbagh et al. [31], namely composition, specializa-
tion, trigger, and information flow, with the last two being specified as behavioral ones
(Table3,thehighestvaluesarebolded).Whiletwosymbolsmaysharethesamemeaning
in praxis which stands for ‘symbol overload’ (e.g. solid line and arrow, different types
of arrows), we did specify any correct definitions in this case.
Table 3. Comprehension of explicit relationships
Table 3 reveals that subjects responded the most consistently (in respect to different
levels of expertise) in the case of a conditional trigger relationship (D11), which may be
associated with the intuitiveness of a diamond shape symbol, commonly representing a
decision-point. Information flow (D12) was correctly recognized by experts, which may
be related to the fact that the depiction is equal to BPMN’s message flow. In a similar
manner,the‘generic-specific’relationship(D13)wascorrectlyidentifiedbytheexperts,
whomayhavetheknowledgeeitherofUMLclassdiagramsorArchimate.Thesequential
relationship(D14)wasnotcorrectlyrecognizedbyinexperiencedusers,whereasallother

--- PAGE 232 ---
An Empirical Investigation of the Intuitiveness of Process Landscape Designs 219
expertise levels including all answers inferred the correct meaning. The answers were
also inconsistent in the case of a solid line, whereas the majority of subjects reported as
being a ‘generic-specific’ relationship (i.e. as common in organizational charts).
The focus of the right diagram in Fig. 4 was to investigate the implicit relationships
between processes, which commonly occur on a landscape diagram, especially value-
chain based. In this manner, subjects were asked to specify the relationships between
the processes sharing the same letter and color (Table 4).
Table 4. Comprehension of explicit and implicit relationships
Element set
Sequentially
Parallel
Independ-
ent
Undecided
Valid
Element set
Sequentially
Parallel
Independent
Undecided
Valid
A
I 72% 17% 1% 9% 144
E
9% 61% 16% 14% 144
B 82% 16% 2% 0% 51 8% 75% 14% 4% 51
L 69% 31% 0% 0% 16 6% 63% 19% 13% 16
A 72% 20% 2% 6% 288 10% 63% 17% 11% 288
B
I 78% 6% 6% 10% 144
F
65% 12% 10% 13% 144
B 82% 10% 6% 2% 51 82% 8% 4% 6% 51
L 75% 13% 6% 6% 16 88% 6% 0% 6% 16
A 75% 11% 6% 9% 288 66% 13% 9% 11% 288
C
I 5% 4% 80% 11% 144
G
11% 4% 69% 16% 144
B 2% 4% 92% 2% 51 14% 2% 80% 4% 51
L 6% 6% 88% 0% 16 19% 6% 75% 0% 16
A 5% 5% 81% 9% 288 11% 5% 72% 12% 288
D
I 8% 67% 13% 11% 144
H
77% 3% 2% 17% 144
B 6% 76% 16% 2% 51 94% 0% 4% 2% 51
L 0% 94% 6% 0% 16 81% 0% 13% 6% 16
A 7% 73% 12% 8% 288 79% 4% 4% 13% 288
Expertise: I=inexperienced; B= BPMN expert; L= landscapes modeling expert; A= all subjects.
As evident from Table 4, subjects responded completely consistently in all sets of
related processes (Fig. 4, right) and in all expertise levels. So, we can conclude that
they have no problems identifying sequentially, parallel or independent processes either
connected explicitly with arrows or implicitly by using the mechanism of proximity.
5 Conclusions
Based on the results which were presented and discussed in the previous chapter, we
may provide the answers to the stated research questions as follows.

--- PAGE 233 ---
220 G. Polančič et al.
RQ1: Are common landscape designs semantically transparent to ‘novice users’?
When observing the subgroup of subjects, who did not report any level of expertise in
BPMN and landscapes modeling (Table 1, ‘inexperienced’), we may conclude that they
wereabletosuccessfullyassociatethestateddepictionsofprocesslandscapeelementsto
themeaningstheyshareinthediagrams(Table2),especiallyinthecases,wheresymbols
share the same meaning over different notations (e.g. D7 and D8 in Table 2). They also
successfully recognized all process symbols, especially when considering them in the
context, as summarized in Table 5.
Table 5. Process depictions as recognized by inexperienced users
Symbol
Individual element level 12% 29% 12%
Diagram level (context) 58% 72% 67%
Whencomparingtheresultsofalternativeprocessrepresentations(e.g.D1andD2in
Table 2), subjects reported better in the case of the chevron symbol (D1) despite the fact
D2 is used in a formal specification (ArchiMate). In respect to between-process connec-
tions, the ‘inexperienced’ subgroup of subjects failed to associate the stated depictions
to the proper meanings as used in landscape diagrams (Table 3), despite the fact that
the investigated depictions were put into the context (Fig. 4, left). However, the same
subjectsreportedconsistentlywithexperienceduserswhenidentifyingsequentially,par-
allel or independent processes either connected explicitly with arrows or implicitly by
facilitating the mechanism of proximity between the elements.
RQ2:Howdoesthepreviousknowledgeimpactsthecomprehensionofprocesslandscape
designs?
Two types of previous knowledge were investigated in our research: experiences with
BPMN and experience with landscape modeling (Table 1). The results of our investi-
gation show that by considering previous knowledge subjects responded differently in
several cases when compared to ‘inexperienced’ subgroup of subjects. These were most
evident in the cases of a rectangle (Table 2, D4) and chevron arrow with a plus sign
(Table 2, D6). Table 6 summarizes these by comparing the comprehension of process
landscape elements by considering their definitions as specified or used in praxis.
Besides,theconnectionelements,whichdepictionsaremainlyspecifiedinaconven-
tional way (they do not have any ‘built-in mnemonics’) have reported different compre-
hension levels, when considering different levels of expertise. E.g. in the case of BPMN
experts a dotted arrow was successfully associated with an information flow (in BPMN
it represents a Message flow), whereas they successfully associated solid arrow with a
triggering relationship (in BPMN it represents a Message flow).

--- PAGE 234 ---
An Empirical Investigation of the Intuitiveness of Process Landscape Designs 221
Table 6. Comprehension of landscape elements in respect to levels of expertise
ExperƟse
Process
(chevron)
Process
(ArchiMate)
Support
process
ParƟcipant
Mngm.
process
Process
collecƟon
Database
Document
CollecƟon
(chevron)
CollecƟon
(ArchiMate)
Average
"undecided"
I 29% 18% 12% 27% 12% 5% 59% 85% 1% 4% 27%
L 39% 25% 29% 20% 25% 22% 88% 92% 2% 2% 21%
B 31% 25% 19% 19% 25% 13% 69% 88% 6% 0% 21%
Expertise: I=inexperienced; B= BPMN expert; L= landscapes modeling expert;
5.1 Implications
We foresee several implications of our investigation. First, experts involved in develop-
ingandevolvingprocesslandscapelanguagesmayconsiderourresearchresultstoselect
and/or specify the depictions of elements which are intuitive to modelers. Secondly, the
selection of visual elements for process landscape design should consider related nota-
tions (e.g. BPMN), where elements depictions may already have standardized meanings
and therefore should not be overridden. Our research may also be of use for researchers
who investigate and propose simplifications of complex process languages, as well as
for the ones who extend existing visual languages.
5.2 Research Limitations and Future Work
Theresultsofthisresearchshouldbeconsideredwiththefollowinginternalandexternal
limitations in mind. With respect to the external validity, there is a certain degree of risk
of generalizing results above the research sample. While students reported as not being
skilled in BPMN and landscape modeling languages, another group of subjects could
provide different results (e.g. subjects from another environment could be impacted
by other signs in their everyday life). Besides, the sample of subjects experienced in
landscape design was rather small (16 subjects). Secondly, there is also a certain degree
of risk associated with the instrument, where the subject may not be able to correctly
interpret the depictions as well the semantics of the symbols out of the instructions (e.g.
as in the case of expanded process collections).
Our future work will be focused on specifying a modified landscape modeling nota-
tion,basedontheseresultsandtestiftheresultingdiagramsaremorecognitivelyeffective
when compared to existing ones. Besides, we may extend the research to other regions
to test on how cultural differences may impact the intuitiveness of symbols.
Acknowledgment. The authors (Gregor Polančič) acknowledge the financial support from the
Slovenian Research Agency (research core funding No. P2-0057).

--- PAGE 235 ---
222 G. Polančič et al.
References
1. Dijkman, R., Vanderfeesten, I., Reijers, H.A.: Business process architectures: overview,
comparison and framework. Enterp. Inf. Syst. 10, 129–158 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1080/
17517575.2014.928951
2. Dumas, M., Rosa, M.L., Mendling, J., Reijers, H.: Fundamentals of Business Process
Management. Springer, Heidelberg (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-56509-4
3. Becker, J., Pfeiffer, D., Räckers, M., Fuchs, P.: Business process management in public
administrations-the PICTRUE approach. In: PACIS 2007 Proceedings, p. 142 (2007)
4. Malinova, M., Leopold, H., Mendling, J.: An explorative study for process map design. In:
Nurcan, S., Pimenidis, E. (eds.) CAiSE Forum 2014. LNBIP, vol. 204, pp. 36–51. Springer,
Cham (2015). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-19270-3_3
5. VanNuffel,D.,DeBacker,M.:Multi-abstractionlayeredbusinessprocessmodeling.Comput.
Ind. 63, 131–147 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2011.12.001
6. von Rosing, M., von Scheel, H., Scheer, A.-W.: The Complete Business Process Handbook:
Body of Knowledge from Process Modeling to BPM, Volume I: Body of Knowledge from
Process Modeling to BPM, vol. 1. Morgan Kaufmann, Waltham (2014)
7. Larkin, J.H., Simon, H.A.: Why a diagram is (sometimes) worth ten thousand words. Cogn.
Sci. 11, 65–100 (1987)
8. Siau, K.: Informational and computational equivalence in comparing information modeling
methods. JDM 15, 73–86 (2004). https://doi.org/10.4018/jdm.2004010103
9. Zhang, J., Norman, D.: Representations in distributed cognitive tasks. Cogn. Sci. 18, 87–122
(1994)
10. Gonzalez-Lopez, F., Bustos, G.: Business process architecture design methodologies – a
literature review. Bus. Process Manag. J. (2019). https://doi.org/10.1108/BPMJ-09-2017-
0258
11. Porter, M.E.: Competitive Advantage: Creating and Sustaining Superior Performance. Free
Press; Collier Macmillan, New York, London (1985)
12. Gonzalez-Lopez, F., Pufahl, L.: A landscape for case models. In: Reinhartz-Berger, I.,
Zdravkovic, J., Gulden, J., Schmidt, R. (eds.) BPMDS/EMMSAD -2019. LNBIP, vol. 352,
pp. 87–102. Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-20618-5_6
13. Poels, G., García, F., Ruiz, F., Piattini, M.: Architecting business process maps. Comput. Sci.
Inf. Systems. (2019). https://doi.org/10.2298/csis181118018p
14. Stefanov, V., List, B., Schiefer, J.: Bridging the gap between data warehouses and business
processes:abusinessintelligenceperspectiveforevent-drivenprocesschains.In:NinthIEEE
International EDOC Enterprise Computing Conference, EDOC 2005, pp. 3–14. IEEE (2005)
15. Weske, M.: Business Process Management: Concepts, Languages, Architectures. Springer,
Heidelberg (2019)
16. Dijkman, R., Vanderfeesten, I., Reijers, H.A.: The Road to a Business Process Architec-
ture: An Overview of Approaches and Their Use. Einhoven University of Technology, The
Netherlands (2011)
17. Muehlen, M.Z., Ho, D.T.: Service process innovation: a case study of BPMN in practice. In:
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, Proceedings of the 41st Annual. p. 372
(2008). https://doi.org/10.1109/HICSS.2008.388
18. Polančič, G., Huber, J., Tabares, M.S.: An analysis of BPMN-based approaches for process
landscape design [Elektronski vir]. Presented at the Gregor Polančič, Jernej Huber, Marta S.
Tabares (2017)
19. Malinova, M., Mendling, J.: Why is BPMN not appropriate for Process Maps? In: ICIS 2015
Proceedings. (2015)
20. Chandler, D.: Semiotics: The Basics. Routledge, London; New York (2007)

--- PAGE 236 ---
An Empirical Investigation of the Intuitiveness of Process Landscape Designs 223
21. OMG: Business Process Model and Notation version 2.0, http://www.omg.org/spec/BPMN/
2.0/. Accessed 15 Mar 2011
22. Caire,P.,Genon,N.,Heymans,P.,Moody,D.L.:Visualnotationdesign2.0:towardsusercom-
prehensible requirements engineering notations. In: 2013 21st IEEE International Require-
ments Engineering Conference (RE), pp. 115–124 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1109/RE.2013.
6636711
23. Petre, M.: Why looking isn’t always seeing: readership skills and graphical programming.
Commun. ACM 38, 33–44 (1995). https://doi.org/10.1145/203241.203251
24. Britton, C., Jones, S.: The untrained eye: how languages for software specification support
understanding in untrained users. Hum.-Comput. Interact. 14, 191–244 (1999). https://doi.
org/10.1080/07370024.1999.9667269
25. Britton, C., Jones, S., Kutar, M., Loomes, M., Robinson, B.: Evaluating the intelligibility
of diagrammatic languages used in the specification of software. In: Anderson, M., Cheng,
P., Haarslev, V. (eds.) Diagrams 2000. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 1889, pp. 376–391. Springer,
Heidelberg (2000). https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-44590-0_32
26. Hruby, P.: Structuring specification of business systems with UML (with an emphasis on
workflowmanagementsystems).In:Patel,D.,Sutherland,J.,Miller,J.(eds.)BusinessObject
Design and Implementation II, pp. 77–89. Springer, London (1998). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-1-4471-1286-0_9
27. Neiger, D., Churilov, L., Flitman, A.: Business process modelling with EPCs. In: Neiger,
D., Churilov, L., Flitman, A. (eds.) Value-Focused Business Process Engineering: A Systems
Approach. ISIS, vol. 14, pp. 1–31. Springer, Boston (2009). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-
387-09521-9_5
28. Polančič, G., Šumak, B., Pušnik, M.: A case-based analysis of process modeling for public
administration system design. Inf. Model. Knowl. Bases XXXI 321, 92 (2020)
29. Recker, J.: Continued use of process modeling grammars: the impact of individual difference
factors. Eur. J. Inf. Syst. 19, 76–92 (2010)
30. Christensen, L.B., Johnson, B., Turner, L.A., Christensen, L.B.: Research methods, design,
and analysis (2011)
31. Eid-Sabbagh, R.-H., Dijkman, R., Weske, M.: Business process architecture: use and cor-
rectness. In: Barros, A., Gal, A., Kindler, E. (eds.) BPM 2012. LNCS, vol. 7481, pp. 65–81.
Springer, Heidelberg (2012). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-32885-5_5

--- PAGE 237 ---
Requirements and Method Engineering
(EMMSAD 2020)

--- PAGE 238 ---
A Multi-concern Method for Identifying
Business Services: A Situational Method
Engineering Study
O. Ege Adali(B), Oktay Türetken, Baris Ozkan, Rick Gilsing, and Paul Grefen
Eindhoven University of Technology, De Zaale, 5612 AR Eindhoven, The Netherlands
{o.e.adali,o.turetken,b.ozkan,r.a.m.gilsing,
p.w.p.j.grefen}@tue.nl
Abstract. Business services are offerings that enable organizations to achieve
their strategic objectives by making their functionality accessible to their cus-
tomers and business partners. Thus, organizations pay significant attention to and
invest in the explicit identification and definition of their business services. This
is, however, not a trivial endeavor as multiple concerns that are intrinsic to the
concept of business service should be taken into consideration in identifying ser-
vices. Existing business service identification methods used in isolation do not
offer adequate coverage for these concerns. Addressing this issue, we propose a
novel method assembled by situational method engineering from a set of existing
service identification methods, taking the best aspects from each of them. In this
paper, we present an instantiation of the situational method engineering approach
alongside the details of the constructed method. We also provide a demonstration
of the method with an illustrative scenario based on a real-life business case.
Keywords: Service identification · Method · Situational method engineering
1 Introduction
The most recent business approaches are increasingly shifting their focus away from
goods-thinking to services-thinking [1]. Driven by the influence of digitalization,
increasedconnectivity,andglobaleconomy,theconceptofservicehasbecomecentralto
value-creation [2]. As a result, many organizations are providing services as first-class
standalone offerings in their value propositions, whereas many others are enhancing
their offerings by transforming their products into services through servitization [3].
In this context, one major challenge for such organizations is the identification of
their service offerings. When identifying service offerings, organizations have to deal
with various service provisioning issues, such as determining what can be offered to
whichexistingandpotentialcustomersandbusinesspartners[4–8],alignmentofservice
offerings with the long-term strategic interests of the organization [9], and identification
of business capabilities to provide a specific service offering [10–12]. To address this
broad range of concerns, scholars have proposed the concept of ‘business service’, and
relevant business service identification methods (BSIMs).
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. Nurcan et al. (Eds.): BPMDS 2020/EMMSAD 2020, LNBIP 387, pp. 227–241, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49418-6_15

--- PAGE 239 ---
228 O. Ege Adali et al.
The business service concept is a powerful abstraction that incorporates a number
of design concerns to address service provisioning issues. At the meta-level, BSIMs
provide procedures specifically designed to identify business services while addressing
a number of these design concerns. BSIM procedures focus on a key business artifact
(e.g., a business process, goal, business function, feature) and include a set of activities
that employ this artifact in business service identification [13].
The literature reviews on BSIMs put forward a wide array of design concerns and
investigatetheBSIMsthattheyidentifiedfromvariousperspectives,eachemphasizinga
subset of such design concerns [13]. However, a thorough investigation of these reviews
reveals that, while each BSIM addresses certain design concerns, a BSIM that is driven
by a complete and refined set of reported design concerns is still lacking. Furthermore,
existing BSIMs do not recognize contemporary perspective of markets reflected as the
Service-Dominant (S-D) logic [2]. Therefore, a BSIM driven by both a complete and
refined set of business service concerns and the contemporary business perspective can
help organizations to identify business services that can enable them to better leverage
this concept in addressing service provisioning issues.
In this paper we address this gap by developing a multi-concern business service
identification method –MCBSIM- that covers a wider and more comprehensive selec-
tion of business service design concerns. In developing the MCBSIM, we followed
the situational method engineering (SME) approach as it enables the construction of a
method by assembling existing and reusable method fragments stored in a method base
[14, 15]. In this regard, first, we have defined requirements for the MCBSIM based on
the concerns related to business services and identified and analyzed 47 existing BSIMs
to investigate the extent to which they meet these requirements. Next, we have identified
andintegratedcarefullyselectedpartsofanumberofBISMsintoacoherentmethodthat
meets the requirements set-forth. This paper presents the MCBSIM and demonstrates it
by going through a real-life business scenario.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Sect. 2 introduces the related work on
businessservicesandBSIMs.Section3presentstheresearchdesignforthedevelopment
of the MCBSIM. We describe the MCBSIM and demonstrate its use in the business case
in Sects. 4 and 5, respectively. Finally, Sect. 6 concludes with limitations and future
research directions.
2 Background and Related Work
In this section, we first provide related work on business services and concerns related
to the concept of business service and then, on BSIMs and their shortcomings.
2.1 Business Services
Business services are engineering artifacts designed by service providers with the pur-
pose of achieving their strategic goals [4–6]. In that sense, the design of a business ser-
vice involves bringing specificity to resources which have the potential to be acquired
by specific customers or customer segments [16]. All in all, business services repre-
sent different types of value propositions in the form of offerings that service providers

--- PAGE 240 ---
A Multi-concern Method for Identifying Business Services 229
expose to advertise and manage their resources and interactive processes [11]. As is the
case with the parent term service, the literature provides many different definitions of
the term business service. Each definition caters to a set of design concerns intrinsic to
the context in which the term is used. As a result, this creates an ambiguity surrounding
the term and this ambiguity represents a challenge to the investigation of how business
services are identified and defined. Therefore, as a first step in the purpose of designing
a BSIM, we have studied the definitions of the concept of business service in the schol-
arly literature. These definitions bring together various design concerns related to the
concept.
To discover these associated design concerns -which we will refer to as business
service concerns from this point on-, we conducted a literature review by performing
searches on established scientific databases (Ebsco, ScienceDirect, Scopus Springer-
Link,WebofScience,andWiley)usingthesearchstring“businessservice”.Thisresulted
in an initial set of 104 studies. Next, we applied backward snowballing on these studies
[17]. The main inclusion criterion for selecting studies from the start set was that the
study should propose a definition for the term ‘business service’. We conducted two
iterations and our final list of studies included a total of 16 studies. The references of
these studies can be found in Table 1 below. We extracted each definition introduced by
the aforementioned 16 studies and applied a grounded theory approach [18] to extract
and refine a complete set of business service concerns. Accordingly, we first coded the
business service concerns that each definition adheres to and then translated these into
overarchingthemesbyapplyingaxialcoding[19].Theresultingthemeswiththesources
of definitions is presented in Table 1.
Table 1. Business service concerns
# Business service concern Source(s)
C1 A business service is connected to business goals and objectives [4, 20–24]
C2 A business service offers a business capability [4–7, 10, 11, 25]
C3 A business service encapsulates combinations of basic intangible and
tangible resources
[6, 7, 26]
C4 A business service is customer-facing - external [4–8, 27]
C5 A business service is composed of infrastructure services [5, 7]
C6 A business service has a well-defined interface that explicates to the
service customer how to interact with the business service
[25, 26]
C7 A business service has mechanisms that realize its delivery [7]
C8 A business service shall have a service owner [4–7, 25]
C9 A business service is connected to one or more value propositions [7, 22]
C10 A business service’s temporal and logical dependencies to other
business services is explicitly defined
[5, 7, 28]
C11 All the information regarding a business service is stored in a service
catalogue
[9, 29]

--- PAGE 241 ---
230 O. Ege Adali et al.
2.2 Business Service Identification Methods (BSIMs)
The aim of Business service identification is to identify and define candidate business
services on the basis of business service concept [9]. Since the concept of business
service involves multiple concerns, service identification involves the consideration of
these concerns as well. This requires a systematic method that supports the examination
of organizations from multiple perspectives [13]. In order to address this need, scholars
and practitioners proposed several BSIMs. These methods use different techniques that
involve procedures focusing on a key business artifact (e.g., business processes, goals,
businessfunctions,features)andasetofactivitiesthatemploythisartifactinidentifying
business services [13]. However, reviews conducted on these BSIMs conclude that,
while BSIMs recognize the business service concerns to a certain degree, there is no
consensus on how to deal with multiple business service concerns in a systematic way
[13]. Comparing the previous work on BSIMs, we identified 47 unique BSIMs1 which
populate our method base.
3 Research Design
InthedevelopmentofMCBSIM,weemployedanSMEapproach[14,30].Accordingly,
every SME process includes two main tasks: setting the method engineering goal and
constructing a method that meets this goal [14]. Below we elaborate on each task.
3.1 Setting the Method Engineering Goal
Aligned with the most contemporary perspective to marketing S-D logic [2] we define
the context of our project as “identification of business services for a service provider
making a value proposition to a business network to co-create value with other actors
in the same network”. Furthermore, the service provider’s major concern is to leverage
the business service concept to the fullest in terms of addressing 11 business service
concerns.Inthelightofthiscontextinformation,ananalysisofourmethodbaserevealed
that the present methods provided method chunks to perform certain aspects of business
service identification aligned with our context such as consideration of network or value
propositions during identification. Additionally, we observed the existence of at least
one method that adheres to a specific business service concern. Therefore, we decided
to follow a method driven strategy and set our method engineering goal as “assembling
a new method by re-using the method chunks of existing BSIMs”.
3.2 Construction of the Method
In line with our goal, we followed an assembly-based method engineering strategy
described in [30]. The process for this strategy consists of three steps: specification of
method requirements, selection of method chunks, and assembly of method chunks.
Below we elaborate on each step.
1 Please visit the following link for the method base: https://sites.google.com/view/bsimbase/.

--- PAGE 242 ---
A Multi-concern Method for Identifying Business Services 231
Specification of Method Requirements
For this stage we followed the process driven strategy as our goal was to construct a new
method[30].Accordingly,wefirstdeterminedourmethodengineeringintentions(MEIs)
as shown in Table 2. These intentions were directly elicited from the characteristics of
the method context described in Sect. 3.1.
Table 2. Method engineering intentions
# Method intention
MEI1 The method should identify business service(s) that comply with 11 business service
concerns
MEI2 The method should target a focal business unit (FBU) to specify business service(s)
MEI3 The method should identify business services based on a value proposition of the FBU
MEI4 The method should be applied in a business network consisting of actors defined in the
value proposition
To realize our MEIs, we developed a strategy driven requirements map (Fig. 1)
as described in [30]. This map was based on the most comprehensive BSIM [31] in
our method base. Each meta-step (MS) of the map and the business service concern it
complies with are shown in Fig. 1 as well. The meta-steps MS3 and MS5 were already
present in the BSIM and were directly carried over to the map. To comply with C9,
we added MS1 which simply involves selecting a value proposition. Furthermore, we
addedMS2tocomplywithC4andC8andMS4tocomplywithC1andC10.Thearrows
in the map represent strategies, each satisfying the objective of the MS connected to
the arrowheads. Accordingly, the initial strategy: “Value proposition driven strategy”
simplyinvolvesselectingavaluepropositionandtheterminatingstrategy“Completeness
strategy”involvesidentificationofallbusinessservicesfortheselectedvalueproposition.
Theremainingstrategies(S1-4)representplaceholdersforspecificmethodchunks.What
S1–S4 entail and how method chunks were selected for them are explained in the next
step.
Selection of Method Chunks
As indicated in Fig. 1, our method selection was targeted at finding suitable method
chunks for strategies S1-4. For selecting the chunks, we extensively used the MEIs and
based on them we developed the following queries for each strategy:
– S1: Application domain = ‘Information Systems’ & Design activity = ‘Model the
ValueCo-CreationContext’&Situation=‘BusinessServices’&Intention=‘Identify
goal dependencies between actors’
– S2: Application domain = ‘Information Systems’ & Design activity = ‘Capture the
Core Business’ & Situation = ‘Business Services’ & Intention = ‘Map business
capabilities of the focal business unit’
– S3: Application domain = ‘Information Systems’ & Design activity = ‘Relate the
Core Business to the Value Creation Context’ & Situation = ‘Business Services’ &

--- PAGE 243 ---
232 O. Ege Adali et al.
Start
Select a Value
Proposi on
Model the
Value Co-
Crea on
Context
Capture the
Core Business
Specify
Business
Services
Stop
S1
S2
S4
Relate the Core
Business to the
Value Crea on
Context
S3
Value
proposi on
driven
strategy
Completeness
strategy
Complies with:
C9 Complies with:
C4, C8
Complies with:
C2, C3, C4, C5, C7, C8
Complies with:
C1, C10
Complies with:
C6, C11
Fig. 1. The requirements map
Intention = ‘Map business capabilities of the focal business unit to goals of the value
creation actors’
– S4: Application domain = ‘Information Systems’ & Design activity = ‘Design Ser-
vice Specifications’ & Situation = ‘Business Services’ & Intention = ‘Create service
specifications’
Each BSIM residing in our method base is labeled with specific tags indicating its
domains, design activity, situation and intention. Therefore, we utilized these tags for
querying the method chunks meeting the requirements of each strategy. Our queries
resulted in selection of a total of 13 method chunks (MCs). The resulting set of MCs for
each query is given in Table 3.
Assembly of Method Chunks
We followed the association strategy at this stage as our selected method chunks each
correspondedtoadifferentfunctionality[30].Accordingly,welookedformethodchunks
which can be bridged together through their input and output products. This means, the
output product of the first chunk in line should be the input product of the following
chunk and so on. The input and output products of each method chunk are given in
Table 3. Apart from the match between input and output products the assembled set of
methods should also comply with all of the strategies S1-4.
In terms of complying with strategies, S3 demands MC3: Capability Modeling
method chunk. Considering the fact that MC3 is a must-have method chunk, the method
chunksthatarebothcoveringS1andcompatiblewithMC3areMC1:i*StrategicDepen-
dency Modelling and MC11: Goal and Scenario Modelling. In terms of covering S1 and
being compatible with MC3, MC8: Business Service Specification stands out from the
crowdastheonlyoption(asMC2:P2S’inputproductdoesnotmatchwithMC3’soutput
product). Overall, our final assembly consists of method chunks MC1, MC3 and MC8
and explained in the next section.

--- PAGE 244 ---
A Multi-concern Method for Identifying Business Services 233
Table 3. Selected method chunks
MC # Method chunk Input Output S1 S2 S3 S4
MC1 i* Strategic
Dependency
Modelling [32–35]
Stakeholders and
Their Objectives
Goal Model
including Goals and
Means (Tasks)
x x
MC2 P2S (from process to
services) [36]
Business Process
Models
Service
Specifications
x
MC3 Capability Modeling
[31, 35]
Business Tasks Capability
Model/Map
x x
MC4 Enterprise Business
Modeling (Input
Process and Entity
Models) [37]
Business Process
Models
Service Model
(Object diagram)
x x
MC5 Intention – Strategy
Map [38]
Business Goals Intention – Strategy
Model
x
MC6 Business Process
Decomposition with
Activity clustering
[39]
Business Use Cases Activity Clusters x
MC7 Functional
Decomposition with
Visibility and
Takeover [40]
Business Process
Models
Activity Clusters
with Associated
Actors
x x
MC8 Business Service
specification [31]
Capability
Model/Map
Business Service
Specification
x
MC9 Enterprise modeling
with financial
network modeling
[41]
Business Process
Models
Activity Clusters x x
MC10 Feature and Feature
Binding analyses [42]
Features Feature Model x
MC11 Goal and Scenario
Methodology [43,
44]
Business Goals Goal and Task Model x
MC12 A Service Model
Design Based on Use
Case [45]
Business Use Cases Activity Clusters x
MC13 Inter-Enterprise
Business Process
Modeling [46]
Business Process
Models
Inter- Enterprise
Business Process
Models
x

--- PAGE 245 ---
234 O. Ege Adali et al.
4 MCBSIM
The method, which consists of four main steps as presented in Fig. 2, has been designed
to be used in a context where a focal business unit (FBU) makes a value proposition to
co-create value with the actors (including customers and other stakeholders) in a certain
context. Accordingly, the initial input for the method is a value proposition that the FBU
aims to make in a certain value co-creation context.
1. Model the Value Co-
Crea on Context in
terms of Goals and
Means
Value
Proposi on
2. Capture the Core
Business Capabili es
Goals and
Means
3. Relate the Core
Business Capabili es to
the Value Crea on
Context
Capability
Map
4. Create
Service Concepts
Goal
Capability
Matching
Business
Service
Specifica on(s)
Fig. 2. MCBSIM
In Step 1, the objective is to model the value co-creation context in terms of deter-
mining goals and means dependencies between the value co-creation actors. The chosen
method chunk for carrying out this step MC1: i* Strategic Dependency Model [47] that
supports four main modelling concepts:
• Actor: A business role (e.g., organization and customer) that carries out actions to
achieve goals by exercising its knowhow. We refer to an actor as a Value Co-creation
Actor in this body of work.
• Goal: A desirable business state an actor aims to reach or sustain.
• Means: A concrete course of action (task) taken to accomplish goals. The realization
of a means is under the control of the actor who proposes (owns) the means.
• Dependency: A link between two actors indicating that one actor (depender) depends
on the other (dependee) for something in order that the former may attain some goal.
Two types of dependencies are considered:
– Goal Dependency: The depender depends on the dependee to bring about a certain
state in the world. The dependee is given the freedom to choose how to do it.
– Means or Task-dependency: The depender depends on the dependee to carry out an
activity. A task dependency specifies how the task is to be performed, but not why.
The output of this step is a set of goal models: a generic model of the whole context, and
goal models focusing on one-to-one goals and means dependencies between the FBU
and each party in the context. It should be noted that the goal models are relative to the
value co-creation context.
In Step 2, the main objective is to focus on the FBU and determine the business
capabilities of the FBU, which contribute in making the selected value proposition.

--- PAGE 246 ---
A Multi-concern Method for Identifying Business Services 235
Various definitions of capabilities exist in the literature [48], however, we adopted the
definition provided in [49] as it is a synthesis of the definitions provided in the literature.
Accordingly, a capability (1) is possessed by a resource or resource groups of resources
(tangible and intangible), (2) is the potential for action via a process, and (3) produces
a value for a customer (internal/external).
To capture such capabilities,we used thetemplate given inFig. 5which was adapted
from [49]. The method chunk for carrying out this step MC8: Capability Modeling [31]
captures capabilities by defining service domains and identifying capabilities that exist
in a specific service domain [31]. A service domain is described as a sphere of control
that contains a collection of service operations to achieve related goals [31]. The service
operations are the activities that are carried out within the service domain to interact
with other service domains [50].
In Step 3, the main objective is to determine the capabilities that enable the achieve-
ment of identified goals and means. As described in MC8: Capability Modeling [31],
the focus of the determination activity is to match the delivered business outcome of
each capability with one or more goals and processes (or activities in the processes)
to the means. After the matching, the capabilities that are necessary to make the value
proposition are identified. These capabilities are the main output of this stage.
In Step 4, the achieved outputs are combined and processed for specification of
the business services as described in MC8: Business Service Specification [31]. For
specification, we used the template given in Fig. 7 which was designed in accordance
with 11 business service concerns. As depicted in template, a business service specifi-
cation involves a set of business service attributes, such as the capability, owner, service
operations, used resources, etc.
5 Demonstration
In this section, we demonstrate the utility of our method by applying it in an illustrative
scenario that is based on a real-life business case. The scenario depicts the case for
a new urban bike sharing business model. We omit the names of the organizations in
the scenario to keep their anonymity. In the selected business model, there are four
actors: traveler (e.g., tourists, students, employees), bike sharing service provider, bike
maintenance provider, and the local municipality. The co-created value proposed for the
traveler is flexible and comfortable travelling experience via cycling around the city.
Thus, the value to be co-created with the business model encapsulates high availability
andwidespreadcoverageofbicycleswithinthecity.Thisshouldallowtraveler,whenever
s/he desires, to take a bicycle and travel around the city. The traveler is not concerned
with managing or maintaining the bicycle and can store the bicycle at any available slot
at a parking station. As such, flexibility and comfort should be granted to the travelers.
How each actor contributes to the value co-creation is described below:
Traveler-being the customer-contributes to the value co-creation through providing
data on the usage of the service. Therefore, the value proposition of the traveler is pro-
file data and data about service-use. Bike Sharing Service Provider contributes to the
value co-creation by providing the facilities for bike sharing. As such, it is responsi-
ble for establishing the infrastructure for the bicycles, the software system to operate

--- PAGE 247 ---
236 O. Ege Adali et al.
and use the bicycles, as well as the IT system to interact with users. Bike Sharing Ser-
vice Provider is the focal business unit (FBU) of the business case. Bike Maintenance
Provider contributes to the value co-creation by ensuring that bikes are in good condi-
tions and available for travelers wherever and whenever they desire. Local Municipality
contributestothevalueco-creationbyprovidingeitherthelegal,financialoroperational
support.
In step 1, we regarded the value co-creation contribution of each actor (except the
customer) as that actor’s motivations and interests [47] and iteratively dissected these
contributionsintogoalsandmeans.Ontheotherhand,thegoal(s)andthesinglemeanof
the customer were defined by dissecting the main characteristic of the co-created value
whichisflexibletravel.Forspaceconsiderations,weonlyprovidethegoalmodel(Fig.3)
that depicts the goals and means dependencies between the FBU (service provider) and
customer (traveler).
Traveler
The travel shall
be flexible
Bike shall
always be at a
good state
Bike Loca on
Informa on shall
be available
Bike shall be
locked/unlocked
Bike shall be
dropped at the
drop-oﬀ point
Get a
bike
Bike shall be
available
Bike
Sharing
Service
Provider
Informa on about
bike drop-oﬀ point
shall be available
Oﬀer Bike
Travelers shall be
given bikes
Oﬀer bike
availability
indica ons
Oﬀer bike
locking/unlocking
Track bike
loca ons
Oﬀer bike
drop-oﬀ
points
Bike loca ons shall be
tracked
Bike shall be
maintained
Bike availability
informa on shall be
available
Bikes shall be locked
with smart locks
Bike
Maintena
-nce
Provider
CG1
CG1.1
CG1.2
CG1.3
CG1.4
CG1.5
BSG1
BSG2
BSG3
BSG4
BSG5
BSG6
Fig. 3. i* goal model for value co-creation context (between service provider and traveler)
In step 2, we determined the service domains and service operations of the FBU
based on the means of the FBU defined in goal models. Then, we matched these service
operations to an already existing list of business capabilities of the FBU which are
shown in Fig. 4. Furthermore, we re-defined each capability in detail according to our
template. Figure 5 presents an example that depicts a specification for the capability
“bike lending”.
Instep3,weexplicitlylinkedthecapabilitiesthatenabletheFBUtoachievethegoals
defined in Step 1. Then, we examined the linked capabilities against 11 business service
concerns to identify capabilities that can be business service candidates. This resulted in
selection of the set of capabilities: Bike Lending and Traveler Guidance (as depicted in
Fig. 6). The capability: Service Platform Management is an enabling capability for the
other capabilities, and it is not provided to the value co-creation context (i.e. does not
comply with concern C4), therefore, is not a candidate business service. Furthermore,
the capabilities Bike Maintenance and Accident Handling are partner capabilities that
do not belong to the FBU.

--- PAGE 248 ---
A Multi-concern Method for Identifying Business Services 237
Capabili es
Bike Pick-up Unlock Bike
Start Session X
Bike Commute Track Travel
Handle Bike Failure X
Handle Accident X
Bike Drop-oﬀ Lock Bike
End Session
Traveler Guidance Suggest Station
Share Avail. Information
Bike Availability Maintain Bikes (Predictive) X
Platform Management Manage Data
Secure Platform X
Analyze Data X
Provide Analytics
Service Opera ons
Service Domains
Fig. 4. Service domains and business capabilities
Fig. 5. Business capability specification for bike lending
Primary Capability 1:
Bike Lending
Partner Capability 5:
Accident Handling
Primary Capability 2:
Traveler Guidance
Partner Capability 3:
Bike Maintenance
Enabling Capability 4:
Service Platform
Management
Information about
bike drop-off point
shall be available
Travelers shall be
given bikes
Bike locations shall be
tracked
Bikes shall be
maintained
Bike availability
information shall be
available
Bikes shall be locked
with smart locks
BSG1
BSG2 BSG3
BSG5 BSG6
BSG4
Fig. 6. Relationship between capabilities and goals

--- PAGE 249 ---
238 O. Ege Adali et al.
In step 4, we specified two business services for 2 FBU capabilities: Bike Lending
and Traveler Guidance by bringing together all the entities and properties of a business
service as defined by our 11 business service concerns. A specification for the Bike
Lending business service is presented in Fig. 7.
Fig. 7. Business service specification for bike lending
6 Conclusion, Limitations and Future Work
In this paper, we present a method for the identification of business services. The main
objective of the proposed method is to cover the concerns that relate to the design of
business services during their identification. To achieve this objective, we identified
the business service concerns and followed an SME approach to develop the method.
In terms of the followed SME approach, we transformed business service concerns
into method building objectives, identified method chunks realizing these objectives
from a method-base of 47 methods, and assembled the identified method chunks into
a procedural method. Furthermore, we demonstrated the method with an illustrative
scenario based on a real-life business case.
Business service concept is a powerful abstraction to determine the service offerings
of organizations. However, fully leveraging this abstraction requires recognition of the
concernsaffiliatedwithit.Incomparison,theproposedmethodrecognizesandleverages
the business service concept better than previously proposed methods. It yields business
servicesthataretruetotheirintendedformandpurposebybuildingoncarefullyselected
method chunks each adhering to aspecific concern affiliated tothe business service con-
cept. Furthermore, previously proposed methods are disconnected from the contempo-
rary perspective of markets that is conceptualized as the Service-Dominant (S-D) logic
[2]. The proposed method takes the central theme of S-D logic -value co-creation- as its
context to better align with the views of modern business.

--- PAGE 250 ---
A Multi-concern Method for Identifying Business Services 239
This study is subject to potential limitations mainly due to the strategy used to
demonstrate the utility of the proposed method. A demonstration with an illustrative
scenario is usually tailored to an ideal context and thus, is highly prone to hinder the
discovery of issues that might result from the use of the artifact at hand in a real setting
or context [51]. Since the proposed method and particularly its steps are highly rooted
in academic literature –mainly in the form of business service concerns and existing
BSIMs-, its effects on a real-world situation are yet to be discovered. Therefore, as
future work, the method can be applied in a number of real-life scenarios in the form
of case studies, and its utility and validity can be further evaluated using qualitative
research methods that involve the practitioners as users of the method. Accordingly, the
methodcanbeimprovedandfinetunedtoaddressanypotentialshortcomingsdiscovered
in these evaluations.
References
1. Plugge, A., Janssen, M.: Exploring determinants influencing a service-oriented enterprise
strategy: an executive management view BT - digital services and platforms. Considerations
for Sourcing, pp. 35–55 (2019)
2. Vargo, S.L., Lusch, R.F.: Evolving to a new dominant logic for marketing. J. Mark. 68(1),
1–17 (2004)
3. Wolfson, A., Dominguez-Ramos, A., Irabien, A.: From goods to services: the life cycle
assessment perspective. J. Serv. Sci. Res. 11(1), 17–45 (2019)
4. Cherbakov, L., Galambos, G., Harishankar, R., Kalyana, S., Rackham, G.: Impact of service
orientation at the business level. IBM Syst. J. 44(4), 653–668 (2005)
5. Sanz, J., Nayak, N., Becker, V.: Business services as a modeling approach for smart business
networks (2006)
6. Tohidi, H.: Modelling of business services in service oriented enterprises. Procedia Comput.
Sci. 3, 1147–1156 (2011)
7. Flaxer, D., Nigam, A.: Realizing business components, business operations and business
services. In: IEEE International Conference on E-Commerce Technology for Dynamic E-
Business, pp. 328–332 (2004)
8. Brocke, H., Uebernickel, F., Brenner, W.: A methodical procedure for designing consumer
oriented on-demand IT service propositions. Inf. Syst. E-bus. Manag. 9(2), 283–302 (2011)
9. Arsanjani,A.,Ghosh,S.,Allam,A.,Abdollah,T.,Ganapathy,S.,Holley,K.:SOMA:amethod
for developing service-oriented solutions. IBM Syst. J. 47(3), 377–396 (2008)
10. Lusch, R.F., Nambisan, S.: Service innovation in the digital age service innovation: a service-
dominant logic perspective. MIS Q. 39(1), 155–176 (2015)
11. Turetken, O., Grefen, P., Gilsing, R., Adali, O.E.: Service-dominant business model design
for digital innovation in smart mobility. Bus. Inf. Syst. Eng. 61(1), 9–29 (2019)
12. Suratno, B., Ozkan, B., Turetken, O., Grefen, P.: A method for operationalizing service-
dominant business models into conceptual process models. In: Shishkov, B. (ed.) BMSD
2018. LNBIP, vol. 319, pp. 133–148. Springer, Heidelberg (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-319-94214-8_9
13. Huergo, R.S., Pires, P.F., Delicato, F.C., Costa, B., Cavalcante, E., Batista, T.: A systematic
survey of service identification methods. Serv. Oriented Comput. Appl. 8(3), 199–219 (2014)
14. Ralyte, J., Deneckere, R., Rolland, C.: Towards a generic model for situational method engi-
neering.In:Eder,J.,Missikoff,M.(eds.)CAiSE2003.LNCS,vol.2681,pp.95–110.Springer,
Heidelberg (2003). https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-45017-3_9

--- PAGE 251 ---
240 O. Ege Adali et al.
15. Iacovelli, A., Souveyet, C., Rolland, C.: Method as a Service (MaaS). In: 2008 Second
InternationalConferenceonResearchChallengesinInformationScience,pp.371–380(2008)
16. Arnould, E.J.: Service-dominant logic and resource theory. J. Acad. Mark. Sci. 36(1), 21–24
(2008)
17. Wohlin, C.: Guidelines for snowballing in systematic literature studies and a replication in
softwareengineering.In:Proceedingsofthe18thInternationalConferenceonEvaluationand
Assessment in Software Engineering, pp. 38:1–38:10 (2014)
18. Corbin, J., Strauss, A.: Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Procedures for
Developing Grounded Theory, 3rd edn. Thousand Oaks, California (2008)
19. Charmaz, K.: The search for meanings - grounded theory. In: Rethinking Methods in
Psychology, pp. 27–49. Sage Publications, London (1996)
20. Estrada, H.: A service-oriented approach for the i* framework. Universidad Politecnica de
Valencia (2008)
21. Flaxer, D., Nigam, A., Vergo, J.: Using component business modeling to facilitate business
enterprise architecture and business services at the US Department of Defense. In: IEEE
International Conference on e-Business Engineering (ICEBE 2005), pp. 755–760 (2005)
22. Nayak,N.,Nigam,A.,Sanz,J.,Marston,D.,Flaxer,D.:Conceptsforservice-orientedbusiness
thinking.In:Proceedings-2006IEEEInternationalConferenceonServicesComputing,SCC
2006, pp. 357–364 (2006)
23. Tians, C., Ding, W., Cao, R., Lee, J.: Business componentization: a guidance to application
service design. In: Min Tjoa, A., Xu, L., Chaudhry, S.S. (eds.) Research and Practical Issues
of Enterprise Information Systems, pp. 97–107. Springer US, Boston (2006). https://doi.org/
10.1007/0-387-34456-x_10
24. Sanz, J., et al.: Business services and business componentization: new gaps between business
and IT. In: IEEE International Conference on Service-Oriented Computing and Applications
(SOCA 2007), pp. 271–278 (2007)
25. Estrada, H., Martínez, A., Santilí An, L.C., Erez, J.: A new service-based approach for
enterprise modeling (2013)
26. Karakostas, B., Zorgios, Y., Alevizos, C.C.: The semantics of business service orchestration.
In:Eder,J.,Dustdar,S.(eds.)BPM2006.LNCS,vol.4103,pp.435–446.Springer,Heidelberg
(2006). https://doi.org/10.1007/11837862_41
27. Cartlidge,A.,Hanna,A.,Rudd,C.,Macfarlane,I.,Windebank,J.,Rance,S.:Anintroductory
overview of ITIL V3 (2007)
28. Böttcher, M., Klingner, S.: Providing a method for composing modular B2B services. J. Bus.
Ind. Mark. 26(5), 320–331 (2011)
29. Kohlborn,T.,Fielt,E.,Korthaus,A.,Rosemann,M.:Towardsaserviceportfoliomanagement
framework. In: Proceedings of 20th Australasian Conference on Information Systems, pp. 1–
12 (2009)
30. Ralyté, J., Rolland, C.: An assembly process model for method engineering. In: Dittrich,
K.R.,Geppert,A.,Norrie,M.C.(eds.)CAiSE2001.LNCS,vol.2068,pp.267–283.Springer,
Heidelberg (2001). https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-45341-5_18
31. Kohlborn, T., Korthaus, A., Chan, T., Rosemann, M.: Identification and analysis of business
andsoftwareservices-aconsolidatedapproach.IEEETrans.Serv.Comput.2(1),50–64(2009)
32. Andersson, B., Johannesson, P., Zdravkovic, J.: Aligning goals and services through goal and
business modelling. Inf. Syst. E-bus. Manag. 7(2), 143–169 (2009)
33. Ramel, S., Grandry, E., Dubois, E.: Towards a design method supporting the alignment
between business and services software. In: Proceedings - International Computer Software
and Applications Conference, vol. 1, pp. 349–354 (2009)
34. Lo,A.,Yu,E.:Frombusinessmodelstoservice-orienteddesign:areferencecatalogapproach.
In:Parent,C.,Schewe,K.D.,Storey,V.C.,Thalheim,B.(eds.)ER2007,vol.4801,pp.87–101.
Springer, Heidelberg (2007). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-75563-0_8

--- PAGE 252 ---
A Multi-concern Method for Identifying Business Services 241
35. Grandry,E.,Dubois,E.,Picard,M.,Rifaut,A.:Managingthealignmentbetweenbusinessand
software services requirements from a capability model perspective. In: Mähönen, P., Pohl,
K., Priol, T. (eds.) ServiceWave 2008. LNCS, vol. 5377, pp. 171–182. Springer, Heidelberg
(2008). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-89897-9_15
36. Bianchini,D.,Cappiello,C.,DeAntonellis,V.,Pernici,B.:P2S:amethodologytoenableinter-
organizational process design through web services. In: van Eck, P., Gordijn, J., Wieringa,
R. (eds.) CAiSE 2009. LNCS, vol. 5565. LNCS, pp. 334–348. Springer, Heidelberg (2009).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-02144-2_28
37. Jamshidi, P., Sharifi, M., Mansour, S.: To establish enterprise service model from enter-
prise business model. In: Proceedings of 2008 IEEE International Conference on Services
Computing, SCC 2008, vol. 1, pp. 93–100 (2008)
38. Kaabi,R.S.,Souveyet,C.,Rolland,C.:Elicitingservicecompositioninagoaldrivenmanner.
In:Proceedingsofthe2ndInternationalConferenceonServiceOrientedComputing-ICSOC
2004, p. 308 (2004)
39. Kim, Y., Doh, K.: The service modeling process based on use case refactoring. In: Abramow-
icz, W. (eds.) BIS 2007. LNCS, vol. 4439, pp. 108–120. Springer, Heidelberg (2007). https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-72035-5_9
40. Klose, K., Knackstedt, R., Beverungen, D.: Identification of services - a stakeholder-based
approach to SOA development and its application in the area of production planning. In:
ECIS, no. 2007, pp. 1802–1814 (2007)
41. Kohlmann, F., Alt, R.: Business-driven service modeling - a methodological approach from
the finance industry. In: Sabre 2007, pp. 1–14 (2007)
42. Lee, J., Muthig, D., Naab, M.: An approach for developing service oriented product lines. In:
2008 12th International Software Product Line Conference, pp. 275–284 (2008)
43. Lee, J., Sugumaran, V., Park, S., Sansi, D.: An approach for service identification using value
co-creation and IT convergence. In: Proceedings of 1st ACIS/JNU International Conference
on Computers, Networks, Systems, and Industrial Engineering, CNSI 2011, pp. 441–446
(2011)
44. Suntae, K., Minseong, K., Sooyong, P.: Service identification using goal and scenario in
service oriented architecture. Neonatal. Paediatr. Child Heal. Nurs. 419–426 (2008)
45. Si, H., Ni, Y., Yu, L., Chen, Z.: A service-oriented analysis and modeling using use case app-
roach. In: Proceedings of 2009 International Conference Computational Intelligent Software
Engineering, CiSE 2009, no. 60773163 (2009)
46. Wang,Z.,Xu,X.,Zhan,D.:Normalformsandnormalizeddesignmethodforbusinessservice.
In: IEEE International Conference on e-Business Engineering (ICEBE 2005), pp. 79–86
(2005)
47. Yu, E.: Modelling strategic relationships for process reengineering (1995)
48. Offerman, T., Stettina, C.J., Plaat, A.: Business capabilities: a systematic literature review
and a research agenda. In: 2017 International Conference on Engineering, Technology and
Innovation (ICE/ITMC) (2017)
49. Michell, V.: A Focused Approach to Business Capability, no. Bmsd, pp. 105–113 (2013)
50. Grefen, P., Turetken, O., Traganos, K., den Hollander, A., Eshuis, R.: Creating agility in
traffic management by collaborative service-dominant business engineering. In: Camarinha-
Matos, L., Bénaben, F., Picard, W. (eds.) PRO-VE 2015, IFIP Advances in Information and
Communication Technology, vol. 463, pp. 100–109. Springer, Heidelberg (2015). https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-319-24141-8_9
51. Peffers, K., Rothenberger, M., Tuunanen, T., Vaezi, R.: Design science research evaluation.
In: Design Science Research in Information Systems. Advances in Theory and Practice,
pp. 398–410 (2012)

--- PAGE 253 ---
Modeling Complex Business
Environments for Context Aware Systems
P. M. Singh(B)
, L. P. Veelenturf, and T. van Woensel
OPAC Research Group, Department of IE&IS,
Eindhoven University of Technology,
Eindhoven, The Netherlands
{p.m.singh,l.p.veelenturf,t.v.woensel}@tue.nl
Abstract. Context awareness in complex business environments has
been recognized as a major challenge for enterprise information systems.
Although, the development of a context aware system in diﬀerent applica-
tion domains is convincingly documented in current literature, the design
of such systems requires greater attention. Particularly, investigating the
context of a context aware system. In this paper, we present a step-wise
method to model a complex business environment. The method pro-
vides an approach for investigating a context and using the investigation
results in subsequent design steps.
Keywords: Context aware · Business environment · System design ·
Complexity
1 Introduction
Advances in Information Technology (IT) have changed the nature of business
environments. Today, business entities exist and work in an environment where
they are interdependent and co-create value [1]. Some characteristics of such a
business environment are, intricate value exchanges, a dynamic market, innova-
tive products/services and loose customer loyalties.
By leveraging the advances in IT and computing capabilities, business enti-
ties adapt and customize their products/services to better align with customers’
needs. In other words, they strive to provide context-aware products/services.
Providing context aware services is no trivial task, particularly in today’s busi-
ness environments. Consequently, “How to oﬀer contextual capabilities in com-
plex business environments?”, is one of the four major challenges for Information
Systems researchers highlighted by Kadiri et al. in [2]. In the same article, as a
suggestion for future research, Kadiri et al. noted that “Context models for com-
plex enterprise applications.... are not being addressed in the research community
so far”. Similar observations have been made by Hong et al. in [3].
Contextual data is necessary to provide context aware products/services.
However, the extraction of (relevant) contextual data in complex business envi-
ronments require proper understanding of the environment [4]. In this paper, we
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. Nurcan et al. (Eds.): BPMDS 2020/EMMSAD 2020, LNBIP 387, pp. 242–256, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49418-6_16

--- PAGE 254 ---
Modeling Complex Business Environments for Context Aware Systems 243
present a step-wise method to model complex business environments. Thus, our
method will help system designers in the design of context aware systems.
In Sect.2, Background, we clarify our understanding of a complex business
environment. We also highlight the challenges presented by complex business
environments for context aware services/products. Thereafter, in Sect.3, we
present our method which is divided in three phases, Motivation Modeling, Use
Case Modeling and Situation Modeling. Section4, illustrates our method using
the case of Janssen Transport b.v, a transport company. The company desires
dynamic routing of its trucks to provide context aware transportation services.
Section5 is the discussion section which provides a reﬂection over our proposed
method. Finally, Sect.6 concludes the paper and highlights the main takeaways.
2 Background
2.1 Context-Aware Systems
Context aware systems gather and analyze (relevant) contextual data, thereby
aiding a business entity to provide context aware services [4]. Using such systems
the business entity can adapt, modify, update or even change its products/ser-
vices & underlying processes. Context aware systems are being developed and
used in various application domains including; health-care [5], disaster manage-
ment [6] and smart cities [7].
2.2 Complex Business Environments
According to Chen et al. [8] complexity in an industry, corresponds to the num-
ber, multiplicity and distribution of external factors. Thus, it refers to the het-
erogeneity and concentration of businesses within an industry. Based on their
study of 746 business entities, they concluded that as the complexity of a busi-
ness environment increases, it becomes increasingly diﬃcult for managers to
make strategic decisions. Saleh and Watson [9] in their study of VUCA1
business
environments, deﬁne complexity as, the interconnected parts, networks and pro-
cedures within the organization and within the external business environment.
Both studies discussed above, approach business complexity from a rather, wide
perspective. While Chen et al. discuss complexity of industries as a whole, e.g.,
the air conditioning (manufacturing) industry, steel industry; Saleh & Watson
discuss complexity w.r.t long term strategic decision making.
Our understanding of business complexity, relevant for context aware ser-
vices, is complexity at the operational, business process level. It is aligned to
Vaconselos and Ramirez’s [10] concept of natural complexity. According to them
there are two types of complexities;
1. algorithmic complexity - the diﬃculty in solving a given, well-deﬁned, prob-
lem.
1
volatile, uncertain, complex and ambiguous.

--- PAGE 255 ---
244 P. M. Singh et al.
2. natural complexity - characterized by no unique solution since the solution
depends on the interpretation of the problem.
An example of algorithmic complexity is, to ﬁnd all words in a dictionary
which start with ‘q’ and end with ‘t’. An example of a natural complexity is,
say, to ﬁnd all words in a dictionary which a child can easily read. The correct
answer to the ﬁrst example is unique, a ﬁxed list of words, irrespective of who
searches for the words. However, there is no one correct answer for the second
example. The list of words, in this case, depends on interpretations like, who is a
child? what does easily read mean? For distinction between the two complexities,
Vascocelos & Ramirez call algorithmic complexity as complication and natural
complexity as complexity.
From the perspective of context aware services, a complex business environ-
ment is one where interpreting the system’s context, is a complex problem and
cannot be achieved with certainty. Moreover, determining/computing the appro-
priate response based on contextual event(s) might involve high complication.
The above discussion leads us to divide business environments into four broad
categories as shown in Fig.1. By proposing a method in this paper, our goal is to
aid system designers in the interpretation of Category II and IV environments.
Fig.1. Diﬀerent business environments along with context interpretation and response
computation in each of them. Text in blue indicates the focus of this paper. (Color ﬁgure
online)
3 Method
This section presents our method for modeling complex business environments.
Using our method, situation of interest for a context aware system can be inter-
preted and modeled. The method has three sequential phases, i.e., Motivation
Modeling, Use-case Modeling and Situation Modeling. With each phase the level
of detail about the system’s context increases, thereby enabling its interpreta-
tion. We have designed the method based on our experiences in diﬀerent research
projects aimed at designing context aware systems.

--- PAGE 256 ---
Modeling Complex Business Environments for Context Aware Systems 245
3.1 Phase I Motivation Modeling
Phase I, motivation modeling, provides a high level view of the current and
desired scenario. Modeling them clariﬁes the motivation behind providing con-
text aware services. The output of Phase I is a motivation model, linking the
current scenario, to-be-provided services and the desired scenario.
Besides obvious value exchanges like money, products and services, business
entities in a business environment also exchange intangible assets, e.g., knowl-
edge, data, expertise and information. To correctly model all value exchanges
in a complex business environment, a formal yet simple modeling technique is
needed. Previous research, e.g. [1], shows that e-3 value modelling is an useful
modeling tool for that purpose. It enables identiﬁcation, modeling and analysis
of all value exchanges between business entities in a complex business environ-
ment [1]. An e-3 value model consists of actors, value oﬀerings and value transfers
(Table1).
Table 1. Text vs e-3 value model
Text e-3 value model
Business entities Actors
Users/customer Actors
Products, services, knowledge, etc. Value objects
Transactions between entities Value transfers
• Activity 1: Model the current scenario of the complex business environment
using an e-3 value model.
Rationale. To identify all relevant business entities in the environment and
their value exchanges.
• Activity 2: Model the desired scenario of the complex business environment
using an e-3 value model. Add new value objects representing new services to
be provided in the desired scenario.
Rationale. To identify (a) what is the additional value provided by context
aware service, (b) who is the beneﬁciary (c) who (possibly more than one
business entity) provides the new services and (d) which additional activities
are needed to provide these services.
A link between the two scenarios is needed to specify, which concerns in the
current scenario are addressed by introduction of context aware services in
the desired scenario. Although, such relationships can be (textually) deduced
from the two e-3 models, however, their deduction may not be straight for-
ward and explicit. Therefore, a modeling tool may be used which links the
motivation (current scenario) and the goal (desired scenario). A motivation-
goal modeling language, like ArchiMate 3.0 [11] is one such modeling tool.

--- PAGE 257 ---
246 P. M. Singh et al.
• Activity 3: Make a motivation model linking the concerns in the current
scenario to the goals of the desired scenario, using a motivation-goal modeling
approach, e.g. Motivation Extension (ArchiMate 3.0) or Business Motivation
Model (OMG) [12]
Rationale: Specifying the motivation to provide context aware services. By
creating the motivation model, the intended value from context aware services
in the desired scenario is better understood.
3.2 Phase II Use-Case Modeling
In Phase II, use-case modeling, results from Phase I are used to create a domain
model and use case diagrams. A domain model includes both physical and
abstract objects, thereby facilitating a clearer understanding of the context. It is
derived from the motivation model and thus restricts domain modeling to rele-
vant entities only. The use case diagrams build upon the domain model and the
motivation model to further dissect (new) services. They provide the designer a
concrete view of the interactions between the user, the system and the context.
• Activity 4: Create a domain model showing relevant entities, intrinsic and
relational entities in the environment. An Entity is an object capable of inde-
pendent existence. An Intrinsic Entity is a property of the entity and a Rela-
tional Entity is an entity which models the relationships between two entities.
Rationale: To document and model all relevant entities, their properties and
relationships.
• Activity 5: Use the motivation model and domain model to create use case
diagrams. Typical questions to be asked during this activity are (a) who uses
the (new-context aware) services? (b) when are these services used? (c) do
these services re-use existing services?
Rationale: A use case diagram clariﬁes the user-system interaction. It is a
ﬁrst attempt by the designer to understand the situations in which the system
should provide its services.
3.3 Phase III Situation Modeling
In Phase III, situation modeling, results from Phase II are used to create situa-
tion models. Here, a situation refers to a state of the environment in which the
user uses the context aware service.
• Activity 6: Using the use case diagrams write the situations in which the user,
uses the services provided by the system.
Rationale: Documenting situations of interest.
• Activity 7: If Activity 6 produces new entities, add them to the domain model.
Rationale: A more comprehensive representation of the context. All entities
in the domain model can together represent all situation in which the user
uses the services.

--- PAGE 258 ---
Modeling Complex Business Environments for Context Aware Systems 247
• Activity 8: Based on the domain model, formalize the situations from Activity
6. Represent them using pseudo code or graphical situation models [13].
Rationale: To give a formal representation of the situation of interest in the
business environment. Pseudo code or situation models are then converted to
executable code.
At the end of Phase III, the designer has modeled situations of interest in
the business environment. They are represented in terms of entities and their
properties. It is these situations which a context aware systems should detect and
interpret. By employing the above steps the system designer has a methodical
approach for modeling a complex business environment. The following section
illustrates the method using the case of Janssen Transport b.v., a transport
company desiring dynamic routing of its trucks.
4 Illustrative Case Study - Janssen Transport b.v.
4.1 Current Scenario
Janssen Transport b.v. (JT) is a transport company in The Netherlands. It
owns trucks and provides transportation services to retail stores and laundry
businesses. Frank Cleaners (FC), a laundry business, is a client of JT. FC washes
laundry from hotels, restaurants, vacation parks and dry cleaning stores. The
collection of dirty laundry is outsourced by FC to JT. All Hotels2
to be visited
by JT, have been divided into ﬁve sectors by JT’s management based on their
proximity to each other. Every day one truck is assigned to a sector. The truck
driver collects dirty laundry from all hotels in that sector and brings it to FC’s
Cleaning Unit. The sequence in which a truck visits the hotels in a sector, i.e.,
a sector’s route, is ﬁxed and is decided by JT’s management. Hotels farthest to
the cleaning unit are visited ﬁrst.
The quantity of dirty laundry to be picked at a hotel, is not known in advance
and varies considerably per day. Frequently, during their routes, trucks become
full, while some hotels still need to be visited by them. The trucks then go to
the FC cleaning unit, oﬀ-load the dirty laundry and continue further to visit the
remaining hotels. Traﬃc conditions aﬀect the arrival time of trucks at hotels.
If a truck is delayed en-route to a hotel, often it is delayed to all subsequent
hotels on the route, i.e., a domino eﬀect. Hotels have a ﬁxed time window (08:00
h–14:00 h), during which they allow their laundry to be picked up by the trucks.
4.2 Desired Scenario
JT has the following concerns over its client FC.
1. Numerous instances of unpicked laundry from hotels, a direct monetary loss
for JT.
2
further on we will use the term Hotels to refer to all collection points for laundry.

--- PAGE 259 ---
248 P. M. Singh et al.
2. Late arrival of trucks at the hotels, i.e., beyond the time window. Delays
are primarily due to traﬃc conditions. Due to delays, the same hotels, those
visited last in each route, get aﬀected. In the desired scenario JT wants to
adopt a pro-active approach of routing its trucks based on historical travel
time data and real time traﬃc data.
3. While some trucks, at the end of their route, return to FC Cleaning Unit half
empty (unused free capacity); others oﬄoad laundry and have to resume on
their routes. In the desired scenario JT wants to predict the daily demands
of each hotel and optimize the truck routes. Demand prediction will be based
on historic demand data.
To address above concerns, JT requires a context aware routing system. The
system should dynamically route trucks, optimize truck capacities and minimize
delayed arrival of trucks.
Fig.2. Janssen transport current scenario
4.3 Phase I: Motivation Modeling
• Activity 1: Fig.2 shows the e-3 value model for JT’s current scenario. It
models the business entities in the environment and the services they oﬀer.
• Activity 2: Fig.3 shows the e-3 value model for JT’s desired scenario. In it,
JT provides better transportation services to FC. Instances of unpicked dirty
laundry decrease and trucks arrive at hotels on time. These are achieved via
the new value activity, Context aware dynamic routing. Beside driving, truck
drivers now provide their location and amount of laundry picked up at each
hotel to JT. Data providers furnish real time traﬃc information to JT used
for ETA calculation of its trucks.
• Activity 3: Fig.4 show the Motivation Model based on Activity 1, 2 and
textual descriptions. In the model (a) Assessment elements model problem-
s/concerns of JT based on the current scenario. (b) Driver elements model

--- PAGE 260 ---
Modeling Complex Business Environments for Context Aware Systems 249
Fig.3. Janssen transport desired scenario
Fig.4. Motivation model using ArchiMate 3.0 motivation elements (assessment, drivers
and goals)
the relevance and eﬀect of each problem/concern. (c) Goal elements model
the new/improved service provided in the desired scenario. Each goal caters
to at least one driver or a lower level goal.
4.4 Phase II. Use-Case Modeling
• Activity 4: The motivation model enables us to design a simple domain model
(Fig.5). Entities are in Bold, intrinsic entities in blue and relational entities
in red.

--- PAGE 261 ---
250 P. M. Singh et al.
• Activity 5: The motivation model and domain model enable us to make a
simple use-case diagram of the Context Aware Routing System (Fig.6). To
determine a truck’s delay, the truck’s location is provided by the truck driver
after logging in the system. The location is used for dynamically routing
the truck (Goal). When the truck arrives at a hotel, the driver enters the
arrival time and the picked up laundry in the system. The total capacity
of the truck and cumulative load of laundry picked up is required for Load
Optimized Routing (Goal) of the trucks. The use-case diagram thus connects
the system’s services to goals in the desired scenario.
Truck
Free Capacity
Hotel
Picked
up
Laundry
Truck Driver
Context
Aware
Routing
System
Delay(Truck)
Actual
Time of
Arrival
Total
Laundry
(Load)
Fig.5. Domain model (Color ﬁgure online)
4.5 Phase III. Situation Modeling
• Activity 6: The following three situation in the business environment have to
be detected by the context aware routing system.
• Situation 1. A truck’s route in a sector is not the fastest route and
remaining hotels can be visited earlier via a diﬀerent route. To determine
this situation, historical travel time data and real time traﬃc data is
required.
• Situation 2. A truck might have to return to the cleaning unit during
its route. In other words, the current free capacity of the truck is less
than the predicted load of the remaining hotels. A diﬀerent truck should
pick up the load from such hotels. In Fig.7, (top) Truck 1 becomes full
after loading laundry from Hotel C, and still has to visit Hotel D. The
subsequent route for Truck 1 in the current situation is shown highlighted
using red arrow. In the desired scenario (bottom) when Truck 1 becomes
full, Truck 2 from an adjacent sector visits Hotel D.

--- PAGE 262 ---
Modeling Complex Business Environments for Context Aware Systems 251
Context Aware Routing System
Context Aware Routing System
include
include
include
include
include
include
Log In
Request
Next Stop
Mark
Hotel as
Visited
Provide
Location
Enter As-
signed Sector
Provide
Dynamic
Routing
Load Opti-
mized Routing
Enter Actual
Time of
Arrival
Enter Picked
Up Laundry
Truck Driver
Fig.6. Use case diagram
• Situation 3. A truck can not arrive at hotel(s) within the time window. It
should be possible for another truck to pick-up laundry from such hotel(s).
In Fig.8 (top) Truck 2 is en-route between Hotel E and Hotel F. The road
has traﬃc congestion, thus traﬃc movement is slow. Though Truck 2 can
reach Hotel F on time it will not be able to do so for Hotel G. In the
current scenario, dirty laundry from Hotel G would be left uncollected.
In the desired scenario another truck picks up dirty laundry from Hotel
G, as shown in Fig.8 (bottom).
• Activity 7: After describing Situations 1–3 in textual form, new entities were
discovered and have been added in the domain model (Fig.9).
• Activity 8: The three situations from Activity 6 are formalized (pseudo code)
using entities from the updated domain model.
• Situation 1. At time t, elements of the set RemainingHotelsTruck(t){}
are all hotels still to be visited by a truck. It is equal to all hotels in
the sector assigned to the truck minus V isitedHotels. Thus, when a
truck, say Truck B, leaves JT in the morning, RemainingHotelsTruckB{}

--- PAGE 263 ---
252 P. M. Singh et al.
Fig.7. Situation 2, when a truck is full en-route a diﬀerent truck visits the remaining
hotels
consists all hotels in the assigned sector. The route of a truck, at
any given time, is represented by the sequence of hotels in the set
RemainingHotelsTruck(t){}. When the set RemainingHotelsTruck(t){}
is empty, the truck goes to Cleaning Unit.
Given a route, at t, RouteTruck(t); a faster route, RouteFasterTruck(t),
exist, if the ETA for RemainingHotelsTruck via RouteFasterTruck(t) is
earlier than via RouteTruck(t). Situation 1 is thus formulated as:
∃RouteTruck such that
ETA(RouteTruck) < ETA(RouteCurrent)
At any time t, there may be multiple routes such that the ETA for hotels
is earlier than the current route. We may call the set of all faster routes
at any given time t as FasterRoutesTruck(t){}. The system selects the
fastest route, RouteFastest, from the set FasterRoutesTrucks(t){}.
• Situation 2. In this situation, FreeCapacityTruck(t) is less than the
total PredictedLoad for RemainingHotelsTruck(t){}.
Figure7, shows a special case of Situation 2, where the FreeCapacity = 0
and Hotel D still needs to be visited, i.e., RemainingHotelsTruck(t) =
{HotelD}. At any time (t), Situation 2 can be formulated as follows:

--- PAGE 264 ---
Modeling Complex Business Environments for Context Aware Systems 253
Fig.8. Situation 3, when a truck cannot arrive at a hotel on time, a diﬀerent truck
visits the remaining hotels
FreeCapacityTruck(t) < PLoad(RemainingHotelsTruck(t),day) ∧
RemainingHotelsTruck(t) = empty
where
RemainingHotelTruck(t) ={HotelM,HotelN,.....}
and
PLoad(RemainingHotelsTruck(t),day) =PLoad(HotelM,day)+
PLoad(HotelN,day)+
PLoad(HotelP,day)+
.....
(1)
If the above situation is detected, the system assigns truck(s) to collect
laundry from the remaining hotels of the truck with limited capacity. The
assignment of trucks is non-trivial and will depend on various conditions,
including; cost, distance of the truck and its free capacity etc.
• Situation 3. In situation 3, the ETA of some trucks at remaining hotels
is beyond the time window. In this situation, to optimize capacity uti-
lization, the routing system assigns trucks to collect laundry from those

--- PAGE 265 ---
254 P. M. Singh et al.
hotels. At time t, Situation 3 can thus be formulated as follows:
∃Hoteli ∈ RemainingHotelsTruck{} ::
ETATruck((Location(Truck(t)),Hoteli)) beyond TimeWindow
(2)
For calculation of ETA, traﬃc events and associated delay related to each
event is needed.
After Activity 8, we have modeled situations of interest in terms of contextual
data from JT environment. The system designer can use these in the subsequent
design steps. The contextual data is in turn, itself derived from the domain,
use-case and motivation models from previous design steps.
5 Discussion
JT’s business environment is a more complex and more complicated business
environment (Category IV, Fig.1). The identiﬁcation of situations, is based on
historic data (e.g., travel times, pick up load) and real time data (e.g., traﬃc,
truck capacity). However, such an identiﬁcation cannot be done with certainty as
travel times and pick up load are stochastic, not deterministic. The context aware
routing system would constantly monitor the context for detecting the situations.
Furthermore, the situations are diﬃcult to identify via manual monitoring of the
context, thereby making it a complex environment. The following points make
the desired scenario more complicated, i.e., the computation of the correct system
response, diﬃcult:
1. Computation of the fastest route for each truck, using historic travel time
data and real time traﬃc information.
2. Calculation of the monetary loss owing to unpicked dirty laundry from a
hotel.
3. The ETA of a truck at a hotel can not be determined with certainty.
4. Selection of a truck among all trucks, such that extra costs associated with
visiting additional hotels (e.g. fuel, driver compensation, etc.) is less than the
loss incurred by unpicked laundry.
In Sect.1, Introduction, we used the article by Kadiri et al. [2] to motivate
our research. In the same article the authors had presented a generic model
showcasing four layers of a context processing life cycle, i.e., Acquisition, Mod-
eling, Processing and Dissemination. Table2 compares these layers vis-à-vis the
phases in our method. Phase III maps to the Processing Layer partially, since
only Activity 8 delivers codes and situation models suitable for processing by
development tools. Our method doesn’t prescribe how situations of interest be
communicated to the actors/business entities in the context. Consequently, there
is no apparent mapping between the Dissemination layer and a phase in our
method. Further study is needed to assess the above comparison and it is an
area for future research. Additionally, future researchers should investigate the
domain speciﬁc modiﬁcations needed for the method.

--- PAGE 266 ---
Modeling Complex Business Environments for Context Aware Systems 255
Truck
Free Capacity
Hotel
Picked
up
Laundry
Truck Driver
Context
Aware
Routing
System
Delay(Truck)
Actual
Time of
Arrival
Total
Laundry
(Load)
Traﬃc
Events
Delay
(Events)
Route
Sector
Location
Visited
Hotels
Total
Capacity
ETA
Time
Window
Predicted
Load
Fig.9. Updated domain model
Table 2. Context processing lifecycle in [2] vs. Phases of the method
Layers [2] Description in [2] Phases in the method
Acquisition Data and process contributing to
context instance deﬁnition
Phase I
Modeling Context representation in
structured form
Phase II & III
Processing Fusion of data and modeling
with processing and reasoning
mechanism
Phase III (partially)
Dissemination Distributing the processed
high-level context to
context-consuming actors
No apparent mapping
Our method will enable system designers to avoid two pitfalls during context
aware system design; (a) considering signiﬁcant amount of contextual informa-
tion during the initial design steps which later proves to be less relevant and (b)
not including relevant contextual data in system design. Using our method, the
designer is not overwhelmed with the complexity of business environments, thus
avoiding the above pitfalls.
The proposed method is based on our experiences in system design and
development. We did not follow a speciﬁc design methodology for designing

--- PAGE 267 ---
256 P. M. Singh et al.
the method. This a limitation of our research as design choices made by us may
not be explicit.
6 Conclusion
Complex business environments pose unique challenges for the design of con-
text aware systems. In this paper we presented a step-wise method to model
a complex business environment. Via our method we, (a) provide a direction
for investigating the context and (b) highlight the use of investigation results
in subsequent design steps. System designers will ﬁnd our method useful for
the design of context aware systems in complex business environments. Future
researchers should apply the method in varied application domains which would
lead to further improvement of the method.
References
1. Wieringa, R., Engelsman, W., Gordijn, J., Ionita, D.: A business ecosystem archi-
tecture modeling framework. Paper presented at the 21st IEEE Conference on
Business Informatics (CBI) 2019, Moscow, Russia (2019)
2. Kadiri, S.E., et al.: Current trends on ICT technologies for enterprise information
systems. Comput. Ind. 79, 14–33 (2016)
3. Hong, J., Suh, E., Kim, S.-J.: Context-aware systems: a literature review and
classiﬁcation. Expert Syst. Appl. 36(4), 8509–8522 (2009)
4. van Engelenburg, S., Janssen, M., Klievink, B.: Designing context aware systems:
a method for understanding and analysing context in practice. J. Logical Algebraic
Methods Program. 103, 79–104 (2019)
5. Trinugroho, Y.P.D., Reichert, F., Fensli, R.: An ontology enhanced SOA-based
home integration platform for the well being of inhabitants. Paper presented at
the 4th IADIS International Conference on e-Health 2012, Lisbon, Portugal (2012)
6. Fleischer, J., et al.: An integration platform for heterogeneous sensor systems in
GITEWS - Tsunami Service Bus. Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci. 10, 1239–1252
(2010)
7. Auger, A., Exposito, E., Lochin, E.: iQAS: an integration platform for QoI assess-
ment as a service for smart cities. Paper presented at 3rd World Forum on IoT
2016, Reston, USA (2016)
8. Chen, H., Zeng, S., Lin, H., Ma, H.: Muniﬁcence, dynamism, and complexity: how
industry context drives corporate sustainability. Bus. Strategy Environ. 25, 125–
141 (2017)
9. Saleh, A., Watson, R.: Business excellence in a volatile, uncertain, complex and
ambiguous environment (BEVUCA). TQM J. 29(5), 705–724 (2017)
10. Vasconcelos, F.C., Ramirez, R.: Complexity in business environments. J. Bus. Res.
64, 236–241 (2011)
11. ArchiMate 3.0.1 Speciﬁcation. https://pubs.opengroup.org/architecture/
archimate3-doc/chap06.html
12. OMG Business Motivation Model v1.3. https://www.omg.org/spec/BMM/1.3/
PDF
13. Costa, P.D., Mielke, I.T., Pereira, I., Almeida, J.P.A.: A model-driven approach to
situations: situation modeling and rule-based situation detection. Paper presented
at the IEEE 16st International EDOC Conference 2012, Beijing, China (2012)

--- PAGE 268 ---
Towards Automating the Synthesis
of Chatbots for Conversational
Model Query
Sara Pérez-Soler1
, Gwendal Daniel2
, Jordi Cabot2,3
, Esther Guerra1(B)
,
and Juan de Lara1
1
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
{Sara.PerezS,Esther.Guerra,Juan.deLara}@uam.es
2
Universitat Oberta de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain
gdaniel@uoc.edu
3
ICREA, Barcelona, Spain
jordi.cabot@icrea.cat
Abstract. Conversational interfaces (also called chatbots) are being
increasingly adopted in various domains such as e-commerce or customer
service, as a direct communication channel between companies and end-
users. Their advantage is that they can be embedded within social net-
works, and provide a natural language (NL) interface that enables their
use by non-technical users. While there are many emerging platforms for
building chatbots, their construction remains a highly technical, chal-
lenging task.
In this paper, we propose the use of chatbots to facilitate querying
domain-speciﬁc models. This way, instead of relying on technical query
languages (e.g., OCL), models are queried using NL as this can be more
suitable for non-technical users. To avoid manual programming, our solu-
tion is based on the automatic synthesis of the model query chatbots from
a domain meta-model. These chatbots communicate with an EMF-based
modelling backend using the Xatkit framework.
Keywords: Model-driven engineering · Model query · Automatic
chatbot synthesis
1 Introduction
Instant messaging platforms have been widely adopted as one of the main tech-
nologies to communicate and exchange information. Most of them provide built-
in support for integrating chatbot applications, which are automated conver-
sational agents capable of interacting with users of the platform [10]. Chat-
bots have proven useful in various contexts to automate tasks and improve the
user experience, such as automated customer services [23], education [9] and
e-commerce [21]. However, despite many platforms have recently emerged for
creating chatbots (e.g., DialogFlow [6], IBM Watson [7], Amazon Lex [1]), their
construction and deployment remains a highly technical task.
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. Nurcan et al. (Eds.): BPMDS 2020/EMMSAD 2020, LNBIP 387, pp. 257–265, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49418-6_17

--- PAGE 269 ---
258 S. Pérez-Soler et al.
Chatbots are also increasingly used to facilitate software engineering activi-
ties [5,12] like automating deployment tasks, assigning software bugs and issues,
repairing build failures, scheduling tasks like sending reminders, integrating com-
munication channels, or for customer support. In this context, we explored the
use of chatbots for domain modelling in previous work [16,17]. Modelling chat-
bots can be embedded within social networks to support collaboration between
diﬀerent stakeholders in a natural way, and enable the active participation of
non-technical stakeholders in model creation.
In the present work, we extend the previous ideas to support natural lan-
guage (NL) conversational queries over the models. This is a more accessible
and user-friendly way to query models than the use of technical languages like
OCL (Object Constraint Language [15]). Moreover, we avoid the manual pro-
gramming of the model query chatbots by their automatic synthesis. For this
purpose, our solution is based on (i) the availability of a meta-model describing
the structure of the models, (ii) its conﬁguration with NL information (class
name synonyms, names for reverse associations, etc.), and (iii) the automatic
generation of a chatbot supporting queries over instances of the given meta-
model. This approach is implemented on top of the Xatkit model-based chatbot
development platform [4], which interprets the generated chatbot model and
interacts with an EMF (Eclipse Modeling Framework) backend.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. First, Sect.2 provides motiva-
tion using a running example, and introduces background about chatbot design.
Then, Sect.3 explains our approach, and Sect.4 describes the prototype tool
support. Finally, Sect.5 compares with related works, and Sect.6 concludes.
2 Motivation and Background
In this section, we ﬁrst provide a motivating example, and then introduce the
main concepts behind chatbots.
2.1 Motivation
As a motivating example, assume a city hall would like to provide open access
to its real-time traﬃc information system. Given the growth of the open data
movement, this is a common scenario in many cities, like Barcelona1
or Madrid2
.
We assume that the data provided includes a static part made of the diﬀerent
districts and their streets, with information on the speed limits. In addition, a
dynamic part updated in real-time decorates the streets and their segments
with traﬃc intensity values and incidents (road works, street closings, accidents
or bottlenecks). Figure1 shows a meta-model capturing the structure of the
provided information.
In this scenario, citizens would beneﬁt from user-friendly ways to query those
traﬃc models. However, instead of relying on the construction of dedicated front-
ends with ﬁxed queries, or on the use of complex model query languages like
1
https://opendata-ajuntament.barcelona.cat/.
2
https://datos.madrid.es.

--- PAGE 270 ---
Towards Automating the Synthesis of Chatbots 259
TimeInterval
init: DateTime
end: DateTime
Bottleneck Closed
Accident
injuries: int RoadWork
Incident
description: String
TrafficIntensity
value: float
/serviceLevel: {moving, heavy, jam, closed}
Transitable
hasCyclistPath: boolean
Section
fromNumber: int
toNumber: int
maxVelocity: int
Street
name: String
District
name: String
City
name: String
causes
*
0..1
real
0..1
estimated
0..1
intensity
*
incidents
*
sections
*
streets
districts
*
Fig.1. A meta-model for real-time traﬃc information.
OCL, our proposal is the use of conversational queries based on NL via chat-
bots. Chatbots can be used from widely used social networks, like Telegram or
Twitter, facilitating their use by citizens. Hence, citizens would be able to issue
simple queries like “give me all accidents with more than one injury”; and also
conversational queries like “what are the incidents in Castellana Street now?”,
and upon the chatbot reply, focus on a subset of the results with “select those
that are accidents”. Finally, for the case of dynamic models, reactive queries like
“ping me when Castellana Street closes” would be possible.
Our proposal consists in the generation of a dedicated query chatbot given the
domain meta-model. But, before introducing our approach, the next subsection
explains the main concepts involved in chatbot design.
2.2 Designing a Chatbot
The widespread interest and demand for chatbot applications has emphasized
the need to quickly build complex chatbots supporting NL processing (NLP) [8],
custom knowledge base deﬁnition [18], and complex action responses including
external service composition. However, the development of chatbots is challeng-
ing as it requires expertise in several technical domains, ranging from NLP to
a deep understanding of the API of the targeted instant messaging platforms
and third-party services to be integrated. To alleviate this situation, many chat-
bot creation frameworks have emerged, like DialogFlow [6], IBM Watson [7] or
Amazon Lex [1].
User
NL phrase
intent1
intentn
Chatbot
match intent
…
intenti
… chatbot
response
External
Service
1 2
3 4
Fig.2. Chatbot working scheme.
Figure2 shows a simpliﬁcation of the
typical working scheme of chatbots. Chat-
bots are often designed on the basis of
intents, where each intent represents some
user’s aim (e.g., booking a ticket). The
chatbot waits for NL inputs from the user
(label 1 in the ﬁgure); then, it tries to
match the phrase with some intent (label
2), optionally calling an external service
(label 3) for intent recognition or addi-
tional data collection; ﬁnally, it produces
a response, which is often a NL sentence among a predeﬁned set (label 4).

--- PAGE 271 ---
260 S. Pérez-Soler et al.
Intents are deﬁned via training phrases. These phrases may include parame-
ters of a certain type (e.g., numbers, days of the week, countries). The parameter
types are called entities. Most platforms come with predeﬁned sets of entities
and permit deﬁning new ones. Some platforms permit structuring the conversa-
tion as an expected ﬂow of intents. For this purpose, a common mechanism is
providing intents with a context that stores information gathered from phrase
parameters, and whose values are required to trigger the intent. In addition,
there is normally the possibility to have a fallback intent, to be used when the
bot does not understand the user input.
3 Approach
domain
meta-model
NL
configuration
+ chatbot
synthesis
model
instance
«conforms to»
chatbot designer chatbot users
chatbot
execution
platform
EMF
platform
…
…
instant
messaging
platforms
chatbot
model
Fig.3. Scheme of our approach.
Figure3 shows the scheme
of our approach. First, the
chatbot designer needs to
provide a domain meta-
model (like the one in
Fig.1) deﬁning the struc-
ture of the models to
be queried, and comple-
mented with NL hints on
how to refer to its classes
and features (synonyms). From this information, an executable chatbot model
that can be used to query model instances is generated. The next subsections
explain these two steps.
3.1 Chatbot Generation: Intents and Entities Model
The chatbot designer has to provide a domain meta-model and optionally, a NL
conﬁguration model. The latter is used to optionally annotate classes, attributes
and features with synonyms, and the source of references with a name to refer to
its backward navigation. From this information, we generate the chatbot intents
and entities.
Table(a) of Fig.4 captures the generation of intents. We create an intent per
query type, plus an additional intent called loadModel to select the model to be
queried. The second row of the table shows the intent allInstances, which returns
all objects of a given class. The intent is populated with training phrases that
contain the class name as parameter. The possible class names are deﬁned via
an entity Class (see Table(b)). This intent would be selected on user utterances
such as “give me all cities” or “show every incident”. The intent requires having
a loaded model, which the table indicates as the intent requiring a model as
context.
In the same table, intent filteredAllInstances returns all instances that satisfy
a given condition. The intent is populated with training phrases that combine
a class name and a condition made of one or more ﬁlters joined via logical

--- PAGE 272 ---
Towards Automating the Synthesis of Chatbots 261
name descripƟon training phrases providedcontext required context
loadModel loads working model from the
backend
load the model {MODEL}
open model {MODEL}…
MODEL type text
-
allInstances returns all instances of a given class give me all the {CLASSNAME}
show me the {CLASSNAME}…
CLASSNAMEtype Class
MODEL
filtered
AllInstances
returns all instances of a given class
and sa sfying a condi on
select the {CLASSNAME}with {FILTER1}
display the {CLASSNAME} with {FILTER1}
{CONJ} {FILTER2}…
CLASSNAMEtype Class
FILTER1 and FILTER2 type Condi on
CONJ type Conjunc on
MODEL
entries synonyms
city metropolis, town
… …
bo leneck traﬃc jam, conges on
entries synonyms
name tle, designa on
descrip on summary
entries synonyms
starts with begins with
ends with finishes with, end is
equals is same as
contains has
entries synonyms
from number from, starts
to number to, ends
max velocity velocity limit
value amount of traﬃc
injuries harm
entries synonyms
greater than bigger, more than
smaller than less than
equals is same as
entries
and
or
type entries
StringCondi on
StringA ribute + StringOperator + text
StringA ribute + StringOperator + StringA ribute
NumericCondi on
NumericA ribute + NumericOperator + number
NumericA ribute + NumericOperator + NumericA ribute
a) Intents
b) Class enƟty c) StringAƩribute enƟty d) NumericAƩribute enƟty
h) StringOperator enƟty
e) NumericOperator enƟty
f) CondiƟon composite enƟty
g) ConjuncƟon enƟty
Fig.4. Intents and entities generated for the running example chatbot.
connectives. We provide an entity Condition for the ﬁlters, explained below. This
intent would be selected upon receiving phrases like “give me all accidents with
more than one injury” (please note the singular variation w.r.t. the attribute
name injuries).
In addition to intents, we create several entities based on the domain meta-
model and the NL conﬁguration. Speciﬁcally, we create an entity named Class
(Table(b)) with an entry for each meta-model class name. These entries may
have synonyms, as provided by the NL conﬁguration, to refer to the classes
in a more ﬂexible way. Likewise, we create an entity for each attribute name
attending to their type: String (Table(c)), Numeric (Table(d)), Boolean and Date
(omitted for space constraints). For example, the StringAttribute entity (Table(c))
has an entry for all String attributes called name. Just like classes, these entries
may have synonyms if provided in the NL conﬁguration.
The Condition entity (Table(f)) is a composite one, i.e., its entries are made
of one or more entities. This entity permits deﬁning ﬁlter conditions in queries,
such as “name starts with Ma” or “injuries greater than one”.
Regarding the complexity of the chatbot, the number of intents is ﬁxed,
and it depends on the primitives of the underlying query language that the
chatbot exposes. Figure4 exposes two primitives of OCL: allInstances, and
allInstances()→select(cond). Other query types can be added similarly, which would
require deﬁning further intents. The number of generated entities is also ﬁxed,
while the number of entries in each entity depends on the meta-model size and
the synonyms deﬁned in the NL conﬁguration.
3.2 Chatbot Generation: Execution Model
The generated chatbot also contains actions, required to perform the query on
a modelling backend, which we call the execution model. This execution model

--- PAGE 273 ---
262 S. Pérez-Soler et al.
contains a set of execution rules that bind user intentions to response actions as
part of the chatbot behaviour deﬁnition (cf. label 4 in Fig.2). For each intent in
the Intent model, we generate the corresponding execution rule in the execution
model using an event-based language that receives as input the recognized intent
together with the set of parameter values matched by the NL engine during the
analysis and classiﬁcation of the user utterance.
All the execution rules follow the same process: the matched intent and the
parameters are used to build an OCL-like query to collect the set of objects
the user wants to retrieve. The intent determines the type of query to perform
(e.g., allInstances, select, etc.), while the parameters identify the query parame-
ters, predicates, and their composition. The query computation is delegated to
the underlying modelling platform (see next section), and the returned model
elements are processed to build a human-readable message that is ﬁnally posted
to the user by the bot engine.
As an example, Listing1 shows the execution rule that handles an allInstances
operation. The class to obtain the instances of is retrieved from the context
variable (available in every execution rule) and passed to our EMF Platform, which
performs the query. Next, the instances variable holding the results is processed
to produce a readable string (in this case a list of names), and the Chat Platform
is called to reply to the user.
1 on intent GetAllInstances do
2 val Map<String, Object> collectionContext = context.get(”collection”)
3 val instances = EMFPlatform.GetAllInstances( collectionContext.get(”class”) as String )
4 val resultString = instances.map[name].join(”, ”)
5 ChatPlatform.Reply(”I found the following results” + resultString)
Listing 1. Execution rule example
4 Proof of Concept
As a proof of concept, we have created a prototype that produces Xatkit-based
chatbots [4], following the two phases depicted in Fig.3. Xatkit is a model-
driven solution to deﬁne and execute chatbots, which oﬀers DSLs to deﬁne the
bot intents, entities and actions. The execution of such chatbots relies on the
Xatkit runtime engine. At its core, the engine is a Java library that implements
all the execution logic available in the chatbot DSLs. Besides, a connector with
Google’s DialogFlow engine [6] takes care of matching the user utterances, and a
number of platform components enable the communication between Xatkit and
other external services.
In the context of this paper, we have developed a new EMF Platform that
allows Xatkit to query EMF models in response to matched intents. The ﬁrst
version of our prototype platform3
provides actions to retrieve all the instances
of a given class, and ﬁlter them based on a composition of boolean predi-
cates on the object’s attributes or references. These predicates are retrieved
from the context parameter deﬁned in the intents (see Sect.3.1), and mapped
3
https://github.com/xatkit-bot-platform/xatkit-emf-platform.

--- PAGE 274 ---
Towards Automating the Synthesis of Chatbots 263
to Java operations (e.g., the StringComparison “contains” is translated into
((String)value).contains(otherValue). The query result is returned as a list of EObjects,
which is processed using the bot expression language to produce the response mes-
sage. Listing1 showed an example of the use of this EMF Platform.
We have also developed a web application, where domain meta-models (in
.ecore format) can be uploaded, and then (optionally) conﬁgured with synonyms.
Once the conﬁguration is ﬁnished, the application synthesizes a Xatkit chatbot
model, which then can be executed using the Xatkit runtime engine.
Figure5(a) shows the web application on the left, where the running example
meta-model (cf. Fig.2) is being conﬁgured. Figure5(b) shows a moment in the
execution of the generated Xatkit chatbot, and the result returned by the bot
when processing the example utterance “show all accidents with more than one
injury”.
Fig.5. (a) Web application to conﬁgure the chatbot. (b) A query in the generated
chatbot.
5 Related Work
Next, we review approaches to the synthesis of chatbots for modelling or data
query.
Our work relies on NL as a kind of concrete syntax for DSLs [17]. NLP has
been used within Software Engineering to derive UML diagrams/domain models
from text [2,11]. However, the opposite direction (i.e., generating chatbots from
domain models) is largely unexplored. Almost no chatbot platform supports
automatic chatbot generation from external data sources. A relevant exception
is Microsoft QnA Maker [14], which generates bots for the Azure platform from
FAQs and other well-structured textual information.

--- PAGE 275 ---
264 S. Pérez-Soler et al.
Closest approaches to ours are tools like ModelByVoice [13] and VoiceTo-
Model [20], which oﬀer some predeﬁned commands to create model elements
for speciﬁc types of models. In contrast, our framework targets model queries
and not model creation, which was pursued in our previous work [17]. None of
those two approaches support queries. Castaldo and collaborators [3] propose
generating chatbots for data exploration in relational databases, but requiring
an annotated schema as starting point, while in our case providing synonyms is
an optional step. Similarly, [19] integrates chatbots to service systems by anno-
tating and linking the chatbot deﬁnition to the service models. In both cases,
annotations and links must be manually created by the chatbot designer to gen-
erate the conversational elements. In contrast, our approach is fully automatic.
In [22], chatbots are generated from OpenAPI speciﬁcations but the goal of such
chatbots is helping the user in identifying the right API Endpoint, not answering
user queries.
Altogether, to our knowledge there are no automatic approaches to the gener-
ation of ﬂexible chatbots with model query capabilities. We believe that applying
classical concepts from CRUD-like generators to the chatbot domain is a highly
novel solution to add a conversational interface to any modelling language.
6 Conclusion
Conversational interfaces are becoming increasingly popular to access all kind
of services, but their construction is challenging. To remedy this situation, we
have proposed the automatic synthesis of chatbots able to query the instances
of a domain meta-model.
In the future, we aim to support more complex queries, including the conver-
sational and reactive ones mentioned in Sect.2.1. Our approach could be used to
query other types of data sources (e.g., databases or APIs) via an initial reverse
engineering step to build their internal data model and translate the NL query
into the query language of the platform. Finally, we would like to add access
control on top of the bot deﬁnition to ensure users cannot explore parts of the
model/system unless they have permission.
Acknowledgments. Work funded by the Spanish Ministry of Science (RTI2018-
095255-B-I00 and TIN2016-75944-R) and the R&D programme of Madrid
(P2018/TCS-4314).
References
1. Amazon: Amazon Lex (2019). https://aws.amazon.com/lex/
2. Arora, C., Sabetzadeh, M., Briand, L.C., Zimmer, F.: Extracting domain mod-
els from natural-language requirements: approach and industrial evaluation. In:
Proceedings of the MoDELS, pp. 250–260. ACM (2016)
3. Castaldo, N., Daniel, F., Matera, M., Zaccaria, V.: Conversational data explo-
ration. In: Bakaev, M., Frasincar, F., Ko, I.-Y. (eds.) ICWE 2019. LNCS, vol.
11496, pp. 490–497. Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
19274-7 34

--- PAGE 276 ---
Towards Automating the Synthesis of Chatbots 265
4. Daniel, G., Cabot, J., Deruelle, L., Derras, M.: Xatkit: a multimodal low-code
chatbot development framework. IEEE Access 8, 15332–15346 (2020)
5. Erlenhov, L., de Oliveira Neto, F.G., Scandariato, R., Leitner, P.: Current and
future bots in software development. In: Proceedings of the BotSE@ICSE, pp.
7–11. IEEE/ACM (2019)
6. Google: DialogFlow (2019). https://dialogﬂow.com/
7. IBM Watson Assistant (2019). https://www.ibm.com/cloud/watson-assistant/
8. Jackson, P., Moulinier, I.: Natural Language Processing for Online Applications:
Text Retrieval, Extraction and Categorization, vol. 5. John Benjamins Publishing,
Amsterdam (2007)
9. Kerlyl, A., Hall, P., Bull, S.: Bringing chatbots into education: towards natural
language negotiation of open learner models. In: Ellis, R., Allen, T., Tuson, A.
(eds.) SGAI 2006, pp. 179–192. Springer, London (2007). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-1-84628-666-7 14
10. Klopfenstein, L., Delpriori, S., Malatini, S., Bogliolo, A.: The rise of bots: a survey
of conversational interfaces, patterns, and paradigms. In: Proceedings of the DIS,
pp. 555–565. ACM (2017)
11. Landhäußer, M., Körner, S.J., Tichy, W.F.: From requirements to UML models
and back: how automatic processing of text can support requirements engineering.
Softw. Qual. J. 22(1), 121–149 (2014)
12. Lebeuf, C., Storey, M.D., Zagalsky, A.: Software bots. IEEE Softw. 35(1), 18–23
(2018)
13. Lopes, J., Cambeiro, J., Amaral, V.: ModelByVoice - towards a general purpose
model editor for blind people. In: Proceedings of the MODELS Workshops. CEUR
Workshop Proceedings, vol. 2245, pp. 762–769. CEUR-WS.org (2018)
14. Microsoft: QnA Maker (2019). https://www.qnamaker.ai/
15. OCL (2014). http://www.omg.org/spec/OCL/
16. Pérez-Soler, S., Guerra, E., de Lara, J.: Collaborative modeling and group decision
making using chatbots in social networks. IEEE Softw. 35(6), 48–54 (2018)
17. Pérez-Soler, S., González-Jiménez, M., Guerra, E., de Lara, J.: Towards conver-
sational syntax for domain-speciﬁc languages using chatbots. JOT 18(2), 5:1–21
(2019)
18. Shawar, A., Atwell, E., Roberts, A.: FAQchat as in information retrieval system.
In: Proceedings of the LTC, pp. 274–278. Wydawnictwo Poznańskie, Poznań (2005)
19. Sindhgatta, R., Barros, A., Nili, A.: Modeling conversational agents for service sys-
tems. In: Panetto, H., Debruyne, C., Hepp, M., Lewis, D., Ardagna, C.A., Meers-
man, R. (eds.) OTM 2019. LNCS, vol. 11877, pp. 552–560. Springer, Cham (2019).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-33246-4 34
20. Soares, F., Araújo, J., Wanderley, F.: VoiceToModel: an approach to generate
requirements models from speech recognition mechanisms. In: Proceedings of the
SAC, pp. 1350–1357. ACM (2015)
21. Thomas, N.: An e-business chatbot using AIML and LSA. In: Proceedings of the
ICACCI, pp. 2740–2742. IEEE (2016)
22. Vaziri, M., Mandel, L., Shinnar, A., Siméon, J., Hirzel, M.: Generating chat bots
from web API speciﬁcations. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN Onward!, pp.
44–57 (2017)
23. Xu, A., Liu, Z., Guo, Y., Sinha, V., Akkiraju, R.: A new chatbot for customer
service on social media. In: Proceedings of the CHI, pp. 3506–3510. ACM (2017)

--- PAGE 277 ---
Enterprise and Business Modeling
(EMMSAD 2020)

--- PAGE 278 ---
Conceptualizing Capability Change
Georgios Koutsopoulos(B), Martin Henkel, and Janis Stirna
Department of Computer and Systems Sciences, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden
{georgios,martinh,js}@dsv.su.se
Abstract. Organizationsareoperatingwithindynamicenvironmentsthatpresent
changes,opportunitiesandthreatstowhichtheyneedtorespondbyadaptingtheir
capabilities.OrganizationalcapabilitiescanbesupportedbyInformationSystems
during their design and run-time phases, which often requires the capabilities’
adaptation. Currently, enterprise modeling and capability modeling facilitate the
design and analysis of capabilities but improvements regarding capability change
can be made. This design science research study introduces a capability change
meta-model that will serve as the basis for the development of a method and a
supporting tool for capability change. The meta-model is applied to a case study
at a Swedish public healthcare organization. This application provides insight on
possible opportunities to improve the meta-model in future iterations.
Keywords: Capability · Enterprise Modeling · Change · Adaptation ·
Transformation
1 Introduction
Organizations are dynamic systems, constantly being in a state of change and evolution
[1]. This state is driven by the dynamism existing in the organization’s environment,
both internally and externally. In the face of environmental opportunities and threats,
organizations need to change to improve their effectiveness at achieving their goals
[2], or ensure survival [3]. The changes occurring in an organization’s environment
are characterized by speed and direction which are often difficult to anticipate [3]. In
addition, the environment’s pace of change is higher that the organization’s [4], and the
speed is further increased by factors like the digital transformation of the society [5] and
emerging technologies and strategies [3]. The concepts of change and strategy are not
only linked to each other, but also to the concept of capability [6].
Thenotionofcapabilitybearssignificancebecauseitdepictsanorganizationalview-
pointthatencompassesseveralnotionssignificanttoorganizationalchange.Forexample,
goal, decision, context, process and service [7, 8] have been used, especially in the man-
agementliterature,notonlytodescribeanorganization’svalue-generatingelements,but
havealsobeenusedasthecoreconceptsofEnterpriseModeling(EM)approaches[8,9].
EM, as a discipline, captures relevant knowledge and provides motivation and input
for designing Information Systems (IS) to support the organization [10]. ISs are signif-
icant for every organization since they help in simplifying the organization’s activities
and processes and have gradually become integrated with almost every aspect of the
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. Nurcan et al. (Eds.): BPMDS 2020/EMMSAD 2020, LNBIP 387, pp. 269–283, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49418-6_18

--- PAGE 279 ---
270 G. Koutsopoulos et al.
business [11], to the level where business and IT have been “fused” into one [5]. This
integration has raised several challenges for EM, especially regarding the organizations
that are in motion, changing and evolving. Due to a high rate of change in modern enter-
prises, the maintenance of models that are sufficiently capturing the architecture from
the perspective of involved stakeholders does not seem to be feasible. One of the main
challengesforEMishowtocapturethemotionofanorganization,thatis,itscurrentand
desired affairs [5]. Capability modeling, as a specialization of EM, also needs to tackle
this challenge. This can be achieved by optimizing existing approaches or developing
specific modeling approaches for depicting capability change.
The objective of this study is to propose a meta-model for depicting capability
change. It belongs to a research project that aims to provide methodological and tool
support for organizations that are undergoing changes or need to. The project is elab-
orated following the principles of Design Science Research (DSR) [12, 13]. Following
the exploration of the field [14], the elicitation of requirements for the artifact [15], and
the introduction of a typology for changing capabilities [16], the present study belongs
to the project step that concerns the initial development of a meta-model. This is a
design artifact that will serve as a basis for a capability modeling method. In addition,
the meta-model is demonstrated by applying it to an existing case, in particular, a public
healthcare organization in Sweden which is undergoing changes.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides a brief presentation
of the background and research related to this study. Section 3 describes the methods
employed in this study. Section 4 introduces and describes the capability change meta-
modelanditscomponents.Section5presentsanexampleapplicationofthemeta-model
onacasestudy.Section6discussesthemeta-modelanditsapplication.Section7provides
concluding remarks.
2 Background and Related Research
This section presents a brief overview of the existing capability modeling research and
the topics relevant to the development of the meta-model.
2.1 Organizational Change
Organizations are social goal-directed systems which maintain boundaries that reflect
their goals [3]. Changing organizations have been widely researched. There are several
termsdescribingthephenomenon withdifferentterms,forexample change, transforma-
tion, adaptation [3]. These terms are sometimes used interchangeably or used to reflect
differentscopesofundergoingchanges[17].Thetermsbusiness,organizationandenter-
prise are often used interchangeably as well, however, there are also cases where they
are distinguished, like for example [1], where an enterprise is defined as a collection of
organizations that share a common set of goals.
Regarding the drivers of organizational change, there are several perspectives and
associated theories. Zimmermann [3] has provided a detailed analysis of these perspec-
tives. One of the main perspectives is based on the assumption of human rationality and
utility maximization, which results in assuming that entire organizations are rationally

--- PAGE 280 ---
Conceptualizing Capability Change 271
adapting to the environment [3]. These theories that consider the environment as the
factor setting the point of time and the direction of change are called deterministic, in
comparisontothevoluntaristictheoriesthatbuildontheimportanceoftheconsideration
ofstrategicchoice.Thisperspectiveemphasizesonstrategicchoiceoftheorganization’s
decision-makers and their role in shaping the organization [3].
However, there are also theories that reconcile these perspectives to facilitate under-
standingofchangeasacombination ofenvironmental andmanagerialforcestakingalso
organizational inertia into consideration. For example, the cognitive approach aims to
understand the processes of an organization that lead both to prosperity and decline, and
also to failure to change. This is preceded by the definition of cognition as the process
that involves the perception and interpretation of the environment and the translation of
this information into strategic choice [3]. Including the negative aspect of change is in
line with our earlier work [16].
A noteworthy point is that the diverse drivers of change do not provide any indi-
cation between causes and consequences. The causality of change and the causal rela-
tionships among the factors driving change, which have often been neglected, should be
implemented in research methods aiming to capture the complexity of change [3].
2.2 Enterprise Modeling
Theprocessofcreatingamodelcapturingalltheaspectsofanenterprisethatamodeling
purpose requires, is called EM. Thus, the produced model consists of interconnected
models,eachofthembeingfocusedononespecificviewpointofthemodeledenterprise,
for example, processes, goals, concepts and business rules [18]. Any organization or its
part can benefit from the application of EM.
An enterprise model can help people in an organization to develop a deeper under-
standing of the system, in other words, how their work gets integrated in a bigger pic-
ture and, additionally, models can enable the users’ understanding of the supporting
information systems and its interplay with organizational action patterns [19].
Furthermore, since the meta-models specify modeling languages, they are valuable
to (i) modelers, who are interested in understanding and applying the language, (ii)
researchers, who have interest in evaluating and adapting a language, for example to a
domain-specific version, and (iii) tool vendors, who have interest in developing tool for
the language [20].
2.3 Capabilities
There is no consensus on the definition of capability in the literature. In this study, the
notionofcapabilityisdefinedasasetofresources,whoseconfigurationbearstheability
and capacity to create value by fulfilling a specific goal within a specific context. This
definition is the result of combining two earlier definitions from [8, 21].
Theconceptofcapabilityisoftenconsideredasthemissinglinkinbusiness/ITtrans-
formation [22]. Its growing popularity can be attributed to the fact that it enables busi-
ness/ITtransformationsby(i)providingacommonlanguagetothebusiness,(ii)enabling
to-the-point investment focus, (iii) serving as a baseline for strategic planning, change

--- PAGE 281 ---
272 G. Koutsopoulos et al.
management and impact analysis, and (iv) leading directly to business specification and
design [22].
Capability Modeling
The capability modeling approaches that exist in the literature have been identified and
their meta-models have been explored in our earlier work. In particular, 64 capability
meta-models have been analyzed using a change function-related framework [14]. The
change functions of the framework are observation, decision and delivery of capability
change. It has been identified that the majority of the meta-models include concepts that
address at least partially, all the above mentioned functions and have a scope combining
business and IT. A set of change related-concepts has been elicited for inclusion in a
capability change meta-model, so as to facilitate the development of a method.
Regarding the modeling of capabilities, [23] have suggested three strategies within
the Capability-Driven Development (CDD) method. All three strategies consist of three
steps, which are (i) Capability design, (ii) Capability evaluation, and (iii) Development
of Capability delivery application. Steps two and three are common in all strategies. The
second step concerns the evaluation of the design from both business and technical per-
spectives before the implementation of the capability. The third step involves packaging
the indicators for monitoring and the algorithms for run-time adjustments as a support
application. The differentiation among the three strategies lies only in the first step. It
concerns the design of the capability using as a starting point: (i) goals, (ii) processes,
or (iii) concepts [23].
3 Methodology
This section presents the methods employed for the development of the meta-model and
the case study.
3.1 Design Science
The DSR project to which this study belongs follows the guidelines of [13]. According
to this framework, a DSR project consists of five activities, namely (i) problem explica-
tion, (ii) outline artifact and define requirements, (iii) design and develop artifact, (iv)
demonstrateartifact,and(v)evaluate artifact.Thepresentstudybelongstothethirdstep
which,createsanartefactfulfillingtherequirementselicitedduringthepreviousactivity,
since it presents the first stage of the development of a method artifact, the creation of a
meta-model. The process is iterative and incremental, which means that several rounds
of development are needed to reach a final version of the artifact.
3.2 Meta-model Development
A meta-model is a part of a modeling language which consists of (i) notation, which is
its graphical representation, (ii) syntax, that is the available language concepts, and (iii)
semantics, the meaning of the language concepts [24]. Different meta-model specifica-
tion techniques result to different meta-model types, i.e. slicing, referencing, generic,

--- PAGE 282 ---
Conceptualizing Capability Change 273
notation-aware, matrix and tabular meta-models. In this work, a generic meta-model is
developed.Theroleofgenericmeta-modelsistofocusonunderstandingthestructureof
the meta-model by providing generic concepts [20]. In this study, the notation aspect is
not being addressed.
Regardingthesyntaxofthedevelopedmeta-modelitself,theprinciplesoftheUnified
Modeling Language (UML) [25] have been followed. The common element types that
existing in meta-models are (i) First Class concepts (classes), (ii) Relationships (of
classes), (iii) attributes, (iv) inheritance and (v) others [26]. The element types have
been used in the development of the proposed meta-model.
Regarding the semantics, we use as input our preceding research. In our earlier
work, a plethora of existing capability modeling approaches has been explored and 64
meta-models have been identified and analyzed in terms of their inclusion of concepts
relevant to change [14]. A framework has been used that identified the main functions
of a capability oriented adaptive system. The three functions are observation, decision
and delivery, which reflect capturing information from the organizational internal and
external environment, deciding on a change based on analyzing the observed conditions
andapplyingcriteriabasedonintentionelementsandfinally,deliveringthechangeinthe
capability’sconfiguration,takingintoconsiderationtheinterrelationofexistingcapabil-
ities. In this way, the adaptive characteristics of capability meta-models that have been
explored in the literature, have been analyzed to identify the concepts that may be useful
to include in a meta-model aiming to capture changing capabilities. Furthermore, the
literature review, combined with a case study involving inter-organizational capabilities
have resulted in a set of goals [15] for the meta-model under development. These goals
are:
1. To manage capability change
2. To observe business context
3. To support decision on capability change
4. To manage capability delivery
5. To identify decision criteria
6. To identify capability alternatives
7. To analyze observed context data
8. To ensure that decision complies with intentions
9. To elicit internal and external business context
10. To manage transition delivery
11. To manage capability architecture
12. To observe external business context
13. To observe internal business context
14. To monitor political, economic, social, technological and legal context
15. To measure relevant properties
16. To establish KPIs
17. To manage introduction of a new capability
18. To manage retirement of a new capability
19. To manage modification of a new capability
20. To manage capability configuration
21. To allocate resources to capability

--- PAGE 283 ---
274 G. Koutsopoulos et al.
22. To specify capability ownership
23. To specify resource ownership
24. To manage internal resources
25. To identify external resources
26. To identify outsourced tasks
27. To support defining organizational boundaries
28. To identify collaborating organization
The manner in which these have driven the development of the meta-model is dis-
cussedbelow.Inaddition,thedimensionsofcapabilityandchangehavebeenresearched
andthisresultedinintroducingastate-basedcapabilitytypology[16],wherethepossible
states of capability change have been presented as a UML State Machine diagram. This
earlier work serves as input for the development of the meta-model.
Finally,theconstraintsin[27]havebeentakenintoconsideration,whichsuggestthat
(i) the meta-model should be minimal, which means that no elements that are not moti-
vated by the elicited information needs should be included, (ii) the design rationale for
theincludedelementsshouldberecordedand(iii)thesemanticsoftheincludedelements
should be clarified to avoid possible misunderstandings among different stakeholders.
3.3 Case Study
A regional public healthcare organization responsible for providing healthcare in a
Swedish county is the object of the case study. We refer to the organization as Regional
Healthcare (RH) to retain their anonymity along with the names of the organizations
they collaborate with. The specific object of the study was the organization’s capability
to provide healthcare guidance via phone to its residents. The data collection process for
the capability’s undergoing change was iterative and consisted of:
• Unstructured group interviews, conducted within four meetings. Two RH experts
were involved in the first one and one expert in the following three. The aim of
these interviews was to explore the changing capability based on change requests the
organization had received.
• Workshops, aiming to identify the main resources comprising the capability’s config-
uration, along with the associations among the resources. Three workshops resulted
in the creation of a value network model.
• Document studies, in order to explore the existing documentation concerning the
changing capability.
For the analysis, the experts were asked to identify the potential impact of the change,
which means that an experiential approach [28] was applied.
4 A Meta-model for Capability Change
The meta-model and its component elements are presented in this section.

--- PAGE 284 ---
Conceptualizing Capability Change 275
4.1 The Meta-model
The meta-model is presented in Fig. 1 as a UML Class Diagram that includes all the
relevantconcepts.Ascanbeseen,acentralpartisthethreechangefunctions:observation,
decision, and delivery.
Fig. 1. The capability change meta-model.
4.2 Meta-model Elements
In this section, we present the components of the meta-model which are addressing the
information needs elicited as goals for capability change in [15] and the capability and
change states in [16]. The meta-model elements and the goals they are addressing are
discussed below.
Capability (Goal 10, 11, 20, 22): The concept has been defined in Sect. 2. By def-
inition, modeling capability change requires the inclusion of the concept of capability.
A capability depends on one or more capabilities, has one or more configurations, has a
state and one or more outcomes and belongs to an owner.
Context (Goal 7, 9, 12, 13, 14): The context of the organization refers to all the
environmental factors that are relevant to the performance of the capability. Specialized
context-modeling methods exist within the area of capability modeling [29]. Context
may be assessed via measurements and has two specializations, internal and external
context.
Internal context (Goal13):These are thefactors existing withintheorganization and
are determined by at least one organization owning the capability.
External context (Goal 12): Refers to factors outside the organization, like political,
economic, social, environmental, or technological factors.

--- PAGE 285 ---
276 G. Koutsopoulos et al.
Resource (Goal 21, 23, 24, 25): Employing resources and capabilities analysis
explains how resources can deliver added value [30]. The concept includes capital,
infrastructures, human resources etc. Apart from being one of the most popular con-
cepts in capability meta-models, the concept has also been identified as an important
factor for two of the change functions. A set of resources is what comprises a capability
configuration and is involved not only in the delivery of change due to reallocations, but
also in the decision function using reallocation and new resources as a means for iden-
tifying new capability alternatives [15]. Resource may belong to one or more owners,
and is allocated to one or more capability configurations.
Organization (Goal 28): The concept refers to any public or private organization or
organizationalunit.Anyorganizationcaninteractwithoneormoreorganizations.Inthis
meta-model, the emphasis is not on the architecture of an organization, therefore, the
organization element only depicts an organization as a capability owner. Additionally,
the organization determines a capability’s internal context.
Owner (Goal 22, 23, 24, 25): This concept determines the ownership of capabilities
and resources. Any number of owners can own any number of capabilities and any
number of resources. In the meta-model, it is used as a generalization of organization.
Interaction type (Goal 28): This association class element describes the interaction
between organization elements, for example, collaboration or outsourcing.
Organizational boundary (Goal 26, 27): The importance of organizational boundary
has been identified in our earlier work [15, 31]. It defines the limits of an organization’s
capabilities. As an association class element in the meta-model, it is determined by the
interaction type, it determines at least one type of interaction and may be regulated by
boundary control.
Boundary control (Goal 27): Initially explored as a modeling element in [31], the
concept concerns any type of control between organizations, so as to regulate the inter-
action. It may refer to any level of control, from an informal agreement, to a detailed
formal contract.
Configuration (Goal 4, 6, 10, 20, 21): The complete set of resources that comprise
the capability along with the behavior elements that deliver it. A capability may have
several different configurations but only one may be active at any given moment in time.
In the meta-model, the actual change is captured as a transition between configurations.
It partially consists of one or more behavior elements and has allocated resources, thus
specifies a capability.
Change (Goal 1, 2, 3, 4): captures the change process as a whole. It has at least one
changetypeandconsistsofatleastonefunction.Inaddition,itisassociatedtoonestate.
ChangeType(Goal17,18,19):Thiselementmaydescribechangeelements.Possible
types of changes are introduction, modification or retirement [15].
Function (Goal 2, 3, 4): The function element refers to the specific change functions
thathavebeenidentifiedinourearlierwork[14].Morespecifically,oneormorefunctions
comprise change and it is a generalization of observation, decision and delivery.
Observation (Goal 2, 7, 12, 13, 14): The observation function concerns monitoring
a capability by capturing relevant external and internal data. The observation element

--- PAGE 286 ---
Conceptualizing Capability Change 277
in the meta-model is meant to depict the collecting sources of data valuable for eval-
uating a capability’s performance. It is a change function, it consists of one or more
measurements, and leads to one or more decisions.
Measurement (Goal 15, 16): It concerns the activity of assessing a factor relevant
to the capability’s performance. The element has a natural association to measurable
indicators like KPIs. It is a part of observation, can be applied to outcomes, is assessing
one or more context factors, and may result in the elaboration of decision criteria.
Outcome (Goal 15, 17, 18, 19): The outcome of a capability realization is used to
provide insight on whether a capability change is required or not. It is the result of one
or more capabilities and may be subjected to one or more measurements.
Decision (Goal 3, 5, 6, 7, 8): The decision activities are related to analyzing context
data to make a decision on capability change, in association to whether an adjustment
or transformation is required and which capability configuration is optimal for the adap-
tation. Therefore, decision is a change function, is determined by at least one criterion,
may be motivated by one or more intention elements, leads to delivery and observation
leads to it.
Intentionelement(Goal8):Thisabstractmeta-elementincludesalltheconceptsthat
refer to the intentions driving the change, i.e. concepts like goal, objective and desire.
An intention element may motivate one or more decisions.
Criterion (Goal 5): Decision criteria provide the standards that will be used in order
to make a decision. A criterion is often formulated through observation of the context.
In the meta-model, one or more criteria determine a decision and may be determined by
one or more measurements of the context.
Delivery (Goal 4, 10): Delivery of change refers to how the decision on change is
applied affecting the way a capability is realized and capabilities’ interrelationships.
Regarding the delivery element in the meta-model, it is a change function, at least one
decisionleadstoit,andasanassociationclass,describesthetransitionbetweencapability
configurations.
Behavior element (Goal 4): Another abstract meta-element which is meant to depict
every possible process, service or activity that is involved in the realization of the
capability. A behavior element is part of one or more capability configurations.
State (complies with [16]): The notion of state has been explored in earlier research
in relation to capability and change. The attribute potentiality has two possible values,
that is, enabled or disabled. In the meta-model the state class is a generalization for
capability and change states.
Capabilitystate(complieswith[16]):Aspecializationofthestateclass,isassociated
to one or more capabilities. The purpose attribute reflects if the capability is meant to
fulfil a goal or avoid a problem.
Change state (complies with [16]): A specialization of the state class, this element
includes as attributes the dimensions of change that have been introduced in [16], which
are scope, control, frequency, stride, desire, intention and tempo, specified for every
state, which means that the attributes always need to have a value.

--- PAGE 287 ---
278 G. Koutsopoulos et al.
5 Case Study: Improving a Public Healthcare Capability
RH is an organization whose responsibility is healthcare provision in a Swedish county.
One of its capabilities is providing healthcare advice via phone to residents and visitors
of the county. This capability is delivered by specially trained nurses, who are supported
by various information sources incorporated in specialized software. The capability is
known as 1177, named after the 4-digit number used for contacting the nurses. 1177’s
goal is to filter the cases and provide advice to the ones that are not in urgent need of
a physician’s attention, so that the workload of other health providing organizations is
reduced.
1177 is owned by RH but several public and private organizations are collaborating
by providing resources for it, a fact which results in a complex capability configuration.
Any proposed change to the capabilities of RH requires detailed analysis in order
to identify what will be affected and how. There are proposed changes that will have
an effect not only on how the capability is delivered but also on the interaction with
collaborating organizations, for example by requiring different contractual agreements.
The driving forces behind the changes are coming both via top-down and bot-
tom up motivations, the former as political interventions, pushing for quality improve-
ment and cost reduction, and the latter as employee and partner proposals. Further-
more,technologicaldevelopmentslikevideocalls,provideanopportunityforcapability
updates.
The incoming changes need to be analyzed and the meta-model should support the
analysis by including all the needed information. One specific change request has been
selected in order to demonstrate the meta-model’s efficiency for this task. It concerns an
improvement in the guidance support that enables the nurses that respond to the calls to
guide a caller directly to a health provider through an assessment of their symptoms.
5.1 Change Case: Guidance Support Improvement
Every call is handled using a Guidance support system, whose ownership, development
and usage are nationwide. The caller is asked to state existing symptoms which are reg-
istered by the nurse and the system responds by presenting possible sub-symptoms, that
the caller confirms or rejects in order to distinguish the state and emergency of the case.
There is a wide spectrum of responses depending on the emergency level, from advising
on self-treatment to calling an ambulance or suggesting a healthcare provider. This is
possible using an integrated healthcare provider catalogue. This catalogue is developed
andmaintainedbyacollaboratingprivateprovider,incontrastwiththeguidancesupport
system.
A proposed improvement concerns the association of each provider in the catalogue
withalistofsymptomsthattheprovidercanhandle.Thischangewillmakeitpossiblefor
a caller to be guided directly to a provider having, in the meantime, avoided the need to
reachadiagnosisofthecase.Thereareseveralbenefitsinvolvedfromtheimplementation
of this change. First of all, the caller is guided to a provider with the optimal expertise.
Additionally, the capability gains increased efficiency, reducing the required cost and
effort. Furthermore, it improves the usage of human resources, having the physicians
handle the cases that are most relevant to their expertise. A group of expert physicians is

--- PAGE 288 ---
Conceptualizing Capability Change 279
currently working on mapping healthcare providers to symptoms, in order to facilitate
the development of a web system for direct use and an .xml file that could be compatible
for usage in other systems.
Fig. 2. An instance of the meta-model for a capability modification case.
In practice, the change concerns the modification of a capability, which translates
to a different configuration according to our approach. The case has been modeled
as an instantiated version of our meta-model, which results in an object diagram, as
shown in Fig. 2. The Health Guidance capability has a goal-fulfilment purpose and
is enabled, as depicted through the association with the Health guidance state object
of the Capability state class. The Capability object is also associated to an instance
of the Organization class to depict its ownership by RH. The Change object, named
Health guidance improvement, has an enabled state, and it is characterized through
its attributes as a planned, continuous, incremental, desirable, intentional, and slow
adaptation. Its type is Modification and consists of three objects, the Health guidance
monitoringObservationobject,theChangeconfigurationDecisionobject,andtheAtoB
Deliveryobject.ObservationleadstoDecisionandthentoDelivery.Observationconsists
of three measurement objects which depict the assessment of three context factors,
Employee proposals, Partner proposals and Political influence, which are all included as
objects and associated to the respective measurement objects. The first factor concerns
internal context, and is associated to the RH object, while the other two are external
context factors. The external factor objects are also resulting in a Reduced cost Criterion
which determines the Decision object. This is also motivated by Improved efficiency,
which isan Intention element object. Additional associations of the capability object are

--- PAGE 289 ---
280 G. Koutsopoulos et al.
connectingitwithtwoconfigurationobjects,namelyConfigurationAandB.Theformer
is the one enabled before the change and the latter is the one enabled after the change.
ThisiscapturedintheDeliveryobject,whichisassociatedtobothConfigurationobjects
to depict the transition. The delivery of change disables Configuration A and enables
configuration B. The difference between the two configurations is depicted through
their allocated resources. Configuration A is only associated to the Guidance system
and Provider catalogue system, while B is also associated to the Symptom – provider
system. An 1177 Behavior element object is associated to both configurations. It is
interesting to note that the Provider catalogue and Guidance system are associated to the
Private provider and National public provider respectively, so as to represent ownership.
This means that while RH owns the capability, the two collaborating organizations
own involved resources. Especially when it comes to the symptom – provider system,
the object, which is part of Configuration B, is owned by RH along with the System
development capability, on which Health guidance depends, and the Expert physicians
used to develop it. However, the Provider catalogue system and the Provider data are
owned by Private provider, so the Collaboration Interaction type object is not enough to
representthecase.ADataavailabilityOrganizationalboundaryandaContractBoundary
control object complement the required information for this part of the diagram.
6 Discussion
This study is a part of an ongoing work, hence, the development of the presented meta-
model artifact will evolve in the following design-evaluation cycles. DSR guidelines are
also stating that artifact development is almost always an iterative step [13]. What an
iterative process implies is the identification of weaknesses and strengths in the artifact,
which can be translated to opportunities for improvement. Since a meta-model is an
essential method component, the current version of the meta-model contributes towards
establishing the foundation for the development of a method specially designed for
managing capability change, by (i) capturing the relevant information according to the
elicited goals and (ii) decomposing change into the previously elicited functions that it
consists of, and, (iii) depicting the transition during change implementation.
Regarding the efficiency of the meta-model in capturing the needed information and
depictingtheaspectsofcapabilitychange,thedemonstrationusingtheRHcasesuggests
that all the required factors have been taken into consideration and the information
structure seems adequate for the particular case. The set of goals elicited in our previous
work have been fulfilled, even though the case was not optimal for details in goals like
the elicitation of context, because to a certain degree, the elicitation had already been
performed by the stakeholders and interviewees, in terms of recognizing the political,
employee and partner influence on the Health guidance capability. Therefore, any future
application of the meta-model should favor the selection of a case, where the need and
reasons for change are not obvious, so that the meta-model’s possible deficiencies will
be indicated.
The main concern that has risen from the application in this study is the complexity
of the produced models, which is a result of the meta-model’s structure, and seems
to produce visually cluttered models. During the instantiation of the meta-model to an

--- PAGE 290 ---
Conceptualizing Capability Change 281
object diagram, the complexity of the object diagram exceeded our initial expectations
and what can intuitively be seen as practical for the purpose of communicating with
domain experts. For this reason, several pieces of information have been omitted in
order to reduce the complexity of the result, in terms of a less cluttered model. For
example, many resources involved in the configurations of the capability are missing
because their role in the undergoing change was deemed of lower priority. For example,
the specialized nurses that perform the guidance, the telephone system and the journal
system are not affecting the change project. Yet, omitting pieces of information is not
feasible in every case, and this should be addressed in the meta-model.
During the development of the meta-model the decision to develop a single unified
meta-modelthatwouldencompassallaspectsofchangealreadyindicatedahighlevelof
complexity.Forthisreason,certainaspectsofcapabilitychangewereslightlyneglected,
which means that a higher level of abstraction was applied, a fact that resulted in more
generic meta-elements, for example, Intention element and Behavior element. However,
it is not a coincidence, that all the generic meta-elements reflect aspects that could
be decomposed into entire models. For example, decomposing Intention, Behavior or
Context elements may require the integration of a goal, process [18] or context model
[29] respectively. Among the elements that were included in the meta-model, the point
of emphasis that stands out as the epicenter of change is the Configuration class and
its recursive association that depicts transitions between configurations. Any further
decompositionofthispartwillonlypromotetheinitialgoal,tomodelcapabilitychange.
Nevertheless, decomposing goals and processes may be useful, yet, it is not the main
focus point of this project.
This raises the question of employing the technique of slicing meta-models [20],
whichmeansthatthemeta-model issplitaccording tospecificviewpoints.Ononehand,
pre-existingcommonviewpointslikegoals,processesandcontextcanbeintegratedusing
existing compatible approaches, to save significant time and effort. On the other hand,
within this project, new viewpoints can also be elaborated, i.e. capability, observation,
decision, delivery and ownership. This is a possible future step that is worth exploring
before deciding to finalize the artifact.
7 Conclusion
In this study a meta-model has been presented that will act as a basis for the develop-
ment of a method for modeling and analyzing capability change. Being a DSR project,
its nature is iterative, therefore, several iterations are expected before the artifact is final-
ized. Therefore, the introduction of the meta-model was succeeded by an application of
the artifact on a real case for demonstrative reasons. This application provided opportu-
nities for improvement, especially in the area of complexity, including the possibility to
introduce viewpoints in a later version of the model.
The next step in our project is to validate the meta-model via interviews with experi-
enced decision-makers. This activity will provide additional insights towards the final-
ization of the artifact. In parallel, the initial experience of this study will be taken into
consideration, in order to explore the implementation of viewpoints in the next stage of
method development.

--- PAGE 291 ---
282 G. Koutsopoulos et al.
Acknowledgment. We would like to express our gratitude to the employees of RH who took
their time in letting us interview them to identify and describe the presented case.
References
1. Proper, H.A., Winter, R., Aier, S., de Kinderen, S. (eds.): Architectural Coordination
of Enterprise Transformation. Springer, Cham (2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
69584-6
2. Burnes, B.: Managing Change. Pearson, Harlow, England (2014)
3. Zimmermann,N.:DynamicsofDriversofOrganizationalChange.Gabler,Wiesbaden(2011).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-8349-6811-1
4. Burke, W.W.: Organization Change: Theory and Practice. Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks
(2017)
5. van Gils, B., Proper, H.A.: Enterprise modelling in the age of digital transformation. In:
Buchmann,R.A.,Karagiannis,D.,Kirikova,M.(eds.)PoEM2018.LNBIP,vol.335,pp.257–
273. Springer, Cham (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-02302-7_16
6. Hoverstadt, P., Loh, L.: Patterns of strategy. Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group, London,
New York (2017)
7. Loucopoulos, P., Stratigaki, C., Danesh, M.H., Bravos, G., Anagnostopoulos, D., Dimi-
trakopoulos, G.: Enterprise capability modeling: concepts, method, and application. In: 2015
International Conference on Enterprise Systems (ES), pp. 66–77. IEEE, Basel (2015)
8. Sandkuhl,K.,Stirna,J.(eds.):CapabilityManagementinDigitalEnterprises.Springer,Cham
(2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-90424-5
9. Loucopoulos, P., Kavakli, E.: Capability oriented enterprise knowledge modeling: the
CODEK approach. In: Karagiannis, D., Mayr, H.C., Mylopoulos, J. (eds.) Domain-Specific
Conceptual Modeling, pp. 197–215. Springer, Cham (2016). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
319-39417-6_9
10. Persson, A., Stirna, J.: An explorative study into the influence of business goals on the prac-
tical use of enterprise modelling methods and tools. In: Harindranath, G. et al. (eds.) New
Perspectives on Information Systems Development, pp. 275–287 Springer, Boston (2002).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4615-0595-2_22
11. Pearlson, K.E., Saunders, C.S., Galletta, D.F.: Managing and Using Information Systems: a
Strategic Approach. Wiley, Hoboken (2020)
12. Hevner,A.,Chatterjee,S.:DesignResearchinInformationSystems.Springer,Boston(2010).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4419-5653-8
13. Johannesson, P., Perjons, E.: An Introduction to Design Science. Springer, Cham (2014).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-10632-8
14. Koutsopoulos, G., Henkel, M., Stirna, J.: Dynamic adaptation of capabilities: exploring
meta-model diversity. In: Reinhartz-Berger, I., Zdravkovic, J., Gulden, J., Schmidt, R. (eds.)
BPMDS/EMMSAD -2019. LNBIP, vol. 352, pp. 181–195. Springer, Cham (2019). https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-20618-5_13
15. Koutsopoulos,G.,Henkel,M.,Stirna,J.:Requirementsforobserving,deciding,anddelivering
capability change. In: Gordijn, J., Guédria, W., Proper, H.A. (eds.) PoEM 2019. LNBIP, vol.
369, pp. 20–35. Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-35151-9_2
16. Koutsopoulos, G., Henkel, M., Stirna, J.: Modeling the dichotomies of organizational
change: a state-based capability typology. In: Feltus, C., Johannesson, P., Proper, H.A. (eds.)
Proceedings of the PoEM 2019 Forum, pp. 26–39. CEUR-WS.org, Luxembourg (2020)

--- PAGE 292 ---
Conceptualizing Capability Change 283
17. Maes,G.,VanHootegem,G.:Towardadynamicdescriptionoftheattributesoforganizational
change. In: Research in Organizational Change and Development, pp. 191–231. Emerald
Group Publishing Limited (2011)
18. Sandkuhl, K., Stirna, J., Persson, A., Wißotzki, M.: Enterprise Modeling: Tackling Business
Challenges with the 4EM Method. Springer, Heidelberg (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-662-43725-4
19. Frank, U.: Enterprise modelling: The next steps. Enterp. Model. Inf. Syst. Architect.
(EMISAJ) 9, 22–37 (2014)
20. Bork, D., Karagiannis, D., Pittl, B.: How are metamodels specified in practice? Empirical
insights and recommendations. Presented at the 24th Americas Conference on Information
Systems, AMCIS 2018, New Orleans, LA, USA, 16 August 2018
21. Koutsopoulos, G.: Modeling organizational potentials using the dynamic nature of capabili-
ties.In:JointProceedingsoftheBIR2018ShortPapers,WorkshopsandDoctoralConsortium,
pp. 387–398. CEUR-WS.org, Stockholm (2018)
22. Ulrich, W., Rosen, M.: The business capability map: the “Rosetta stone” of business/IT
alignment. Cutter Consort. Enterp. Archit. 14(2) (2011)
23. España, S., et al.: Strategies for capability modelling: analysis based on initial experiences.
In: Persson, A., Stirna, J. (eds.) CAiSE 2015. LNBIP, vol. 215, pp. 40–52. Springer, Cham
(2015). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-19243-7_4
24. Karagiannis, D., Bork, D., Utz, W.: Metamodels as a conceptual structure: some seman-
tical and syntactical operations. In: Bergener, K., Räckers, M., Stein, A. (eds.) The
Art of Structuring, pp. 75–86. Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
06234-7_8
25. Object Management Group (OMG): OMG® Unified Modeling Language®. https://www.
omg.org/spec/UML/2.5.1/PDF (2017)
26. Bork, D., Karagiannis, D., Pittl, B.: A survey of modeling language specification techniques.
Inf. Syst. 87, 101425 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.is.2019.101425
27. Kurpjuweit, S., Winter, R.: Viewpoint-based meta model engineering. In: Reichert, M.,
Strecker,S.,Turowski,K.(eds.)EnterpriseModellingandInformationSystemsArchitectures:
Concepts and Applications, pp. 143–161. Ges. für Informatik, Bonn (2007)
28. Kilpinen, M.S.: The emergence of change at the systems engineering and software design
interface (2008)
29. Koç,H.,Sandkuhl,K.:Contextmodellingincapabilitymanagement.In:Sandkuhl,K.,Stirna,
J. (eds.) Capability Management in Digital Enterprises, pp. 117–138. Springer, Cham (2018).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-90424-5_7
30. Lynch, R.L.: Strategic Management. Pearson Education, Harlow, New York (2018)
31. Henkel, M., Koutsopoulos, G., Bider, I., Perjons, E.: Using the fractal enterprise model for
inter-organizational business processes. In: Joint Proceedings of the ER Forum and Poster &
Demos Session 2019, pp. 56–69. CEUR-WS.org, Salvador (2019)

--- PAGE 293 ---
Supporting Early Phases of Digital Twin
Development with Enterprise Modeling
and Capability Management: Requirements
from Two Industrial Cases
Kurt Sandkuhl1 and Janis Stirna2(B)
1 University of Rostock, Rostock, Germany
kurt.sandkuhl@uni-rostock.de
2 Department of Computer and Systems Sciences, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden
js@dsv.su.se
Abstract. Industry 4.0 is a concept that has attracted much research and devel-
opment over the last decade. At its core is the need to connect physical devices
with their digital representations which essentially means establishing a digital
twin.Currently,thetechnologicaldevelopmentofdigitaltwinshasgatheredmuch
attention while the organizational and business aspects are less investigated. In
response, the suitability of enterprise modeling and capability management for
the purpose of developing and management of business-driven digital twins has
been analyzed. A number of requirements from literature are summarized and
two industrial cases have been analyzed for the purpose of investigating how the
digital twin initiatives emerge and what forces drive the start of their implementa-
tion projects. The findings are discussed with respect to how Enterprise Modeling
and the Capability-Driven Development method are able to support the business
motivation, design and runtime management of digital twins.
Keywords: Capability management · Digital twins · Digital transformation
1 Introduction
Inmanufacturingindustries,industry4.0anddigitaltransformationareinterrelatedfields
that both motivate the development of digital twins. Industry 4.0 is a concept attracting
much research and development over the last decade, including reference models [1],
applications [2],standards [3]and supporting methods [4].A core idea of Industry 4.0 is
to connect physical devices (e.g., manufacturing systems and the objects they produce),
digital components (e.g. ERP or MES systems) and human actors along production
processes for the sake of seamless integration and continuous monitoring and control
[5]. Digital twins (DT) support this core idea and can be defined as “a dynamic virtual
representation of a physical object or system across its lifecycle, using real-time data to
enable understanding, learning and reasoning” [6]. Digital transformation, in general,
denotes adopting digital technologies, such as industry 4.0 related technologies or DTs,
inthedigitalizationofanorganization’sbusinessmodelanditsoperations(cf.Sect.2.3).
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. Nurcan et al. (Eds.): BPMDS 2020/EMMSAD 2020, LNBIP 387, pp. 284–299, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49418-6_19

--- PAGE 294 ---
Supporting Early Phases of Digital Twin Development 285
Several researchers emphasize the importance of industry 4.0 for digital transformation
[21] or, vice versa, that digital transformation motivates the implementation of industry
4.0 [20]. However, DTs as an element of digital transformation or digital transformation
as driver for DT development are not included in the aforementioned work. A literature
analysis (see Sect. 5) confirmed that digital twin research predominantly focuses on
technologicalquestionsofDTdesignandoperations.Sofar,organizationalandbusiness
model related aspects of DTs are only sparsely covered in research which motivated
this paper. In response to this, the paper’s objective is to investigate how DT solutions
are integrated into organizational structures and business models of manufacturing
enterprises, and what motivates the development of DT from a digital transformation
perspective.
Enterprise Modeling (EM) is a versatile approach and is able to tackle various orga-
nizational design problems by means of multi-perspective conceptual modeling. EM
captures organizational knowledge about the motivation and business requirements for
designing IS [7]. Hence it has the potential of capturing and representing the organi-
zational motivation for DT design. A key aspect of operating and managing DTs is to
configure and adjust them according to the situational changes in operations. Capability
Management,andinparticularCapabilityDrivenDevelopment(CDD),hasbeenproven
applicable for managing information systems (IS) in changing context [10]. E.g., CDD
supports generation of monitoring dashboards from models that include context ele-
ments, measurable properties, KPIs as well as rule-based based adjustments based on
context data. In concrete terms, the goal of this paper is to analyze the suitability of EM
and capability management for the purpose of supporting the development and man-
agement of DTs from an organizational perspective. We have chosen the 4EM and CDD
methods for the purpose of this study because they have already established integration
mechanisms between themselves and with other modeling languages.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 gives background to EM,
CDD, and digital transformation. Section 3 describes our research approach. Section 4
presents two case studies. Section 5 summarizes the main requirements for developing
Industry 4.0 solutions found in literature. Section 6 discusses the requirements from
Sects. 4 and 5 with respect to CDD. Section 7 discusses an example of a capability
model for the purpose of DT development. Section 8 provides concluding remarks.
2 Background
2.1 Enterprise Modeling and 4EM
EM is the process of creating an enterprise model that captures all the enterprise’s
aspects or perspectives that are required for a given modeling purpose. An enterprise
model consists of a set of interlinked sub-models, each of them focusing on a specific
perspective, like, processes, goals, concepts, actors, rules, IS components.

--- PAGE 295 ---
286 K. Sandkuhl and J. Stirna
4EM [7] is a representative of the Scandinavian strand of EM methods. At its core
is participatory stakeholder involvement and the modeling process is usually organized
in the form of facilitated workshops. 4EM shares many underlying principles of the, so
called, multi-perspective, approaches that recommend analyzing organizational prob-
lems from various perspectives, e.g. AKM [12] and MEMO [11]. 4EM consists of six
interconnected sub-model types for modeling a specific aspect or perspective of the
enterprise – Goals Model, Business Rules Model, Concepts Model, Business Process
Model, Actors and Resources Model, as well as Technical Components and Require-
mentsModel.4EMalsosupportsintegrationwithothermodelinglanguagesandmethods
by allowing to define new inter-model relationships between the 4EM components and
components of the modeling language to be integrated.
2.2 Capability Driven Development
In [10] the concept of capability thinking and a method to capability management are
introduced. It is an organizational mindset that puts capabilities in focus of the business
model and IS development. Capability thinking emphasizes that capabilities are not
self-emergent, instead they should be planned, implemented, controlled, and adjusted.
In doing so they need to be addressed from the perspectives of (1) vision (e.g. goals
and KPIs), (2) enterprise designs such as processes and IS architectures, (3) situation
context incl. measurable properties, as well (4) best practices such as process variants
and patterns for dealing with context changes. Capability as a concept allows reasoning
about these four aspects of the business in an integrated way because enterprises need
to know how to realize the business vision and designs as well as what needs to be
changed depending on real-life situations. The definition of capability is the ability and
capacity that enables an enterprise to achieve a business goal in a certain context [10].
Successful implementation of capability thinking will lead to capability management as
a systematic way to plan, design, develop, deploy, operate, and adjust capabilities.
CDD is a method supporting the four perspectives of capability thinking. CDD con-
sistsofanumberofmethodcomponentseachfocusingonaspecifictaskofthecapability
cycle, such as Capability Design, Context Modeling, Patterns and Variability Modeling,
Capability Adjustment Algorithm Specification, as well as method extensions for deal-
ing with certain business challenges such as supporting business process outsourcing
and managing service configuration with the support of open data [17].
2.3 Digital Transformation
In scientific literature, digital transformation often is discussed in the general context
of digitalization and considered the most complex digitalization phase [13]. Its focus is
on the disruptive social and economic consequences which, due to the potential of digi-
tal technologies to substantially change markets, lead to new technological application
potentials and the resulting changes in economic structures, qualification requirements
for employees and working life in general. [14] proposes to distinguish between trans-
formation of the value proposition and the value creation when analysing and planning
digital transformation. These two “dimensions” can be divided into different steps of

--- PAGE 296 ---
Supporting Early Phases of Digital Twin Development 287
digitalization which form the prerequisite for the next step. In [15] we have proposed
the steps for the dimensions of operations and product digitization.
In the operations dimension, the steps are (1) replacing paper documents with dig-
ital representations, (2) end-to-end automated processing of this digital representation
within a process and (3) integration of relevant processes within the enterprise and with
partners.Ontheproductdimension,thedeparturepointfordigitizationarephysicalprod-
ucts without built-in information or communication technology. Digitization steps are
(1) to enhance the product/service by providing complementary services (maintenance
information, service catalogs) without actually changing it, (2) to extend functionality
and value proposition of products by integration of sensors and actuators, and (3) redef-
inition of the product or service which leads to a completely new value proposition. A
completed digital transformation requires all three steps in both dimensions.
3 Research Approach
This study is part of a research program aiming to provide methodological and tool
support for organizations in dynamic contexts, e.g., supporting the process of digital
transformation and capability management. It follows the five stages of Design Science
research [16], namely, problem explication, requirements definition, design and devel-
opment of the design artifact, demonstration, as well as evaluation. This study concerns
the first two steps for the design artifact supporting DT design and management from an
organizational perspective. This part of our research started from the following research
question which is based on the motivation presented in Sect. 1: RQ: In the context of
digitaltransformation,howaredigitaltwininitiativesemergingandwhatarethedriving
forces for starting implementation projects?
The research method used for working on this research question is a combination of
literature study and descriptive case study. Based on the research question, we identified
industrial cases of digital transformation suitable for studying the origin of DT develop-
ments, i.e. we performed qualitative case studies in order to obtain relevant and original
data(seeSect.4).Qualitative casestudyisanapproach toresearchthatfacilitatesexplo-
ration of a phenomenon within its context using a variety of data sources. This ensures
that the subject under consideration is explored from a variety of perspectives which
allows for multiple facets of the phenomenon to be revealed and understood. Within
the case studies, we used three different perspectives, which at the same time represent
sources of data: we analyzed documents about business models, products, manufactur-
ing process of the companies; we performed workshops targeting digital transformation
and DTs as part thereof; and we interviewed domain experts. Yin [18] differentiates
case studies explanatory, exploratory and descriptive. The case studies in Sect. 4 are
considered descriptive, as they describe the phenomenon of initiating DT development
and the real-life context in which it occurs.
Based on the results of the case studies, primarily case study requirements to DT
development, we selected research areas with relevant work for these requirements and
analyzed the literature in these areas. The purpose of the analysis was to find existing
approaches and methods for modeling DT and how they are integrated into the business.
This work limits the focus on DTs in manufacturing, although they can also be used in
other application fields. To summarize,

--- PAGE 297 ---
288 K. Sandkuhl and J. Stirna
– Thecasestudiesexplorewhetherbusinessmodelsandorganizationalcontextarereally
relevant from industrial perspective. We focus on the early phases of DT realization,
i.e. decision making and specification,
– A literature study explores whether existing research work covers modeling
approaches for business models and organizational context of DT.
4 Industrial Case Studies
4.1 Case Study A: Producer of Pumps
Company A is a medium-sized manufacturer of different kinds of pumps and pumping
technologies, e.g. swimming pool pumps, sewage pumps, industrial pumps for heavy
environments or ship pumps. Company A is well-established on the international mar-
ket with a market share of more than 50% in some segments. Although its business is
stable and developing well, the management decided to explore new service opportuni-
ties and business models applying digital technologies. More concretely, the idea of the
company’sproductmanagementistointegratesensorsintopumpsandtransmittheinfor-
mation to the back-office by using a datalink. This idea can be classified as converting
the pumps into smart connected products or Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices.
TheopportunityfordatacollectionatcompanyAemergedwhentheitagreedtostart
a study on digital transformation options. The study so far had two workshops at the
company’s headquarter and several interviews. The first workshop was directed to the
management with a focus on clarifying general steps of digital transformation, possible
procedures and aspects of the enterprise to be considered. The second workshop was
directed towards identifying concrete digital transformation options and potential ways
of implementation. For our research question, the second workshop and the preparatory
interviews were the most relevant and will be in focus of the analysis.
One purpose of the preparatory interviews for the second workshop was to under-
stand the current situation of IoT and sensor integration into the company’s products.
The key expert here was the research and development manager. Before the interview,
guidelines consisting of a list of questions and aspects to explore were prepared. The
interview took 30 min and was conducted by one researcher; notes were taken. As a
preparation of the digital transformation workshop, the participants were selected to
include all relevant departments of company A (product development, production, mar-
keting, sales & distribution, and services) and members of top and middle management.
All eight participants were informed in beforehand about the purpose of the workshop
and importance of their participation. The workshop included the collection and cluster-
ing of new product and services ideas from the participants, joint definition of priorities,
and development of a business model prototype for the top three product/service ideas.
The workshop was documented in photo documentation of collected ideas and clusters,
written documentation of the business model prototypes. Notes were taken to capture
additional information regarding ideas and the business model.

--- PAGE 298 ---
Supporting Early Phases of Digital Twin Development 289
Theproductmanagerstatedasoneofthemotivationsfortheworkshop:“Ourdatalink
device is nearly ready. It captures data and puts them into our own cloud. So far, we
only capture data about malfunction or energy consumption that is anyhow visible on
the pump’s display. But we do not have a good idea, how to do business with this data.
And we probably need more sensors.”
Among the top innovation ideas were (a) smart pumps and (b) pumping as a ser-
vice, which the workshop participants both related to the topic of digital twins. When
discussing the smart pump, the sales representative explained: “We think that our bigger
customers want to have control if our pumps do what they are supposed to do in their
installations. Some of them call it the digital twin. This would help us to sell pumps to
them. We have to use or develop sensors that deliver this kind of information.”
Pumping as a service aims at selling the functionality of the pump instead of the
pump as physical device which would lead to a service agreement where the company
is paid for pumped cubic meters or hours of pumping. One of the participants remarked
to this idea: “For this, we need full control what is happening with the pump. So, we
need something a bit like a digital twin, but for our internal purposes.”
When developing the business model prototype for pumping as a service, most of
thediscussiontimewasspentonorganizational issueswithinthecompany: “wheredoes
all the information from our pumps arrive, how do we make sense out of it and how do
we organize the reaction?” For the smart pumps, the discussion was more about “how
do we integrate our pumps in the DT system of our customer and what kind of sensors
do we need?” Furthermore, the development department mentioned “We would need
to know what technical basis our customers use for their DTs and what interfaces we
have to provide. But most of our customers have no real answers to these questions.
Sometimes we get the impression that they simply don’t know.”
4.2 Case Study B: Tool Produces for Automotive Industry
CompanyBisasubsidiaryofamajorautomotivemanufacturerresponsibleforproducing
toolsforthemetalpartsofchassisproduction,suchasroofs,doors,sidepanels,etc.These
tools, called (press) forms, are developed individually for each car model variant in an
iterative process of casting, milling and/or welding, and polishing. Active components,
suchascutters,hydraulicspringsorpunchers areintegratedintotheactualform.Putting
the forms into operation in a press shop requires a try-out phase to fine-tune the forms’
precision. Company B is doing the largest share of its business with the automotive
manufacturer. It also serves other automotive and truck suppliers. Due to its unique
specializationonformsforaspecificmetal,companyBiswell-positionedinthemarket.
However,itsmanagementaimstoincreaseefficiencyandflexibilityinthebusinessmodel
to be prepared for possible future market changes.
This case study emerged when company B decided to investigate radical digital
innovation focusing on disruptive ways of working or technologies instead of grad-
ual optimization or increase in efficiency. A workshop was planned to investigate the
potential for radical innovation concerning the possibilities for drastic and seemingly

--- PAGE 299 ---
290 K. Sandkuhl and J. Stirna
unrealistic changes, like, reduction of production time for forms to 10% of the current
value, no setup time of the production system or internal logistics requiring no staff.
Preparationandexecutionoftheworkshopwassimilartowhatwasdescribedforthe
firstcasestudy:theselectedparticipantsrepresentedallrelevantdepartmentsofthecom-
pany (design, production, logistics, procurement, human resources, economics, service
and customer care), mostly represented by the head of the unit or senior experts. All ten
participantswereinformedbeforehand aboutpurposeoftheworkshop,theneedtothink
“out-of-the-box” and the importance of their participation. The workshop included the
collection and clustering of radical transformation of products and of operations, joint
clustering and definition of priorities. Based on the priorities, an initial evaluation of the
top three options for radical transformation of products and the top three transforma-
tions in operations was done. The content of the workshop was documented in photo
documentation of collected ideas and clusters, written documentation of the evaluation
results, and notes. The workshop was conducted by two researchers: one facilitator and
one note taker. In this paper analyzes the documented content.
For radical transformation of internal operations, one of the clusters identified was
named“digitaltwinoftheownfactory”.Theprimaryintentionwastoalwayshaveareal-
time status of all resource in the own production system including facilities, parts and
staff.Fortheradicaltransformationoftheproducts,oneoftheclusterswastheDTofeach
individualformonthecustomers’site.Itisexpectedthatafullydigitalizedandautomated
press shop would need full control and real-time monitoring of the complete production
flow and all components of the press shop. In this regard, the workshop participants
discussedhowtosetupthecooperationwithpressmanufacturersandlogisticscompanies
to discuss standards for the DT.
4.3 Case Study Analysis
The case study requirements (CSR) are derived from analysis of the two case studies
and are presented in the following with a short motivation from the cases.
CSR1: DTs have to support the goals and business models of the company.
Both companies did not have any ongoing DT activity before the start of the digital
transformation initiative. Once the workshops explicated ideas for service and business
models that demand DT-like functionality, DTs were seriously considered and finally
selected for implementation. In both cases, the primary goal is not to implement DT per
se but to provide services or create a platform which can be facilitated by DTs.
CSR2:DTsarepartofoperationsinanenterprise–eithertosupportmanufacturing
execution in the own or the client’s production, or to facilitate value-added services on
the customer side, like, e.g. predictive/preventive maintenance.
TheconceptofDTandenvisionedfunctionalityappearedintheusecasesindifferent
shapes:a)theDTsofthecompany’sproductsinstalledattheclients’sitesforthepurpose
ofofferingservicesdependingon(real-time)datasupplyandmonitoring(e.g.,pumping-
as-a-servicerequiresmonitoringofthepumpsinstalledattheclients’industrialfacility),
b) the DT for the control of a facility possibly integrating various components (e.g. the
DT of the manufacturing facility of company B or the DT of a ship which has a pump of

--- PAGE 300 ---
Supporting Early Phases of Digital Twin Development 291
company A installed), and c) the combination of a) and b), i.e. the company’s product
monitored in a client’s facility. E.g., the form of company B with remote monitoring
for purposes of preventive maintenance and local monitoring for optimizing production
in the press shop. Options a) and b) require different information to be aggregated,
displayed, and monitored.
CSR3: What aspect of reality has to be represented in a DT depends on the
organizational integration and the intended business model of the company.
CSR1 sates that DTs must be supporting a company’s business model. When imple-
menting business models, this means that the digital twin has to provide the information
about status or operations of the product required for the value creation underlying the
business model. E.g. in case A, pumping-as-a-service requires to capture the perfor-
mance of a pump to be able to invoice the provided hours or pumped volume, the energy
consumption of the pump, and the status of lubricants to avoid problems in the service.
CSR4: Identification offeaturesandparameters thathavetobevisibleintheDTcan
be supported by developing business model prototypes and investigating organizational
integration.
In both case studies, the options for new DT-based services were subject to an initial
feasibilitystudy.Thisstudystartedfromthedefinitionofwhatservicehastobeprovided
for the customer, what information and functionality are required for the services (i.e.,
specificationoffeaturesandparameters)andhowthisinformationisprocessedandused
in the enterprise to deliver the service (i.e. the organizational processes).
CSR5: Component developers request a better methodical and technical integration
of DTs (platform) development and component development.
In particular in case B, the case study company made clear that the development
of a smart form would require collaboration with the manufacturer of the press for
implementing the vision of a smart press shop. In case A, a similar request emerged
when discussing the integration of pumps in complex systems, like, e.g. a cruising ship.
Both cases showed the need for technical agreements (interfaces and platforms) and
methodical agreements with the digital twin provider.
CSR6: Business models and organizational processes are subject to continuous
improvement and so are DT features and parameters.
During development of business model prototypes, in both cases a kind of roadmap
for stepwise implementing and extending services and business model was discussed,
and the actual prototype intended to cover only the first stage. An expectation was
expressed that the first stage would have to be extended based on the feedback of the
customer and lessons learned from operations. With respect to modeling support, our
recommendation is to explicitly model organizational context and business models as
preparation of the DT design.
5 Requirements for Digital Twin Design from Literature
DTs are usually designed and operated in the context of industry 4.0. In the field of pro-
ductionsystems,thereisasubstantialamountofworkonDTs.Inthecontextofthispaper,

--- PAGE 301 ---
292 K. Sandkuhl and J. Stirna
theintersectionofdigitaltransformationandDTasindustry4.0solutionismostrelevant.
Mittal et al. [20] investigated what manufacturing small and medium-sized enterprises
(SME) need to successfully adopt industry 4.0. As a result, 16 specific requirements for
SME were identified including smart manufacturing solutions for specialized products,
which includes DTs. Schumacher et al. [21] proposed a maturity model for assessing
Industry4.0readinessandidentifyninedimensions ofmaturityand62maturityitemsin
their Industry 4.0 Maturity Model. The maturity items include technology and product
related aspects, like digitalization of products, product integration into other systems,
and DTs. Considering the objective of this research our primary focus is on supporting
the fit of the DT to the organization’s needs in the industry 4.0 program, which, as dis-
cussedpreviously,canbesupportedbymodeling.Therehavebeenseveralinvestigations
of the needs for modeling support for industry 4.0. Hermann et al. [9] present four main
principles of industry 4.0, namely:
– Interconnection supporting various aspects of communication between actors, such
as human to human, human to machine, and machine to machine.
– Informationtransparency requiressupportingtheidentificationandlinkingofvarious
data types and sources, e.g. sensor data, process execution data, and factory designs,
which in essence leads to DTs. A part of this task is the creation and monitoring
the surrounding environment and situational properties related to the factory, i.e.
the application context needs to be modelled and monitored. Some of the context
information might also be needed in advance which requires using the means of
predictive data analytics. All data needs to be presented to participants in the industry
4.0 design, depending on the criticality and relevance.
– Decentralized decisions. The design should be able to combine local as well as global
information to support decentralized and autonomous decision making.
– Technical assistance. The decentralized decision making needs to be supported by
assistanceISthatareabletoaggregateandvisualizecontentinvariousformatssuitable
for different application contexts.
Wortmann et al. [8] report on a systematic literature review and in terms of the
expected benefits for modeling for industry 4.0 puts forward the following: reducing
time (development time, time-to-market), reducing costs (of development, integration,
configuration), improving sustainability, and improving international competitiveness.
This is in line of what are the general intentions of allying development methods and
tools. In the context of industry 4.0 modeling addresses cyber aspects, physical aspects,
orcyber-physicalaspectsofwhichthelatteristheleastresearchedandforwhichtheleast
number of contributions have been elaborated. Wortmann et al. indicate that the current
trends include methods for modeling digital representation, failure handling, human
factors,informationmanagement,integration,process,product,configurationvalidation
and verification, as well as visualization. The areas of product modeling, validation
and verification, and information management attracting the most attention right now.
Human factors and visualization are addressed by considerably fewer contributions.
However, this study focused mostly on methods that have proven useful for IS design

--- PAGE 302 ---
Supporting Early Phases of Digital Twin Development 293
and development, and these methods do not support a holistic view on design that
integrates organizational and human aspects with the more common IS aspects.
The analysis of the current state of modeling for the purpose of designing industry
4.0 solutions, including DTs, calls for a number of areas of advancements, as follows.
Concerning modeling and model management:
– Support for integrated multi-perspective views on all aspects of, such as, business and
organizational, IS architecture, implementation, and operation at runtime.
– Integration of different artifact kinds such as models, 3D drawings. In this regard,
Wortmann et al. call for the integration of models in the engineering, deployment
process, and operation processes. To achieve alignment, the integration should start
with the business design and requirements for the engineering process.
– Supporting design models with runtime data and, consequently, extracting models
that can be used in later design iterations from runtime data. Using runtime data for
the purpose of assessing the performance of designs, especially reusable designs that
are applied in several operational installations.
Concerning adaptation and adjustment:
– Support for adaptation and adjustment of the solution according to changing business
goals and requirements as well as application context.
– The solution should have built-in means for runtime adaptations that do not require
re-design and re-deployment.
Concerning continuous lifecycle management:
– Supporting visualizations of runtime data in design models, e.g. by specifying
what data should be presented and in what format. Management dashboards and
presentation views can be generated from models.
– Support of the management of the complete lifecycle including design and runtime.
Withrespecttothelatter,[8]discussthepossibilityofadoptingtheDevOpsprinciples
for developing industry 4.0 solutions. The proposed vision for such a lifecycle is similar
to the CDD process [10], discussed in Sect. 6.
6 Analysis
6.1 Discussing the Requirements from Literature and Case Studies
First, we will discuss the requirements from Sect. 5 and how the three main topics of (1)
modeling and model management, (2) adaptation and adjustment; and (3) continuous
lifecycle management, can be addressed by EM and CDD. This will be followed by a
discussion of the case study requirements.

--- PAGE 303 ---
294 K. Sandkuhl and J. Stirna
Modeling and model management. It calls for multi-perspective views to integrate
various aspects and artefacts of the organizational design and align them with the DT
design. Multi-perspective EM methods, such as 4EM, are suitable for supporting this.
The organizational aspects need to be linked with capabilities and DT designs. A part
of this task would be modeling the context information that affects the operation of
the DT. Since DTs are operated continuously the runtime data allows the assessment
and improvement of the design models. E.g. the Context Modeling component supports
the design by officering a set of measurable context elements that are already available
in the context platform. CDD includes a component for Reuse of Capability Designs
supported by a pattern repository that captures pattern performance data over time [19].
This information is valuable for new as well as for improving the existing designs.
Adaptation and adjustment. DTs need to be operated continuously, in various sit-
uations, and according to various business models. It can also be expected that these
change under the lifetime of a DT. In this respect EM can be used for capturing the busi-
ness dimensions of change, and CDD components for Capability Design and Context
Modeling are to be used for capturing changes in the application context. Components
for Reuse of Capability Designs and for Runtime Adjustments can be used to specify
automatic adjustments or reconfigurations of the solutions including the DTs.
Continuous lifecycle management pertain to two key aspects. First, visualization of
operational and contextual data at runtime and then using this data and information to
create new business models and DT designs as well as to change the existing ones. Part
of the CDD method is generation of capability monitoring applications from capability
design models and context models. Similarly, a monitoring dashboard for DTs can be
generated from capability models, because it allows specifying KPIs and context ele-
ments together with their calculation from measurable properties that can be assembled
from various data sources – internal application data as well as external environment
data.Concerningthesecondaspect,thelifecyclesupport,CDDisfocusingoncapability
design and context-based adjustment of IS. To include DT designs in capability designs
would need having a more explicit integration with EM as well as dedicated tasks for
designing the functionality of DTs. This would imply that the DT is designed together
with the capability as a solution to a business goal. Such an approach would contribute
to ensuring that the DT fits the business design. The CDD method is also supported by a
tool environment which would be needed to monitor context and runtime data, calculate
KPI values, and, if necessary, to trigger adjustment algorithms.
The requirements elicited in the case studies are to a large extend addressing similar
issues to the requirements from literature. Table 1 summarizes the CDD support.
The requirements from literature and the case studies point to the need for the exten-
sionoftheDTdesignwiththeaspectsofbusinessmotivationandlifecyclemanagement.
The following modeling artifacts and practices contribute to this purpose:
– Enterprise models to capture the business models. Later they can be linked with the
DT design models repressing the technical details of the DT.
– Capability design models to represent the more detailed designs of the DT.

--- PAGE 304 ---
Supporting Early Phases of Digital Twin Development 295
Table 1. Requirements from case studies supported by the CDD method components
CDD method components
CSRs Enterprise
Modeling
Capability
Design
Context
Modeling
Reuse of
Capability
Designs
Runtime Del.
Adjustments
CSR1 Captures the
business
motivation
DT design
linked to the
requiring parts
of the enterprise
model
Captures
reusable
solutions, e.g.
DT capabilities
CSR2 Captures the
business
motivation
Links design to
the business
motivation
Context
monitoring
with model
driven
dashboards
Specify
operational
adjustments of
DTs
CSR3 Captures the
business
model
Links the
capability driven
DT to the
business model
Model the
context data
for
monitoring
Supports
management of
reusable
components
CSR4 Captures the
business
motivation
Capability
driven DT and
allows model
driven
Context
monitoring
with model
driven
dashboards
CSR5 Management of
reusable
artifacts, incl.
their
performance
CSR6 Captures the
business
motivation
Capability-based
development of
DT functionality
Modeling of
the DT usage
context,
generation of
dashboards
Context driven
adjustment at
runtime
– Context models to show the dependence on local and global data in the environment
as well as to adjustments of the DTs and their monitoring dashboards.
– The capability design models and the enterprise models need to be linked to establish
the business motivation and fit of the DT.
– Capability designs and context models should be used for generating dashboards for
DTmanagement.Keydatatypesthathavethepotentialofbeingusefulherearecontext
data, KPI, historical data about performance of reusable components.
– The models used need to be reasonably open and extendable in order to be able to
incorporate additional perspectives of modeling.

--- PAGE 305 ---
296 K. Sandkuhl and J. Stirna
6.2 Supporting the Continuous Way of Working
Concerning requirementsCSR5andCSR6,theycanbesupportedbytheCDD’smethod
componentsasdiscussedintheprevioussection,buttheyalsocallfortheestablishmentof
anewwayofworking.Itneedstosupportthecoretasksofdevelopmentandmanagement
ofefficientDTs,suchas,capturingthebusinessmotivation,designoftheDT,anddelivery
and operation of the DT. The CDD process, which shares similarities with the DevOps
principleofcontinuousdevelopmentandoperation,hasthepotentialofbeingadaptedfor
this purpose. Wortmann et al. [8] also call for this kind of approach to DT development
and operation. The case study requirements suggest that to make the DTs more fitting
to the business model, explicit focus should be on the issues such as business goals,
processes, and integration with the IS architecture. These are issues suitable for EM.
Figure 1 proposes a DT development and management lifecycle that incorporates three
sub-cycles – EM, DT Design, and Delivery and Operation. The internal steps and tasks
in the sub-cycles follow the established procedures in [7] for EM and in [10] for Design
and Operation. The following artifacts support the transition between the sub-cycles
(grey arrows in Fig. 1):
– EM provides explicated knowledge about the business motivation for the DT in the
form of enterprise models.
– Capability design provides (1) capability based digital twin design that are executable
in the sense that they are integrated with the physical twins, and (2) generates the
monitoring applications for digital twin management from the context model.
– The delivery and operation sub-cycle provides data types (e.g. context element types,
measurable properties, KPIs) of available data used at runtime of the digital twin.
Thisallowsextendingtheexistingdesignsaswellasselectingexistingandobtainable
data in new designs. The Design provides best practices and reusable components on
which the EM sub-cycle can base new business developments.
Fig. 1. An overview of the envisioned capability-driven cycle of management digital twins.

--- PAGE 306 ---
Supporting Early Phases of Digital Twin Development 297
7 Feasibility Demonstration
Figure 2 illustrates the feasibility of the CDD use with a fragment of a capability model
consisting of goals, capabilities, and context modeling elements. The digital transfor-
mation workshop at company A identified an option to develop a pump-as-a-service
product. When prioritizing the options, this option was top rated and, hence, converted
into Goal 1 to develop pumping-as-a-service. It was refined into three sub-goals aiming
at low maintenance pumps (1.1), possibility for real-time monitoring (1.2) and develop-
ment of a preventive maintenance service (1.3). KPIs were set for all three sub-goals.
The goal model is shown on the right side of Fig. 2 and follows the 4EM notation.
Fig. 2. A capability model for operating product as a service.
From a capability perspective, pump-as-a-service can be considered in more general
terms as product-as-a-service capability if company A wants to offer other physical
products as a service. The core sub-capabilities of product-as-a-service are real-time
monitoring a product at the client site (which motivates the digital twin) and a reliable
product without downtimes. The capabilities are visible in the center of the model.
The left side shows the context elements and the measurable properties on which
they are based, in which context sets they are included, and their relation to capabilities.
These context elements are calculated from the measurable properties and monitored
oncethecapabilityisimplemented.ThisalsospecifiesthedatatobeprovidedbytheDT.
Anexampleforacontextelementisthetotalenergyconsumptionofthepumpmeasured
by the energy consumption of the motor and the energy recuperation achieved by the
installed power converter. This context element is required for providing the product as
a service (as part of the cost structure) and also for evaluating when to trigger preven-
tive maintenance. From this model the CDD Environment would be able to generate a
monitoring dashboard for Capability 1.2. It would display energy consumption, product
status, and lubricant level as runtime properties of the application for operational mon-
itoring. For a more strategic view on the capability fulfillment of KPI3 and KPI4 also

--- PAGE 307 ---
298 K. Sandkuhl and J. Stirna
need to be monitored. For brevity reasons, context and KPI calculations as well as the
operational processes linked to the capabilities are not shown in the model.
8 Concluding Remarks and Future Work
The starting point for our work was the analysis of two industrial cases on how digital
twin initiatives emerge and what the driving forces for starting implementation projects
are. An observation from both cases is that digital transformation and development of
new business model options are a motivation and driving force of DT implementation.
Both case studies resulted from the need of companies to explore innovative products or
services based on digital technologies, embedded into their operational processes and
structures. DTs are considered as a way of integrating innovative products/services into
theoperationalcontext,whichleadstorequirementsforDTfunctionalityandimplemen-
tation. In summary, we see clear support for our conjecture that DT have tobe integrated
into the organizational structures and business models of manufacturing enterprises.
Furthermore, we analyzed requirements for DT development from literature. Require-
ments pose a number of issues concerning a model-based design and management with
a particularly strong emphasis on establishing a good fit between the business issues
and DT-based solutions. This is an area to which EM and CDD have the potential of
contributing. In this regard we have proposed an integrated lifecycle and discussed how
capability-based DT designs could be used. The initial feasibility demonstration gives
reason to the assumption that this approach is promising and should be pursued.
Concerning future work, we plan to investigate to what extent existing technically
motivated DT implementations are used for new services or products and cause digital
transformation in the enterprise and how the design of the DT features can be included
in the capability design. We also aim to establish a development environment for the
proposed way of working by integrating components of the CDD Environment with the
modeling support by the ADOxx tool.
References
1. IIRA: Technology Working Group Industrial Internet Consortium, IIC Architecture Task
Group: The Industrial Internet Reference Architecture v1.8 (2017)
2. Strange, R., Zucchella, A.: Industry 4.0, global value chains and international business.
Multinational Bus. Rev. 25(4) (2017)
3. International Electrotechnical Commission: IEC PAS 63088:2017. Smart Manufacturing -
Reference Architecture Model Industry 4.0 (RAMI4.0) (2017)
4. Nardello, M., Han, S., Møller, C., Gøtze, J.: Automated Modeling with Abstraction for
Enterprise Architecture (AMA4EA): Business Process Model Automation in an Industry
4.0 Laboratory, CSIMQ, no. 19 (2019)
5. Sniderman, B., Mahto, M., Cotteleer, M.: Industry 4.0 and Manufacturing Ecosystems:
Exploring the World of Connected Enterprises. Deloitte University Press (2016)
6. Bolton, R., et al.: Customer experience challenges: bringing together digital, physical and
social realms. J. Serv. Manag. 29(5) (2018)
7. Sandkuhl, K., Stirna, J., Persson, A., Wißotzki, M.: Enterprise Modeling. Tackling Business
Challenges with the 4EM Method. Springer, Heidelberg (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-662-43725-4

--- PAGE 308 ---
Supporting Early Phases of Digital Twin Development 299
8. Wortmann, A., Barais, O., Combemale, B., et al.: Modeling languages in Industry 4.0: an
extended systematic mapping study. Softw. Syst. Model. 19, 67–94 (2020)
9. Hermann, M., Pentek, T., Otto, B.: Design principles for Industrie 4.0 scenarios. In:
Proceedings of the HICSS 2016. IEEE (2016)
10. Sandkuhl,K.,Stirna,J.(eds.):CapabilityManagementinDigitalEnterprises.Springer,Cham
(2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-90424-5
11. Frank,U.:Multi-perspectiveenterprisemodeling:foundationalconcepts,prospectsandfuture
research challenges. Softw. Syst. Model. 13(3), 941–962 (2012)
12. Lillehagen,F.,Krogstie,J.:ActiveKnowledgeModelingofEnterprises.Springer,Heidelberg
(2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-79416-5
13. Hirsch-Kreinsen, H., ten Hompel, M.: Digitalisierung industrieller Arbeit: Entwicklungsper-
spektiven und Gestaltungsansätze. In: Handbuch Industrie 4.0 Bd.3 (2017)
14. Berman, S.J., Bell, R.: Digital transformation: creating new business models where digital
meets physical. In: IBM Institute for Business Value (2011)
15. Sandkuhl, K., Shilov, N., Smirnov, A.: Facilitating digital transformation by multi-aspect
ontologies: approach and application steps. IJSM (2020)
16. Johannesson, P., Perjons, E.: An Introduction to Design Science. Springer, Cham (2014).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-10632-8
17. Kampars, J., Zdravkovic, J., Stirna, J., Grabis, J.: Extending organizational capabilities with
opendatatosupportsustainableanddynamicbusinessecosystems.Softw.Syst.Model(2019).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10270-019-00756-7
18. Yin, R.K.: Case Study Research: Design and Methods. SAGE Publications, Thousand Oaks
(2002)
19. Kampars, J., Stirna, J.: A repository for pattern governance supporting capability driven
development. In: CEUR Workshop Proceedings, pp. 1–12 (2017)
20. Mittal, S., Khan, M.A., Romero, D., Wuest, T.: A critical review of smart manufacturing &
Industry 4.0 maturity models: implications for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).
J. Manufact. Syst. 49, 194–214 (2018)
21. Schumacher, A., Erol, S., Sihn, W.: A maturity model for assessing Industry 4.0 readiness
and maturity of manufacturing enterprises. Procedia Cirp 52(1), 161–166 (2016)

--- PAGE 309 ---
Integrated On-demand Modeling
for Configuration of Trusted ICT Supply Chains
Jānis Grabis(B)
Department of Management Information Technology, Riga Technical University,
Kalku 1, Riga, Latvia
grabis@rtu.lv
Abstract. Digital enterprises and their networks increasingly rely on advanced
decision-making capabilities, however, development of decision-making models
requires significant effort and is often performed independently of other digital-
ization activities. Additionally, dynamic nature of many decision-making prob-
lems requires rapid ramp-up of decision-making capabilities. To addresses these
challenges, this position paper proposes to elaborate a method for integrated on-
demand decision modeling. The method combines mathematical programming
and data analytics models to create case specific models on the basis of generic
decision-making models. The integrated model and its data supply pipelines
are configured using enterprise models allowing for consistent and rapid model
deployment. The integrated model is intended for the trusted ICT supply chain
configuration problem though it can be used for solving various types of decision-
making problems. The main expected results are formulation of the new type
decision-making model and the method for on-demand configuration of such
models.
Keywords: On-demand modeling · Integrated modeling · ICT supply chain
1 Introduction
Digital enterprises increasingly rely on smart and intelligent decision-making based on
non-trivial computations and complex algorithms (Carlsson 2018). Decision-making is
perceivedasaselectionofbusinessprocessexecutionalternatives(e.g.,acceptordecline
a customer request in Customer Relationships Management system) or finding values of
quantitative decision variables (i.e., how many products to order in Warehouse manage-
ment System). It is assumed that decisions are made using a kind of algorithm or model
referred as to decision-making model and the process of creating and using the model is
referredastodecision-modelling.Therearedifferenttypesofdecision-makingproblems,
for example, capacity planning, supplier selection, fraud detection. Decision-making
models have been developed forthese typical decision-making problems, however these
models still need to be adapted for specific use cases.
Decision-modelling often is time consuming and complex endeavor while dynamic
operations increasingly require decision-making capabilities provided on short notice
for solving short life-cycle decision-making problems (Halpern 2015), for example,
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. Nurcan et al. (Eds.): BPMDS 2020/EMMSAD 2020, LNBIP 387, pp. 300–307, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49418-6_20

--- PAGE 310 ---
Integrated On-demand Modeling 301
selection of the delivery mode in hyperconnected systems (Sallez et al. 2016). That
creates a need for on-demand decision-modelling (ODDM) allowing for quick model
development,deploymentandexecutionforaparticularshort-lifecycleapplicationcase.
It is proposed that ODDM models can be developed by integrating various mod-
ellingparadigms.Inparticular,mathematicalprogrammingmodelsareprescriptivemod-
els allowing to generate the optimal solution for the decision-making problem though
requiring significant development expertise and effort. Data analytical models (e.g.,
regression, deep neural networks) on the other hand have predictive capabilities and
given their structure and data can be estimated on-demand. Therefore, we propose to
create ODDM models as integrated models or iODDM. On-demand models are envi-
sioned to have multiple applications. The proposed research will focus specifically on
configuration ofInformationandCommunication Technology (ICT)supplychains(SC)
what is a topical problem in practice (Kshetri and Voas 2019).
Challenges associated with intelligent applications and on-demand decision mod-
elling can be summarized as follows:
1. Digital enterprises require rapidly deployable advanced decision-making models;
2. Models are still developed independently and their integration with other systems is
done in an ad-hoc manner;
3. Data analytics models are more suitable for on-demand decision-making (e.g.,
non-parametric models) though some of data analytics models lack explanatory
capabilities;
4. Model development is time consuming and performed on the case-to-case basis;
5. Many applications such as SC configuration are context dependent and require
application case specific data structures.
To address these challenges, the goal of the proposed research is to enable devel-
opment of on-demand decision-making models for configuration of trusted ICT SCs by
integrating three modeling paradigms - enterprise modelling, mathematical program-
ming and big data analysis. Enterprise models represent the decision-making problem
in the enterprise context to facilitate integration, mathematical programming models
capture underlying structure of the decision-modeling problem and big data analysis or
dataanalyticalmodelsaccountforcasespecificvariationsindatastructuresandcontent.
Expected scientific contributions are: 1) formulation of the general iODDM model and
a new type of SC configuration model; 2) method for development of iODDM models
as a part of decision-making information systems; 3) extension of enterprise modelling
to support representation of trusted SC modelling aspects; and 4) big data processing
pipeline for decision-modelling data supply.
2 Related Work
Integrated on-demand modeling and configuration of trusted ICT SC are two key areas
of innovation of this proposal. Integrated and hybrid modelling is often used to attain
benefits brought by different modelling paradigms (Chandra and Grabis 2016a). Com-
plexityofcurrentdecision-makingmodelsalsorequiresanappropriatedevelopmentand
execution environment (Chen and Zhang 2014).

--- PAGE 311 ---
302 J. Grabis
Models are typically integrated using a staged approach when one model serves as
an input to another model (Chandra and Grabis 2016b). Optimization models are often
combined with simulation models (Amaran et al. 2016). However, simultaneous run-
ningofmathematicalprogramminganddataanalyticalmodelsisrarelyconsidered.Kuo
et al. (2015) provide one example where data analytical models feed mathematical pro-
gramming models in real-time. The proposal’s authors have made early attempts to inte-
grate mathematical programming models and data analysis models (Grabis et al. 2012)
though that is done without generalizing the integration approach. Ning and You (2019)
pointoutthatfurtherdevelopmentofintegratedmodelsrequiresbetterclosed-loopfeed-
backmechanisms.Fromthecomputationalperspective,specificationofdecision-making
components using domain specific languages allows development of reusable compo-
nents pluggable in different enterprise applications (Brodsky et al. 2015). Wei and Ma
(2014)integrateproductconfiguration,productionplanningandproductionexecutionon
thebasisoftheERPsystem.DecisionModelandNotationallowsrepresentingdecision-
making logics in business processes (Hasic et al. 2018). However, these technologies
are often restricted to specific types of decision-models and do not cover the full-cycle
of integrated modelling, especially, integration with enterprise modelling or on-demand
modelling data provisioning. There is an increasing interest in modelling as a service
though practical applications are mainly restricted to descriptive models (e.g., Schuff
et al. 2018).
Mathematical and simulation models mainly have been used in SC configuration
(Chandra and Grabis 2016b) and qualitative and descriptive techniques have been used
to evaluate SC risks (Sigler et al. 2017). Patrignani and Kavathatzopoulos (2018) point
out that complexity of ICT systems pose new challenges not addressed by the existing
methods.Baryannisetal.(2019)concludethatartificialintelligencecouldhelptoaddress
these concerns though comprehensive methods are yet to be developed.
The proposed research will extend the state of the art by elaborating a new type
of integrated decision-making models, which fuse mathematical programming and data
analytics in a generalized manner and are configurable according to enterprise models.
The model when tailored to the trusted ICT SC configuration problem will be provide
a novel solution to configuration of this type of SC using mathematical programming
for typical SC configuration decisions and data analytics for risk and trustworthiness
evaluation.
3 Model Formulation
Adigitalenterprise(ornetworkofenterprises)faceadecision-makingproblem(e.g.,SC
configuration). A generic decision-making model is available to solve this problem. The
genericdecision-makingmodelneedstobetailoredforaspecificusecase.Theproposed
method streamlines the tailoring process. Application of the method is supported by
the decision support information system. Figure 1 shows the conceptual landscape of
ODDM. The decision making problem is formally defined using enterprise modelling,
which will be extended to cover needs specific to iODDM. The case specific model
addressing the decision-making problem is developed as an iODDM consisting of the
generic model and the data analytical model. It is configured according to the enterprise

--- PAGE 312 ---
Integrated On-demand Modeling 303
model to rise level of abstraction and improve integration with the decision support
information system. The generic model captures core aspects of decision making and
is formulated as a mathematical programming model while the data analytical model
provides case specific customization using models fitted for the specific case.
Fig. 1. Conceptual landscape of ODDM.
The integrated model combines enterprise modeling, mathematical programming
and data analytics. Mathematical programming is used to represent the core part of
the decision-making problem and data analytics is used to represent the case specific
part of the decision-making problem. For instance, in the case of SC configuration,
the mathematical programming model represents cost optimization and data analytical
models are incorporated to represent influence of trust related aspects such supplier
reputation, risk of delays and impact of shock events.
Figure 2 shows an initial proposal for the integrated SC configuration model. The
SC configuration model deals with selection of suitable SC nodes, establishing connec-
tions among the nodes and allocating SC activities to the nodes and connections. In the
case of ICT SCs, one needs to ensure that all components used in end-products and
services meet security and reliability standards and requirements and SC can deliver
products as promised withstanding various shock events. The core part of the model is
a mathematical programming model. X, Y, and V are matrices representing decision
variables concerning node selection, definition of connections and activity allocation,
respectively.Thevector c representscostparametersassociatedwithnodes,connections
and activities as indicated by their indices (e.g., costs of operating a SC node). Vectors
ai and bi are parameters used to specify constraints. The generic model is augmented
by a customizable part. That includes customization of the objective function by adding
a term v’P, where P is a vector of penalties for not meeting case specific goals and v is
a vector of weights indicating a relative importance of each goal. A corresponding set
of constraints 4th item in Fig. 2 is also added to the model. These constraints represent
relationships among target values of KPI and values estimated by the model. kpiT are
targetvaluessetbydecision-makersand KPIC isaKPIvalueestimatedusingthemodel.
The penalty term in the objective function and the KPI constraint are added according to
the enterprise model. Additionally, SC trustworthiness factor R is added to the objective
and a constraint is added (3rd item in Fig. 2). The trustworthiness factor is a combi-
nation of security and trust factors characterizing the SC and it is evaluated using data

--- PAGE 313 ---
304 J. Grabis
analytical models. Various types of data analytical models could be used ranging from
linear regression model to neural networks. The model can be estimated on-demand and
represents security and reliability concerns relevant to particular case.
Fig. 2. The initial proposal of iODDM model.
The specific features to ICT SCs are representation of complex product structure,
combinationofvirtualandphysicalaspects,anddomainspecificperformanceandquality
attributes such as data security, performance and reliability attributes and licensing.
The enterprise model provides means for business analysts to configure iODDM. It
represents the case specific goals and their KPI as well as restricts a number of plausible
scenarios. For instance, configuration of SC for a new product has fewer constrains on
decision variables than changing one of the nodes of the existing SC. The decision-
making information system provides data needed for estimation and operation of data
analytical models in a speedy and scalable manner.
It is important to note that data analytical models are an integral part of the model
rather than just input data providers as it is a case in traditional multi-stage modeling.
Resultsofthedataanalyticalmodelingarerecalculatedineverymodelsolvingiteration.
Depending on the type of analytical models used traditional or non-parametric (e.g.,
genetic algorithms) will be used to solve the model.
4 Modeling Process
The iODDM model should be available for decision-making within a short time period
measured from couple of minutes to one week. The method supports all steps of model
development and includes three main stages: 1) Model development; 2) on-demand
configuration; and 3) model execution and adaptation (Fig. 3). The model development
stage concerns creation of the iODDM for the decision-making problem. Enterprise
modeling techniques are used to specify modeling goals, constraints and data entities
characteristic for the decision-making problem. The mathematical programming model
is also formulated and it is linked with the enterprise model. The data entities represent
data requirements for decision-making purposes. Usage of data analytical models is
represented in an abstract form.
Whenever a need arises for an on-demand modeling, the model developed is con-
figured in the second stage of the method. The enterprise model is changed to represent

--- PAGE 314 ---
Integrated On-demand Modeling 305
RepresentaƟon
of decision-
making problem
Enterprise model
Development of
iODDM model
Generic model
ConfiguraƟon of
iODDM model
Data binding
and
instanƟaƟon of
data analyƟcs
Model
execuƟon
Change of model
parameters required
Change of model structure required
Change of Enterprise model required
Case specific
model
Improvements
required
On-demand
decision-making
required
Fig. 3. Overview of the iODDM method.
casespecificobjectivesandconstraintsandthesechangesarerepresentedinthedecision-
making model by means of transformations. Case specific data sources are bound to the
data requirements. That includes specification of data transformation procedures. It is
important to note that both data streams and batch data can be used as data sources. The
abstract data analytical models are instantiated using the case specific data and are made
ready for usage in the optimization model.
Themodelexecutionstageconcernsactualusageofthemodels.Twomainchallenges
addressed during this stage are monitoring of data sources and scalability what is sup-
ported by the modeling platform. Additionally, adaptation of the modeling parameters
also could be performed.
5 Tool Support
Development and execution of iODDM models is supported by the appropriate techno-
logicalsolutionwhatisessentialtodealwithusability,scalabilityandreliabilityrequire-
ments of the iODDM method. The architecture of this decision-making information
system or ODDM platform is given in Fig. 4.
It consists of the following key components:
• ODDM core - the central element of the architecture. It provides a web-based user
interface that is used for iODDM model authoring and deployment. After models
have been deployed and run various model related performance dashboards can be
monitored in ODDM user interface. ODDM core also takes care of the infrastruc-
ture management and configuration of the remaining components of the ODDM
architecture.
• Data ingest - used for ingesting data into the ODDM stream processor. Data ingestion
in Fig. 4 is marked with #1. Typical data sources are open data, internet of things and
othertypesofdatastreams.Theintelligentapplicationitselfcanserveasadatasource
(e.g. passing in streams of log files or transactions).
• Stream processor - used for processing ingested data streams (#2), which serve as the
input for the iODDM model, and executing the model itself. Stream processor also
aggregates the input data up to the defined level of granularity and persists it in the

--- PAGE 315 ---
306 J. Grabis
ODDM core
Data lake
Data
ingest
Modelrepository Stream
processor
Modeling authoring Dashboards & KPIS
Infrastructure management RunƟme adjustments
Batch processor
2
3
Model
execuƟon
Model tuning
Models as paƩerns
Data
archiving
Intelligent
ApplicaƟon Decisionas a
Service
1
Open data
IoT
Data
streams
1
1
1
7
4
5
6
Fig. 4. Architecture of the ODDM platform.
datalake(#3).Duringthemodelexecution,Runtimeadjustmentsaretriggeredtopass
decision-modeling results to consumers, e.g., supply chain (#7).
• Batch processor - provides batch processing of the archived data from the data lake
(#4)andfinetuningofmodelparameterswhicharethensavedinthemodelrepository
(#5). Various machine learning approaches are applied based on the available input
data and model specifics.
• Model repository - provides storage of the integrated on-demand decision-making
models in a form of reusable patterns that are then used by the Stream processor (#6).
Therepositoryalsoaccumulatesmodels’usageperformancedata.Modelperformance
is measured under specific contextual situation (defined by the input data) and Stream
processorisabletoswitchtoamoreappropriatealternativemodelifthecontextwould
change.
• Datalake-adistributed,horizontallyscalablepersistentdatastorethatintegrateswith
the Stream processor (#3) and batch data processor (#4).
6 Conclusion
ThepaperdescribesanideaofcreatingiODDMmodelswhatincludesboththemodeling
approach and tool support to enable complex computations required. The immediate
steps of further research are development of case specific models and generalization of
the observations made.
Theproposedapproach hasanumberofpotentialrisks.Thatincludesprovingutility
of using enterprise models to configure analytical models, data availability and stability
of mathematical models with data modeling augmented constraints. Additionally, the
proposed method relays having sufficient level of similarity among the case specific
models and reusability of modeling components.

--- PAGE 316 ---
Integrated On-demand Modeling 307
References
Amaran,S.,Sahinidis,N.V.,Sharda,B.,Bury,S.J.:Simulationoptimization:areviewofalgorithms
and applications). Ann. Oper. Res. 240(1), 351–380 (2016)
Brodsky, A., Krishnamoorthy, M., Menasce, D.A., Shao, G., Rachuri, S.: Toward smart manufac-
turing using decision analytics. In: Proceedings of 2014 IEEE International Conference on Big
Data, p. 967 (2015)
Baryannis, G., Validi, S., Dani, S., Antoniou, G.: Supply chain risk management and artificial
intelligence: state of the art and future research directions. Int. J. Prod. Res. 57(7), 2179–2202
(2019)
Carlsson, C.: Decision analytics-Key to digitalisation. Inf. Sci. 460, 424–438 (2018)
Chandra, C., Grabis, J.: Reconfigurable supply chains: an integrated framework. In: Chandra, C.,
Grabis, J. (eds.) SC Configuration, pp. 69–86. Springer, Heidelberg (2016a). https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-1-4939-3557-4_4
Chandra, C., Grabis, J.: Simulation modeling and hybrid approaches. In: Chandra, C., Grabis, J.
(eds.) SC Configuration, pp. 173–197. Springer, Heidelberg (2016b). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-1-4939-3557-4_9
Chen, C.L.P., Zhang, C.-Y.: Data-intensive applications, challenges, techniques and technologies:
a survey on big data. Inf. Sci. 275, 314–347 (2014)
Grabis, J., Chandra, C., Kampars, J.: Use of distributed data sources in facility location. Comput.
Ind. Eng. 63(4), 855–863 (2012)
Halpern, F.: Next-generation analytics and platforms for business success: tDWI research report
(2015). www.tdwi.org
Hasić,F.,DeSmedt,J.,Vanthienen,J.:Augmentingprocesseswithdecisionintelligence:principles
for integrated modelling. Decis. Support Syst. 107, 1–12 (2018)
Kshetri, N., Voas, J.: Supply Chain Trust. IT Prof. 21(2), 6–10 (2019)
Kuo, Y., Leung, J.M.Y., Meng, H.M., Tsoi, K.K.F.: A real-time decision support tool for disaster
response: a mathematical programming approach. In: Proceedings - 2015 IEEE International
Congress on Big Data, BigData Congress 2015, p. 639 (2015)
Ning, C., You, F.: Optimization under uncertainty in the era of big data and deep learning: when
machinelearningmeetsmathematicalprogramming.Comput.Chem.Eng.125,434–448(2019)
Patrignani, N., Kavathatzopoulos, I.: On the complex relationship between ICT systems and the
planet.In:Kreps,D.,Ess,C.,Leenen,L.,Kimppa,K.(eds.)HCC132018,vol.537,pp.181–187.
Springer, Heidelberg (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-99605-9_13
Sallez,Y.,Pan,S.,Montreui,B.,etal.:OntheactivenessofintelligentPhysicalInternetcontainers.
Comput. Ind. 81, 96–104 (2016)
Schuff, D., Corral, K., St. Louis, R.D., Schymik, G.: Enabling self-service BI: a methodology and
a case study for a model management warehouse. Inf. Syst. Front. 20(2), 275–288 (2018)
Sigler, K., Shoemaker, D., Kohnke, A.: Supply Chain Risk Management: Applying Secure
Acquisition Principles to Ensure a Trusted Technology Product. CRC Press, Auburn Hills
(2017)
Wei, J., Ma, Y.-S.: Design of a feature-based order acceptance and scheduling module in an ERP
system. Comput. Ind. 65(1), 64–78 (2014)

--- PAGE 317 ---
Software-Related Modeling
(EMMSAD 2020)

--- PAGE 318 ---
A Modeling Method for Systematic
Architecture Reconstruction of
Microservice-Based Software Systems
Florian Rademacher1(B)
, Sabine Sachweh1
, and Albert Zündorf2
1
IDiAL Institute, University of Applied Sciences and Arts Dortmund,
Otto-Hahn-Straße 27, 44227 Dortmund, Germany
{florian.rademacher,sabine.sachweh}@fh-dortmund.de
2
Department of Computer Science and Electrical Engineering, University of Kassel,
Wilhelmshöher Allee 73, 34121 Kassel, Germany
zuendorf@uni-kassel.de
Abstract. Microservice Architecture (MSA) is an approach to archi-
tecting service-based software systems, which aims for decreasing ser-
vice coupling to enable independent service development and deploy-
ment. Consequently, the adoption of MSA is expected to particularly
beneﬁt the scalability, maintainability, and reliability of monolithic sys-
tems. However, MSA adoption also increases architectural complexity
in service design, implementation, and operation. As a result, Soft-
ware Architecture Reconstruction (SAR) of microservice architectures
is aggravated. This paper presents a modeling method that systematizes
SAR of microservice architectures with the goal to facilitate its execu-
tion. The method yields reconstruction models for certain architecture
viewpoints in MSA to enable eﬃcient architecture analysis. We validate
the method’s applicability by means of a case study architecture and
the assessment of its risk in technical debt using derived reconstruction
models.
Keywords: Microservice architecture · Software Architecture
Reconstruction · Model-driven engineering · Modeling languages
1 Introduction
Microservice Architecture (MSA) is a novel approach to architecting service-
based software systems that puts a strong emphasis on service-speciﬁc indepen-
dence [11]. MSA promotes to (i) tailor services to exactly one, distinct capability;
(ii) shift responsibilities in a service’s design, development, and deployment to
a single team composed of members with heterogeneous professional skills; and
(iii) keep services executable, testable, and deployable in isolation [10,11].
MSA is expected to beneﬁt quality attributes like scalability, maintainability,
and reliability [11]. Thus, it is frequently used to refactor monolithic systems for
which these quality attributes decreased critically [16].
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. Nurcan et al. (Eds.): BPMDS 2020/EMMSAD 2020, LNBIP 387, pp. 311–326, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49418-6_21

--- PAGE 319 ---
312 F. Rademacher et al.
However, MSA adoption increases architectural complexity signiﬁcantly. For
example, MSA architects and developers need to make sure that microservices
do not become too ﬁne-grained to lower network load [4]. Additionally, MSA
allows for choosing diﬀerent technologies per technical concern and microser-
vice, which can increase learning curves for developers and the risk for technical
debt [15]. Moreover, MSA requires a sophisticated operation infrastructure to
enable independent service deployment and DevOps practices [17], as well as
the provisioning of components for, e.g., service discovery and monitoring [2].
The diﬀerent degrees in complexity aggravate software architecture recon-
struction (SAR) [3] of MSA-based software systems [1]. While SAR is key
to architecture veriﬁcation, conformance checking, and trade-oﬀ analysis [3],
research on SAR of microservice architectures is still formative [1,6].
In this paper, we present a modeling method that systematizes SAR of
microservice architectures with the goal to guide its structured execution. The
method builds upon our previous research on model-driven MSA engineering, in
which we developed a set of modeling languages for the speciﬁcation of microser-
vice architectures [12,13] based on architecture viewpoints [3]. Our modeling
method exploits these languages to capture reconstructed architecture informa-
tion in reconstruction models. They aim to facilitate architecture analysis in the
context of MSA. We validate the applicability of our SAR modeling method by
means of a case study microservice architecture and the assessment of its risk in
technical debt [14] leveraging the derived reconstruction models.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section2 presents back-
ground information on SAR and our languages for model-driven MSA engineer-
ing. Section3 introduces our method for systematic SAR of microservice archi-
tectures. In Sect.4, we apply the method to a case study architecture and assess
its risk in technical debt using the reconstruction models. Section5 discusses our
approach. Section6 presents related work and Sect.7 concludes the paper.
2 Background
This section presents background information on SAR and an overview of our
modeling languages for viewpoint-based, model-driven MSA engineering.
2.1 Software Architecture Reconstruction
SAR is an iterative reverse engineering process that derives a representation of a
software architecture from artifacts like documentation or source code [3]. It aims
to document architecture implementations, which lack thorough documentation,
and enable subsequent architecture analysis. SAR consists of four phases [3]:
1. Raw view extraction: Gathers architecture information from architecture-
related artifacts. Each set of artifact-speciﬁc information can be considered a
view that represents certain architecture elements and their relations [3].
2. Database construction: Transforms views into a canonical representation and
stores them in a structured form like a database.

--- PAGE 320 ---
A Modeling Method for Systematic Architecture Reconstruction 313
3. View fusion and manipulation: Combines views to improve accuracy of recon-
structed information. For instance, a domain view may be associated with a
component view to document runtime processing of domain data.
4. Architecture analysis: Aims for answering hypotheses about architecture
implementations from reconstructed architecture information.
2.2 Viewpoint-Based Modeling of Microservice Architectures
In our previous works, we developed a set of modeling languages for model-driven
MSA engineering [12,13]. Each language focuses on an architecture viewpoint in
MSA and thus addresses the concerns of certain MSA stakeholder groups [3]. In
the following, we provide an overview of our modeling languages per viewpoint.
Domain Viewpoint. This viewpoint addresses the concerns of domain experts
and service developers in MSA engineering. Its Domain Data Modeling Language
[13] enables both stakeholder groups to collaboratively construct domain models
and augment them with patterns from Domain-driven Design (DDD) [7,11].
Technology Viewpoint. This viewpoint focuses on service developers and opera-
tors. Its Technology Modeling Language [12] allows for constructing technology
models that prescribe available technologies for microservice implementation and
operation. In addition, generic technology aspects may be modeled to augment,
e.g., microservices with technology-speciﬁc access means and conﬁguration.
The viewpoint also comprises the Technology Mapping Language. Mapping
models extend domain and service models with technology information.
Service Viewpoint. The viewpoint’s Service Modeling Language [13] targets the
Dev perspective in DevOps-based MSA teams [10]. It enables service developers
to construct service models that specify microservices, interfaces, and endpoints.
Operation Viewpoint. The Operation Modeling Language [13] targets the Ops
perspective [10]. It enables service operators to construct operation models that
describe service deployment and infrastructure for, e.g., service discovery and
monitoring [2].
The modeling languages integrate an import mechanism to connect viewpoints’
models and create coherent architecture descriptions. For example, service mod-
els may import domain models to relate domain concepts with microservices.
Moreover, operation models may import service models to express service deploy-
ment and infrastructure usage.
3 A Modeling Method for Systematic Reconstruction
of Microservice Architecture
It is the goal of our modeling method to systematize SAR of microservice archi-
tectures. To this end, we explore the application of our viewpoint-based lan-
guages (cf. Subsect.2.2), which were originally developed to enable model-driven
MSA engineering [13], for realizing the SAR process described in Subsect.2.1.

--- PAGE 321 ---
314 F. Rademacher et al.
Figure1 shows our SAR modeling method in a UML activity diagram. The
sequence of its six activities follows the relationships between MSA viewpoints
(cf. Subsect.2.2). Each activity targets certain phases of the SAR process (cf.
Subsect.2.1) and is described in the following subsections together with example
reconstruction models expressed in corresponding modeling languages.
Fig.1. Deﬁnition of our SAR modeling method in a UML activity diagram.
3.1 Activity 1: Preparation
Each instance of the SAR modeling method starts with the Preparation activ-
ity (cf. Fig.1). In its ﬁrst action, a set of input ﬁles, from which the examined
microservice architecture shall be reconstructed, is selected. Such ﬁles may con-
tain, e.g., documentation, source code, build scripts, or conﬁguration values [1].
In the second action, technology models (cf. Subsect.2.2) are selected or
created. In case the technologies employed by the examined architecture are
known, already existing technology models, e.g., constructed in previous method
instances, may be reused. If no such models exist or the technology stack is
unknown, empty technology models are created. A reasonable default is the
creation of three technology models for domain-, service-, and operation-related
technologies to be discovered (cf. Subsects.3.2 to 3.4).
The Preparation activity contributes to Phase 1 of the SAR process as they
identify the sources to extract architecture information from (cf. Subsect.2.1).
3.2 Activity 2: Domain Modeling
This activity examines the selected input ﬁle set for domain concepts (cf. Fig.1).
In object-oriented programming languages like Java, domain concepts may be

--- PAGE 322 ---
A Modeling Method for Systematic Architecture Reconstruction 315
realized by POJOs1
, i.e., classes that implement concepts of the application
domain independent of external frameworks. Discovered domain concepts are
captured in reconstruction domain models via our Domain Data Modeling Lan-
guage (cf. Subsect.2.2). Listing1 shows a reconstruction domain model excerpt.
The reconstruction domain model excerpt captures a reconstructed
domain concept called Address as a structure with three string ﬁelds, i.e.,
streetAddress, postalCode, and city. The structure carries the semantics
of a DDD Value Object [7]. Value Objects are typically immutable and lack
a domain-speciﬁc identity. Hence, they may act as value containers for data
exchange.
The Address structure belongs to the customer Bounded Context. In DDD,
a Bounded Context is a means to cluster domain concepts and constrain their
scope [7]. Bounded Contexts are crucial to MSA, since each microservice should
be responsible for exactly one context [11]. Thus, when the input ﬁle set of
an instance of our SAR modeling method (cf. Subsect.3.1) belongs to a single
service, the Domain Modeling activity should yield a domain model with only one
context. In case the input ﬁles concern several services, ambiguous assignment
of discovered domain concepts to contexts hints at wrong service tailoring.
During the examination of input ﬁles for domain concepts, technology-related
information, e.g., for mapping concept instances to database tables, may be
discovered. In this case, our modeling method delegates to a technology modeling
sub-activity via activity edge connector “B” (cf. Fig.1). It handles the occurrence
of technology-related information in domain concepts and is shown in Fig.2.
Fig.2. Domain-related technology modeling sub-activity
Starting at connector “B”, the sub-activity checks if the discovered technology
information was already captured in a technology model. Otherwise, it is added
to a suitable existing technology model (cf. Subsect.3.6) or to the domain-related
technology model created in Activity 1 (cf. Subsect.3.1). Next, the domain con-
cept itself is captured in a domain model if it was not yet, which may happen,
e.g., for Java code where annotations like @Table from the Java Persistence
1
https://www.martinfowler.com/bliki/POJO.html.

--- PAGE 323 ---
316 F. Rademacher et al.
API (JPA)2
are placed before class deﬁnitions. Finally, the discovered technol-
ogy information is assigned to the captured domain concept within a mapping
model (cf. Subsect.2.2). Listing2 shows a reconstruction domain-related tech-
nology model and mapping model derived during the Domain Modeling SAR
activity.
Line 2 speciﬁes an aspect in a technology model [12]. The aspect reﬂects
the discovered @Table annotation. The mapping model in Lines 4 to 6 imports
the technology model and assigns the aspect to the Address data structure (cf.
Listing1) to prescribe address storage in a database table called “addresses”.
The Domain Modeling activity and its successor Activities 3 to 5 (cf. Sub-
sects.3.3 to 3.5) cover SAR Phases 2 and 3 (cf. Subsect.2.1). Discovered archi-
tecture information is transformed into canonical forms, i.e., models (Phase 2),
which are then combined via imports to reﬂect architectural relations (Phase 3).
3.3 Activity 3: Service Modeling
The Service Modeling activity (cf. Fig.1) examines the input ﬁle set for microser-
vices and related information, which are then to be captured in service models
(cf. Subsect.2.2). In Java-based microservice architectures such information may
be found, e.g., in classes that employ annotations for web-based data binding
like @RestController and @GetMapping from the Spring3
framework. Docker
Compose4
and build scripts also support microservice identiﬁcation [1].
Similarly to Activity 2 (cf. Subsect.3.2), discovered technology information
is handled in a dedicated sub-activity. This service-related technology modeling
sub-activity is entered via activity edge connector “E” (cf. Fig.1). It proceeds
analogously to the domain-related technology modeling sub-activity of Activity 2
(cf. Fig.2), but captures newly discovered microservices in service models and
returns to the current method instance via edge connector “F” (cf. Fig.1).
Listing3 shows reconstruction models that result during the Service Mod-
eling activity, i.e., a service-related technology model, a service model, and a
mapping model (cf. Subsect.2.2).
2
https://jakarta.ee/speciﬁcations/platform/8/apidocs/javax/persistence/Table.
html.
3
https://spring.io.
4
https://docs.docker.com/compose.

--- PAGE 324 ---
A Modeling Method for Systematic Architecture Reconstruction 317
The technology model in Lines 2 to 4 comprises discovered protocols and
technology aspects [12]. Line 3 captures the HTTP protocol and JSON data for-
mat. Line 4 deﬁnes the PutMapping aspect for the eponymous Spring annotation.
Lines 6 to 8 show a service model, which imports the domain model in Listing1
to refer to the Address domain concept. Lines 7 to 8 capture the discovered
CustomerCore service. Its management interface clusters the changeAddress
operation, whose address parameter is typed with the Address concept.
Lines 10 to 17 of Listing3 show a mapping model. According to the exam-
ined input ﬁles, it speciﬁes that the CustomerCore service (i) uses the HTTP
protocol from the service-related technology model (Line 14); (ii) has an HTTP
endpoint in the form of a URI path (Line 15); and (iii) enables invocation of
the changeAddress operation via Spring’s @PutMapping annotation (Lines 16
and 17).
3.4 Activity 4: Operation Modeling
This activity captures discovered operation nodes (cf. Fig.1) in reconstruction
operation models (cf. Subsect.2.2). Operation nodes may represent containers
for service deployment [10] or provide infrastructure capabilities to the examined
architecture [2]. From the input ﬁle set, containers and infrastructure nodes may
be discovered in Dockerﬁles5
, or Docker Compose or build ﬁles [1], respectively.
The Operation Modeling activity invokes a sub-activity when operation-
related technology is discovered (cf. activity edge connector “H” in Fig.1). The
sub-activity proceeds analogously to the domain-related technology modeling
sub-activity (cf. Fig.2), but captures newly discovered operation nodes in oper-
ation models. It returns to a method instance via connector “I” (cf. Fig.1).
Listing4 shows reconstruction models derived during the execution of the
Operation Modeling SAR activity.
5
https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/.

--- PAGE 325 ---
318 F. Rademacher et al.
Lines 2 to 8 of Listing4 capture discovered technology information in an
operation-related technology model. Line 3 speciﬁes the HTTP protocol with
the JSON format. Lines 4 to 5 model the discovered deployment technology
Docker6
. Its default operation environment (Line 5) corresponds to the Docker
image discovered as being used to execute microservices. Lines 6 to 8 deﬁne the
Dockerfile aspect. It can be used in combination with the Docker deployment
technology to capture reconstructed Dockerﬁle contents in operation models.
Lines 10 to 17 of Listing4 show a reconstruction operation model for the
CustomerCore microservice. The service’s reconstruction model (cf. Listing3) is
imported in Line 10. The CC_Container uses the Docker deployment technology
(Line 13) from the operation-related technology model to deploy the service
(Line 14). In Line 15, the Dockerfile aspect captures discovered Dockerﬁle
contents, and Lines 16 and 17 determine a discovered container endpoint.
3.5 Activity 5: Technical Refinement
This activity focuses on discovering technology information (cf. Fig.1), which
was yet not captured in Activities 2 to 4 (cf. Subsects.3.2 to 3.4). For exam-
ple, the Spring framework allows for keeping microservice conﬁguration separate
from source code in distinct conﬁguration ﬁles. Thus, these ﬁles may not have
been examined in Activity 3 and are hence explicitly targeted by the Technical
Reﬁnement activity. In the event of discovering a yet not reconstructed tech-
nology information, the technology modeling sub-activity corresponding to the
type of the new information is invoked via activity edge connectors “B”, “E”, or
“H” (cf. Fig.1 and the descriptions of the sub-activities in Subsects.3.2 to 3.4).
The Technical Reﬁnement SAR activity focuses on extending previously cap-
tured reconstruction models. Thus, it speciﬁcally targets Phase 3 of the SAR
process (cf. Subsect.2.1), i.e., the manipulation of derived architecture models.
6
https://www.docker.com.

--- PAGE 326 ---
A Modeling Method for Systematic Architecture Reconstruction 319
3.6 Activity 6: Post-processing
The Post-processing activity comprises two SAR actions (cf. Fig.1). The Refac-
tor action is concerned with refactoring reconstruction models and thus con-
tributes to SAR Phase 3 (cf. Subsect.2.1). For example, when conducting Activ-
ities 2 and 3 (cf. Subsects.3.2 and 3.3) it is convenient to collect all discovered
Bounded Contexts and their domain concepts, as well as all discovered microser-
vices, in a single domain and a single service model, respectively. However,
when adopting DDD in MSA engineering, domain and service models should
be aligned to Bounded Contexts [11]. That is, a domain model should specify
a single context and a related service model should only comprise microservices
being responsible for concepts from that context (cf. Listings1 and 3). Another
Refactor task is to derive reusable technology models from domain-, service-,
and operation-related technology models (cf. Subsect.3.1). For instance, both
service- and operation-related technology models in Listings3 and 4 deﬁne the
HTTP protocol. Both protocol speciﬁcations may therefore be merged into a
technology model dedicated to clustering protocol speciﬁcations only.
The Post-processing activity concludes with executing actions, e.g., for archi-
tecture veriﬁcation, conformance checking, or trade-oﬀ analysis [3], on recon-
struction models. Hence, it covers Phase 4 of the SAR process (cf. Subsect.2.1).
Subsection4.2 illustrates the processing of reconstruction models to assess indi-
cators for the risk in technical debt of reconstructed microservice architectures.
4 Validation
In the following, we validate the applicability of our SAR modeling method (cf.
Sect.3) on a case study microservice architecture (cf. Subsect.4.1). Moreover, we
illustrate the usage of the reconstruction models in the Post-processing activity
of our method (cf. Subsect.3.6) on the example of assessing certain indicators
for the risk in technical debt of the reconstructed architecture (cf. Subsect.4.2).
4.1 Executing the Modeling Method on a Case Study Architecture
We validated the applicability of our SAR modeling method with a case study
microservice architecture called “Lakeside Mutual” (LM)7
. LM realizes an appli-
cation for a ﬁctitious insurance company. For the validation of our modeling
method, we focused on LM’s backend microservices, because they implement
LM’s domain concepts and business logic. Table1 describes the capabilities of
the examined microservices according to their documentation on GitHub (See
footnote 7).
The following paragraphs summarize, per activity (cf. Sect.3), the results
from executing our SAR modeling method on the LM architecture. To enable
reproducibility, we provide a comprehensive validation package on GitHub8
. It
includes the examined source code and the derived reconstruction models.
7
https://github.com/Microservice-API-Patterns/LakesideMutual.
8
https://github.com/SeelabFhdo/emmsad2020.

--- PAGE 327 ---
320 F. Rademacher et al.
Table 1. Overview of the backend microservices of the LM case study architecture.
# Service name Capabilities
1 Customer Core Manages LM customer data. The service
provides REST endpoints [8] to interact with
Services 2, 3, and 4
2 Customer Management
Backend
Enables employees of LM’s customer service to
interact with customers
3 Customer Self-Service
Backend
Allows customers for registering to an LM web
portal, change their address, and view their
insurance policy
4 Policy Management Backend Provides management functionalities to LM
employees regarding customers’ insurance policies
Activity 1: Preparation. We used the ﬁles in the source code folders of LM,
which correspond to the examined microservices (cf. Table1), and the ﬁles on
the top-level folder hierarchy of LM’s repository (See footnote 7), e.g., “docker-
compose.yml”, as input ﬁle set. Together, the set comprised 160 ﬁles with 8858
lines of code (LOC). Moreover, we created empty technology models for Activi-
ties 2, 3, and 4 (cf. Subsect.3.1), because we were not aware of the technologies
employed by LM.
Activity 2: Domain Modeling. We created a reconstruction domain model with
a Bounded Context for each LM backend microservice (cf. Subsect.3.2 and
Table1). The domain concepts in the contexts were reconstructed from Java
classes found in the corresponding services’ source code folders. Whenever recog-
nizable from their classes, DDD information were added to domain concepts. For
example, classes that represent Data Transfer Objects (DTOs) [5] were modeled
as DDD Value Objects, since in MSA they are used to prescribe data exchange
[13]. In total, we reconstructed 99 domain concepts from the input ﬁles.
We also discovered that LM uses JPA for database mapping of domain con-
cepts and Spring for DTO serialization. Hence, technology aspects were created
in the domain-related technology model (cf. Subsect.3.2). They reﬂect, e.g.,
JPA’s @Table annotation and Spring’s @ResourceParam9
annotation. Aspects
were then assigned to domain concepts in mapping models (cf. Listing2).
Activity 3: Service Modeling. We created a reconstruction service model for each
examined microservice (cf. Subsect.3.3 and Table1). Microservice elements were
reconstructed from Java classes that employed Spring annotations for web con-
trollers and mapping of HTTP methods (cf. Subsect.3.3). For all four services,
we discovered 13 interfaces with 39 operations.
Based on the Spring annotations for HTTP mapping, we reconstructed 16
operations with an explicit REST endpoint (cf. Listing3). The annotations
9
https://docs.spring.io/spring-hateoas/docs/0.25.3.BUILD-SNAPSHOT/api.

--- PAGE 328 ---
A Modeling Method for Systematic Architecture Reconstruction 321
were captured in the service-related technology model and assigned to modeled
microservices via mapping models (cf. Listing3).
Activity 4: Operation Modeling. This activity discovered that each microservice
source code folder of LM exhibits a Dockerﬁle (cf. Subsect.3.4). Hence, we cre-
ated a reconstruction operation model for each LM backend service (cf. Table1)
and speciﬁed a Docker container for each reconstructed microservice (cf. List-
ing4). To capture Dockerﬁles’ contents, we modeled a dedicated Dockerfile
technology aspect. From the source code of Service 4, we also reconstructed an
ActiveMQ10
broker as infrastructure node and the AMQP11
protocol, which was
added to the operation-related technology model (cf. Subsect.3.4).
Activity 5: Technical Reﬁnement. In this activity, we reconstructed information
from yet unconsidered input ﬁles (cf. Subsect.3.5). For example, from Spring-
related conﬁguration ﬁles like “application.properties” we extracted information
about URIs and ports of microservice containers (cf. Listing4). Moreover, LM’s
“docker-compose.yml” ﬁle provided us with information about service interac-
tions. As a result, we extended the reconstruction models of Services 2, 3, and 4
(cf. Table1) to require Service 1 for their operation. For this purpose, our Service
Modeling Language deﬁnes the required microservices statement [13].
Activity 6: Post-processing. We refactored the domain-, service-, and operation-
related technology models created during Activities 2 to 4 (cf. Subsect.3.6). To
this end, we ﬁrst merged all three models and removed duplicate information.
Next, we split the merged technology model into six models, each dedicated to a
certain technology. For example, the “java” technology model only clusters Java-
and Spring-related information, while the “activemq” and “docker” technology
models only focus on the eponymous technologies. The refactored technology
models can thus be reused in future instances of the SAR modeling method.
Next, we processed the reconstruction models for assessing certain indicators
of LM’s architecture concerning its risk in technical debt (cf. Subsect.4.2).
4.2 Post-processing Example: Technical Debt Assessment
Toledo et al. discovered indicators for MSA-speciﬁc architectural technical debt
(ATD), which can be examined by analyzing service communication character-
istics [14]. We illustrate the processing of reconstruction models derived by our
SAR modeling method (cf. Subsect.4.1) to assess these indicators and thus a
part of LM’s risk in technical debt. The following paragraphs describe, per ATD
type [14], our ﬁndings from processing LM’s reconstruction models.
10
https://activemq.apache.org.
11
https://www.amqp.org.

--- PAGE 329 ---
322 F. Rademacher et al.
TooManyPoint-to-Point(PtP)Connections. PtPconnectionsbetweenmicroser-
vices are identiﬁable from reconstruction models by two characteristics. First, an
infrastructurenoderealizesacommunicationlayer [14]usedonlybyasmallsubset
of services. Second, services not using the node require other services. LM deﬁnes
a communication layer with an ActiveMQ node used by Service 4 only (cf. Activ-
ity 4 in Subsect.4.1). It is thus likely that Services 2 to 4, which require Service 1
(cf. Activity 5 in Subsect.4.1), interact with it via PtP connections.
Business Logic Inside Communication Layer. Reconstruction domain and map-
ping models may indicate this ATD type. For instance, the Domain Data Mod-
eling Language (cf. Subsect.2.2) allows for declaring function signatures in data
structures. Thus, functions conveying the semantics of data format conversions
hint at this ATD type [14]. These functions usually take a single input parameter
typed by a Value Object that reﬂects a DTO (cf. Activity 2 in Subsect.4.1) and
return an instance of another data structure within the Bounded Context of the
function. Moreover, this ATD type is also indicated by protocol assignments in
mapping models (cf. Listing3). Microservices, that convert requests for use by
other services, exhibit endpoints, whose protocols diﬀer from the majority of ser-
vices in the same Bounded Context. Our analysis of the reconstruction models
showed that LM does not exhibit conversion domain functions or microservices.
No Standardized Communication Model. This ATD type is identiﬁable from
reconstruction domain models (cf. Subsect.3.2). They capture business-related
communication models [14]. For example, data structures, which cannot be
unambiguously assigned to a single Bounded Context, violate the principle of a
canonical domain model [14]. We did not ﬁnd such violations for LM.
Reconstruction domain models also allow for eﬃcient analysis of the con-
sistency of shared domain concepts [11]. For instance, the domain models of
Services 2 to 4 (cf. Table1) all specify the Value Object CustomerProfileDto
as a DTO for the CustomerProfileEntity of Service 1. LM thus exhibits the
risk that the Value Objects evolve diﬀerently from the Entity [7], although they
are meant to be shareable representations of it. Our analysis of the three ver-
sions of CustomerProfileDto showed, however, that they all exhibit the same
structure. Hence, they could be refactored into a single shared domain model.
Weak Source Code and Knowledge Management. Our SAR modeling method
does not directly support in assessing this ATD type. However, reconstruction
models provide a well-deﬁned means for documenting views on microservice
architectures (cf. Subsect.2.1). Consequently, they can accompany centralized
MSA documentation [14] as they capture architecture knowledge in a concise
format.
Diﬀerent Middleware Technologies for Service Communication. Reconstruc-
tion technology and mapping models facilitate identiﬁcation of this ATD type,
because they capture discovered communication technologies and their usage
(cf. Listing3). LM employs diﬀerent means for synchronous and asynchronous

--- PAGE 330 ---
A Modeling Method for Systematic Architecture Reconstruction 323
communication, i.e., REST and ActiveMQ (cf. Activities 3 and 4 in Subsect.4.1).
We consider LM’s risk in this ATD type to only be slightly increased, as in MSA
it is common to employ at most one protocol for each communication kind [11].
However, our analysis of reconstruction mapping models showed that more
REST operations are invokable via an HTTP method (26) than explicit REST
endpoints were speciﬁed (16). Such inconsistencies in services’ communication
speciﬁcations are likely to cause communication failures at runtime.
5 Discussion
For the validation of our SAR modeling method (cf. Sect.4), we executed it man-
ually on the input ﬁle set. We then ensured the correctness of the reconstruc-
tion models by comparing them with LM’s documentation and double-checking
their consistency with LM’s source code. Consequently, we perceive our method
to be basically applicable on microservice architectures. Nonetheless, a current
threat to validity is the increased error-proneness given the manual execution
of the method. However, this weakness may be mitigated by employing auto-
mated source code analysis techniques, particularly in SAR Activities 2 to 4 (cf.
Subsects.3.2 to 3.4). For example, in case of Java-based microservice architec-
tures, class bodies and employed annotations, as well as Dockerﬁles in general,
represent valuable analysis targets (cf. Sect.4).
The input ﬁle set selected in Activity 1 of our SAR modeling method (cf.
Subsect.3.1) depends on the availability of artifacts in the targeted microservice
architecture. For instance, due to the structure of the case study architecture,
the input ﬁle set for the method’s validation mainly consisted of Java ﬁles (cf.
Sect.4). Hence, the reconstruction eﬀort was relatively high, because all LOC
needed to be examined. However, source code ﬁles that reﬂect domain concepts or
service implementations may also be replaced, e.g., by concise models of database
structures or API documentation. Like the SAR process (cf. Subsect.2.1), our
modeling method does not constrain input ﬁle types.
In its current form, the SAR modeling method directly aligns its activi-
ties to the viewpoints being addressed by our languages for model-driven MSA
engineering and their relationships (cf. Fig.1 and Subsect.2.2). As a result, the
method does not take the perspective of stakeholders like business analysts or
project managers into account, yet. To this end, the set of SAR activities would
need to be extended with modeling approaches tailored to stakeholders, who do
not directly participate in software engineering in the context of MSA. Further
research is necessary to identify the concerns of these stakeholders and derive
corresponding SAR activities.
Since our method anticipates reconstruction of technology information, the
degree of abstraction in reconstruction models may be comparatively close to
that of source code. However, due to the usage of mapping models, reconstruction
domain and service models are basically technology-agnostic (cf. Subsects.3.2
and 3.3). Thus, the execution of sub-activities, which capture technology infor-
mation, may be omitted in Activities 2 and 3, depending on the goal of the

--- PAGE 331 ---
324 F. Rademacher et al.
conducted SAR process (cf. Subsect.2.1) and technology information being irrel-
evant to its achievement.
6 Related Work
Alshuqayran et al. [1] conduct an empirical study on eight open source microser-
vice architectures to derive a metamodel for SAR in MSA. They also analyze a
set of heterogeneous input ﬁles that contain, e.g., Java source code, build scripts,
and conﬁguration ﬁles (cf. Sects.3 and 4). The derived metamodel is similar to
the ones of our Service and Operation Modeling Languages [13]. However, it does
not support the reconstruction of domain concepts. Furthermore, technologies
like Asynchronous Message Bus are ﬁxed metamodel concepts, while with our
Technology Modeling Language [12] they can ﬂexibly be integrated in recon-
struction models as they occur in input ﬁles. In addition, Alshuqayran et al.
do not present a concrete syntax for their metamodel, nor do they specify its
systematic usage in a SAR process like our modeling method.
MicroART [9] is a tool for reconstructing microservice architectures. It
extracts service-related information, e.g., services’ names, ports, and develop-
ers from source code repositories. Moreover, it performs a runtime analysis of
log ﬁles in order to determine containers, network interfaces, and service inter-
action relationships. From the gathered information, MicroART instantiates a
model from a speciﬁcally designed metamodel. Like our approach, MicroART
is model-based. On the contrary, it does not consider the Domain, Operation,
and Technology viewpoints (cf. Subsect.2.2) when gathering architecture infor-
mation. Furthermore, a systematic method and concrete syntax for facilitating
architecture analyses is not presented.
Zdun et al. introduce an approach towards assessing MSA conformance [18].
Therefore, existing microservice architectures are reconstructed leveraging a
formal model with MSA-speciﬁc component and connector types. MSA con-
formance of reconstructed architectures is then assessed via metrics and con-
straints deﬁned by the relationships between these types. Like for our SAR
modeling method, reconstructed formal models also need to be derived manu-
ally from existing architecture implementations. However, no modeling language
with MSA-speciﬁc abstractions is employed to facilitate the creation of the for-
mal models. Moreover, a systematic reconstruction method is not presented and
domain-speciﬁc information is not considered.
7 Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we presented a modeling method for systematic Software Architec-
ture Reconstruction (SAR) of software systems based on Microservice Architec-
ture (MSA). The method employs a set of modeling languages for model-driven
MSA engineering to capture reconstructed information in viewpoint-speciﬁc
architecture models. Consequently, method instances yield domain, technology,

--- PAGE 332 ---
A Modeling Method for Systematic Architecture Reconstruction 325
service, and operation reconstruction models for examined microservice archi-
tectures. These models aim to facilitate architecture analysis in the context of
MSA. We validated our SAR modeling method with a case study microservice
architecture and showed the applicability of derived reconstruction models on
the example of assessing certain indicators of the case study’s risk in technical
debt.
In future works, we plan to investigate the extension of our SAR modeling
method with automation capabilities. First, the derivation of the reconstruction
models may be facilitated by automated source code analysis. Second, post-
processing of reconstruction models would beneﬁt from static model analysis
in order to automatically gather metrics like the diversity of communication
technologies, their usage by microservices, or the existence of duplicate domain
concepts. Moreover, we are currently working on a code generator to produce
source code and conﬁguration ﬁles from reconstruction models. With the gener-
ator, architecture design and refactoring based on reconstruction models would
become feasible, because architecture models and architecture implementation
could be automatically kept consistent.
References
1. Alshuqayran, N., Ali, N., Evans, R.: Towards micro service architecture recovery:
an empirical study. In: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Software Architec-
ture (ICSA), pp. 47–56 (2018)
2. Balalaie, A., Heydarnoori, A., Jamshidi, P.: Microservices architecture enables dev-
ops: migration to a cloud-native architecture. IEEE Softw. 33(3), 42–52 (2016)
3. Bass, L., Clements, P., Kazman, R.: Software Architecture in Practice, 3rd edn.
Addison-Wesley, Boston (2013)
4. Bogner, J., Fritzsch, J., Wagner, S., Zimmermann, A.: Microservices in indus-
try: insights into technologies, characteristics, and software quality. In: 2019 IEEE
International Conference on Software Architecture Companion (ICSA-C), pp. 187–
195 (2019)
5. Daigneau, R.: Service Design Patterns. Addison-Wesley, Boston (2012)
6. Di Francesco, P., Malavolta, I., Lago, P.: Research on architecting microservices:
trends, focus, and potential for industrial adoption. In: 2017 IEEE International
Conference on Software Architecture (ICSA), pp. 21–30. IEEE (2017)
7. Evans, E.: Domain-Driven Design. Addison-Wesley, Boston (2004)
8. Fielding, R.: Representational state transfer. Ph.D. thesis (2000)
9. Granchelli, G., Cardarelli, M., Francesco, P.D., Malavolta, I., Iovino, L., Salle,
A.D.: Towards recovering the software architecture of microservice-based sys-
tems. In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Software Architecture Workshops
(ICSAW), pp. 46–53 (2017)
10. Nadareishvili, I., Mitra, R., Mclarty, M., Amundsen, M.: Microservice Architecture.
O’Reilly Media, Sebastopol (2016)
11. Newman, S.: Building Microservices. O’Reilly Media, Sebastopol (2015)
12. Rademacher, F., Sachweh, S., Zündorf, A.: Aspect-oriented modeling of technology
heterogeneity in microservice architecture. In: 2019 IEEE International Conference
on Software Architecture (ICSA), pp. 21–30. IEEE (2019)

--- PAGE 333 ---
326 F. Rademacher et al.
13. Rademacher, F., Sorgalla, J., Wizenty, P., Sachweh, S., Zündorf, A.: Graphical and
textual model-driven microservice development. In: Bucchiarone, A., et al. (eds.)
Microservices, pp. 147–179. Springer, Cham (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-030-31646-4_7
14. Soares de Toledo, S., Martini, A., Przybyszewska, A., Sjøberg, D.I.K.: Architec-
tural technical debt in microservices: a case study in a large company. In: 2019
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Technical Debt (TechDebt), pp. 78–87.
IEEE (2019)
15. Taibi, D., Lenarduzzi, V.: On the deﬁnition of microservice bad smells. IEEE Softw.
35(3), 56–62 (2018)
16. Taibi, D., Lenarduzzi, V., Pahl, C.: Processes, motivations, and issues for migrating
to microservices architectures: an empirical investigation. IEEE Cloud Comput. 5,
22–32 (2017)
17. Taibi, D., Lenarduzzi, V., Pahl, C.: Continuous architecting with microservices
and DevOps: a systematic mapping study. In: Muñoz, V.M., Ferguson, D., Helfert,
M., Pahl, C. (eds.) CLOSER 2018. CCIS, vol. 1073, pp. 126–151. Springer, Cham
(2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-29193-8_7
18. Zdun, U., Navarro, E., Leymann, F.: Ensuring and assessing architecture confor-
mance to microservice decomposition patterns. In: Maximilien, M., Vallecillo, A.,
Wang, J., Oriol, M. (eds.) ICSOC 2017. LNCS, vol. 10601, pp. 411–429. Springer,
Cham (2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-69035-3_29

--- PAGE 334 ---
Can We Design Software as We Talk?
A Research Idea
Marcela Ruiz(B)
and Björn Hasselman
Institute of Applied Information Technology, Zurich University of Applied Sciences,
Winterthur, Switzerland
marcela.ruiz@zhaw.ch, hassebjo@students.zhaw.ch
Abstract. In the context of digital transformation, speeding up the
time-to-market of high-quality software products is a big challenge.
Main challenges. Software quality correlates with the success of
requirements engineering (RE) sessions. RE sessions demand software
analysts to collect all relevant material usually speciﬁed on written notes,
ﬂip charts, pictures, etc. Afterwards comprehensible requirements need
to be speciﬁed for software implementation and testing. These activities
are mostly performed manually, which causes process delays and soft-
ware quality attributes like reliability, usability, comprehensibility, etc.,
are diminished causing software devaluation. Innovative aspects. This
research idea paper proposes a framework for automating the tasks of
requirements speciﬁcation. The proposed framework involves computa-
tional mechanisms to enable the automatic generation of software design
while requirements are discussed. The innovative aspect of this research
comes from digitally transforming the software development life cycle
(SDLC) where requirements are generated “on the ﬂy” and virtual real-
ity systems are in place. Potential to make change. The proposed
framework has the potential to renovate the role of software analysts,
which can experience substantial reduction of manual tasks, more eﬃ-
cient communication, dedication to more analytical tasks, and assurance
of software quality from conception phases. This research idea paper
introduces the framework for automating the task of requirements spec-
iﬁcation, and report our progress. We conclude the paper by outlining
lessons learnt and future lines of work.
Keywords: Requirements engineering · Digital transformation ·
Software development life cycle · User stories generation
1 Introduction
Living in a digital era, service providers are challenged to oﬀer services to
their customers through a wide spectrum of channels. This constant introduc-
tion of new devices and technology challenges organisations to provide rapid
This research project is supported by ZHAW Digital and the Digitalisation Initiative
of Zürich Universities DIZH.
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. Nurcan et al. (Eds.): BPMDS 2020/EMMSAD 2020, LNBIP 387, pp. 327–334, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49418-6_22

--- PAGE 335 ---
328 M. Ruiz and B. Hasselman
improvements of their IT infrastructure, while ensuring the highest user experi-
ence possible. Digital transformation stimulates the adaptation of existent busi-
ness models and the creation of new ones; while society adapts to new ways to
interact with services. Software systems are omnipresent in digital transforma-
tion process; making software quality of crucial value to ensure successful digital
transformation [1].
Software quality correlates with the success of requirements engineering (RE)
sessions [2], which makes RE a crucial phase of the software development life
cycle (SDLC) [3]. The agile movement have proposed user stories as a minimal
but complete language for the speciﬁcation of software requirements [4]. This
language has been proven to be successful and widely adopted by software devel-
opers [5]. software requirements are collected during RE sessions in the shape
of pictures, ﬂip chart notes, documentation etc. Later on, relevant information
is digitalised in order to specify a set of comprehensible user stories to be used
during development phases. Digitalisation of discussed requirements demands
extra eﬀort that has to be undertaken by software analysts [6]. All this complex-
ity is magniﬁed if we consider that software development is not usually taking
place in the same geographical location. Big companies make use of software
providers located in diﬀerent continents. Teleworking is posing big challenges at
the moment to ensuring collaborative requirements engineering [7].
The main objective of our research endeavour is to reduce the time-to-market
of software products by automating the task of requirements specification while
requirements are discussed. In this research idea paper, we introduce a framework
for automating the task of requirements speciﬁcation (see Fig.1). We conceive a
requirements engineering room where participants discuss requirements that are
automatically speciﬁed in the shape of user stories, and transformed into software
prototypes. In this room, we incorporate virtual reality tools like double robots
for embodiment of remote participants, and interactive boards with collaborative
tools as they have demonstrated to facilitate access and real-time edition of dis-
cussed requirements [8]. By implementing the proposed framework in practical
settings, it is expected that SDLC goes through a process of digital transforma-
tion where software analysts are going to experience a signiﬁcant reduction of
manual tasks. User stories will be generated on the ﬂy during the session, and
virtual reality systems will allow eﬃcient communication. Software analysts get
empowered by focusing on meaningful tasks like analysing created user stories
and prioritization. Software quality is then assured from the ﬁrst release. The
framework components are still under design and evaluation phases. Particu-
larly, this paper reports our ﬁrst steps towards automating the speciﬁcation of
user stories “on the ﬂy” during RE elicitation sessions. We discuss the design
and illustrate the use of the DEEP LEARNING CLASSIFIER and ONTOLOGY
CRAWLER components presented in Fig.1. Setting up of the requirements engineer-
ing room and software prototype generation are considered part of our short term
research plans.
Paper Organisation: After reviewing related work in Sect.2, we introduce our advances
on providing automatic speciﬁcation of user stores in Sect.3. We summarise the design
of two components: a deep learning classiﬁer in Sect.3.1, and an ontology crawler in

--- PAGE 336 ---
Can We Design Software as We Talk? 329
AUTOMATIC REQUIREMENTS SPECIFICATION
AUTOMATIC SPECIFICATION OF
USER STORIES
DEEP
LEARNING
CLASSIFIER
ONTOLOGY
CRAWLER
USER STORY
ASSEMBLER
USER STORIES
SOFTWARE PROTOTYPE
GENERATION
CODE
COMPILER LEGEND
COMPONENT
INPUT/OUTPUT
ARTEFACT SOFTWARE
PROTOTYPE
REQUIREMENTS ENGINEERING ROOM
INTERACTIVE BOARD
AUTOMATIC
TRANSCRIPTION
TOOL
END USER AND
REQUIREMENTS
ENGINEERS
EMBODIMENT OF
REMOTE SOFTWARE
DEVELOPER
How do you
want to buy
products?
I want to buy
products so my
SuperStore is
well supplied
In average, how
many products
do you buy?
REQUIREMENTS
TRANSCRIPT
REQUIREMENTS
SESSION RECORDING
As a <user>
I want to <buy>
products so my
SuperStore is
<well supplied>.
SUPERSTORE
BUY
Fig.1. Framework for automating the task of requirements speciﬁcation
Sect.3.2. Finally, we conclude our idea research paper by discussing lessons learnt and
future lines of work in Sect.4.
2 Related Work
In the ﬁeld of requirements engineering there are several related work that approach
the challenge of automate requirements speciﬁcations from diﬀerent angles. We anal-
yse these approaches based on: (a) requirements source: audio recordings/transcripts
from requirements meetings, tweets, bug reports, user stories, existing documentation,
domain repository; (b) generated requirements speciﬁcation in the shape of: meet-
ing minutes, knowledge extraction, tweets classiﬁcation, relevant topics, remedied user
stories, meeting summaries, and user stories; (c) Existing validation or evaluation: lab-
oratory demonstration, comparative experiment; (d) Existence or not of tool support;
and (e) Whether or has been applied in practice.
Some works focus on supporting software requirements speciﬁcation by generating
meeting minutes. For instance, Kaiya et al. [9] proposes a tool to support requirement
elicitation meetings by recording the sessions and providing an assistant tool to manage
the recordings and mark the important points via hypertext. Authors conclude that
further collaboration mechanisms need to be incorporated to facilitate real-time edition
of requirements and knowledge share. Murray et al. [10] developed a natural language
processing approach to summarize emails and conversations in general, more projects
involving textual sources appeared. Especially in the ﬁeld of machine learning were
multiple techniques developed to extract requirements engineering relevant information
from diﬀerent written origins [4,11–14].
Rodeghero et al. [13] proposed a machine learning classiﬁcation algorithm trained
to recognise user stories’ information [15]. As a conclusion of this study, the authors
found out that information about software functionality and requirements rationale can

--- PAGE 337 ---
330 M. Ruiz and B. Hasselman
be identiﬁed by means of classiﬁcation algorithms. Nevertheless, no information about
the role can be automatically extracted. Another tool assisted approach to dynamic
requirement elicitation was introduced by Abad et al. [14]. The tool extracts relevant
snippets and simultaneously uses a third-party API to recognize tone and intentions
of statements’ providers.
We have taken the aforementioned research works as a reference to cover the gaps
in terms of providing complete user stories from spoken software requirements during
elicitation sessions (see last row in Table1).
Table 1. Summary of related research for automatic generation of software require-
ments.
Ref Requirements source Generated
requirements
specification
Validation or
evaluation
Tool support? Applied in
practice?
[9] Audio recordings from
requirements meetings
Meeting
minutes,
meeting
summaries
Comparative
experiment
Management
tool
Yes
[13] Audio transcripts
from requirements
meetings
Partial user
stories
(functions and
rationale)
Comparative
experiment
Machine
Learning
classifier
No
[14] Audio transcripts
from requirements
meetings, existing
documentation,
domain repository
Relevant topics Expert analysis ELICA tool Case study
[11] Tweets Tweets
classification
Comparative
experiment
ALERTme tool Tested using
Twitter
[4] User stories Remedied user
stories
Supervised
learning
AQUSA tool Tested in
University
lab
[12] Bug reports Meeting
summaries
Comparative
experiment
Machine
Learning
classifier
No
Ours Audio transcripts
from requirements
meetings
Complete user
stories (roles,
functions and
rationales)
Laboratory
demonstration
Yes No
3 Automatic Specification of User Stories
Our goal is to elicit complete user stories including information related to “Role, Func-
tion and Rationale”. Based on the research work presented in Rodeghero et al. [13],
we propose to classify software functionality in terms of functional and non-funcional
requirements; as well as identify requirements’ rationale from requirement elicitation

--- PAGE 338 ---
Can We Design Software as We Talk? 331
sessions. Our research strategy is summarised in Fig.2. In short, our research idea is
to build a deep learning algorithm that can be further trained by providing labeled
requirements elicitation sessions. For identifying missing roles, we propose to make use
of existing ontologies that provide information related to typical roles belonging to the
context in which software elicitation sessions take place.
In this paper, we summarise the deep learning classiﬁer (see Sect.3.1) and the
ontology crawler components (see Sect.3.2). For implementation purposes We chose the
Java language as it guarantees portability and its popularity results in maintained and
tested frameworks we can use. It has a sophisticated deep learning framework available
in DL4J1
and the Java OWL API2
for handling Ontology ﬁles. The components will
later provide the data to be used by the user story assembler component (out of scope
of this paper).
Fig.2. Research strategy for automatic generation of user stories
3.1 Deep Learning Classifier Component
We propose a deep learning classiﬁer based on the work proposed by [13]. We used deep
learning speciﬁcally, because our intention is to imitating the classiﬁcation process
that has been done by using machine learning. In this way we can further compare
performance values in subsequent experiments.
A turn is an established unit of analysis in natural language processing as opposed
to using single sentences. It describes, when a person speaks in a conversation in
between other speakers. To represent a turn in a learnable format, we use word embed-
dings provided by the model described in the work of Pennington et al. “GloVe: Global
Vectors for Word Representation” [17]. Here, words will be represented as multidimen-
sional, real-value vectors. In a three-dimensional space, similar words would lie ‘closer’
together than those, that semantically diﬀer. Diﬀerent, pre-trained word embedding
models are available . The available representation dimensions depend on the vectors
but range from 50 to 300. They also diﬀer in terms of topic and number of tokens.
1
https://deeplearning4j.org/.
2
http://owlcs.github.io/owlapi/.

--- PAGE 339 ---
332 M. Ruiz and B. Hasselman
For our initial development process, we used the smallest set; the “Wikipedia 2014 +
Gigawords”, which consists of 6 billion tokens and a representation of 50 dimensions.
The implementation of the deep learning classiﬁer is available in our public
GitHub repository at https://github.com/lmruizcar/requirements classiﬁer. An exam-
ple of classiﬁcation is presented in Fig.3. The model in its current state performs about
as well as random guessing since we need data for training purposes. As it has been
mentioned by [16], the lack of data from requirements elicitation sessions is an obstacle
in this type of investigations. Our model diﬀerentiates between three labels: None (0),
Non-Functional (1) and Functional (2). A caveat of this deep learning approach is, that
it only cares indirectly for the fact that turns can be both; labelled 1 and 2. Whereas
[13] built multiple binary classiﬁers which each analysed the turn, our approach uses a
SoftMax layer for which the output is interpret able as probabilities. A turn that falls
into both categories, would have probabilities around 0.5 for both labels which can be
interpreted individually, but is not represented in the standard evaluation method of
machine learning classiﬁers.
Fig.3. Results from running the deep learning classiﬁer component
3.2 Ontology Crawler Component
Rodeghero et al. stated, that in conversations in requirement elicitation meetings “only
0.5% discussed role” [13]. Which is why they concluded that it is not feasible to extract
role information from transcripts. For a complete user story, this role information
is crucial. An established practice in information science is the use of ontologies to
organize data and reduce complexity. We propose the ontology crawler component.
The ontology crawler searches an ontology for deﬁned entities and their restrictions
to identify possible roles in the required context. As input, it takes an ontology from
a ﬁle formatted in Web Ontology Language format. As output, it generates a list of
foundational user stories, which consist of a role, an action and an object. For this, we
have implemented a prototype based on Java OWL API. The prototype is available on
our GitHub public repository at https://github.com/lmruizcar/ontology crawler.
Figure4 exempliﬁes the generation of foundational user stories for the SmallShop
Case. A product manager needs to be able to add products to the shop and remove it,
e.g., if they are not in stock anymore. The customers that use the shop want to buy

--- PAGE 340 ---
Can We Design Software as We Talk? 333
Fig.4. Example of executing the ontology crawler component in the context of the
SmallShop case
products. And for returning customers it is good practice to store relevant information
like the shipping address in a user account.
4 Lessons Learnt and Future Work
The current paper presents a research idea for automating the process of require-
ments speciﬁcation. We propose a framework consisting of a requirements engineering
room, and components to support the automatic generation of user stories and soft-
ware prototype generation. This paper presents results from the implementation of the
components for automatic generation of user stories while requirements are discussed.
Our eﬀorts lead to the development of prototypes for a deep learning classiﬁer and
ontology crawler. Initial results are promising and proves the feasibility of the pro-
posed research idea. Prototypes are made available on our public GitHub repository
to motivate further research in the ﬁeld.
For the near future, we plan to keep evolving the prototype for user stories assembler
component. In this way, we can obtain full user stories from elicitation sessions. For
our framework to mature and being implemented in practical settings, we envision to
build a ﬂexible environment to support the plug-and-play of components that conform
the framework. In this way, we can incorporate alternative components while ensuring
a proper interoperability. In addition to evaluating the extent to which our solution
improves user stories’ generation in terms of eﬃciency, we plan to evaluate the intention
to use and usability of the framework from the perspective of requirements engineers.
For our long term plans, we plan to investigate the quality of software engineering
recordings to further adjust and improve our framework.
References
1. Gebhart, M., Giessler, P., Abeck, S.: Challenges of the digital transformation in
software engineering. In: The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engi-
neering Advances (ICSEA) (2016)
2. Mund, J., Femmer, H., Mendez, D., Eckhardt, J.: Does quality of requirements
speciﬁcations matter? Combined results of two empirical studies (2017). https://
arxiv.org/pdf/1702.07656.pdf
3. Chakraborty, A., Baowaly, M., Areﬁn, A., Bahar, A.: The role of requirement
engineering in software development life cycle. J. Emerg. Trends Comput. Inf. Sci.
3, 723–729 (2012)

--- PAGE 341 ---
334 M. Ruiz and B. Hasselman
4. Dalpiaz, F., Brinkkemper, S.: Agile requirements engineering with user stories. In:
26th International Requirements Engineering Conference (RE), Banﬀ, AB, Canada
(2018)
5. Wagenaar, G., Overbeek, S., Lucassen, G., Brinkkemper, S., Schneider, K.: Work-
ing software over comprehensive documentation - rationales of agile teams for arte-
facts usage. J. Softw. Eng. Res. Dev. 6, 7 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1186/s40411-
018-0051-7
6. Wüest, D., Seyﬀ, N., Glinz, M.: FlexiSketch: a lightweight sketching and meta-
modeling approach for end-users. Softw. Syst. Model. 18(2), 1513–1541 (2017).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10270-017-0623-8
7. Damian, D., Zowghi, D.: RE challenges in multi-site software development orga-
nizations. Requir. Eng. J. 8, 149–160 (2003). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00766-003-
0173-1
8. Wüest, D., Seyﬀ, N., Glinz, M.: Sketching and notation creation with FlexiSketch
team: evaluating a new means for collaborative requirements elicitation. In: 23rd
International Requirements Engineering Conference (RE), Ottawa (2015)
9. Kaiya, H., Saeki, M., Ochimizu, K.: Design of a hyper media tool to support
requirements elicitation meetings. In: Proceedings Seventh International Workshop
on Computer-Aided Software Engineering (1995)
10. Murray, G., Carenini, G.: Summarizing spoken and written conversations. In: Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, PA, USA, Strouds-
burg (2008)
11. Guzman, E., Ibrahim, M., Glinz, M.: A little bird told me: mining tweets for
requirements and software evolution. In: 25th International Requirements Engi-
neering Conference (RE) (2017)
12. Rastkar, S., Murphy, G.C., Murray, G.: Summarizing software artifacts: a case
study of bug reports. In: Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on
Software Engineering, NY, USA, New York, vol. 1 (2010)
13. Rodeghero, P., Jiang, S., Armaly, A., McMillan, C.: Detecting user story informa-
tion in developer-client conversations to generate extractive summaries. In: 39th
International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) (2017)
14. Abad, Z.S.H., Gervasi, V., Zowghi, D., Barker, K.: ELICA: an automated tool for
dynamic extraction of requirements relevant information. In: International Work-
shop on Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Requirements Engineering (AIRE) (2018)
15. Krasniqi, R., Jiang, S., McMillan, C.: TraceLab components for generating extrac-
tive summaries of user stories. In: International Conference on Software Mainte-
nance and Evolution (ICSME) (2017)
16. Rodeghero, P.: Behavior-informed algorithms for automatic documentation gen-
eration. In: International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution
(ICSME) (2017)
17. Pennington, J., Socher, R., Manning, C.: Glove: global vectors for word repre-
sentation. In: Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP), Doha, Qatar (2014)

--- PAGE 342 ---
Non-Functional Requirements Orienting
the Development of Socially Responsible
Software
Luiz Marcio Cysneiros1 and Julio Cesar Sampaio do Prado Leite2(B)
1 School of Information Technology, York University, Toronto, ON, Canada
cysneiro@yorku.ca
2 Departamento de Informática, PUC-Rio, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
julio@inf.puc-rio.br
Abstract. Nowadays, software is ubiquitous and present in almost everything
we buy and use. Artificial intelligence (AI) is becoming prevalent in software
products. The use of AI entices consumer inquisitiveness, promising software
products that can make our lives easier, productive, and in some mission-critical
applications safer. Similar reasoning can be applied to systems exploring Internet
ofThings,cloudservices,andmobiletechnologies.However,thereisatrustdeficit
when it comes to accepting AI as well as the other above-mentioned features, as a
reliable technology platform. This paper argues that the more critical the domain
is, the less consumers seem to trust software to make decisions on their behalf
or even to be used. Aspects such as safety, privacy, and ethics challenges the
perception of trustworthy computing. In the past two decades, several works have
suggested that Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) may play an essential role
in creating a trust paradigm between customers and businesses promoting loyalty,
customer retention and thus enhancing customer trust and increasing corporate
profit. We believe that the software industry will need soon rather than later to
encouragetrustintheirembeddedsoftware.Apromisingapproachliesinadapting
principlesassociatedwithCSRtoguidethesoftwaredevelopmentprocesses.Such
an approach could help to achieve two goals: Deliver trustworthy software and,
if desired, deliver socially responsible software. We believe that Non-Functional
Requirements(NFR)willplayacrucialroleinthisendeavor.Thispaperhighlights
a first approach to establishing a basic set of NFRs that should always be carefully
considered when developing software, as to aim socially responsible software.
Keywords: Socially responsible software · Non-Functional Requirements ·
Trust · Transparency · Ethics
1 Introduction
Today, software is embedded in almost everything we buy or use daily in our lives.
In recent years, AI has been increasingly used to deliver solutions in many different
commercial and regulatory domains, from personal assistance devices such as Alexa1
1 https://developer.amazon.com/en-US/alexa.
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. Nurcan et al. (Eds.): BPMDS 2020/EMMSAD 2020, LNBIP 387, pp. 335–342, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49418-6_23

--- PAGE 343 ---
336 L. M. Cysneiros and J. C. S. do Prado Leite
to face recognition technologies used by law enforcement agencies. However, the use
of AI raises doubts in the mind of consumers regarding how much we can trust AI2 to
make decisions on our behalf. The lack of trust seems to be more prevalent in mission-
critical systems where personal safety is in the care of the machine. Kolm shows [1]
that 70% of Canadians are comfortable with AI scheduling appointments, but only 39%
feel comfortable with AI piloting autonomous vehicles. Therefore, we believe that the
software development process needs to address ways to assure consumers they can trust
the software embedded in the products they are buying and/or using.
Applications utilizing concepts related to Internet of Things, cloud services, and
mobile technologies will raise similar concerns aggravated with the expectation of pri-
vacy and safety, triggering ethical questions that will directly impact how much cus-
tomers can trust their devices. Although there are works [2, 3] tackling trust related to
machine learning and decision support systems, they look at trust in a single dimension
and do not capture the consequences of trust from a social perspective.
Our work aims to consider trust of AI-based software from a citizen’s viewpoint,
using the metaphor of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR)3. In the past two decades,
many works have pointed out that CSR goes a long way in promoting positive outcomes
such as loyalty, repeat business, and purchase intention [4, 5]. Furthermore, CSR efforts
may also positively impact the market value of companies that are perceived to be
committed to social responsibility [6]. One important aspect of CSR is that its adoption
reduces information asymmetry [7], and as such, it brings out transparency. It is to note
the tangling effect of CSR in the broader concept of Corporate/Company Reputation
[30].
One of the main reasons for consumers to value CSR is because it promotes intrinsic
trust in the company. One way of looking at trust is to measure how much a consumer
thinks a company can be deemed reliable in situations entailing risk to the consumer.
One critical factor is how much consumers believe the company’s actions and behaviors
have the consumers’ interest and welfare in mind [9].
This work builds an initial argumentation of why using CSR knowledge does help
softwareengineersdeveloptrustfulSoftware.ThebenefitsofusingCSRconceptswould
be twofold i) Develop trustworthy systems that would help to retain customers and to
increase market share ii) Use this trustworthy as the basis for developing a socially
responsible system that is likely to be in high demand in the near future.
In this idea paper, we present the foundation for our ongoing work. We are tackling
what we believe will be the core requirements to deliver trustworthy software. We asso-
ciate these requirements with the perspective of society, in general, to be able to opt for
sociallyresponsiblesoftwaretogetherwiththegoalofrepetitivebusinessandimproving
market share. We hope to inspire other researchers to explore similar paths.
2 https://www.nytimes.com/2020/01/18/technology/clearview-privacy-facial-recognition.html.
3 The Business Domain debates over the similitudes/differences among the acronyms CS
(CorporateSustainability)andCSR.WesidewiththosethatconsiderCSandCSRassynonyms.

--- PAGE 344 ---
NFR Orienting the Development of Socially Responsible Software 337
2 Method
We carried out a brief literature review starting with the CSR domain to investigate
the qualitative properties used in their experience to promote corporate social respon-
sibility that could be adapted to the software domain. We used keyword searches such
as (csr AND trust), (corporate social responsibility AND Trust) from 2015 to 2019.
We recovered 112 publications. After removing duplicated references, snowballing, and
examiningtheabstracts,wereviewed22references.Ourchoicewasbasedonthelinkage
of CSR and Trust.
We elicited knowledge from these references to create a matrix with the most often
mentioned properties expected to be present in companies adopting the CSR approach.
Following, we analyzed which of those properties should be implemented in company’s
Information Systems, in general, to contribute to a trustworthy and socially responsible
environment.UsinganNFR(Non-FunctionalRequirements)perspective[21],wefound
three NFRs: Trust, Ethics, and Transparency in these properties. Using earlier knowl-
edge [22, 27], we searched for NFRs which may interact either positively or negatively
with these three NFRs, and we elicited Privacy, Safety, and Security.
OuraimwasnottobuildsoftwaretosupportCSRadoptionbycompanies.Westudied
theCSRapproachasabasistoproposewhichwouldbethecriticalqualitativeproperties
to develop trustworthy Information Systems software, based on the company’s goal. As
such, these qualities would stand as essential NFRs to develop software to support the
delivery of socially responsible Information Systems either as a goal by its own or as
part of the adoption of CSR. At the same time, companies that are interested on a stricter
approach to CSR will also have a solid base to start from.
3 Results
As pointed out by Vlachos et al. [10] and others, trust is central for companies to be
perceived as socially responsible. By the same token, we set trust as the primary NFR
to be satisfied, i.e., satisfied within acceptable limits. Our reasoning follows the idea
that safety-critical systems and any software using AI as well as advanced forms of
technology such as internet of things and cloud systems, will inherently trigger fear
in many customers who are forced to relinquish their safety to a machine or to face
unwanted misuse of their behaviors and preferences and sometimes both
Incorporatedomains,trustwouldcomewhenprovidersdemonstrateethicalbehavior
enforced in their software. Bowen illustrates such a scenario for safety-critical systems
[11]. In order to promote trust, software engineers need to take a bottom-up approach in
developing domain-specific knowledge of elements that build the foundations of trust.
Trust is also frequently linked to the concept of ethics. Consumers tend to trust
companies that they perceive as ethically sound [12]. Nevertheless, consumers also
identifyandbelievethatcompaniesarefollowingmoralstandardsiftheyaretransparent
in the way they do business [6]. The ISO 26000 standard points out how businesses and
organizationsshouldhandleethicalandtransparentconcernstoactresponsibly[13].We
believe that a similar perspective could be applied to software development in general.
Ethics helps to promote trust [5, 14], together with the understanding that safety-
critical systems need to demonstrate ethical behavior to be accepted by consumers.

--- PAGE 345 ---
338 L. M. Cysneiros and J. C. S. do Prado Leite
However, Ethics is not a straightforward concept that can be easily applied. It is a
human compass that shifts with the sand of time. Researchers studying the self-driving
car domain have pointed out many ethical dilemmas that need to be addressed [15].
Furthermore, ethical decisions made either by the software or its users choosing an
ethical scenario may entail legal implications [15]. The first step to building ethics into
a machine is to recognize that all models will have their faults and limitations. There
can be no single software architecture which proclaims to be the benchmark of moral
goodness. Since human interest cannot always be satisficed due to inherent conflicts,
ethics will likely be aggressively contested in the court of law between those who seek
to exploit AI technology in the public domain and those who wish to confine it to a
controlled environment. Insurance companies will likely use such types of arguments
in many cases when AI making decisions are involved. Software developers should be
prepared to counter-argument any accusations or even better, be pro-active, and not give
space to them.
Even for systems that are more benign in terms of damage, such as Alexa, ethi-
cal behavior can become a fundamental requirement for retaining customers, since its
use may threaten privacy. Another critical requirement is privacy. Customers are re-
discovering the importance of privacy [16], and states are enacting privacy laws, as the
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). There have been many breaches of pri-
vacysuchastheSamsungvoice-recognitionbeingactivatedbydefaultinsmarttelevision
models to Alexa capturing conversations and sending them to a repository [17].
Additionally, safety will play an essential role in many different domains. Software,
AI based, will demand safety to be mandatory. Smart homes, for example, can bring
threats to safety if not extensively analyzed when dealing with heating systems. It also
should avoid exposing residents to external monitoring. Huang et al. survey points out
most essential qualities to be satisficed [18] as to attain safety.
Systemslikesmarthomeadministrationcanattractconsumerswiththeirconvenience
features,togetherwiththeexpectationsofsavingmoneyonthingssuchasenergycontrol.
However, they may open the door for hackers to exploit vulnerabilities and misuse
information. A recent study carried out in England shows the industry providing smart
home solutions has not yet offered consumers with enough evidence they can trust that
their home solutions will comply with the security and privacy standards they expect
[19]. Poorly managing security and privacy can expose vendors to legal disputes, which
is the price to pay by not observing social responsibility.
Weadvocatethatsoftwareengineersshouldstartinvestigatinghowtooperationalize4
Ethics, Safety, Security, and Privacy requirements. They can either carry out literature
reviews to identify possible operationalizations for each NFR or use existing knowledge
bases that capture knowledge that can be reused [20]. One of our goals for future work
is to produce or improve existing knowledge bases representing them in the form of
Softgoal Interdependencies Goals (SIG) catalogues [21], for example, those proposed
by Zinovatna for Privacy and Transparency together [22]. There is empirical evidence
that the use of SIG catalogues helps to obtain an improved set of NFRs [20, 23, 24].
4 Recent work [31] brings an operationalization perspective on how to use goal models to define
systems considering privacy, security and trust.

--- PAGE 346 ---
NFR Orienting the Development of Socially Responsible Software 339
Fig. 1. A SIG with the Key NFRs for responsible software
AlltheNFRsmentioned
above alone will not
be enough to promote
trust in software. Trust
will only be achieved if
the software is transpar-
ent enough to demon-
strate its qualities to
consumers and illustrate
that the software is act-
ing accordingly to what
consumers expect from
it. In fact, Bachmann
et al. [25] point out that transparency is one of the critical issues for companies to
recover from a situation that led to a lack of trust by consumers. Furthermore, no matter
how well-designed software is, there will always be scenarios where failures, accidents,
anddamageswillbeinevitable.Inthesecases,transparentsoftwarecanhelptodetermine
responsibilities and deal with liabilities and civil and criminal implications. Software
Transparency implies that software will supply transparency not only of the data it has
used and manipulated but also on the process of development behind this software. Leite
and Cappelli provides a catalogue of transparency with a set of possible solutions to
build transparent software [28]. Cysneiros et al. point out that transparency may play
an essential role in the acceptance and willingness to buy and use self-driving cars. It
also illustrates how legal disputes are an important requirement in the self-driving car
domain, suggesting that transparency may play an important role in legal disputes [27].
Hence, we believe that legal disputes will certainly also be a requirement that will
often be necessary to be tackled in a pro-active manner delivering systems that make
use of AI, IofT, or cloud computing. Systems may have to embed ethical choices to
guide the reasoning behind decisions made by the software. Injuries, damages, or even
deathsresultingfromthesechoicesmayresultinbothcivilandcriminalprocedures[15].
On the other hand, in many cases manufacturers will be able to allow users to set their
own scenario for ethical and safety decisions which could shift the liability away from
software companies but may result in lower sales sparking fear in consumers to accept
the risk without totally understanding, or more importantly, trusting how this feature
would work. Systems that connect to several devices may be exposed to mal-function
due to failures that can go from problems in communication to the lack of appropriate
procedures to deal with mal-functions. This can also lead to legal disputes, and once
again,systemspreparedtobetransparentcanmitigatetheconsequencesoflegalactions.
Summarizing, it is our understanding that to support a socially responsible software
development that can stimulate citizens/consumers to trust software embedded artifacts
that they will be using or buying, we must develop the software with a close look at
Ethics, Safety, Security and Privacy. These four NFRs should promote trust when the
softwareisdeveloped,andtheymustbetransparentenoughtodemonstratetoconsumers
that the software will meet their expectations for these four NFRs. Each of these NFRs,
whenmanagedwithTransparency,mayhaveapositiveimpactonlegaldisputesthatmay

--- PAGE 347 ---
340 L. M. Cysneiros and J. C. S. do Prado Leite
arise due to suspect software behavior. In Fig. 1, a SIG maps the interactions among
Softgoals (NFRs) [21]; so Ethics, Safety, Privacy, and Security contribute positively
(Help) for Trust, but it needs Transparency to allow the contribution to be effective in
mitigating legal disputes. We certainly acknowledge that other NFRs will also play a
relevant role in distinct types of applications, like Reliability, for instance. Nevertheless,
we believe the NFRs illustrated in Fig. 1 is the anchor we need to carefully elicit and
model operationalizations for developing software, that people can trust.
4 Conclusion
Society has been changing and evolving at a fast pace. Ubiquitous computing, massive
social connection, and growing use of AI/ML (Machine Learning) quite often linked to
IofT concepts have been pushing software development to a new paradigm. In a recent
paper[8]Agrawaletal.stated:“MachineLearningmodelsaresoftwareartifactsderived
from data”. More then ever, we can not afford to build software targeting one single
scenario of use. New software may have immense social impact with legal implications.
Weneedtomoveourpracticetoembracethisnewscenariowherewemustbuildsoftware
that is trustworthy and can be accountable for behaving in a socially responsible way.
Our contribution relies on eliciting, from social sciences, basic qualities for socially
responsible software to be represented as SIG catalogues, anchored on the NFR Frame-
work [21]. We will be developing catalogues to capture as many as possible solutions
(operationalizations) to each NFR illustrated in Fig. 1. We aim to research systematic
ways to search and find satisficing solutions to each of the above NFRs and integrate
these solutions into a software reuse processes, taking in consideration how each possi-
ble solution will impact other NFRs. We will revisit and extend existing catalogues such
as Leite’s transparency [28] and Zinovatna’s privacy and transparency [22], as well as
exploring existing operationalizations, such as [31]. We will also focus on better under-
standing the implications of ethical concepts in the development of software and how it
wouldimpacttrustaswellasitslegalramifications.Thatwillleadtoinvestigatepersonal
and group values that are closely related to ethics aspects [29].
Atthecoreofourresearch,trustistheprimarygoaltobeachieved.Ifconsumerscan
trust your company and, by extension, your products (software), they tend to become
loyal to your brand and refer your products to acquaintances, which in a social network
era can translate into benefits, avoiding legal disputes.
References
1. Kolm, J.: How comfortable are Canadians with AI? strategy. http://strategyonline.ca/2017/
12/14/how-comfortable-are-canadians-with-ai/. Accessed 13 Nov 2018
2. Bussone, A., Stumpf, S., O’Sullivan, D.: The role of explanations on trust and reliance in
clinical decision support systems. In: Proceedings - 2015 IEEE International Conference
on Healthcare Informatics, ICHI 2015, pp. 160–169. Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers Inc. (2015). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICHI.2015.26
3. Ribeiro,M.T.,Singh,S.,Guestrin,C.:“Whyshoulditrustyou?”Explainingthepredictionsof
any classifier. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 1135–1144. Association for Computing Machinery, New
York (2016). https://doi.org/10.1145/2939672.2939778

--- PAGE 348 ---
NFR Orienting the Development of Socially Responsible Software 341
4. Chaudhuri, A., Holbrook, M.B.: The chain of effects from brand trust and brand affect to
brand performance: the role of brand loyalty. J. Mark. 65, 81–93 (2001). https://doi.org/10.
1509/jmkg.65.2.81.18255
5. Park, E., Kim, K.J., Kwon, S.J.: Corporate social responsibility as a determinant of consumer
loyalty: an examination of ethical standard, satisfaction, and trust. J. Bus. Res. 76, 8–13
(2017). https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JBUSRES.2017.02.017
6. Kang, J., Hustvedt, G.: Building Trust Between Consumers and Corporations: The Role of
Consumer Perceptions of Transparency and Social Responsibility. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10551-013-1916-7
7. Cui, J., Jo, H., Na, H.: Does corporate social responsibility affect information asymmetry? J.
Bus. Ethics 148, 549–572 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-015-3003-8
8. Agrawal, A., et al.: Cloudy with high chance of DBMS: a 10-year prediction for Enterprise-
Grade ML (2019)
9. Delgado-Ballester, E., Munuera-Aleman, J.L., Yague-Guillen, M.J.: Development and
validation of a brand trust scale. Int. J. Mark. Res. 45, 35–56 (2003)
10. Vlachos, P.A., Tsamakos, A., Vrechopoulos, A.P., Avramidis, P.K.: Corporate social respon-
sibility: attributions, loyalty, and the mediating role of trust. J. Acad. Mark. Sci. 37, 170–180
(2009). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11747-008-0117-x
11. Bowen, J.: The ethics of safety-critical systems. Commun. ACM 43, 91–97 (2000). https://
doi.org/10.1145/332051.332078
12. Pivato, S., Misani, N., Tencati, A.: The impact of corporate social responsibility on consumer
trust: the case of organic food. Bus. Ethics A Eur. Rev. 17, 3–12 (2007). https://doi.org/10.
1111/j.1467-8608.2008.00515.x
13. ISO - ISO 26000 Social responsibility. https://www.iso.org/iso-26000-social-responsibility.
html. Accessed 22 Oct 2019
14. Bews, N.F., Rossouw, G.J.: A role for business ethics in facilitating trustworthiness. J. Bus.
Ethics 39, 377–390 (2002). https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1019700704414
15. Lin,P.:Whyethicsmattersforautonomouscars.In:Maurer,M.,Gerdes,J.,Lenz,B.,Winner,
H.(eds.)AutonomesFahren,pp.69–85.Springer,Heidelberg(2015).https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-662-45854-9_4
16. Buck, C., Stadler, F., Suckau, K., Eymann, T.: Privacy as a part of the preference structure of
users app buying decision. In: Proceedings of the Wirtschaftsinformatik 2017 (2017)
17. Thierer, A.D.: The internet of things and wearable technology: addressing privacy and secu-
rity concerns without derailing innovation. SSRN 21 (2014). https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.
2494382
18. Huang, F., Wang, Y., Wang, Y., Zong, P.: What software quality characteristics most concern
safety-critical domains? In: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Software Quality, Relia-
bility and Security Companion (QRS-C), pp. 635–636. IEEE (2018). https://doi.org/10.1109/
QRS-C.2018.00111
19. Wilson, C., Hargreaves, T., Hauxwell-Baldwin, R.: Benefits and risks of smart home
technologies. Energy Policy 103, 72–83 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENPOL.2016.
12.047
20. Veleda, R., Cysneiros, L.M.: Towards an ontology-based approach for eliciting possible solu-
tions to non-functional requirements. In: Giorgini, P., Weber, B. (eds.) CAiSE 2019. LNCS,
vol. 11483, pp. 145–161. Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-21290-
2_10
21. Chung, L., Nixon, B.A., Yu, E., Mylopoulos, J.: Non-Functional Requirements in Software
Engineering. Springer, Boston (1999). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4615-5269-7
22. Zinovatna, O., Cysneiros, L.M.: Reusing knowledge on delivering privacy and transparency
together. In: 2015 IEEE Fifth International Workshop on Requirements Patterns (RePa),
pp. 17–24 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1109/RePa.2015.7407733

--- PAGE 349 ---
342 L. M. Cysneiros and J. C. S. do Prado Leite
23. de Gramatica, M., Labunets, K., Massacci, F., Paci, F., Tedeschi, A.: The role of catalogues
of threats and security controls in security risk assessment: an empirical study with ATM
professionals.In:Fricker,S.,Schneider,K.(eds.)REFSQ2015.LNCS,vol.9013,pp.98–114.
Springer, Cham (2015). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-16101-3_7
24. Cardoso, E., Almeida, J.P., Guizzardi, R.S., Guizzardi, G.: A method for eliciting goals for
business process models based on non-functional requirements catalogues. In: Frameworks
forDevelopingEfficientInformationSystems:Models,Theory,andPractice:Models,Theory,
and Practice, pp. 226–242 (2013)
25. Bachmann, R., Gillespie, N., Priem, R.: Repairing trust in organizations and institutions:
towardaconceptualframework.Organ.Stud.36,1123–1142(2015).https://doi.org/10.1177/
0170840615599334
26. Cysneiros, L.M., Yu, E.: Non-functional requirements elicitation. In: do Prado Leite, J.C.S.,
Doorn, J.H. (eds.) Perspectives on Software Requirements. SECS, vol. 753, pp. 115–138.
Springer, Boston (2004). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4615-0465-8_6
27. Cysneiros, L.M., Raffi, M., Sampaio do Prado Leite, J.C.: Software transparency as a key
requirementforself-drivingcars.In:2018IEEE26thInternationalRequirementsEngineering
Conference (RE), pp. 382–387. IEEE (2018). https://doi.org/10.1109/RE.2018.00-21
28. do Prado Leite, J.C.S., Cappelli, C.: Software transparency. Bus. Inf. Syst. Eng. 2, 127–139
(2010). https://doi.org/10.1007/s12599-010-0102-z
29. Angela Ferrario, M., Simm, W., Forshaw, S., Gradinar, A., Tavares Smith, M., Smith, I.:
Values-first SE: research principles in practice. https://doi.org/10.1145/2889160.2889219
30. Shim, K., Yang, S.: The effect of bad reputation: the occurrence of crisis, corporate social
responsibility, and perceptions of hypocrisy and attitudes toward a company. Public Relat.
Rev. 42(1), 68–78 (2016)
31. Salnitri,M.,Angelopoulos,K.,Pavlidis,M.,etal.:Modellingtheinterplayofsecurity,privacy
and trust in sociotechnical systems: a computer-aided design approach. Softw. Syst. Model.
19, 467–491 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10270-019-00744-x

--- PAGE 350 ---
Domain-Specific Modeling (EMMSAD
2020)

--- PAGE 351 ---
A Journey to BSO: Evaluating Earlier and
More Recent Ideas of Mario Bunge
as a Foundation for Information Systems
and Software Development
Roman Lukyanenko(B)
HEC Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada
roman.lukyanenko@hec.ca
Abstract. A prominent theoretical foundation for IT analysis, design and devel-
opment is general ontology - a branch of philosophy which studies what exists in
reality. A widely used general ontology is BWW (Bunge-Wand-Weber) – based
on ideas of the philosopher and physicist Mario Bunge, synthesized by Wand and
Weber. It is regarded as a major contribution to conceptual modeling, database
design, data collection design and information quality, as well as theory of IT. At
thesametime,theontologywasfoundedonanearlysubsetofBunge’sphilosophy
and Bunge’s ideas have evolved since then. An important question, therefore, is:
dothemorerecentideasexpressedbyBungecallforanewontology?Inthispaper
we conduct an analysis of research by Bunge aiming at addressing this question.
We compare the constructs of BWW with what we call Bunge’s Systemist Ontol-
ogy (BSO) – a new ontology based on broader and more recent ideas developed
by Bunge. Informed by this comparison we offer suggestions for ontology studies
as well as future applications of Bunge in conceptual modeling and other areas of
IT.
Keywords: Ontology · Upper-level ontology · Bunge · Bunge-Wand-Weber
ontology · Bunge’s Systemist Ontology · Conceptual modeling · IT development
1 Introduction
With the increased reliance on information technology (IT), grows the importance of
building IT based on solid foundations [1, 2]. Historically, one of the most prolific and
effective references for IT analysis, design and development has been ontology. In this
paper we focus on general ontology – a branch of philosophy which studies what exists
in reality (and what reality is) [3, 4] – rather than a domain ontology – a description
(often formal) of constructs in a particular domain (e.g., ontology of Software Defects,
Errors and Failures, see [5] or ontology of research validity [6]) [7].
A general (also known as foundational or upper level) ontology offers IT develop-
menttheoreticallygrounded(i.e.,basedonestablishedknowledgefromotherdisciplines
as psychology or physics), consistent, formalized and rigorous meaning for the basic
notionsofwhatexistsinrealityandthusinadomainofIT.Assuch,ontologicalstudiesare
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. Nurcan et al. (Eds.): BPMDS 2020/EMMSAD 2020, LNBIP 387, pp. 345–358, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49418-6_24

--- PAGE 352 ---
346 R. Lukyanenko
now widely embraced by the IT community. Applications of ontologies are especially
prolific in research on semantic web (which aims to move beyond syntactic matches
to deeper interoperability), and conceptual data and process modeling (which devel-
ops representations of application domains and user requirements), but have also been
used in knowledge management, artificial intelligence, interface design, data collection
processes, database schema integration, analysis of software performance, information
quality, among others [4, 8–14]. Empirical benefits of adopting a particular domain
ontology (e.g., in the design of conceptual modeling grammars or improving quality of
data produced by an IT) have been documented [8, 15–19].
Considering the demonstrable benefits of general ontologies, research has proposed
a number of general ontologies to be used for IT analysis, design and development,
such as Unified Foundational Ontology (UFO) [20], social ontology of Searle [21],
General Formal Ontology [22], DOLCE [23]. A prominent ontology is BWW (Bunge-
Wand-Weber)–basedonideasofthephilosopherandphysicistMarioBunge(1919-Feb
2020), synthesized by Wand and Weber [24, 25].
The BWW is widely regarded as major contribution to theory and practice of IT and
conceptual modeling, at it has been informing theoretical, empirical and design works
across a wide range of disciplines [26, 27]. At the same time, the ontology has been
criticized e.g., [28], especially on grounds related to the assumptions underlying the
ontology rooted in philosophical beliefs of Bunge.
Notable, BWW was developed on a subset of Bunge’s ontology [29, 30] which is
now over 40 years old (i.e., 1977 and 79). In the 40 years since the publication of the
two primary sources of BWW [29, 30], Bunge published over 100 books and 300 papers
[31], in which his ideas were further expanded, refined, and sometimes, altered. Several
question, therefore, arise:
Research Questions (RQs): is there a need for a revision to the original BWW? Are
statements such as “Bunge believes the world is made of things” justified in light of
more recent publications? Should this be a minor, or a major revision? Does it result in
an expansion of BWW e.g., [32], or do the ideas expressed (since 1979) by Bunge call
for a completely new ontology?
In this paper we provide results of a first phase of the project aiming at addressing
these questions. In this phase we compare key constructs of BWW with what we coin
Bunge’s Systemist Ontology (BSO) – a more recent set of ideas developed by Bunge
since the volumes which formed basis for BWW. Informed by this analysis we offer
suggestionsforfutureresearchonbothdevelopmentofontologyaswellasuseofBunge
in conceptual modeling and other areas of IT.
2 Background: Bunge-Wand Weber Ontology
Inarecentessay,YairWandandRonWeberofferafirst-handaccount[26]ofwhatmoti-
vated them to pursue their program of grounding information systems (IS) research in
foundational ontology and how they developed a set of theories (e.g., theory of ontolog-
ical expressiveness, representation model, good-decomposition model) based on what
becameknownasBunge-Wand-Weberontology.Althoughtheyconsultedothersources,
the primary foundation of BWW are two seminal manuscripts on ontology by Bunge
[29, 30], part of his eight volume Treatise on Basic Philosophy.

--- PAGE 353 ---
A Journey to BSO: Evaluating Earlier and More Recent Ideas of Mario Bunge 347
Briefly, following philosophy of Bunge, BWW [24, 25] argues that the world is
madeofthings–substantialindividuals–whichpossessproperties;thingsmaycompose
formingcompositethings,interactwithoneanother,leadingtoacquisitionofneworloss
of existing properties, resulting in events; sets of things from systems. Properties are not
directly accessible to human observers, resulting in the notion of attributes; attributes
which humans ascribe to things may or may not be accurate or complete representations
of the underlying properties. In sum, the key constructs from Bunge which have been
adopted into BWW are: thing, property, attributes, functional schema, state, law, state
space, event, history, coupling, system, class, kind, and their derivatives (e.g., lawful
state space) i.e., see Table 1, p. 222 [33] and [34].
The BWW ontology and the theories, models and methods derived from it, have
been used widely in conceptual, empirical and design work in information systems,
conceptual modeling, software engineering and other areas [26], making it among the
most important developments in the area of ontology in disciplines of IT [35].
Despite the prolific use of BWW (for most recent reviews, see [35, 36]) the ontol-
ogy has been criticized for its narrow physicalist focus, lack of attention to social and
psychological phenomena, as well as postulates which may be problematic for mod-
eling certain type of domain rules (e.g., BWW proscribed optional properties, denied
independent existence of properties, and properties of properties) [4, 21, 28, 37].
Despite the many debates centered on BWW, a generally overlooked issue is that the
original ontology is based on select references from Bunge. Although there have some
attempts at expanding BWW to incorporate other ideas of Bunge [32], these were still
narrow in scope and did not see widespread adoption compared with BWW.
The basis for BWW have been two, albeit seminal and focused on ontology,
manuscripts by Bunge. However, as Bunge frequently noted, ontology is inseparable
from other beliefs, such as on how to obtain knowledge in the world [38]. Indeed,
the Treatise contained many additional beliefs, including on matters of semantics,
epistemology, methodology, ethics, technology, among others.
Additionally, in the over 40 years since the publication of the 1977 and 79 volumes
(and even since the last book of the Treatise - on ethics [39]), Bunge published over 400
manuscripts,inwhichhisideaswerefurtherexpanded,refined,andsometimes,altered1.
Some of these more recent ideas were of great potential relevance to IT, as they directly
dealt with issues of information technology e.g., [41].
Considering the broad and profound impact BWW had on the disciplines of IT, such
as conceptual modeling, an important question to ask is: Can we further IT research and
practice by incorporating these, more recent views and beliefs of Mario Bunge? In order
to answer this question, it is first incumbent to assess the extent to which the original
basis for BWW and the more recent thinking agree and diverge.
1 An example of a reversal is Bunge’s admiration for Marxism-Leninism (an extensive set of
beliefstranscendingthegeneralpublic’smostfamiliarideasaboutpoliticsandeconomy).Itwas
Bunge’s first major philosophical doctrine, according to his own confessions but over the years
he distanced himself and then ended up being a vehement critic of Marxist-Leninist “ontology
and politics” [31, p. vii], [40].

--- PAGE 354 ---
348 R. Lukyanenko
3 Constructing Bunge’s Systemist Ontology
The task of understanding the differences between Bunge’s ideas enshrined in BWW
and his other, and more recent thinking, meets a challenge: the ideas which formed
BWW were carefully distilled, while the more recent thinking was not. Although based
on two volumes, BWW was founded on a self-contained Treatise on Basic Philosophy
which developed and present ideas systematically and with great internal consistency:
beginning with semantics [42], then ontology [29], followed by epistemology [43],
methodology [43] and ethics [39]. In contrast, the more recent thinking of Bunge (e.g.,
since the Treatise) has not been assembled into a dedicated, self-contained single com-
pendium. Rather is a collection of over 400 essays, papers and books (e.g., [38, 41,
44–46]), which require dedicated synthesis2.
To answer the RQs of the paper, we engaged in a comprehensive and systematic
effort to catalog and present these beliefs, a project which was done over a period of five
years (2015–2020), covering up to the last known publication by late Bunge.
The procedure was conducted in the following steps: First, we began to assemble
a library of publications by Bunge and conducted a scoping survey of the writing to
gain a preliminary idea of the extend of alternations and expansions compared with the
Treatise. Second, half-way into the process, the author contacted Mario Bunge, who
kindly agreed to meet and provided a general overview of his earlier and most recent
thinking and answered numerous clarifying questions. Third, we reviewed all pertinent
publications using GoogleScholar and [31] as the sources3. Fourth, we followed the
logical path outlined in the Treatise (i.e., ontology, epistemology, methodology and
ethics) and re-iterated and explained by Bunge in other sources e.g., [38] to catalog
the ideas beginning with basic assumptions about reality, followed by the problem of
knowledge of reality and then the application and use of the knowledge by society (e.g.,
inpolicy-making,scienceanddailylife).Fifth,webegansynthesizingtheideas,favoring
the most recent publications e.g., [45, 46] as the primary signal and referencing earlier
publications e.g., [38], Bunge’s own memoirs [40], and authoritative studies on Bunge
[31], for clarification or expansion of ideas, when needed4.
The result is a systematic synthesis of Bunge’s publications aimed at distilling and
presenting a single, coherent and consistent set of beliefs with the aim of using these
ideas in the context of IT. As mentioned, Bunge kindly clarified some of the ideas of his
ontologyandalsosharedacopyofhismostrecentand(asofFebruary2020)unpublished
manuscript. However, all claims made here are justified either through direct references
to published works by Bunge or are explicitly noted as author’s own inferences, and
derivations. To report the findings, we analyze the constructs of BWW presented in see
Table 1, p. 222 [33] compared with what we refer to as Bunge’s Systemist Ontology
2 For example, although Bunge has made a stronger emphasis toward systems, his recent writing
is still rich in references to things, including in the same texts where he talks about systems
being primary existents and preferable to notion of things (e.g., [45, p. 174]).
3 https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=7MmcYgEAAAAJ&hl=en&oi=ao.
4 For example, whereas Bunge describe systems in [44, p. 270] (among many other sources),
to find more detailed discussion of properties of systems, one can consult, for example, [38,
pp. 10–19].

--- PAGE 355 ---
A Journey to BSO: Evaluating Earlier and More Recent Ideas of Mario Bunge 349
(BSO) which as we argue later is a new ontology. Bunge uses multiple labels to describe
his set of beliefs (e.g., “emergentist materialism” [47], “hylorealism” [38, p. 27]), but
the most frequently used appears to be “systemism” [30, 46, 48].
4 Bunge’s Systemist Ontology Vs Foundations of BWW
The BSO claims reality is all that we know to exist and distinguishes five “kinds” or
“levels” of reality, including physical, chemical, biological, social and technical [44,
p. 25]. These levels may have different actual or perceptible to human properties or
events, but all are ultimately grounded in the underlying physical level.
The BWW ontology postulated that reality is made of things, which have properties
[29, pp. 26–29]. Things are “substantial individuals”, which could be composed of other
individuals or be simple [34, p. 126]. A set of things forms a system [30, p. 6].
Although the notion of system exists in BWW, through the passage of time, BSO
has been adopting a new postulate that under some interpretation inverts the relationship
between things and systems. In BSO, Bunge believes the world is made of systems:
“everything is a system or a component of a system” [46, p. 23]. Thus, Bunge argues,
“everythingiseitherasystemoracomponentofsuch”,“everyconstructisacomponent
ofatleastoneconceptualsystem”,“everysymbolisacomponentofatleastonesymbolic
system” [44, p. 266]. A thing is a type of system (although this view is not consistent
through Bunge’s recent wring).
By drawing upon recent advances in physics, especially particle physics that Bunge
followed closely e.g., [49], Bunge [45] explains (p. 174, emphasis added):
The word ‘system’ is more neutral than ‘thing’, which in most cases denotes a
system endowed with mass an perhaps tactually perceptible; we find it natural to
speakofaforceorfieldasasystem,butwewouldbereluctanttocallitathing.By
calling all existents “concrete systems” we tacitly commit ourselves in tune with a
growing suspicion in all scientific quarters - that there are no simple, structureless
entities.
Systemism doesn’t suggest things no longer exist, but for Bunge it appears more
productive to think about the basic elements of the world as systems, rather than things.
Yet, it is notable that he has not fully committed himself to this thinking as he admits a
possibility of atomic things (i.e., “non-systems”) [48, p. 148]:
Onlyparticlephysicistsstudynon-systems,suchasquarks,electrons,andphotons.
But they know that all such simple things are parts of systems or will eventually
be absorbed by some system.
Yet, as conceptual modeling and many other areas of IT do not engage with quarks,
electrons, and protons (perhaps the progress in quantum computing may change this in
the future), effectively these disciplines may disregard the caveat in [48, p. 148] and
treat all existents of interest as systems. Thus, we can conclude that in BSO, the world
is made of systems.

--- PAGE 356 ---
350 R. Lukyanenko
For Bunge, systmism holds numerous advantages, as it conceptually lies in between
individualism (which under-represents internal structures of a system, its relationship
with outer environment, its levels of composition and emergence) and holism (which is
not interested in the components and specificity of subsystems). For Bunge, systemism
represents the best of these two ideas, without sacrificing the benefits of each [48]. This
is how Agazzi, a friend and close associate of Bunge, summarizes his views, which he
debated with Bunge extensively over the years [50, p. 224]:
[Bunge] explicitly presents his position (which he calls “systemism”) as interme-
diate between two erroneous extremes, “atomism” and “holism”. The weakness
of atomism resides in that it ignores the relevance of properties and especially
relations, without which it is impossible to distinguish a single “aggregate” from a
“system”. The weakness of holism resides (according to Bunge) in its pretension
that the knowledge of the whole must precede and make possible the knowledge
of the parts. Systemism avoids both mistakes by recognizing that the whole “re-
sults” from the correlation of its parts and at the same time has influence on their
functioning.
Bunge believes, systems are always composed of components or parts [46, p. 23].
However, it is not clear what the construct of “part” or “component” mean – we have not
seen their definition in Bunge’s writings. A way to avoid this problem is to recognize,
one again, that in the domains of interest to IT, parts or components of systems are
systems themselves. This is an important realization, as it liberates the field of IT from
the need to resolve the fundamental ontological status of the “component” or “system
part”.
Over the years, Bunge developed and expanded his ontology of systems. Thus, in
the Treatise, Bunge postulated that any system should have “a definite composition, a
different environment, and a different structure. The composition of the system is the
set of its components; the environment, the set of items with which it is connected;
and the structure, the relations among its components as well as among these and the
environment” [30, p. 4].
Inlaterwritings,thisinitialideawasdevelopedintoaCESMmodel,whichinaddition
to the composition, environment, and structure (present in BWW), added “mechanism”
[48]. Mechanism is defined as “characteristic processes, that make [the system] what
it is and the peculiar ways it changes” [38, p. 126]. To illustrate, Bunge provides an
example of a traditional nuclear family [38, p. 127]:
Its components are the parents and the children; the relevant environment is the
immediatephysicalenvironment,theneighbourhood,andtheworkplace;thestruc-
ture is made up of such biological and psychological bonds as love, sharing, and
relations with others; and the mechanism consists essentially of domestic chores,
marital encounters of various kinds, and child rearing. If the central mechanism
breaks down, so does the system as a whole.
Adopting BSO in the context of IT allows to potentially remove the notion of a thing
from the ontology, simply replacing it with the system construct. The inversion of the
relationship between things and systems, and the potential obviation of the need for

--- PAGE 357 ---
A Journey to BSO: Evaluating Earlier and More Recent Ideas of Mario Bunge 351
things in BSO, represents a major change, as the construct of thing has been a founding
one for BWW and has been the conceptual foundation for many studies which adopted
BWW [19, 51].
However, as effectively, things in the social and technical levels of early Bunge were
effectivelysystems[30],thischangecanbeeasilyaccommodatedbymuchofpriorwork
which used BWW with a mere replacement of a label.
Assystemsreplacethings,thisresultsinareductionofcomplexityofBWWontology
that dealt with the relationship between things and systems (e.g., obviating the need for
constructs such as “composite thing” or “properties of things”). For example, BWW
defines internal event as “an event that arises in a thing, subsystem, or system” [33,
p. 222]. This definition can simply state that an internal event is an event that arises in
a system. However, note, an ontology that uses systems as its fundamental ontological
primitive, would probably borrow other constructs related to systems, which are beyond
the BWW (e.g., CESM).
As in BWW, BSO continues to uphold the beliefs about the relationship between
systems and properties. Systems have properties. Properties do not exist outside of
systems[45,p.175]:“Property-lessentitieswouldbeunknowable,hencethehypothesis
of their existence is untestable; and disembodied properties and relations are unknown.”
As in BWW, properties according to BSO do not exist in themselves: “However, … can
be material only derivatively, that is, by virtue of the materiality of the things involved:
there are neither properties nor relations in themselves, except by abstraction.” [38,
p. 11].
Notions of classes and kinds are used in BSO, but somewhat differently compared
with BWW. In BWW, classes are sets of things sharing “a common property”, whereas
kinds are sets of things which share “two or more” property [33, p. 223]). Systems with
“one of more” common properties in BSO [44, p. 111], form classes and those with
properties which are interrelated, form kinds [38, p. 13].
The greater emphasis on systems carries other implications, as this new postulate
is propagated throughout most of Bunge’s recent beliefs. According to BSO, some but
not all (an important caveat cf. BWW) systems undergo change, resulting in emergence
(addition of new) or submergence (loss of old) of properties. To account for this, BSO
continues to use the construct of state. Bunge [45, p. 171] defines a state as “the list of
the properties of the thing at that time” – a definition nearly identical to that in BWW
[29, p. 125]. A state can describe multiple properties (at the same moment in time) [38].
A given system has the properties of its subsystems, as well as its own, termed emergent
properties (and idea unchanged since BWW), but now gaining greater focus in BSO, as
a key implication of systemism.
Whereas per BWW, Bunge applies the notion of a state to all things [29, p. 123],
in BSO, Bunge [38] makes an important distinction between systems which undergo
change and those do not. In BWW, a set of postulates deal with changes of states (i.e.,
events) and how the properties which make up the states are perceived by humans (i.e.,
attributes) [29]. However, for BSO these constructs do not apply to all systems.
Bunge distinguishes two kinds of system: conceptual and concrete [44, p. 270].
A conceptual (or formal) system is a system all the components of which are concep-
tual(e.g.,propositions,classifications,andhypothetico-deductivesystems-i.e.,theories).

--- PAGE 358 ---
352 R. Lukyanenko
This is contrasted with concrete (or material) systems which are made of concrete com-
ponents (i.e., subsystems, such as atoms, organisms, and societies), meaning that these
components may undergo change.5
What distinguishes concrete and conceptual systems is the essential property of
mutability – a key element of BSO - which only concrete systems possess: “mutability
is the one property shared by all concrete things, whether natural or artificial, physical
or chemical, biological or social, perceptible or imperceptible” [38, p. 10]. Bunge thus
explains that changes in systems may only occur if the systems are concrete [38, p. 11]:
heat propagation, metabolism, and ideation qualify as material since they are pro-
cesses in material things. By contrast, logical consistency, commutativity, and
differentiability can only be predicated of mathematical objects.
Concrete systems change in the virtue of energy transfer. For Bunge, “the technical
word for ‘changeability’ is energy” [38, p. 12], such that:
To repeat, energy is not just a property among many. Energy is the universal
property, the universal par excellence.
We thus obtain a more formal definition of a concrete system in BSO as a system
that has energy [38, p. 12].
TheBSOdedicatesconsiderabletimetothenotionofenergy,asitunderliesBunge’s
thinking about (new to BWW) constructs of causality, trigger and chance. He ana-
lyzes these notions relative to different kinds of energy, including mechanical, thermal,
kinetic, potential, electric, magnetic, gravitational, chemical (e.g., in [38]). Thus, per
BSO, when systems interact, they transfer energy from one to another. This leads to
change in states of things, as they acquire or lose their properties. This produces events
and processes. Energy when paired with artificial code may transmit information (new
to BWW constructs, and of special relevance to the field of IT).
The consequence of re-definition of systems as either energy-bearing or not, makes
another major change compared with BWW. Thus, while in BWW an event has been
understood as a “change in state of a thing” [33, p. 222], in BSO, event in understood in
terms of energy, thus being only applicable to concrete systems6. Bunge views event as
an energy-involving construct [38, p. 91]:
Event C in thing A causes event E in thing B if and only if the occurrence of C
generates an energy transfer from A to B resulting in the occurrence of E.
Multiple events form processes (a new construct for BWW): defined as “a sequence,
ordered in time, of events and such that every member of the sequence takes part in the
determination of the succeeding member” [45, p. 172].
5 Bunge [44, p. 270] also distinguishes a symbolic (or semiotic) system as a type of a concrete
systemsomecomponentsofwhichstandfororrepresentotherobjects(e.g.,languages,computer
diskettes, and diagrams).
6 This may potentially resolve the criticisms levied against Bunge’s ontology by as being too
physicalist [21, 28] - original ideas of Bunge captured in BWW without explicit qualification
have indeed been casted by BSO as belonging to only material reality.

--- PAGE 359 ---
A Journey to BSO: Evaluating Earlier and More Recent Ideas of Mario Bunge 353
The demarcation between events applicable to concrete vs conceptual systems,
affects the definition of the notion of law, which is applicable to concrete systems only.
Laws are stable patterns which hold “independently of human knowledge or will” [44,
p. 27]. In BSO, conceptual systems do not obey laws, but rather obey rules of logic [38,
p. 19] – a new concept for BWW.
The BSO then draws a very close connection between ontology and epistemology, a
connection which is not as evident in BWW. BSO’s epistemology is vast and extensive
and connects his ontology to other philosophical beliefs differently compared to BWW.
WhereasinBWW,theconnectionismadeviatheconstructsofattributes(i.e.,properties
as seen by people and model things), in BSO the connection is again, via systems.
For BSO, an event or a process as it appears to some human subject is termed
phenomenon [45, p. 173] (new to BWW construct). It is an occurrence registered by
the sensory apparatus of humans or other animals triggered by a change or a serious
of changes in the state of a concrete system. For example, the rising of the sun or
inauguration of the president calls a complex chain of events in the attentive, perceptive,
cognitive and other biological and mental processes of the people who experience these
events (either directly or via a signal, such as radio, Internet or television). Phenomena
are always “in the intersection of the external world with the cognitive subject” [45,
p. 173].
Events, processes, phenomena, and concrete systems are instances of the mental
concept of fact – i.e., they lie “in the extension of the concept of fact” [45, p. 174].
Facts are kinds of objects – “whatever is or may become a subject of thought or action”
[45, p. 174] i.e., “known or assumed - with some ground - to belong to reality” [45,
p. 171]. Thus, through the notions of facts, BSO connects the fundamental ideas about
the composition of reality to the mental world of humans.
As Bunge stresses, what can be observed as phenomena is a small fraction of the
facts constituting the object of an investigation; “the observable facts or phenomena
are documents suggesting or confirming the existence of more interesting facts behind”
[45, p. 177]. Facts are iceberg-like: they are mostly submerged under the surface of
immediate experience and, furthermore, the phenomena are often quite different from
the concrete systems they are based on. Consider for example the difference between
the visual sensations caused by aurora borealis and the actual chemical, magnetic, and
other physical processes involved in the unraveling of this concrete system.
Thus, the “submerged” portion of facts must be hypothesized and, in order to test
such hypotheses, definite relations between the unobserved and the observed must be
added, by which the observed can count as evidence for or against the existence of the
hypothetical unseen, and the unseen can explain what can be seen. These relations are
represented by hypotheses and theories [45, p. 177].
It is a subject of centennial debates in philosophy whether human observers have
access to more than just phenomena. The position of the phenomenalism holds that
only direct sensations and experiences are knowable [52]. In contrast, various strands of
realism generally believe that reality beyond sensations can be known [53]. This can be
accomplished with the aid of experimentation, theory testing, imagination and logical
inference.BungeperBWWandBSOisaproponentofthelatter[45].ForBunge[45],the

--- PAGE 360 ---
354 R. Lukyanenko
pragmatic benefit of realism is that it encourages thinking and action beyond sensations
and encourages an active stance toward reality.
There is no “end” of the BSO per se (recall, BSO is not published in a self-contained
treatise), as Bunge continuously stresses the interdependency between ontology and
other beliefs, thus we draw a demarcation based on constructs in BWW [33]. We note,
Wand and Weber engaged with other ideas of Bunge, as did other scholars e.g., [32,
54], and acknowledged the existence of other constructs and more recent set of beliefs.
As they note, Bunge “has written extensively about social phenomena using constructs
based upon his ontology (e.g., Bunge, 1998)” [26, p. 6]. Yet, much of IT community
adoptedtheviewsofBungestemmingfromBWW,makingthisanimportantbenchmark
comparison.
5 Discussion and Implications
The Bunge-Wand-Weber ontology has been a seminal ontology having demonstrable
and broad impact on various disciplines of IT. It has been proven effective at guiding
conceptual, empirical and design research. The success of BWW motivates our efforts
to examine the extent to which we could benefit from more recent ideas and beliefs of
Mario Bunge. Based on our analysis above, we can draw the following conclusions and
suggest several implications for future studies.
Frist, it is evident that more recent thinking by Bunge remains partially consistent
with BWW. In particular, BSO continues to adhere to the tenets of scientific realism
and grounds thinking into interpretation of the state-of-the-art knowledge in physics
and other disciplines. Many ideas in BSO have not changed compared to BWW; these
includethedenialoftheexistenceofproperties(withknownimplicationsforconceptual
modelingresearch,suchastheproblemofoptionalpropertiesorpropertiesofproperties
[15, 55–57]), emergence, lack of direct human access to reality (i.e., to the properties of
systems), notions of state, event, and change.
Second, many of the changes introduced by BSO could be handled by appropriate
qualifications or more precise specifications of the already existing notions (e.g., that
concrete systems undergo change via energy transfer, but conceptual systems do not).
The notion of things and their properties is still present, as some systems can be viewed
as individual objects.
Thus, there is an important continuity between BSO and BWW - a continuity which
iscriticalinassessingthestatusofimpressivetheoretical,conceptualanddesignresearch
thatstemmedfromtheideasofWandandWeber.Hence,BSOcouldstillbeusedtoposit
that classes “tyrannize” instances [51] or that optional properties should be proscribed
(although, in BSO, for concrete systems only, as conceptual systems do not follow the
same principles as concrete ones).
On the other hand, BSO suggests a new way of thinking about reality, which is
while somewhat compatible with the ideas in BWW, creates significant new openings
for future research.
A more central role of systems carries profound implications beyond a mere poten-
tial for simplification of an ontology. In contrast to the emphasis on unique things BSO
points a researcher and practitioner (e.g., in the context of conceptual modeling) to the

--- PAGE 361 ---
A Journey to BSO: Evaluating Earlier and More Recent Ideas of Mario Bunge 355
importance of representing structure, relationship between systems, emergence, differ-
entlevels,andinteractionsamongsub-systems.InBSO,Bungeclearlywishestobalance
hisviewsbetweenthevalueanindividual-focusedperspectivemaybringvsaperspective
which ismore sensitive to the whole. There have been many studies, including a number
of recent ones, which followed early Bunge and emphasized the primacy of individuals
(e.g.,inthelogicaldatabasedesign,conceptualmodelinggrammars,informationquality,
designcollectionprocesses,e.g.,[19,51,58–60]).Bungeextensivelytalksaboutthelim-
itationsoftheindividual-focusedperspectiveandsuggeststhatamorebalancedapproach
may be more fruitful, an approach which BSO appears to support better [44, 48].
Furthermore, BSO more than BWW enmeshed ontological issues with matters of
epistemology, methodology, technology and ethics. It has provisions for social, mental
and technological reality (including constructs such as social facts, concepts, hypothe-
ses). These ideas stand to lessen many concerns raised earlier about Bunge related to
the physicalist focus of his ontology. Furthermore, several studies used BWW to reason
about notions of information and information quality [12, 19]. However, BSO explicitly
contains some of these constructs, and shows a path from the ontological primitive of
a system to the notion of information, for example. Indeed, Bunge made a concerted
effort to incorporate advances in modern information technology [41]. Thus, adopting
BSO for future studies promises a more direct grounding of many important concepts of
modern society into ideas of Bunge. In short, BSO stands to broadly enrich conceptual
modeling and other IT related topics with many new ideas.
Considering the differences between earlier and more recent thinking of Bunge, we
respond affirmatively to our research question and propose Bunge’s Systemist Ontology
or BSO, as a new ontology, and a new addition to the theoretical toolbox of IT.
6 Conclusion
Mario Bunge made a profound mark on the field of conceptual modeling, software
engineering, information quality, database design. Much of this influence has been via
BWW ontology – an incredibly valuable body of knowledge which popularized Bunge
in the field of IT and became the foundation for numerous studies on design and use of
information technologies. Even researchers who disagreed with aspects of BWW and
Bunge’sontology,benefitedfromtheseideasgreatly,asBWWprovidedakeybenchmark
and inspired to pursue ontological studies in IT [4, 20, 21].
The significance and success of BWW motivated us to seek new ways Bunge’s
extensive thinking can be leveraged in the design and use of IT. As we showed in our
work,BSOcontainsideasthatalthoughsomewhatcompatiblewithBWW,arealsoquite
different, raising new prospects and opening new possibilities.
The new BSO emerges as a complex and extensive set of beliefs. In this paper, we
began to expose its basic tenets and assumptions. However, this work is by no means
complete.OurkeyobjectivewastoestablishBSOasanewontology.Muchworkremains
to study BSO in its own right (including its benefits and limitations for applications in
IT), formalizing it into a finite set of postulates (as Wand and Weber did for BWW), and
seeking out areas of IT practice which could benefit from the application of these ideas.
In short, we call on researchers to consider adopting BSO as a promising new ontology.

--- PAGE 362 ---
356 R. Lukyanenko
References
1. Guerreiro, S., van Kervel, S.J., Babkin, E.: Towards devising an architectural framework for
enterprise operating systems. In: ICSOFT, pp. 578–585 (2013)
2. Henderson-Sellers, B.: Why philosophize; why not just model? In: Johannesson, P., Lee,
M.L., Liddle, S.W., Opdahl, A.L., López, Ó.P. (eds.) ER 2015. LNCS, vol. 9381, pp. 3–17.
Springer, Cham (2015). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-25264-3_1
3. Gonzalez-Perez, C.: How ontologies can help in software engineering. In: Cunha, J., Fer-
nandes, J.P., Lämmel, R., Saraiva, J., Zaytsev, V. (eds.) GTTSE 2015. LNCS, vol. 10223,
pp. 26–44. Springer, Cham (2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-60074-1_2
4. Guizzardi, G.: Ontological foundations for structural conceptual models. Telematics Instituut
Fundamental Research Series, Enschede, The Netherlands (2005)
5. Duarte, B.B., Falbo, R.A., Guizzardi, G., Guizzardi, R.S.S., Souza, V.E.S.: Towards an ontol-
ogy of software defects, errors and failures. In: Trujillo, J.C., et al. (eds.) ER 2018. LNCS,
vol. 11157, pp. 349–362. Springer, Cham (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-00847-
5_25
6. Lukyanenko, R., Larsen, K.R., Parsons, J., Gefen, D., Mueller, R.M.: Toward creating a
general ontology for research validity. In: International Conference on Conceptual Modeling,
Salvador, Brazil, pp. 133–137 (2019)
7. McDaniel, M., Storey, V.C.: Evaluating domain ontologies: clarification, classification, and
challenges. ACM Comput. Surv. 53(1), 1–40 (2019)
8. Verdonck, M., Gailly, F., Pergl, R., Guizzardi, G., Martins, B., Pastor, O.: Comparing tradi-
tional conceptual modeling with ontology-driven conceptual modeling: an empirical study.
Inf. Syst. 81, 92–103 (2019)
9. Recker, J., Rosemann, M., Krogstie, J.: Ontology-versus pattern-based evaluation of process
modeling languages: a comparison. Commun. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 20(1), 48 (2007)
10. Martínez Ferrandis, A.M., Pastor López, O., Guizzardi, G.: Applying the principles of an
ontology-based approach to a conceptual schema of human genome. In: Ng, W., Storey, V.C.,
Trujillo, J.C. (eds.) ER 2013. LNCS, vol. 8217, pp. 471–478. Springer, Heidelberg (2013).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-41924-9_40
11. Pastor, Ó., España, S., González, A.: An ontological-based approach to analyze software
production methods. In: Kaschek, R., Kop, C., Steinberger, C., Fliedl, G. (eds.) UNISCON
2008. LNBIP, vol. 5, pp. 258–270. Springer, Heidelberg (2008). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-540-78942-0_26
12. Wand, Y., Wang, R.Y.: Anchoring data quality dimensions in ontological foundations.
Commun. ACM 39(11), 86–95 (1996)
13. Reinhartz-Berger,I.,Itzik,N.,Wand,Y.:Analyzingvariabilityofsoftwareproductlinesusing
semantic and ontological considerations. In: Jarke, M., et al. (eds.) CAiSE 2014. LNCS, vol.
8484, pp. 150–164. Springer, Cham (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-07881-6_11
14. Guarino,N.:Formalontology,conceptualanalysisandknowledgerepresentation.Int.J.Hum.
Comput. Stud. 43(5–6), 625–640 (1995)
15. Bodart, F., Patel, A., Sim, M., Weber, R.: Should optional properties be used in conceptual
modelling? A theory and three empirical tests. Inf. Syst. Res. 12(4), 384–405 (2001)
16. Burton-Jones,A.,Weber,R.:Buildingconceptualmodelingonthefoundationofontology.In:
Computing Handbook: Information Systems and Information Technology, pp. 15.1–15.24.
CRC Press, Boca Raton (2014)
17. Bera, P., Burton-Jones, A., Wand, Y.: Research note—how semantics and pragmatics interact
in understanding conceptual models. Inf. Syst. Res. 25(2), 401–419 (2014)
18. Recker, J., Rosemann, M., Green, P., Indulska, M.: Do ontological deficiencies in modeling
grammars matter? MIS Q. 35(1), 57–79 (2011)

--- PAGE 363 ---
A Journey to BSO: Evaluating Earlier and More Recent Ideas of Mario Bunge 357
19. Lukyanenko,R.,Parsons,J.,Wiersma,Y.:TheIQofthecrowd:understandingandimproving
informationqualityinstructureduser-generatedcontent.Inf.Syst.Res.25(4),669–689(2014)
20. Guizzardi,G.,Wagner,G.,Almeida,J.P.A.,Guizzardi,R.S.:Towardsontologicalfoundations
forconceptualmodeling:theunifiedfoundationalontology(UFO)story.Appl.Ontol.10(3–4),
259–271 (2015)
21. March, S.T., Allen, G.N.: Toward a social ontology for conceptual modeling. In: Communi-
cations of the AIS, vol. 34 (2014)
22. Herre,H.:Generalformalontology(GFO):afoundationalontologyforconceptualmodelling.
In: Poli, R., Healy, M., Kameas, A. (eds.) Theory and Applications of Ontology: Computer
Applications,pp.297–345.Springer,Heidelberg(2010).https://doi.org/10.1007/978-90-481-
8847-5_14
23. Gangemi, A., Guarino, N., Masolo, C., Oltramari, A., Schneider, L.: Sweetening ontologies
withDOLCE.In:Gómez-Pérez,A.,Benjamins,V.R.(eds.)EKAW2002.LNCS(LNAI),vol.
2473, pp. 166–181. Springer, Heidelberg (2002). https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-45810-7_18
24. Wand, Y., Weber, R.: Toward a theory of the deep structure of information systems. In:
International Conference on Information Systems, Copenhagen, Denmark, pp. 61–71 (1990)
25. Wand, Y., Weber, R.: An ontological analysis of some fundamental information systems
concepts. In: Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Systems,
vol. 1988, pp. 213–226 (1988)
26. Wand,Y.,Weber,R.:Thirtyyearslater:somereflectionsonontologicalanalysisinconceptual
modeling. J. Database Manag. (JDM) 28(1), 1–17 (2017)
27. Burton-Jones, A., Recker, J., Indulska, M., Green, P., Weber, R.: Assessing representation
theory with a framework for pursuing success and failure. MIS Q. 41(4), 1307–1333 (2017)
28. Wyssusek,B.:Onontologicalfoundationsofconceptualmodelling.Scand.J.Inf.Syst.18(1),
63–80 (2006)
29. Bunge, M.A.: Treatise on Basic Philosophy: Ontology I: The Furniture of The World. Reidel,
Boston (1977)
30. Bunge, M.A.: Treatise on Basic Philosophy: Ontology II: A World of Systems. Reidel
Publishing Company, Boston (1979)
31. Bunge, M.A., et al.: Mario Bunge: A Centenary Festschrift. Springer, Cham (2019). https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-16673-1
32. Rosemann, M., Wyssusek, B.: Enhancing the expressiveness of the Bunge-Wand-Weber
ontology. In: AMCIS 2005 Proceedings, pp. 1–8 (2005)
33. Wand, Y., Weber, R.: On the ontological expressiveness of information systems analysis and
design grammars. Inf. Syst. J. 3(4), 217–237 (1993)
34. Wand,Y.,Weber,R.:MarioBunge’sontologyasaformalfoundationforinformationsystems
concepts. In: Weingartner, P., Dorn, G. (eds.) Rodopi, pp. 123–150 (1990)
35. Jabbari, M., Lukyanenko, R., Recker, J., Samuel, B., Castellanos, A.: Conceptual modeling
research:revisitingandupdatingWandandWeber’s2002researchagenda.In:AISSIGSAND,
pp. 1–12 (2018)
36. Saghafi, A., Wand, Y.: Conceptual models? A meta-analysis of empirical work. In: Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences, Big Island, HI, pp. 1–15 (2014)
37. Veres,C.,Mansson,G.:Psychologicalfoundationsforconceptmodeling.In:Blackwell,A.F.,
Marriott, K., Shimojima, A. (eds.) Diagrams 2004. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 2980, pp. 26–28.
Springer, Heidelberg (2004). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-25931-2_5
38. Bunge,M.A.:Chasingreality:strifeoverrealism.UniversityofTorontoPress,Toronto(2006)
39. Bunge, M.A.: Treatise on Basic Philosophy: Ethics: The Good and The Right. Springer,
Amsterdam (1989). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-009-2601-1
40. Bunge, M.A.: Between Two Worlds: Memoirs of a Philosopher-Scientist. Springer, Heidel-
berg (2016). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-29251-9

--- PAGE 364 ---
358 R. Lukyanenko
41. Bunge, M.A.: The dark side of technological progress. In: Sassower, R., Laor, N. (eds.) The
ImpactofCriticalRationalism,pp.109–113.Springer,Cham(2019).https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-319-90826-7_10
42. Bunge, M.A.: Treatise on Basic Philosophy: Semantics I: Sense and Reference. Springer,
Amsterdam (1974). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-010-9920-2
43. Bunge, M.A.: Treatise on Basic Philosophy: Volume 6: Epistemology & Methodology II:
Understanding the World. Reidel, Boston (1983)
44. Bunge,M.A.:FindingPhilosophyinSocialScience.YaleUniversityPress,NewHaven(1996)
45. Bunge,M.A.:PhilosophyofScience:Volume2,FromExplanationtoJustification.Routledge,
New York (2017)
46. Bunge, M.A.: Systems everywhere. In: Cybernetics and Applied Systems, pp. 23–41. CRC
Press, London (2018)
47. Bunge,M.A.:EmergenceandConvergence:QualitativeNoveltyandtheUnityofKnowledge.
University of Toronto Press, Toronto (2003)
48. Bunge, M.A.: Systemism: the alternative to individualism and holism. J. Soc. Econ. 2(29),
147–157 (2000)
49. Bunge,M.A.:Gravitationalwavesandspacetime.Found.Sci.23(2),399–403(2018).https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10699-017-9526-y
50. Agazzi, E.: Systemic thinking. In: Matthews, M.R. (ed.) Mario Bunge: A Centenary
Festschrift, pp. 219–240. Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-16673-
1_13
51. Parsons, J., Wand, Y.: Emancipating instances from the tyranny of classes in information
modeling. ACM Trans. Database Syst. 25(2), 228–268 (2000)
52. Hirst, R.J.: The Problems of Perception. Routledge, London (2002)
53. Hempel, C.G.: Philosophy of Natural Science. Pearson, London (1966)
54. Milton, S.K.: Ontological foundations of representational information systems. Scand. J. Inf.
Syst. 19(1), 5 (2007)
55. Bodart, F., Weber, R.: Optional properties versus subtyping in conceptual modeling: a theory
and empirical test. In: International Conference on Information Systems (1996)
56. Burton-Jones, A., Weber, R.: Properties do not have properties: investigating a questionable
conceptual modeling practice. In: Annual Symposium on Research in Systems Analysis and
Design (2003)
57. Gemino, A., Wand, Y.: Complexity and clarity in conceptual modeling: comparison of
mandatory and optional properties. Data Knowl. Eng. 55(3), 301–326 (2005)
58. Lukyanenko,R.,Parsons,J.,Wiersma,Y.F.,Wachinger,G.,Huber,B.,Meldt,R.:Representing
crowd knowledge: guidelines for conceptual modeling of user-generated content. J. Assoc.
Inf. Syst. 18(4), 297–339 (2017)
59. Lukyanenko,R.,Parsons,J.,Samuel,B.M.:Representinginstances:thecaseforreengineering
conceptualmodelinggrammars.Eur.J.Inf.Syst.28(1),68–90(2019).https://doi.org/10.1080/
0960085X.2018.1488567
60. Samuel, B.M., Khatri, V., Ramesh, V.: Exploring the effects of extensional versus intentional
representations on domain understanding. MIS Q. 42(4), 1187–1209 (2018)

--- PAGE 365 ---
A New DEMO Modelling Tool that Facilitates
Model Transformations
Thomas Gray1, Dominik Bork2 , and Marné De Vries1(B)
1 Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering,
University of Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa
{Thomas.Gray,Marne.DeVries}@up.ac.za
2 Faculty of Computer Science, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
Dominik.Bork@univie.ac.at
Abstract. The age of digitization requires rapid design and re-design of enter-
prises.Rapidchangescanberealizedusingconceptualmodelling.Thedesignand
engineering methodology for organizations (DEMO) is an established modelling
method for representing the organization domain of an enterprise. However, het-
erogeneityinenterprisedesignstakeholdersgenerallydemandfortransformations
between conceptual modelling languages. Specifically, in the case of DEMO, a
transformation into business process modelling and notation (BPMN) models is
desirabletoaccounttoboth,thesemanticsoundfoundationoftheDEMOmodels,
andthewideadoptionofthede-factoindustrystandardBPMN.Modeltransforma-
tion can only be efficiently applied if tool support is available. Our research starts
withastate-of-the-artanalysis,comparingexistingDEMOmodellingtools.Using
a design science research approach, our main contribution is the development of
a DEMO modelling tool on the ADOxx platform. One of the main features of our
tool is that it addresses stakeholder heterogeneity by enabling transformation of
a DEMO organization construction diagram (OCD) into a BPMN collaboration
diagram. A demonstration case shows the feasibility of our newly developed tool.
Keywords: DEMO · BPMN · ADOxx · Model transformation · Model
consistency · Modelling tool
1 Introduction
The age of digitization requires rapid design and re-design of enterprises. In addition,
theagiledesignparadigmembracestheuseofmultiplemodellinglanguagestorepresent
design knowledge. Unfortunately, this paradigm also has challenges regarding incon-
sistencies between model types that represent knowledge from the same knowledge
domain. Modelling researchers should ensure to create models, languages, and methods
that can be adapted to changing requirements in the future [1, p. 3].
Domain-specific languages are created to provide insight and understanding within
a particular domain context and stakeholder group [2]. As an example, the design and
engineering methodology for organizations (DEMO) provides models that represent the
organizationdomainofanenterprise[3].DEMOoffersauniquedesignperspective,since
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. Nurcan et al. (Eds.): BPMDS 2020/EMMSAD 2020, LNBIP 387, pp. 359–374, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49418-6_25

--- PAGE 366 ---
360 T. Gray et al.
its four aspect models have the ability to represent organization design domain knowl-
edgeinaconciseandconsistentway,removingtechnologicalrealizationandimplemen-
tation details [3]. One of DEMO’s aspect models, the construction model, incorporates
an organization construction diagram (OCD) that provides a concise representation of
enterpriseoperations.ManagersvaluetheOCD,sinceitbecomesablueprintthatenables
discussions on enterprise (re-)design and strategic alignment [3, 4]. Recker et al. [5] and
VanNuffeletal.[6]indicatedthatunguideduseoftheBusinessProcessModelingNota-
tion(BPMN)constructsoftenleadstoinconsistentmodels.Itisthusourgoaltocombine
the strengths of DEMO and BPMN by proposing a model transformation and modelling
tool support.
Due to its characteristics of being consistent and concise, various authors experi-
mented with transformations between modelling languages, as discussed in the remain-
ing paragraph. De Kinderen, Gaaloul and Proper [7] indicated that “ArchiMate lacks
specificity on how to model different perspectives in-depth” while [8, 9] add that Archi-
Mate lacks in expressing value exchange. As a solution to these deficiencies, [7] con-
ducted a study to map concepts from DEMO to concepts contained within the busi-
ness layer of the ArchiMate meta-model with the purpose of modelling the essential
aspects of an enterprise first in DEMO, followed by a transformation into an ArchiMate
model, adding technological realization and implementation details. Based on the work
of Ceatano et al. [10] and Heller [11], Mraz et al. [12] presented transformation specifi-
cations to generate BPMN models from DEMO models. Yet, the specifications did not
consider the complexity of hierarchical structures in DEMO models. In addition, their
transformation specifications were not supported by tooling to automate DEMO-BPMN
transformations.
ThisstudystartswithanevaluationofexistingDEMOmodellingtools.Weconclude
that existing modelling tools do not support all of DEMO’s four aspect models. In
addition, the tools do not facilitate transformations to other languages, such as BPMN.
Themainobjectiveofthisarticleistoaddressstakeholderheterogeneitybydevelopinga
DEMOmodellingtoolontheADOxxplatform.Wedemonstrateoneofthemainfeatures
ofourtool,namelytotransformaDEMOorganizationconstructiondiagram(OCD)into
a corresponding BPMN collaboration diagram.
The article is structured as follows. Section 2 provides background on multi-view
modelling,aswellastheexistingknowledgeonDEMOconceptsthatareexplainedviaa
demonstrationcase.Usingdesignscienceresearch,aspresentedinSect.3,wepresentthe
requirementsforanewDEMOtoolinSect.4andtheDEMOconstructionalcomponents
that form part of the OMiLAB ecosystem, in Sect. 5. We also demonstrate the key
functionality of the new DEMO tool, i.e. semi-automatic OCD-BPMN transformations
for one out of four identified transformation scenarios. Section 6 ends with conclusions
and suggestions for future research.
2 Background
Model-based development (MBD) approaches suggest separation of concerns, using
multiple views, to manage the complexity of modern software systems [13]. Yet, one of
the challenges of multi-view modelling is the lack of consistency management [14].

--- PAGE 367 ---
A New DEMO Modelling Tool that Facilitates Model Transformations 361
Bork [15] emphasised the need to develop consistent and concise conceptual models
for domain-specific languages. Prior to developing tool support and model transforma-
tion, language specifications should at least consider to provide syntax, semantics, and
notation for the different viewpoints [16].
Mulder[17]alsoacknowledgedtheneedtovalidatetheexistingDEMOspecification
language (DEMOSL) prior to developing tool support. Using the meta-model definition
presented by [18], metamodels should be sufficiently complete to describe all set of
models (i.e. multiple viewpoints) that are allowed, rejecting models that are not valid.
In addition, the metamodel should enable partial transformation of the model (e.g. from
ontological to implementation level). With respect to the DEMO metamodels, Mulder
[17] already suggested improvements regarding the multiple viewpoints evident in four
aspect models. Since our first version of the DEMO-ADOxx tool only includes the
constructionmodel(CM),weelaboratewithinthenextsectionontheupdatedmetamodel
for the CM.
2.1 DEMO Models and Metamodels
DEMO uses four linguistically based aspect models to represent the ontological model
of the organisation domain of the enterprise, namely the construction model (CM),
process model (PM), action model (AM), and fact model (FM) that exclude technology
implementationdetails[19].Eachmodelisrepresentedbydifferentdiagramsandtables,
as illustrated in Fig. 1.
Construction Model
Fact Model
Action Model
Process Model
Action Rule Specifications (ARS)
Work Instruction Specifications (WIS)
Process Structure Diagram (PSD)
Transaction Process Diagram (TPD)
Object Fact Diagram (OFD)
Derived Fact Specifications (DFS)
Existence Law Specifications (ELS)
Organisation Construction Diagram (OCD)
Transaction Product Table (TPT)
Bank Contents Table (BCT)
Fig. 1. DEMO aspect models with diagram types and tables, based on [19] and [20]
The ontological model is based on a key discovery that forms the basis of the aspect
models, namely the identification of a complete transaction pattern that involves two
actor roles, a production act (and fact), and multiple coordination acts (and facts) that

--- PAGE 368 ---
362 T. Gray et al.
areperformedinaparticularorder[19].Althoughitispossibletoidentifythreedifferent
sorts of a transaction kind (TK), i.e. original, informational and documental, the four
aspect models primarily focus on the original sort. A TK can also be classified as an
elementary TK when it is executed by only one actor role, or an aggregate TK (ATK)
when it is executed by multiple actor roles. Also, an actor role can be classified as either
an elementary actor role (EAR) when s/he executes one TK and a composite actor role
(CAR) when s/he is the executor of more than one TK [19, 20].
The concepts that were discussed so far, as well as the relationships between con-
cepts, are described via a metamodel presented in [19]. Mulder [17] identified several
inconsistencies with regards to the CM, addressing the issues in [21]. Figure 2 presents
an updated metamodel that incorporates the extensions suggested by Mulder [21]. Note
that the Scope of Interest (SoI) is not modelled as a separate concept, since Mulder [21]
argues that the SoI is equivalent to the CAR. The relationships and cardinalities in Fig. 2
signify modelling constraints when a modeller composes a CM. The constraints should
also be incorporated in the modelling tool. As an example, a single relationship exists
between Transaction Kind (TK) and Aggregate Transaction Kind (ATK) in Fig. 2. The
relationship can be interpreted in a forward direction as: “One TK is contained in zero
or many ATKs”. The relationship interpretation of the reverse direction is: “One ATK
contains one or many TKs”.
FACT KIND TRANSACTION KIND
transacƟon sort[SORT]
INDEPENDENT
P-FACT KIND
ELEMENTARY
ACTOR ROLE
COMPOSITE
ACTOR ROLE
AGGREGATE
TRANSACTION
KIND
facts with fact kind FK are
contained in the bank of TK
1..* 0..*
the product kind ofTK is IFK
1..1 1..1
EAR is an iniƟator role of TK
1..* 0..*
EAR is the executor role of TK
1..1 1..1
EAR may inspect the
contents of bank TK
0..* 0..*
EAR is contained in CAR
1..* 0..*
TK is contained
in ATK
1..* 0..*
TK is contained in CAR
EAR has access to the bank of ATK
0..*
0..*
CAR is a specialisaƟon of EAR
CAR is a part ofCAR
Legend
ATK: aggregate transacƟon kind
CAR: composite actor role
EAR: elementary actor role
FK: fact kind
IFK: independent P-fact kind
TK: transacƟon kind
Fig. 2. DEMO construction model metamodel Version 3.7 [19] with extensions of [21]

--- PAGE 369 ---
A New DEMO Modelling Tool that Facilitates Model Transformations 363
2.2 The Demonstration Case
Thedemonstrationcasehadtoincludethenecessarycomplexitytoensurethatamodeler
would be able toconstruct aTPT (illustratedinFig. 3) and an OCD(illustratedinFig. 4)
withalltherelationshipsandcardinalitiesdepictedinFig.2.Selectingafictitiouscollege
astheuniverseofdiscourse,someoperationsofthecollegeregardingthepresentationof
a new project-based module at the college, are incorporated, listed as transaction kinds
in Fig. 3.
Fig. 3. The TPT for a college, based on [19]
The reader is referred to [19] for a comprehensive introduction to the OCD and
legend for concepts included in Fig. 2 and Fig. 4. In our demonstrating OCD, portrayed
in Fig. 4, we assume that we only include TKs that are of the original transaction sort,
in accordance with the guidelines presented by Dietz [20] to focus on the essential
TKs. Based on the concepts declared in [19], we use bold style to indicate the type of
construct and italics when referring to an instance of the construct (see Fig. 4).
Scope of Interest (SoI) indicates that the modeler analyses a particular scope of
operations, namely some operations at a college. Given the SoI, Fig. 4 indicates that
three environmental actor roles are defined, see the grey-shaded constructs student,
project sponsor and HR of project sponsor that form part of the environment. Within
the SoI, multiple transaction kinds (TKs) are linked to different types of actor roles
via initiation links or executor links. As an example, supervisor allocation (T01) is
a TK that is initiated (via an initiation link) by the environmental actor role student
(CA01). In accordance with [20], the student (CA01) is by default also regarded to be a
compositeactorrole “ofwhichonedoesnotknow(orwanttoknow)thedetails”.Since
T01 is linked to an environmental actor role, it is also called a border transaction
kind. T01 is executed (via the executor link) by the elementary actor role named
supervisor allocator (A01).
All the other actor roles in Fig. 4 within the SoI are elementary actor roles, since
each of them is only responsible for executing one transaction kind. A special case of
is where an elementary actor role is both the initiator and executor of a transaction
kind, also called a self-activating actor role. Figure 4 exemplifies the self-activating
actor role with module reviser (A04) and project controller (A05). Since actor roles
need to use facts created and stored in transaction banks, an information link is used

--- PAGE 370 ---
364 T. Gray et al.
to indicate access to facts. As an example, Fig. 4 indicates that project controller (A05)
has an information link to transaction kind module revision (T04), indicating that the
project controller (A05) uses facts in the transaction bank of module revision (T04). It
is also possible that actor roles within the SoI need to use facts that are created via
transaction kinds that are outside the SoI. As an example, Fig. 4 indicates that actor
roles within the SoI (called, some operations at a college) need to use facts that are
created outside the SoI and stored in the transaction banks of aggregate transaction
kinds, namely person facts of AT01, college facts of AT02, accreditation facts of AT03,
timetable facts of AT04 and student enrollment facts of AT05. According to Fig. 4, the
student enrollment facts of aggregate transaction kind AT05 are not accessed by any
actor roles, which should be possible (according to the meta-model depicted in Fig. 2).
Fig. 4. The OCD for a college, based on [19]
EventhoughFig.4onlyincludeselementaryactorroleswithintheSoI,itispossible
toconsolidateelementaryactorroleswithinacompositeactorrole,whereacomposite
actor role “is a network of transaction kinds and (elementary) actor roles” [20]. Figure 4
illustrates two composite actor roles within the SoI, namely College (CA0) and Con-
troller (CA01). Both CA00 and CA01 encapsulate a number of transaction kinds and
elementary actor roles.

--- PAGE 371 ---
A New DEMO Modelling Tool that Facilitates Model Transformations 365
3 Research Method
Applying design science research (DSR), we developed the DEMO-ADOxx modelling
tool. According to Gregor & Hevner’s [22] knowledge contribution framework, the
modelling tool can be considered as an improvement, since the tool will be used for
solving a known problem. Referring to the DSR steps of Peffers et al. [23], this article
addresses the five steps of the DSR cycle in the following way:
Identify a Problem: In Sect. 4.1 we present minimal requirements for a useful DEMO
modelling tool. Based on the requirements, we assess in Sect. 4.2 that existing DEMO
modelling tools are inadequate.
Define Objectives of the Solution: In Sects. 4.3 and 4.4 we specify a new DEMO-
ADOxx tool to address the requirements. We highlight that the DEMO-ADOxx tool
only supports one of the four aspect models, namely the CM. Furthermore, the tool only
incorporates two of the three CM representations, namely the OCD and TPT.
Design and Development: Inaccordancewiththespecification,wedevelopedaDEMO-
ADOxx tool, whose constructional components are presented in Sect. 5.
Demonstration: In accordance with the demonstration case, discussed in Sect. 2.2, we
demonstratethetool,highlightingitskeyfeature,i.e.thetransformationofauser-selected
transaction kind of an OCD into a corresponding BPMN diagram.
Evaluation: Evaluation wasrestrictedtointernaltesting,usingtheDEMO-ADOxxtool
tomodelamoreextensivecase(thanthedemonstrationcaseinSect.2.2).Individualtest
scenarios were created to validate each of the relationships and cardinalities illustrated
in Fig. 2. The study excluded further evaluation, but Sect. 6 provides suggestions on
further evaluating and extending the DEMO-ADOxx tool.
4 Requirements Elicitation and DEMO Tool Specification
A number of tools exist that support, to a limited extent, the creation of DEMO mod-
els. Before we compare these tools, the next section presents three categories of tool
requirements from the perspective of a DEMO modeller.
4.1 DEMO Requirements
During the development of new software application systems, the analyst needs to
consider three main categories of requirements, namely functional requirements, non-
functional requirements, and design constraints [24]. In terms of the DEMO modelling
tool, functional requirements regard the inputs, outputs, functions and features that are
needed [24] (see R1 to R3 below). The non-functional requirements (see R4 and R5
below) incorporate the qualities of a system, such as performance, cost, security, and
usability. The design constraints pose restrictions on the design of the system to meet
technical, business, or contractual obligations. Next, we present initial requirements for

--- PAGE 372 ---
366 T. Gray et al.
aDEMOtool,structuredaccordingtothefirsttwocategories.Thepurposeistocompare
and evaluate the existing DEMO tools in terms of the following minimum requirements
defined from the perspective of a lecturer teaching DEMO:
• R1: The DEMO tool should be comprehensive in supporting all of the DEMO aspect
models, namely the CM, PM, AM and FM (refer to Fig. 1).
• R2:TheDEMOtoolshouldsupportthemostrecentpublishedlanguagespecification,
i.e. DEMOSL 3.7 (see [19]) and the extensions that have been published (see [21]).
The tool should be ready to accommodate future upgrades of the DEMO language.
• R3: The DEMO tool should facilitate model transformations to other modelling
languages such as BPMN.
• R4: The DEMO tool should be available at low cost, especially for educational
purposes.
• R5: The DEMO tool should be usable, i.e. user-friendly.
We used Nassar’s usability requirements [25] to perform initial usability tests on
some of the available DEMO tools:
• U1 Consistency: The system needs to be consistent in its actions, so that the modeller
can get used to the system without constantly having to adapt to a new way of doing
things. Consistency should apply to the way icons and commands are displayed and
used.
• U2 User Control: The system should offer the user control in the way the model is
built and run. This could include cancelling/pausing operations, undoing or redoing
steps. The modeller should be able to foresee or undo errors.
• U3 Ease of learning: The system should be easy to learn for a new modeller. This is
achieved by avoiding icons, layouts and terms that are unfamiliar to the modeller.
• U4 Flexibility: The system is expected to offer different ways to accomplish the same
task so that the user experiences maximum freedom. Examples include shortcut keys,
different icon options or even layout customisation.
• U5 Error Management: The system is expected to have built-in counter-measures to
prevent mistakes by displaying error messages, warning icons or simply preventing
incorrect placement of model elements.
• U6ReductionofExcess:Thesystemshouldavoiddisplayingunnecessaryinformation
oraddingunnecessaryfunctionalitytothetool.Theprogramshouldbefunctionaland
easy to understand.
• U7 Visibility of System Status: The user of the system should be aware of the status
of the system at all times. For example, if a command does not occur instantaneously,
then the system should inform the user of the delay.
4.2 Evaluating Existing DEMO Tools
Inthissection,weprovideanoverviewoftheexistingtools,startingwithalistpresented
in [26], adding Abacus and our ADOxx tool. In a first phase, we evaluated existing tools
in terms of requirements R1 to R4 (see Table 1) using the following methods in order

--- PAGE 373 ---
A New DEMO Modelling Tool that Facilitates Model Transformations 367
of preference: (1) experimenting with the tools that were available; (2) contacting the
tool owners for information about their tools; and (3) using the tool evaluation results of
Mulder [26]. During a second phase, we tested the usability (R5) of four tools that were
openly available (see Table 2).
Table 1. Evaluation results for functional and meta-model requirements
Requirement No -> R1 R2 R3 R4 Legend
Aspect model CM PM AM FM ● Fully supports
Aris ● ◯ ◯ ◯ ◯ ◯ ◐
CaseWise modeler ● ● ◯ ● ◯ ◯ ? ◐ Partially supports
Connexio knowledge
system
● ◯ ● ● ◯ ◯ ◯
DemoWorld ● ● ◯ ● ◯ ◯ ◐ ◯ Does not support
EC-Mod ● ◐ ◯ ◯ ◯ ◯ ◯
Plena ● ● ◐ ◐ ★ ◯ ◐ ★ Does not support, but
vision for future ModelWorld ● ● ◯ ● ◯ ◯ ●
uSoft studio ● ◯ ◯ ◯ ◯ ◯ ?
Visio ● ◯ ◯ ● ◯ ◯ ◐ ? Level of support is unclear
Xemod ● ● ◯ ● ◯ ◯ ◯
Abacus ● ◐ ◯ ◯ ◯ ◯ ◐
DEMO-ADOxx ● ◯ ◯ ◯ ● ● ●
Table 2. Evaluation of usability requirements
U1 U2 U3 U4 U5 U6 U7
Abacus ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
ModelWorld ● ◯ ● ◯ ● ● ◯
Plena ● ● ◐ ● ● ◐ ●
DEMO-ADOxx ● ● ● ◐ ● ● ●
Phase 1 Evaluation: In Table 1, we present evaluation results of existing DEMO tools
with respect to R1 to R4, indicating the extent to which a specific tool meets a require-
ment, as explained in the legend of Table 1. R1, R2 and R4 were evaluated by Mulder
[26]already.InhisstudyhefoundthatonlyPlena(ofthestudiedtools)complieswithR1
(i.e. support all four DEMO aspect models), none of the tools comply with R2 (i.e. sup-
ports the DEMOSL 3.7 specification language with extensions), and only ModelWorld
complies with R4 (i.e. is available free of charge for academics and students).

--- PAGE 374 ---
368 T. Gray et al.
Our ADOxx tool does not comply with R1, since the initial focus of the tool is to
supporttheCM.ForR2,theADOxxtoolsupportsDEMOSL3.7andtheextensions.For
R3 only the ADOxx tool supports transformations from DEMO models to other model
types. Regarding R4, the ADOxx tool is free of cost for education purposes.
Phase 2 Evaluation: We had access to three of the existing DEMO modelling tools
listed in Table 1, namely Abacus, ModelWorld and Plena. Using Nassar’s usability
requirements [25] listed in Sect. 4.1, we evaluated each of the three tools, also adding
the DEMO-ADOxx tool, to gain some insights regarding their usability. The results are
summarised in Table 2, indicating that three of the tools have usability drawbacks:
• Modelworld scoredverylowonU2(UserControl),U4(Flexibility)andU7(Visibility
on System Status). Regarding U2 and U4, the modeller is unable to cancel any steps,
undo any actions or navigate forwards and backwards. Basic keyboard shortcuts are
not available to the user, such as the delete key. With reference to U7, ModelWorld
offers no indication regarding the status of the system.
• Plena scored low on U3 (Ease of Learning), and U6 (Reduction of Excess). Plena
is initially a challenge to use as it needs to be installed separately from Enterprise
Architectandthenimportedasaplugin.SincePlenaisaplugintoEnterpriseArchitect,
some functionality is not applicable to DEMO.
• DEMO-ADOxx scored low on U4 (Flexibility), since the tool deviates from the stan-
dard drag-and-drop behaviour of other modelling tools. For this tool, a modeller
needs to “left-click” on the construct in the template, dropping the construct by “left-
clicking” within the modelling area on the right. It is possible to reason that the
drag-and-drop behaviour is merely a behaviour-preference of one modeller and that
other modellers will not highlight this as a usability deficiency.
The purpose of the evaluation was to provide an overview of the existing DEMO
modellingtoolstoestablishwhetheranewDEMOtoolwasneeded.Eventhoughexisting
tools are available, our main concern is that existing tools do not address requirements
R2, R3 and R4. The new DEMO-ADOxx tool has been developed as a main deliverable
for this study to address these three requirements. In terms of R1, the next section
motivates the decision to initially set the scope to the DEMO CM.
4.3 DEMO Tool Specifications for the OCD and TPT
A qualitative analysis on DEMO aspect models, indicate that the CM, detailed by the
PM, are useful for assigning responsibilities and duties to individuals [4]. The AM
and FM “are necessary if you are going to develop or select applications” [4]. Since
the conceptual knowledge embedded in the PM is similar to the BPMN collaboration
diagram [12] and BPMN is widely adopted by industry [27, 28], the initial DEMO-
ADOxx tool focuses on the CM. We exclude the PM, since the PM logic can be also
representedbytheindustry-acceptednotationBPMN.OurtoolensuresconsistentOCD-
derivedBPMNcollaborationdiagramsthatincorporatethelogicembeddedintheDEMO
standard transaction pattern as defined in [19].

--- PAGE 375 ---
A New DEMO Modelling Tool that Facilitates Model Transformations 369
We incorporated recent specifications regarding the OCD and TPT, as stated in [19]
and [21], as well as BPMN 2.0 [29] for the first version of the DEMO-ADOxx tool.
All of the existence rules, shown in Fig. 2 were implemented, except for one. The rule
“facts with fact kind FK are contained in the bank of TK”, indicated on Fig. 2, has not
been incorporated in the DEMO-ADOxx tool, since it relates to the bank contents table
(BCT), and the BCT relates to concepts that are used as part of the FM.
4.4 OCD-BPMN Transformations Specification
WeidentifiedfourtransformationscenariosthatshouldbeaddressedbytheDEMOtool.
The specifications are excluded for the purpose of this article. Although the ADOxx-
DEMO tool incorporates all four scenarios, we only include the second scenario, since
this scenario already includes complexity of parent-and-part TKs. Referring back to the
OCD depicted in Fig. 4, the four scenarios are as follows:
• Scenario 1: Customer-initiated TK with no parts. For this scenario, an actor role that
is outside the scope-of-interest, initiates a TK. Also, the TK does not have any parts,
i.e., the executor of the TK, is not initiating other TKs. Referring to Fig. 4, the TK
labelled T01 (supervisor allocation) is an example of this scenario. T01 is initiated
by the actor role student. The executor of T01 is the supervisor allocator. Yet, the
supervisor allocator does not initiate any other TKs as parts.
• Scenario 2: TK is part of another TK. For this scenario, the selected TK forms part of
another TK.ReferringtoFig.4theTKlabelledT07 (projectinvolvement)isinitiated
by an actor role A06 (internal project sponsor). Since the internal project sponsor
is both the executor of T06 (internal project sponsoring) and the initiator of T07
(project involvement), T07 is a part of T06.
• Scenario 3: TK is self-initiating. For this scenario, the selected TK is initiated and
executed by the same actor role. Referring to Fig. 4, the TK labelled T04 (module
revision) is initiated and executed by A04 (module reviser).
• Scenario 4: TK has one or more parts. For this scenario, the selected TK has one or
more parts, i.e. the actor role that executes the TK, is also initiating one or more
other TKs. Referring to Fig. 4 the TK labelled T5 (project control) is executed by
actorrole A05 (projectcontroller).Thesame actorrole A05 (projectcontroller)also
initiates multiple other TKs, namely T02 (project sponsoring), T03 (IP clearance),
and T06 (internal project sponsoring).
5 Demonstration of the DEMO-ADOxx Tool in Use
The ADOxx platform, part the Open Models Laboratory (OMiLAB) digital ecosystem,
isdesignedtosupportconceptualization andoperationalization ofconceptualmodelling
methods [30]. ADOxx allows a developer to create new modelling tools, or to extend
existing ones to cater for any number of user requirements and customizations. The
DEMO-ADOxx tool is realized as an OMiLAB project which enables free download1.
1 DEMO-ADOxx download: https://austria.omilab.org/psm/content/demo, last accessed:
09.04.2020.

--- PAGE 376 ---
370 T. Gray et al.
5.1 Modelling and Validation Features
Figure5illustratestwomaintoolsections:(1)Explorer section-models(createdbefore)
are listed far left; and (2) Modelling section - OCD constructs are selected by “left-
clicking” on the construct in the template, dropping the construct by “left-clicking”
within the modelling area on the right. The relationships can be created either from
dragging and dropping, or by using the model assistant which allows one to create a
relationship directly from an existing construct in the model.
Fig. 5. The modelling interface for the DEMO-ADOxx tool
At the top of the screen are the menu options depicted. We implemented a Model
Analysis menuthatprovidestheoptiontoeithergenerateaTPTsuchastheoneinFig.3,
or to validate a model.
The Validation feature implemented each of the existence rules (relationships and
cardinalities)presentedinFig.2,exceptforone,asindicatedbeforeinSect.4.3.Figure6
illustrates a validation table that communicates to the modeller: (1) The nature of a
mistake in the model; and (2) The model constructs involved.
Based on the demonstration case discussed in Sect. 2.2, we used the new tool to
generate an OCD (see Fig. 4) as well as a TPT (see Fig. 3) by utilizing the implemented
semi-automatic model transformations of the DEMO-ADOxx tool.
5.2 Transformation Features
Selecting the Model Transformation menu option, the modeller can select one of the
transaction kinds in the current OCD model. In our example the modeller selected T07

--- PAGE 377 ---
A New DEMO Modelling Tool that Facilitates Model Transformations 371
Fig. 6. Validation feature of the DEMO-ADOxx tool
(project involvement) that represents a Scenario 2 transformation. The modeller also
needs to specify the detail of interaction between parent-and-part TK’s. In addition,
cardinalities that exist between relevant parent-part structures, have to be specified by
the modeller. As an example, Fig. 4 indicates that T07 is initiated by A06 (internal
project sponsor). Yet, A06 is also the executor of T06 (internal project sponsoring).
Therefore, T06 can only be requested when a T07 has made some progress through the
sequence of coordination acts associated with the universal transaction pattern.
As indicated in Fig. 7, the modeller needs to indicate how T07 (project involvement)
isinitiatedasa-part-of-T06(internalprojectsponsoring),i.e.whichoneofthefourbasic
coordination facts for T06 (requested, promised, stated or accepted) is a prerequisite for
initiating T07. In addition, the modeller needs to indicate the cardinalities involved
between one instance of the parent (T06) that generates a number of instances of the
part (T07). For our demonstration (see Fig. 7), the modeller indicated that an instance
of T06 has to be stated before T07 is requested. Also, one instance of T06 initiates
zero-to-many (0..*) instances of T07. Since the transaction-progress of the parts may
alsoregulatethetransaction-progressoftheparent,themodelleralsohastoindicatehow
the zero-to-many (0..*) part-instances (T06 instances) should all be accepted before the
parent instance (T07 instance) can be accepted.
Fig. 7. User-interface to specify cardinalities for parent-part structures

--- PAGE 378 ---
372 T. Gray et al.
Based on the modeller selections illustrated in Fig. 7, the DEMO-ADOxx tool auto-
matically generates the corresponding BPMN collaboration diagram (see Fig. 8). The
BPMN diagram (Fig. 8) presents the initiating actor role (internal project sponsor) as a
BPMN pool and the executing actor role (student) as a BPMN pool. In accordance with
transformation specifications (not detailed in this article), transaction pattern detail for
the standard pattern, is depicted via BPMN concepts.
Fig. 8. BPMN collaboration diagram generated for T07 (project involvement)
6 Conclusions and Future Research
Our research indicated that existing DEMO modelling tools do not meet the minimum
requirements. One of the key requirements is that the modelling tool needs to allow for
model transformations, specifically transformations from a DEMO OCD to a BPMN
collaboration diagram.
We have used two sets of specifications, (1) recent DEMO specifications from [19]
and [21], and (2) OCD-BPMN transformation specifications, to develop a new DEMO-
ADOxx tool to demonstrate the modelling and validation features, as well as the OCD-
BPMN transformation feature.

--- PAGE 379 ---
A New DEMO Modelling Tool that Facilitates Model Transformations 373
The meta-model provided a good baseline for the DEMO-ADOxx tool. Yet, we
acceptthatthemeta-modelwillchangeinthefutureandthesechangesneedtobeaccom-
modatedbyourtoolinfuture.WestillwaitforfeedbackontheOCD-DEMOtransforma-
tion specifications that will require further work on the DEMO-ADOxx tool. Realizing
the tool as an open source project within the OMiLAB ensures that a community can
take over future tool enhancements.
ThedemonstrationcasewasusefulinpresentingthekeyfeaturesofthenewDEMO-
ADOxxtool.Intermsoftheusabilityrequirements,additionalevaluationisrequired.For
future work, DEMO modellers will be involved during usability tests to inform further
toolenhancements.Inaddition,anewversionofDEMOSLwillbereleasedduring2020
and need to be incorporated within the DEMO-ADOxx tool.
References
1. Frank, U., Strecker, S., Fettke, P., Vom Brocke, J., Becker, J., Sinz, E.J.: The research field:
modelling business information systems. Bus. Inf. Syst. Eng. 6(1), 1–5 (2014). https://doi.
org/10.1007/s12599-013-0301-5
2. Karagiannis, D., Mayr, H.C., Mylopoulos, J.: Domain-specific Conceptual Modeling: Con-
cepts, Methods and Tools. Springer, Switzerland (2016). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
39417-6
3. Dietz, J.L.G.: Enterprise Ontology. Springer, Berlin (2006). https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-
33149-2
4. Décosse, C., Molnar, W.A., Proper, H.A.: What does DEMO do? A qualitative analysis about
DEMOinpractice:founders,modellersandbeneficiaries.In:Aveiro,D.,Tribolet,J.,Gouveia,
D. (eds.) EEWC 2014. LNBIP, vol. 174, pp. 16–30. Springer, Cham (2014). https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-319-06505-2_2
5. Recker, J., Indulska, M., Rosemann, M., Green, P.: How good is BPMN really? Insights
from theory and practice. In: Ljungberg, J., Andersson, M. (eds.) Proceedings 14th European
Conference on Information Systems, ECIS, pp. 1582–1593 (2006)
6. Van Nuffel, D., Mulder, H., Van Kervel, S.: Enhancing the formal foundations of BPMN
by enterprise ontology. In: Albani, A., Barjis, J., Dietz, J.L.G. (eds.) CIAO!/EOMAS -2009.
LNBIP, vol. 34, pp. 115–129. Springer, Heidelberg (2009). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
642-01915-9_9
7. de Kinderen, S., Gaaloul, K., Proper, H.A.: On transforming DEMO models to ArchiMate.
In: Bider, I., et al. (eds.) BPMDS/EMMSAD -2012. LNBIP, vol. 113, pp. 270–284. Springer,
Heidelberg (2012). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-31072-0_19
8. Pijpers, V., Gordijn, G., Akkermans, H.: E3alignment: exploring inter-organizational align-
ment in networked value constellations. Int. J. Comput. Sci. Appl. 6(5), 59–88 (2009)
9. Ettema, R., Dietz, J.L.G.: ArchiMate and DEMO – mates to date? In: Albani, A., Barjis, J.,
Dietz,J.L.G.(eds.)CIAO!/EOMAS-2009.LNBIP,vol.34,pp.172–186.Springer,Heidelberg
(2009). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-01915-9_13
10. Caetano, A., Assis, A., Tribolet, J.: Using DEMO to analyse the consistency of business pro-
cess models. In: Moller, C., Chaudhry, S. (eds.) Advances in Enterprise Information Systems
II, pp. 133–146. Taylor & Francis Group, London (2012)
11. Heller,S.:UsageofDEMOmethods forBPMNmodels creation.CzechTechnical University
in Prague (2016)
12. Mráz,O.,Náplava,P.,Pergl,R.,Skotnica,M.:ConvertingDEMOPSItransactionpatterninto
BPMN:acompletemethod.In:Aveiro,D.,Pergl,R.,Guizzardi,G.,Almeida,J.P.,Magalhães,

--- PAGE 380 ---
374 T. Gray et al.
R., Lekkerkerk, H. (eds.) EEWC 2017. LNBIP, vol. 284, pp. 85–98. Springer, Cham (2017).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-57955-9_7
13. France, R., Rumpe, B.: Model-based development. Softw. Syst. Model. 7(1), 1–2 (2008)
14. Cicchetti, A., Ciccozzi, F., Pierantonio, A.: Multi-view approaches for software and system
modelling: a systematic literature review. Softw. Syst. Model. 18(6), 3207–3233 (2019).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10270-018-00713-w
15. Bork, D.: A development method for conceptual design of multi-view modeling tools with
an emphasis on consistency requirements. University of Bamberg (2016)
16. Grundy, J., Hosking, J., Li, K.N., Ali, N.M., Huh, J., Li, R.L.: Generating domain-specific
visual language tools from abstract visual specifications. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. 39(4),
487–515 (2013)
17. Mulder, M.A.T.: Validating the DEMO specification language. In: Aveiro, D., Guizzardi, G.,
Guerreiro,S.,Guédria,W.(eds.)EEWC2018.LNBIP,vol.334,pp.131–143.Springer,Cham
(2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-06097-8_8
18. Aßmann, U., Zschaler, S., Wagner, G.: Ontologies, meta-models, and the model driven
paradigm.In:Calero,C.,Ruiz,F.,Piattini,M.(eds.)OntologiesforSoftwareEngineeringand
Software Technology, pp. 249–273. Springer, Heidelberg (2006). https://doi.org/10.1007/3-
540-34518-3_9
19. Dietz,J.L.G.,Mulder,M.A.T.:DEMOSL-3:demospecificationlanguageversion3.7.SAPIO
(2017)
20. Perinforma, A.P.C.: The Essence of Organisation, 3rd ed. Sapio (2017). www.sapio.nl
21. Mulder, M.A.T.: Towards a complete metamodel for DEMO CM. In: Debruyne, C., Panetto,
H., Guédria, W., Bollen, P., Ciuciu, I., Meersman, R. (eds.) OTM 2018. LNCS, vol. 11231,
pp. 97–106. Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-11683-5_10
22. Gregor, S., Hevner, A.: Positioning and presenting design science research for maximum
impact. MIS Q. 37(2), 337–355 (2013)
23. Peffers, K., Tuunanen, T., Rothenberger, M., Chatterjee, S.: A design science research
methodology for information systems research. J. MIS 24(3), 45–77 (2008)
24. Leffingwell, D.: Agile Software Requirements: Lean Requirements Practices for Teams,
Programs, and the Enterprise. Addison-Wesley, New Jersey (2011)
25. Nassar, V.: Common criteria for usability review. Work 41(Suppl 1), 1053–1057 (2012)
26. Mulder, M.A.T.: Enabling the automatic verification and exchange of DEMO models. Ph.D.
thesis (n.d.)
27. Grigorova, K., Mironov, K.: Comparison of business process modeling standards. Int. J. Eng.
Sci. Manag. Res. 1(3), 1–8 (2014)
28. Recker, J., Wohed, P., Rosemann, M.: Representation theory versus workflow patterns – the
case of BPMN. In: Embley, David W., Olivé, A., Ram, S. (eds.) ER 2006. LNCS, vol. 4215,
pp. 68–83. Springer, Heidelberg (2006). https://doi.org/10.1007/11901181_7
29. ObjectManagementGroup:Businessprocessmodel&notation.https://www.omg.org/bpmn/.
Accessed 30 May 2019
30. Bork, D., Buchmann, R.A., Karagiannis, D., Lee, M., Miron, E.-T.: An open platform for
modeling method conceptualisation: the OMiLAB digital ecosystem. Commun. AIS 44(32),
673–697 (2019)

--- PAGE 381 ---
Reference Method for the Development
of Domain Action Recognition Classifiers:
The Case of Medical Consultations
Sabine Molenaar(B)
, Laura Schiphorst, Metehan Doyran, Albert Ali Salah,
Fabiano Dalpiaz, and Sjaak Brinkkemper
Department of Information and Computing Sciences,
Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands
{s.molenaar,l.a.f.schiphorst,m.doyran,a.a.salah,
f.dalpiaz,s.brinkkemper}@uu.nl
Abstract. Advances in human action recognition and interaction recog-
nition enable the reliable execution of action classiﬁcation tasks through
machine learning algorithms. However, no systematic approach for devel-
oping such classiﬁers exists and since actions vary between domains,
appropriate and usable datasets are uncommon. In this paper, we pro-
pose a reference method that assists non-experts in building classiﬁers
for domain action recognition. To demonstrate feasibility, we instantiate
it in a case study in the medical domain that concerns the recognition
of basic actions of general practitioners. The developed classiﬁer is eﬀec-
tive, as it shows a prediction accuracy of 75.6% for the medical action
classiﬁcation task and of more than 90% for three related classiﬁcation
tasks. The study shows that the method can be applied to a speciﬁc
activity context and that the resulting classiﬁer has an acceptable pre-
diction accuracy. In the future, ﬁne-tuning of the method parameters
will endorse the applicability to other domains.
Keywords: Human action recognition · Interaction recognition ·
Reference method · Method engineering · Machine learning · Domain
action recognition classiﬁer · Computer vision
1 Introduction
Machine Learning (ML) and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) have been introduced to
many diﬀerent industries and ﬁelds of research to automate many tasks, includ-
ing the recognition and classiﬁcation of human actions. Large, context-speciﬁc
datasets are needed to train, validate and test the classiﬁers, but not every avail-
able dataset can be used for every purpose [24]. When a speciﬁc classiﬁcation
task needs to be executed, chances are that no relevant dataset exists.
We focus on human action recognition: the classiﬁcation problem of “label-
ing videos containing human motion with action classes” [20]. Thanks to the
advancements in action recognition, researchers are now able to analyze more
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. Nurcan et al. (Eds.): BPMDS 2020/EMMSAD 2020, LNBIP 387, pp. 375–391, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49418-6_26

--- PAGE 382 ---
376 S. Molenaar et al.
complex tasks such as human-human interaction recognition, which considers
actions between two or more subjects, rather than the movement of a single
subject. Additional challenges exist regarding (i) how to distinguish multiple
subjects, (ii) subjects who (partially) block each other, and (iii) the lack of large
datasets for the diﬀerent contexts [24]. For this kind of classiﬁer, no systematic
method exists for their development, training, and validation.
To overcome this gap, we introduce a reference method for the development
of classiﬁers for actions and interactions in a particular domain, including a sub-
process for the creation of a suitable dataset: the DARC-method. Our aim is
to increase the maturity of action recognition processes through the proposal of
a reference method that can be used by people who have limited expertise in
ML, such as information systems engineers. Besides providing an easy-to-follow
process, our method provides links to literature in the ﬁeld that a user may want
to check to customize the method for the speciﬁc case at hand.
We describe our research method in Sect.2 and discuss related work in Sect.3.
We present the reference method in Sect.4. We demonstrate its feasibility in
Sect.5, by applying it to healthcare through the use of videos that record domain
actions. Finally, in Sect.6, we discuss validity threats, present our conclusions,
and outline future work.
2 Research Method
Techniques, methods and processes for data analysis and ML already exist, but
are not tailored to the speciﬁc purpose of developing domain action recognition
classiﬁers1
. Typically, ML literature assumes the reader has some knowledge or
experience with ML. While they tend to have an implicit method, they pre-
dominantly explain how certain algorithms can be implemented and domain
understanding is assumed when a case study is described. Therefore, we use an
assembly-based method engineering approach, resulting in the following research
question: “How can a reference method be assembled for the development of
domain action recognition classifiers?”
Ralyté et al. [21] distinguish three main activities in their assembly-based
process model: (i) specify method requirements, (ii) select method chunks and
(iii) assemble chunks. In our case, the method requirements are as follows. First,
the method should provide guidance to practitioners in information systems,
rather than ML experts. Second, we focus only on action recognition classiﬁers.
Third, we are concerned with classiﬁers for a given domain: the method should
cover the entire process from domain understanding to deploying the classi-
ﬁer. However, the method should be domain-independent, i.e., applicable to any
domain in which action recognition is used.
The reference method aims to provide a structured overview of the activities
and deliverables and consistent terminology [27]. We hope our method mitigates
the risk of introducing errors throughout the process. Also, since all activities
1
Throughout this paper, ‘action recognition’ stands for both action and interaction
recognition.

--- PAGE 383 ---
Domain Action Recognition Reference Method 377
and deliverables have been predeﬁned, there is a lower chance of accidentally
omitting any steps. Following the method should also aid auditing whether the
classiﬁer was developed correctly and solves the problem at hand. The generic
activities in the method are extracted from existing processes and frameworks,
see Sect.3. More detailed activities and the concepts are extracted from literature
on this topic and assembled and described in Sect.4.
3 Related Works
To the best of our knowledge, no systematic approach exists that describes the
development of action recognition classiﬁers from problem statement to deploy-
ment. Thus, we start from data science frameworks and assemble a reference
method for building eﬀective classiﬁers for action recognition. We compare three
processes: the Common Task Framework (CTF) [6], the Knowledge Discovery
in Databases (KDD) [7] process, and the CRoss Industry Standard Process for
Data Mining (CRISP-DM) [28].
CTF is meant for predictive modeling, making it suitable for classiﬁer devel-
opment. However, it only includes three main elements according to Donoho [6]:
(i) a publicly available training dataset with feature measurements and labels,
(ii) competitors that infer class prediction rules from the data and (iii) a referee
that receives the predictions compares them to the test data and returns the
prediction accuracy. This framework, however, requires an existing dataset. In
addition, competing teams are needed to conduct the common task, which may
not be readily available and/or willing to participate.
The KDD process describes the following steps: data selection, pre-
processing, transformation, data mining and interpretation/evaluation. The pro-
cess was designed for use in the data mining ﬁeld [7]. KDD diﬀerentiates itself by
focusing on the entire knowledge discovery process. Unfortunately, the process
does not start with a speciﬁc problem that needs to be solved. Moreover, it does
not address deployment of the process in another system, since the result of the
process is knowledge that can be used.
Thirdly, CRISP-DM is selected, since it was designed for projects with large
amounts of data and achieving speciﬁc business-related objectives. The CRISP-
DM process model prescribes six phases [28]:
1. Business understanding: involves understanding the business requirements
and objectives and formulating a data mining problem from this knowledge;
2. Data understanding: includes data collection, familiarization and data quality
assessment;
3. Data preparation: focuses on converting the raw data into a usable dataset
through cleaning and attribute selection among others;
4. Modeling: selection and use of modeling techniques, determining parameters
for optimal results;
5. Evaluation: evaluate whether the selected techniques suﬃciently address the
initial problems and objectives;

--- PAGE 384 ---
378 S. Molenaar et al.
6. Deployment: presenting the results in such a way that the customer can use
them, for instance by writing a report.
The application to speciﬁc domains requires the classiﬁer to be trained for each
domain, which requires the method to be able to handle large amounts of data.
Furthermore, the classiﬁer should be deployed in the domain context or system
so that it can be used for prediction tasks by the stakeholder(s). Therefore, the
CRISP-DM process is used as a starting point, as it ﬁts best the requirements
for the reference method.
4 Reference Method for Domain Action Recognition
Classifiers
The reference method for the development of Domain Action Recognition Clas-
siﬁers (DARC-method) is visualized in a Process Deliverable Diagram (PDD)
in Fig.1. A PDD describes a method in a process side on the left based on
UML activity diagrams, and the resulting (indicated with dashed arrows) con-
cepts and deliverables on the right based on UML class diagrams. Open concepts
are described via aggregation relationships in the PDD, while the elaboration
of closed activities and concepts has to be obtained elsewhere [26]. Based on
the CRISP-DM process model, the reference method consists of six consecutive
phases with adapted names and purposes:
1. Domain understanding: documentation related to the domain needs to be
gathered, in particular the actions the classiﬁer should recognize. Also, the
relevance and correctness of these actions should be discussed with domain
professionals;
2. Dataset creation: if no datasets containing the relevant domain actions
exist, it is necessary to create one (if a suitable dataset is available, this
phase can be skipped);
3. Dataset preparation: videos in the dataset need to be prepared before they
can be utilized for classiﬁer training, testing and validation;
4. Classifier modeling: the classiﬁer is modeled, the feature sets are created
and the experimental protocol is determined;
5. Classifier training: the classiﬁer is trained using the main part of the
dataset, then validated using another part of the dataset, parameters are
changed in an attempt to improve the performance (paying attention to
avoiding overﬁtting) and ﬁnally the classiﬁer is tested using the remaining
data;
6. Deployment: once the classiﬁer achieves good results, it needs to be deployed
in the domain system, which changes per domain, and feedback from domain
users can be taken into account for further development and/or improvement.
Firstly, in the domain understanding phase, information related to the
domain is gathered. The CRISP-DM process model describes tasks such as ‘busi-
ness objectives’ and ‘determine data mining goals’ [28]. In the context of action

--- PAGE 385 ---
Domain Action Recognition Reference Method 379
3. Dataset
preparation
Edit
recordings
SEQUENCE
4. Classifier
modeling
Create
experimental
protocol
Create feature
sets
5. Classifier
training
Legend
Closed
activity
CLOSED
CONCEPT
SHALLOW
METHOD
SHALLOW
METHOD
DOMAIN
SYSTEM
POSTURE
SUBJECT
PARAMETER
FEEDBACK
6. Deployment
Test Classifier
Test Classifier
1. Domain
understanding
Extract domain
actions
Discuss with
domain
professionals
Action
0..*
1..*
Cut recordings
into sessions
Software
artifact
DOMAIN
ACTION
Software
artifact
SESSION
1..*
1..1
1..*
records CAMERA
ANGLE
Software
artifact
DOMAIN
GUIDELINE
1..*
1..*
[sufficient]
Annotate
sessions
provides with
ANNOTATION
1..*
POSTURE
SUBJECT
Software
artifact
RECORDING
REGION OF
INTEREST
Train Classifier
trains and
validates
tests
provides
subset
CLASSIFIER
[if performance
unacceptable]
[else]
Test Classifier
PERFORMANCE
ACCURACY
[x - y = V. set]
4..4
[y = Te. set]
Validate Classifier
LEARNING
METHOD
2. Dataset
creation
Divide domain
actions into
sequence
Plan variation
Divide subjects
Edit
recordings
VARIATION
HEURISTIC
0..*
2..*
Select
parameter set
Action SEQUENCE
DATASET 1..1
predicts
FEATURE
SET
REPRESENTATION
BASED FEATURE
SET
DISTANCE
SUBJECTS'
SKELETON
ANGLE
SUBJECTS'
SKELETON
DISTANCE
SKELETON
ANGLE
SKELETON
DISTANCE
SELECTED
SET
Create feature
sets
provides
subset EXPERIMENTAL
PROTOCOL
TRAINING
SET
divides
1..*
1..*
Create
experimental
protocol
1..*
1..*
SUBJECT
- gender:
string
TOUCH
- value:
Boolean
VALIDATION
SET
TEST SET
1..3
1..*
1..*
1..*
0..1
1..*
1..*
1..*
1..*
1..*
1..*
1..*
1..* 1..1
Deploy
classifier
[else]
[if room for
improvement]
Provide feedback
input for
FEEDBACK
0..*
1..*
tunes
PARAMETER
SET
1..* 1..*
SINGLE
FRAME
FRAME
SEGMENT
c
[if dataset
available]
[else]
Record videos
Select classifier
1..1
1..1
0..1
1..*
[100% - x =
Tr. set]
1..*
1..1 1..1 1..1
1..1
DOMAIN
SYSTEM generates
0..* 1..1
deploys
in
1..*
1..*
o
Select method
SHALLOW
METHOD
DEEP
METHOD
determines
1..1
1..*
c
Assess
annotation [else]
c
DEEP NETWORKS
BASED FEATURE
SET
CONCEPT
OPEN
CONCEPT
CLOSED
CONCEPT
Activity
Open
activity
Closed
activity
determines
1..1
1..*
[k-fold
validation]
Use k-fold
cross-validation
c
Fig.1. Reference method for Domain Action Recognition Classiﬁer (DARC)
development.

--- PAGE 386 ---
380 S. Molenaar et al.
recognition, these tasks can be translated to determining the domain objective:
what action recognition problem or need should be addressed by the classi-
ﬁer? For the latter, the prediction goals can be determined, for example which
actions the classiﬁer should be able to classify. Domain actions that need to
be recognized need to be identiﬁed, for instance by extracting them from avail-
able domain guideline repositories. In addition, domain professionals should give
insight into which actions are performed most frequently, in which order they
are performed and which camera angles might be needed to be able to record all
actions to avoid occlusion. Intra-class variation and inter-class variation should
be included in the actions, since subjects perform actions slightly diﬀerently
every time and some actions may seem very similar to others and be classiﬁed
incorrectly as a result. These variations should also include ﬂuctuating duration,
referred to as temporal variation [20]. Supporting variation is becoming easier:
recent publicly available datasets for action recognition often include hundreds
of actions, and datasets have become more realistic in terms of their settings [20].
However, dataset creation is needed if datasets containing actions related to
a speciﬁc domain are not readily available, which is often the case [24].
Based on knowledge gathered in the ﬁrst phase, the domain actions can be
divided into sequences. For instance, actions that are nearly always performed
together will be recorded in sequence, along with variations and combinations of
other actions. Previously developed algorithms have, at times, been trained on
segmented videos, meaning that the annotations have clear boundaries. In case
of real-time action recognition, such boundaries are less evident. The classiﬁer
should be able to detect when an action starts and ends, also referred to as
action spotting [4], and then classify said action. Therefore, the videos, with or
without sequences, should not exclusively include actions [20].
In addition, to mitigate the risk of the classiﬁer focusing on speciﬁc, irrelevant
features, dataset variation (i.e. videos) is needed. Variation can be introduced by
using diﬀerent locations, clothing, camera angles, hairstyles, etc. Also, diﬀerent
subjects should be used to ensure that the classiﬁers are not trained to recognize
actions performed by men and not by women or vice versa. The collection of these
types of variation are referred to as variation heuristics. In addition, multiple
subjects need to be distinguished. The subjects may occlude each other, which is
why multiple camera angles should be used to decrease the risk of occlusion [19].
The setting (fore- and back-ground) plays an important role in dataset creation
too. Lighting conditions and additional movement in the recordings can aﬀect
the accuracy of the classiﬁer. It is, however, ill-advised to create a ‘clean’ and
static environment, since this is not comparable to the real-world context [20].
Variations in location may be desirable. When variation plans have been made,
subjects have been divided and actions and sequences have been determined,
the videos can be recorded. The minimal amount of data is diﬃcult to ascertain,
since this may vary between classiﬁcation tasks, but more is nearly always better.
Finally, statistical sparsity is a valid dataset quality concern. Even large datasets
may be lacking in their inclusion of varied scenarios [8].

--- PAGE 387 ---
Domain Action Recognition Reference Method 381
In the data preparation phase, the CRISP-DM model prescribes data cleaning
and formatting. To prepare for supervised learning, the instances (actions) in the
data should be labeled [13]. So, after recording, the videos should be prepared
for training in the dataset preparation phase. If multiple cameras were used,
the videos should be edited, such that they have the same dimensions and are
uniform in terms of brightness, frame rate, etc. This is done to ensure that the
variations in formatting do not aﬀect the predictions. Besides, data augmentation
can be applied during the editing activity, which means adding noisy versions
of existing data to increase the size of the dataset. The augmentation approach
depends on the data. For instance, when working with imagery, it is possible to
mirror the existing images to create additional data. Alternatively, 3D synthesis
can be utilized to generate synthetic data from real data, also with the intent
of increasing the volume of data [25]. Then, recordings need to be cut into
diﬀerent sessions, since recordings can span over multiple sessions (to save time
while recording). Subsequently, they can be annotated (supplied with the correct
labels), so that the ground truth is available for training the classiﬁer.
For the annotation, we distinguish four diﬀerent labels: posture of the sub-
ject, region of interest, domain action and touch. Since the former three should be
deﬁned for a speciﬁc domain, they have not been extended with speciﬁc options.
According to Moeslund et al. [16], concepts like action, activity and behavior
are sometimes considered synonyms. In this method, however, we adopt their
action taxonomy: (i) action primitives, which are atomic entities that comprise
an action, (ii) actions, a set of action primitives that are needed to perform the
particular action and (iii) activities, a collection of actions that describe a larger
event. For example, ‘playing tennis’ is an activity, that contains action such as
‘serve’ and ‘return ball’, in which the latter consists of action primitives like
‘forehand’, ‘run right’ and ‘jump’ [16]. Preferably, the quality of the annotations
is assessed. As an example, Mathias et al. [15] illustrated that re-annotating data
with strict and consistent rules, as well as adding ‘ignore’ tags to unrealistically
diﬃcult samples, can have a signiﬁcant impact on the assessment of classiﬁers.
Incorrect annotations counted as errors created an artiﬁcial slope on the assess-
ment curves and biased the results. Multiple labels for individual items, also
referred to as repeated labeling, was also proven to be valuable [23].
Subsequently, in the classifier modeling phase, a learning method is
selected. Kong and Fu distinguish two types of methods: shallow and deep.
Action recognition predominantly makes use of deep methods, with shallow
methods being better suitable when small amounts of training data are avail-
able [12]. Herath et al. divide action recognition in two similar categories, namely
representation-based solutions and deep networks-based solutions [10]. For the
former, some sort of representation, e.g., keypoints, silhouettes, 2D/3D models,
are required in order to train, validate and test the classiﬁer. If a deep method is
selected, there are three diﬀerent options: (i) if a large, labeled dataset is avail-
able, it is possible to perform end-to-end training of a deep neural net, (ii) if
the dataset has some labeled data, data augmentation or transfer learning can
be applied, i.e., employing large datasets to train deep networks and then using

--- PAGE 388 ---
382 S. Molenaar et al.
intermediate layer representations as deep features for a diﬀerent classiﬁcation
task [24] and (iii) if there is little labeled data available, active learning can be
applied to select and annotate additional, relevant data to increase the size of
the dataset [17].
Feature sets need to be extracted in order to recognize actions. Herath et al.
distinguish between methods that are based on handcrafted features and those
that use deep learning based techniques [10]. The former are referred to as
representation-based feature sets in the method. An example of a spatial fea-
ture set is provided in Fig.1, which includes distance between the keypoints
within the person for all subjects, distance between keypoints of one subject
and another, among others. Deep network solutions, on the other hand, implic-
itly extract features from the input data, which means they cannot be deter-
mined a-priori and are therefore not speciﬁed in the method. In addition, one or
multiple classiﬁers need to be selected for the classiﬁcation task. Multiple clas-
siﬁcation methods (e.g., Naive Bayes, Random Forest, k-Nearest Neighbor) can
be trained to see which one yields the best results. Given that not every classiﬁer
may be appropriate for every classiﬁcation task or dataset and classiﬁer selection
may be inﬂuenced by the available time and computing power, no classiﬁers are
prescribed in the method.
To validate and test the classiﬁer, we either rely on standard techniques or
use k-fold cross-validation. In case of the former, the dataset is divided into sub-
sets to be used for training, validation and testing the classiﬁers, these subsets
are used in the training phase. To avoid overﬁtting on a speciﬁc angle (if multiple
cameras are used), subsets should be created based on actions, rather than indi-
vidual sessions. Overﬁtting can be described as the risk of “memorizing various
peculiarities of the training data rather than finding a general predictive rule” [5].
If this occurs, the classiﬁer might perform well on training data and less so on
unseen data. Alternatively, k-fold cross-validation splits a single dataset into a
training set (known data) and test set (unknown data) k times. For instance, if
k=3, the classiﬁer is trained and tested on three diﬀerent training and test sets,
which are derived by slicing the dataset in diﬀerent ways.
Furthermore, the dataset can be fed to the classiﬁer using single frames or
frame segments. Some domain actions may appear similar or nearly identical
when single frames are considered, but can be distinguished when multiple frames
are shown. Therefore, the classiﬁer can be provided with multiple frames at once,
for instance 30. If within those 30 frames 20 are identiﬁed as a speciﬁc action,
all 30 frames will receive that label. The length of the sliding window (or skip
length) refers to the number of frames the window moves through time (temporal
direction) before a new segment is started [2].
The classifier training phase uses the subsets speciﬁed in the experimental
protocol and the created feature sets to train, validate and test. The classiﬁers
are trained and validated using several parameter sets. If parameters are only
optimized for the training data, there is a risk of overﬁtting [5]. In case of limited
data availability, training starts from a classiﬁer trained for a similar, related task
(i.e. transfer learning). Alternatively, using k-fold cross-validation, training and

--- PAGE 389 ---
Domain Action Recognition Reference Method 383
testing are conducted k times. After training and validation is completed using
all selected parameter sets, the parameter set that yields the best performance
is selected for testing the classiﬁers. No speciﬁc parameter sets are described,
since these may vary between domains. It should be noted that the subsets of the
dataset should under no circumstances overlap. However, it is possible to join
the training and validation sets for a ﬁnal round of training before reporting
results on the test set. In some cases, dataset creation and classiﬁer training are
performed iteratively, until a certain accuracy level is reached. If the accuracy
level on the validation set is unacceptable, there are four options: (i) re-train
the classiﬁer using k-fold cross-validation, for example, (ii) creating diﬀerent
feature sets and/or selecting a diﬀerent classiﬁer, (iii) editing or augmenting the
recordings in order to increase the size of the dataset or creating synthetic data
and (iv) creating additional data from scratch.
If the classiﬁer is suﬃciently accurate, it can be used in its intended domain
during the deployment phase. If not, the classiﬁer should not be considered
for deployment. Instead, an attempt can be made to identify more appropriate
feature sets or a better suiting classiﬁer. Context systems are systems used in
the speciﬁc domain. The results of the classiﬁers might need to be included
in an existing system, for instance. Finally, end-users of the classiﬁer might
want or need to provide feedback on its performance. If users notice that one
speciﬁc action is often classiﬁed as another, additional data and training might be
needed. This is in accordance with the monitoring and maintenance plan task
included in the CRISP-DM process [28]. Since feedback cannot be predicted
beforehand, it is assumed all phases in the process can be aﬀected.
5 Case Study: Medical Consultations
The DARC-method was applied to a case study within the context of the
Care2Report research program regarding the automated reporting of medical
consultations [14]. The purpose of the case study is twofold: (i) to assess the fea-
sibility of the method by demonstrating how the activities and deliverables can
be applied, and (ii) to evaluate the eﬀectiveness, by reporting on the prediction
accuracy of the resulting classiﬁer.
The method was applied to the healthcare domain, since General Practi-
tioners (GPs) generally experience a high workload. A classiﬁer that is able to
recognize medical actions performed in a GP’s oﬃce can support the adminis-
trative work of GPs, not by diagnosing disease or by detecting anomalies, but by
serving the medical reporting of the consultation. The classiﬁer and its results
are also discussed in [22].
1. Domain understanding. In the Netherlands, GPs make use of clinical guide-
lines and standards developed by the Nederlands Huisartsen Genootschap2
(transl. Dutch General Practitioners Society). First, all medical actions that
occur in the clinical guidelines were extracted. Then, a selection was made based
2
https://www.nhg.org/nhg-standaarden.

--- PAGE 390 ---
384 S. Molenaar et al.
on the instruments available for this study and whether the actions are of a sen-
sitive nature. For the former, actions such as performing an ECG were excluded,
since we did not possess such instruments. For the latter, actions that require
subjects to (partially) undress were excluded to preserve the privacy of subjects
participating in the recordings. The following medical actions were included in
the dataset, in decreasing occurrence order in the guidelines [22]: Blood pressure
measurement (BPM), Palpation abdomen (PaA), Percussion abdomen (PeA),
Auscultation lungs (AL), Auscultation heart (AH), and Auscultation abdomen
(AA).
In addition, there is a ‘no action’ class, in case no action is occurring in a
segment of the video. We also distinguish the following classes: ‘sitting upright’,
‘laying down’ and ‘laying down with knees bent’ (posture of patient), whether
the GP touches the patient or not (distance to patient) and ‘arm’, ‘chest’, ‘upper
back’ and ‘abdomen’ (region of interest). Actions, however, are not always per-
formed in isolation, but may be part of a sequence. In discussion with medical
professionals, and taking into account the guidelines, the most frequently occur-
ring combinations and order within those combinations were used most often,
with some slight variation to mitigate overtraining on speciﬁc sequences. Using
the previously mentioned taxonomy [16], we distinguish the following examples:
(i) ‘pressing with the hand’ and ‘releasing pressure of the hand’ as action prim-
itives, (ii) ‘palpation of the abdomen’ as action and (iii) ‘physical examination’
or ‘medical consultation’ as activity.
2. Dataset creation. The videos [22] were recorded with four subjects (three
female, one male), who all played the roles of both GP and patient. Since GPs
examine one patient at a time, exactly two subjects appear in all videos. In
68% of the videos, both subject were female, in 15% only the GP was female
and in 17% only the patient was female. In addition, they all changed clothes,
hair and jewelry. The GP is required to wear their hair up, but the patient
can have any hairstyle. The same is true for jewelry, since GPs are not allowed
to wear any jewelry while patients are. It should also be noted that, in the
Netherlands, GPs rarely wear white coats, which is why the GP role also changed
clothing throughout the recordings. Glasses were worn by both GP and patients.
During examinations, the patient is either sitting upright, laying down ﬂat or
laying down with their knees bent. The GP performed actions from either side
of the patient and there is variation within actions. For instance, when listening
to the lungs, sometimes they started on the right and sometimes on the left.
Stethoscopes were used during recordings, both a red and black one to introduce
variation. Finally, three cameras from three diﬀerent angles were used, which is
visualized in [22].
Since the GP (subject A) only performs medical actions using their hands,
the lower half of their body is not of importance and can be hidden behind the
examination table or gurney. The GP may have to move around to perform the
appropriate medical actions, which is why three cameras were used. By placing
them in diﬀerent positions and thus acquiring three diﬀerent angles, the chances
of occlusion are reduced. A total of 451 videos were recorded, 73.6% of which

--- PAGE 391 ---
Domain Action Recognition Reference Method 385
included a single action (those videos contained frames without any action as
well), the rest contained sequences [22].
3. Dataset preparation. All recordings were cut into sessions, 192 in total [22],
which were then annotated, meaning they were provided with the right labels.
The online annotation tool ELAN [9] was used, since it allows for annotating
multiple videos concurrently. An example of how part of a video is annotated is:
‘sitting upright’ (posture subject), ‘arm’ (region of interest), ‘true’ (touch) and
‘BPM’ (domain action).
4. Classifier modeling. In this case a representation-based solution was used,
due to the small amount of data and since the human body structure and its
movements are the focus of the classiﬁer [10]. Either keypoints (also referred to as
skeleton joints) can be extracted or images or videos can be used as input for the
classiﬁer [11]. Since distances between the subjects are important, to recognize
interaction, and actions can be deﬁned using distances and angles, keypoints are
used. Information such as colors and background is present in images and videos,
but is not required to recognize domain actions. Keypoints are used to extract
a skeletal representation from the subjects in the videos. These representations
can also be used to reduce the dimensionality of the dataset, by determining the
minimum and maximum values of the feature set, as well as the average and
variance, of multiple frames. This results in improved computational eﬃciency
and accuracy [3].
Fig.2. 2D skeleton generated by Open-
Pose with patient laying down.
Fig.3. 2D skeleton generated by Open-
Pose with patient sitting up. (Color
ﬁgure online)
OpenPose was applied to all sessions to extract keypoints, since it is publicly
available and able to recognize multiple subjects [1]. Examples of 2D skeletons
generated by Openpose are depicted in Figs.2 and 3. Note that in Fig.2 the
GP’s face is blurred for privacy reasons. These keypoints are then utilized to
create mathematical representations of the subjects and to determine the dis-
tances between skeleton joints and angles that each line between two neighbor

--- PAGE 392 ---
386 S. Molenaar et al.
joints makes with the horizontal axis of each camera viewpoint [29,30]. We cal-
culate angles diﬀerently from previous literature, where they use angles of two
lines between three neighbor joints. Our approach on computing angles allows
us to embed the body orientation of each subject both relative to camera view-
point and therefore to each other as well. The 2D joint coordinates (Eq.1) are
determined in order to calculate the angles and distances:
Jc = Jc(J) = (Jx,Jy) (1)
We use J for joint and Jc for 2D joint coordinate where Jx and Jy represent the
x and y axis, respectively. Secondly, the angle between a line of two neighbor
joints and the horizontal axis (Eq.2) is calculated as follows [18]:
LLa = LLa(LJ1→J2
,Lh) = arctan(
J1x
− J2x
J1y
− J2y
) (2)
LLa, LJ1→J2
, Lh represent line-line angle, line between two joints, and horizontal
line, respectively. Finally, the (Euclidean) distance between two or more joints
of one subject and the distances between the joints of two or more subjects are
determined (Eq.3) using the following equation:
JJd = JJd(J1,J2) =
− − − − →
||J1J2|| =

(J1x
− J2x
)2 + (J1y
− J2y
)2 (3)
In Fig.3 an example of how Eq.3 is calculated can be seen. The distance
between the right hand of the GP (in yellow) and the back of the patient (in
red) can be used to determine whether the GP is touching the patient and which
medical action (in this case AL) is being performed. The calculation of angles
and distances was done as deﬁned in Eqs.1, 2 and 3.
Considering the medical actions, experiments were conducted using ﬁve dif-
ferent feature sets, to determine which set(s) oﬀered the most valuable informa-
tion. The following sets of features were included in experimentation:
Feature set 1: Pre-selected group of features: (i) angle between the neck and
mid-hip of both subjects, (ii) distances between both hands of subject A and
a speciﬁc body part (i.e. chest, abdomen, arm, left hand and right hand) of
subject B and vice versa;
Feature set 2: Distances between all keypoints within subjects;
Feature set 3: Angles of keypoints relative to other keypoints within subjects;
Feature set 4: Distances between both hands of subject A and the upper body
of subject B and vice versa;
Feature set 5: Angle of the hands of subject A relative to the upper body of
subject B and vice versa.
Note that in these feature sets, the upper body is considered to range from the
head to the lower abdomen (right above the keypoints of the hips).

--- PAGE 393 ---
Domain Action Recognition Reference Method 387
5. Classifier training. We selected Random Forest (RF) to be used in the med-
ical action recognition. Some experimentation was done with both k-Nearest
Neighbors and Decision Trees, but results are left out for the sake of brevity.
The classiﬁers were trained using 60% of the dataset (i.e. sessions). Then, 20%
of the remaining 40% was used to validate the classiﬁer. Based on the validation
results, the parameter set with the highest accuracy was selected. Finally, the
last 20% was used to test the classiﬁers. For all three subsets, the training set
contained 60% of the sessions, distributed evenly over available angles. The RF
classiﬁer was trained, validated and tested on the aforementioned feature sets, as
well as combinations of the sets, resulting in a predication accuracy of 0.697. An
example of distance parameters that were used to classify the medical actions is
shown in Fig.4. Note that these distance parameters were ﬁxed, but the decision
tree was not, due to the nature of RF classiﬁers.
Fig.4. Example of distance parameters in a decision tree.
At ﬁrst, single frames were used to recognize actions. However, some med-
ical actions are quite similar when comparing individual frames rather than a
segment of a video, because they are performed on the same region of interest.
For instance, during palpation of the abdomen, both hands are pressed on the
abdomen, while during percussion one hand is not released from the abdomen,
while the other is. Therefore, percussion is easily confused with palpation. The
same is true for auscultation of the lungs and heart. In case of the heart, only
the area of the chest around the heart is covered, while in case of the lungs the
entire chest is examined. The two are more diﬃcult to distinguish when only
individual frames are considered. When taking into account frame segments of
videos as opposed to single frames, the accuracy of the classiﬁer increases by
0.059, using 120 frames and a sliding window of 20 frames, to 0.756.
The use of segments increased the accuracy of the classiﬁer when distinguish-
ing palpation and percussion of the abdomen and auscultation of the lungs and
heart. Confusion matrices illustrating the prediction accuracy of the best per-
forming feature set using both individual frames and segments of the classiﬁer
are shown in Figs.5 and 6, respectively. While the prediction accuracy does not
increase for all individual actions, the average prediction accuracy does. The

--- PAGE 394 ---
388 S. Molenaar et al.
Fig.5. Confusion matrix of feature set
with best test accuracy (sets 3–5) of RF
classiﬁer.
Fig.6. Confusion matrix of best per-
forming segment (120, 20) for RF (fea-
ture sets 3–5).
prediction accuracy of the other annotations, i.e. posture of patient, distance
to patient and region of interest are 0.996, 0.910 and 0.908, respectively, using
feature sets 3, 4 and 5 and frame segments of 30 frames with a sliding window
of 15 frames. In [22] we report on the results of a 4-fold cross-validation.
6. Deployment. The Care2Report (C2R) system, ﬁrst presented by Maas
et al. [14], strives for fully automated medical reporting. Currently, the system is
able to generate medical reports adhering to clinical guidelines by using audio of
a consultation as input. However, the consultation with a patient often includes
a physical examination as well, which requires video for analysis. The recorded
medical actions need to be identiﬁed automatically, for which the described clas-
siﬁer can be used. The goal for the C2R system is recognition of medical actions
performed by GPs in real-time, so that its results complement the report gen-
erated from the audio input. Therefore, the deployment context of the classiﬁer
is a GP’s oﬃce. In addition, it will have to interact with the electronic medical
record in the C2R system, but this is left to future work.
6 Discussion
In this paper, we presented the DARC-method, a reference method for devel-
oping classiﬁers for domain action recognition, based on existing methods and
techniques. We then applied the method to a case study and reported on the
prediction accuracy of the developed classiﬁer.
Validity Threats. Firstly, the DARC-method was only applied to a single case
and a single domain; it may need customization when applied to other domains.
Secondly, the method was applied by people with some experience with both

--- PAGE 395 ---
Domain Action Recognition Reference Method 389
ML and classiﬁers and the speciﬁc domain it was used for. Additionally, we were
unable to conduct the deployment phase as of yet, meaning this part was never
tested in a real-world situation and cannot be described in detail. Given that
there are additional steps to developing the classiﬁer, there is a risk of introducing
errors throughout the process [24]. Finally, others less familiar with the subject
matter and process may have a more diﬃcult time applying the method to their
own case and/or domain. However, the method is based on existing and validated
techniques, which should improve its external validity.
Conclusion. Our research question “how can a reference method be assembled
for the development of domain action recognition classifiers?” was answered
by designing a reference method using a method assembly approach, combining
existing methods and techniques. We expect the method to provide assistance, in
line with the ﬁrst requirement, when developing a classiﬁer, by providing a step-
wise process, related literature and consistent terminology. In accordance with
the second requirement, the method is tailored to action recognition learning
methods and relies on video input. Also, the DARC-method introduces algorith-
mic restrictions by deﬁning a standard set of representation-based features. The
domain understanding and deployment phases support the third requirement.
The developed classiﬁer proves that the reference method can be applied to a
case in the medical domain. Thanks to the method, the decisions made for each
activity in the process were reported in a structured manner. The classiﬁer was
trained to perform four diﬀerent classiﬁcation tasks: identifying medical actions,
the posture of the patient, the distance of the GP to the patient and the region
of interest. The prediction accuracy of the tasks are 75.6%, 99.6%, 91.0% and
90.8% respectively.
Future Work. In order to evaluate the eﬀectiveness of the method an exper-
iment using students as test subjects will be conducted. Students with little to
no experience with action recognition will be divided into an experimental and a
control group. The former will make use of the method, while the latter will use
no method. The eﬀectiveness of the method can then be assessed by comparing
the eﬃciency, number of errors and quality of the resulting work of both groups.
Next steps include the classiﬁer being trained using diﬀerent datasets for addi-
tional contexts and purposes. For instance, the method and its resulting classiﬁer
can be applied to the orthopedics specialization. Thanks to the use of imagery,
we should be able record a patient’s range of movement over a period of time
and analyze the data. Placing the method in a broader perspective, classiﬁers
can be developed and trained for use in other contexts, such as police reporting.
Furthermore, the deployment of the trained classiﬁer in the automated reporting
system C2R should be investigated to evaluate the ﬁnal phase of the method.

--- PAGE 396 ---
390 S. Molenaar et al.
References
1. Cao, Z., Hidalgo, G., Simon, T., Wei, S.E., Sheikh, Y.: OpenPose: real-
time multi-person 2D pose estimation using part aﬃnity ﬁelds. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1812.08008 (2018)
2. Colleoni, E., Moccia, S., Du, X., De Momi, E., Stoyanov, D.: Deep learning based
robotic tool detection and articulation estimation with spatio-temporal layers.
IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 4(3), 2714–2721 (2019)
3. Cunningham, P.: Dimension reduction. In: Cord, M., Cunningham, P. (eds.)
Machine Learning Techniques for Multimedia. COGTECH, pp. 91–112. Springer,
Heidelberg (2008). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-75171-7 4
4. Derpanis, K.G., Sizintsev, M., Cannons, K., Wildes, R.P.: Eﬃcient action spotting
based on a spacetime oriented structure representation. In: Proceedings of the
CVPR, pp. 1990–1997. IEEE (2010)
5. Dietterich, T.: Overﬁtting and undercomputing in machine learning. ACM Com-
put. Surv. (CSUR) 27(3), 326–327 (1995)
6. Donoho, D.: 50 years of data science. J. Comput. Graph. Stat. 26(4), 745–766
(2017)
7. Fayyad, U., Piatetsky-Shapiro, G., Smyth, P.: The KDD process for extracting
useful knowledge from volumes of data. Commun. ACM 39(11), 27–34 (1996)
8. Gudivada, V., Apon, A., Ding, J.: Data quality considerations for big data and
machine learning: going beyond data cleaning and transformations. Int. J. Adv.
Softw. 10(1), 1–20 (2017)
9. Hellwig, B.: EUDICO linguistic annotator (ELAN) version 1.4-manual. Last
updated (2003)
10. Herath, S., Harandi, M., Porikli, F.: Going deeper into action recognition: a survey.
Image Vis. Comput. 60, 4–21 (2017)
11. Jordan, M.I., Mitchell, T.M.: Machine learning: trends, perspectives, and
prospects. Science 349(6245), 255–260 (2015)
12. Kong, Y., Fu, Y.: Human action recognition and prediction: a survey. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1806.11230 (2018)
13. Kotsiantis, S.B., Zaharakis, I., Pintelas, P.: Supervised machine learning: a review
of classiﬁcation techniques. Emerg. Artif. Intell. Appl. Comput. Eng. 160, 3–24
(2007)
14. Maas, L., et al.: The Care2Report system: automated medical reporting as an
integrated solution to reduce administrative burden in healthcare. In: Proceedings
of the 53rd HICSS (2020)
15. Mathias, M., Benenson, R., Pedersoli, M., Van Gool, L.: Face detection without
bells and whistles. In: Fleet, D., Pajdla, T., Schiele, B., Tuytelaars, T. (eds.) ECCV
2014. LNCS, vol. 8692, pp. 720–735. Springer, Cham (2014). https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-319-10593-2 47
16. Moeslund, T.B., Hilton, A., Krüger, V.: A survey of advances in vision-based
human motion capture and analysis. Comput. Vis. Image Underst. 104(2–3), 90–
126 (2006)
17. Nath, T., Mathis, A., Chen, A.C., Patel, A., Bethge, M., Mathis, M.W.: Using
DeepLabCut for 3D markerless pose estimation across species and behaviors. Nat.
Protoc. 14(7), 2152–2176 (2019)

--- PAGE 397 ---
Domain Action Recognition Reference Method 391
18. Noori, F.M., Wallace, B., Uddin, M.Z., Torresen, J.: A robust human activity
recognition approach using OpenPose, motion features, and deep recurrent neural
network. In: Felsberg, M., Forssén, P.-E., Sintorn, I.-M., Unger, J. (eds.) SCIA
2019. LNCS, vol. 11482, pp. 299–310. Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-030-20205-7 25
19. Park, S., Trivedi, M.M.: Understanding human interactions with track and body
synergies (TBS) captured from multiple views. Comput. Vis. Image Underst.
111(1), 2–20 (2008)
20. Poppe, R.: A survey on vision-based human action recognition. Image Vis. Comput.
28(6), 976–990 (2010)
21. Ralyté, J., Deneckère, R., Rolland, C.: Towards a generic model for situational
method engineering. In: International Conference on Advanced Information Sys-
tems Engineering, pp. 95–110 (2003)
22. Schiphorst, L., Doyran, M., Salah, A.A., Molenaar, S., Brinkkemper, S.:
Video2report: a video database for automatic reporting of medical consultancy
sessions. In: 15th IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face and Gesture
Recognition, Buenos Aires (2020)
23. Sheng, V.S., Provost, F., Ipeirotis, P.G.: Get another label? Improving data quality
and data mining using multiple, noisy labelers. In: Proceedings of the 14th ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp.
614–622 (2008)
24. Stergiou, A., Poppe, R.: Analyzing human-human interactions: a survey. Comput.
Vis. Image Underst. 188, 102799 (2019)
25. Varol, G., et al.: Learning from synthetic humans. In: Proceedings of the CVPR,
pp. 109–117 (2017)
26. van de Weerd, I., Brinkkemper, S.: Meta-modeling for situational analysis and
design methods. In: Handbook of Research on Modern Systems Analysis and
Design Technologies and Applications, pp. 35–54. IGI Global (2009)
27. van de Weerd, I., de Weerd, S., Brinkkemper, S.: Developing a reference method
for game production by method comparison. In: Ralyté, J., Brinkkemper, S.,
Henderson-Sellers, B. (eds.) Situational Method Engineering: Fundamentals and
Experiences. ITIFIP, vol. 244, pp. 313–327. Springer, Boston, MA (2007). https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-73947-2 24
28. Wirth, R., Hipp, J.: CRISP-DM: towards a standard process model for data mining.
In: Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on the Practical Applications
of Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 29–39 (2000)
29. Yun, K., Honorio, J., Chattopadhyay, D., Berg, T.L., Samaras, D.: Two-person
interaction detection using body-pose features and multiple instance learning. In:
Proceedings of the CVPRW (2012)
30. Zhang, S., Liu, X., Xiao, J.: On geometric features for skeleton-based action recog-
nition using multilayer LSTM networks. In: Proceedings of the WACV, pp. 148–
157. IEEE (2017)

--- PAGE 398 ---
Evaluation-Related Research
(EMMSAD 2020)

--- PAGE 399 ---
An Evaluation of the Intuitiveness
of the PGA Modeling Language Notation
Ben Roelens1,2(B)
and Dominik Bork3
1
Faculty of Management, Science and Technology,
Open University, Heerlen, The Netherlands
ben.roelens@ou.nl
2
Faculty of Economics and Business Administration,
Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium
3
Faculty of Computer Science, University of Vienna,
Waehringer Street 29, 1090 Vienna, Austria
dominik.bork@univie.ac.at
Abstract. The Process-Goal Alignment (PGA) modeling method is a
domain-speciﬁc modeling language that aims to achieve strategic ﬁt of
the business strategy with the internal infrastructure and processes. To
ensure the acceptance and correct understanding of PGA models by
business-oriented end-users, an intuitively understandable notation is of
paramount importance. However, the current PGA notation was not for-
mally tested up to now. In the paper at hand, we apply an evaluation
technique for testing the intuitiveness of domain-speciﬁc modeling lan-
guages to bridge that research gap. Based on an analysis of the tasks,
we propose improvements to six elements of the initial PGA notation.
Our research contributes a comprehensive description of the empirical
modeling language evaluation, which enables the reproducibility of the
evaluation procedure by the conceptual modeling community.
Keywords: Conceptual modeling · Intuitiveness · Modeling notation ·
Process-goal alignment method
1 Introduction
The design of Domain-Speciﬁc Modeling Languages (DSMLs) is gaining popu-
larity in the Conceptual Modeling ﬁeld [9]. DSMLs are speciﬁcally designed for
a speciﬁc purpose (e.g., to analyze and communicate about a problem) in a par-
ticular domain [6]. In comparison to General Purpose Modeling Languages (e.g.,
UML or ER), DSMLs reduce the complexity of the modeling eﬀort by using con-
cepts that are familiar to the intended end-users and by hiding complex model
constraints in the tailored meta-model [6].
The Process-Goal Alignment (PGA) modeling method is a speciﬁc DSML,
which has the purpose to achieve strategic ﬁt in the business architecture [15].
Strategic ﬁt is an important architectural concern for organizations, as it requires
c  Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. Nurcan et al. (Eds.): BPMDS 2020/EMMSAD 2020, LNBIP 387, pp. 395–410, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49418-6_27

--- PAGE 400 ---
396 B. Roelens and D. Bork
to align the business strategy with the internal infrastructure and processes [7].
This enables companies to adequately react on opportunities and threats in its
external environment. The design of the PGA modeling method is the result of
diﬀerent iterations of Action Design Research [17], which allowed the gradual
reﬁnement of its syntax, semantics, and modeling procedure [15].
One of the design requirements of the PGA method is a clear communication
of the organizational strategy to ensure its understanding by business-oriented
experts [15]. These experts are not applying the method themselves, but are
guided by a modeler, who collects the necessary information and constructs the
PGA models. Therefore, ensuring that PGA models can be intuitively under-
stood by business-oriented end-users is of paramount importance to reduce the
cognitive load for them. This will foster the use of the models to identify possi-
ble organizational improvements. To realize this, the PGA notation was initially
guided by the principle of semantic transparency. This principle imposes that
the graphical notation of a modeling language element suggests its meaning [10].
However, the intuitiveness of the PGA notation was not tested yet.
This research gap can be solved by an evaluation technique for testing the
intuitiveness of DSMLs [3]. The technique comprises a set of tasks which are
divided into three phases: (i) term association, (ii) notation association, and (iii)
case study. These tasks were conducted by Master students of Ghent University
to test the intuitiveness of the PGA notation. Based on an analysis of the results,
improvements to the initial notation are proposed.
The paper is structured as follows. Section2 reviews foundational literature
about conceptual modeling, modeling language notations, and the PGA model-
ing method. Afterwards, Sect.3 describes how the evaluation technique and the
data analysis were performed. In Sect.4, the results of the analysis are presented,
which leads to the proposal of an improved PGA notation in Sect.5. The paper
ends with a reﬂection and concluding remarks in Sect.6.
2 Foundations
2.1 Conceptual Modeling
Conceptual modeling concerns the application of abstraction to reduce the com-
plexity of a certain domain for a speciﬁc stakeholder purpose. Originally, con-
ceptual modeling was targeting to support human beings for the purposes of a
common understanding and communication [11]. In recent years, the scope of
the discipline has exceeded this pure representative means toward using the cre-
ated models as a formalized knowledge base that enables automated processing.
Modeling methods are the core of conceptual modeling [8], which consist of: a
modeling language, a modeling procedure, and mechanisms & algorithms. The
modeling language encompasses its syntax, semantics, and notation. The syn-
tax deﬁnes the grammar of the language, which includes the available concepts
and the allowed relationships between them. Semantics refers to the meaning,
whereas notation is the visual representation of the language concepts.

--- PAGE 401 ---
An Evaluation of the Intuitiveness of the PGA Modeling Language Notation 397
2.2 Modeling Language Notation
Information processing can be divided into two steps [12]: Perceptual Processing
(seeing) which is fast and automatic, and Cognitive Processing (understanding)
which is slow and resource-intensive. Conceptual models should aim for computa-
tional oﬄoading, i.e., replacing some cognitive tasks by perceptual ones. Moody
states that “Designing cognitively eﬀective visual notations can [..] be seen as a
problem of optimizing them for processing by the human mind” [10, p. 761].
“The extent to which diagrams exploit perceptual processing largely explains
diﬀerences in their eﬀectiveness” [10, p. 761]. When analyzing the perceptual
processing quality of a visual notation, one needs to consider semantic trans-
parency [10]. Semantic transparency is deﬁned as “the extent to which a novice
reader can infer the meaning of a symbol from its appearance alone” [10, p. 765].
In literature, semantic transparency is often considered synonymous to an intu-
itive understanding. A notation with a high semantic transparency enables users
to infer the meaning of a symbol/model from their working and/or long-term
memory. Semantic transparency therefore “plays a crucial role in [...] accep-
tance” of modeling languages [5, p. 123].
2.3 PGA Modeling Method
PGA has been introduced in [14] and further developed in [15] as a project within
the Open Models Laboratory (OMiLAB) [2]. A tool prototype has been realized
with the ADOxx meta-modeling platform [1]. To achieve strategic ﬁt in the busi-
ness architecture, PGA aims at the development of a business architecture heat
map following a modeling procedure that consists of three activities: (i) develop-
ing a prioritized business architecture hierarchy, (ii) executing the performance
measurement, and (iii) performing the strategic ﬁt improvement analysis.
The ﬁrst step aims to model the creation of value throughout a hierarchi-
cal structure of business architecture elements. Based on Strategic Management
frameworks, the PGA meta-model incorporates the following elements (i.e., cap-
italized in the remainder of the text): Activity, Process, Competence, Value
Proposition, Financial Structure, Internal Goal, Customer Goal, and Financial
Goal. To design an intuitive notation for business-oriented end-users, icons were
used to represent these elements. An overview of the initial PGA notation is
found in Table4. Afterwards, valueStream relations are added between these
elements to show the hierarchical value structure. Each valueStream relation
is prioritized by using the AHP mechanism (i.e., based on pairwise compar-
isons) [16] and a color coding with accompanying line texture is used to diﬀer-
entiate between a high (i.e., solid red color), medium (i.e., dashed orange color),
or low priority (i.e., dotted green color) w.r.t. their strategic Importance.
The performance measurement mechanism is applied to each business archi-
tecture element to identify an appropriate performance indicator, set a perfor-
mance target and an allowed deviation percentage, and to analyze the actual
outcome for each indicator. This enables the diﬀerentiation between an excel-
lent, expected, or bad Performance for each element. Following existing heat

--- PAGE 402 ---
398 B. Roelens and D. Bork
mapping techniques, bad Performance is visualized by using a solid red, expected
Performance by a dashed orange, and excellent Performance by a dotted green
color.
The ﬁrst two activities result in a business architecture heat map (see Fig.1
for an example1
), which can be further analyzed during the strategic ﬁt improve-
ment analysis. The main objective of this analysis is to identify operational
changes that could potentially improve the value creation throughout the busi-
ness architecture to result in a better realization of the strategic objectives.
To support this, a critical path can be identiﬁed starting from a Goal with
a bad Performance (e.g., Improve short-term solvency in Fig.1) as a chain of
valueStream relations that have a high or medium Importance and that con-
nect business architecture elements on downstream hierarchical levels of which
the Performance can be improved (e.g., Increase current assets, Sale additional
products, Operational excellence, and Baking) [15]. A critical path ends at the
Fig.1. Example of a business architecture heat map in PGA [14] (Color ﬁgure online)
1
The labels were manually adapted to improve readability on a limited space.

--- PAGE 403 ---
An Evaluation of the Intuitiveness of the PGA Modeling Language Notation 399
Activity or Process level of the business architecture (e.g., Preheating), which
leads to concrete changes that can be applied to the organizational processes.
3 Methodology
3.1 Evaluation Technique
In this paper, we applied the evaluation technique of [3] to test the intuitiveness
of the PGA notation by the intended end-users2
. The participants were given
60min to complete the evaluation questions. This evaluation comprised a set of
tasks, which were clustered in three core phases surrounded by an initiation and
a conclusion phase (see Fig.2).
Fig.2. Procedure of the evaluation technique [3]
Initiation Phase. Participants were brieﬂy introduced to the relevant domain
(i.e., strategic ﬁt in the business architecture) and the building blocks of
the PGA modeling method without showing any visual aspects like language
concepts or sample models. Besides this, some information about the partic-
ipants was collected. This information comprised demographic aspects (i.e.,
gender, age) as well as questions regarding the experience of the participant
with modeling languages. An informed consent was used to provide the nec-
essary information about voluntary participation to the user study and the
anonymous processing of the collected data.
Phase 1 – Term Association. Participants were provided terms that refer to
names of PGA modeling language concepts. Each participant then individu-
ally drafted one or more graphical representations that he/she deems as the
most intuitive for the element. Participants received a blank paper with a list
of the terms and they were asked to use a variation of colors to perform this
task.
Phase 2 – Notation Association. Afterwards, samples of the current PGA
notation were presented and participants were asked to record up to three
intuitive associations that pop out when looking at them. Notably, the nota-
tions were presented without any hint of e.g., the name or the semantics of
this concept. Furthermore, the concepts forming part of the term association
were diﬀerent to the ones of the notation association to omit hampering intu-
itiveness. In order to enable a full coverage of the PGA notation, we decided
2
The evaluation forms can be found via: https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.27473.
48489.

--- PAGE 404 ---
400 B. Roelens and D. Bork
to divide the participants into two groups. Group A had half of the concepts
as part of the term association and the other half as part of the notation asso-
ciation. For group B, the order of the phases was the same, but the concepts
were divided oppositely between the two tasks.
Phase 3 – Case Study. This task included comprehension questions targeting
an example of a business architecture heat map (see Fig.1). The legend is
added here for clariﬁcation but was not provided to the respondents. Each
question was oriented towards the identiﬁcation of particular meta-model
elements in the model, e.g., how many elements have a good performance,
which type of element is supported by Operational excellence, etc.
Concluding Phase. As a last step, participants were asked to provide qualita-
tive feedback and improvement suggestions about the current PGA notation.
3.2 Data Analysis
Phase 1 – Term Association. For the analysis, one needs to deconstruct the
participants’ graphical representations according to diﬀerent visual variables
[10], such as color, shape, icons, texture, or any other visual aspect that
pops out. As not all respondents used the full range of visual variables, their
relative frequency per meta-model element is analyzed. For example, 75% of
the shapes used to depict an Activity is a (rounded) rectangle (see Table1).
Phase 2 – Notation Association. The percentage of participants that pro-
vided a matching association with the name of the meta-model element is cal-
culated. Besides, the relative rank of this percentage is interesting to analyze,
as it is an indicator of the extent to which the PGA element is outperformed
by other meta-model constructs. This would show that there is a problem
with the perceptual discriminability as the diﬀerent symbols are not clearly
distinguishable from each other in the current notation [10].
Phase 3 – Case Study. Comprehension questions can be answered based on
the available information in the sample model. Therefore, it is possible to
analyze the given responses and calculate the percentage of participants that
provided a correct answer to a certain comprehension question.
All participant responses were digitized and stored in a shared cloud infras-
tructure. All authors started a pretest for analyzing the results with only a few
responses. Afterwards, the gained experience was exchanged to streamline the
structure of the analysis, e.g., the visual variables to be applied during the clas-
siﬁcation of the term associations. Next, the authors independently analyzed all
responses, after which the analysis was condensed toward a harmonized result.
4 Evaluation Results
4.1 Participants
The participants were students following a Master level class on IT Management
at the Faculty of Economics and Business Administration of Ghent University.

--- PAGE 405 ---
An Evaluation of the Intuitiveness of the PGA Modeling Language Notation 401
In total, 139 students participated in the user study. The participants were ran-
domly assigned to two diﬀerent groups (see Sect.3.1), resulting in 70 participants
for group A and 69 for group B. Their average age was 22 years and 41% of them
were female. Although the participants were not familiar with the PGA method,
86% had some prior modeling knowledge about ER modeling, 90% about busi-
ness process modeling, and 34% about ArchiMate.
4.2 Analysis of the Term Association Phase
Table1 shows the deconstruction of the participants’ graphical representations
according to diﬀerent visual variables. The relevant variables that were used
by participants include color, shape, icons, and text. In this respect, icons are
symbols that perceptually resemble the concepts they represent [10], while shape
refers to geometric ﬁgures (e.g., square, line). Due to limited space, Table1 only
covers the most used visual variables (i.e., a cumulative frequency of at least
50% if the individual absolute frequency is at least two).
During the term association analysis, some interesting insights are obtained.
First, it is observed that the participants dominantly used a blue color to design
a graphical representation for a given meta-model element. To eﬃciently handle
a large group of 139 respondents, they were asked to bring a variety of colors.
However, we see that the majority of the participants only used one color to draft
a notation. This unexpected result is a limitation in the set-up of the evaluation
technique.
Concerning shape, some recurring proposals can be seen such as a rectangle,
triangle, ellipse, or arrow. The origin of these proposals can be explained by the
modeling experience of the participants, which are familiar with ER and busi-
ness process modeling. Although the intuitiveness of such shapes is quite limited,
participants added to them corresponding icons to further shape the meaning
of the concepts (e.g., thinking balloon, dollar/euro sign, bull’s-eye, graph, excla-
mation mark, etc.). These icons seem to provide an important instrument for
participants to design an intuitive notation.
In line with the principle of Dual Coding [10], participants used text to
complement the proposed graphics, which enabled them to depict the meaning
of an element both visually and verbally. In most cases, the text is equal to the
ﬁrst letter of the meta-model element (e.g., C for Competence) or its complete
name (e.g., Activity). In other cases, text refers to the content of a meta-model
element. This is the case for Financial structure, which is a representation of the
cost and revenue structure (e.g., as coded by C & R) that is implemented by an
organization.
Finally, number and graphical position were used for speciﬁc meta-model
elements. More speciﬁcally, participants employed spatial enclosure to represent
activities as a subset of the overarching process. In this case, we see a dom-
inant proposal of three rectangles connected by arrows. Graphical position is
also proposed for the representation of a valueStream. In this case, participants
use a hierarchy of arrows to depict the value creation throughout the business
architecture.

--- PAGE 406 ---
402 B. Roelens and D. Bork
Table 1. Results of the term association task
PGA concept Color Shape Icons Text
Activity 1. Blue (71%) 1. (Rounded)
rectangle (75%)
1. Person (18%) 1. Activity (46%)
2. A (23%)
Process 1. Blue (75%) 1. Arrow (28%)
2. Rectangle (28%)
– 1. Act. nr. (71%)
Competence 1. Blue (76%) 1. Rectangle (31%)
2. Triangle (23%)
1. Thinking
balloon (21%)
2. Person (14%)
3. Light bulb (14%)
4. Brain (10%)
1. C (57%)
Value
Proposition
1. Blue (78%) 1. Ellipse (27%)
2. Rectangle (24%)
1. Dollar/Euro (29%)
2. + sign (10%)
3. Light bulb (10%)
4. People (6%)
1. V (27%)
2. VP (27%)
Financial
Structure
1. Blue (63%) 1. Ellipse (35%)
2. Rectangle (33%)
1. Dollar/Euro (80%) 1. Cost &
revenues (40%)
2. C & R (20%)
Internal Goal 1. Blue (67%) 1. Ellipse (54%) 1. Bull’s-eye/arrow (64%) 1. I (29%)
2. x (21%)
Customer
Goal
1. Blue (65%) 1. Ellipse (34%)
2. Cloud (16%)
1. Bull’s-eye/arrow (48%)
2. Person (33%)
1. C (44%)
2. Customer
(goal) (22%)
Financial
Goal
1. Blue (65%) 1. Ellipse (30%)
2. Rectangle (30%)
1. Dollar/Euro (67%) –
valueStream 1. Blue (73%) 1. Arrow (69%) 1. Dollar/Euro (47%)
2. Stream (18%)
1. V (67%)
Performance 1. Blue (72%) 1. Rectangle (32%)
2. Ellipse (21%)
1. Graph (18%)
2. V checkbox (18%)
3. Muscle (13%)
4. Trophy (10%)
–
Importance 1. Blue (66%) 1. Rectangle (26%)
2. Triangle (26%)
1. Exclamation
mark (75%)
–
4.3 Analysis of the Notation Association Phase
Table2 shows the results of the notation association task. For each element, the
percentage of participants giving a matching association and the relative rank of
this association is listed. Important to note here is that the visualization of the
valueStream relation (i.e., a non-directed line, see Table4), was not explicitly
tested as the meaning of this relation only becomes clear when included in a
hierarchical business architecture heat map.
The percentage of correct associations ranges between 0% and 36.23%. The
PGA concepts Activity (24.29% - rank 1), Process (36.23% - rank 1), Financial
Structure (12.75% - rank 3), and Financial Goal (20.29% - rank 2) perform the
best as we analyze both the percentage and the relative rank of the correct asso-
ciations. The notation of the other elements is less intuitive, as the percentages
are below 5%. Moreover, some of them are outperformed by other meta-model
elements. More speciﬁcally, the Competence notation (i.e., a stage icon) is con-

--- PAGE 407 ---
An Evaluation of the Intuitiveness of the PGA Modeling Language Notation 403
Table 2. Results of the notation association task
PGA concept Percentage of
correct associations
Relative rank of
correct association
Activity 24.29% 1
Process 36.23% 1
Competence 2.90% 8
Value Proposition 2.83% 9
Financial Structure 12.75% 3
Internal Goal 4.90% 5
Customer Goal 0% –
Financial Goal 20.29% 2
Performance 0% –
Importance 0% –
fused with Performance by 52.17% of the participants and the icon of Internal
Goal (i.e., a cogwheel) is associated with a Process by 35.29% of the participants.
4.4 Analysis of the Case Study Phase
In Table3, the results of the case study are given. To keep this example man-
ageable for participants in the given time, only one type of Goal (i.e., Financial
Goal) was included in the sample model. This is the reason why no results
are available for Customer and Internal Goal in Table3. Although all questions
were oriented towards the identiﬁcation of meta-model elements, partially cor-
rect answers could also be identiﬁed. These include naming elements at the
instance level (e.g., Take sample instead of Activity) or using close synonyms for
the meta-model element (i.e., Task as a synonym for Activity). Besides, there
was not a question that directly targeted the identiﬁcation of a valueStream,
but problems with the intuitiveness of this relation can be derived from incor-
rect answers to the questions about the Activity and Value Proposition concept.
More speciﬁcally, some incorrect answers indicate that the valueStream relation
was interpreted in the wrong direction.
Although the mean score of complete correct answers for this task is 41.32%,
Table3 shows that the meaning of the Value Proposition (i.e., 5.04% correct
answers) and Importance (i.e., 5.76% correct answers) notation cannot easily be
derived from the business architecture heat map. Even if partially correct answers
are included, these elements are the two least performing of all PGA concepts
with total scores of 21.59% for Value Proposition and 14.39% for Importance.
Besides, there seems to be a problem with the intuitiveness of the valueStream
notation, which was read in the wrong direction in the Activity and Value Propo-
sition question by respectively 18.71% and 27.34% of the participants. As one
can notice, the scores for Financial Structure and Financial Goal are the same,

--- PAGE 408 ---
404 B. Roelens and D. Bork
Table 3. Results of the case study task
PGA concept Percentage of
correct
answers
Partially correct/incorrect
answers
Activity 23.02% Synonym (task): 9.35%
Instance level elements: 15.83%
Process 74.10%
Competence 42.45%
Value Proposition 5.04% Instance level elements: 16.55%
Financial Structure 57.55%
Financial Goal 57.55%
valueStream – Incorrect question activity: 18.71%
Incorrect question value proposition: 27.34%
Performance 81.29%
Importance 5.76% Partial answer: 8.63%
as the identiﬁcation of these meta-model elements was included in one question
during the case study task.
4.5 Analysis of the Concluding Phase
During the conclusion phase, we obtained 104 remarks from 58 unique partici-
pants (i.e., a response rate of 41.73%). Of the responses, 45 could be speciﬁcally
traced back to the PGA meta-model, distributed among the aspects color and
line style (24 remarks), Importance (12 remarks), valueStream (5 remarks), and
Activity (4 remarks). As can be seen in Table4, color and line style refer both to
Performance and Importance in the PGA meta-model. We provide illustrative
feedback in the following.
– Color & line style: “Using colors is a good idea, it gives a nice and quick
overview.”
“The meaning of the diﬀerent colors & line styles is not clear.”
– Importance: “It is not clear what the numbers next to the relations mean.”
– valueStream: “It is diﬃcult to see where certain value streams go to.”
– Activity: “The model would improve if the total process of how the organi-
zation operates was represented.”
5 Towards an Improved PGA Notation
We conclude the design cycle by proposing directions for improving the PGA
notation. This proposal is based on the combined evaluation results discussed
previously. In particular, we distinguish between (i) no change is required and

--- PAGE 409 ---
An Evaluation of the Intuitiveness of the PGA Modeling Language Notation 405
(ii) the suggestion of a new notation. In the ﬁrst case, no change is required
as the results conﬁrm the intuitiveness of the initial notation. In the latter, we
use (some of) the suggestions of the participants to propose a new notation. For
some elements, this also includes changes aimed at the homogenization of the
notations of all PGA elements.
For the PGA elements Activity, Process, Financial Structure, Financial Goal,
and Performance, we propose to preserve the initial notation based on the anal-
ysis of the results. The notation association, case study, and qualitative feedback
conﬁrm the intuitiveness of these elements. Moreover, the suggested notations
of the term association phase only include generic shapes (i.e., rectangle and
ellipse) with no or recurring icons (i.e., dollar/euro sign). Following these sug-
gestions would have a negative impact on the perceptual discriminability between
Activity and Process on the one hand, and Financial Structure and Financial
Goal on the other hand. Besides, we understand the qualitative feedback about
the lack of a complete process description in the PGA models. However, this
is a deliberate design choice of the modeling method as the main purpose of
the business architecture heat maps is to achieve alignment between the diﬀer-
ent layers. Therefore, it is not always needed to oﬀer a complete view on the
business architecture, as this may hamper the understanding of the models [15].
Performance is an exception in the analysis, as it combines a low score for the
notation association (i.e., 0%) with a score of 81.29% for the case study. This
can be explained by the fact that Performance is implemented as an attribute
to the other PGA meta-model elements. Consequently, the meaning of the color
coding only becomes intuitive when implemented in a complete business archi-
tecture heat map (see Fig.1). Qualitative feedback further conﬁrmed that the
use of color enables to give a nice and quick overview of alignment opportunities
in the business architecture.
The main argument to propose a new notation for Competence is the con-
fusion that the initial one causes for end-users. Indeed, during the notation
association phase, it became clear that people naturally attach the meaning of
Performance to the visualization. Based on the suggestions of the participants
during the term association task, we propose a combination of a person and light
bulb icon as the new notation (see Table4). This notation should refer to the
cognitive abilities that are associated with the deﬁnition of a Competence as the
internal knowledge, skills and abilities of an organization.
A new notation for Value Proposition is also proposed in Table4, as the ini-
tial notation was one of the least performing PGA elements during the notation
association (i.e., 2.83%) and case study (i.e., 5.04%) tasks. However, the sug-
gested icons by participants do not show a clear preference as they are closely
related to ﬁnancial elements (i.e., dollar/euro or + sign) or cognitive abilities
(i.e., light bulb). Therefore, the new notation is a gift that is exchanged between
two hands. We believe this provides a more intuitive notation for the products
and services that are exchanged between a company and its customers. This pro-
posal is in line with the notation of a Value Proposition in the Business Model
Canvas (i.e., a gift icon) [13].

--- PAGE 410 ---
406 B. Roelens and D. Bork
Table 4. Suggested improvements to the current PGA notation
PGA concept
Initial
notation
Suggestion by Participants
Suggested new
notation
Activity Blue (rounded) rectangle
No change is
required
Process
Three blue rectangles,
connected by arrows
No change is
required
Competence
Blue rectangle/triangle
with a thinking cloud,
person or light bulb icon
Value Proposition
Blue ellipse/rectangle with
a euro/dollar icon
Financial Structure
Blue ellipse/rectangle with
a euro/dollar icon
No change is
required
Internal Goal
Blue ellipse with a
bull’s-eye/arrow icon and
text I
Customer Goal
Blue ellipse with a
bull’s-eye/arrow and person
icon and text C
Financial Goal
Blue ellipse/rectangle with
a bull’s-eye/arrow and
euro/dollar icon
No change is
required
valueStream
Blue arrow in a hierarchical
structure
Performance
Blue rectangle with a graph
or V checkbox icon
No change is
required
Importance
Blue rectangle with an
exclamation mark icon

--- PAGE 411 ---
An Evaluation of the Intuitiveness of the PGA Modeling Language Notation 407
The notation of an Internal Goal needed improvement as respondents con-
fused it with processes during the notation association phase. As the current
PGA notation already includes a bull’s-eye to represent the goal aspect, the
analysis of the term association task did not provide further concrete sugges-
tions. To stress the internal characteristic of the term, it was decided to graphi-
cally enclose cog wheel icons (i.e., the initial notation) inside a factory icon (see
Table4).
A similar argument can be provided for the new notation of a Customer Goal.
This element scored low (i.e., 0%) in the notation association task, which clearly
shows that the intuitiveness of the current notation needs improvement. Based on
the suggestions of the term association phase, it was decided to clearly represent
the customer by a person icon in the new notation. To stress the meaning of a
customer, the person is shaking hands with another person, holding a briefcase
(see Table4).
Problems with the understanding of the valueStream relation became appar-
ent during the case study, in which a large part of the participants applied it
in the wrong direction. Furthermore, some of the qualitative feedback conﬁrms
that the direction of the valueStream is not clear. In line with the term associ-
ation task, this issue is solved by using an arrow in the newly proposed PGA
notation. This arrow points towards the element in business architecture heat
map, of which the value creation is supported by an element on the downstream
hierarchical level.
A last change that is proposed concerns the Importance element. In the
initial notation, this attribute was visualized by a colored valueStream accom-
panied by a certain texture. Furthermore, we added a number (i.e., showing its
relative importance) to this visualization as a form of dual coding. However, the
results of the diﬀerent evaluation tasks showed that this notation was poorly
understood by participants. This was also conﬁrmed by the qualitative feedback
about the confusing color coding and numbers of the valueStream relations. A
ﬁrst improvement could be identiﬁed based on the term association phase, of
which the results show that an exclamation mark is an intuitive way of repre-
senting Importance. We combine this suggestion by replacing the color coding
by a diﬀerent thickness of the valueStream relations. As a result, a valueStream
with a high Importance will be depicted by a thick arrow, combined with three
exclamation marks. The thickness and number of exclamation marks decreases
for a valueStream with a medium or low Importance (see Table4).
6 Reflection and Concluding Remarks
This paper describes the execution of an evaluation technique [3] to test the
intuitiveness of the initial PGA notation [15]. This evaluation was needed to
validate the communication potential of PGA and to improve the understand-
ing and acceptance of the resulting models by business-oriented end-users. The
evaluation tasks were performed by 139 Master’s students of Ghent University
with an elaborate economical background and basic modeling experience. The

--- PAGE 412 ---
408 B. Roelens and D. Bork
analysis of these tasks and the qualitative feedback led to the proposal of an
alternative notation for six of the 11 elements of the PGA modeling method.
This research is not free from threats to validity [18]. To preserve construct
validity, it is important to ensure that the executed tasks are suited to eval-
uate the intuitiveness of a DSML. Therefore, we applied an existing evaluation
technique, for which the origin of the tasks is rigorously substantiated [3]. With
respect to internal validity, external factors that inﬂuence the results need
to be avoided. In this respect, participants were chosen with the same educa-
tional background (i.e., Master’s students in Business Engineering and Business
Administration). Besides this, the participants had similar foreknowledge in con-
ceptual modeling and received a collective introduction to PGA. Furthermore,
participation was voluntarily and no compensation was provided. Finally, we
used two diﬀerent randomly assigned groups and divided the PGA concepts
between the term association and notation association tasks to mitigate an allo-
cation bias. In this way, we made sure that the terms given during the ﬁrst task
did not inﬂuence the associations of the notation association phase. The choice of
participants also aﬀects the external validity or generalizability of the results.
The students have a strong economic orientation which enabled us to obtain
a group of respondents with knowledge and skills that can act as a proxy for
business-oriented stakeholders. These stakeholders are the targeted end-users of
the PGA modeling method. Nevertheless, the choice for students is an inherent
limitation and further research is needed to replicate the evaluation technique
with business practitioners. Reliability reﬂects the degree to which the results
could be reproduced by the modeling community. To ensure this, the procedure
that was used to apply the evaluation technique and the URL of the evaluation
questionnaires can be found in Sect.3.1. Finally, we added the details about the
analysis of the diﬀerent evaluation tasks in Sect.3.2.
Future research is needed for the evaluation of the proposed improvements.
This includes an experiment, in which the intuitiveness of the initial and newly
proposed notation is compared. Such an experiment could be based on recall
and comprehension questions, which compare the eﬀectiveness and eﬃciency of
interpreting both versions of the PGA notation [4]. Nevertheless, more research is
needed to set-up a rigorous experimental design. In this respect, we are currently
implementing the new version of the notation to become part of a future version
of the PGA modeling tool. The new tool shall be made available through the
PGA project space within the OMiLAB3
of the Open Models Laboratory [2].
On a separate research stream, we will investigate possibilities of automat-
ing the applied evaluation technique [3]. In this respect, we aim to set up a
web-environment that automatically generates the evaluation sheets once the
concepts and sample notations are uploaded. Moreover, it shall provide a WYSI-
WYG web editor for drawing notations and storing them. To support the anal-
ysis of the collected data, this system shall use OpenCV or similar technologies
to automatically analyze the created proposals for new notations. Besides this,
3
PGA project space within OMiLAB [online], https://austria.omilab.org/psm/
content/PGA/info, last accessed: 04.03.2020.

--- PAGE 413 ---
An Evaluation of the Intuitiveness of the PGA Modeling Language Notation 409
enabling text analysis could be useful for the results of the notation associa-
tion task as well as implementing statistical analysis of the responses and the
automated generation of evaluation reports. Ultimately, the web-environment
will increase the possibilities of testing a modeling language comprehensively,
as it enables an eﬃcient set-up, execution, and analysis of the evaluation. Con-
sequently, it will mitigate issues related to the paper-and-pen evaluation of a
tool-based modeling language.
References
1. ADOxx.org: ADOxx Metamodelling Platform (2020). https://www.adoxx.org/
live/home. Accessed 15 Jan 2020
2. Bork, D., Buchmann, R.A., Karagiannis, D., Lee, M., Miron, E.T.: An open plat-
form for modeling method conceptualization: the OMiLAB digital ecosystem. Com-
mun. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 44, 673–697 (2019)
3. Bork, D., Schrüﬀer, C., Karagiannis, D.: Intuitive understanding of domain-speciﬁc
modeling languages: proposition and application of an evaluation technique. In:
Laender, A.H.F., Pernici, B., Lim, E.-P., de Oliveira, J.P.M. (eds.) ER 2019. LNCS,
vol. 11788, pp. 311–319. Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
030-33223-5 26
4. Burton-Jones, A., Wand, Y., Weber, R.: Guidelines for empirical evaluations of
conceptual modeling grammars. J. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 10(6), 495–532 (2009)
5. El Kouhen, A., Gherbi, A., Dumoulin, C., Khendek, F.: On the semantic trans-
parency of visual notations: experiments with UML. In: Fischer, J., Scheidgen,
M., Schieferdecker, I., Reed, R. (eds.) SDL 2015. LNCS, vol. 9369, pp. 122–137.
Springer, Cham (2015). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-24912-4 10
6. Frank, U.: Domain-speciﬁc modeling languages: requirements analysis and design
guidelines. In: Reinhartz-Berger, I., Sturm, A., Clark, T., Cohen, S., Bettin, J.
(eds.) Domain Engineering, pp. 133–157. Springer, Heidelberg (2013). https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-642-36654-3 6
7. Henderson, J., Venkatraman, N.: Strategic alignment: leveraging information tech-
nology for transforming organizations. IBM Syst. J. 38(2–3), 472–484 (1999)
8. Karagiannis, D., Kühn, H.: Metamodelling platforms. In: Bauknecht, K., Tjoa,
A.M., Quirchmayr, G. (eds.) EC-Web 2002. LNCS, vol. 2455, pp. 182–182.
Springer, Heidelberg (2002). https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-45705-4 19
9. Karagiannis, D., Mayr, H.C., Mylopoulos, J.: Domain-Speciﬁc Conceptual Mod-
eling - Concepts, Methods and Tools. Springer, Cham (2016). https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-319-39417-6
10. Moody, D.: The “physics” of notations: toward a scientiﬁc basis for constructing
visual notations in software engineering. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. 35(6), 756–779
(2009)
11. Mylopoulos, J.: Conceptual Modelling and Telos. Conceptual Modelling,
Databases, and CASE: an Integrated View of Information System Development,
pp. pp. 49–68. Wiley, New York (1992)
12. Newell, A., Simon, H.A.: Human Problem Solving, vol. 104. Prentice-Hall, Engle-
wood Cliﬀs (1972)
13. Osterwalder, A., Pigneur, Y., Tucci, C.: Business Model Generation: A Handbook
for Visionaries, Game Changers, and Challengers. Wiley, Hoboken (2010)

--- PAGE 414 ---
410 B. Roelens and D. Bork
14. Roelens, B., Poels, G.: The creation of business architecture heat maps to support
strategy-aligned organizational decisions. In: 8th European Conference on IS Man-
agement and Evaluation (ECIME), pp. 388–392. Acad. Conferences Ltd. (2014)
15. Roelens, B., Steenacker, W., Poels, G.: Realizing strategic ﬁt within the business
architecture: the design of a process-goal alignment modeling and analysis tech-
nique. Softw. Syst. Model. 18(1), 631–662 (2019)
16. Saaty, T.: How to make a decision: the analytic hierarchy process. Eur. J. Oper.
Res. 48(1), 9–26 (1990)
17. Sein, M., Henfridsson, O., Purao, S., Rossi, M., Lindgren, R.: Action design
research. MIS Q. 35(1), 37–56 (2011)
18. Wohlin, C., Runeson, P., Höst, M., Ohlsson, M.C., Regnell, B., Wesslén, A.: Exper-
imentation in Software Engineering. Springer, Heidelberg (2012). https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-642-29044-2

--- PAGE 415 ---
Does Enterprise Architecture Support Customer
Experience Improvement? Towards
a Conceptualization in Digital Transformation
Context
Mouaad Hafsi(B) and Saïd Assar(B)
LITEM, Univ Evry, IMT-BS, Université Paris-Saclay, 91025 Evry, France
{mouaad.hafsi,said.assar}@imt-bs.eu
Abstract. Customer Experience (CE) is often presented as a competitive battle-
field in the new digital context. However, it is defined so broadly, so holistically,
thatcompaniesfinditchallengingtoimproveitthroughwell-definedprojectswith
animpactanalysisofthedifferentchangesthatcouldbebroughtabout.Enterprise
Architecture Management (EAM) is supposed to be a suitable means to support
the management of such transformation projects. However, the depth and disrup-
tive nature of these changes raise multiple questions concerning the adequacy of
EAMforCustomerExperienceImprovement(CEI).Incurrentcorporatepractice,
there seems to be no regular application of EAM as a central support service for
CEI in the digital context. In this paper, we explore how EAM can support CEI
and examine how digitalization transforms the customer experience. We further
identify the required information inputs for these transformations. Based on this
foundation, we identify content elements that EAM can provide by analyzing
EAM meta-models. Comparing the requirements by CEI projects and the supply
by EAM shows that EAM, in general, provides valuable inputs for organizational
issuesandrolesbutshowsweaknesseswhenitcomestoinformationabouttrends,
contextual and environmental information.
Keywords: Digital transformation · Customer Experience Improvement ·
Enterprise Architecture Management · Enterprise Models · ArchiMate
1 Introduction
Digital transformation (DT) is proliferating in organizations around the world [1b].
Increasinglydemandingcustomersarepushingdigitalcompetitiontoitsedges[8].Many
organizations operating in the products and services marketing, involving direct interac-
tions with customers, invest considerably in digital transformation [1b, 2b]. One of the
main reasons for these investments is the ability of DT to improve customer experience
[3b, 4b, 8, 9b]. Banks are, for example, among the first industries engaging DT projects
[36].Changingconsumerhabitsandthenewcompetitiveenvironment,areforcingbanks
to urgently deal with their customer process so as not to be left behind in a rapidly fluc-
tuating market. Customers expect financial services to be available 24 h a day, seven
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. Nurcan et al. (Eds.): BPMDS 2020/EMMSAD 2020, LNBIP 387, pp. 411–427, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49418-6_28

--- PAGE 416 ---
412 M. Hafsi and S. Assar
days a week, and as user-friendly as social networks or messaging solutions that they
use every day [4b, 5b, 6b].
Thus, customer experience is seen as the new competitive field of marketing. The
consulting firm Gartner pointed out that 57% of customers stopped buying from a com-
pany because a competitor offered a better experience [37], and that 67% of customers
are willing to pay more for better customer experience. However, digital projects con-
cerning improving customer experience often remain at the starting point [36, 37]. This
is due to the complexity of implementing this transformation; indeed, it is a complex
process impacting several areas and components of the organization [4b, 8b]. It involves
managing the volatile behavior of customers, understanding their complex data [7b,
16b, 17b, 18b, 19b], carrying out numerous optimizations of customer processes [14b],
transforming business models [6b, 13b, 14b], integrating various digital technologies
[6b, 7b, 8b] and adapting to changing business conditions [8b, 12b, 14b].
This implementation is even more complex since organizations do not start from a
blank page to design their customer experiences. Many have already established cus-
tomers, processes, and assets that require reorientation to carry out strategies specific to
the customer experience [5b]. Drawing on our expertise in digital transformation con-
sulting, managers suffer from the absence of tools helping to define a reachable target
while considering their existing environment. Consultants often tend to start their ana-
lyzesfromablank sheetandtodesignidealtransformativecustomer experiences almost
independent of the real context that the company operates.
Among the techniques that appeared in recent years to support such transforma-
tions, Enterprise Architecture (EA) and EA Management (EAM) seem to be essential
[1, 4, 5]. While EA describes the fundamental structures of an organization, EAM is
believed to support transformations management by guiding the necessary coordination
efforts [3] and providing information for strategy development [4, 5, 7]. It also provides
EnterpriseModels(EM)tovariousstakeholdersintransformationprojectsandenhances
communication by establishing shared and mutual understandings [5]. Likewise, EAM
can guide decision processes and contributes to better design choices that align with the
operational and strategic goals of the transformation endeavor [6, 10, 11, 16, 17].
Nevertheless, and according to our consulting experience, EAM is not commonly
applied. It is rarely perceived as a support service for digital projects, especially projects
concerning experience client improvement. There is a tendency to consider EAM as a
discipline mostly about IT and located in the IT departments [23]. Customer Experi-
ence Improvement (CEI) projects are, however, more profound and broader than an IT
transformation and could impact commercial processes and business models [8, 9, 5b,
10b].
We tend to consider that there is a severe gap between the information offered by
EAM and the managers’ demands in digital transformation projects. Architects seem
not to know how to support CEI project managers, and these managers are not aware
of how EAM might support their effort [23]. For this paper, we try to provide the first
step towards a better understanding of EAM support for CEI in a digital transformation
context. This leads to the research question:

--- PAGE 417 ---
Does Enterprise Architecture Support Customer Experience Improvement? 413
• RQ: Does EAM support ECI projects in a digital transformation context?
– RQ1a: How digitalization transforms customer experience?
– RQ1b: And what are the necessary information needs to these transformations?
• RQ2:WhatarethecontentelementsthatEnterpriseModelscanprovidetocoverthese
necessary information needs?
In order to answer the question, we proceed as follows. We first introduce related
work and go on with illustrating our research approach. We present the results and
provide a discussion. We close with a summary and implications.
2 Related Work
2.1 Digital Transformation for a Better Customer Experience
Digitaltransformationoperatesaradicalchangeintheorganizationstructure,processes,
functionsandbusinessmodels[5b,8b,9b,10b].Companiesadoptdigitaltechnologiesto
mainly improve business performance [1b, 7b]. Digital transformation promises many
benefits: enhancing organizational processes [7b, 9b, 10b, 12, 38]; improving value
propositionstothecustomer[3b,5b,13];risingtheservicesquality[12b,13b];reducing
the products and services costs [2b, 14]; innovating new products and services [3b,
15]; increasing customer loyalty and revenues [5b, 13–15]; and finally, improving the
customer experience [5b, 8b, 9b, 10b, 12b].
The study by [8] summarizes DT impacts in three main areas: customer experience,
operational processes, and business model. Each of these three areas is divided into
three sub-elements. The customer experience is divided into customer understanding,
growth, and customer touchpoints. What isinterestingisthat,traditionally,the customer
experience has only been seen from different points of contact [5b]. Westerman et al. in
[8]drawabroaderpicturebyaddingelementsaroundsalesrationalizationandmarketing
processes improvement, as well as new digital capabilities to understand customers and
their volatile behaviors.
Numerous studies have examined the implementation of projects for improving the
customer experience in organizations [1b]. For example, assessing target strategies and
policies around the customer experience [8b], examining engagement processes [16b],
or analyzing the critical factors to reshape the customer value proposition [11b, 14b].
Thesestudiestendtofocusmainlyondefiningwhatcustomerexperienceisaboutandits
ecosystem in the company. Few attempts have been made to develop a comprehensive
approachhelpingmanagerstounderstandtheimpactofCEIprojectsontheorganization
ecosystems, considering the new context of digital transformation.
2.2 Enterprise Architecture as a Support Tool to Manage Digital Transformation
Many research studies have stated that EAM can address partial problems within DT
from a management point of view. In [15], the authors consider EAM as a governing

--- PAGE 418 ---
414 M. Hafsi and S. Assar
tool that helps mastering the alignment of portfolios of transformation steps. They also
claim potential capacities in different fields, such as strategic direction, gap analysis,
strategic planning, and operational planning. In [17], the focus is on the strategic change
process and how EAM can support it. The author sees that the strategic fit with the
marketenvironment and business-ITalignment can be,presumably, supported by EAM.
Moreover, EAM can help in preparing the change by standardizing and modularizing
parts of the enterprise.
Over the years, studies have associated several benefits with EAM. These are gen-
erally indirect, large-scale, and perceived over a long period, which generally makes it
difficulttocalculateanexactreturnoninvestment(ROI)[35].However,intheoccasional
cases where the ROI has been calculated, the results seem remarkable [35]. Among
these benefits, we highlight: increasing flexibility, integration and interoperability [7,
15, 17, 19–22]; better alignment of IT with business [1, 3, 10, 11, 15, 17, 19, 22]; IT
costs reduction [1, 3, 15, 17]; improved risk management, situational awareness and
decision-making [3, 9, 16, 21]; better results from strategic business initiatives [10, 11,
21, 38].
Otherrecentstudies(e.g.[21,22])examinetheevolutionofmodelinglanguagesand
techniques to make them better adapted to the new age of digital transformation. They
assume that during enterprise transformations, companies need shared understanding
and agreement on topics such as the overall strategy of the enterprise, the existent pro-
cesses, as well as the future vision of the top management. However, when enterprise
modeling languages were developed, the digital transformation challenges were not yet
that noticeable. At that time, the focus was more on consolidation and optimization [38,
39]. As such, it is logical to expect that the existing languages may require some updates
concerningnewelementcontenttobetrulyreadyformodelingthedigitaltransformation
impacts on the organization ecosystem [23].
Toconclude,manystudiesfocusonhowEAMcansupporttransformationsmanage-
mentfromanEAMpointofview(e.g.[10,15–18]).However,thedemandperspectiveof
CEIprojectsinadigitaltransformationcontext isnotavailable inthecurrentdiscussion.
Thus, we will investigate which information inputs the demand side needs and if current
EAM can provide them.
3 Research Approach
To answer our research questions, we proceeded in three steps (Fig. 1):
Fig. 1. Research approach

--- PAGE 419 ---
Does Enterprise Architecture Support Customer Experience Improvement? 415
3.1 Step 1: Defining How Digitalization Transforms Customer Experience
and What Are the Necessary Information Needs to These Transformations
In order to assess if CEI projects can be supported by EAM, we conduct a systematic
literature review, following [24] and [25] protocol, to identify how digitalization affects
CE and what are the information needed to succeed these transformations (c.f. Fig. 2).
Research Identification
For this paper we investigated the research question RQ described in the introduction.
Search Strategy
Wedevelopedthetermsrelatedtotheresearchquestions;theaimisidentifyingsynonyms
for these terms by leading several tests. We used the Boolean operators (OR, AND) for
connecting the founded terms. We used strings for automated search: (“digital transfor-
mation” OR “digitalization”) AND (“customer experience” OR “consumer experience”
OR “client experience”). We conducted the search of articles by using Scopus database.
The search started on 25 of January 2020.
Study Selection
We have included papers that respect the following criteria: a) written in English; b)
published in a scientific journal; c) it deals with digital transformation; d) documents
which weren’t accessible were excluded, as well as, master and doctoral theses, pro-
ceedings or conference articles, working papers and textbooks. This choice of journal
articles respects the position of [26], who claims “academics and practitioners a like
use journals most often for acquiring information and disseminating new findings and
represent the highest level of research”.
Quality Assessment
Based on the works of [27–29], we assessed the rigor and relevance of the selected
articles. We used criteria’s such as clear description of the context in which the research
was carried out, precise statement of research aims, high level of rigor in conducting the
data collection and analysis, relevance of the findings and the extent to which the study
is valuable for research or practice. The assessment was conducted by both authors and
Fig. 2. Steps of systematic literature review

--- PAGE 420 ---
416 M. Hafsi and S. Assar
each paper was given a quality score. At the end of this process, we had qualified 19
articles to be analyzed for the data extraction step. These articles are numbered 1b, 2b,
etc. and appear separately in an online appendix 1.
Data Extraction
We extracted data from the qualified articles and categorized it according to the model
proposed by [8]. The authors of this work have defined three blocks of digital transfor-
mation impact on the customer experience (Customer understanding, Top Line Growth,
and Customer Touch point). Thus, from each paper, we extracted the data requirements
that were considered necessary to carry out these transformations and categorized them
according to the three proposed blocks.
Data Synthesis and Analysis
The extracted data is classified according to the three blocks mentioned previously [8]
and analyzed in terms of content and semantics. Our analysis allowed us to rename the
three proposed group of transformations (Understanding Customer, Enabling selling
activities, Managing Customer touch points), and also to add a new group (Integrating
Digital capabilities) to take into account all data extracted and new items that emerged.
3.2 Step 2: Defining What Are the Content Elements that EAM Can Provide
by Analyzing ArchiMate Meta-Model
In a second step, we analyze and then conceptualize the information inputs that EAM
can provide to the CEI projects. We relied for our work on the content meta-model
of ArchiMate 3.0. ArchiMate is a mature industry standard that, on the one hand, is
maintained by companies and research partners; on the other hand, it is often used as a
foundationformanycorporateEAMframeworks[29].ArchiMateprovidesaconceptual
macro overview of the information that EAM can provide and thus allows for a more
genericdiscussion.Again,weensuredreliabilityandvaliditybycomparingtheidentified
contentelementswithothermeta-modelslikeTOGAF[2],GERAM[30],Zachman[31],
DODAF [32] and IEEE [33].
3.3 Step 3: Mapping Results of Steps 1 and 2 Using Focus Group Technique
After identifying the needed information inputs of ECI projects and the available infor-
mation outputs of EAM, we mapped both in a third step. Major challenges were the
different languages apparent in both disciplines that inhibited a straightforward one-
to-one mapping. Hence, at start, we based our first mapping test on the meta-model
specification andadditionalliterature.Thenweproceeded foraFocusGroup[34]where
we presented our pre-filled mapping to six enterprise architects from a French bank who
use and master ArchiMate as a meta-model in their daily modeling activities (Table 1).
We collected feedback on our initial mapping by explaining our choices based on
literature. Then, the architects tried to analyze for each ECI information need, the con-
tent that ArchiMate meta-model could provide in terms of concepts, based on concrete
1 Available online at ResearchGate: https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.33596.18560.

--- PAGE 421 ---
Does Enterprise Architecture Support Customer Experience Improvement? 417
examples of their modeling activities. The focus group process took almost two weeks.
Three meetings (2 to 3 h for each one) were held to introduce and work on Mapping.
The process can be summarized as follows:
Table 1. Profiles of the enterprise architects in the focus group
Enterprise architect Experience in EA Expertise level
FTX 10 years Expert – had worked in other banks before
FAR 9 years Expert – had worked in other banks before
MHI 6 years TOGAF certified – has worked in other banks before
CTR 12 years ArchiMate expert – has worked in other banks before
YLE 3 years Confirmed
AZE 11 years Expert & TOGAF certified
First,wediscussedtheinitialresultsofourfirstliterature-basedmapping.Oneofthe
co-authors led this stage. He was invited to share ideas from the literature concerning
ArchiMatemodeling.Thisfirstmeetingwasmorelikeanopendiscussionanddiscussed
the advantages and limitations of ArchiMate in the banking context.
Second,thearchitectsrealizedoutthemappingbyrelyingontransformationprojects
relatedtoCEI.Weaskedeacharchitecttodefine,alone,amapping;andthenwediscussed
the outputs to agree on a common mapping, which was adopted by all participants at the
endofthismeeting.Thefinalmappingisaccomplishedthroughacollegialreconciliation
of the individual results, which did not differ much at the base.
In the last step the final mapping is presented by one of the co-authors to reflect col-
legially on the limits of the ArchiMate modeling. This is formulated in the “Discussion”
section of this paper.
4 Results
4.1 Required Information for Customer Experience Improvement
Based on [8] work and our data analysis, we have identified four major groups of
how digitalization transforms customer experience and the information needed to these
transformations:
A) Understanding Customer: Companies are exploring social media to comprehend
customer satisfaction. Depending on that, they launched special products, based on
their customer context. In addition, companies are learning more about customer
feeling and habits, it helps companies to promote their brands more effectively
through digital media. Companies are also building new online communities to
collect feedbacks, to advise and build loyalty with clients (Table 2).

--- PAGE 422 ---
418 M. Hafsi and S. Assar
Table 2. “Understanding Customer” and required information.
Information needs Description restitution References
Social knowledge To know company’s client
through social networks, so that
to collect informal information
on the attitude of the client and
their preferences
[4b, 9b, 12b, 13b, 19b]
Value proposition Companies offer personalized
products with a clear added
value in the customer’s context
[2b, 3b, 5b, 7b, 8b, 11b, 13b,
19b]
Feedback Organizations collect customer
feedback to use it in product
creation and to master loyalty
management
[1b, 2b, 3b, 4b, 8b, 15b, 17b,
19b]
Satisfaction measurement Companies must continuously
measure customer satisfaction
to satisfy their changing needs
and habits
[6b, 5b, 15b, 16b, 19b]
Information confidentiality To protect their customers,
companies must control the
information collected from them
and trace its lifecycle in the
company without abusing its
use
[1b, 5b, 11b]
Customer context The company uses the history of
its relationship with the client
to understand his context, it
also uses social networks to fuel
this understanding
[1b, 2b, 3b, 4b, 6b, 7b, 18b,
19b]
Customer journey The company must trace all the
customers’ commercial
activities in order to understand
their habits and preferences
[1b, 4b, 5b, 7b, 8b, 13b, 18b,
19b]
Customer feelings The company is interested in
the feelings at a moment T of a
customer, the change of its
feelings feeds the
personalization of the products
for these customers
[1b, 2b, 12b, 17b, 18b]
Trends The company is also interested
in modes and trends in the
customer consumption, these
trends are classified by age
groups or by social
categorization
[1b, 5b, 11b]

--- PAGE 423 ---
Does Enterprise Architecture Support Customer Experience Improvement? 419
B) Enabling selling activities: Companies evolve their business models by proposing
new digitalstrategies.They usetechnology toenhance salesconversations and self-
interactions and introduce mobile tools to help salespeople and customers engage
in analytics-based exploration. They simplify their processes through digitalization
andseektomakethecustomer’slifemorecomfortable.Theyalsodevelopintegrated
multi-channel experiences to make customer’s purchases more efficient (Table 3).
Table 3. “Enabling selling activities” and required information.
Information requirements Description restitution References
Business network The company needs to
collaborate with other market
players to cover all the services
that their customers need, the
company needs to know more
about these market players
[1b, 2b, 4b, 19b]
Digital strategy The company is evolving its
strategy by considering new
digital products and by
changing the way it interacts
with its customers
[1b, 2b, 3b, 4b, 5b, 7b, 8b, 10b,
12b, 19b]
Business model The business model also evolves
and carries the digital strategy
of the company
[1b, 4b, 13b, 18b]
Process The company must know its
processes because the change
takes place first on the internal
processes
[1b, 4b, 5b, 7b, 8b, 10b, 13b,
18b, 19b]
Sales history The company needs to draw
more information on the
products which are well bought
or not, and to rely on data
analytics to predict the change
in the commercial conditions of
the market
[1b, 2b, 3b, 4b, 15b, 17b, 19b]
Performance measurement The company sets up indicators
to measure its commercial
performance
[3b, 16b, 17b, 18b, 19b]
C) Managing Customer Touch Points: Companies that provide multiple channels to
thecustomer,areexperiencingnewapproachestoprovideanintegratedexperience.
In retail and financial services in particular, firms are focusing on integrated mul-
tichannel activity. However, multichannel services require implementing change

--- PAGE 424 ---
420 M. Hafsi and S. Assar
Table 4. “Managing Customer touch points” and required information.
Information requirements Description restitution References
Organizational structure Organization must master the
composition of their current
organizational structure and
how it evolves
[4b, 9b, 12b, 13b, 19b]
Self service The company offers increasingly
services where the customer
realizes the whole sales process
alone or in interaction with
machines
[1b, 4b, 5b, 7b, 8b, 10b, 13b,
18b, 19b]
Cross channel The company allows customers
to move from one channel to
another while preserving the
same elements of the customer’s
context
[1b, 5b, 8b, 11b, 12b, 18b]
Process The company evolves the
operational processes to take
into consideration the new
distribution channels
[1b, 5b, 7b, 8b, 10b, 13b, 14b,
18b, 19b]
Customer accessibility The company allows the
customer to manage
accessibility to all distribution
channels
[12b]
across customer experience and operational processes; for examples, many retail-
ers now offer home shopping with the option to receive products by mail or in a
store (Table 4).
D) IntegratingDigitalCapabilities:Digitalcapabilitiesarefundamentalcomponents
for transforming customer experience. While top management and existing IT
departments are leading digital initiatives across companies, they hire new digital
skills around Big Data, real time communication, etc. During the ‘Data Analysis’
phase, we introduced this group to classify all the information input that the com-
pany needs to know about the digital capabilities it has, and how to integrate and
reuse them for other transformation needs (Table 5).
4.2 EAM Outputs
ArchiMateisanEnterpriseArchitecturemodelinglanguage,avisuallanguagewithaset
of default iconography for describing, analyzing, and communicating many concerns of
EnterpriseArchitecturesastheychangeovertime.TheArchiMatestandardprovidesaset
of entities and relationships with their corresponding iconography for the representation
of Architecture Descriptions [29, 40].

--- PAGE 425 ---
Does Enterprise Architecture Support Customer Experience Improvement? 421
Table 5. “Integrating Digital capabilities” and necessary Information needs
Information requirements Description restitution References
Digital capabilities The company is using more and more
new technologies to improve
operational performance and their
commercial activities
[1b, 4b, 17b, 18b, 19b]
Integration The company is asking questions
about its ability to integrate new
technologies into its information
system, and to be agile in absorbing
new changes in existing processes
[3b, 16b, 17b, 18b, 19b]
Skills The company needs to know if its
employees use and master new
technologies, e.g., Big Data, real time
communication, etc.
[1b, 5b, 8b, 11b, 12b, 18b]
Inthispart,weillustrate,whichinformationEAMcanprovidebyfollowingthebasic
structure of the ArchiMate 3.0 content meta-model [29]. This meta-model contains
general elements that are connected in a one-to-one manner. The other elements are
differentiated into business, data, application and technology architecture.
4.3 Mapping EAM Inputs with CEI Needed Information
Based on step 1 and step 2, we analyzed for each CEI information need the extent to
which it can be provided by ArchiMate meta-model. During this analysis, it became
Table 6. Major input of CEI projects supported by EAM
Major support by EAM
Digital capabilities Process Business model
Self service Interaction Digital strategy
Customer journey Organizational structure Cross channel
Value proposition Performance measurement Customer accessibility
Table 7. Minor input of CEI projects supported by EAM
Minor support by EAM
Business network Customer context Social knowledge
Customer feedbacks Satisfaction measurement Trends
Customer feelings skills Information confidentiality sales history Integration

--- PAGE 426 ---
422 M. Hafsi and S. Assar
Fig. 3. Results for ‘Understanding Customer’ information mapping
Fig. 4. Results for ‘Enabling selling activities’ information mapping
apparent that some CEI needed information can be (almost) fully provided by EAM,
and some, almost not. We rated this on a five-point scale ranging from one “ECI needs
almost not supported by EAM” to five “full support”. In Figs. 3, 4, 5, 6, we provide the
mapping results.

--- PAGE 427 ---
Does Enterprise Architecture Support Customer Experience Improvement? 423
Fig. 5. Results for ‘Managing Customer touch points’ information mapping
Fig. 6. Results for ‘Integrating digital capabilities’ information mapping
In Tables 6 and 7, we summarize the findings of the mapping process, focusing on
the information needs for CEI that can be well supported (rated five during the analysis)
by EAM and those that can be less supported (rated one or two during the analysis).
Ourmappingprocessrevealssomemeta-modelelementsthataremoreimportantfor
CEI support than others are. Especially knowledge about processes is needed for almost
transformation groups that we have identified. Sometimes they are directly requested,
sometimes in combination with the general EAM elements like goals.
5 Discussion
Thefindingsshowthat,fromamodelingpointofview,EAMhasthepotentialtosupport
CEIprojects.OurresultsfurthershowthattherearesomeinformationelementsthatEAM
caneasilydeliversincetherelevantinformationsourceexistsexplicitlyandismaintained
frequently(e.g.,process,goals,orroles).Otherinformationinputsrequiremoreanalysis
and interpretation by the architects to be a valuable input to the requesting CEI projects

--- PAGE 428 ---
424 M. Hafsi and S. Assar
(e.g., digital strategy, business model). CEI required elements of information that are
well supported by EAM, have some common characteristics:
A) They do not focus on individuals but cover an overall perspective (e.g., goals, struc-
tures of the enterprise). Activities that take a social and a narrower focus would
be better documented by other disciplines like human-focused management or
psychology (e.g., customer ideologies, trends, etc.).
B) Theinformationhasastrongfocusontheinternalperspectiveoftheenterprise;they
are about the organizational processes, structures, etc. Thus, data that needs to be
collected outside the company like context, business networks, market trends, cus-
tomersatisfactionorfeeling,etc.arenotincludedinthecurrentEAMpractice.Such
external information is explicitly hard to collect for EAM (because of limitations
in the meta-model), and thus, should be instead piloted by other disciplines like
marketing departments or special projects that sense for such needed information.
We also claim that EAM does not offer enough elements to describe the context of
customers and their feedback because organizations are not used to putting them
at the heart of project design. With the emergence of collaborative and agile inno-
vation methods in companies, the EAM must adapt their meta-models to consider
customer trends and their feedback before the completion of projects.
C) EAM mostly supports digital projects that are based on explicit and formal require-
ments.Inputsthatarerelatedtosociety,trends(sociallyinformedknowledge,market
information), or predictive analysis are usually not supported. EAM also does not
address the confidentiality of customer information through modeling.
6 Conclusion
In this paper, we discussed how EAM could support CEI projects in terms of modeling
usingArchiMate.Wecontributedfirstwithadetailedliteraturesurveytoidentifythedig-
italizationimpactoncustomerexperience.Oursystematicliteratureidentifiesfourmajor
groups of how digitalization transforms customer experience: Understanding Customer,
Enabling selling activities, Managing Customer Touch Points, and Integrating digital
technologies. Then, we have defined the information inputs required for these transfor-
mations to understand what CEI is comprised of, and to provide a solid foundation for
further research in the customer experience and digital transformation area. The results
show that, in general, EAM is suited to support customer experience projects in a dig-
ital transformation context. Such transformations have a strong focus on the internal
perspective of the enterprise that is based on formal requirements (e.g., organizational
structure). Nevertheless, EAM lacks support when it comes to activities that require
inputs from the environment (e.g., trends, customer needs, customer satisfaction, etc.)
or society, trends, or predictive aspects.
This work has some limitations.First,our SLR is limitedto a single database and we
chosetouseonlythejournalarticlesthatwehadaccessto.Second,theArchiMatemeta-
model reflects the information that Enterprise Modeling can provide but do not integrate
specific potentials that EAM as an overall framework could additionally cover (e.g.,

--- PAGE 429 ---
Does Enterprise Architecture Support Customer Experience Improvement? 425
architecture principles, best practices, etc.). We dealt with this limitation by conducting
several iterations during the Focus Group and by including additional EAM literature
duringthemappingprocedure.Third,wecarriedouttheFocusGroupwithonlybanking
experts; nevertheless, we tend to believe that this work could be generalized in other
industrial fields because the customer experience has been impacted by digitalization in
the same way for all retailers (banks and others). We intend to ensure this in our future
work. Moreover, as future work, we intend to focus on the Enterprise Architecture
Support to other shapes of digital transformations.
References2
1. Ross, J.W., Weill, P., Robertson, D.: Enterprise Architecture as Strategy: Creating a
Foundation for Business Execution. Harvard Business Press, Brighton (2006)
2. TOG, The Open Group: TOGAF Version 9.1. The Open Group, Berkshire, UK (2011)
3. Rouse, W.B.: A theory of enterprise transformation. Syst. Eng. 8(4), 279–295 (2005)
4. Tamm,T.,Seddon,P.B.,Shanks,G.,Reynolds,P.:Howdoesenterprisearchitectureaddvalue
to organisations. Commun. AIS 28(1), 141–168 (2011)
5. Abraham, R., Aier, S., Labusch, N.: Enterprise architecture as a means for coordination – an
empirical study on actual and potential practice. In: The 7th Mediterranean Conference on
Information Systems, Paper 33. AIS Electronic Library (2012)
6. Asfaw, T., Bada, A., Allario, F.: Enablers and challenges in using enterprise architecture con-
ceptstodrivetransformation:perspectivesfromprivateorganizationsandfederalgovernment
agencies. J. Enterpr. Architect. 5(3), 18–28 (2009)
7. Greefhorst, D., Proper, E.: Architecture Principles – The Cornerstones of Enterprise
Architecture. Springer, Heidelberg (2011). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-20279-7
8. Westerman, G., Calméjane, C., Bonnet, D., Ferraris, P., McAfee, A.: Digital Transformation:
ARoadmapforBillion-DollarOrganizations.MITCenterforDigitalBusinessandCapgemini
Consulting (2011)
9. Pittl, B., Bork, D.: Modeling digital enterprise ecosystems with ArchiMate: a mobility pro-
vision case study. ICServ 2017. LNCS, vol. 10371, pp. 178–189. Springer, Cham (2017).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-61240-9_17
10. Lankhorst, M.: Enterprise Architecture at Work: Modelling, Communication and Analysis,
2nd edn. Springer, Heidelberg (2009)
11. Winter, R., Townson, S., Labusch, N., Noack, J.: Enterprise architecture and transformation:
thedifferencesandthesynergypotentialofenterprisearchitectureandbusinesstransformation
management. In: Uhl, A., Gollenia, L.A. (eds.) Business Transformation Essentials: Case
Studies and Articles, pp. 219–231. Routledge (2013)
12. Stolterman, E., Fors, A.C.: Information technology and the good life. In: Kaplan, B., Truex,
D.P., Wastell, D., Wood-Harper, A.T., DeGross, J.I. (eds.) Information Systems Research.
IIFIP, vol. 143, pp. 687–692. Springer, Boston, MA (2004). https://doi.org/10.1007/1-4020-
8095-6_45
13. Fitzgerald, M., Kruschwitz, N., Bonnet, D., Welch, M.: Embracing digital technology: a new
strategic imperative. MIT Sloan Management Review, Research Report (2013)
14. Martin, A.: Digital Literacy for the Third Age: Sustaining Identity in an Uncertain World.
eLearning Papers, no. 12, p. 1 (2009)
2 The references of the 19 articles selected for the Systematic Literature Review can be found
in the online appendix at ResearchGate: https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.33596.18560.

--- PAGE 430 ---
426 M. Hafsi and S. Assar
15. Harmsen, F., Proper, H.A.E., Kok, N.: Informed governance of enterprise transformations.
In: Proper, E., Harmsen, F., Dietz, Jan L.G. (eds.) PRET 2009. LNBIP, vol. 28, pp. 155–180.
Springer, Heidelberg (2009). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-01859-6_9
16. Boh, W.F., Yellin, D.: Using enterprise architecture standards in managing information
technology. J. Manag. Inf. Syst. 23(3), 163–207 (2007)
17. Radeke, F.: Toward understanding enterprise architecture management’s role in strategic
change:antecedents,processes,outcomes.In:Wirtschaftinformatik,Paper62,Zuerich(2011)
18. Pulkkinen, M., Naumenko, A., Luostarinen, K.: Managing information security in a busi-
ness network of machinery maintenance services business - enterprise architecture as a
coordination tool. J. Syst. Softw. 80(10), 1607–1620 (2007)
19. Foorthuis, R., Van Steenbergen, M., Mushkudiani, N., Bruls, W., Brinkkemper, S., Bos, R.:
On course, but not there yet: enterprise architecture conformance and benefits in systems
development. In International Conference on IS (ICIS), Paper 110 (2010)
20. Lange, M., Mendling, J., Recker, J.: Realizing benefits from enterprise architecture: a
measurement model. In 20th European Conference on IS (ECIS), Paper 10 (2012)
21. van Gils, B., Proper, H.A.: Enterprise modelling in the age of digital transformation. In:
Buchmann,R.A.,Karagiannis,D.,Kirikova,M.(eds.)PoEM2018.LNBIP,vol.335,pp.257–
273. Springer, Cham (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-02302-7_16
22. Fayoumi, A.: Toward an adaptive enterprise modelling platform. In: Buchmann, R.A., Kara-
giannis, D., Kirikova, M. (eds.) PoEM 2018. LNBIP, vol. 335, pp. 362–371. Springer, Cham
(2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-02302-7_23
23. Winter, R., Labusch, N.: Towards a conceptualization of architectural support for enterprise
transformation. In: ECIS 2013. AIS Library (2013)
24. Kitchenham, B.: Guidelines for performing systematic literature reviews in software.
Technical Report EBSE-2007-01, UK, Keele University and University of Durham (2007)
25. Okoli, C.: A guide to conducting a standalone systematic literature review. Commun. AIS 37
(2015). https://doi.org/10.17705/1CAIS.03743
26. Ngai, E.W.T., Wat, F.K.T.: A literature review and classification of electronic commerce
research. Inf. Manag. 39(5), 415–429 (2002)
27. Nguyen-Duc,A.,Cruzes,D.S.,Conradi,R.:Theimpactofglobaldispersiononcoordination,
team performance and software quality: a systematic literature review. Inf. Softw. Technol.
57, 277–294 (2015)
28. Hauge, O., Ayala, C., Conradi, R.: Adoption of open source software in software intensive
organizations – a systematic literature review. Inf. Softw. Technol. 52(11), 1133–1154 (2010)
29. The Open Group: ArchiMate® 2.0 Specification. The Open Group, Berkshire, UK (2017)
30. Bernus, P., Noran, O.: A metamodel for enterprise architecture. In: Bernus, P., Doumeingts,
G., Fox, M. (eds.) EAI2N 2010. IAICT, vol. 326, pp. 56–65. Springer, Heidelberg (2010).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-15509-3_6
31. Chen,Z.,Pooley,R.:RequirementanalysisforenterpriseIS–developinganontologicalmeta-
model for Zackman framework. In: ICIS Proceedings, Paper 182. AIS Electronic Library
(2009)
32. DoD, Department of Defense: DoD Architecture Framework Version 2.02 (2012). https://
dodcio.defense.gov/Library/DoD-Architecture-Framework/dodaf20_dm2/. Accessed 05 Feb
2020
33. IEEE: IEEE Recommended Practice for Architectural Description of Software Intensive
Systems (IEEE Std 1471-2000), New York, NY (2000)
34. Rabiee, F.: Focus-group interview and data analysis. Proc. Nutr. Soc. 63, 655–660 (2004)
35. Rico, D.F.: Optimizing the ROI of enterprise architecture using real options. In: End User
Computing Challenges and Technologies: Emerging Tools and Applications, Information
Science Reference, Hershey, PA (2007)

--- PAGE 431 ---
Does Enterprise Architecture Support Customer Experience Improvement? 427
36. Forrester:Bankingofthefuture:howbankswillusedigitalcapabilitiestoremaincompetitive
(2019). https://www.forrester.com/webinar/Banking+Of+The+Future+How+Banks+Will+
Use+Digital+Capabilities+To+Remain+Competitive/-/E-WEB19183.Accessed05Feb2020
37. Gartner:HypeCycleforDigitalBankingTransformation(2019).https://www.gartner.com/en/
documents/3955840/hype-cycle-for-digital-banking-transformation-2019. Accessed 05 Feb
2020
38. Hafsi, M., Assar, S.: Does enterprise architecture support digital transformation endeav-
ors? Questionning the old concepts in light of new findings. In: Proceedings Mediterranean
Conference on Information Systems (MCIS) (2019)
39. Hafsi, M., Asaar, S.; What enterprise architecture can bring for digital transformation: an
exploratory study. In: IEEE 18th Conference on Business Informatics (2016)
40. Hafsi, M., Assar, S.: Managing strategy in digital transformation context: an exploratory
analysisofenterprisearchitecturemanagementsupport.In:IEEE21stConferenceonBusiness
Informatics (2019)

--- PAGE 432 ---
A Formal Basis for Business Model Evaluation
with Linguistic Summaries
(Work-in-Progress Paper)
Rick Gilsing, Anna Wilbik(B), Paul Grefen, Oktay Turetken, and Baris Ozkan
Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands
{R.A.M.Gilsing,A.M.Wilbik,P.W.P.J.Grefen,O.Turetken,
B.Ozkan}@tue.nl
Abstract. Given its essential role in understanding, explaining and structuring
digital innovation, we see the increased prevalence of the business model con-
cept as a unit of analysis in IS research. In contemporary, fast-paced markets,
business models are volatile in nature and should be continuously innovated to
accommodatenewcustomerneedsandtechnologydevelopments.Businessmodel
innovation can be considered as an iterative process to guide business models
from ideation towards implementation, in which the proper evaluation of business
model prototypes is essential. For this evaluation, we need normative guidance,
tools and rules to understand the relative performance of a new business model
design. In the early design phases, this implies dealing with high levels of uncer-
tainty. A few techniques and methods have been proposed for this purpose, but
these lack the formal basis required for systematical application and development
of automated evaluation tools. As a novel approach, we have earlier proposed the
application of linguistic summarization to support early-phase, soft-quantitative
business model evaluation. In this paper, we focus on a structural formalization
of this approach as the basis for the development of well-defined user guidelines
and automated evaluation tools. In doing so, we bridge the existing gap between
qualitative and quantitative business model evaluation. We demonstrate the for-
malization by means of a running case inspired by a real-world project in the
highly dynamic urban mobility domain.
Keywords: Business models · Business model evaluation · Linguistic
summarization · Formal model
1 Introduction
Factors such as digitization, globalization and rapid technology change cause evolution
of contemporary markets at an accelerated pace [1, 2]. Although these factors provide
organizations promising opportunities with respect to digital innovation and customer
engagement, organizations increasingly are forced to adapt their current business logic
to enable the adoption of new IT developments and the adherence to shifting customer
needs. It is therefore not surprising that we see the increased prevalence of the business
model concept in IS research [1, 3]. A business model describes the logic of how value
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. Nurcan et al. (Eds.): BPMDS 2020/EMMSAD 2020, LNBIP 387, pp. 428–442, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49418-6_29

--- PAGE 433 ---
A Formal Basis for Business Model Evaluation with Linguistic Summaries 429
is created and captured, the internal and external resources used to enable value creation
andtheorganizationalandtechnicalarchitecturedeployedtosupportthebusinessmodel
[4, 5]. Business models bridge the gap between business strategy [6] and operational
business process models [7] as they concretize strategy and provide the context for the
underlying process models. As such, given their pivotal role in business conceptualiza-
tionand their descriptive and explanatory power, they are often used as aunitof analysis
to understand the impact of IT or digital innovation and to structure its implementation
[1, 8].
Theadaptationorinnovationofbusinessmodelstoaccommodateorintegratedigital
innovation is a complex, non-linear design process and requires several iterative design
and evaluation tasks [9]. Normative guidance, technological rules and methodological
support can aid both research and practitioners in understanding or conducting business
model innovation [10]. Although tools and methods have been proposed in research to
support or guide business model design [11–13], limited support is present, particularly
from an engineering or methodological perspective, for the evaluation of business mod-
els [1, 14]. This issue is even more apparent for the early phases of business model
innovation, for which business model design decisions often are high-level in nature and
uncertain [15, 16], resulting in difficulties with respect to quantifying or even merely
assessing the potential risks and outcomes as a part of business model evaluation. As a
result, qualitative evaluation approaches are advocated to support early-phase business
model innovation [17]. Although qualitative techniques such as focus groups or expert
judgment are frequently used [18], these techniques are informal and lack structure to
be systematically applied. On the other hand, we see the use of performance criteria
or metrics as a more formalized approach to qualitative business model evaluation [19,
20]. However, these techniques lack methodological guidance on how these should be
catered to the specific characteristics of business model designs, and they often require
quantitative support to be effectively used.
As a novel technique, we have proposed the use of linguistic summarization as a
means to derive and specify ‘soft’ key performance indicators (SKPIs) that describe
performance characteristics of specific business model designs [21]. These SKPIs are
expressedinsoft-quantitativeterms,whichmakesthemsuitabletosupportearlybusiness
model evaluation, when ‘hard’quantitative data ona businessmodel isnotyet available.
So far, the technique has been proposed in an informal way. To support systematic
applicationandthedevelopmentoftoolingtowardsbusinessmodelevaluation,wemake
the next step in this paper: we focus on the formalization of the approach, linking
formal specification of business models and formal specification of the type of linguistic
summaries that we use (intentional linguistic summaries). On this basis, we show how
theformalmodelisabasisforthedevelopmentofsupportforourapproach.Accordingly,
the research question for this paper is as follows:
“How can the application of linguistic summarization to support soft-quantitative
business model evaluation be formalized and how can this formalization be
applied?”
Theanswertothisquestionhelpsbridgingthecurrentlyexistinggapbetweenthefully
qualitative evaluation business models (which relies heavily on intuition of designers)

--- PAGE 434 ---
430 R. Gilsing et al.
and the fully quantitative evaluation of business models (which requires far more data
than is typically available in the early stages of business model design). Bridging this
gap is of interest to both the business model research community and the design and use
of business models in business practice.
The remainder of this research-in-progress paper is structured as follows. In Sect. 2,
we discuss the research background on business models, business model evaluation and
linguistic summarization. Section 3 introduces the running example that we use for the
remainderofthispapertoillustratetheapplicationoflinguisticsummarization.Section4
details the formalization to our approach. We illustrate how formalization supports the
practical application of our method in Sect. 5 through ILSs with respect to the running
case. Section 6 concludes the paper, expressing the avenues for future work and the
outlook of our research.
2 Related Work
Inthissection,wedescriberelatedworkinthreefieldsofresearchthatformthebasisfor
our work: business model design, business model evaluation and linguistic summaries.
Business Model Design. Business models are increasingly used in IS research as a
means to explore how digital innovations or IT-enabled innovations may impact the
current business logic [1, 11]. Given its pivotal role between business strategy and
operational models [7], the concept of business model often serves as a bridge to sup-
port business-IT alignment. Many componentizations have been proposed to structure
the business model construct [22]. For instance, from an IS perspective, Hedman and
Kalling [3] componentize business models into levels related to the market or environ-
ment, the offerings of the business model, the architectural structure and the resource
deployed. Through detailing each level, organizations obtain a better understanding of
what business logic is followed, how resources can be integrated or deployed and how
this may influence or support customer offerings.
Severaltoolshavebeenproposedtoguidethedesignofbusinessmodels.Forinstance,
Osterwalder and Pigneur [11] propose the widely popular Business Model Canvas
(BMC), which represents a graphical template consisting of nine building blocks that
address various elements of business model design. The BMC takes an organization-
centric, resource-based perspective and focuses explicitly on customer-supplier inter-
actions and relationships. However, we see that as organizations increasingly transi-
tion towards service-orientation and collaborative networks [23–25], tooling towards
networked, service-dominant business model design is proposed. For instance, Zol-
nowski et al. [26] propose the Service Business Model Canvas, which adapts the origi-
nal BMC to accommodate the modelling of service business. Similarly, Grefen [27] and
Turetken et al. [12] describe and evaluate the Service-Dominant Business Model Radar
(SDBM/R), which through its circular template accommodates an explicitly networked
perspective of business model design.
Business Model Evaluation. Business model evaluation is an essential activity to sup-
port design decision making either to reduce uncertainty and risk with respect to a
business model design, to motivate the continuation of business model innovation or

--- PAGE 435 ---
A Formal Basis for Business Model Evaluation with Linguistic Summaries 431
to support the selection of a specific design configuration or alternative [15]. Busi-
ness model evaluation is argued to positively influence business model innovation [28].
Althoughsometoolsexistwithrespecttobusinessmodelevaluation,eitherqualitatively-
oriented [20, 29] or quantitatively-oriented [13, 30, 31], limited normative guidance has
been investigated for structuring business model evaluation, especially in the context of
businessmodelinnovation[1,32].Simmertetal.[14]proposeaprocess-oriented,multi-
step evaluation approach to support business model improvement. Although it provides
initial structure towards business model evaluation, the techniques used for evaluation
(focus groups and quality criteria) are informal and hence provide limited support for
detailed structure of application.
Linguistic Summaries. Linguistic summaries (LS) are statements with a specific for-
mat (template or protoform) that are used to describe data in brief natural language
constructs and that can be automatically generated [33]. LS allow to more easily com-
prehend a set of data [34]. Linguistic data summaries are quantified propositions with
two protoforms (or templates): a simple protoform, Q y’s are P, exemplified by “most
carsarenew”andanextendedprotoform,QRy’sareP,exemplifiedby“mostfast carsare
new”. Q is the linguistic quantifier, e.g. most. P is the summarizer, an attribute together
with a linguistic value, e.g. new car. R is an optional qualifier, another attribute together
with a linguistic value, which narrows down the scope of universe, e.g., fast car. Inten-
tionallinguisticsummaries(ILSs)[21]arequantifiedstatementswiththesamestructure
as linguistic summaries: Q y’s are P and Q Ry’s are P. The main difference is that ILSs
are not created from existing data, but capture intentions that the stakeholders want to
be true. In other words, they specify desired constraints over future data. We use this
construct to specify constraints over future effects of business models.
3 Running Example
We demonstrate the application of linguistic summarization to support business model
evaluation by means of an illustrative case study. The case concerns a business model
design that emerged from the urban mobility business domain as the result of a work-
shop with industry practitioners. The business model design was generated as an initial
solution to address challenges of increased traffic problems in the city of Amsterdam at
days when large public events (such as pop concerts or soccer matches) are organized
in the city [35]. As a result of these large events, which often start around peak hours,
a significant inflow of traffic users (event visitors that travel by car) is generated in
this period, causing many severe traffic jams. Therefore, the city explored together with
partners such as parking providers, event providers and road authority a collaborative
solution aimed at decreasing the negative traffic effects of these large events.
The solution that emerged from the workshop constituted a service platform that
enables event visitors to use their event ticket to receive free parking tickets at predeter-
mined arrival times. Receiving free parking tickets encourages event visitors to arrive at
thespecifiedtime,asparkingisexpensiveinAmsterdam.Thearrivaltimesconsequently
can be set in such a way that it balances the load to the road infrastructure. To offer the

--- PAGE 436 ---
432 R. Gilsing et al.
solution,theresourcesofpartnerssuchasplatformproviders,municipality,roadauthor-
ity, parking provider and event location and event providers were integrated. To further
stimulate the financial viability of the collaboration, retailers were involved as they may
significantly benefit from event visitors arriving early in the city. The SDBM/R tech-
nique was used as the tool for business model design [12, 27, 36]. The resulting business
model design to accommodate the solution is presented in Fig. 1. In this business model
radar (which we label TJFERC), we see the central value (value-in-use) of the business
model in the center of the radar and the involved customer (Large City) as one of the
eight involved business parties (the actors in the network) – each having one ‘slice’
of the radar, labeled in the outer ring. Apart from the customer, the orchestrator party
(Mobility Broker) and six other parties are present. A party can be a core party (i.e.,
essential for the functioning of the business model and operation of the offered service)
or an enriching party (i.e., bringing non-essential added value). The three rings around
the central value detail for each party (from the center outwards) the value that each
party contributes to the central value-in-use (its actor value proposition), the activities
it has to perform to create this value (value coproduction activities), and its costs and
benefits (both financial and non-financial). Note that each business model only has a
single value-in-use, which is construed from the set of actor value propositions. As a
consequence, to generate a different value-in-use, a different set of value propositions
would be needed (which in turn results in a different business model design).
Fig. 1. Business model design draft to address event induced traffic challenges in the inner-city.
Tosupporttheevaluationofthebusinessmodeldesign,wegenerateILSsperpartyof
the business model. ILSs represent operationalized, strategic preferences or summaries
perpartythatarespecificallycateredtothebusinessmodeldesign.Assuch,eachbusiness

--- PAGE 437 ---
A Formal Basis for Business Model Evaluation with Linguistic Summaries 433
model design, depending on its contents, may result in different ILSs. The ILSs serve
as the basis for communicating under what conditions a party is willing to participate in
the business model. By assessing whether the ILSs can be achieved, the viability of the
businessmodelcanbeevaluated[21].TheILSsarepresentedinapre-specifiedstructure
(named protoforms), as usual in research into linguistic summarization [34]. Although
the ILSs are initially soft-quantitative in nature, the structure of the summaries allows
the ILSs consequently to be further quantified through concrete membership functions
of the linguistic summaries [33, 34]. We will demonstrate the ILSs for this example in
Sect. 5.
4 Groundwork for the Formal Approach
In this section, we describe the groundwork for the formalization of our approach. We
do this by formalizing the two main elements of the approach: business model radars
(SDBM/R)andintentionallinguisticsummaries(ILS).InSect.5,weintegratethesetwo
formalizations to become the ‘formal spine’ of our business model evaluation approach.
4.1 Formalizing the SDBM/R Concept
To formalize the SDBM/R concept (which we call business model radar or BMR from
now on for easy readability), we identify that this concept has an overall structure that is
independent from the number of involved parties, and a structure per party. Hence, we
provide the formalization in two steps: the radar and the parties.
A business model radar (BMR) is a business model specification with the following
formal type and constraint:
BMR = name: L,value: ViU,cust: P,orch: P, parts: {part: P,core: BOOL}
parts = ∅
Here, name is the name of the business model from the set of labels L, value is the value
in use of the business model from the set of values-in-use ViU, cust is the customer from
the set of parties P, orch is the orchestrator party from P, and parts is the set of other
parties of type {P, BOOL}, i.e., a set of pairs of parties and an indication whether a
partyisacorepartyinthebusinessmodel.Thestructurestatesthatexactlyonecustomer
party is present and exactly one orchestrator party. The additional constraint specifies
that at least one other party must be present – this to make it a true networked business
model and not a dyadic relation.
A BMR instance b therefore has the following format:
b = l,viu, p1, p2,{p3,b3,··· ,pn,bn}n ≥ 3
A party is the specification of a role in a business model radar with the following type:
P = name: L,avalp: {AV P},acopa: {ACA},aben: {AB},acost: {AC}
avalp,acopa,aben,acost = ∅

--- PAGE 438 ---
434 R. Gilsing et al.
The set avalp contains the set of actor value propositions of a party (a party can have
more than one actor value proposition), acopa the set of actor coproduction activities
(a party can have more than one activity), aben the set of actor benefits, and accost the
set of actor costs. All of the four sets need to be non-empty for a business model to be
viable: each actor needs to contribute to the central value-in-use, each actor needs to
perform at least one activity to generate this contribution, and each actor needs to have
both benefits (its reason to participate in the business model) and costs (not to be a ‘free
rider’ to the other parties).
The above shows that this simple formalization already provides a nice set of cor-
rectness criteria for business models specified in the SDBM/R technique, which can
be automatically checked. These criteria are of a syntactical nature though and specify
nothing about the intended business effects of the business model. To enable this, we
use intentional linguistic summaries.
4.2 Formalizing the ILS Concept
To use it in the business model context, we operationalize the concept of intentional
linguisticsummary(ILS)intotheconceptofintentionalsoftquantifiedstatement (ISQS).
In general, an ISQS specifies a desired characteristic of a set of objects of a specific type
in a universe of discourse (UoD) in soft quantified terms. We first discuss the overall
formal structure of the ISQS concept. Then, we detail each of its components.
The set of ISQS QS has the following type (following the structure of a protoform
of linguistic summaries [33]):
QS = quant: QF,obj: {OB},oqual: {OQ},ochar: {OC}
Here, quant is a soft quantifier of type QF, obj is the set of quantified objects of type
OB,oqual isthesetofobjectqualifications(features)oftypeOQ,andochar isthesetof
object characteristics (features) of type OC. Object qualification oqual can be a feature
describing all objects in a UoD.
An ISQS instance qs therefore has the following format:
qs = qf,ob,oq,oc
In the above specification, QF is the enumerated set of soft quantifiers, which state the
intended fraction of the set of quantified objects. Usually relational quantifiers are used
(i.e., describing the proportion within the set), like most, indicating above 50%. Seldom,
absolute quantifiers (i.e., referring to the absolute object count) are used, e.g., around 5,
more than 7. An often used set of soft quantifiers is the following, and we will use it in
our work for soft quantification of business models:
QFou = {ALL, ALMOST ALL, MANY, SOME, FEW, ALMOST NONE, NONE}
We use only a part of the expressiveness of the linguistic summaries model to stay
pragmatic. Therefore, we define the elements of QFou to have a fuzzy ordinal relation
denoted with the fuzzy comparison operator :
ALL  ALMOST ALL  MANY  SOME  FEW  ALMOST NONE  NONE

--- PAGE 439 ---
A Formal Basis for Business Model Evaluation with Linguistic Summaries 435
The elements of QF indicate the desired proportion of a set, modelled using a fuzzy
set. An actual proportion of a subset may therefore satisfy two adjacent soft quantifiers,
where adjacent is defined by the fuzzy ordinal relation specified above.
The set of quantified objects OB is the powerset of objects in the UoD over which
we want to state soft quantifications:
OB = {{O ∈ UoD}}
Consequently, a set of quantified objects ob is a set of elements in the UoD:
ob = {o ∈ UoD}
A feature of an object is a tuple of type F that contains the feature label and the set of
linguistic value labels:
F =  f eatureLabel: FL,{linguisticValue: LV}
For instance
Linguistic value labels can be made precise and represented as fuzzy sets, with M as the
membership function:
M: OB × FL × LV → [0,1]
The membership functions do not have to be defined for intentional soft quantified
statements at the early design stage, allowing the linguistic value labels to have more
intuitive definition and meaning and be made more precise in later design stages.
The set of features of an object is given by the function ofeat that takes an object:
of eat: UoD → {F}
Everyfeatureisassociatedtoanenumeratedsetofpossiblevalues.Inprinciple,afeature
can possibly have multiple values with different membership values – but we abstract
from them. For example, we take object c ∈ Cars:
The set of object qualifications OQ consists of pairs of a feature label and a linguistic
value. More complex situations are allowed, where multiple feature labels and linguistic
values can be combined with conjunctions. For pragmatic reasons, we focus only on the
simple case in this work.
OQ: FL × LV
We have a function oqmem which for the sets of objects in the UoD and a feature
combined with a linguistic value identifies subsets of the UoD of which the elements
have the same type, plus a feature label and a feature value:
oqmem: OB × FL × LV → OB

--- PAGE 440 ---
436 R. Gilsing et al.
An object qualification oq is applied to a set of qualified objects to constrain this set to
a subset under consideration.
The last element in the ISQS structure is the set of object characteristics OC. OC
contains pairs of a feature label and a linguistic value, similar to OQ. In general case,
more complex expressions of feature labels and linguistics values are possible, but for
reasons of pragmatism, this is beyond scope of the current formalization.
OC: FL × LV
OC is intended predicate over QF objects resulting from oqmem.
With the above formalism, we can precisely describe an ISQS in a structured way
that is fit for tooling. To make things easier to interpret for humans, we can obviously
generate a textual representation of an ISQS, using the natural language format that
is typical for linguistic summaries. An ISQS instance qs1 = qf,ob,oq,oc can for
example be:
qs1 = MANY,Cars,color,red,speed, f ast
This can be textually represented as “MANY red cars ARE fast”. A simplified ISQS
instance qs2 = qf,ob,oq,oc can for example be:
qs2 = SOME,Cars,any F,all V,speed, f ast
In this case <any F, all V> is a feature describing all objects in a UoD. This can be
textually represented as “SOME cars ARE fast”.
5 Integration for Business Model Evaluation
In this section we discuss how we combine the formalisms of business model radars
and intentional linguistic summaries into an integrated formalism for the specification
ofsoft-quantifiedcharacteristicsofbusinessmodels.Wealsoshowillustrativeexamples
for the BMR example presented in Sect. 3.
To generate intentional linguistic summaries for specifying intentions of business
models,weuseISQStemplatesthatrepresenttypicalcharacteristicsofbusinessmodels.
The templates presented in this paper are important representatives of this class, but the
presented set is certainly not yet complete. For instance, we wish to expand this set such
thatitcoversallelementsofthebusinessmodeldesign.Moreover,weaimtoexplorewhat
operationelementsperISQSsuitbestunderwhatconditions.Asthispaperpresentswork
in progress, we aim to construct a complete set and test this in the real-world practice of
business model design and evaluation.
GivenaBMRinstanceb(followingthestructureintroducedintheprevioussection):
b = l,viu, p1, p2,{p3,b3,··· ,pn,bn}
we want to specify ISQS instances over this BMR instance and create a soft-quantified
BMR with the following type (which combines the two formalizations of the previous
section):
SQBMR = bmr: BMR,sq: {QS}

--- PAGE 441 ---
A Formal Basis for Business Model Evaluation with Linguistic Summaries 437
So in short, an instance s of the type SQBMR is a soft-quantified business model radar,
i.e., the next step after drafting a non-quantified BMR in the ideation process of creating
new business models. The set of soft quantifications sq attached to a business model b
contains a number of ISQSs that describe the desired soft-quantified behavior of b when
it will be executed in practice.
This formalization allows the precise specification of the nature of these ISQSs to
obtain a structured soft-quantification and to reason about the set of ISQSs. To do so, the
ISQSs are organized in categories that we describe in the subsections below in detail:
the customer with its value-in-use, its benefits and its costs, and the core parties with
characteristics that vary by the nature of the party. As the orchestrator essentially also
represents a core party, we can use the same templates for this role. For now, we do not
include characteristics of enriching (non-core) parties in the set of ISQSs for business
model evaluation, as these parties are not essential for the operation of the business
model. After we have described the categories of ISQSs, we present an initialdiscussion
on the soft-quantified intentional validity of business models.
5.1 Customer
Fromacustomer-orientedperspective,wecreateasetofISQStemplatesthatdescribethe
mostimportantaspectsofabusinessmodelforevaluationfromthecustomerperspective,
i.e., the value-in-use, the benefits and the costs. Note that based on this template the
respective stakeholder (in this case the customer) can select the objects that are most
appropriate to express its strategic goals or motivation to participate.
Value-in-Use. We create a soft quantification over the value-in-use for the set of cus-
tomers of a business model, stating that the majority of customers indeed receives this
value-in-use:
qs0 = qf, p1,any F,all V, f (viu)
with qf ∈ {ALL, ALMOST ALL, MOST}
Note that the value any F,all V for the object qualification function means that all
objects are included. f(viu) is a linguistic label for a feature of the value-in-use.
For the running example of Sect. 3, the value-in-use is traffic-jam free event rich
city. A feature of this value-in-use is the amount of traffic jams and their classification.
Traffic jams can be characterized by, e.g. three linguistic labels into three classes: heavy,
medium and small. In this case, the ISQS can be as follows:
qs0 = MOST,large city,any F,all V, f ew traf f ic − jams,heavy
which can be transformed to textual format for easy reading:
qs0: Most large cities have few heavy traffic-jams caused by the events.
where most is the quantifier (qf), large city is the customer (p1), and few traffic-jams
caused by the event is the feature label for the value-in-use, and heavy is its linguistic
label.

--- PAGE 442 ---
438 R. Gilsing et al.
Benefits. We create a soft quantification over the benefits for the customer, stating that
desired benefits occur often:
qs1a = qf, p1,any F,all V, f (p1.aben)
with qf ∈ {ALL, ALMOST ALL, MOST}
For the running example we use the above template to create the following ISQSs
describing the benefits of the customer (large city):
qs1a = MOST,large city,any F,all V,less traf f ic − jam,heavy
qs1a = MOST,large city,any F,all V,more events,big
qs1a = MOST,large city,any F,all V,image of city, positive
Those ISQSs can be represented in textual form as:
qs1a: Most large cities have less heavy traffic jams.
qs1a : Most large cities have more big events.
qs1a : Most large cities have positive image of the city.
Costs. We make a soft quantification over the costs for the customer, stating that
unacceptable costs do not occur often:
qs1b = qf, p1,any F,all V, f (p1.acost)
with qf ∈ {NONE, ALMOST NONE, FEW}
For the running example this can be the following ISQS
qs1b = NONE,largecity,any F,all V,monthly subsidy,large
and in textual format:
qs1b: None of the large cities is paying a large monthly subsidy.
Through use of the template, a customer consequently is able to translate strategic
motives into concrete, business model specific conditions to participate, which can be
used for evaluative purposes.
5.2 Core Parties
The core parties are essential for the functioning of a business model. Consequently,
we make soft quantifications over the costs/benefits for each core party, stating that an
acceptable cost/benefit ratio occurs often:
qsk = qf, pk,oq, f (pk.aben, pk.acost) f or 3 ≤ k ≤ n if bk
with qf ∈ {ALL, ALMOST ALL, MOST}

--- PAGE 443 ---
A Formal Basis for Business Model Evaluation with Linguistic Summaries 439
For the running example we have created a set of example statements. For the parking
provider an ISQS is:
qsk1 = 
MOST, parking provider,any F,all V,
parking planning,signif icantly improved
,
or in a textual format:
qsk1: Most parking providers have significantly improved planning on most events.
The retailer is mostly focused on the financial aspect, therefore a good ISQS is:
qsk2: All retailers make an acceptable profit on most events.
For the visitor the concert experience and memories are the most important, leading us
to the following ISQS:
qsk3: Most visitors have a very high concert satisfaction.
For the event organizers and the event location providers the focus is also on customer
satisfaction:
qsk4:Alleventorganizers(locationproviders)haveahighcustomersatisfactiononmost
events.
Again, each stakeholder can change the set of objects of the introduced templates to
generate ISQSs that express its strategic motives or goals. Please note that in the sum-
maries presented above, the focus is on the stakeholder, e.g., the summaries describe the
retailers, visitors and event organizers. A different set of summaries can be obtained, if
weputtheoperation,inthiscaseanevent,inthefocusoflinguisticsummaries.Currently
we are working on normative guidance towards what level of the operation should be
used as focus of the linguistic summaries, given the preferences of stakeholders and the
context of the BMR.
GivenalltheaboveingredientsfortheformalrepresentationofexamplefromSect.3,
we can specify the soft-quantified business model:
sqbmtjf erc = T JFERC,{qs0,qs1a,qs1a ,qs1a ,qs1b,qsk1,qsk2,qsk3,qsk4}
5.3 Soft-Quantified Intentional Validity of Business Models
Once an initialbusinessmodel design isgenerated, the ISQSs can be compared amongst
stakeholders or domain experts who can judge whether these statements are acceptable
and achievable. This can be used using the linguistic value scale <not feasible, rather
not feasible, not sure, rather feasible, feasible>.
Toallowforautomatedreasoningaboutthevalidityofsoft-quantifiedbusinessmod-
els, we can formalize this as well. Formally, a business model is intentionally valid

--- PAGE 444 ---
440 R. Gilsing et al.
from a soft-quantified perspective if all ISQSs for that BMR are above the fuzzy ‘truth
value’ T ∈ M, where T can be chosen depending on the ‘strictness’ of business model
evaluation:
FValid(b) ⇔ ((Truth(qso) > T) ∧ (Truth(qs1a) > T) ∧ (Truth(qs1b) > T)
∧ (Truth(qs3) > T) ∧ ··· ∧ (Truth(qsn) > T))
If we define FValid in terms of a complete SQBMR instance sqb, we get:
FValid(sqb) ⇔ (∀s ∈ sqb.sq)(Truth(s))
If for example, all the statements we have generated are evaluated as at least “rather
feasible”, the model is judged to be valid for all stakeholders. For instance, if by means
of collaborative discussions, all stakeholders determine that the linguistic summary “all
retailers makes an acceptable profit on most events” is rather feasible, the business
model design for the retailer is considered feasible. If all generated linguistic summaries
are feasible, the business model design can progress to the next phase (integration), in
which the design is further concretized and quantified in a more traditional way.
6 Conclusions and Outlook
As markets evolve at an accelerated pace, we see that contemporary organizations
increasingly are required to adapt their business logic in order to adhere to shifting
customer needs and to support new business activities through the inclusion of digital
innovations. The consequently increased prevalence of the business model concept as
a unit of analysis to support IT implementation and to understand its impact or impli-
cations for business strategy [3, 8] calls for structured approaches for business model
evaluation. To assess the market potential of business models in early design stages,
existing strictly qualitative approaches for evaluation need to be complemented with
approaches that bridge the gap towards traditional, strictly quantitative approaches (e.g.,
from business economics).
To bridge this gap, we have focused in this paper on the formalization of the appli-
cation of linguistic summarization as a method to support business model evaluation.
Linguistic summarization facilitates users to derive ILSs, which capture the strategic
preferences or KPIs of stakeholders without a need to specify or quantify these KPIs to
a large extent. The formalization builds upon the groundwork that we have established
in Wilbik et al. [21] which elaborates on how the method is used. The formalization
consisted of two parts, namely formalizing a business model representation (to which
we used the SDBM/R [12]) and formalizing the generation of ILSs [21] in ISQS format.
We have integrated and combined these formalizations to illustrate how, in a systematic
way, ILSs can be generated on the basis of a service-dominant business model design.
We demonstrate the formalization by means of a set of examples and show how these
may contribute towards support for business model evaluation.
As an outlook to the approach presented in this paper, we aim to further develop
the set of ISQSs that can be developed per application. This includes finalizing the set
of ISQS templates that can be generated, such that all business model elements can be

--- PAGE 445 ---
A Formal Basis for Business Model Evaluation with Linguistic Summaries 441
expressedbymeansofISQSs,aswellasprovidingruleswithrespecttothegenerationof
ISQSs.Currently,analmostinfinitesetofISQSscanbegeneratedperpartyinabusiness
model, which may inhibit the usability and interpretability of the outcomes. Therefore,
we will assess which ISQS templates should be generated under which circumstances,
or how the strategic preferences of a stakeholder can be captured through a limited set
of ISQSs. Moreover, we also aim to validate our method further to understand the initial
usability, usefulness and ease-of-use of the proposed method.
Future research will build upon this formalization. One promising approach is to use
the formalization as a basis for developing automated tooling for business model evalu-
ation. The formalisms presented in this paper can rather straightforwardly be translated
into a data model and a rule base for such a tool. A second approach is the development
of a directive on how different evaluation methods can be formalized to accommodate
business model evaluation.
References
1. Veit, D., et al.: Business models. Bus. Inf. Syst. Eng. 6(1), 45–53 (2014)
2. Gambardella, A., Mcgahan, A.: Business-model innovation: general purpose technologies
and their implications for industry structure. Long Range Plann. 43, 262–271 (2010)
3. Hedman,J.,Kalling,T.:Thebusinessmodelconcept:theoreticalunderpinningsandempirical
illustrations. Eur. J. Inf. Syst. 12(1), 49–59 (2003)
4. Al-Debei, M., Avison, D.: Developing a unified framework of the business model concept.
Eur. J. Inf. Syst. 19(3), 359–376 (2010)
5. Zott,C.,Amit,R.:Businessmodeldesign:anactivitysystemperspective.LongRangePlann.
43(2–3), 216–226 (2010)
6. Shafer, S., Smith, J., Linder, J.: The power of business models. Bus. Horiz. 48, 199–207
(2005)
7. Al-Debei, M., El-Haddadeh, R., Avison, D.: Defining the business model in the new world
of digital business. In: AMCIS 2008 Proceedings (2008)
8. Teece,D.:Businessmodels,businessstrategyandinnovation.LongRangePlann.43,172–194
(2010)
9. Sosna, M., Trevinyo-Rodriguez, R., Velamuri, S.: Business model innovation through trial-
and-error learning: the naturhouse case. Long Range Plann. 43(2–3), 383–407 (2010)
10. Bucherer, E., Eisert, U., Gassmann, O.: Towards systematic business model innovation:
lessons from product innovation management. Creat. Innov. Manag. 21(2), 183–198 (2012)
11. Osterwalder,A.,Pigneur,Y.:BusinessModelGeneration:AHandbookforVisionaries,Game
Changers, and Challengers. Wiley, Hoboken (2010)
12. Turetken, O., Grefen, P., Gilsing, R., Adali, O.: Service-dominant business model design for
digital innovation in smart mobility. Bus. Inf. Syst. Eng. 61(1), 9–29 (2019)
13. Gordijn, J., Akkermans, H.: Designing and evaluating E-business models. IEEE Intell. Syst.
Appl. 16(4), 11–17 (2001)
14. Simmert, B., Ebel, P., Peters, C., Bittner, E., Leimeister, J.: Conquering the challenge of
continuous business model improvement. Bus. Inf. Syst. Eng. 61(4), 451–468 (2019)
15. McGrath, R.: Business models: a discovery driven approach. Long Range Plann. 43(2–3),
247–261 (2010)
16. Zott, C., Amit, R.: Business model innovation: toward a process perspective, pp. 395–406
(2015)

--- PAGE 446 ---
442 R. Gilsing et al.
17. Tesch,J.,Brillinger,A.:Theevaluationaspectofdigitalbusinessmodelinnovation:aliterature
review on tools and methodologies. In: 25th European Conference on Information Systems,
pp. 2250–2268 (2017)
18. Bocken, N.M.P., Antikainen, M.: Circular business model experimentation: concept and
approaches.In:Dao,D.,Howlett,R.J.,Setchi,R.,Vlacic,L.(eds.)KES-SDM2018.SIST,vol.
130, pp. 239–250. Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-04290-5_25
19. Heikkila,M.,Bouwman,H.,Heikkila,J.,Solaimani,S.,Janssen,W.:Businessmodelmetrics:
an open repository. Inf. Syst. E-bus. Manag. 14(2), 337–366 (2016)
20. Diaz-Diaz, R., Muñoz, L., Pérez-González, D.: The business model evaluation tool for smart
cities: application to SmartSantander use cases. Energies 10(3), 262 (2017)
21. Wilbik, A., Gilsing, R., Grefen, P., Turetken, O., Ozkan, B.: Intentional linguistic summaries
for collaborative business model radars. In: WCCI (2020)
22. DaSilva, C., Trkman, P.: Business model: what it is and what it is not. Long Range Plann.
47(6), 379–389 (2014)
23. Kindström, D.: Towards a service-based business model – key aspects for future competitive
advantage. Eur. Manag. J. 28(6), 479–490 (2010)
24. Gebauer, H., Fleisch, E., Friedli, T.: Overcoming the service paradox in manufacturing
companies. Eur. Manag. J. 23(1), 14–26 (2005)
25. Grefen, P., Turetken, O.: Achieving business process agility through service engineering in
extended business networks. In: BPTrends (2018)
26. Zolnowski,A.,Weiß,C.,Böhmann,T.:Representingservicebusinessmodelswiththeservice
business model canvas - the case of a mobile payment service in the retail industry. In: 47th
Hawaii International Conference on System Science, pp. 718–727 (2014)
27. Grefen, P.: Service-Dominant Business Engineering with BASE/X: Business Modeling
Handbook. Amazon CreateSpace (2015)
28. Schrauder, S., Kock, A., Baccarella, C., Voigt, K.: Takin’ care of business models: the impact
of business model evaluation on front-end success. J. Prod. Innov. Manag. 35(3), 410–426
(2018)
29. Mateu, J., March-Chorda, I.: Searching for better business models assessment methods.
Manag. Decis. 54(10), 2433–2446 (2016)
30. Moellers, T., Von der Burg, L., Bansemir, B., Pretzl, M., Gassmann, O.: System dynamics for
corporatebusinessmodelinnovation.Electron.Mark.29,387–406(2019).https://doi.org/10.
1007/s12525-019-00329-y
31. Daas, D., Hurkmans, T., Overbeek, S., Bouwman, H.: Developing a decision support sys-
tem for business model design. Electron. Mark. 23, 251–265 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12525-012-0115-1
32. Schoormann,T.,Kaufhold,A.,Behrens,D.,Knackstedt,R.:Towardsatypologyofapproaches
forsustainability-orientedbusinessmodelevaluation.In:Abramowicz,W.,Paschke,A.(eds.)
BIS 2018. LNBIP, vol. 320, pp. 58–70. Springer, Cham (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-319-93931-5_5
33. Yager, R.R.: A new approach to the summarization of data. Inf. Sci. 28(1), 69–86 (1982)
34. Kacprzyk, J., Zadrożny, S.: Linguistic database summaries and their protoforms: towards
natural language based knowledge discovery tools. Inf. Sci. 173(4), 281–304 (2005)
35. Grefen,P.,Turetken,O.,Traganos,K.,denHollander,A.,Eshuis,R.:Creatingagilityintraffic
management by collaborative service-dominant business engineering. In: Camarinha-Matos,
L.M., Bénaben, F., Picard, W. (eds.) PRO-VE 2015. IAICT, vol. 463, pp. 100–109. Springer,
Cham (2015). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-24141-8_9
36. Gilsing,R.,Turetken,O.,Adali,O.E.,Grefen,P.:Areferencemodelforthedesignofservice-
dominant business models in the smart mobility domain. In: International Conference on
Information Systems (2018)

--- PAGE 447 ---
Author Index
Adali, O. Ege 227
Amme, Wolfram 193
Andree, Kerstin 20
Andrews, Kevin 3
Andritsos, Periklis 150
Assar, Saïd 411
Bala, Saimir 135
Bayomie, Dina 185
Bernard, Gaël 150
Bianchini, Devis 70
Bork, Dominik 359, 395
Brin, Pavlo 209
Brinkkemper, Sjaak 375
Cabot, Jordi 257
Cuellar, Jorge 85
Cysneiros, Luiz Marcio 335
Dalpiaz, Fabiano 375
Daniel, Gwendal 257
de Lara, Juan 257
De Vries, Marné 359
Di Ciccio, Claudio 36
Djurica, Djordje 135
do Prado Leite, Julio Cesar Sampaio 335
dos Reis, Julio Cesar 101
Doyran, Metehan 375
Dumas, Marlon 166
Eder, Johann 117
Elkoumy, Gamal 166
Fahrenkrog-Petersen, Stephan A. 166
Franceschetti, Marco 117
Gilsing, Rick 227, 428
Grabis, Jānis 300
Gray, Thomas 359
Grefen, Paul 227, 428
Gross, Steven 185
Guerra, Esther 257
Hafsi, Mouaad 411
Hasselman, Björn 327
Heinze, Thomas S. 193
Heloisa Thom, Lucineia 209
Henkel, Martin 269
Ihde, Sven 20
Kasinathan, Prabhakaran 85
Kocbek Bule, Mateja 209
Koopman, Ashley 55
Koutsopoulos, Georgios 269
Laud, Peeter 166
Leotta, Francesco 70
Lubas, Josef 117
Lukyanenko, Roman 345
Mecella, Massimo 70
Mendling, Jan 135, 185
Meroni, Giovanni 36
Molenaar, Sabine 375
Montecchi, Leonardo 101
Ozkan, Baris 227, 428
Pankova, Alisa 166
Paolini, Paolo 70
Pérez-Soler, Sara 257
Pernici, Barbara 70
Plebani, Pierluigi 36
Polančič, Gregor 209
Pufahl, Luise 20
Rademacher, Florian 311
Reichert, Manfred 3
Roelens, Ben 395
Rooein, Donya 70
Rubira, Cecília Mary Fischer 101
Ruiz, Marcela 327
Sachweh, Sabine 311
Salah, Albert Ali 375
Sandkuhl, Kurt 284

--- PAGE 448 ---
Schiphorst, Laura 375
Schmerl, Bradley 101
Seymour, Lisa F. 55
Shumaiev, Klym 85
Singh, P. M. 242
Sosa, Encarna 209
Stahnke, Susanne 85
Stefanko, Viktor 193
Steinau, Sebastian 3
Stirna, Janis 269, 284
Türetken, Oktay 227
Turetken, Oktay 428
van Woensel, T. 242
Veelenturf, L. P. 242
Venero, Sheila Katherine 101
Vidgof, Maxim 135
Weidlich, Matthias 166
Wilbik, Anna 428
Yeshchenko, Anton 185
Zündorf, Albert 311
444 Author Index