--- PAGE 1 ---
ScienceDirect
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Procedia Computer Science 234 (2024) 1561–1569
1877-0509 © 2023 TheAuthors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the Seventh Information Systems International Conference
10.1016/j.procs.2024.03.158
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
Procedia Computer Science 00 (2023) 000–000
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia
1877-0509 © 2023 The Authors. Published by ELSEVIER B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the Seventh Information Systems International Conference.
Seventh Information Systems International Conference (ISICO 2023)
Assessing the Digital Transformation Landscapes of Organization:
The Digital Transformation Self-Assessment Maturity Model (DX-
SAMM)
Tining Haryantia,b
, Nur Aini Rakhmawatia
*, Apol Pribadi Subriadia
a
Information System, Faculty of Intelligent Electrical and Informatics Technoloy (F-Electics), Institut Teknologi Sepuluh Nopember, Surabaya
60111, Indonesia
b
Informatics Department, Faculty of Engineering, Universitas Muhammadiyah Surabaya, Surabaya 60113, Indonesia
Abstract
The increasing digitalization of business and society has brought major changes for organizations to transform in an effort to
maintain their sustainability. Adaptation to technological developments that impact various adjustments to strategies, business
processes, and organizational structures has become an integral part of being able to transformation. This transformation effort is
accompanied by monitoring and evaluation to ensure conformity of the transformation with digital transformation maturity level
standards. This study proposes an independent digital maturity measurement model (DX-SAMM Digital Transformation Self-
Assessment Maturity Model) that allows companies to classify their achievement of digital maturity. The expansion of existing
digital maturity measurement models to include multidimensional engagement that dominates Digital Transformation is the focus
of the research objectives. Overall, seven dimensions and twenty-one sub-dimensions were defined to measure the maturity level
of digital transformation in organizations. This digital maturity measurement application considers various dimensions related to
Digital Transformation, namely Strategy, Organizational Structure, Technology, Employees, Customers, Business Processes, and
Culture. The Digital Transformation maturity level standard used adopts SPICE. It is part of the ISO/IEC 3300XX family of
standards, which specifically serves as a maturity reference for established structures. Case studies as empirical tests of model
implementation are presented in this study.
© 2023 The Authors. Published by ELSEVIER B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the Seventh Information Systems International Conference.
Keywords: Digital Transformation; Digitalization; Maturity Model; Maturity Level
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: nur.aini@is.its.ac.id
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
Procedia Computer Science 00 (2023) 000–000
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia
1877-0509 © 2023 The Authors. Published by ELSEVIER B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the Seventh Information Systems International Conference.
Seventh Information Systems International Conference (ISICO 2023)
Assessing the Digital Transformation Landscapes of Organization:
The Digital Transformation Self-Assessment Maturity Model (DX-
SAMM)
Tining Haryantia,b
, Nur Aini Rakhmawatia
*, Apol Pribadi Subriadia
a
Information System, Faculty of Intelligent Electrical and Informatics Technoloy (F-Electics), Institut Teknologi Sepuluh Nopember, Surabaya
60111, Indonesia
b
Informatics Department, Faculty of Engineering, Universitas Muhammadiyah Surabaya, Surabaya 60113, Indonesia
Abstract
The increasing digitalization of business and society has brought major changes for organizations to transform in an effort to
maintain their sustainability. Adaptation to technological developments that impact various adjustments to strategies, business
processes, and organizational structures has become an integral part of being able to transformation. This transformation effort is
accompanied by monitoring and evaluation to ensure conformity of the transformation with digital transformation maturity level
standards. This study proposes an independent digital maturity measurement model (DX-SAMM Digital Transformation Self-
Assessment Maturity Model) that allows companies to classify their achievement of digital maturity. The expansion of existing
digital maturity measurement models to include multidimensional engagement that dominates Digital Transformation is the focus
of the research objectives. Overall, seven dimensions and twenty-one sub-dimensions were defined to measure the maturity level
of digital transformation in organizations. This digital maturity measurement application considers various dimensions related to
Digital Transformation, namely Strategy, Organizational Structure, Technology, Employees, Customers, Business Processes, and
Culture. The Digital Transformation maturity level standard used adopts SPICE. It is part of the ISO/IEC 3300XX family of
standards, which specifically serves as a maturity reference for established structures. Case studies as empirical tests of model
implementation are presented in this study.
© 2023 The Authors. Published by ELSEVIER B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the Seventh Information Systems International Conference.
Keywords: Digital Transformation; Digitalization; Maturity Model; Maturity Level
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: nur.aini@is.its.ac.id
© 2023 TheAuthors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the Seventh Information Systems International Conference

--- PAGE 2 ---
1562 Tining Haryanti et al. / Procedia Computer Science 234 (2024) 1561–1569
2 Tining Haryanti et.al. / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2023) 000–000
1. Introduction
Companies face major challenges due to technological, social, economic, and societal development.
Transformation, as a form of response and adaptation to immediate changes, is required to maintain sustainability.
Technology has developed significantly since Industrial Revolution 4.0. Although it brings great opportunities,
disruptive challenges are inevitable, such as artificial intelligence, intelligence of things, and automation of various
activities. Companies must be able to transform digitally. Digital Transformation (DX)[1]–[3] itself, as a form of
continuous transformation, is complex and plays an important role in shaping the organization’s future [4].
DX is becoming increasingly complex and involves various aspects[5]. A comprehensive viewpoint is
required to embrace DX, which includes heterogeneous and complex processes with various dimensions[6],
[7]. Therefore, over the coming time, both academics and practitioners will continue to strive to improve the efficiency
of digital transformation accordingly through various digital integrations and consequent intelligence at both
horizontal and vertical levels in organizations. On the other hand, organizations need to identify the state of
development of digital transformation that has been carried out to link the transformation carried out with their
strategy. Digital transformation involves various dimensions, methods, and tools that adopt related dimensions to
digital transformation. The research question posed is: What are the holistic dimensions that support digital
transformation, and how can their maturity be measured. In this study, a digital maturity model called the Digital
Transformation Self-Assessment Maturity Model (DX-SAMM) was used. DX-SAMM is used to systematically assess
the state of development of an organization's digital transformation in relation to its maturity level of digital
transformation. The digital maturity measurement involves management levels that understand the strategy and
implementation of digital transformation within an organization. The development of this maturity model has both
scientific and practical objectives. The scientific goal is to obtain precise data on the current state of an organization's
digital transformation and DX achievement strategy. A holistic understanding of the supporting dimensions of Digital
Transformation is needed to fill the reference gap in digital maturity across domains. The practical goal is to enable
organizations to monitor and rigorously evaluate their own digital maturity. Finally, digital maturity measurements
can be used as a guide for developing future strategies. The structure of this paper includes, the first chapter discusses
the Background, continued the discussion of Analysis of the use of the Maturity Index level, Calculation of the
Maturity Index assessment score, Demonstrate Artifact, Evaluate Artifact and the implementation of the Digital
Maturity Model Dashboard in several industry sectors and ends with a conclusion[8]
2. State of the arts of digital maturity models
Digital Transformation in various sectors has experienced unstoppable developments. Various organizations
respond to digital transformation by adopting changes in their business processes to compete and survive. Digital
maturity monitoring is part of a guide to determine the level of achievement of digital transformation that has been
carried out. This also helps organizations formulate strategies in the future. The digital maturity model is often
interpreted as an instrument for measuring and conceptualizing organizational readiness under certain conditions and
targets. These digital maturity states are identical in capturing the initial conditions that initialize later development.
Digital maturity is defined as measuring achievement in a desired future state. Digital transformation is growing
rapidly and massively and will continue to be interesting in the future. Researchers and practitioners have conducted
extensive research on digital transformation and maturity measurement models. However, these maturity models have
diverse dimensions and cannot generally be applied to various sectors. Meanwhile, according to Gokalp and Martinez
[4] and Ozkar and Demiror [9] in their work, the maturity model should have standard characteristics that can be
widely applied in various sectors. Some of the pre-existing digital maturity models are presented in table 1
[1][2][3][4][9]
The DX-CMM is a digital maturity model that can be used for a variety of sectors, but measurement tools or
applications that can be easily used by organizations are still unavailable. Impulse comprehensively and in detail
describes the dimensions, items, and value approaches. The impulse also has web-based tools that organizations can
easilyusetomeasuredigitalmaturity. However,thismaturitymodelislimitedtothemanufacturingdomainandcannot
be used in other domains. Bandara et al. (2019) [11] applied the level of digital maturity specifically to banking. In

--- PAGE 3 ---
Tining Haryanti et al. / Procedia Computer Science 234 (2024) 1561–1569 1563
Tining Haryanti et.al. / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2023) 000–000 3
addition to being applied to specific domains, this model is not equipped with maturity measurement tools that can be
directly accessed by users.
Table 1. Previous research
Model Name Digital Maturity Assessment Source
The DX-CMM, 2021 DX measurement dimensions: Capability and Process; Maturity level in the range of 0-
incomplete to 5-iinovating; used for all sectors; can be used independently; There is no
digital maturity measurement device / application yet
[4]
Industry 4.0 Maturity
Model, 2016
Dimensions used: customer, strategy, technology, operations, culture, people and the
organization; Maturity level in the range of 1-Initiating to 5-Leading; manufacturing
sector, requires a third party to use it
[8]
Digital Maturity Model,
2020
Dimensions used: culture, customer, people, strategy, operations, technology, and the
organization; Maturity level in the range of 1-Initiating to 5-Leading; can be used in
various sectors, requires a third party to use it
[10]
A model for assessing the
maturity of Industry 4.0 in
the banking sector, 2019
Dimensions used: Products and services, Governance, Technology and Resources,
Operations, Strategy and organization, Employees; Maturity level in the range of 1-
Initiating to 5-Digital Oriented; specifically for banking; require a third party to use it
[11]
Deloitte's digital maturity
model, 2018
Dimensions used: customer, strategy, culture, people, structure, tasks; can be used in
various sectors, requires a third party to use it
[12]
Dreamy, 2017 Dimensions used: Organization, Process, Technology, Monitoring and Control;
Maturity level in the range of 1-Initiating to 5-Digital Oriented; specifically for
banking; require a third party to use it
[13]
Impulse, 2015 Dimensions used: strategy and organization, smart operations, smart factory,
employees, smart products, data-driven services; Maturity level in the range of 1-Top
performer to 5-Insider; manufacturing, requires a third party to use it, tools available
[14]
Meanwhile, organizations need digital maturity monitoring as a guide to determine future strategies. Self-
monitoring of digital maturity makes it easier for organizations to evaluate the achievement of digital maturity
whenever needed. While various maturity models already exist, not all can be used independently by the organization
(requiring a third party). In addition, existing maturity models measure digital maturity more specifically. Therefore,
this study proposes a form of expansion of digital maturity measurement models and tools, focusing on a
multidimensional approach that can be utilized for general use. This measurement model is then equipped with digital
maturity measurement tools that can be independently utilized through website-based digital maturity measurement
services [4][9][10][11][14] [15] .
3. Methodology
This study proposes the development of a digital maturity model to independently determine the maturity level of
digital transformation in organizations. The method used to develop the digital maturity model adopted Becker’s
approach [17]. This approach focuses on a maturity model with a strong theoretical foundation. The maturity
measurement devices developed in this study use the design science approach proposed by Hevner [16]. Based on the
Becker [17] procedure, model development is carried out using multiple methodologies, such as a systematic literature
review and conceptual validation of the model and its testing. In this study, the development process was divided into
several stages. The first stagewas an understanding of the domain of digital maturity, and interviews with practitioners
and researchers were conducted to help determine the problems and needs of digital maturity measurements. The next
step was to conduct a literature review. The literature study was conducted using the keywords’ digital maturity’ and’
digital transformation’ from various reputable scientific studies. This literature review produced dozens of models
with hundreds of dimensions of digital transformation [16] [17].
The results of the literature review were revalidated in relation to the relevance and suitability of the dimensions,
resulting in 44 digital maturity models. This maturity model is considered for further analysis because it offers a
relevant framework within which the maturity level assessment has been practically tested. From this work, relevant

--- PAGE 4 ---
1564 Tining Haryanti et al. / Procedia Computer Science 234 (2024) 1561–1569
4 Tining Haryanti et.al. / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2023) 000–000
concepts were obtained for the structure of the digital maturity development model offered in this study, such as the
maturitylevel.Ingeneral,therearefivematuritylevels,rangingfromoneaslowestmaturitytofiveashighestmaturity.
Table 2. DX-SAMM Dimensions and Sub Dimensions
Dimension Information Sub Dimensions
Organization
and Structure
The structure of the organization consists of internal organization and dynamic
network collaboration. Organization can be defined as an input to DX.
Management's readiness to change is needed in achieving digital maturity. Another
requirement is continuous learning and restructuring of the organization's business
processes in order to prepare for transformation.
Organizational Structure
Management,
Organization Change
Management, Sustainable
Learning Management
Technology Technology represents the ability to effectively plan, deploy, and integrate
technology to support digital business.
Information System,
Infrastructure, Security
Management,
Strategy Strategy plays an important role in providing input to the organization in shaping
organizational readiness to transform. He leads the vision, roadmap, and inspires
how existing technology can create value in the future.
Strategy Development,
Financial Analysis,
Portfolio Management
Customer Customer involvement in interacting with the organization's digital services provides
an experience for customers. An easy user interface is required to support this
activity. Good customer experience in interacting increases customer trust in the
organization's services.[18]
Customer Engagement,
Customer Experience,
Customer Trust
Employee The ease of adaptation of the organization to various changes is supported by
continuous learning activities and change management. In addition, the willingness
to learn allows for a better process of organizational adaptation.[10]
Awareness, Skills,
Continuous learning
Culture Technology does not add value to an organization until it has a culture in which
employees trust the system, known and readily accept it[19][20], [21] .
Social Collaboration,
Willingness to Change
Business
Process
ProcessTransformation describestheextentto which processesareintegrated through
technology forefficiency.Theintegration referred to attheinternal and externallevels
of organizational and business digitization processes. External integration consists of
electronic data exchange with partners.[4][22][23][24][25][26]
Business Process
Digitalization, Business
proses Vertical
Integration, Business
Proses Horizontal
Integration.
The assessment form uses assessments of several dimensions. Assessments are performed independently or by a
third party, and the models are visualized in numbers or graphs. All validated models were rechecked to ensure the
completeness and suitability of the dimensions. A comparative analysis of the digital maturity model was carried out
to identify the dimensions of success of Digital Transformation, which were then evaluated for their application to the
proposed digital maturity development model. The intended comparative analysis involved comparing the similarities
of dimensions and sub-dimensions among 44 previously validated models of digital maturity [3]. The dimensions
consistently present in these models were grouped together and proposed as the dimensions of digital maturity
measurement in this study. The dimensions obtained from the comparative study were then mapped into a
questionnaire format on the digital maturity measurement tool (https://bit.ly/Questionnaire_Example). The next stage
is to visualize the model as a practical tool that can be used to measure digital maturity. The proposed model is
visualized in the form of an artifact, a digital maturity measurement application that can be accessed independently.
Construction of this artifact using a design science research approach. The model validation phase used a case study
approach. Case studies are a design evaluation approach that can be used to validate the models. In the end, a case
study of a transport company is proposed to test the implementation of the development of a digital maturity model
[3] [9][15][16]. A case study of a financial company is proposed to test the implementation of digital maturity model
development. The financial company was chosen because it is currently striving to undergo digital transformation.
With over 200 employees and various branches, an assessment of the maturity of the transformation is required.
Therefore, this company was also used to evaluate the success of the proposed digital transformation measurement
tool. The questionnaire on digital maturity measurement was filled out by employees at the management level.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Tining Haryanti et al. / Procedia Computer Science 234 (2024) 1561–1569 1565
Tining Haryanti et.al. / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2023) 000–000 5
4. Digital Maturity Measurement (DX-SAMM Digital Transformation – Self Assessment Maturity Model)
This study proposes the development of a digital maturity model that considers multidimensional involvement to
facilitate the monitoring of digital maturity in organizations. Based on the literature review and the Comparative
Analysis Technique described in the previous chapter, a distribution of seven dimensions and 21 sub-dimensions
supporting the success of digital transformation was obtained. These dimensions and subdimensions were
subsequently proposed for inclusion in the development of a digital maturity model, referred to as the Digital
Transformation – Self Assessment Model (DX-SAMM), in this research. This model is intended to measure digital
maturity in organizations in a general sense [4]. Table 2 presents a general explanation of the proposed dimensions
and their accompanying subdimensions. The maturity level used in this study was adopted from the maturity level of
SPICE. It is part of the ISO/IEC 3300XX family of standards and is widely used as a reference model for maturity. In
addition, SPICE has been widely adopted for maturity measurement in various domains such as organizational agility
measurement, automotive, governance, and cross-domains. The maturity levels ranged from 0 to 5. Level 0 is called
incomplete and describes theDX requirement to be low. Level 1: Performed, indicating that the DX process had begun
Level 2: Managed DX processes are well-managed. Level 3: Established Process, The Digital transition process has
been carried out consistently in accordance with established standards. Level 4: Predictable and DX process
quantitative techniques are applied. Level 5: Optimizing, DX process evaluation is carried out[4][9][27][28][29].
Fig. 1. Digital Maturity Measurement Process[1]
The stages of the DX-SAMM digital maturity measurement are presented in figure 2. Digital maturity assessment
was measured through the dimensions and subdimensions of digital transformation using questionnaires. One
dimension was measured through several sub-dimensions, and each sub-dimension was measured through several
question items in the form of a questionnaire. Each question’s answer was mapped on a Likert scale. To be able to
answer questionnaires correctly and accurately measure digital maturity, user understanding of the meaning of digital
transformation and the business processes that occur in organizations is very important. Therefore, a management
group discussion session was required to complete the DX-SAMM assessment. Responses to the questionnaires served
as data inputs to calculate and represent maturity levels. The next step involved data processing by processing the
values of the input results of the questionnaire answers.
𝐽𝐽(𝑑𝑑,𝑎𝑎) =
∑
∑ 𝐻𝐻(𝑟𝑟,𝑞𝑞) 𝑟𝑟∈𝑅𝑅
|𝑅𝑅| 𝑞𝑞∈𝑄𝑄𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑
|𝑄𝑄𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑|
𝑀𝑀(𝑑𝑑) =
∑ 𝐽𝐽(𝑎𝑎,𝑑𝑑) 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝐴𝐴𝑑𝑑
|𝐴𝐴𝑑𝑑|
𝑀𝑀0 = 𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀(𝑀𝑀1,𝑀𝑀2,…𝑀𝑀𝐷𝐷)
M: Maturity; A: Average value of the attribute; Q: Question; H: The result of the value of the Likert scale; D:
Dimension; R: Respondents; A: Attributes.
User
Input
Organization
Data Dimensions –
DX Maturity
Indicator
Assessment
based on the
DX maturity
dimension
Data
Processing
Displaying DX
Maturity Value
DX Maturity
improvement matrix
recommendations
based on the maturity
dimension value index
DX Maturiy
Assessment
Matrix
1
2
3
Bargraph
Data Processing
(1)
(2)
(3)

--- PAGE 6 ---
1566 Tining Haryanti et al. / Procedia Computer Science 234 (2024) 1561–1569
6 Tining Haryanti et.al. / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2023) 000–000
The calculation process was carried out according to the formulas presented in formulas 1, 2, and 3 (Eq. 1, 2, 3).
Fromtheresultsofthesecalculations [1][8][26],thematuritylevelwasobtained inaccordancewiththescorelimit[26].
Level 0 limits the maximum score 0.2, level 1 with a maximum value of 0.8, level 2 with a maximum value of 1.6,
level 3 with a maximum value of 2.4, level 4 with a maximum value of 3.2, and level 5 with a maximum value of 4.0.
Generally, maturity models tend to fail when they are too complex. Therefore, the level of detail for developing this
model was adjusted to the needs of various domains, as explained earlier. DX-SAMM aims to make it easy for
organizations to measure their own digital maturity achievements independently. The results of data processing were
then presented by the system in the form of a dashboard on the website. Representations of the overall maturity
achievements and the details of each dimension are also presented. Evaluations to test the practical use of DX-SAMM
are conducted with organizational case studies discussed in the next chapter[8].
5. Case-study
Case studies evaluating the use of DX-SAMM were conducted in financial sector organizations with more than 200
employees and several branches. To ensure the accuracy of the results, organizations that had undertaken digital
transformation were selected. A management group session was formed to assist in the completion of the assessment.
Furthermore, the system processes the input results according to the answers to each question on a Likert scale. In
figure 2 (fig.2) the maturity levels of the seven dimensions are visualized.
Fig. 2. Maturity Measurement in Financial Organizations
Based on the DX-SAMM measurements, this organization is at level 3, namely, the established process with a
digital maturity score of 2.37. Digital maturity in each dimension included M (organization structure) = 3.30,
M(technology)= 3.80, M(strategy) = 3.23, M(employee) = 2.83, M(customer) =2.37, M (Business Process) = 3.00,
and M(culture) = 3.40. The value of each subdimension is shown in Figure 3. A Customer Score of 2.37 is the lowest
score of all dimensions. This is mainly because service users and customers are still not fully involved in digital
services, lack experience in using services with technology, and have low customer trust in technology. This is
confirmed in the management group sessions; namely, the practice of helping customers when using services is still
common. Someofthereasonsforthisarethedifficultyofcustomersinusingthesystemandthehesitationofcustomers
in processing services using technology rather than manually. The technology dimension score was 3.8, which was
the highest score for all dimensions in the organization. This is because in the process of its work, the organization has
utilized technology requirements for DX projects, including development, integration, business processes, and
infrastructure. This technology has been used for application development, data processing, and IT security
management[4][10][30]. The organization and its branches are equipped with computers, computer networks, and
Internet connection services, including the use of fixed and cellular broadband or other fixed connections. Projects
and activities related to digital transformation were identified, evaluated, and prioritized. Infrastructure and skill
improvement programs were provided to support this transformation. Various digital transition activities have been
consistently conducted. Organizations have also changed their existing business processes by digitizing technology.

--- PAGE 7 ---
Tining Haryanti et al. / Procedia Computer Science 234 (2024) 1561–1569 1567
Tining Haryanti et.al. / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2023) 000–000 7
In addition to providing digital maturity measurement results, the DX-SAMM also provides recommendations for
improvements to the next maturity level and necessary improvements to the current level. Based on ISO/IEC
Assessment-SPICE, it is recommended that the customer dimension be optimized for the maturity level. The customer
dimension consists of the Customer Engagement sub-dimension, which is associated with customer engagement in
digital services; Customer Experience, which is associated with customer experience in interacting with the
organization; and customer trust, which is customer trust in technology services provided by the organization.
Fig. 3. Dimension and Sub Dimension Score in Case Study
These improvements relate to the DX requirements that provide space for customer engagement in interacting with
the organization through an easy-to-use user interface. Customer involvement enables the creation of a customer
experience. The reliability of services increases customer trust. The results of the confirmation in the organizational
management session showed that customer independence in using technology-based services was minimal. Generally,
customers depend on employee assistance when interacting with a service. The next improvement is that organizations
need partnerships to build a digital ecosystem, digitize customer service delivery, and digitize contact. The utilization
of internet (mobile) technology as an intermediary in direct access to customers is necessary to offer full transparency
and the possibility of innovation in new types of services [8] [10] [11] [31][32].
6. Conclusion
In this study, a digital maturity measurement model called DX SAMM was developed. It is intended for monitoring
digital maturity measurements in general to be utilized by organizations in assessing their digital maturity
independently. This monitoring involves organizational management. The model in this research was developed using
several approaches, including a literature review, comparative analysis, design in the development of measurement
tools, and empirical validation with case studies. In this study, SPICE was adopted as a reference for maturity levels
in various domains. Unlike other digital maturity models, DX-SAMM emphasizes digital maturity measurements that
involve multi-dimensionality, can be used in various domains in general, and can be used independently. Digital
maturity measurements can also be practically applied. Case studies show that organizations can use the results of
their digital maturity assessments as a guide to formulate future strategies. This study contributes to the literature by
adding references to digital maturity measurements that can be implemented in general. The main dimensions that
affect the success of transformation are identified through comparative analysis, namely, seven dimensions with 21
sub-dimensions. The proposed dimensions of digital maturity reveal the overall status of Digital Transformation
achievement within an organization. The Organization and Structure dimension has an impact on measuring the
restructuring of the company resulting from digital transformation. Meanwhile, the Strategy dimension focuses more
on the direction of the organization's vision and mission. The Technology dimension does not dominate digital
maturity, which aligns with previous research findings that DX is not just about technology [33]. The success of DX
lies in aligning strategy and governance [4], [10], [34], and various other dimensions.
-
1,00
2,00
3,00
4,00
5,00
Organizatio…
Organizatio…
Sustainable…
Organizatio…
Technology
Informatio…
Security…
Infrastruct…
Strategy
Strategy…
Financial…
Portfolio…
Employee
Skill
Awareness
Pembelajar…
Customer
Customer…
Customer…
Customer…
Proses…
Business…
Business…
Business…
Culture
Willing to…
Social…
Dimensions and Sub Dimensions
Maturity
Sub Dimension Dimension

--- PAGE 8 ---
1568 Tining Haryanti et al. / Procedia Computer Science 234 (2024) 1561–1569
8 Tining Haryanti et.al. / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2023) 000–000
Although the development of the DX-SAMM model has resulted in maturity measurements that can be used in
various domains, the differences in characteristics between the domains are not generalizable. Therefore, dimensional
and sub-dimensional depth adjustments in different domains cannot be ignored. Future research is needed to
empirically test this hypothesis using more cases from various domains. Deepening the testing through a customized
questionnaire that aligns with specific domain characteristics is necessary. The digital maturity measurement in this
study focuses more on assessing digital maturity in a general sense that can be implemented across domains. Specific
digital maturity measurements within a particular domain require adjustments tailored to the characteristics of that
domain. Finally, DX-SAMM is a practical alternative for organizations to monitor the achievement of the digital
transformation process independently, and the measurement results can be used as a baseline to achieve a better level
of maturity.
Acknowledgement
This work was supported by the Institut Teknologi Sepuluh Nopember Surabaya in Research Grants Funds of The
Sepuluh Nopember Institute of Technology Batch 1 Year 2023 Number 1770/PKS/ITS/2023.
References
[1] T. Haryanti, N. A. Rakhmawati, and A. P. Subriadi, “The Extended Digital Maturity Model,” Big Data and
Cognitive Computing, vol. 7, no. 1, 2023, doi: 10.3390/bdcc7010017.
[2] T. Haryanti, N. A. Rakhmawati, and A. Subriadi, “The Design Science Research Methodology (DSRM) for
Self-Assessing Digital Transformation Maturity Index in Indonesia,” 2022 IEEE 7th International
Conference on Information Technology and Digital Applications (ICITDA), Nov. 2022, Accessed: Feb. 26,
2023. [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9971171
[3] J. Bumann and M. Peter, “Action fields of digital transformation–a review and comparative analysis of
digital transformation maturity models and frameworks,” Digitalisierung und andere Innovationsformen im
Management, vol. 2, pp. 13–40, Nov. 2019.
[4] E. Gökalp and V. Martinez, “Digital transformation capability maturity model enabling the assessment of
industrial manufacturers,” Comput Ind, vol. 132, pp. 1–23, 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.compind.2021.103522.
[5] P. C. Verhoef et al., “Digital transformation: A multidisciplinary reflection and research agenda,” J Bus Res,
vol. 122, pp. 889–901, 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.jbusres.2019.09.022.
[6] A. A. Neff, F. Hamel, T. P. Herz, F. Uebernickel, W. Brenner, and J. Vom Brocke, “Developing a maturity
model for service systems in heavy equipment manufacturing enterprises,” Information and Management,
vol. 51, no. 7, 2014, doi: 10.1016/j.im.2014.05.001.
[7] T. Haryanti, N. A. Rakhmawati, and A. P. Subriadi, “Journal of Industrial Engineering and Management A
Comparative Analysis Review of Digital Transformation Stage in Developing Countries,” Journal of
Industrial Engineering and Management, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 150–167, 2023, doi: 10.3926/jiem.4576.
[8] A. Schumacher, S. Erol, and W. Sihn, “A Maturity Model for Assessing Industry 4.0 Readiness and
Maturity of Manufacturing Enterprises,” in Procedia CIRP, 2016. doi: 10.1016/j.procir.2016.07.040.
[9] Ö. Özcan-Top and O. Demirors, “Application of a software agility assessment model – AgilityMod in the
field,” Comput Stand Interfaces, vol. 62, 2019, doi: 10.1016/j.csi.2018.07.002.
[10] M. Newman, “Digital Maturity Model (DMM),” tmforum.org, 2020.
[11] O. Bandara, K. Vidanagamachchi, and R. Wickramarachchi, “A model for assessing maturity of industry 4.0
in the banking sector,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Industrial Engineering and
Operations Management, 2019, pp. 1141–1150.
[12] C. Anderson and E. William, “Digital Maturity Model Achieving digital maturity to drive growth,” 2018.
[13] A. De Carolis, M. Macchi, E. Negri, and S. Terzi, “A maturity model for assessing the digital readiness of
manufacturing companies,” in IFIP Advances in Information and Communication Technology, 2017. doi:
10.1007/978-3-319-66923-6_2.
[14] K. Lichtblau et al., “IMPULS - Industrie 4.0- Readiness,” 2015.
[15] A. M. Maier, J. Moultrie, and P. J. Clarkson, “Assessing organizational capabilities: Reviewing and guiding
the development of maturity grids,” IEEE Trans Eng Manag, vol. 59, no. 1, 2012, doi:

--- PAGE 9 ---
Tining Haryanti et al. / Procedia Computer Science 234 (2024) 1561–1569 1569
Tining Haryanti et.al. / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2023) 000–000 9
10.1109/TEM.2010.2077289.
[16] A. R. Hevner, S. T. March, J. Park, and S. Ram, “Design science in information systems research,” MIS Q,
vol. 28, no. 1, 2004, doi: 10.2307/25148625.
[17] J. Becker, R. Knackstedt, and J. Pöppelbuß, “Developing maturity models for it management - A procedure
model and its application,” Business and Information Systems Engineering, vol. 51, no. 3, 2009, doi:
10.1007/s11576-009-0167-9.
[18] O. Valdez-de-Leon, “A Digital Maturity Model for Telecommunications Service Providers,” Technology
Innovation Management Review, vol. 6, no. 8, 2016, doi: 10.22215/timreview/1008.
[19] S. Berghaus, A. Back, and B. Kaltenrieder, “Digital Maturity & Transformation Report 2017,” 2017.
[20] G. Schuh, R. Anderl, J. Gausemeier, M. Ten Hompel, and W. Wahlster, “acatech STUDY Industrie 4.0
Maturity Index Managing the Digital Transformation of Companies,” 2018.
[21] G. Schuh, R. Anderl, R. Dumitrescu, and A. Krüger, “acatech STUDY Industrie 4.0 Maturity Index,” 2020.
[22] U. Sener, E. Gökalp, U. Şener, and P. E. Eren, “Towards a Maturity Model for Industry 4.0: A Systematic
Literature Review and a Model Proposal,” in Industry 4.0 from the MIS Perspective, 21st ed.Peterlang,
2018.
[23] E. Gökalp, U. Şener, and P. E. Eren, “Development of an assessment model for industry 4.0: Industry 4.0-
MM,” in Communications in Computer and Information Science, 2017. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-67383-
7_10.
[24] B. Asdecker and V. Felch, “Development of an Industry 4.0 maturity model for the delivery process in
supply chains,” Journal of Modelling in Management, vol. 13, no. 4, 2018, doi: 10.1108/JM2-03-2018-0042.
[25] R. Friedrich, M. Le Merle, F. Gröne, and A. Koster, “Leaders and laggards in the digital economy
Measuring industry digitization,” 2011.
[26] K. Y. Akdil, A. Ustundag, and E. Cevikcan, “Maturity and Readiness Model for Industry 4.0 Strategy,”
2018. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-57870-5_4.
[27] S. Automotive, “Automotive SPICE Process Assessment Model,” Final Release, v4, 2010.
[28] C. Salazar Dorn and C. L. Knüvener, “Building the Bridge Between Automotive SPICE® and Agile
Development,” in Communications in Computer and Information Science, 2021. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-
85521-5_26.
[29] E. Gökalp and O. Demirörs, “Model based process assessment for public financial and physical resource
management processes,” Comput Stand Interfaces, vol. 54, 2017, doi: 10.1016/j.csi.2016.11.011.
[30] P. A. H. Williams, B. Lovelock, T. Cabarrus, and M. Harvey, “Improving digital hospital transformation:
Development of an outcomes-based infrastructure maturity assessment framework,” JMIR Med Inform, vol.
7, no. 1, 2019, doi: 10.2196/12465.
[31] E. A. Isaev, N. L. Korovkina, and M. S. Tabakova, “Evaluation of the readiness of a company’s IT
department for digital business transformation,” Business Informatics, no. 2, 2018, doi: 10.17323/1998-
0663.2018.2.55.64.
[32] R. Berger, “The Digital Transformation of Industry Strategy Consultants,” Germany, 2015. Accessed: Apr.
01, 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://www.rolandberger.com/publications/publication_pdf/roland_berger_digital_transformation_of_indus
try_20150315.pdf
[33] B. Tabrizi, E. Lam, K. Girard, and V. Irvin, “Digital Transformation Is Not About Technology,” Harv Bus
Rev, 2019.
[34] Aslanova IV and Kulichkina AI, “Digital Maturity: Definition and Model,” 2020.
[35] M. Shahiduzzaman, M. Kowalkiewicz, R. Barett, and M. McNaughton, “Digital Business: Towards a Value-
Centric Maturity Model,” PWC Report Chair in Digital Economy, no. August, 2017.