--- PAGE 1 ---
REPRINTED FROM IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL32, NO 1, 1993; © 1993,1999
Strategic alignment:
Leveraging
informationtechnology
for transforming
organizations
by J. C. Henderson
N. Venkatraman
Itisclearthateventhoughinformation
technology (lIT)hasevolvedfromItstraditional
orientation ofadministrative supporttoward a
morestrategic rolewithin anorganization,there
isstill aglaring lack offundamentalframeworks
withinwhichtounderstandthepotential of1fT for
tomorrow's organizations. Inthispaper,we
develop amodelforconceptualizing and
directing theemergingarea ofstrategic
management ofinformation technology.This
model,termedthe Strategic Alignment Model,Is
definedInterms offourfundamentaldomains of
strategic choice:businessstrategy,information
technology strategy,organizationalinfrastructure
andprocesses,andInformation technology
Infrastructure andprocesses-each withItsown
underlying dimensions. Weillustrate thepower
ofthismodelinterms of twofundamental
characteristics ofstrategicmanagement:
strategic fit(theinterrelationships between
extemalandIntemalcomponents)andfunctional
Integration (integration betweenbusinessand
functional domains).Morespecifically, wederive
fourperspectives ofalignmentwithspecific
implications forguiding managementpracticein
thisImportantarea.
I
t is perhaps a truism that the role and impact of
information technology (Iff) on today's orga-
nizations has significantly changed over the last
decade. Across a wide spectrum of markets and
countries, Iff is transcending its traditional "back
office" role and is evolving toward a "strategic"
role with the potential not only to support chosen
business strategies, but also to shape new busi-
ness strategies. l -4 Yet, there is increasing con-
cern that the anticipated value of the investment
in Iff is not being achieved. 5 How do we reconcile
the dramatic increase in the role of Iff in organi-
zations and markets with the evidence of minimal
productivity gains at an aggregate level of the
economy?
We argue that the inability to realize value from
Iff investments is, in part, due to the lack of align-
ment between the business and Iff strategies of
organizations. We view strategy as involving both
formulation (decisions pertaining to competitive,
product-market choices) and implementation
(choices that pertain to the structure and capa-
bilities of the firm to execute its product-market
choices). Our concept of strategic alignment is
based on two fundamental assumptions: One,
economic performance is directly related to the
ability of management to create a strategic fit be-
tween the position of an organization in the com-
IilCopyright1993 by International Business Machines Corpo-
ration. Copying in printed fOmI for private use is pemIitted
without payment of royalty provided that (1) each reproduc-
tion is done without alteration and (2) the Journal reference
and IBM copyright notice are included on the first page. The
title and abstract, but no other portions, of this paper may be
copied or distributed royalty free without further pemIission
by computer-based and other infomIation-service systems.
Permission to republish any other portion of this paper must
be obtained from the Editor.
472 HENDERSON AND VENKATRAMAN 0018-8670/99/$5.00 © 1999 IBM IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL38, NOS 2&3,1999

--- PAGE 2 ---
473VOL32, NO 1, 1993, REPRINTIBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL38, NOS 2&3, 1999 HENDERSON AND VENKATRAMAN
petitive product-market arena and the design of
an ｡ｰｰｲｯｰｲｩ｡ｴｾ admin.istrative ｳｾｲｵｾｵｲ･ to. sup-
port its executIon. Th1S assumpt10n 1S cons1stent
with the generally accepted axi.om that ｳｴｲ｡ｴ･ｾｩ｣
choices in the external and mternal domams
should be consistent. 6,7 Two, we contend that this
strategic fit is inherently ､ｹｮｾ｣Ｎ The ｣ｾｯｩ｣･ｳ
made by one business ･ｾｴ･ｲｰｮｳ･ＬＮ or firm (1f ｾｾﾭ
damentally strategic), wdl over time evoke im1-
tative actions, which necessitate subsequent re-
sponses. Thus, strategic alignment is not an event
but a process of continuous adaptation and
change.
In this context a critical lever for attaining this
dynamic capability is not a specific set of sophis-
ticated technological functionality but the orga-
nizational capabilities to leverage techn?logy to
differentiate its operations from compet1tors. In
other words, no single IIf ｡ｰｰｬｩｾ｡ｴｩｯｮＭｨｯｷ･ｶ･ｲ
sophisticated and state of the art 1t may be-could
deliver a sustained competitive advantage. Rather,
advantage is obtained through the capability of an
organization to exploit IIf functionality on a con-
tinuous basis. This requires a fundamental change
in managerial thinking about the role of IIf in orga-
nizationaltransformation, as well as an understand-
ing of the ｣ｲｩｴｩｾ ｣ｯｭｰｯｮ･ｮｴｾ of IIf ｳｾ｡ｴ･ｧｹ and its
role in supporting and shapmg busmess strategy
decisions.
Although there may be some consensus on the
changing role of IIf ｷｩｴｨｾ ｯｲｧｾｩｺ｡ｴｩｯｮｾＬ manag-
ers are still confronted Wlth bas1c quest10ns such
as:
• What are the implications of IIf in my business
operations? Today? In the future?
• What are the alternative perspectives for lever-
aging information technology capabilities for
business operations?
• Is the locus of IIf competence "inside" or "out-
side" the operation?
• What is the executive role of senior manage-
ment for leveraging IIf capabilities?
• How should the Iff function be organized, and
what is the role of IIf outsourcing?
• What are the appropriate criteria for assessing
IIf-based benefits?
We attempt to answer these and related questions
by developing a model that defines the range of
strategic choices facing managers and by explor-
ing how they interrelate. As a prelude to the de-
velopment of such a ｭｯ､ｾｬＬ let us ｣ｯｮｳｩＮｾ･ｾ how
organizations are leveragmg IIf capabihtIes to
shape and support their business strategies
through the following four examples:
• Eastman Kodak Company and IBM announced
an "unusual agreement under which IBM will
take over the work done by four data centers,
and 300 Kodak workers will become IBM em-
ployees" (Wall Street Journal, July 26, 1989).
Kodak expects to cut their operating costs by as
much as 50 percent. In addition, Kodak turned
over the management of its telecommunications
network to Digital Equipment Corp. and· the
maintenance of its personal computers to Com-
puterland Corp.
• Baxter Healthcare Corp. has launched a new
business program, ValueLink**, whereby it
takes over the materials management function
of its customers-hospitals on a partnership ba-
sis with stringent performance clauses; the crit-
ical business competence for offering this pro-
gram is rooted in their superior information
processing capabilities derived from their now-
famous Analytic System/Automated Purchas-
ing (ASAP) information systems.
• Since the advent of electronic filingof individual
income taxes in the United States, many tax-re-
turn preparers (for example, H & R Block, Inc.)
have created new electronic linkages with retail
financial institutions that enable interested tax-
payers, for a fee, to receive refunds at the ｾｩｭ･ of
electronically filing their return. Electromc con-
nection between the filers and the Internal Rev-
enue Service, combined with superior ｾ｡ｰ｡｢ｩｬｩｴｹ
to check for errors, has become an important
competency in this fast-changingmarketplace.
• Procter & Gamble Co. and Wal-Mart Stores,
Inc., have built upon new, integrated informa-
tion systems to redesign key business processes
that affect their ability to manage the movement
of products through their North American
distribution channels. As a result, both firms
achieve significant improvements in operating
costs and, more importantly, increased ｾ｢Ａｬｩｴｹ
to respond quickly to local market cond1tIons
and requirements.
These examples highlight different facets of align-
ing IIf strategy and ｢ｵｾｩｮ･ｾｳ strategy. In ｴｨｾ ｾｯｬﾭ
lowing sections, we bnefly mtroduce the buddmg
blocks of our proposed Strategic Alignment
Model.

--- PAGE 3 ---
VOL32, NO 1, 1993, REPRINT IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL38, NOS 2&3, 1999 HENDERSON AND VENKATRAMAN474
Strategic alignment: The emerging concept
Our concept of strategic alignment is based on
two building blocks: strategic fit and functional
integration. The former recognizes the need for
any strategy to address both external and internal
domains. The extemal domain is the business
lIT strategy should be articulated
in terms of an external domain
and an internal domain.
arena in which the firm competes and is con-
cerned with decisions such as product-market of-
fering and the distinctive strategy attributes that
differentiate the firm from its competitors, as well
as the range of "make-versus-buy" decisions, in-
cluding partnerships and alliances. In contrast,
the intemal domain is concerned with choices
pertaining to the logic of the administrative struc-
ture (functional or divisional or matrix organiza-
tion) and the specific rationale for the design and
redesign of critical business processes (product
delivery, product development, customer ser-
vice, total quality), as well as the acquisition and
development of the human resource skills neces-
sary for achieving the required organizational
competencies.
Within the business domain, the fit between ex-
ternal positioning and internal arrangement has
been argued to be critical for maximizing eco-
nomic performance. 8 We adopt this logic to argue
that the fit between external positioning and in-
ternal arrangement is equally relevant within the
I!I' domain. 1,9 More specifically, we contend that
Iff strategy should be articulated in terms of an
external domain-how the firm is positioned in
the Iff marketplace-and an internal domain-
how the liS (information systems) infrastructure
should be configured and managed. However, our
research suggests that managers are more often
comfortable with their capability to understand
positioning choices in the business marketplace
(where their products are sold) than with their
understanding of how to be strategically posi-
tioned in the I!I' marketplace (where they obtain
critical technological functionality that supports
and shapes their business strategies). This is
partly due to the fact that strategy-as a manage-
ment concept-has historically been applied to
the output market rather than input markets and
that liS strategy has often been viewed as a func-
. tional, internal response to the business strategy.
Thus, we propose that the position of the orga-
nization in the Iff marketplace involves three sets
of choices:
1. Information technology scope-those specific
information technologies (for example, elec-
tronic imaging, local- and wide-area networks,
expert systems, and robotics) that support cur-
rent business strategy initiatives or could
shape new business strategy initiatives for the
firm. This is analogous to business scope,
which deals with choices pertaining to prod-
uct-market offerings in the output market.
2. Systemic competencies-those attributes of
I!I' strategy (for example, system reliability,
cost-performance levels, interconnectivity,
flexibility) that could contribute positively to
the creation of new business strategies or bet-
ter support of existing business strategy. This
is analogous to the concept of business dis-
tinctive competencies, which deal with those
attributes of strategy (pricing, quality, value-
added service, superior distribution channels)
that contribute to a distinctive, comparative
advantage to a firm over its competitors.
3. Iff governance-selection and use of mecha-
nisms (for example, joint ventures with ven-
dors, strategic alliances, joint research and
development for new Iff capabilities) for ob-
taining the required Iff competencies. This is
analogous to business governance, which
involves make-versus-buy choices in business
strategy. Such choices cover a complex array
of interfirm relationships such as strategic al-
liances, joint ventures, marketing exchange,
and technology licensing.
In a similar vein, the internal liS domain must
address at least three components, namely:
1. liS architecture-choices that define the port-
folio of applications, the configuration of hard-
ware, software, and communication, and the
data architecture that collectively define the
technical infrastructure. This is analogous
to the choices within the internal business

--- PAGE 4 ---
475VOL32, NO 1, 1993, REPRINTIBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL38, NOS 2&3, 1999 HENDERSON AND VENKATRAMAN
strategy arena to articulate the administrative
structure of the firm dealing with roles, respon-
sibilities, and authority structures.
2. liS processes-choices that define the work
processes central to the operations of the liS
infrastructure such as systems development,
maintenance, and monitoring and control sys-
tems. This is analogous to the need for design-
ing the business processes that support and
shape the ability of the firm to execute busi-
ness strategies.
3. liS skills-choices pertaining to the acquisi-
tion, training, and development of the knowl-
edge and capabilities of the individuals re-
quired to effectively manage and operate the
liS infrastructure within the organization. This
is analogous to the skills required within the
business domain to execute a given strategy.
Why is the distinction important? Traditionally,
managers think of IfI' strategy in terms of the latter
three components that reflect an internal orien-
tation. It is understandable, since the historical
view is that Iff is a support function not essential
to the business of the firm. In the words of one
frustrated manager, "1fI' in our organization is
viewed as the technical core of the MIS [manage-
ment information systems] function. The wide-
spread feeling is that it has very little to do with
our business strategy. Unfortunately, we could
not be farther from the truth." This statement is
applicable to those executives who view Iff as a
"cost of doing business."
As IfI' emerges as a critical enabler of business
transformation with capabilities to deliver firm-
level advantages, it is imperative that firms also
pay attention to the three external components of
IfI' strategy. Hence, we argue that Iff strategy
should be elevated from its traditional internal
focus to address external issues of how well the
firm is positioned in the fast-changing IfI' market-
place.
Consider the example of McGraw-Hill, Inc.'s
custom publishing offering, Primis**, in the text-
book marketplace. Primis reflects a strategy of
offering custom textbooks as an alternative to
standard textbooks via its sophisticated elec-
tronic imaging technology infrastructure (a three-
way joint venture with Eastman Kodak and R. R.
Donnelley & Sons Co.). In this business strategy,
McGraw-Hill determines the needs of an individ-
ual instructor and, from a set of modules, con-
structs or assembles a custom textbook that sat-
isfies the market need. The IfI' strategy for this
initiative must address and define a critical IfI'
scope (electronic imaging technology), systemic
competence (superior level of clarity of imaging
to guarantee high-quality printing and flexible
binding capability), as well as IfI' governance
Goint ventures and long-term agreements for ob-
taining the requisite competencies). Choices in
these three areas determine the position of Mc-
Graw-Hill in the IfI' and business marketplaces
and have the potential to both shape and support
the business strategy. Specifically, these choices
can be directly related to choices pertaining to
business scope and business competencies. More
importantly, the technology attributes playa very
important role in shaping these new business
strategy initiatives. Such a view of IfI' strategy has
a clear external positioning focus that is to be
distinguished from its internal liS infrastructure.
Need to align external and internal domains ofIff.
Our call for articulating IfI' strategy in terms of an
external domain does not in any way imply that
the internal domain is unimportant or secondary.
Indeed, our field research over the last few years
clearly indicates that the inadequate fit between
external and internal domains of IfI' is a major
reason for failure to derive benefits from Iff in-
vestments. One has only to scan the current bus-
iness periodicals to recognize the possibility of an
Iff strategy failing due to the poor supporting liS
infrastructure. A vivid example is provided by
Citibank N.A.'s strategy for point-of-sale (pos)
information services. It launched its POS Infor-
mation Services **in 1985with the explicit idea of
linking store purchase with electronic couponing,
payment, and frequent-shopper points, as well as
the electronic capture of important information
on purchase patterns. Although the general idea
of combining information and financial transac-
tions is still considered worthwhile, Citibank has
reportedly faced several significant technical
problems in the implementation of the concept
that have resulted in its inability to establish a
clear leadership position. Several similar initia-
tives undertaken by competitors, although smaller
in scale, are reportedly doing well, and still others
are attempting to establish an important compe-
tency in this arena.
Need to integrate business and Iff domains. The
second dimension of the Strategic Alignment
Model is functional integration. The need to in-

--- PAGE 5 ---
VOL32, NO 1, 1993, REPRINT IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL38, NOS 2&3, 1999 HENDERSON AND VENKATRAMAN476
Figure 1 Strategic Alignment Model
BUSINESS STRATEGY liT STRATEGY
--'<{
Z
II:
W
ｾ
W
BUSINESS
SCOPE
TECHNOLOGY
SCOPE
, ,
STRATEGIC FIT AUTOMATION )( LINKAGE, ,
ｾ］］］］ﾱ］］］］］］］［［［ｦ ｾ］］］］］ﾱ］］］］］ｾ
ORGANIZATIONAL INFRASTRUCTURE liS INFRASTRUCTURE AND PROCESSES
AND PROCESSES
BUSINESS INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
FUNCTIONAL INTEGRATION
tegrate the Iff strategy and the business strategy
has long been advocated by both researchers
and practitioners. 10-12 This dimension specifically
considers how choices made in the Iff domain
impact (enhance or threaten) those made in the
business domain and vice versa. However, much
of current research has focused only on issues of
integrating the internal JJS strategies (JJS infra-
structure and processes) with internal organiza-
tional requirements as a response to business
strategies. 13
The Strategic Alignment Model (see Figure 1)
identifies the need to specify two types of inte-
gration between business and Iff domains. The
first, termed strategic integration, is the link be-
tween business strategy and Iff strategy reflecting
the external components. More specifically, it
deals with the capability of Iff functionality to
both shape and support business strategy. This
capability is particularly important as Iff has
emerged as an important source of strategic ad-
vantage to firms. The second type, termedoper-
ational integration, deals with the corresponding
internal domains, namely, the link between orga-
nizational infrastructure and processes and JJS in-
frastructure and processes. This type highlights
the criticality of ensuring internal coherence be-

--- PAGE 6 ---
477VOL32, NO 1, 1993, REPRINTIBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL38, NOS 2&3, 1999 HENDERSON AND VENKATRAMAN
tween the organizational requirements and ex-
pectations and the delivery capability within the
lIS function.
The logicof strategic alignment. A third premise of
the Strategic Alignment Model (see Figure 1) is
that effective management of Iff requires a bal-
ance among the choices made across all four do-
mains. The question, then, is how do we concep-
tualize and achieve this type of alignment?
The simplest approach calls for considering all
combinations of any two domains, a bivariate-fit
perspective. If, for instance, the organizational
and liS infrastructures can be reconfigured easily,
then a strategic perspective that focused only on
strategic integration, bivariate fit between busi-
ness and Iff strategies, could suffice. That is, if the
firm could easily adapt their internal process
(both business and Iff) to support any possible
market positioning strategy, the executives could
delegate this issue and spend their time under-
standing only the dynamics of markets. Unfortu-
nately, there exists a significant possibility that
internal inconsistencies (mutually conflicting di-
rections) will occur. For instance, a bivariate per-
spective that considered only external issues
(business and Iff strategies without any regard for
the internal, organizational domains) could seri-
ously underestimate the difficulty (risks) of rede-
signing key business processes. Alternatively, a
bivariate fit that considered issues of business and
Iff strategic fit separately has been argued to be
dysfunctional. ll,1f,14
In contrast, the Strategic Alignment Model calls
for the recognition of multivariate relationships,
or more precisely, cross-domain relationships.
Four types of cross-domain relationships are dis-
cussed in the next section.
Four dominant alignment perspectives
Businessstrategy'as the driver. The first two cross-
domain relationships given here arise when bus-
iness strategy serves as the driving force.
Perspective One: Strategy execution. As depict-
ed in Figure 2, this perspective is anchored on the
notion that a business strategy has been articu-
lated and is the driver of both organizational de-
sign choices and the design of liS infrastructure.
Figure 2 Strategy execuUon alignment perspective
DRIVER: BUSINESS STRATEGY
ROLE OF TOP MANAGEMENT STRATEGY FORMULATOR
ROLE OF liS MANAGEMENT STRATEGY IMPLEMENTOR
PERFORMANCE CRITERIA. COST/SERVICE CENTER
This alignment perspective is, perhaps, the most
common and widely understood perspective as it
corresponds to the classic, hierarchical view of
strategic management. Thus, it is not surprising
that several different analytical methodologies
are available to make this perspective operation-
al: critical success factors,1S business systems
planning,16and enterprise modeling. 17
It is important to identify the specific role of man-
agement to make this perspective succeed. Spe-
cifically, we contend that top management should
play the role of the strategy formulator to artic-
ulate the logic and choices pertaining to business
strategy, whereas the role of the liS manager
should be that of the strategy implementor, one
who efficiently and effectively designs and imple-
ments the required lIS infrastructure and pro-
cesses that support the chosen business strategy.
The performance criteria for assessing the liS
function within this perspective are based on fi-
nancial parameters reflecting a cost center focus.
Perspective Two: Technology transformation. As
shown in Figure 3, this alignment perspective in-
volves the assessment of implementing the cho-
sen business strategy through appropriate Iff
strategy and the articulation of the required liS
infrastructure and processes. In contrast to the
strategy execution logic, this perspective is not

--- PAGE 7 ---
VOL32, NO 1, 1993, REPRINT IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL38, NOS 2&3, 1999 HENDERSON AND VENKATRAMAN478
Figure 3 Technology transformation alignment
perspective
DRIVER BUSINESS STRATEGY
ROLE OF TOP MANAGEMENT TECHNOLOGY VISIONARY
ROLE OF I SMANAGEMENT: TECHNOLOGY ARCHITECT
PERFORMANCE CRITERIA TECHNOLOGY LEADERSHIP
constrained by the current organization design,
but instead seeks to identify the best possible Iff
competencies through appropriate positioning in
the Iff marketplace, as well as identifying the cor-
responding internal liS architecture. For example,
United Services Automobile Association (USAA),
a leading U.s. insurance company, decided that
their business strategy of low-cost insurance de-
livery via telemarketing required the develop-
ment of a superior document-handling system
based on state-of-the-art electronic imaging tech-
nology. Since such technology was not available,
they pursued a joint development venture with
mM. Their Iff strategy involved defining this key
technology scope and the associated critical com-
petencies and committing to a technology alli-
ance. Equally important, however, the strategic
management process also defined the changes in
the liS infrastructure that were necessary to ex-
ecute this technology strategy. Thus, they under-
stood the issues in migrating their technology ar-
chitecture, including the need to invest in the
development of a data architecture.
Another example is American Express Travel Re-
lated Services Co., Inc., whose business strategy
is anchored on two technology-based competen-
cies: providing quick approval of purchases made
by charge card and providing copies of receipts to
the cardholders. The approval process on a
charge card (without any preset spending limit)
typically has a longer lead time than a corre-
sponding transaction involving their competitors'
credit cards (with a preset spending limit). It was
imperative that American Express match the re-
sponse time of the leading competitors to reduce
the possibility of the cardholder switching to an
alternative, faster-transacting card. This business
strategy required a systemic competence involv-
ing expert systems (Authorizer's Assistant**) as
well as corresponding changes in the internal liS
organization for developing, maintaining, and
controlling the systems. The second component,
called ECCB (Enhanced Country Club Billing**),
refers to their business practice of providing cop-
ies of all charge slips with the monthly statement.
Although cardholders expressed satisfaction with
this service, the cost of maintaining and distrib-
uting the slips was becoming prohIbitive in the
traditional mode. Their investment in an optical-
scanning, storage, and laser-printing system al-
lowed the delivery of the same level of service
more efficiently.
These examples highlight the impact of business
strategy (especially, distinctive competence) on
Iff strategy (Iff governance and systemic compe-
tencies, respectively) and the corresponding im-
plications for lIS infrastructure and processes.
Techniques used to aid executives in the devel-
opment of this strategy include technology fore-
casting and a variety of architectural planning ap-
proaches. The role of executive management in
this perspective is to provide technology vision
that would best support the chosen business strat-
egy. The role of the liS manager should be that of
the technology architect, who efficiently and ef-
fectively designs and implements the required lIS
infrastructure that is consistent with the Iff vision
(scope, competencies, and governance). The per-
formance criteria in this perspective are based on
technology leadership, often utilizing a bench-
marking approach to assess the position of the
firm in the Iff marketplace.
Iff strategy as the enabler. The following two
cross-domain relationships arise when manage-
ment explores how Iff might enable new or en-
hanced business strategies with corresponding
organizational implications.
Perspective Three: Competitive potentiaL As
shown in Figure 4, this alignment perspective is
concerned with the exploitation of emerging Iff

--- PAGE 8 ---
479VOL32, NO 1, 1993, REPRINTIBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL38, NOS 2&3, 1999 HENDERSON AND VENKATRAMAN
Figure 5 service level alignment perspective
Figure 4 Competitive potential alignment perspective
I TSTRATEGY
BUSINESS VISIONARY
CATALYST
BUSINESS LEADERSHIP
DRIVER I TSTRATEGY
ROLE OF TOP MANAGEMENT PRIORITIZER
ROLE OF I SMANAGEMENT EXECUTIVE LEADERSHIP
PERFORMANCE CRITERIA CUSTOMER SATISFACTION
DRIVER
ROLE
OF TOP MANAGEMENT
ROLE OF LS MANAGEMENT
PERFORMANCE CRITERIA
tative measurements pertaining to product lead-
ership such as market share, growth, or new prod-
uct introduction.
Perspective Four: Service level. As shown in Fig-
ure 5, this alignment perspective focuses on how
to build a world-elass lIS service organization.
The specific role of top management to make this
perspective succeed is that of the business vision-
aly-one who articulates how the emerging Iff
competencies and functionality as well as chang-
ing governance patterns in the Iff marketplace
would impact the business strategy. The role of
the lIS manager, in contrast, is one of the cata-
o/st-one who identifies and interprets the trends
in the Iff environment to assist the business man-
agers to understand the potential opportunities
and threats from an Iff perspective. The perfor-
mance criteria in this perspective are based on
business leadership with qualitative and quanti-
Key examples of this perspective include the ex-
ploitation by Baxter Healthcare of its Iff position
(enhanced technology scope, greater systemic
competencies, and governance with ffiM through
the Spectrum joint venture that will provide soft-
ware service to the health care marketplace) to
deliver superior, value-added service to its hos-
pital customers and the consequent implications
for redesigning the internal organizational pro-
cesses. iS Similarly, the attempt by Federal Ex-
press Corp. to create a new standard for over-
night delivery, through its COSMOS/PULSAR**
system, with corresponding implications for re-
designing its internal processes or the ability of
American Express, through its IDS Financial Cor-
poration, to leverage its Iff infrastructure to de-
velop capabilities for electronically filing income
tax returns and for customized financial products
reflect how an effective Iff positioning can be used
to enhance or create new business strategies.
That is, in each of these cases, an important en-
abler of the ability of the firm to move quickly to
acquire technology or achieve the competencies
necessary to embark on their strategy was their
position in the Iff market.
capabilities to impact new products and services
(business scope), influence the key attributes of
strategy (distinctive competencies), and develop
new forms of relationships (business gover-
nance). Unlike the previous perspective that con-
siders business strategy as given (or, a constraint
for organizational transformation), this perspec-
tive allows the adaptation of business strategy via
emerging Iff capabilities. Beginningwith the three
dimensions of Iff strategy, this perspective seeks
to identify the best set of strategic options for
business strategy and the corresponding set of
decisions pertaining to organizational infrastruc-
ture and processes.

--- PAGE 9 ---
VOL32, NO 1, 1993, REPRINT IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL38, NOS 2&3, 1999 HENDERSON AND VENKATRAMAN480
This requires an understanding of the external di-
mensions of Iff strategy with corresponding inter-
nal design of the I/S infrastructure and processes.
This strategic fit for Iff creates the capacity to
meet the needs of I/S customers. In this perspec-
tive, the role of business strategy is indirect and
is viewed as providing the direction to stimu-
late customer demand. This perspective is often
viewed as necessary (but not sufficient) to ensure
the effective use of Iff. The I/S organization must
deploy resources and be responsive to the grow-
ing and fast-changing demands of the end-user
population. Analytical methodologies even par-
tially reflecting this perspective require a system-
atic analysis of both the customer needs and the
products and services that currently exist, along
with those under development. Examples of an-
alytical methods include end-user-needs survey-
ing,19 service-level contracting,2O and architec-
tural planning. 21
The specific role of top management to make this
perspective succeed is that of the prioritizer, the
one who articulates how best to allocate the
scarce resources both within the organization and
in the Iff marketplace (in terms of joint ventures,
licensing, minority equity investments). The role
of the I/S manager, in contrast, is one of executive
leadership, with the specific tasks of making the
internal service business succeed within the op-
erating guidelines from top management. The per-
formance criteria in this perspective are based on
customer satisfaction obtained with qualitative
and quantitative measurements using internal and
external benchmarking.
Key Issues and managementchallenges
DitI'erentiating strategic alignment from tradi-
tionallinkage. The Strategic Alignment Model in
some ways reflects and accommodates a long his-
tory of research and practice concerning the most
effective means of linking business and technol-
ogy strategies. However, the concept of strategic
alignment differs from the traditional views of
linkage in four important ways (see Table 1).
First, the Strategic Alignment Model calls for a
fundamental shift in the focus of the lIS function
from an internal orientation toward one of stra-
tegic fit within the Iff domain, namely, recogni-
tion of the external Iff marketplace in terms of the
scope of the technologies, the desired level ?f
competencies, and the locus of governance. This
shift is important if we consider that Iff has the
potential to shape business competencies and ac-
tions in the product-market arena.
Second, whereas the traditional management ob-
jectives for the I/S function were geared toward
ensuring that I/S activities are linked with the bus-
iness requirements, we argue that future chal-
lenges deal with the selection of appropriate align-
ment perspectives (out of the four dominant ones
identified in this paper) that best suit the business
conditions and organizational objectives. This ar-
gument requires the business leadership to con-
sider a broader vision of the potential role and
scope of Iff within organizations. In essence, the
contextual frame of reference for understanding
and making strategic choices varies. One impli-
cation of this variation is the need to alternate
planning processes to ensure that critical issues
associated with the different perspectives are ad-
dressed systematically.
Third, the model and the alternative alignment
perspectives highlight the diversity of roles car-
ried out by both line and I/S executives. As dis-
cussed earlier, the line executives must, at times,
assume traditional leadership roles associated
with strategy implementation. At other times,
however, alignment requires roles including
those of business visionary, technology vision-
ary, and prioritizer. For the I/S managers, the
roles range from the traditional functional man-
ager (resource optimizer) to executive leadership,
technology architect, and change catalyst. Rec-
ognizing the diversity of these roles and ensuring
that the right role is present for the right alignment
perspective is, we argue, an important enabler of
achieving strategic alignment. Finally, the criteria
for performance assessment expand from cost
and service considerations to a larger set involv-
ing multiple goals-both operational and strate-
gic. The need to view organizational performance
from multiple perspectives is widely recog-
nized. 22 The Strategic Alignment Model helps to
articulate and emphasize how the performance
criteria shift across different alignment perspec-
tives and argues that each set of criteria should be
present across different stages in evolution.
Management implications. Several key implica-
tions can be derived from the Strategic Alignment
Model. First, one possible reason for the current
dissatisfaction with the level of integration be-

--- PAGE 10 ---
481VOL32, NO 1, 1993, REPRINTIBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL38, NOS 2&3, 1999 HENDERSON AND VENKATRAMAN
Table 1 Dltlerentlatlngstndeglc alignmentfrom traditionalvtewa on linkage
Characteristics
Predominant focus of information
systems and technology
Management objectives
US executive roles
Dominant criteria for performance
assessment
Traditional Linkage
Internal liS function and
organization
Ensuring that liS activities are linked
to business requirements
Line leadership and liS functional
support
Cost and service considerations
Strategic Alignment
Internal liS function and organization
and external Iff marketplace
Selecting appropriate alignment
perspectives for achieving business
objectives
Multiple executive roles for line and
liS managers
Multiple criteria
tween the business and lIS domains and possibly
the absence of value derived from I/T investments
lies in the lack of understanding of the enabling
strategic choices that bind a business strategy and
lIS infrastructures. Viewed within the Strategic
Alignment Model shown in Figure 1, the direct
link between business strategy (top left) and lIS
infrastructure (bottom right) can only derive its
logic within the context of the two alignment per-
spectives that have business strategy as the driv-
er: strategy execution and technology transfor-
mation. In the former case, the link derives its
meaning by translating the implications of busi-
ness strategy for the organizational infrastructure
with subsequent demands for I/S products and
services. In the latter case, the linkage is achieved
through the effective positioning of the firm in the
I/T marketplace, namely, the specification of the
three components of I/T strategy and the conse-
quent implications for the three internal compo-
nents of the lIS infrastructure and processes.
The prescription from the Strategic Alignment
Model is that both perspectives should be con-
sidered for attaining the best possible link be-
tween business strategy and the I/S infrastructure.
More importantly, the senior line management
must understand both perspectives. Too often,
we believe, line management is engaged in the
process of strategy execution but delegates-ex-
plicitly or implicitly-the responsibility for tech-
nology transformation. There appears to be one
exception-in the case of 1/1' outsourcing. How-
ever, even in this case, we believe that the deci-
sions are viewed from a general sense of dissat-
isfaction with the costs and performance of the
internal I/T infrastructure and processes rather
than as a primary desire to be actively pursuing a
position and stake in the I/T marketplace.
Similarly, the direct link between an I/T strategy
and organizational infrastructure has no straight-
forward logic. One cannot and should not simply
seek to identify and adopt the best available tech-
nology to restructure the organization or stream-
line the business processes without due consid-
eration to the two alignment perspectives that
have I/T strategy as the driver: competitivepo-
tential and service level. The former identifies the
potential impact of I/T strategy on business strat-
egy with consequent implications for the organi-
zational infrastructure. The latter seeks to pro-
vide the best possible service to the internal client
by developing the appropriate basis for the rede-
sign of the I/S infrastructure. We would expect
that in the absence of such understanding, there
would be a significant probability of failure for
investments made to transfer business processes,
because of an inability to provide the information
necessary to execute the processes.
Second, managers need to reconceptualize the
scope and power of the I/T strategy of the firm.
The Strategic Alignment Model highlights the
compelling need to view the strategic choices in
the I/T domain in terms of both an external and an
internal orientation. Although the internal focus
is traditional with a requirement to support high-
er-level (corporate and business) strategies, we
believe it is also important to have an external
focus-in terms of the requirements of position-
ing the firm in the I/T marketplace (I/T scope, sys-
temic competencies, and I/T governance). This
level of understanding will become more impor-

--- PAGE 11 ---
VOL32, NO 1, 1993, REPRINT IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL38, NOS 2&3, 1999 HENDERSON AND VENKATRAMAN482
tant as firms realize that the source of Iff com-
petencies is not entirely within the firm but
involves a complex array of alliances and part-
nerships with a wide-ranging set of firms in the
marketplace.
Third, the criteria to assess the performance of
the Iff function should be reconceptualized. It is
expected that the Iff manager would be evaluated
using a mix of four criteria: evaluation as a cost
center (to ensure that the internall/S organization
has its cost levels for delivering the required level
of support comparable to the external Iff vendor
community actively soliciting outsourcing con-
tracts), evaluation as a service center (with levels
of service quality that are comparable to the best-
in-industry as well as best-in-class), evaluation as
a profit center (to create a sense of market refer-
ent within thelIS organization), and evaluation as
an investment center (through investments such
as a minority equity stake in emerging technolo-
gies, joint research and development invest-
ments, joint ventures, technology licensing, and
other means to enhance the required Iff compe-
tencies). In the absence of such a fundamental
shift in the criteria used to assess the performance
of the Iff function, thelIS organization would not
have emerged as a serious and significant member
of the top management team. Indeed, we should
strive to assign appropriate performance criteria
for the different alignment perspectives.
Finally, the use of this model requires an under-
standing of its intrinsic dynamic nature. Many of
the strategic planning techniques popularized in
the 1970s and 1980s have gone out of favor-not
because of the weakness in their logic, but due to
their failure to recognize the dynamic nature of
strategy. Managers are painfully aware that the
real business challenge is not static alignment
among the four domains at anyone point in time
(when the strategic planning exercise is carried
out!), but ensuring continual assessment of the
trends across these four domains to allow them to
reposition the firm in the external environment
and rearrange their internal infrastructure. We
urge managers to recognize seriously the need to
evolve from one perspective to another based on
shifts in the business environment-both internal
and external. This is consistent with the current
emphasis on the centrality of learning and adap-
tation for achieving successful organizational
transformation. As one senior manager who is in
the midst of adopting the Strategic Alignment
Model said: "The most important lesson to keep
in mind is that strategic alignment is a journey and
not an event."
Concludingremarks
We have been asked on numerous occasions:
"Which alignment perspective is the best?" As
researchers and observers of strategic manage-
ment phenomena, we do not believe that there is
one universally superior mode to formulate and
implement strategy. If there were, it would not be
strategic because all firms would adopt it. The
four dominant alignment perspectives that use the
two strategies as the driver are equally useful and
powerful in thinking about the role of Iff in orga-
nizational transformation. Indeed, we urge man-
agers not to consider Iff as a panacea and conse-
quently focus only on those two perspectives with
Iff strategy as the starting point (namely, com-
petitive potential and service level). Nor do we
want to argue that business strategy should al-
ways be the starting point and adopt only the
other two perspectives on strategic alignment.
The potential for Iff impact is so varied and com-
plex that the executive must consider these per-
spectives as alternative conceptual lenses and be
prepared to continuously make adaptations.
Other papers in this special issue deal with a set
of themes that complement the strategic align-
ment concept. Specifically, the paper by Luftman,
Lewis, and Oldach 23 explores in more pragmatic
detail how to translate the Strategic Alignment
Model into management frameworks and action
plans for the transformation of the enterprise.
Keen 24 develops a companion concept of a fusion
map to link information technology to business op-
erations; Boynton, Victor, and Pine 25 examine
some of the structural transformations in the mar-
ket and explore the potential role of information
technology capabilities; Davidson 26 provides a
complementary perspective by looking at the role
of organizational competencies enhanced through
information technology; Konsynski 27 considers in
some detail the possibility of redefining firm bound-
aries through information technologies and the re-
quired management strategies to compete in the
changing marketplace; and Broadbent and Weill28
discuss valuable lessons from cases in the Austra-
lian banking industry on this topic.
Our hope is that the conceptual model of strategic
alignment and the companion papers will go a

--- PAGE 12 ---
483VOL32, NO 1, 1993, REPRINTIBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL38, NOS 2&3, 1999 HENDERSON AND VENKATRAMAN
long way toward providing a set of ideas, tools,
and illustrations to leverage the emerging capa-
bilities of I!I' for transforming organizations and
markets.
"Trademark or registered trademark of Baxter Healthcare
Corp., McGraw-Hill, Inc., Citibank, N.A., American Ex-
press, or Federal Express Corp.
Cited references
1. P. G. W. Keen, Shaping the Future, Harvard Business
School Press, Boston, MA (1991).
2. B. R. Konsynski and W. F. McFarlan, "Information Part-
nerships-Shared Data, Shared Scale," Harvard Busi-
ness Review 68, No.5, 114-120 (September-October
1990).
3. M. S. Scott Morton,The Corporationofthe 1990s,Oxford
University Press, Oxford (1991).
4. N. Venkatraman, "Information Technology-Induced
Business Reconfiguration: The New Strategic Manage-
ment Challenge," The Corporation of the 1990s, M. S.
Scott Morton, Editor, Oxford University Press, Oxford
(1991).
5. S. S. Roach, "Services under Siege-The Restructuring
Imperative," Harvard Business Review 69, No.5, 82-91
(September-October 1991).
6. A. C. Hax and N. S. Majluf, The Strategy Concept and
Process: A PragmaticApproach, Prentice-Hall, Inc., En-
glewood Cliffs, NJ (1991).
7. N. Venkatraman and J. C. Camillus, "Exploring the Con-
cept of 'Fit' in Strategic Management," Academy ofMan-
agement Review 9, 513-525 (1984).
8. A. D. Chandler, Strategy and Structure: Chapters in the
History ofAmerican Enterprise, The M.LT. Press, Cam-
bridge, MA (1962).
9. M. M. Parker and R. J. Benson, with H. E. Trainor, In-
formation Economics: Linking Business Performance to
Information Technology, Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood
Cliffs, NJ (1988).
10. J. C. Henderson, J. F. Rockart, and J. G. Sifonis, "In-
tegrating Management Support Systems into Strategic In-
formation Systems Planning," Journal of Management
Information Systems 4, No.1, 5-23 (1987).
11. W. R. King, "Strategic Planning for Management Infor-
mation Systems," MIS Quarterly 2, No.1, 27-37 (1978).
12. E. R. McLean and J. V. Soden, Strategic Planning for
MIS, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York (1977).
13. A. C. Boynton and R. W. Zmud, "Information Technol-
ogy Planning in the 199Os: Directions for Practice and
Research," MIS Quarterly 11, 59-71 (1987).
14. P. J. Pyburn, "Linking the MIS Plan with Corporate Strat-
egy: An Exploratory Study," MIS Quarterly 7, No.2,
1-14 (1983).
15. J. F. Rockart, "Chief Executives Define Their Own Data
Needs," Harvard Business Review 57, No.2, 81-93
(1979).
16. Information Systems Planning Guide, Business Systems
Planning, GE20-0527-2, 3rd edition, ffiM Corporation
(July 1981); available through IBM branch offices.
17. J. Martin, Strategic Data Planning Methodologies, Pren-
tice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, NJ (1982).
18. N. Venkatraman and J. E. Short, "Strategies for Elec-
tronic Integration: From Order-Entry Systems to Value-
Added Services at Baxter," MIT Center for Information
Systems Research Working Paper, Cambridge, MA
(1991).
19. R. M. Alloway and J. A. Quillard, "User Managers' Sys-
tems Needs," MIS Quarterly 7, 27-41 (1983).
20. R. L. Leitheiser and J. C. Wetherbe, "Service Support
Levels: An Organized Approach to End-User Comput-
ing," MIS Quarterly 10, No.4, 337-349 (1986).
21. J. A. Zachman, "A Framework for Information Systems
Architecture," IBM Los Angeles Scientific Center Re-
port, G320-2785(March 1986).Also in IBM Systems Jour-
nal 26, No.3, 276-292 (1987).
22. N. Venkatraman and V. Ramanujam, "Measurement of
Business Performance in Strategy Research: A Compar-
ison of Approaches," Academy of Management Review
11, No.4, 801-814 (1986).
23. J. N. Luftman, P. R. Lewis, and S. H. Oldach, "Trans-
forming the Enterprise: The Alignment of Business and
Information Technology Strategies," IBM Systems Jour-
nal 32, No.1, 198-221 (1993, this issue).
24. P. G. W. Keen, "Information Technology and the Man-
agement Difference: A Fusion Map," IBM Systems Jour-
na132, No.1, 17-39 (1993, this issue).
25. A. C. Boynton, B. Victor, and B. J. Pine II, "New Com-
petitive Strategies: Challenges to Organizations and In-
formation Technology," IBM Systems Journal 32, No.1,
40--64 (1993, this issue).
26. W. H. Davidson, "Beyond Re-engineering: The Three
Phases of Business Transformation," IBM Systems Jour-
na132, No.1, 65-79 (1993, this issue).
27. B. R. Konsynski, "Strategic Control in the Extended En-
terprise," IBM Systems Joumal32, No.1, 111-142(1993,
this issue).
28. M. Broadbent and P. Weill, "Improving Business and
Information Strategy Alignment: Learning from the
Banking Industry," IBM Systems Journal 32, No.1,
162-179 (1993, this issue).
General references
J. J. Cash and B. Konsynski, "liS Redraws Competitive
Boundaries," Harvard Business Review 63, No.2, 134-142
(1985).
A. C. Hax and N. S. Majluf, Strategic Management: An In-
tegrative Perspective, Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs,
NJ (1984).
J. C. Henderson, "Plugging into Strategic Partnerships: The
Critical liS Connection," Sloan Management Review 31, No.
3, 7-18 (1990).
J. C. Henderson and J. G. Sifonis, "The Value of Strategic liS
Planning: Understanding Consistency, Validity, and liS Mar-
kets," MIS Quarterly 12, 187-200 (1988).
B. Ives and G. P. Learmonth, "The Information System as a
Competitive Weapon," Communications of the ACM 27,
1193-1201(1984).
H. R. Johnston and P. Lawrence, "Beyond Vertical Integra-
tion- The Rise of Value-AddingPartnerships," Harvard Bus-
iness Review 66, No.4, 94-101 (July-August 1988).
R. Kling, "Social Analyses of Computing: Theoretical Per-
spectives in Recent Empirical Research," Computing Surveys
12, No.1, 61-110 (1980).
M. L. Markus and"D. Robey, "Information Technology and
Organization Change: Causal Structure in Theory and Re-
search," Management Science 34, No.5, 583-598 (1988).

--- PAGE 13 ---
VOL32, NO 1, 1993, REPRINT IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL38, NOS 2&3, 1999 HENDERSON AND VENKATRAMAN484
F. W. McFarlan, "Information Technology Changes the Way
You Compete," Harvard Business Review 62, No.3, 98--103
(1984).
M. E. Porter and V. E. Millar, "How Information Technology
Gives You Competitive Advantage" Harvard BusinessRe-
view 63, No.4, 149-160 (July-August 1985).
J. F. Rockart and J. E. Short, "Iff in the 1990s: Managing
Organizational Interdependence," Sloan Management Re-
view 30, No.2, 7-17 (1989). .
P. Strassman, The Informtltion Payoff, The Free Press, New
York (1985).
R. W. Zmud, A. C. Boynton, and G. C. Jacobs, "The Infor-
mation Economy: A New Perspective for Effective Informa-
tion Systems Management," Data Base 16, No.1, 17-23
(1986).
S. Zuboff, In the Age of the Smart Machine, Basic Books,
New York (1988).
Accepted for publication September 8, 1992.
John C. Henderson Systems Research Center, School of
Management, Boston University, 704 Commonwealth Ave-
nue, Boston, Massachusetts 02215 (electronic mail: smg9j2n
@buacca.bu.edu). Dr. Henderson is Professor of Management
Information Systems and Director of the Systems Research Cen-
ter at the Boston University School of Management. He earned
his Ph.D., M.S., and B.S. degrees from the University otTexas
at Austin. His early work focused on decision support systems
and the development of prototyping as an approach to develop-
ing both decision support systems and the more traditional man-
agement information systems. Presently, his research is focused
in three areas: the alignment of business and information tech-
nology strategies, the role of information technology in building
and managing strategic partnerships, and the use of information
technology to support software development teams. He has held
faculty appointments at Florida State University and Ohio State
University and has served as staff director for the Joint Com-
mittee on Electronic Data Processing at the Florida legislature.
Prior to coming to Boston University, Dr. Henderson was on the
faculty of the Alfred P. Sloan School of Management at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He is the author of a
number of articles dealing with management and information
technology issues.
N. VenkatremanAlfred P. Sloan School of Management,
E52-537,Massachusetts Institute ofTechnology, 50Memorial
Drive, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02135. Dr. Venkatraman is
an associate professor at the Sloan School of Management. He
holds a Ph.D. from the University of Pittsburgh, an M.B.A.
from the Indian Institute of Management, and a B.Tech. from
the Indian Institute of Technology. Dr. Venkatraman has pub-
lished extensively in professional and management journals
and serves on the editorial boards of Sloan ManagementRe-
view and the Academy ofManagement Review. For his Ph.D.
dissertation he received the 1986 A. T. Kearney Award for
Outstanding Research in General Management.