--- PAGE 1 ---
49
Guiding incumbent companies in navigating
digital transformations: A qualitative study on
structural ambidexterity and strategic leadership
SabrinaHoessler1
,Claus-ChristianCarbon2
Abstract
PURPOSE: Despite digital transformation being a focus topic for incumbent companies, organizational structures are
a significant barrier to their success. Referring to the positive correlation between ambidexterity and digital innovation, our
research provides guidance on structural ambidexterity for incumbent companies. Previous research has barely differentiated
between exploration and exploitation in digital transformation. In the present paper, we fill part of this research gap by focusing
on structural ambidexterity in digital transformations and providing guidance on how incumbent companies can overcome
organizational challenges. METHODOLOGY: Our research is based on an explorative research design with 33 semi-structured
interviews that allow in-depth information. The interview partners were selected using purposive sampling and represented
different industry and hierarchy levels. All of them have been in a position related to digital transformation in an incumbent
company for the last two years. We ensure scholarly rigor using thematic analysis to analyze our data. FINDINGS: Our decision
tree guides separation or integration based on the closeness of digital activities to the core business and the association of the
activities to exploration or exploitation. Additionally, we recommend considering the digital maturity grade in the decision-
making.Developingacross-functionaldigitaltransformationstrategyandpursuingabalancedportfoliofostersambidexterityin
digital transformation. Clear responsibilities, collaborative decision-making, candidate selection, and collaboration with IT are
essential leadership activities. IMPLICATIONS for theory and practice: Our research expands the existing research on digital
transformations of incumbent companies. We specifically contribute to the limited details on how to separate digital activities
considering an exploration/exploitation perspective. Our study guides practitioners to address one of their major challenges
in digital transformations with the help of our decision tree. ORIGINALITY AND VALUE: Based on the positive correlation
between ambidexterity and digital innovation, our study contributes to the existing research by providing in-depth knowledge of
structural ambidexterity in digital transformations. This detailed information is essential to provide knowledge on enabling the
positive correlation between ambidexterity and innovation in the context of structural ambidexterity.
Keywords: digital transformation, digitalization, organizational structures, structural ambidexterity, temporal ambidexterity,
incumbent companies, guidelines
1 Sabrina Hoessler, PhD Student, University of Bamberg, Department of General Psychology and Methodology, Karlstr. 26, 89129 Langenau, Germany, e-mail: sabrina.hoessler@student.
steinbeis-sibe.de (ORCID ID: https//orcid.org/0000-0002-7606-8891).
2 Claus-Christian Carbon, Full Professor, Head of the Department of General Psychology and Methodology, Head of School, University of Bamberg, University of Bamberg, Department of
General Psychology and Methodology, Markusplatz 3, 96047 Bamberg, Bavaria, Germany, e-mail: ccc@uni-bamberg.de (ORCID ID: https//orcid.org/0000-0002-3446-9347).
Received 29 February 2024; Revised 4 July 2024; Accepted 29 July 2024.
This is an open access paper under the CC BY license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode).
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7341/20242043
JEL Codes: L22, O30, D22
Journal of Entrepreneurship, Management and Innovation (2024)
Volume 20 Issue 4: 49-72

--- PAGE 2 ---
50
Sabrina Hoessler, Claus-Christian Carbon
INTRODUCTION
Digital transformation has become a primary concern for many incumbent companies (Hess et al., 2016; Kane et
al., 2015). Incumbent companies no longer question the decision to digitally transform as this is no longer an option to
staycompetitive(Brunettietal.,2020;Mirkovićetal.,2019;Paulino,2022;Verhoefetal.,2021).Facingmarketdisruptions
enabled by digital technologies and new market entrants, companies need to derive a strategy to embrace digital
transformation(Hessetal.,2016).Incumbentcompaniesrequireanswersonleveragingopportunitiessupportedbydigital
technologies (Westerman et al., 2014). Despite the growing interest, the research on incumbent’s digital transformation is
still quite narrow (Gregory et al., 2015; Oberländer et al., 2021). The availability of new technologies provides companies
across multiple industries (Soto Setzke et al., 2023) with new opportunities (Göbeler et al., 2020) to change their value
propositions (Soto Setzke et al., 2023). Nevertheless, incumbent companies also face challenges in that process (Klos et
al., 2021; Mirković et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2023). Often, companies fall behind on the expected financial improvements
despite investments in digital offerings (Gebauer et al., 2020; Klos et al., 2021). Even if the majority of the existing
literature addresses the impact of technologies on digital transformation (Coreynen et al., 2020; Mirković et al., 2019;
Soluk & Kammerlander, 2021), technological know-how is not identified as a significant barrier to digital transformation
(Mirković et al., 2019). Studies show that planning, developing, and implementing the technological aspects of digital
transformations is most evident, but technological know-how alone is insufficient for success. Instead, the required
organizational changes confront incumbent companies with additional tasks (Bjoerkdahl, 2020; Mirković et al., 2019).
Developing new digital value propositions, such as digital services, requires incumbent companies to adjust processes,
working models, and organizational structures (Soto Setzke et al., 2023). Therefore, aside from technological aspects,
the managerial aspect of digital transformation might have substantial implications (Soluk & Kammerlander, 2021).
The definition of digital transformation shows that it includes improving the existing by raising efficiencies of existing
processes and enhancing products and services by integrating digital technologies. It also contains aspects with a higher
level of change impact, such as rethinking business models in a radically new way (Alghamdi, 2018; Hess et al., 2016;
Schiffer, 2021; Vesna Bosilj Vukšić et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2021). Also, Soto Setzke et al. (2023) point out the fundamental
change character of digital transformation and the differentiation to prior technology changes.
Therefore, digital transformation comprises incremental and radical innovation activities (Hoessler & Carbon, 2022;
Ismail et al., 2017) and can be linked to the concept of ambidexterity (Duncan, 1976; March, 1991). Ambidexterity is
about being able to address current business needs but also addressing future developments. Ambidextrous companies
can balance conflicting demands (Duncan, 1976; Gibson & Birkinshaw, 2004; Michael. Tushman & O’Reilly III, 1996).
Whereas there is individual research on digital transformation or ambidexterity, research has not focused too much on
ambidexterity (Brauer et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2021). Suppose ambidexterity is connected with digital transformation;
in that case, the focus is often on individual aspects such as performance impact (Del Giudice et al., 2021), technical
aspects (Shao et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2021), or IT structures (Iho & Missonier, 2020; Jöhnk et al., 2020; Montealegre
et al., 2019). Nevertheless, research shows a positive correlation between ambidexterity and digital innovation (Del
Giudice et al., 2021). One differentiating factor of the different concepts of ambidexterity is separation and integration via
organizationalstructures,anddigitaltransformationeffortsoftenrequirestructuralchanges(Hessetal.,2016;SotoSetzke
etal.,2023).Multipleresearchersexplainthatdigitaltransformationinfluencesorganizationalstructures(Holotiuk,2020;
Schiffer,2021),andithasbeenidentifiedasachallengeforincumbentcompanies(Bjoerkdahl,2020;Mirkovićetal.,2019).
Nevertheless, this has received little research attention so far, especially not providing in-depth details. Also, a recent
study highlights the need for more research on the centralizing and decentralizing dynamics in digital transformation
(Plekhanov et al., 2023).
We aim to address this research gap. To guide how to manage one of the major challenges in digitally transforming
incumbentcompanies,wefocusonstructuralambidexterityindigitaltransformations.Withthis,weaddresstheresearch
gap on how incumbent companies can overcome organizational challenges (Smith & Beretta, 2021). Addressing the lack
ofdetailsonhowtoseparate,weinvestigateexploration/exploitationseparation,itsdrivingfactors,andhowtoseparateor
integrate digital / core business. As leadership is required to create or reinforce ambidextrous behavior (Alghamdi, 2018;
Bell & Hofmeyr, 2021; Jansen et al., 2008; Keller & Weibler, 2015; Lin & McDonough III, 2011; Mueller et al., 2020; Probst
et al., 2011), we add needed strategic leadership activities to frame our research objective. Our study aims, therefore, to
answer the following research questions (RQs):

--- PAGE 3 ---
51
Guiding incumbent companies in navigating digital transformations:
A qualitative study on structural ambidexterity and strategic leadership
RQ1) How can incumbent companies apply the concept of structural ambidexterity to navigate digital transformation?
RQ2) What elements of strategic leadership do leaders in incumbent companies need to implement when navigating
digital transformation considering structural ambidexterity?
We first develop the theoretical background, make our methodology transparent, and illustrate our results, and
will then discuss the results in the face of already existing findings to draw practical conclusions for entrepreneurship,
management, and innovation leadership (Hoessler & Carbon, 2022; Ismail et al., 2017).
LITERATURE REVIEW
Digital transformation
Digital transformation has gained increasing interest from researchers and practitioners (Klonek et al., 2020; Vesna Bosilj
Vukšić et al., 2018; Westerman et al., 2014). Lacking one unified definition (El Sawy et al., 2020; Haffke et al., 2016),
existing understandings have similarities, which we use for our combined definition in this paper. Digital transformation
goes beyond technologies (Eberl & Drews; El Sawy et al., 2020). It is a leadership challenge to enable the necessary change
to transform the business successfully (Hensellek, 2020). Compared to new digital start-ups, incumbent companies
have already established external relationships, defined internal processes (Zhang et al., 2023), and preserved core
competencies (Klos et al., 2021). Therefore, their reaction to digital transformation is different. In our study, we focus
on incumbent companies to address this distinction. Digital transformation aims to create radically new ways of doing
business (Berghaus & Back, 2016; Holotiuk; Nambisan et al., 2019). A fundamental change in value proposition through,
for example, new business models is characteristic of digital transformation (Zhang et al., 2023). The existing way of
doing business is either substituted, extended, or transformed with the help of digital technologies and leadership (Pihir
et al., 2018). Especially recent developments in three-dimensional printing (Klos et al., 2021) and artificial intelligence
are seen as enablers for transforming decision-making processes or business models (Klos et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023).
Digital transformation can be seen as the most advanced stadium of a three-phase process (Hoessler & Carbon, 2022;
Verhoef et al., 2021). This is a long path achieved by combining incremental and radical innovations shown in different
maturity phases (Goerzig & Bauernhansl, 2018; Porfírio et al., 2021). This transformation process needs to be guided by
a strategic setting (Klos et al., 2021). The first phase of digital transformation is digitization (Tekic & Koroteev, 2019).
This phase is limited to technology (Yoo et al., 2010). The second phase is an intermediate stage between the initial
digitization and the final target of a digitally transformed business. Words like digitalization, digital innovation, and
digital business model change describe phase two. Automated, extended, or substituted business processes with higher
efficiency or higher value added for the customer is the outcome (Cavalcante et al., 2011; Florek-Paszkowska et al., 2021;
Li, 2020; Sousa & Rocha, 2019). Whereas there is no clear key performance indicator, when the next phase is achieved, it
ismoreaboutclusteringdifferentactivitiesonthepathtodigitaltransformation.Therefore,Saarikkoetal.(2020)describe
the three clusters as domains instead of stages. In this paper, we use the term “phase,” as we can see them as consecutive
but not as clearly moving upwards as the term “stage” would imply. Those phases can be connected to digital maturity
grades (Ifenthaler & Egloffstein, 2020). Nevertheless, digital transformation is not a final stage. Instead, it is a path that
includes multiple choices with potentially different outcomes (Furr et al., 2022). With the given definition, we identify
that digital transformation is a process that includes incremental and radical innovations and, therefore, can be linked to
the concept of ambidexterity. In the following section, we will first generate a general understanding of ambidexterity, its
concepts, and how to achieve it independently of the digital context. This is followed by an analysis of the literature on
ambidexterity in digital transformation.
Ambidexterity in general
Companies that balance exploration and exploitation are ambidextrous organizations (Duncan, 1976; Michael. Tushman
& O’Reilly III, 1996). Exploration is characterized by experimenting and investigating radically new topics (March, 1991)
and is associated with radical innovations (Beckman, 2006; Benner & Tushman, 2003). A higher level of risk is associated
with exploration due to the unknown (March, 1991). Exploitation can be described as improving the existing, focusing
on efficiency and productivity gains. Exploitation is closely connected to established processes or products, so the results

--- PAGE 4 ---
52
Sabrina Hoessler, Claus-Christian Carbon
are more obvious and risk-averse (March, 1991). Achieving balance should be the target as too much exploration can
result in high costs with no results, but too much exploitation is unfavorable as it leads to stagnation (March, 1991).
Existent research proves the positive relationship between ambidexterity and a company’s long-term performance
(Brix, 2019). Especially in a fast-changing environment, one characteristic of digital technologies is that a long-term
balance of exploration and exploitation is essential (O’Reilly III & Tushman, 2013; Yoo et al., 2012). As those activities
are paradoxical, managing them is highly challenging for companies—they often have problems achieving ambidexterity.
For example, companies find it difficult to find an applicable balance (Chen & Katila, 2008), not prioritizing one of the
activities, especially exploitation (Chen & Katila, 2008), responding to changing environments (Halevi et al., 2015),
achieving ambidexterity in superior management (Keller & Weibler, 2015) and establishing new mindsets and skills
(Michael Tushman & Euchner, 2015). There is no unique definition of ambidexterity, mainly resulting from different
understandings if exploration and exploitation are complementary or fundamentally incompatible and in competition.
In addition, scholars represent different opinions if ambidexterity means achieving a simultaneous balance of exploration
and exploitation (balanced ambidexterity) (Cao et al., 2009; Gupta et al., 2006; Levinthal & March, 1993) or if it also can
be switching between them over time (combined ambidexterity) (Cao et al., 2009). Based on those various definitions,
multiple concepts of ambidexterity have evolved (Cao et al., 2009). In the original literature on ambidexterity, the main
concepts are structural ambidexterity (Benner & Tushman, 2003; Duncan, 1976; Gibson & Birkinshaw, 2004; O’Reilly III
& Tushman, 2013), sequential ambidexterity/punctuated equilibrium (Boumgarden et al., 2012; Cao et al., 2009; Gupta
et al., 2006; Simsek, 2009) and contextual ambidexterity (Gibson & Birkinshaw, 2004). Reasoned by the interdisciplinary
characteristics of digital innovation and the fast-changing character of digital technologies, Holotiuk and Beimborn
(2019) introduced a new form of ambidexterity called temporal ambidexterity. The different concepts of ambidexterity are
not mutually exclusive but can be combined (Brauer et al., 2021; Jöhnk et al., 2020). If structural separation occurs and
employees are guided to pursue exploration and exploitation activities (contextual), companies combine structural and
contextual ambidexterity. This concept of ambidexterity is called hybrid ambidexterity (Jöhnk et al., 2020; Ossenbrink et
al., 2019). We do not list this concept separately as it involves the combination of structural and contextual ambidexterity,
which would duplicate the individual aspects.
Ambidexterity is often connected to dynamic capabilities, and especially in the digital context, this connection is
justified.Dynamiccapabilitieshelptoaddresschangingenvironmentsandgaincompetitiveadvantage(Teeceetal.,1997).
Dynamic capabilities are split into three primary activities: 1) Sensing, 2) Seizing, and 3) Transforming (Teece, 2007).
On the one hand, sensing can be connected to exploration as it is about identifying new things (Birkinshaw et al.,
2016; Teece, 2007). On the other hand, seizing is related to exploitation as it is about improving the existing through
execution (Birkinshaw et al., 2016; Teece, 2007). Connecting dynamic capabilities with exploration, exploitation, and
ambidexterity leads to the lower-level concepts of sensing (exploration) and seizing (exploitation). Those are associated
with the higher-level concept of transformation, which is about splitting resources (Birkinshaw et al., 2016). Table 1
illustrates the differences between the four concepts of ambidexterity based on the main differentiating factors and
dynamic capabilities perspective.
Table 1. Characterizations of concepts of ambidexterity
Structural
ambidexterity
Sequential
ambidexterity
Contextual
ambidexterity
Temporal
ambidexterity
Responsibility split regarding exploration and
exploitation
Separation of
organizational units
Shift of focus on the
firm level
Employees to split
time
Employees to
shift between
organizational units
Way of managing trade-off between exploration
and exploitation
Separation Consecutive Integration Temporal separation
and Alignment
Dedicated exploration or exploitation
organizational unit
Either / Or Either / Or – changes
over time
Both Both – limited time
Team structure within organizational Unit No details available
– tendency towards
more fix structures
N/A as no different
organizational units
N/A as no different
organizational units
Flexible team
structure – Employees
shifting between units

--- PAGE 5 ---
53
Guiding incumbent companies in navigating digital transformations:
A qualitative study on structural ambidexterity and strategic leadership
Structural
ambidexterity
Sequential
ambidexterity
Contextual
ambidexterity
Temporal
ambidexterity
Dynamic capabilities Separated sensing/
seizing units via
resource-linking
capability
Sensing and seizing
managed via focus-
shifting capability
Sensing and seizing
managed via context-
shaping capability
Separated sensing/
seizing units via
resource-linking
capability, temporal
focus-shifting
capability
Source: Birkinshaw et al. (2016), Hoessler and Carbon (2022), and Holotiuk and Beimborn (2019).
Withthehelpofdualstructures,suchasseparatingbysettingupbusinessunitsdedicatedtoeitherexplorationorexploitation,
the two competing activities can be balanced when following the concept of structural ambidexterity (Duncan, 1976;
Gibson & Birkinshaw, 2004). Separated sensing/seizing units are managed via a resource-linking capability (Birkinshaw
et al., 2016). When a company’s focus is set to either exploration or exploitation over a more extended period and then
shifted consecutively on a company level, companies pursue sequential ambidexterity (Gupta et al., 2006; Simsek, 2009).
Sensing and seizing are managed via a focus-shifting capability (Birkinshaw et al., 2016). Companies enabling employees
to split their time between exploration and exploitation choose contextual ambidexterity by integrating exploration and
exploitation. There is no focus on exploration or exploitation (Gibson & Birkinshaw, 2004). Sensing and seizing are
managedviacontext-shapingcapability(Birkinshawetal.,2016).Temporalambidexteritycombinesstructural,sequential,
and contextual ambidexterity as selected employees shift to the digital innovation lab for a limited time and focus on
explorationduringthistime.Withthisflexibleteamstructure,employeesreturntotheiroriginalbusinessandconcentrate
again on exploitation (Holotiuk & Beimborn, 2019). Separated sensing/seizing units are managed via resource-linking
and focus-shifting capability for employees shifting between units (Birkinshaw et al., 2016). Overall, there is no universal
right decision. Instead, the leadership is responsible for placing the company in a suitable composition of exploration
and exploitation to gain a competitive advantage (Keller & Weibler, 2015). This also highly depends on the context, such
as industries and other environmental factors (Bell & Hofmeyr, 2021; Havermans et al., 2015; Wasono & Furinto, 2018).
Empirical research proves a positive relation between ambidexterity and superior company performance (Brix, 2019),
and leadership is required to create or reinforce ambidextrous behavior (Alghamdi, 2018; Bell & Hofmeyr, 2021; Jansen et
al., 2008; Keller & Weibler, 2015; Lin & McDonough III, 2011; Mueller et al., 2020; Probst et al., 2011). Leadership in this
paperimplies“lead[ing]oneselfandhumancommunities[…]intoaninnovativeandcreativefutureinopenandcomplex
situations under unclearly defined and dynamic conditions” (Faix et al., 2020, p. 61). Aside from motivating people to
change, providing direction and vision and aligning people are leadership responsibilities (Kotter, 2017). This definition
also considers the requirements and specifics of current times (Faix et al., 2020). According to (Samimi et al., 2020, p. 3),
leadership includes “managing conflicting demands,” implicating a connection to ambidexterity.
Ambidexterity in digital transformation
IT ambidexterity is a research stream covering a portion of ambidexterity in digital transformation (Park et al., 2020).
Itdoesnotcoverthefullscopeofdigitaltransformation.Instead,itislimitedtotheparadoxesofITtransformations,such
as IT portfolio decisions or IT architecture (Gregory et al., 2015) and infrastructure changes (Montealegre et al., 2019). In
addition, IT ambidexterity applies the described concepts of structural, sequential, or contextual ambidexterity to the IT
context(Parketal.,2020).Nevertheless,thoseconceptsarelimitedtothetechnologycharacterandpurposeofITwithout
considering the full intent of digital transformation. For example, Park et al. (2020) refer to digitization as not covering
the aspects of digital transformation. Individually, sequential ambidexterity (Smith & Beretta, 2021) and contextual
ambidexterity (Hoessler & Carbon, 2022; Hron et al., 2021) are only sporadically brought into the context of digital
transformation. Smaller companies, mainly, have limited resources and, therefore, pursue a path of digital transformation
with different focus areas over time (Bjoerkdahl, 2020). This concept can be indirectly linked to sequential ambidexterity.
Asking leaders to provide the context for employees to focus on suitable activities can be indirectly mapped to contextual
ambidexterity (Göbeler et al., 2020; Hoessler & Carbon, 2022; Hron et al., 2021).
The highest popularity within the digital transformation context receives structural ambidexterity, mainly focusing
on digital innovation labs (Holotiuk, 2020; Raabe et al., 2020) or separating the traditional from the new digital business
(Kaiser & Stummer, 2020). Structural ambidexterity is described as a concept especially applicable to incumbent
companies, allowing them to continue the existing but also step into the digital world (Schiffer, 2021). In addition,

--- PAGE 6 ---
54
Sabrina Hoessler, Claus-Christian Carbon
we see the closely associated concept of temporal ambidexterity due to its origin in the digital context as a focus area
(Holotiuk & Beimborn, 2019). This paper focuses on structural ambidexterity as organizational structures are identified
as one major challenge of digital transformations of incumbent firms (Mirković et al., 2019). We identified the literature
connecting digital transformation with ambidexterity, mainly focusing on structural ambidexterity, and analyzed the
existing research. We selected “Web of Science” as the scientific platform using the databases CPCI-SSH , CPCI-S , SCI-
EXPANDED , SSCI for our research. “Digital AND ambidex*” is the search topic we used to identify research connecting
digital transformation and ambidexterity. As digital transformation is an emerging research field that has started growing
in the last 15 years (Hoessler & Carbon, 2022; Pihir et al., 2018), we limited our search to 2008-2023. Our initial search
results included 193 articles. After eliminating the non-accessible ones, we reviewed 174 articles. Our exclusion criteria
removed articles with no digital context, different focus areas, no or minimal ambidexterity qualitative context, limited
to technologies, no business context, and not related to incumbent companies. The result was 23 articles. Details can be
found in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Process of literature review
Combining the traditional understanding of separating exploration/exploitation activities via organizational
structures as structural ambidexterity, we categorized the 23 articles into four categories:
1) Not distinguished between exploration/exploitation in digital business (7).
2) Fuzzily distinguished exploration/exploitation in digital business (7).
3) Clear distinguished exploration/exploitation in digital business (4).
4) N/a; no details provided (5).
The comparison of the categories shows that most of the existing research either provides no details, neglects the
differentiationofexploration/exploitationindigitalbusiness,orprovidesonlyminimalinformationabouttheseparation.
Only4outof23analyzedpapersclearlydistinguishbetweenexploration/exploitationindigitalbusiness.Here,theauthors
clearly state the separation of exploration from exploitation in digital business (Brauer et al., 2021; Holotiuk & Beimborn,
2019; Hron et al., 2021). An example of providing a low level of distinguishing between exploration/exploitation in digital
business is the work of Hess et al. (2016). Hess et al. (2016) recommend separating new digital products and integrating
hybrid products related to the core business in the core organization. Sia et al. (2021) and van den Buuse et al. (2021)
extend the scope from product to offerings and propose separating them. Nevertheless, there is no indication of how
incrementalorradicalthenewofferingsare.Fromaprocessperspective,Siaetal.(2021)provideclearguidancetointegrate
automation activities into the core organization. This aligns with the literature review of Hoessler and Carbon (2022),
who classified the automation of existing processes as exploitation. In addition, existing literature suggests considering
innovation stages (Hellmich et al., 2021), focus areas (Jöhnk et al., 2020), and levels (Jaspert & Ebel, 2022). 7 out of 23
papersdonotdistinguishbetweenexploration/exploitationindigitalbusiness.Evenifalotoftheresearchdoesnotlabelit
structuralambidexterity(Schiffer,2021),researchisshowingthatcompaniesseparatenewdigitalbusinesseswiththehelp
ofseparatebusinessunits(Sundetal.,2021)orsub-companies(Kaiser&Stummer,2020).So-calleddigitalunitsordigital
innovation labs are separated to conduct digital innovations. Nevertheless, there is no distinction between exploration

--- PAGE 7 ---
55
Guiding incumbent companies in navigating digital transformations:
A qualitative study on structural ambidexterity and strategic leadership
and exploitation within digital innovation (Åkesson et al., 2018; Göbeler et al., 2020; Holotiuk, 2020; Kaiser & Stummer,
2020; Schiffer, 2021; Smith & Beretta, 2021; Sund et al., 2021). A case study conducted by Göbeler et al. (2020) shows
problemsarisingfromseparatingalldigitalactivities.Inadditiontothefourcategoriesmentionedabove,weanalyzedthe
literature to see if they mention details on how organizational structures can change over time. It is brought up by some
authorsthatadigitalinnovationhubcanbeatemporaryseparationanddissolvedovertime(Åkessonetal.,2018;Göbeler
etal.,2020;Hronetal.,2021;Svahnetal.,2017).Also,weidentifiedthatmorethanhalfoftheexistingstudiesfocusonone
industry. As digital transformation affects a wide range of industry sectors (Hess et al., 2016; Kane et al., 2015), we see this
as a limitation and recommend a study not limited to one specific sector. Table 2 summarizes the results of our literature
research on digital transformation and structural ambidexterity.
Table 2. Literature research on digital transformation and structural ambidexterity
Number (%) Details and sources
Not distinguished exploration/exploitation in
digital business
7 (30%) Everything related to digital separated (Åkesson et al., 2018; Göbeler et al.,
2020; Holotiuk, 2020; Kaiser & Stummer, 2020; Schiffer, 2021; Smith & Beretta,
2021; Sund et al., 2021) but closely connected to core organization (Smith &
Beretta, 2021) or integration of exploration outcome (Holotiuk, 2020)
Case studies show problems arising from separating all digital activities
(Göbeler et al., 2020)
Fuzzily distinguished exploration/exploitation
in digital business
7 (30%) Hybrid products related to core business integrated into the core organization
and new digital products are separated (Hess et al., 2016)
Automation core business (Sia et al., 2021), new digital offerings separate unit
(Sia et al., 2021; van den Buuse et al., 2021)
Renewal and refinement units (limited to digital platforms) (Montealegre &
Iyengar, 2021)
Different set-ups depending on the innovation stage (Hellmich et al., 2021),
focus areas (Jöhnk et al., 2020) and levels (Jaspert & Ebel, 2022)
Clear distinguished exploration/exploitation in
digital business
4 (17%) Exploration in a separate unit (Brauer et al., 2021; Holotiuk & Beimborn, 2019;
Hron et al., 2021; Raabe et al., 2020) but drift to exploitation (Hron et al., 2021)
N/a; no details provided 5 (22%) No details overall on the responsibilities of separate unit (e.g., innovation hub)
vs. core (Kronblad et al., 2023; Soto Setzke et al., 2023; Svahn et al., 2017)
No separation (Gastaldi et al., 2018; Oberländer et al., 2021)
Total 23
Change over time 4 (17%) Dissolvement of innovation hub (Åkesson et al., 2018; Göbeler et al., 2020;
Hron et al., 2021; Svahn et al., 2017)
No details on change over time 19 (83%) No details on changes in separate hub (Brauer et al., 2021; Hellmich et al., 2021;
Hess et al., 2016; Holotiuk, 2020; Jaspert & Ebel, 2022; Jöhnk et al., 2020; Kaiser
& Stummer, 2020; Kronblad et al., 2023; Montealegre & Iyengar, 2021; Raabe
et al., 2020; Schiffer, 2021; Sia et al., 2021; Smith & Beretta, 2021; Soto Setzke et
al., 2023; Sund et al., 2021; van den Buuse et al., 2021)
Total 23
One industry 13 (57%) (Åkesson et al., 2018; Gastaldi et al., 2018; Göbeler et al., 2020; Hron et al.,
2021; Jaspert & Ebel, 2022; Kaiser & Stummer, 2020; Kronblad et al., 2023;
Schiffer, 2021; Sia et al., 2021; Smith & Beretta, 2021; Sund et al., 2021; Svahn et
al., 2017; van den Buuse et al., 2021)
Multiple industries 9 (39%) (Brauer et al., 2021; Hellmich et al., 2021; Hess et al., 2016; Holotiuk, 2020;
Holotiuk & Beimborn, 2019; Jöhnk et al., 2020; Oberländer et al., 2021; Raabe
et al., 2020; Soto Setzke et al., 2023)
Unclear 1 (4%) (Montealegre & Iyengar, 2021)
Total 23
METHODOLOGY AND RESEARCH METHODS
TheunderlyingmethodtoanswerourresearchquestionisbasedonMayring(2001)andenrichedwithguidanceprovided
by Braun and Clarke (2006) for code development. Figure 2 displays the method used in the present paper.

--- PAGE 8 ---
56
Sabrina Hoessler, Claus-Christian Carbon
Figure 2. Research design for a qualitative study
Source: Mayring (2001) and Braun and Clarke (2006).
Our study has the purpose of addressing the research gap on how to overcome organizational challenges (Smith
& Beretta, 2021) and master structural ambidexterity in digital transformations. Therefore, we provide guidance for
incumbent companies on achieving structural ambidexterity in digital transformations. Therefore, one of our two
research questions is: How can incumbent companies apply the concept of structural ambidexterity to navigate digital
transformation? In our study, we investigate exploration/exploitation separation and its driving factors, as well as how
to separate or integrate digital/core business. The baseline for those focus areas in our research is the literature research
illustrated in Table 2. Explained by the necessity of leadership to achieve ambidexterity (Alghamdi, 2018; Bell & Hofmeyr,
2021; Jansen et al., 2008; Keller & Weibler, 2015; Lin & McDonough III, 2011; Mueller et al., 2020; Probst et al., 2011) we
also consider needed strategic leadership activities in our research objective. Related to this, our second research question
is: What elements of strategic leadership do leaders in incumbent companies need to implement when navigating digital
transformation considering structural ambidexterity? After defining the purpose and research question, as a second
step, we provide insights into the conceptional context by providing definitions of the affected research streams digital
transformationandambidexterity.Inaddition,wecombinethetwotopics,focusingonstructuralambidexterityfollowing
our research questions.
Sampling: One aspect of our purposive sampling (Etikan et al., 2016) was ensuring our 33 interview partners work
in incumbent companies, not digital startups (Misoch, 2019). Another characteristic of the expertise of the selected
participants is the job title. Our selection criteria of being in a position related to digital transformation in an incumbent
companyinthelasttwoyearsensuredfamiliaritywiththeresearchtopic.Differenthierarchylevelsprovideaheterogeneous
sample for the leadership aspects we address with our research. In addition, we identified that a perspective on multiple
industries is beneficial, so we clustered our interview partners using the Global Industry Classification Standard.
Interviewing study participants from different industries increases the robustness and credibility of our findings as
we allow a holistic view considering multiple industries. This is especially relevant due to the wide-spread impact of
digital transformation on multiple industries. In addition to industry experience, we included researchers or lecturers
in our study to cover the research side. Split by the variables sector experience and hierarchy levels, Table 3 shows the
composition of our interview partners.

--- PAGE 9 ---
57
Guiding incumbent companies in navigating digital transformations:
A qualitative study on structural ambidexterity and strategic leadership
Table 3. Study participants
Variables Variable description Number (%)
Sector experience Consumer Discretionary Sector (Automobiles & Components) 5 (15%)
Healthcare (Pharmaceuticals, Biotechnology & Life Science) 5 (15%)
Industrials (Electrical Equipment, Machinery, Transportation, Construction and Engineering) 10 (30%)
Materials (Chemicals, Construction Materials) 3 (9%)
Information Technology (Technology Hardware & Equipment, Software & Service) 4 (12%)
Consultancy 3 (9%)
Research 3 (9%)
Total 33
Hierarchy level Senior Executive 3 (9%)
Vice President 3 (9%)
Director 7 (21%)
Head of 10 (30%)
Manager 4 (12%)
Consultant 3 (9%)
University Professor 3 (9%)
Total 33
Researchmethod:Whileresearchonambidexterityandleadershipoftenusesaquantitativeresearchdesign(Baškarada
et al., 2016), we decided to use a qualitative research design followed by a thematic analysis (Braun & Clarke, 2006). As
we addressed the research gap in in-depth detail on structural ambidexterity in digital transformation, the explorative
research design offers this possibility. In addition, as there is still limited research combining the individual research
streams of digital transformation and structural ambidexterity (Holotiuk & Beimborn, 2019; Jaspert & Ebel, 2022), the
explorativeresearchdesignfitsourstudyrequirements.Aftercodingeachbatchofthreeinterviews,weexaminedwhether
we accomplished code saturation (Hennink et al., 2017). We reached code saturation after 11 rounds of reviewing three
interviews in a batch, which resulted in 33 interviews. Driven by our sample size and as we suggest further testing our
study results with a quantitative or longitudinal study, our research can be treated as a pilot study (van Teijlingen &
Hundley, 2001). To increase the robustness of our study, one researcher did the initial coding of the transcripts, and
the second researcher performed an inter-coder check (Mayring, 2014). The research partner acted as supervisor
with unlimited access to all material related to the research. The second reviewer confirmed the suggested coding and
conclusions. To ensure consistency (Misoch, 2019) we conducted semi-structured interviews as a qualitative research
approach. Based on the main findings of our literature research on digital transformation and structural ambidexterity,
our open-ended questions focused on separation/integration in digital transformations of incumbent companies as well
as associated leadership aspects and what could trigger changes over time. The software MicrosoftTeams allowed us to
interview study participants globally. Between May 2023 and July 2023, the first author conducted all interviews using
Microsoft Teams©. To be able to familiarize with the data, we transcribed all interviews. MicrosoftTeams enabled the
first raw transcription which we imported into MAXQDA (VERBI Software, 2021). The naturalized/ intelligent verbatim
approachhelpedusgenerateeasilyreadabletranscriptsfromtherawtranscripts(McMullin,2023).Weusedtimestampsto
connect the transcripts with the recorded audio files from Microsoft Teams and anonymized all data. The steps described
in Figure 2 following “Familiarizing with data” are described in the following section.
RESULTS
Our literature research on organizational structures, displayed in Table 2, served to set the level of abstraction. We are
thereforefocusinginourthematicanalysisonhowtheseparationisdone(exploration/exploitation,digital/corebusiness),
driving factors behind the separation, changes over time, and aspects of temporal ambidexterity. The guidance for code
development provided by Braun and Clarke (2006) is the baseline to answer our research question. Appendix (Tables 4, 5,
and6)displaysthedetailsofourprocess,fromourinitialcodingtodefinedthemes(Braun&Clarke,2006).Toenhanceour

--- PAGE 10 ---
58
Sabrina Hoessler, Claus-Christian Carbon
research from a scholarly rigor perspective, we applied the procedure described by Gioia et al. (2013) for code clustering
and illustration. As a first step, we generated initial codes, which were revised by either rewording, summarizing, or
deleting. The result of this process step is 1st
order concepts. Those are reviewed and combined in 2nd
order themes (Gioia
et al., 2013). As a final step, we aggregated all 2nd
order themes into aggregated dimensions (Gioia et al., 2013). Figure 3
visualizes the summary of our results.
Figure 3. Structural ambidexterity in digital transformation and strategic leadership aspects
Organizational separation: Exploration/Exploitation
Followingtheliteratureonambidexterity(March,1991),structuralseparationofexplorationandexploitationisoneofthe
main concepts to become ambidextrous (Benner & Tushman, 2003; Duncan, 1976; Gibson & Birkinshaw, 2004; O’Reilly
III & Tushman, 2013). Separation is also the most addressed concept in the context of digital transformation. Based on
our interview results, we provide insights on when to separate and integrate digital business in terms of exploration and
exploitation and the details explaining the rationale.
Digital exploration separated: Our study results show that one decision criterion to separate or integrate is how close
the digital business is to the core business. Our interview partners suggest that if the digital exploration is distant to the
core business, separate it. With these distinguishing criteria of closeness to business, we can provide further details on the
differentiation made in the literature of new digital products (Hess et al., 2016) and offerings (Sia et al., 2021; van den
Buuse et al., 2021). One of our interview partners states it with the following words: “Running digital initiatives, more on
the exploration area, [***] do[ing] something fundamentally different, doing that through a separate group [***] or even
legal entity.” The recommendation is even to place the separate digital exploration unit geographically distant. Separate
unitscanbecarvedoutinternallywithinaResearchandDevelopmentorganization,anexploration(digital)innovationhub,
or a think tank for explorative activities. All those set-ups allow employees to focus on explorative digital activities. Aside
frominternalseparation,externallybuyingsharesofstartupsalsoenablesincumbentcompaniestohavedigitalexploration
activities separated. The activities of a separate digital innovation unit are characterized by piloting radical new things.
According to our interview partners, the separation allows “try[ing] something completely new” and “always keep[ing]

--- PAGE 11 ---
59
Guiding incumbent companies in navigating digital transformations:
A qualitative study on structural ambidexterity and strategic leadership
thepipelineofideasfilled”byscoutingnewtechnologies.Wealsofoundoutthattheaspectofpilotingby“start[ing]small
and [***] try[ing] very different things” is needed to think outside the box and possibly within a separate unit.
Whenseparating,ourinterviewpartnerssuggestthatincumbentcompaniesestablishdedicatedbudgetsandstructures.
Having a dedicated budget was especially important as, without a budget, improving existing topics wins over digital
explorationduetoshort-timeprioritizationandquickerandmoreknownreturns.Asthebudgetisoftenallocatedthrough
performance achievement measured by KPIs, digital exploration units would risk not getting the needed funding. We
suggest implementing different processes and structures in a separate digital exploration unit to ensure the needed speed
and flexibility. Ideas brought up are flat hierarchies or product owner structures instead of hierarchical organizations.
Associated with different processes is the need to create trust and freedom. One of our interview partners described it
with the following words: “Create the atmosphere, the room for that explorational task [***], give the freedom to the
people on different levels to work on the future.” It is essential not to overwhelm employees with too much guidance and
controlmechanisms,especiallyintheearlystagesofexploration.Instead,leadersshouldcreateasafespacetoexplorenew
solutions without fear. The separation of digital exploration enables leaders in incumbent companies to develop that trust
and freedom and not get wound up in the follow-up culture of the core business.
Digital exploitation closely integrated: Following the same logic as for separation, our study results suggest not
separating but instead integrating digital exploitation closely connected to the existing business. When, for example,
digitizing the existing product portfolio or automating processes with the help of digital technologies, the baseline are the
existing products or processes of the incumbent company. Digital exploitation is built on the company’s existing business.
Therefore, integrating digital exploitation is recommended by our interview partners. One study participant summarizes
this with the following statement:” [It] would not make [***] sense to separate this from each other structurally. You
need the process expertise and the digitalization expertise in this field [***] and you must bring this as closely together as
possible and not separate this:” Detailed examples are integration in business units via centralized departments or even
closer to the day-to-day business via support functions or directly in the business. This integration and close connection
to the existing core business is essential to understanding processes to improve efficiency through digital technologies.
Also, as digital technologies are one enabler to more efficient processes, integration can be explained by the business
ownership to improve. Even if there is a high priority on improving internally incrementally, as one interview partner
stated: “Make my daily work better and not do[ing] something completely radical,” it is not limited to internal aspects
but also addressing product improvements. The necessity of having core business knowledge is one major result in our
studyexplainingtherecommendationforintegration.Ourinterviewpartnersfurtherdistinguishinprocess,product,and
customer knowledge. It can be described in the words of one of our study participants: “The functional experience has
amoreimportantrolebecause[***]wefocusonthecurrentstatusand[***]you’rediscussingonaprocesslevel.Youneed
to know how the processes are built, what are some standards [***] and what are the pain points.” Also, having customer
relationships and knowing how the company engages with customers is important and explains the integration.
Organizational separation: Digital/Core business
Aside from separating exploration and exploitation in digital transformations, our literature research shows that some
authors refer to a separation of all digital activities (Åkesson et al., 2018; Göbeler et al., 2020; Holotiuk, 2020; Kaiser &
Stummer,2020;Schiffer,2021;Smith&Beretta,2021).Nevertheless,theexistingresearchlacksdetailshere,andourstudy
results provide insights on occasions supporting this separation and associated risks.
Digital business separated: Our study shows that one reason for separating all digital activities from the core
organization is to build up a digital mentality through merger & acquisitions (M&A). One interview partner explained it in
thefollowingwords:“That’swhywedecidedtousetheresourcesfromoutside,usestartups[and]disruptivetechnologies.”
More specifically, startups in the digital area are often acquisition targets to bring a digital mindset into an incumbent
company. Similar to building up a digital mentality through a merger, M&A is the idea of separating a unit to generate
a startup culture internally. Benefits related to the digital context are that those startups within an incumbent company
can be more flexible, agile, dynamic, and faster. All requirements are often mentioned in the context of fast-changing
technologies. The separation explains how incumbent companies can focus on necessities specific to the digital context
they have not been growing with.
Risks neglecting exploration and exploitation differences in digital: Building up a digital mentality through M&A and
generating a startup culture are reasons we identified justifying separating all digital activities. Nevertheless, our study
results show, similar to the work of Göbeler et al. (2020), that there are risks associated with this kind of separation. One

--- PAGE 12 ---
60
Sabrina Hoessler, Claus-Christian Carbon
risk with separating digital from the core business is that incumbent companies could favor digital over core business.
Digital is often associated with something new, fancy, and something people want to belong to. Not educating people
enough about what digital means, especially the link to the core business for digital exploitation, can lead to the fact that
the digital unit is favored over the core business. Some injustice could arise as the core business feels like being alone
and responsible for the company’s profit, and digital is seen as the part of the company that is getting investments such
as new office spaces. One of our study participants summarizes this: “How do you feel belonging to the legacy part, to
the classic part? While the others are the ones getting the invest[ments] and the others are [***] asked for more EBIT
to support them? [***] You can either be on the sunny side [and] spend the money, or you can [***] be on the maybe
classical side.” Also, Oberländer et al. (2021) describe the tensions between the core business and the digital business.
As mentioned above, we identified that digital exploitation needs to be closely connected or integrated into the core
business. If the separation is now based on digital/core business, we identified a risk of diminishing digital activities in the
corebusinessduetotheseparation.Withoutacloseconnection,knowledgeaboutnewtechnologiesandmindsetscannot
be transferred to the core organization, resulting in increased efficiencies. One of our interview partners condensed it by
saying: “If you have a digital hub where everything digital happens, the old company will stay in the non-digital world.”
In addition, separating all digital activities could lead to a focus on more radical new activities, and no digitalization
activities are performed for the existing business, neglecting the ambidexterity concept. We also identified that in the
current stage of having a lot of digital technologies readily available, with the speed of new developments increasing and
somehow already integrated into the business, we see difficulties in distinguishing digital and core for a separation. The
non-digital and digital world continuously merges, and as one study participant said: “Nowadays, digital is a necessity.
Ican’timagineoneworkshopwhereyoutrytodevelopyourexistingportfoliowhereyoudon’tthinkaboutincorporating
digital.” Therefore, we see a risk in drawing a clear line between digital/core business, especially the more advanced
a company is in its digital transformation.
Another risk associated with difficulties distinguishing digital from core is that scaling up new digital ideas, such as
new products or business models, does not require to be ringfenced anymore but instead requires a sales organization
and more structures. Therefore, our interview partners stated the necessity of integrating digital at one point to gain
efficiencies and grow the business. One study participant summarizes the thoughts of this risk: “If this is too much
disconnectedfromthecorebusiness,tr[ying]toexploit[***]andtry[ing]tomakethingsmoreefficient,thenyouhave[a]
challenge.”Thisriskbecomesevenmorerelevantfordigitalexploitationasthedigitalunitcouldexploretechnologiesthat
are not feasible for the use cases. Integration into the core business is seen as a challenge if the core business needs are not
addressed. This risk is closely connected to the risk of missing process and product know-how. If a digital unit is separated
without or low interaction with the core business, there is a lack of the needed process and product know-how from
experienced employees. One interview partner explained this aspect: “They might not be that good [in] being creative
or experimenting with technology or building prototypes. [Instead] they are good in having a product or a service and
scalingthat,dealingwithcustomers,havingoperationalsalesdivisionsandcustomerexchange.This[***]explainswhyin
acceleration it is better to be closer to existing business again.” Separating all digital activities could lead to the fact as one
study participant states: “That you create something that the market is not looking for.”
Temporal ambidexterity: Temporal ambidexterity is an aspect brought up less in the interviews; nevertheless, it was
mentioned by multiple participants and justifies that we include it in our results. We follow the definition of temporal
ambidexterity given in the Literature review section. With a flexible team structure, employees work in the digital
innovationlabforalimitedtime,andemployeesreturntotheiroriginalbusiness(Holotiuk&Beimborn,2019).Thestudy
of Holotiuk and Beimborn (2019) assumes that the digital innovation lab is only responsible for exploration. Following
this understanding, our interview partners see temporal ambidexterity as helpful for mutual learning. On the one hand,
it helps mitigate the risk of difficulties integrating innovations later. The words of one of our interview partners illustrate
this: “I think the success of the exploration also depends on if the ideas can be brought back to the process. If they can
be brought to the exploitation. So maybe it would help to have colleagues [***] working on already existing processes
that they get some time, [for example] one day a week time to work in the innovation hub.” On the other hand, assuming
temporal ambidexterity can also be applied to the separation of digital/core business, this can help foster mutual learning
in terms of process and product knowledge for the employees in the digital lab, but also digital skills and work methods
for employees located in the core business. Again, this mitigates the risks of missing process and product know-how and
diminishes digital activities in the core business. Nevertheless, it was mentioned multiple times that leaders must ensure

--- PAGE 13 ---
61
Guiding incumbent companies in navigating digital transformations:
A qualitative study on structural ambidexterity and strategic leadership
consistency in flexible structures. This is explained by having a stable core team to ensure processes are known, and it is
not always a starting from scratch.
Strategic leadership
As it is a leadership challenge to enable the necessary change in digital transformations (Hensellek, 2020) and reinforce
ambidextrous behavior (Alghamdi, 2018; Bell & Hofmeyr, 2021; Jansen et al., 2008; Keller & Weibler, 2015; Lin &
McDonough III, 2011; Mueller et al., 2020; Probst et al., 2011), we will cover strategic leadership topics associated with
structural ambidexterity.
Strategy: Our study results show that a clear company vision and how digital transformation is embedded is crucial.
The vision makes the targeted future of the company transparent, including aspects such as where the company wants to
be active and how the company wants to be seen. The strategy and road map are associated with a vision, detailing how
the company intends to achieve the target picture. This also includes organizational structures and innovation activities
exploration and exploitation. One interview partner states: “Have a clear vision of where they [want to] go and what they
want,[forexample]thedifferentstepstheyneedtotakeintheexplorationandintheexploitationtogetthereandthenkeep
ontrack[of]both”asimportant.Ourstudyresultsemphasizethatdigitaltransformationactivitiesneedtobealignedwith
thecorporateanddigitaltransformationstrategycoveringexplorationandexploitationbasedonthevision.Ourinterview
partnerseesthetopmanagementresponsibilityasthefollowing:“C-levelneedstoprovidesomekindofstrategicframing.
So simply to avoid that [***] innovation [focused employees] are working on topics that are not in line with the strategic
route of the company.” In addition, we want to highlight that transparency and continuous communication of the vision
and strategy is crucial. Aside from having a common vision and strategy, cross-functional collaboration is vital in digital
transformation. Having diverse teams and collaborating with different functions and departments to pursue the strategy
and vision was mentioned as relevant. The fast-changing character of digital technologies forces companies to not rely on
individualsbutinsteadcross-functionalteamstoleveragethemostofit.Closelyassociatedwithambidextrousleadership,
our study results provide evidence about the necessity of awareness about differences of exploration and exploitation in the
top management. Different leadership is required for exploration and exploitation; not everything in digital should be
treated the same way. One study participant phrased it like this: “I think it’s awareness and also teaching the organization
that there are different things and not digital is digital.” Aside from knowing the difference, keeping in mind that both
activities are relevant for long-term success and, therefore, achieving a long-term balance was emphasized as an essential
topic for top management. We can connect this aspect to the vision and strategy as top management should integrate
both activities. This can be summarized with the words of one of our interview partners: “A leader must be conscious or
must know for himself that these two tasks that he has need to be balanced.” Closely associated with this is the 1st
order
concept balancing portfolio. Regarding balancing exploration and exploitation in digital transformation, our interview
partners referred to balancing activities with the help of portfolio management. This means ensuring that activities in
digital transformation related to exploration with a higher level of risk are more future-oriented while also exploiting the
existingbusinesswiththehelpofdigitaltechnologies.Theinnovationportfolioshouldbecomposedofboth.Exploitation
activities ensure the current product portfolio continues to deliver a constant cash flow, which can be allocated to invest
in exploration activities. A balanced portfolio is seen as crucial, as one interview partner described with the following
words:“Ifyoujustexploititanddon’texplore,youwilldiefromlackofinnovation.Ifyoujustexplore,notexploit,youwill
starve.” Our interview partners combined this recommendation with the product life cycle and connected the approach
with the Boston Consulting matrix (BCG). One study participant explained it that way: “If you take the classical BCG
matrix [***], then you [***] would consider the stars or sometimes even the cash cows to be your products which are in
your portfolio really established and you still have to work on these products to improve them and to still earn money
with them [***]. And [***] it’s more the direction or the positioning of these question marks to be considered as the more
innovative products where [***] exploration activities will happen in [***] your portfolio.”
Leadership activities: Aside from creating a strategic framework, we identified further leadership activities as relevant
for structural ambidexterity in digital transformations of incumbent companies. Our study results indicate that leaders
need to establish clear responsibilities. This includes being clear about what precisely exploration and exploitation mean.
Especially in cases of separation, the scope and task of the separate unit need to be clearly defined and communicated to
avoid the feeling of injustice.Establishingleaderswithclearjobdescriptionsforseparateentitiessupportsthissuggestion.
Closely connected to responsibilities, top management must ensure they select fitting candidates for exploration and
exploitation responsibilities in digital transformation. One study participant explains this with the words: “Leadership

--- PAGE 14 ---
62
Sabrina Hoessler, Claus-Christian Carbon
needs to identify what people are [***] best for and put the right people in the right [***] position [***] or organization.”
Different skill sets and personnel preferences are required on the individual employee level, especially when it comes to
exploration and exploitation. It can be further detailed with the words of one of our interview partners: “[Who] is very
innovativeshouldbefocusingonexplor[ing]thingsandtheonesthatareverystructured,ofcourse,youneedtobealittle
bit innovative [***] for exploitative things, but if you are a researcher, for example, that isn’t the best choice for that.” Of
course,amindsetthatfitsthedigitalcontextshouldalsobeconsideredforcandidateselection.Knowingthatmostleaders
similar to employees have slight preferences for exploration or exploitation, our interview partners suggest collaborative
decision-making as a countermeasure to foster ambidexterity. Based on the study results, we suggest having a sounding
board and increasing diversity in the leadership team to support ambidexterity. One interview partner explained that
“[the leader] needs to find where he is good in and needs to get the others [***] helping him to do the other thing.”
Connected to skill set, candidate selection, and cross-functional projects, we identified the importance of collaborating
with IT. Due to the nature of digital transformation in digital technologies, some digital literacy is crucial and involves
experts from the IT department.
Impacting factors: We identified in the Literature review section that only a view paper focus on changes over time
in terms of separation and integration (Åkesson et al., 2018; Göbeler et al., 2020; Hron et al., 2021; Svahn et al., 2017).
Wehavebeenfocusingonthisaspectinourresearchtogainmoreinsights.Ourinterviewpartnersarguedthatexploration
and exploitation should not be isolated in the sense of incremental and radical innovations. Instead, an innovation can
be looked at as having different innovation phases. The innovation can start with an exploration phase and then mature
with exploitation at one point. Therefore, we recommend establishing a minimum level of collaboration, especially when
separating exploration and when it is close to the core business. One study participant summarized it with the following
statement: “[There] [s]hould be a[n] [***] intense link to the exploitation organization, that the transfer is fast because
otherwise, the benefit out of the exploration [***] is maybe not that big.” Therefore, we identified that the shift from
exploration to exploitation can be a trigger to integrate activities into the core business. In addition, we identified the
maturity grade incumbent companies within digital transformation as an impacting factor on separation and integration
decisions. The digital maturity grade is a trigger point to rethink separation decisions. This can be connected to the
three-phase approach we described in the Literature review. Similar to the guidance we provided in generating a startup
culture, at the beginning of the digital transformation, a separation of all digital activities is recommended based on our
study results. One of our interview partners explained this with the words: “In the beginning, it was very [***] central
because that knowledge did not exist in the organization.” So, generating digital literacy and creating first successes can
help establish a digital mindset and acceptance with the company by having a dedicated separate unit. Depending on the
closeness of the core business, the more mature companies become, the more pull for digital improvements for the core
business is generated, which is a trigger to dissolve the digital hub.
Connecting to the color coding displayed in Figure 3, we identified that the traditional way of structural separation
focusing on exploration and exploitation is associated with most counts. The comparable lower number of counts related
to “Digital business separated” and the medium number of counts linked to the risks let us conclude that separating all
digital activities can be recommended at certain times as a solution, but leaders need to be aware of the risks. As the risks
are often closely associated with exploration and exploitation, which are different activities requiring different skills and
leadership, this justifies the importance of the traditional ambidexterity concept. Therefore, we recommend that leaders
monitor the impacting factors and risks to make a suitable decision on separation.
DISCUSSION
As the significant challenge of incumbent companies in digital transformation is related to organizational structures
(Bjoerkdahl,2020;Mirkovićetal.,2019)andlimitedin-depthresearchonorganizationalambidexterity,ourstudyanswers
this research gap. Our research addresses the lack of details on separation by investigating exploration/exploitation
separation, its driving factors, and digital/core business separation. Figure 4 illustrates our main findings regarding
separation and integration in a matrix. As our literature research in Table 2 illustrates, most authors do not distinguish
betweenexploration/exploitationindigitaltransformationorprovideonlyminimaldetails.Questioningour33interview
partners enabled us to generate deeper insights and advance the research. We identified that the closeness of the digital
activitiestothecorebusinessandwhethertheactivitiesarerelatedtoexplorationorexploitationshoulddrivethedecision
to separate or integrate those activities. We recommend separation if incumbent companies set an exploration focus for

--- PAGE 15 ---
63
Guiding incumbent companies in navigating digital transformations:
A qualitative study on structural ambidexterity and strategic leadership
digitalactivitiesthatarefarfromthecorebusiness.ConcreteexamplesincludeaResearchandDevelopmentorganization,
an exploration (digital) innovation hub, or a think tank for explorative activities. Separating distant digital exploration
activities enables companies to ensure freedom, establishing different processes and dedicated budgets to drive digital
exploration successfully. We see two options if incumbent companies target exploring digital activities but still have some
closeness to the core business. On the one hand, companies can separate those activities but ensure collaboration with the
core organization. On the other hand, incumbent companies can integrate those activities into the core organization but
ensureenoughfreedomandadedicatedbudget.Thisrecommendationisbasedonourfindingsonexploration/exploitation
distinguishing and closeness/distance to the core business. As the constellation of exploration of digital activities close to
the core business affects both aspects, we see two options regarding organizational structures. In addition, our interview
partnersidentifiedrisksforintegratingexplorationactivitiescloselyconnectedwiththecorebusiness,whichareseparated,
but also recommended a dedicated budget and structures for exploration activities.
Figure 4. Decision-matrix for structural ambidexterity in digital transformation
Our interview results provide evidence of our recommendation to integrate digital exploitation activities closely
related to the core business. We explain this with the need for core business knowledge such as process, product, and
customer familiarity. Some authors refer in their work to the separation of digital business from the core business
(Åkesson et al., 2018; Göbeler et al., 2020; Holotiuk, 2020; Kaiser & Stummer, 2020; Schiffer, 2021; Smith & Beretta, 2021;
Sund et al., 2021) but also providing indicators of problems arising in this context (Göbeler et al., 2020). Based on our
study results, we recommend that incumbent companies decide on separating digital and core business based on their
digital maturity grade. Especially in the early stages of digital transformations, separating digital activities allows them to
generate a startup culture internally. Higher flexibility, speed, and agility will enable an adaptation to the digital context.
Connecting this to our guidance based on exploration/exploitation, we recommend seeing different innovation phases
as trigger points for change. Moving toward integration in case of increasing digital maturity and closeness to the core
business or continued separation in case of exploration focus distant to the core business.
Aside from the pureorganizationstructuretosupportambidexterity,ourstudyaddressesstrategicleadership aspects
that are necessary to foster ambidexterity (Alghamdi, 2018; Bell & Hofmeyr, 2021; Jansen et al., 2008; Keller & Weibler,

--- PAGE 16 ---
64
Sabrina Hoessler, Claus-Christian Carbon
2015; Lin & McDonough III, 2011; Mueller et al., 2020; Probst et al., 2011). Figure 5 summarizes our recommendations
on organization structures in digital transformation in a decision tree and connects it with strategic leadership aspects
and a dynamic capability perspective. The baseline for organizational ambidexterity achieved through a structural
separation is a cross-functional digital transformation strategy, which should be embedded in the company strategy. We
identified a clear vision and strategy as crucial to guiding employees and managers. Senior leadership should be aware
of the differences between exploration and exploitation, the role of those activities, and their balance in their digital
transformation strategy. Using a portfolio approach to ensure balancing exploration and exploitation and then setting up
organizational structures based on our recommended decision tree will foster ambidexterity in digital transformations of
incumbent companies. In addition to the traditional concept of structural ambidexterity, our study includes the concept
of temporal ambidexterity, which was developed in the digital context (Holotiuk & Beimborn, 2019). This could be
applied in the case of separation based on digital/core business and exploration/exploitation. Nevertheless, we identified
the necessity for a certain degree of consistency. Our identified leadership activities establishing clear responsibilities,
collaborative decision making, candidate selection, and collaborating with IT are required to support the balance in
digital transformation in incumbent companies continuously. As dynamic capabilities are often brought up in the context
of ambidexterity, we incorporated related aspects based on the research of Hoessler and Carbon (2022) and Birkinshaw
et al. (2016). Separation is associated with separated sensing and seizing units linked via resource-linking capability.
Temporal ambidexterity adds a temporal focus-shifting capability.
Figure 5. Structural ambidexterity in digital transformation: Decision tree embedded in a strategic framing
CONCLUSION
This study aimed to develop guidance for incumbent companies on the question of separation and integration in their
digital transformations. Existing research either neglects or provides little insight into the differentiation between
exploration and exploitation. Our results show the importance of understanding the differences between exploration
and exploitation in digital transformation. Exploration is associated with piloting radical new things, a higher level of
risk, and being more future-oriented. Exploitation is characterized by using the incumbent company’s existing products
or processes as a baseline. The returns are quicker and defined with a higher level of certainty. One of the major drivers
for exploitation is incremental efficiency increase enabled by digital technologies. The understanding of exploration and

--- PAGE 17 ---
65
Guiding incumbent companies in navigating digital transformations:
A qualitative study on structural ambidexterity and strategic leadership
exploitation in digital transformation follows March (1991). Our study helps incumbent company leaders overcome the
challenges posed by digital transformation using structural ambidexterity. As incumbent companies often fall behind
their expectations in digital transformation, we provide with our decision tree guidance to help them evaluate which
activities should be separated or integrated to capture the expected results. We also provide descriptions and examples
of exploration and exploitation activities to allow practitioners to apply this in their incumbent companies. Our study
enlightens incumbent companies about the crucial differences between exploration and exploitation activities in digital
transformation. For instance, we clarify the distinction between piloting radical new initiatives and targeting incremental
efficiency increases enabled by digital technologies. This increased transparency about different digital transformation
activities helps incumbent companies avoid separation based on digital vs. non-digital business without being aware of
theassociatedrisks,suchasnotaddressingbusinessandcustomerrequirements.Inaddition,ourstudyhelpspractitioners
rethink their structural set-up over time, allowing them to adapt structures as necessary based on, for example, increased
digitalmaturity grades.Asincumbentcompaniesseeorganizationalstructuresasamajorchallenge,andthereis evidence
of a positive correlation between ambidexterity and digital innovation, we provide further insights with our study results.
We reveal that the closeness of digital activities to the core business and whether the activities are related to exploration
or exploitation are major decision-making criteria for leaders. Our recommendation for exploration digital activities
that are distant to the core business is separation. In contrast, exploitation digital activities closely connected to the core
businessshouldbeintegrated.Explorationdigitalactivitiesclosetothecorebusinesscanbeeitherseparatedorintegrated
by including both decision-making criteria.
Nevertheless, we recommend ensuring collaboration with the core organization in case of separation and generating
enoughfreedomandadedicatedbudgetincaseofintegration.Incumbentcompanieswithalowdigitalmaturitygradeare
supportedwithaseparationtobuildupknowledgeandhaveadigitalstartupculture.However,werecommendintegration
when increasing the digital maturity grade and closeness to the core business is given. The broader company vision
provides guidance to leaders and employees about the targeted future state of a company to ensure that resources are used
effectively, supporting the company’s goals and a unified direction of ongoing and planned activities. Aligning the digital
transformation strategy with the overall company strategy based on the vision is essential that digital transformation
initiatives are prioritized based on their strategic impact. As a company’s vision considers the target market, ensuring
digital transformation projects are market-driven, and market changes will also be addressed. Furthermore, as the overall
visionislong-termfocused,analignmentsupportsconcentratingonexplorationandexploitationindigitaltransformation
rather than prioritizing short-term gains due to quicker payoffs. In addition, breaking down the digital transformation
strategy into a roadmap allows differentiation into exploration and exploitation. It helps to ensure effective and efficient
resource management, supporting the long-term goals of the company if this is aligned with the broader vision.
Furthermore, integrating digital transformation with the company’s strategy allows employees to identify their
contribution to the overall goals and can support employee motivation and commitment. Especially in cross-functional
digitaltransformationactivities,thealignmentcangiveacommonpurposeandenhancetherequiredchangemanagement
process.Therefore,incorporatingacross-functionaldigitaltransformationstrategyinthecompanystrategyanddeveloping
a balanced portfolio supports fostering ambidexterity in digital transformation. We identified the necessity for leaders to
consider employees’ skill sets and personnel preferences to foster innovation. Primarily related to exploration, leaders
need to allow freedom to explore new digital technologies and apply them to business cases. Leaders driving exploration
activities supporting innovation in the digital context must create trust and freedom to explore new solutions without
fear. The fast-changing character of digital technologies requires leaders to engage employees in constantly scouting new
technologies and piloting ideas to address the complexities of digital disruption. In addition, we identified that leaders
need to consider a balance of exploration and exploitation to avoid a lack of innovation in the case of a pure focus on
exploration or a lack of results in the case of only exploration. We identified temporal ambidexterity as a possibility for
collaboration between employees working in a digital hub and the core business. Especially if exploitation activities in
digitaltransformationareseparatedinadigitalhub,thiscollaborationisrequiredtoensureprocessandproductknowledge,
ensuring effective impacts of the activities. Leaders engaging employees moving between the departments support the
needed collaboration. In addition, building cross-functional teams allows companies to leverage the expected results
of digital transformation. The close alignment and interaction with the IT department support digital transformation
efforts as expert knowledge about existing infrastructure or new trends is incorporated. We included aspects of strategic
leadership in our qualitative study. Even though we included aspects of strategic leadership in our qualitative study, we
see the potential for future studies to focus more on the role of leadership. We suggest examining how leadership fosters

--- PAGE 18 ---
66
Sabrina Hoessler, Claus-Christian Carbon
ambidextrous capabilities in the context of digital transformation. In addition, a study exploring the long-term effects of
structural ambidexterity on the organizational performance of incumbent companies undergoing digital transformation
would create additional insights and justify our results.
Our explorative research design includes a purposive sampling of 33 interview partners with work experience in
digital transformations in incumbent companies or covering the research stream of digital transformation. Even though
we covered various hierarchies and industries with our study participants, the count of 33 interview partners can still
be seen as a weakness. Our clearly defined research process, including a detailed description of the conducted thematic
analysis, and an explanation of how we achieved code saturation, helps offset this limitation.
In addition, we suggest further research to consider the digital maturity grade of the incumbent companies to cluster
the findings further in that direction, as we identified this as one primary decision criterion. Combining this with how we
achieved code saturation, we did not perform this check on the level of the digital maturity grade of the companies the
study participants represent. This could influence our study results by achieving code saturation earlier and, therefore,
missing some additional insights that are specifically relevant depending on sector experience or digital maturity grade.
Therefore, we suggest that in a future study, the research sample can be clustered by sector experience, digital maturity
grade, and testing for code saturation on this level. In addition, longitudinal studies with incumbent companies moving
through different maturity grades could help gain further in-depth insights. The work of Del Giudice et al. (2021)
provides evidence of the positive relation between ambidexterity and digital innovation. Coreynen et al. (2020) see
limitations regarding digital servitization. Nevertheless, Coreynen et al. (2020) show that when reaching a medium level
of exploitation, there is an exponential impact on the relation between exploration and digital servitization. Knowing
this, we can see our study as a pilot for a quantitative study to investigate the correlation between digital maturity grades
and our proposed organizational structure. Associated with this suggestion, future research could provide more in-depth
insights into innovation phases. One interview partner provided insights on different phases in exploration, which could
be seen to gain even further details on trigger points of separation/integration decisions within exploration activities. In
addition, it is not part of this study to investigate different working methods and decision-making forms within different
organizational units. New circumstances and the availability of new technologies require leaders to rethink and adapt
existing processes. Existing research addressing the digital contexts often associates this with agile structures (Mustafa et
al.,2022).Therefore,weseepotentialinaddressingtheapplicabilityofagileworkmethodsindigitalactivitiesrelatedtothe
core business and how structures could change with increasing maturity grades. We addressed the concept of structural
and temporal ambidexterity, therefore, we suggest future research to investigate the role of contextual ambidexterity in
digital transformation or even combine this with this research in the form of hybrid ambidexterity.
Weknowthatapotentialanalysisbiascanimpactourstudyresultsbyhavingtheriskofselectivecoding.Toovercome
this, one researcher did the initial transcripts coding, and the second researcher, acting as supervisor, performed an inter-
coder check. In addition, we see the risk of interviewee bias leading to answers the interviewees think are expected rather
than their honest opinion. Also, as we were aware of the company they work for, this could result in a potential bias
toward reporting more positive aspects. To overcome this, we ensured the anonymity of the interview partners’ personnel
information as well as company-related information. In addition, interpersonal dynamics between the researcher and the
interview partners can impact the level of detail and quality of the shared insights and, therefore, the quality of our study
results. We mitigated this limitation by having semi-structured interviews and applying an interview guide. Another
methodological limitation is the replicability of qualitative research. As interviews are associated with a defined context
and a set of participants, replication is challenging. We address this limitation by describing our research process and
clustering our participants by sector experience and hierarchy levels.
References
Åkesson,M.,Sørensen,C.,&Eriksson,C.I.(2018).Ambidexterityunderdigitalization:AtaleoftwodecadesofnewmediaataSwedishnewspaper.
Scandinavian Journal of Management, 34(3), 276–288. https://doi.org/10.1016/0048-7333(85)90021-6
Alghamdi, F. (2018). Ambidextrous leadership, ambidextrous employee, and the interaction between ambidextrous leadership and employee
innovative performance. Journal of Innovation and Entrepreneurship, 7(1), 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13731-018-0081-8
Baškarada, S., Watson, J., & Cromarty, J. (2016). Leadership and organizational ambidexterity. Journal of Management Development, 35(6), 778–
788. https://doi.org/10.1108/JMD-01-2016-0004
Beckman, C. M. (2006). The influence of founding team company affiliations on firm behavior. Academy of Management Journal, 49(4), 741–758.
https://doi.org/10.5465/amj.2006.22083030
Bell, L., & Hofmeyr, K. (2021). Enabling organisational ambidexterity: A leadership perspective. South African Journal of Business Management,
52(1), 1–15. https://doi.org/10.4102/sajbm.v52i1.2268

--- PAGE 19 ---
67
Guiding incumbent companies in navigating digital transformations:
A qualitative study on structural ambidexterity and strategic leadership
Benner, M. J., & Tushman, M. L. (2003). Exploitation, exploration, and process management: The productivity dilemma revisited. Academy of
Management Review, 28(2), 238–256. https://doi.org/10.5465/AMR.2003.9416096
Birkinshaw, J., Zimmermann, A., & Raisch, S. (2016). How do firms adapt to discontinuous change? Bridging the dynamic capabilities and
ambidexterity perspectives. California Management Review, 58(4), 36–58.
Bjoerkdahl, J. (2020). Strategies for Digitalization in Manufacturing Firms. California Management Review, 62(4), 17–36. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0008125620920349
Boumgarden, P., Nickerson, J., & Zenger, T. R. (2012). Sailing into the wind: Exploring the relationships among ambidexterity, vacillation, and
organizational performance. Strategic Management Journal, 33(6), 587–610. https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.1972
Brauer, P., Raabe, J.‑P., & Schirmer, I. (2021). Realizing Organizational Ambidexterity: A Taxonomy of Digital Accelerators and Their Integration
Mechanisms for Digital Innovation. PACIS, 181.
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology, 3(2), 77–101. https://doi.
org/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa
Brix, J. (2019). Ambidexterity and organizational learning: revisiting and reconnecting the literatures. The Learning Organization, 26(4), 337–351.
https://doi.org/10.1108/TLO-02-2019-0034
Brunetti, F., Matt, D. T., Bonfanti, A., Longhi, A. de, Pedrini, G., & Orzes, G. (2020). Digital transformation challenges: strategies emerging from
a multi-stakeholder approach. The TQM Journal, 32(4), 697–724. https://doi.org/10.1108/TQM-12-2019-0309
Cao, Q., Gedajlovic, E., & Zhang, H. (2009). Unpacking Organizational Ambidexterity: Dimensions, Contingencies, and Synergistic Effects.
Organization Science, 20(4), 781–796. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1090.0426
Cavalcante, S., Kesting, P., & Ulhøi, J. (2011). Business model dynamics and innovation: (re)establishing the missing linkages. Management
Decision, 49(8), 1327–1342. https://doi.org/10.1108/00251741111163142
Chen, E. L., & Katila, R. (2008). Rival interpretations of balancing exploration and exploitation: simultaneous or sequential. Handbook of
Technology and Innovation Management, 1, 197–214.
Coreynen, W., Matthyssens, P., Vanderstraeten, J., & van Witteloostuijn, A. (2020). Unravelling the internal and external drivers of digital
servitization: A dynamic capabilities and contingency perspective on firm strategy. Industrial Marketing Management, 89, 265–277. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2020.02.014
Del Giudice, M., Scuotto, V., Papa, A., Tarba, S. Y., Bresciani, S., & Warkentin, M. (2021). A self‐tuning model for smart manufacturing SMEs:
Effects on digital innovation. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 38(1), 68–89.
Duncan, R. B. (1976). The ambidextrous organization: Designing dual structures for innovation. The Management of Organization, 1(1), 167–188.
Etikan, I., Musa, S. A., & Alkassim, R. S. (2016). Comparison of convenience sampling and purposive sampling. American Journal of Theoretical
and Applied Statistics, 5(1), 1–4. https://doi.org/10.11648/j.ajtas.20160501.11
Faix, W. G., Windisch, L., Kisgen, S., Paradowski, L., Unger, F., Bergmann, W., & Tippelt, R. (2020). A new model for state-of-the-art leadership
education with performance as a driving factor for future viability. Leadership, Education, Personality: An Interdisciplinary Journal, 2(2),
59–74. https://doi.org/10.1365/s42681-020-00011-4
Florek-Paszkowska, A., Ujwary-Gil, A., & Godlewska-Dzioboń, B. (2021). Business innovation and critical success factors in the era of digital
transformationandturbulenttimes.JournalofEntrepreneurship,ManagementandInnovation,17(4),7–28.https://doi.org/10.7341/20211741
Furr, N., Ozcan, P., & Eisenhardt, K. M. (2022). What is digital transformation? Core tensions facing established companies on the global stage.
Global Strategy Journal, 12(4), 595–618. https://doi.org/10.1002/gsj.1442
Gastaldi, L., Appio, F. P., Corso, M., & Pistorio, A. (2018). Managing the exploration-exploitation paradox in healthcare: Three complementary
paths to leverage on the digital transformation. Business Process Management Journal, 24(5), 1200–1234. https://doi.org/10.1108/BPMJ-04-
2017-0092
Gebauer, H., Arzt, A., Kohtamäki, M., Lamprecht, C., Parida, V., Witell, L., & Wortmann, F. (2020). How to convert digital offerings into revenue
enhancement–Conceptualizingbusinessmodeldynamicsthroughexplorativecasestudies.IndustrialMarketingManagement,91,429–441.
Gibson, C. B., & Birkinshaw, J. (2004). The antecedents, consequences, and mediating role of organizational ambidexterity. Academy of
Management Journal, 47(2), 209–226. https://doi.org/10.2307/20159573
Gioia,D.A.,Corley,K.G.,&Hamilton,A.L.(2013).Seekingqualitativerigorininductiveresearch:NotesontheGioiamethodology.Organizational
Research Methods, 16(1), 15–31. https://doi.org/10.1177/1094428112452151
Göbeler, L., Schaar, D., & Hukal, P. (2020). Initiating Ambidexterity through Digital Innovation Labs. ECIS 2020, 55. Retrieved from https://aisel.
aisnet.org/ecis2020_rp/55
Goerzig, D., & Bauernhansl, T. (2018). Enterprise architectures for the digital transformation in small and medium-sized enterprises. Procedia
CIRP, 67, 540–545. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2017.12.257
Gregory, R. W., Keil, M., Muntermann, J., & Mähring, M. (2015). Paradoxes and the nature of ambidexterity in IT transformation programs.
Information Systems Research, 26(1), 57–80.
Gupta, A. K., Smith, K. G., & Shalley, C. E. (2006). The interplay between exploration and exploitation. Academy of Management Journal, 49(4),
693–706. https://doi.org/10.2307/20159793
Halevi, M. Y., Carmeli, A., & Brueller, N. N. (2015). Ambidexterity in SBUs: TMT behavioral integration and environmental dynamism. Human
Resource Management, 54(S1), 223–238. https://doi.org/10.1002/hrm.21665
Havermans, L. A., Hartog, D. N. den, Keegan, A., & Uhl‐Bien, M. (2015). Exploring the role of leadership in enabling contextual ambidexterity.
Human Resource Management, 54(1), 179-200. https://doi.org/10.1002/hrm.21764
Hellmich, J., Raabe, J.‑P., & Schirmer, I. (2021). Towards a Foundational and Extensional Dynamic Capability Perspective on Digital Innovation
Units. AMCIS, 1–10.
Hennink,M.M.,Kaiser,B.N.,&Marconi,V.C.(2017).Codesaturationversusmeaningsaturation:Howmanyinterviewsareenough?Qualitative
Health Research, 27(4), 591–608. https://doi.org/10.1177/1049732316665344
Hess, T., Matt, C., Benlian, A., & Wiesböck, F. (2016). Options for formulating a digital transformation strategy. MIS Quarterly Executive, 15(2).
Hoessler, S., & Carbon, C. C. (2022). Digital transformation and ambidexterity: A literature review on exploration and exploitation activities in
companies’ digital transformation. International Journal of Innovation Management, 26(08), 22300003.
Holotiuk, F. (2020). The Organizational Design of Digital Innovation Labs: Enabling Ambidexterity to Develop Digital Innovation. ICIS, 1019–
1034. https://doi.org/10.30844/wi_2020_j6-holotiuk

--- PAGE 20 ---
68
Sabrina Hoessler, Claus-Christian Carbon
Holotiuk, F., & Beimborn, D. (2019). Temporal ambidexterity: how digital innovation labs connect exploration and exploitation for digital
innovation. ICIS, 1–17. Retrieved from https://aisel.aisnet.org/icis2019/business_models/business_models/18
Hron, M., Obwegeser, N., & Müller, S. D. (2021). Innovation drift: the influence of digital artefacts on organizing for innovation. Innovation:
Organization & Management, 1–33. https://doi.org/10.1080/14479338.2021.1937185
Ifenthaler, D., & Egloffstein, M. (2020). Development and implementation of a maturity model of digital transformation. TechTrends, 64(2),
302–309.
Iho, S., & Missonier, S. (2020). Integrating Structural IT Ambidexterity: A Multiple Case Study, 1–11.
Ismail, M. H., Khater, M., & Zaki, M. (2017). Digital business transformation and strategy: What do we know so far. Cambridge Service Alliance,
10(1), 1–35.
Jansen,J.J.P.,George,G.,vandenBosch,F.A.J.,&Volberda,H.W.(2008).Seniorteamattributesandorganizationalambidexterity:Themoderating
role of transformational leadership. Journal of Management Studies, 45(5), 982–1007. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-6486.2008.00775.x
Jaspert, D., & Ebel, M. (2022). Settings of Organizational Adjustments due to Digital Servitization. HICSS, 1278–1287. Retrieved from https://hdl.
handle.net/10125/79489
Jöhnk,J.,Ollig,P.,Oesterle,S.,&Riedel,L.‑N.(2020).TheComplexityofDigitalTransformation-ConceptualizingMultipleConcurrentInitiatives.
Wirtschaftsinformatik (Zentrale Tracks), 1051–1066.
Kaiser, I., & Stummer, C. (2020). How the traditional industrial manufacturer Miele established a new smart home division. Research-Technology
Management, 63(4), 29–34. https://doi.org/10.1080/08956308.2020.1762446
Kane, G. C., Palmer, D., Phillips, A. N., Kiron, D., & Buckley, N. (2015). Strategy, not technology, drives digital transformation. MIT Sloan
Management Review and Deloitte University Press, 14(1-25).
Keller, T., & Weibler, J. (2015). What it takes and costs to be an ambidextrous manager: Linking leadership and cognitive strain to balancing
exploration and exploitation. Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies, 22(1), 54–71. https://doi.org/10.1177/1548051814524598
Klos,C.,Spieth,P.,Clauss,T.,&Klusmann,C.(2021).Digitaltransformationofincumbentfirms:Abusinessmodelinnovationperspective. IEEE
Transactions on Engineering Management, 70(6), 2017–2033. https://doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2021.3075502
Kotter, J. P. (2017). What leaders really do. Leadership Perspectives, 7–15.
Kronblad,C.,Pregmark,J.E.,&Berggren,R.(2023).Difficultiestodigitalize:ambidexteritychallengesinlawfirms.Journal of Service Theory and
Practice, 33(2), 217–236. https://doi.org/10.1108/JSTP-05-2022-0120
Levinthal, D. A., & March, J. G. (1993). The myopia of learning. Strategic Management Journal, 14(S2), 95–112. https://doi.org/10.1002/
smj.4250141009
Li, F. (2020). The digital transformation of business models in the creative industries: A holistic framework and emerging trends. Technovation,
92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.technovation.2017.12.004
Lin, H.‑E., & McDonough III, E. F. (2011). Investigating the role of leadership and organizational culture in fostering innovation ambidexterity.
IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 58(3), 497–509. https://doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2010.2092781
March,J.G.(1991).ExplorationandExploitationinOrganizationalLearning.OrganizationScience,2(1),71–87.https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.2.1.71
Mayring, P. (2001). Combination and integration of qualitative and quantitative analysis. Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung/Forum: Qualitative
Social Research, 2 (1). https://doi.org/10.17169/fqs-2.1.967
Mayring, P. (2014). Qualitative content analysis: theoretical foundation, basic procedures and software solution, 1–143.
McMullin, C. (2023). Transcription and qualitative methods: Implications for third sector research. VOLUNTAS: International Journal of
Voluntary and Nonprofit Organizations, 34(1), 140–153. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11266-021-00400-3
Mirković,V.,Lukić,J.,Lazarević,S.,&Vojinović,Ž.(2019).KeyCharacteristicsofOrganizationalStructurethatSupportsDigitalTransformation.
In Proceedings of the 24th International Scientific Conference Strategic Management and Decision Support Systems in Strategic Management.
University of Novi Sad, Faculty of Economics in Subotica. https://doi.org/10.46541/978-86-7233-380-0_46
Misoch, S. (2019). Qualitative interviews. De Gruyter Oldenbourg. https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110545982
Montealegre, R., & Iyengar, K. (2021). Managing digital business platforms: A continued exercise in balancing renewal and refinement. Business
Horizons, 64(1), 51–59.
Montealegre, R., Iyengar, K., & Sweeney, J. (2019). Understanding ambidexterity: Managing contradictory tensions between exploration and
exploitation in the evolution of digital infrastructure. Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 20(5), 647–680. https://doi.
org/10.17705/1jais.00547
Mueller,J.,Renzl,B.,&Will,M.G.(2020).Ambidextrousleadership:Ameta-reviewapplyingstaticanddynamicmulti-levelperspectives.Review
of Managerial Science, 14(1), 37–59. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11846-018-0297-9
Mustafa, G., Solli-Sæther, H., Bodolica, V., Håvold, J. I., & Ilyas, A. (2022). Digitalization trends and organizational structure: bureaucracy,
ambidexterity or post-bureaucracy? Eurasian Business Review, 12(4), 671–694. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40821-021-00196-8
Oberländer, A. M., Röglinger, M., & Rosemann, M. (2021). Digital opportunities for incumbents–A resource-centric perspective. The Journal of
Strategic Information Systems, 30(3), 101670. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis.2021.101670
O’ReillyIII,C.A.,&Tushman,M.L.(2013).Organizationalambidexterity:Past,present,andfuture.AcademyofManagementPerspectives,27(4),
324–338. https://doi.org/10.5465/amp.2013.0025
Ossenbrink, J., Hoppmann, J., & Hoffmann, V. H. (2019). Hybrid ambidexterity: How the environment shapes incumbents’ use of structural and
contextual approaches. Organization Science, 30(6), 1319–1348. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.2019.1286
Park, Y., Pavlou, P. A., & Saraf, N. (2020). Configurations for achieving organizational ambidexterity with digitization. Information Systems
Research, 31(4), 1376–1397. https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.2020.0950
Paulino,E.P.(2022).Amplifyingorganizationalperformancefrombusinessintelligence:Businessanalyticsimplementationintheretailindustry.
Journal of Entrepreneurship, Management and Innovation, 18(2), 69–104. https://doi.org/10.7341/20221823
Plekhanov, D., Franke, H., & Netland, T. H. (2023). Digital transformation: A review and research agenda. European Management Journal, 41(6),
821–844. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.emj.2022.09.007
Porfírio, J. A., Carrilho, T., Felício, J. A., & Jardim, J. (2021). Leadership characteristics and digital transformation. Journal of Business Research,
124, 610–619. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2020.10.058
Probst, G., Raisch, S., & Tushman, M. L. (2011). Ambidextrous leadership: Emerging challenges for business and HR leaders. Organizational
Dynamics, 40(4), 326–334. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.orgdyn.2011.07.010

--- PAGE 21 ---
69
Guiding incumbent companies in navigating digital transformations:
A qualitative study on structural ambidexterity and strategic leadership
Raabe, J.‑P., Horlach, B., Schirmer, I., & Drews, P. (2020). Forewarned is Forearmed’: Overcoming Multifaceted Challenges of Digital Innovation
Units. AMCIS, 1–10.
Saarikko, T., Westergren, U. H., & Blomquist, T. (2020). Digital transformation: Five recommendations for the digitally conscious firm. Business
Horizons, 63(6), 825–839. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bushor.2020.07.005
Samimi, M., Cortes, A. F., Anderson, M. H., & Herrmann, P. (2020). What is strategic leadership? Developing a framework for future research.
The Leadership Quarterly, 1–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101353
Schiffer, S. (2021). Structural Ambidexterity as an Approach for an Incumbents Digital Transformation. AMCIS, 1–10. Retrieved from https://
aisel.aisnet.org/amcis2021/org_transform/org_transform/6
Shao, Z., Li, X., & Wang, Q. (2021). From ambidextrous learning to digital creativity: An integrative theoretical framework. Information Systems
Journal, 544–572. https://doi.org/10.1111/isj.12361
Sia, S. K., Weill, P., & Zhang, N. (2021). Designing a future-ready enterprise: The digital transformation of DBS bank. California Management
Review, 63(3), 35–57. https://doi.org/10.1177/0008125621992583
Simsek, Z. (2009). Organizational ambidexterity: Towards a multilevel understanding. Journal of Management Studies, 46(4), 597–624. https://
doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-6486.2009.00828.x
Smith,P.,&Beretta,M.(2021).Thegordianknotofpracticingdigitaltransformation:copingwithemergentparadoxesinambidextrousorganizing
structures. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 38(1), 166–191. https://doi.org/10.1111/jpim.12548
Soluk, J., & Kammerlander, N. (2021). Digital transformation in family-owned Mittelstand firms: A dynamic capabilities perspective. European
Journal of Information Systems, 30(6), 676–711. https://doi.org/10.1080/0960085X.2020.1857666
SotoSetzke,D.,Riasanow,T.,Böhm,M.,&Krcmar,H.(2023).Pathwaystodigitalserviceinnovation:Theroleofdigitaltransformationstrategies
in established organizations. Information Systems Frontiers, 25(3), 1017–1037. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10796-021-10112-0
Sousa, M. J., & Rocha, Á. (2019). Digital learning: Developing skills for digital transformation of organizations. Future Generation Computer
Systems, 91, 327–334. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2018.08.048
Sund, K. J., Bogers, M. L., & Sahramaa, M. (2021). Managing business model exploration in incumbent firms: A case study of innovation labs in
European banks. Journal of Business Research, 128, 11–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2021.01.059
Svahn, F., Mathiassen, L., & Lindgren, R. (2017). Embracing digital innovation in incumbent firms. MIS Quarterly, 41(1), 239–254.
Teece, D. J. (2007). Explicating dynamic capabilities: the nature and microfoundations of (sustainable) enterprise performance. Strategic
Management Journal, 28(13), 1319–1350. https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.640
Teece, D. J., Pisano, G., & Shuen, A. (1997). Dynamic capabilities and strategic management. Strategic Management Journal, 18(7), 509–533.
Tekic, Z., & Koroteev, D. (2019). From disruptively digital to proudly analog: A holistic typology of digital transformation strategies. Business
Horizons, 62(6), 683–693. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bushor.2019.07.002
Tushman, M., & Euchner, J. (2015). The challenges of ambidextrous leadership. Research-Technology Management, 58(3), 16–20.
Tushman, M. [Michael.], & O’Reilly III, C. A. (1996). Ambidextrous organizations: Managing evolutionary and revolutionary change. California
Management Review, 38(4), 8–29. https://doi.org/10.2307/41165852
VandenBuuse,D.,vanWinden,W.,&Schrama,W.(2021).Balancingexplorationandexploitationinsustainableurbaninnovation:anambidexterity
perspective toward smart cities. Journal of Urban Technology, 28(1-2), 175–197. https://doi.org/10.1080/10630732.2020.1835048
Van Teijlingen, E., & Hundley, V. (2001). The importance of pilot studies. Social Research Update. (35), 1–4. https://doi.org/10.7748/
ns2002.06.16.40.33.c3214
VERBI Software (2021). MAXQDA 2022 [Computer software]. Berlin, Germany, VERBI Software. Retrieved from maxqda.com
Verhoef,P.C.,Broekhuizen,T.,Bart,Y.,Bhattacharya,A.,Dong,J.Q.,Fabian,N.,&Haenlein,M.(2021).Digitaltransformation:Amultidisciplinary
reflection and research agenda. Journal of Business Research, 122, 889–901. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2019.09.022
Vesna Bosilj Vukšić, Lucija Ivančić, & Dalia Suša Vugec (2018). A Preliminary Literature Review Of Digital Transformation Case Studies.
International Scholary Ans Scientific Research & Innovation, 12 (9), 737–742. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1474581
Wasono, L. W., & Furinto, A. (2018). The effect of digital leadership and innovation management for incumbent telecommunication company in
the digital disruptive era. International Journal of Engineering and Technology, 7(2.29), 125–130.
Westerman, G., Bonnet, D., & McAfee, A. (2014). The nine elements of digital transformation. MIT Sloan Management Review, 55(3), 1–6.
Wu, T., Chen, B., Shao, Y., & Lu, H. (2021). Enable digital transformation: entrepreneurial leadership, ambidextrous learning and organisational
performance. Technology Analysis & Strategic Management, 33(12), 1389–1403. https://doi.org/10.1080/09537325.2021.1876220
Yoo, Y., Boland, R. J., Lyytinen, K., & Majchrzak, A. (2012). Organizing for Innovation in the Digitized World. Organization Science, 23(5),
1398–1408. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1120.0771
Yoo, Y., Lyytinen, K. J., Boland, R. J., & Berente, N. (2010). The next wave of digital innovation: Opportunities and challenges: A report on the
research workshop igital Challenges in Innovation Research. Social Science Research Network.
Zhang,Z.,Jin,J.,Li,S.,&Zhang,Y.(2023).Digitaltransformationofincumbentfirmsfromtheperspectiveofportfoliosofinnovation.Technology
in Society, 72, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2022.102149

--- PAGE 22 ---
70
Sabrina Hoessler, Claus-Christian Carbon
Appendix
Table 4. Building 1st order concepts
Original Code (1st order concepts) Count Description of changes Final code (1st order concepts)
Not close to core 10 Summarized Distant to core business
Different location 1
Explore and experiment 6 Summarized Piloting radical new things
Piloting 4
Research 3
Scouting 2
Searching new solutions 4
Trust and freedom 15 Rephrased Creating trust and freedom
Different processes 5 Summarized Establishing dedicated budget and structures
Different structures 4
Dedicated budget 4
Innovation hubs, R&D, shares in start/ups 11 Summarized R&D, innovation hub, shares in startups
Get ideas 1
Built on existing in business or close 12 Built on existing in business or close
Customer relationships 3 Summarized Having core business knowledge
Product and process know-how 5
Understand core business 12
Improve efficiency through digital technologies 12 Rephrased Improving efficiency through digital
technologies
M&A 6 Rephrased Digital mentality through M&A
Startup culture 10 Rephrased Generating startup culture
One better 7 Rephrased Favor digital over core business
Need digital also in core business 8 Rephrased Diminish digital activities in core business
difficult to differentiate sometimes 12 Rephrased Difficulties in distinguishing digital and core
Integration if applications for core difficult with separation 14 Rephrased Difficulties to integrate
needed product & process know/how missing 8 Rephrased Missing process and product know-how
Costs 1 Eliminated
Learn from each other 7 Rephrased Mutual learning
Some fix people needed 6 Rephrased Ensure consistency
Cross-functional 10 Rephrased Digital transformation is cross-functional
Collaborating with IT 11 Collaborating with IT
Common vision and strategy 30 Summarized Common vision and strategy
Communication of strategy 4
Portfolio 22 Rephrased Balancing portfolio
Clear responsibilities 11 Rephrased Establishing clear responsibilities
Candidate selection 8 Candidate selection
Collaborative decision making 8 Collaborative decision making
Awareness 19 Rephrased Being aware about differences
Integration e-->e 16 Rephrased Innovation activities
Maturity grade 18 Rephrased Digital maturity grade

--- PAGE 23 ---
71
Guiding incumbent companies in navigating digital transformations:
A qualitative study on structural ambidexterity and strategic leadership
Table 5. Building 2nd order themes
1st order concepts 2nd order themes
Distant to core business Digital exploration separated
R&D, innovation hub, shares in startups
Piloting radical new things
Establishing dedicated budget and structures
Creating trust and freedom
Built on existing in business or close Digital exploitation closely integrated
Improving efficiency through digital technologies
Having core business knowledge
Digital mentality through M&A Digital business separated
Generating startup culture
Favor digital over core business Risks neglecting exploration and exploitation differences in digital
Diminish digital activities in core business
Difficulties in distinguishing digital and core
Difficulties to integrate
Missing process and product know-how
Mutual learning Temporal ambidexterity
Ensure consistency
Common vision and strategy Strategy
Digital transformation is cross-functional
Being aware about differences
Balancing portfolio
Establishing clear responsibilities Leadership activities
Candidate selection
Collaborative decision making
Collaborating with IT
Innovation activities Impacting factors
Digital maturity grade
Table 6. Building aggregated dimensions
1st order concepts 2nd order themes Aggregated dimensions
Distant to core business Digital exploration separated Organizational separation:
Exploration/ Exploitation R&D, innovation hub, shares in startups
Piloting radical new things
Establishing dedicated budget and structures
Creating trust and freedom
Built on existing business or close Digital exploitation closely integrated
Improving efficiency through digital
technologies
Having core business knowledge
Digital mentality through M&A Digital business separated Organizational separation:
Digital/Core business Generating startup culture
Favor digital over core business Risks neglecting exploration and exploitation
differences in digital Diminish digital activities in core business
Difficulties in distinguishing digital and core
Difficulties to integrate
Missing process and product know-how
Mutual learning Temporal ambidexterity
Ensure consistency

--- PAGE 24 ---
72
Sabrina Hoessler, Claus-Christian Carbon
1st order concepts 2nd order themes Aggregated dimensions
Common vision and strategy Strategy Strategic leadership
Digital transformation is cross-functional
Being aware about differences
Balancing portfolio
Establishing clear responsibilities Leadership activities
Candidate selection
Collaborative decision making
Collaborating with IT
Innovation activities Impacting factors
Digital maturity grade
Biographical notes
Sabrina Hoessler is a PhD student at the University of Bamberg. She holds a Master’s Degree International Management
(M. Sc.) from the School of International Business and Entrepreneurship (Steinbeis University). Her research work is in
the area of digital transformations and the implication on leadership.
Claus-Christian Carbon studied Psychology (Dipl.-Psych.), followed by Philosophy (M.A.), both at University of
Trier, Germany. After receiving his PhD from the Freie Universität Berlin and his “Habilitation” at the University of
Vienna, Austria, he worked at the University of Technology Delft, Netherlands and the University of Bamberg, Germany,
where he currently holds a full professorship leading the Department of General Psychology and Methodology and the
“Forschungsgruppe EPAEG”—a research group devoted to enhancing the knowledge, methodology and enthusiasm in
the fields of cognitive ergonomics, psychological aesthetics and Gestalt (see www.experimental-psychology.com and
www.epaeg.de for more details). He is the author of more than 500 publications, including more than 200 peer-reviewed
internationaljournalarticles,mainlyaddressingperceptualtopics,andhasconductedmorethanadozenresearchprojects
with a total budget amount of approx. 5 mill. EURO on perception and marketing issues and a renowned contributor and
invited speaker at international research conferences. CCC is Editor-in-Chief of the scientific journal Art & Perception,
Section Editor of Perception and i-Perception, Associate Editor of Frontiers in Psychology, Frontiers in Neuroscience,
Journal of Perceptual Imaging and Advances in Cognitive Psychology and a member of the Editorial Boards of Open
Psychology, Musicae Scientiae and Leadership, Education and Personality. Since 2023, CCC is an ordinary member of the
European Academy of Sciences and Arts.
Author Contribution
SabrinaHoessler:Conceptualization,Sampling,DataCollection,Methodology,FormalAnalysis,ProjectAdministration,
Visualization, Writing. Claus-Christian Carbon: Conceptualization, Sampling, Methodology, Formal Analysis, Project
Administration, Visualization, Writing, Supervision, Review & Editing.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Citation (APA Style)
Hoessler, S., & Carbon, C-C. (2024). Guiding incumbent companies in navigating digital transformations: A qualitative
study on structural ambidexterity and strategic leadership. Journal of Entrepreneurship, Management and Innovation,
20(4), 49-72. https://doi.org/10.7341/20242043