--- PAGE 1 ---
From AI to digital transformation: The AI
readiness framework
Jonny Holmström
Swedish Center for Digital Innovation, Department of Informatics, Umeå University,
Sweden
KEYWORDS
Artificial intelligence;
AI readiness;
Digital transformation;
Digitalization;
Digitization
Abstract Strategies and means for selecting and implementing digital technolo-
gies that realize firms’ goals in digital transformation have been extensively inves-
tigated. The recent surge in artificial intelligence (AI) technologies has amplified
the need for such investigation, as they are being increasingly used in diverse orga-
nizational practices, creating not only new opportunities for digital transformation
but also new challenges for managers of digital transformation processes. In this
article, I present a framework intended to assist efforts to address one of the first
of these challenges: assessment of organizational AI readinessdthat is, an organi-
zation’s ability to deploy AI technologies to enable digital transformation, in four
key dimensions: technologies, activities, boundaries, and goals. I show that this
framework can facilitate analysis both of an organization’s current sociotechnical
AI status and of the prospects for the technology’s fuller value-adding, sociotech-
nical deployment. The AI readiness framework invites fuller theorizing of the roles
that AI candand willdplay in digital transformation.
ª 2021 Kelley School of Business, Indiana University. Published by Elsevier Inc. This
is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).
1. The challenge of AI readiness
Artificialintelligence(AI)hasbeentoutedasameans
for organizations to cut costs and to enhance their
quality of services, coordination, productivity, and
practice efficiencies (Davenport, 2018; Iansiti &
Lakhani, 2020). Today, AI technologies are being
increasinglyusedindiverseorganizationalpractices,
creating new types of human-machine configura-
tions and playing an increasing role in contemporary
organizing (Boden, 2016; Seidel et al., 2018). Exam-
ples of organizational use of AI can be found in such
diverse areas as management decision-making,
manufacture, and design (Kittur et al., 2019). The
AI systems involved can be described as rational
agents that autonomously respond to inputsdwith
little or no user interventiondby performing tasks
guided by their underlying models and functions
E-mail address: jonny.holmstrom@umu.se
Note: This research is supported by the Marianne & Marcus
Wallenberg Foundation and the Knut & Alice Wallenberg
Foundation.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bushor.2021.03.006
0007-6813/ª 2021 Kelley School of Business, Indiana University. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC
BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Business Horizons (2022) 65, 329e339
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
www.journals.elsevier.com/business-horizons

--- PAGE 2 ---
(Bostrom, 2014; Canhoto & Clear, 2020). In this
manner, AI technologies constitute a new type of
agency in the context of contemporary organizing.
Despite AI technologies’ proliferation, accessi-
bility, scalability, and ease-of-use, organizations
are still struggling to reap their full potential. For
instance, a recent McKinsey report suggested that
while the business world is beginning to harness
these technologies and their benefits, funda-
mental transformation barriers remain (Boutetiere
& Reich, 2018). For organizations to reap the full
potential of digital technologies in general and of
AI in particular, they need to enable mutual
adoption of technology and organization. But dig-
ital technologies such as AI are said to be notori-
ously challenging and dynamic, as their adoption
entails multiple, continuous, and simultaneous
adjustments of organizations’ resources, staffing,
culture, and decision-making (Davenport, 2018). A
challenge for organizations adopting AI in their
operations is that AI platforms vary in both scope
and complexity, which hinders familiarity with
them and hence their deployment to obtain
competitive advantage (Iansiti & Lakhani, 2020).
This springs partly from the black-box nature of
the algorithms (sets of digital instructions imple-
mented to achieve defined goals) dictating AI re-
sponses, which are difficult to understand for
members of organizations that are being increas-
ingly shaped by AI (Hallinan & Striphas, 2014;
Lindgren & Holmström, 2020; Pasquale, 2015). AI
platforms are likely to transform organizations in
qualitatively different ways from other technolo-
gies, so it is crucial to develop an understanding of
organizations’ abilities to meet these challenges
(i.e., of their AI readiness).
Since AI technologies have humanlike cognitive
capabilities (Huang & Rust, 2018), including
knowing, learning, perceiving, sensing, acting,
communicating, and reasoning, their deployment
may have far-reaching consequences for organi-
zations and various associated ecosystem actors,
including consumers, vendors, frontline service
providers, and other stakeholders (Fernandes &
Oliveira, 2021). But there is a huge gap between
the AI hype touted by AI vendors and its actual use
in organizations. Thus, the importance of organi-
zations’ AI readiness in ongoing digital trans-
formation has been recognized (Li et al., 2017;
Pan, 2016). Moreover, there is a clear need for
deeper exploration of AI’s impact on organiza-
tional activities, boundaries, and goals, including
the mechanisms and processes involved in har-
nessing its power in digital transformation (Aldrich
& Ruef, 2006).
For the purposes of this article, I define AI
readiness as an organization’s abilities to deploy
and use AI in ways that add value to the organi-
zation. I present a novel approachdthe AI readi-
ness frameworkdto assess and visualize four key
dimensions of this readiness: technologies, activ-
ities, boundaries, and goals. The framework has
been applied in workshop settings allowing an or-
ganization’s members to grade their organization’s
capabilitiesdboth current and future poten-
tialdin each dimension. It highlights the risks and
challenges involved in digital transformation
associated with firm-wide mobilization of AI tech-
nologies for new ends, for which success rates are
often low (Agarwal et al., 2010). The multidi-
mensional AI readiness framework provides a
pragmatic tool that facilitates efforts to meet the
associated challenges, to reduce the risks, and to
increase success rates.
2. Theoretical background
2.1. AI and digital transformation
Digital technologies are radically changing the way
firms operate (Henfridsson & Bygstad, 2013;
Jonsson et al., 2018), and it is hard to deal with
organizing without considering digital technology
(Kallinikos et al., 2013). Simply put, digital tech-
nologies are integral to contemporary firms to the
extent that organizing and digitization are two
sides of the same coin. Digital technologies are
seen as “products or services that are either
embodied in information and communication
technologies or enabled by them” (Lyytinen et al.,
2016, p. 49). As such, they exist in the forms of
digital platforms (Tiwana et al., 2010) or of arti-
facts with digitized components (Ekbia, 2009).
While there is a broad range of digital technology
types, a common theme for all types of digital
technology is the decoupling of digital information
from the physical form of the material device (Yoo
et al., 2010).
Digitalization cannot occur without digitization.
Digitization is the conversion of analog to digital,
whereas digitalization is the use of digital tech-
nologies and digitized data to shape how work gets
done, how customers and firms engage and
interact, and how revenue streams are created.
Digitization refers to the internal optimization of
processes (e.g., work automation), which often
results in cost reductions. In contrast, digitaliza-
tion goes beyond the implementation of technol-
ogy to imply a deeper change to the entire
330 J. Holmström

--- PAGE 3 ---
business model and to the evolution of work (see
Table 1).
In the end, very few businesses have undergone
successful digital transformations. For instance,
Kane et al. (2017) found in a global study that only
25% of organizations had transformed into digital
businesses, that 41% were on transformative
journeys, and that 34% invested more time talking
about the digital transformation trend than they
did acting on it. What is noteworthy form this
study, however, is that 85% of executives stated
that attaining digital maturity is critical to orga-
nizational success.
Despite various conceptualizations of digital
transformation (Vial, 2019; Wessel et al., 2020), it is
widelyagreedthatdigitaltechnologies,especiallyin
theformofAI,canmassivelytransformorganizations
(Constantinides et al., 2018; Davenport, 2018).
Hence, in the last decade, increasing attention has
been paid to the process and to its associated ten-
sions as organizations deploy AI in their operations
(Agarwal et al., 2010; Hinings et al., 2018). Among
otherthings,managersmustdecidewhethertofocus
onexploitingexistingtechnologiesortoinvestinnew
AI technologies for the future (Gibson & Birkinshaw,
2004;Raischetal.,2009).Theyalsofacepressuresto
change rapidly in order to keep up with competitors
and with investors’ demands, while avoiding rash
decisions and carefully taking stock of long-term
shifts in the business environment and in society
(Perlow et al., 2002).
The increasing use of digital technologies linked
to various kinds of datasets has given rise to
diverse AI capabilities designed to augment orga-
nizational capabilities (Khrais & Shidwan, 2020).
Examples include provision of online conversation
through text or text-to-speech by chatbots, as well
as advanced digital services such as fraud detec-
tion and personalized investment advice. But
despite growing recognition of AI’s potential to
augment organizational capabilities, there have
been few conceptual and empirical investigations
of AI’s effects on organizations’ digital trans-
formation processes. This is connected to the
debate on narrow versus wide AI applications,
where narrow AI applications are tied to a specific
context with a specific and limited dataset
(Brynjolfsson et al., 2018). The notion of AI read-
iness is especially important for wider AI applica-
tions because of their greater complexity.
Transformations introduce discontinuities into an
organization’s life, and they may have disruptive
effects on goals, boundaries, and activities (Aldrich
& Ruef, 2006). Thus, as AI has developed in recent
years, it has permeateddsometimes explosively
devery aspect of organizational life, affecting such
complex processes as classification, optimization,
estimation, and image recognition (Agrawal et al.,
2018; Brynjolfsson et al., 2018; Brynjolfsson &
McAfee, 2014). Thus, digital transformation is
considered a broader concept than information-
technology-enabled (IT-enabled) organizational
change, although most conceptualizations place
digital transformation within the boundaries of a
single organization (Vial, 2019) because it is deeply
entangled with several layers of organizational re-
ality. Hence, recent academic interest in digital
transformation focuses on mechanisms and pro-
cesses that harness digital technology’s power to
transform firms’ activities, boundaries, and goals
(Wessel et al., 2020; Wimelius et al., 2021).
2.2. The four dimensions of digital
transformation
The AI readiness framework is designed to enable
the capture and tracing of an organization’s soci-
otechnological AI status, to assist the character-
ization of associated cultural factors, and to
Table 1. Key digital constructs
Term Definition Key references
Digitization A technical
process of
transforming
analog formats
into digital
formats
Tilson et al.
(2012);Sandberg
et al. (2020)
Digitalization A sociotechnical
process of
applying
digitizing
techniques to
broader social
and
institutional
contexts that
render digital
technologies
infrastructural
Nylén and
Holmström
(2015); Yoo
et al. (2010)
Digital
transformation
The profound
transformation
of
organizational
activities,
boundaries, and
goals to
leverage the
opportunities of
digital
technologies
Matt et al.
(2015); Vial
(2019)
The AI readiness framework 331

--- PAGE 4 ---
facilitate efforts to address key bottlenecks. It
focuses attention on four key dimensions of the
fabric of organizational life: technologies, activ-
ities, boundaries, and goals. Technologies play
major roles in digital transformation by definition,
and the others correspond to three dimensions of
the theoretical definition of organizations as goal-
oriented, bounded entities that participate in ex-
change activities across organizational boundaries
with their environments (Aldrich, 1979; Aldrich &
Ruef, 2006). Transformations of elements associ-
ated with each of these dimensions may be diffi-
cult to achieve, as they take place against a
background of the daily reproduction of routines.
Thus, in the framework presented here, the di-
mensions are considered separately for clarity,
although they are clearly interdependent. The
process is illustrated in the following sub-sections
by the first practical application of the frame-
work, in which an insurance firm’s AI readiness was
assessed by a team of the firm’s managers in a
workshop, using the self-reporting questionnaire
shown in Appendix 1.
2.2.1. Technologies
Debates about digital technologies’ effects on or-
ganizations and on the nature of work have
intensified recently. This may largely be due to the
rapid emergence and scaling of new digital tech-
nologies (Huang et al., 2017), together with new
and increased concerns about the consequences
associated with their increasing levels of
complexity (Sandberg et al., 2020). The new digi-
tal technologies developed and implemented in
recent years have had major effects, with large-
scale transformations of occupations, job roles,
and entire industries (Acemoglu & Autor, 2011;
Mokyr et al., 2015). Several key functional quali-
ties of digital technologies, such as editability and
generativity (Kallinikos et al., 2013; Yoo et al.,
2010), have been identified that shape firms’ ac-
tivities, boundaries, and goals (Alaimo et al.,
2020). Thus, the insurance firm’s management
team initially focused on the technology dimension
in the workshop. In answering the questionnaire
shown in Appendix 1, for which I acted as a facil-
itator, the management team awarded the firm a
score of 4 (excellent) for their current AI tech-
nology portfolio in terms of the value it adds to
their organization. This portfolio included a chat-
bot function with functionality that the firm had
not intended to expand, owing to an assumption
that the best customer interactions were phone-
mediated. The firm’s customer ratings had been
very high for many years, and it did not see a
reason to change channels. Its AI technology
portfolio also included data analytics capacities
based on TensorFlow and Tableau. The rating for
the firm’s future AI technology portfolio was lower,
2 (moderate) on the 0e4 scale, because the firm
had no strategy for using any further AI technology
to add value to the organization. It merely inten-
ded to continue to use the chatbot function on its
website and to analyze data using TensorFlow and
Tableau. See full ratings in Appendix 2.
2.2.2. Activities
Previous studies have shown that algorithm-
governed digital systems can enable organiza-
tions to perform activities more effectively and to
augment their capacities, but they also have
affordances that can have radically differing con-
sequences from planned changes (Neff & Nagy,
2016). They can also organize, manage, and con-
trol many activities delegated to them by humans,
but this control is not always obvious or trans-
parent (Felzmann et al., 2019). Specifically,
learning algorithms have the potential to trans-
form expertise in organizations and to reshape
occupational boundaries (Faraj et al., 2018). Ac-
tivities that may be affected by such digital
transformation include the handling of money
transfer via mobile banking (Malar et al., 2019),
the emergent use of sensor-based technologies in
the automotive insurance industry (Marabelli
et al., 2017), and fundamental AI-mediated
changes in work practices (Jarrahi, 2018). Thus,
in the workshop, after appraising the insurance
firm’s technological status, the team next consid-
ered the activities dimension. It awarded the firm
a score of 2 (moderate) in terms of its AI’s value-
adding support for key activities. The activities
supported by AI technology at the time of the
workshop were customer support and data ana-
lytics. There were no concrete plans to expand
these activities or to push for deeper use of AI, but
there was evidence of some enthusiam for
expansion in the future, as a score of 3 (high) was
awarded for the firm’s strategies for supporting
future activities with AI.
2.2.3. Boundaries
Changes that occur in digital transformation may
involve expansion, contraction, or even disap-
pearance of boundaries (Aldrich & Ruef, 2006).
Scholars have been concerned with boundary
change in relation to mergers and acquisitions
(Henningsson & Carlsson, 2011), organizations
332 J. Holmström

--- PAGE 5 ---
establishing new digital innovation units (Nylén
et al., 2014), layoffs of organizational members
(Spencer, 2018), and skill replacements (Gekara &
Thanh Nguyen, 2018). Boundary changes may also
arise from physical products being increasingly
enhanced with digital components, such as sen-
sors, or from linear value creation being dissolved
as newly incorporated digital capabilities allow the
addition of novel services during their life cycles.
For example, adding sensors in work contexts en-
ables new forms of service arrangements (Jonsson
et al., 2018; Westergren et al., 2019). Another
example of boundary change is the emergence of
the gig economy, with people increasingly working
from remote places (Lehdonvirta, 2018).
Clearly, in order to exploit the affordances of
digital technologies, an organization must have the
ability to identify and implement appropriate
boundary changes. Thus, in the workshop, the
management team considered boundaries as the
thirddimensionofAIreadinessandawardedthefirm
a score of just 1 (low) on the 0e4 scale for value-
adding changes in organizational boundaries associ-
atedwiththeuseofAI.Theonlyboundary-stretching
examples the team mentioned were experiments
withsmarthomesolutionsandtheemergenceofbig,
complex, and unstructured data sets from such ex-
periments. In the long run, the team’s boundaries
with customers and real estate owners are likely to
change, but current intiatives that could induce or
include boundary changes did extend beyond these
experiments. But the participants expressed enthu-
siam about these experiments and hoped that some
of the tested ideas would be realized in the future,
leading to a self-reported score of 2 (moderate) for
value-adding strategies to stretch organizational
boundaries using AI in the future.
2.2.4. Goals
Digital transformation may have profound effects
on organizations’ deep structure, including on
their goals and identities (Wessel et al., 2020). The
process of creating, capturing, and delivering
value from digital transformation provides oppor-
tunities to create new processes, products, ser-
vices, and ultimately new goals, typically by
drawing on the affordances associated with digital
technologies. Cross-disciplinary research has
shown that organizational identity has important
effects, as who we are has implications for what
we dodboth of which considerations should
ideally be clear and in sync with each other (Ravasi
et al., 2020). The alignment of organizational ac-
tivities with organizational identity (Santos &
Eisenhardt, 2005) also has major implications for
digital transformation efforts. For example,
Baiyere et al. (2020) have demonstrated needs to
consider, and if necessary adjust, business process
management when introducing new digital prod-
ucts and service offerings. Similarly, Gregory et al.
(2015) have illuminated complexities of digital
transformation and associated needs for effective
management strategies in pursuit of ambidextrous
resolutions of paradoxesdthat is, of tensions
arising from conflicting needs, such as simulta-
neous needs for IT agility and for stability. Thus, in
the workshop, the management team used the AI
readiness framework to focus on the goals
dimension and awarded their insurance firm a
score of 0 (none), indicating that its present AI use
provides no value-added support for attainment of
the organization’s goals. The participants engaged
in a debate about ways in which some new startups
have entered the market and seemed to appeal to
the young customer base. For example, Hedvigda
purely digital startup in the insurance industry
driven by AIdhas taken a big slice of the market in
the Nordic countries. They also discussed U.S.-
based insurance companies’ stronger reliance on
AI than their European counterparts, which they
attributed partly to technological factors and
partly to ethical issues (the managers insisted that
they did not want to cross an ethical line by finding
out too much about their customers). But they
expressed some interest in increasing use of AI to
provide value-adding support for the organiza-
tion’s goals in the future, so they awarded the firm
a score of 1 (low) in this respect.
Theproposedmodeldrootedinresearchstreams,
summarized in Table 2dframes the relationships
between digital technology and the other di-
mensions, such as activities, boundaries, and goals.
Thus, it moves beyond the prevailing assumption
that treats technology as an entity distinct from the
other dimensions; it instead includes technology as
an integral part of organizational fabric. It also
avoidsthe frequentlyblack-boxed representation of
technology,whichhashinderedpreviousattemptsto
thoroughly examine technologies’ true roles in digi-
tal transformation. A further distinctive feature of
the model is that the four dimensions can be
considered both separately and holistically when
analyzing organizational AI readiness.
3. The AI readiness framework
Experiences with AI have shown that it can greatly
change an organization’s workforce, required skills,
and ways of both communicating and cooperating
(e.g., Ransbotham et al., 2017). AI and digital
transformation go hand in hand, but a systematic
The AI readiness framework 333

--- PAGE 6 ---
effort is needed to maximize the potential of this
relationship. The presented AI readiness framework
focuses attention on the key dimensions of digital
transformationdtechnologies, activities, bound-
aries,and goalsdtoprovidearichpictureofafirm’s
AI readiness. The framework addresses current sit-
uations and future expectations in relation to these
dimensions. Based on self-evaluation by people
working in a focal organization, with scores ranging
from 0 to 4 for each dimension, the framework
provides a convenient means for assessing and
visualizing (Figures 1 and 2) the organization’s AI
readiness.
To illustrate the visualization potential of the
model, Figure 2 presents results from the workshop
using the framework for measuring the insurance
organization’s AI readiness. The assessment session
showed that while the organizational members felt
comfortable with the current technology status,
they were less confident about the firm’s ability to
harness the value-adding potential of new technol-
ogies in the future. In a similar vein, they were
relatively confident in the ways in which AI supports
and relates to organizational activities, but they
were less certain of how AI supports and relates to
future activities. Their uncertainty was strongest
and most pervasive regarding AI’s support for, and
Figure 1. Scorecard for the AI readiness framework
Table 2. Research streams related to digital
transformation dimensions
Dimension of
digital
transformation
Manifested
in
Exemplary
articles
Technologies Changes in
digital
technology
Alaimo et al.
(2020);
Kallinikos et al.
(2013); Monteiro
and Parmiggiani
(2019);
Wimelius et al.
(2021); Yoo
et al. (2010)
Activities Changes in
activities,
triggered by
changes in
digital
technology
Faraj et al.
(2018); Jarrahi
(2018); Malar
et al. (2019);
Marabelli et al.
(2017).
Boundaries Changes in
boundaries,
triggered by
changes in
digital
technology
Gekara and
Thanh Nguyen
(2018); Jonsson
et al. (2018);
Lehdonvirta
(2018); Nylén
et al. (2014);
Spencer (2018);
Westergren
et al. (2019).
Goals Changes in
goals,
triggered by
changes in
digital
technology
Baiyere et al.
(2020); Gregory
et al. (2015).
Figure 2. Completed AI readiness framework score-
card for the focal insurance firm
334 J. Holmström

--- PAGE 7 ---
relations to, boundaries and goals, so subsequent
workshops (not reported here) focused on these
aspects.
According to Crossan et al. (1999), a good frame-
workhasthreerequirements.First,itshouldidentify
the phenomenon of interestdin this case, AI readi-
ness. Second, the key premises or assumptions un-
derlying the framework must be stated. A key
premise underlying the presented AI readiness
framework is that AI readiness is multidimensional,
and thatdigital transformation through AIaffectsall
dimensions.Third,therelationshipsamongelements
of the framework must be described. The presented
AIreadinessframework focuses attention oneach of
the dimensions separately, but it is also intended to
promote consideration of interactions among ele-
ments associated with the dimensions, and of ten-
sions associated with AI-mediated digital
transformation. I hope that it will help practitioners
identify and manage the links between the di-
mensions and the tensions inherent in digital trans-
formation processes.
To handle digital transformation effectively, em-
ployees must work together in a new way, breaking
down silos and collaboratively addressing cross-
dimensional issues. Organizational members need
to learn from one another in order to respond more
quickly and consistently to changes in the market
and within their own organization. Corporate cul-
tures also need to move toward a digital mindset in
whichinnovationisrewardedandinwhichadditional
digital expertise can be brought in to help organi-
zations embrace the digital world and acquire the
necessary skills and knowledge. In addition, organi-
zationsneedtoolsandframeworkstoenablethemto
avoid reinventing the wheel and to steer digital
transformation efforts in an appropriate direction.
ThepresentedAIreadinessframeworkisintendedto
provide suchability byfacilitating the assessment of
key organizational capabilitiesdor the lack there-
ofdin relation to four dimensions: technologies,
activities,boundaries,andgoals.Forexample,inthe
case considered here, the framework suggests that
while the firm had some capabilities related to
technologies and activities, it found building capa-
bilities related to boundaries and goals more chal-
lenging.Thus,theframeworkillustratestheutilityof
assessing and visualizing AI readiness in the four key
dimensions for enabling organizations to develop
their AI readiness and to identify skills and capabil-
ities required for that transition.
4. Conclusions
AI is a key driver of digital transformation in to-
day’s organizations, largely due to its utility in
decision-making when combined with large data
sets. Thus, deployment of AI technologies provides
some of the greatest opportunities and poses some
of the most severe challenges facing organizations.
Many leaders, however, have little idea how to
address these challenges. They recognize that AI
plays crucial roles in organizations’ performance
but not how their firms can deploy AI to achieve
desired performance outcomes and to promote
effective digital transformation.
Many organizations focus on performance out-
comes related to AI, which are obviously impor-
tant, but they are only one aspect of AI
governance. Moreover, various studies have shown
that sometimes short-term hits in performance
must be accepted during AI-mediated digital
transformation to enable long-term sustainability,
so adaptability must be considered as well as
performance. The presented framework for
measuring an organization’s AI readiness is inten-
ded to facilitate such consideration by enabling
quantification of a firm’s potential for digital
transformation in four key dimensions: technolo-
gies, activities, boundaries and goals. Thus, it can
be used to help organizations design and develop
their AI-based business opportunities by enabling
more complete mapping of digital transformation
opportunities and bottlenecks.
From an evolutionary perspective, it can also be
used to investigate the development of firms’ AI-
related learning in each of the dimensions. Some
organizations begin with a largely blank slate, so
they must initiate rules or principles and experi-
ment with them until they find the most effective
or appropriate AI use for them. Organizations that
begin with inadequate knowledge or experience
will feel strong pressure to learn by doing. Orga-
nizations that have acquired routines or organizing
procedures from existing workplaces may find it
easier to muddle through the initial stages, but
they must nonetheless learn to anticipate and to
cope with environmental changes. Regardless of
their current AI readiness, all organizations must
understand the multidimensional and dynamic
nature of digital transformation associated with
AI, and the presented framework can assist in this
understanding.
The AI readiness framework 335

--- PAGE 8 ---
Appendices
Appendix 1. Questionnaire for the AI readiness framework
336 J. Holmström

--- PAGE 9 ---
Appendix 2. Questionnaire for the AI readiness framework and scores awarded for
the insurance firm
The AI readiness framework 337

--- PAGE 10 ---
References
Acemoglu, D., & Autor, D. H. (2011). Skills, tasks, and tech-
nologies: Implications for employment and earnings. Hand-
book of Labor Economics, 4(3), 1043e1171.
Agarwal, R., Gao, G., DesRoches, C., & Jha, A. K. (2010).
Research commentarydThe digital transformation of
healthcare: Current status and the road ahead. Information
Systems Research, 21(4), 796e809.
Agrawal, A. K., Gans, J. S., & Goldfarb, A. (2018). Exploring the
impact of artificial intelligence: Prediction versus judgment
(Working Paper 24626). Washington, DC: National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Alaimo, C., Kallinikos, J., & Valderrama, E. (2020). Platforms as
service ecosystems: Lessons from social media. Journal of
Information Technology, 35(1), 25e48.
Aldrich, H. E. (1979). Organizations and environments. Engle-
wood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Aldrich, H. E., & Ruef, M. (2006). Organizations evolving.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Baiyere, A., Salmela, H., & Tapanainen, T. (2020). Digital
transformation and the new logics of business process
management. European Journal of Information Systems,
29(3), 238e259.
Boden, M. (2016). AI: Its nature and future. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Bostrom, N. (2014). Superintelligence: Paths, dangers, strate-
gies. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Boutetiere, H., & Reich, A. (2018, October). Unlocking success
in digital transformations. New York, NY: McKinsey &
Company.
Brynjolfsson, E., & McAfee, A. (2014). The second machine age:
Work, progress, and prosperity in a time of brilliant tech-
nologies. New York, NY: WW Norton & Company.
Brynjolfsson, E., Rock, D., & Syverson, C. (2018). Artificial in-
telligence and the modern productivity paradox: A clash of
expectations and statistics. In The economics of artificial
intelligence: An agenda (pp. 23e57). Chicago, IL: University
of Chicago Press.
Canhoto, A. I., & Clear, F. (2020). Artificial intelligence and
machine learning as business tools: A framework for diag-
nosing value destruction potential. Business Horizons, 63(2),
183e193.
Constantinides, P., Henfridsson, O., & Parker, G. G. (2018).
IntroductiondPlatforms and infrastructures in the digital
age. Information Systems Research, 29(2), 381e400.
Crossan, M. M., Lane, H. W., & White, R. E. (1999). An organi-
zational learning framework: From intuition to institution.
Academy of Management Review, 24(3), 522e537.
Davenport, T. H. (2018). The AI advantage: How to put the
artificial intelligence revolution to work. Boston, MA: MIT
Press.
Ekbia, H. R. (2009). Digital artifacts as quasi-objects: Qualifi-
cation, mediation, and materiality. Journal of the American
Society for Information Science and Technology, 60(12),
2554e2566.
Faraj, S., Pachidi, S., & Sayegh, K. (2018). Working and orga-
nizing in the age of the learning algorithm. Information and
Organization, 28(1), 62e70.
Felzmann, H., Fosch-Villaronga, E., Lutz, C., & Tamò-
Larrieux, A. (2019). Transparency you can trust: Trans-
parency requirements for artificial intelligence between
legal norms and contextual concerns. Big Data and Society.
Available at https://doi.org/10.1177/2053951719860542
Fernandes, T., & Oliveira, E. (2021). Understanding consumers’
acceptance of automated technologies in service
encounters: Drivers of digital voice assistants adoption.
Journal of Business Research, 122(1), 180e191.
Gekara, V. O., & Thanh Nguyen, V. X. (2018). New technologies
and the transformation of work and skills: A study of com-
puterisation and automation of Australian container termi-
nals. New Technology, Work and Employment, 33(3),
219e233.
Gibson, C., & Birkinshaw, J. (2004). The antecedents, conse-
quences, and mediating role of organizational ambidex-
terity. Academy of Management Journal, 47(2), 200e226.
Gregory, R. W., Keil, M., Muntermann, J., & Mähring, M. (2015).
Paradoxes and the nature of ambidexterity in IT trans-
formation programs. Information Systems Research, 26(1),
57e80.
Hallinan, B., & Striphas, T. (2014). Recommended for you: The
Netflix Prize and the production of algorithmic culture. New
Media and Society, 18(1), 117e137.
Henfridsson, O., & Bygstad, B. (2013). The generative mecha-
nisms of digital infrastructure evolution. MIS Quarterly,
37(3), 907e931.
Henningsson, S., & Carlsson, S. (2011). The DySIIM model for
managing IS integration in mergers and acquisitions. Infor-
mation Systems Journal, 21(5), 441e476.
Hinings, B., Gegenhuber, T., & Greenwood, R. (2018). Digital
innovation and transformation: An institutional perspective.
Information and Organization, 28(1), 52e61.
Huang, J., Henfridsson, O., Liu, M. J., & Newell, S. (2017).
Growing on steroids: Rapidly scaling the user base of digital
ventures through digital innovation. MIS Quarterly, 41(1),
301e314.
Huang, M. H., & Rust, R. T. (2018). Artificial intelligence in
service. Journal of Service Research, 21(2), 155e172.
Iansiti, M., & Lakhani, K. (2020). Competing in the age of AI:
Strategy and leadership when algorithms and networks run
the world. Boston, MA: Harvard Business Review Press.
Jarrahi, M. H. (2018). Artificial intelligence and the future of
work: Human-AI symbiosis in organizational decision making.
Business Horizons, 61(4), 577e586.
Jonsson, K., Mathiassen, L., & Holmström, J. (2018). Repre-
sentation and mediation in digitalized work: Evidence from
maintenance of mining machinery. Journal of Information
Technology, 33(3), 216e232.
Kallinikos, J., Aaltonen, A., & Marton, A. (2013). The ambiva-
lent ontology of digital artifacts. MIS Quarterly, 37(2),
357e370.
Kane, G. C., Palmer, D., Phillips, A. N., Kiron, D., & Buckley, N.
(2017, July 13). Achieving digital maturity: Adapting your
company to a changing world. MIT Sloan Management Re-
view. Available at https://sloanreview.mit.edu/projects/
achieving-digital-maturity/
Khrais, L. T., & Shidwan, O. S. (2020). Mobile commerce and its
changing use in relevant applicable areas in the face of
disruptive technologies. International Journal of Applied
Engineering Research, 15(1), 12e23.
Kittur, A., Yu, L., Hope, T., Chan, J., Lifshitz-Assaf, H.,
Gilon, K., et al. (2019). Scaling up analogical innovation with
crowds and AI. In Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences (pp. 1870e1877). Washington, DC: NAS.
Lehdonvirta, V. (2018). Flexibility in the gig economy: Managing
time on three online piecework platforms. New Technology,
Work and Employment, 33(1), 13e29.
Li, B. H., Hou, B. C., Yu, W. T., Lu, X. B., & Yang, C. W. (2017).
Applications of artificial intelligence in intelligent
manufacturing: A review. Frontiers of Information Tech-
nology and Electronic Engineering, 18(1), 86e96.
Lindgren, S., & Holmström, J. (2020). A social science
perspective on artificial intelligence: Building blocks for a
338 J. Holmström

--- PAGE 11 ---
research agenda. Journal of Digital Social Research, 2(3),
1e15.
Lyytinen, K., Yoo, Y., & Boland, R. J. (2016). Digital product
innovation within four classes of innovation networks. In-
formation Systems Journal, 26(1), 47e75.
Malar, D. A., Arvidsson, V., & Holmström, J. (2019). Digital
transformation in banking: Exploring value co-creation in
online banking services in India. Journal of Global Infor-
mation Technology Management, 22(1), 7e24.
Marabelli, M., Hansen, S., Newell, S., & Frigerio, C. (2017). The
light and dark side of the black box: Sensor-based technol-
ogy in the automotive industry. Communications of the As-
sociation for Information Systems, 40(1). Article 16.
Matt, C., Hess, T., & Benlian, A. (2015). Digital transformation
strategies. Business and Information Systems Engineering,
57(5), 339e343.
Mokyr, J., Vickers, C., & Ziebarth, N. L. (2015). The history of
technologicalanxietyandthefutureofeconomicgrowth:Isthis
timedifferent?JournalofEconomicPerspectives,29(3),31e50.
Monteiro, E., & Parmiggiani, E. (2019). Synthetic knowing: The
politics of the internet of things. MIS Quarterly, 43(1),
167e184.
Neff, G., & Nagy, P. (2016). Talking to bots: Symbiotic agency
and the case of Tay. International Journal of Communica-
tion, 10, 4915e4931.
Nylén, D., & Holmström, J. (2015). Digital innovation strategy: A
framework for diagnosing and improving digital product and
service innovation. Business Horizons, 58(1), 57e67.
Nylén, D., Holmström, J., & Lyytinen, K. (2014). Oscillating
between four orders of design: The case of digital maga-
zines. Design Issues, 30(3), 53e68.
Pan, Y. (2016). Heading toward artificial intelligence 2.0. En-
gineering, 2(4), 409e413.
Pasquale, F. (2015). The Black Box Society: The
secret algorithms that control money and information.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Perlow, L., Okhuysen, G., & Repenning, N. (2002). The speed
trap: Exploring the relationship between decision making
and temporal context. Academy of Management Journal,
45(5), 931e955.
Raisch, S., Birkinshaw, J., Probst, G., & Tushman, M. L. (2009).
Organizational ambidexterity: Balancing exploitation and
exploration for sustained performance. Organization Sci-
ence, 20(4), 685e695.
Ransbotham, S., Kiron, D., Gerbert, P., & Reeves, M. (2017,
September 6). Reshaping business with artificial intelli-
gence: Closing the gap between ambition and action. MIT
Sloan Management Review. Available at https://
sloanreview.mit.edu/projects/reshaping-business-with-
artificial-intelligence/
Ravasi, D., Tripsas, M., & Langley, A. (2020). Exploring the
strategy-identity nexus. Strategic Organization, 18(1),
5e19.
Sandberg, J., Holmström, J., & Lyytinen, K. (2020). Digitization
and phase transitions in platform organizing logics: Evidence
from the process automation industry. MIS Quarterly, 44(1),
129e153.
Santos, F. M., & Eisenhardt, K. M. (2005). Organizational
boundaries and theories of organization. Organization Sci-
ence, 16(5), 491e508.
Seidel, S., Berente, N., Lindberg, A., Lyytinen, K., &
Nickerson, J. V. (2018). Autonomous tools and design: A
triple-loop approach to human-machine learning. Commu-
nications of the ACM, 62(1), 50e57.
Spencer, D. A. (2018). Fear and hope in an age of mass auto-
mation: Debating the future of work. New Technology, Work
and Employment, 33(1), 1e12.
Tilson, D., Lyytinen, K., & Sørensen, C. (2010). Research com-
mentary - Digital infrastructures: The missing IS research
agenda. Information Systems Research, 21(4), 748e759.
Tiwana, A., Konsynski, B., & Bush, A. A. (2010). Platform evo-
lution: Coevolution of platform architecture, governance,
and environmental dynamics. Information Systems
Research, 21(4), 675e687.
Vial, G. (2019). Understanding digital transformation: A review
and a research agenda. The Journal of Strategic Information
Systems, 28(2), 118e144.
Wessel, L., Baiyere, A., Ologeanu-Taddei, R., Cha, J., &
Jensen, T. (2020). Unpacking the difference between digital
transformation and IT-enabled organizational trans-
formation. Journal of the Association for Information Sys-
tems, 22(1). Available at https://doi.org/10.17705/1jais.
00655
Westergren, U. H., Holmström, J., & Mathiassen, L. (2019).
Partnering to create IT-based value: A contextual ambidex-
terity approach. Information and Organization, 29(4).
Article 100273.
Wimelius, H., Mathiassen, L., Holmström, J., & Keil, M. (2021).
A paradoxical perspective on technology renewal in digital
transformation. Information Systems Journal, 31(1),
198e225.
Yoo, Y., Henfridsson, O., & Lyytinen, K. (2010). Research com-
mentarydThe new organizing logic of digital innovation: An
agenda for information systems research. Information Sys-
tems Research, 21(4), 724e735.
The AI readiness framework 339