--- PAGE 1 ---
Vol.10 (2020) No. 1
ISSN: 2088-5334
Development and Validation of Enterprise Architecture (EA)
Readiness Assessment Model
Surya Sumarni Hussein#1
, Mohd Naz’ri Mahrin#2
, Nurazean Maarop#3
, Nur Azaliah Abu Bakar#4
#
Razak Faculty of Technology and Informatics, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Email: 1
shsurya2@live.utm.my; 2
mdnazim@utm.my; 3
nurazean.kl@utm.my; 4
azaliah@utm.my
Abstract— Enterprise architecture (EA) proves to be a holistic strategy in aligning business and information technology. An
increasing number of organizations, especially in the public sector, have adopted EA in order to take advantage of the opportunities
that it offers. Through EA, the efficiency of the organization is improved, with the optimization of resources and the elimination of
duplication and redundancy. However, the successful establishment of EA relies on the organization’s readiness and ability to adopt
EA practices because without proper readiness, the practices will probably fail. EA readiness refers to the assessment of how ready an
organization is to adopt and to establish EA practices. EA readiness helps the organization to measure their stage of readiness, to
identify any gaps, and then to redesign its strategy in order to adopt EA practices. EA is a merger between business and IT. Thus, the
important elements of EA readiness should comprise of people, process, technology, and catalyst enabler. There is a lack of readiness
for an assessment model that shapes these four elements towards EA; hence, a clear gap has been identified. Therefore, the objective
of this study is to validate the EA Readiness Assessment Model (EARAM) by performing the Delphi technique. The study adopts a
three-round Delphi Technique to verify the identified elements and factors and this is followed by developing and validating the
proposed model. Results from the Delphi analysis have validated four (4) major elements of EARAM, namely people, process,
technology, and catalyst enabler. The number of factors that contributes towards the readiness of the EA establishment is fourteen
(14). It is anticipated that this model (EARAM) can help the Malaysian Public Sector (MPS) organization to identify and understand
the elements and factors that must be considered when assessing the readiness to practice EA.
Keywords—Enterprise Architecture; readiness; assessment; public sector; Delphi technique.
I. INTRODUCTION
The emergence of e-government theories and practices of
the public sector has made another phase of inclination in
a new digital era. However, according to Witarsyah [1],
much money has been spent by the government to improve
e-government services, but the return of investment is
difficult to justify. Enterprise architecture (EA) has become
an influential agenda of e-government to strategized
business with an information technology plan to overcome
the issue. EA is a strategic approach to manage the
complexity of an organization [2]–[5]. This includes the
public sector that recently has an interest in EA; thus, the
attention to this approach is evolving.
An increasing number of public sector organizations have
adopted EA in order to take advantage of the opportunities
that it offers. Through EA, the efficiency of the organization
is improved, with the optimization of resources and the
elimination of duplication and redundancy. However, the
successful establishment of EA relies on the organization’s
readiness and ability to adopt EA practices because without
proper readiness, the practices will probably fail [4], [6].
EA readiness refers to the assessment of how ready an
organization is to adopt and establish EA practices. EA
readiness helps the organization to measure their stage of
readiness, to identify any gaps, and then to redesign its
strategy in order to adopt EA practices [2], [7]–[9].
Several studies have been conducted on the importance of
the organization’s readiness towards EA establishment.
Jahani, Javadein, and Jafari [8] pointed out that any
organization that plans to establish EA must measure its
readiness as the first step in preparation for an EA
implementation process [9], [10]. According to statistics by
MAMPU, the lack of readiness in agencies to embrace EA is
one of the critical problems that lead to slow EA
establishment [11].
In Malaysia, the EA readiness studies have begun to grow
since 2007, which covers most of the factors in EA readiness.
However, not many studies focus on the EA readiness
assessment model itself [4], [12]. It is found that a
comprehensive assessment model for readiness has not been
established despite the extensive discussion on EA readiness
factors [13]–[15]. Though other scholars have proposed
other EA Readiness Models, none of them can fit into the
157

--- PAGE 2 ---
Malaysian Public Sector’s (MPS) EA implementation
approach due to the MPS’s governance structure and project
management. Realizing this gap, this study proposes an EA
readiness assessment model to measure the Malaysian Public
Sector organization’s readiness in EA establishment.
This paper will explain the validation process of the
proposed EA Readiness Assessment Model (EARAM)
through the Delphi technique. A three-round Delphi
Technique is adopted, firstly, to verify the identified
elements and factors, secondly to develop the model and
thirdly to validate the model (EARAM) that is built base on
the elements and factors verified. It is anticipated that this
model (EARAM) will bring great assistance to the MPS in
identifying and assessing the EA readiness factors before
embarking on an EA implementation practice.
Previous studies have shown that early experiences have
appeared to be tedious and have complicated the process of
establishing EA in the public sector [12], [16]–[18]. This is
because the organization needs to prepare themselves before
embarking on such a project. Therefore, a major concern that
needs to be addressed is the readiness of the organization
itself. The lack of readiness in agencies to embrace EA is
one of the critical problems that is leading to the slow
establishment of EA in organizations [11], [12].
In Malaysia, the interest in EA began to grow since 2007
from both the public and private sectors. However, most of
the studies in EA readiness that have been conducted in
western countries do not suffice to address the EA readiness
in a Malaysian context. Notably, only two studies that are
related to EA readiness have been conducted in a Malaysian
context. The studies were conducted in 2014 and 2016 to
assess the readiness of agencies in EA establishment in the
public sector. The study has revealed that the MPS is
moving towards a partial readiness to embark on EA
practices [19], [20]. According to the results, the lack of
readiness in agencies to embrace EA is one of the critical
problems that lead to slow EA establishment [11].
Nevertheless, these studies have merely been based on the
industries’ consultant perspective, and there is no assurance
on the rigorousness of the readiness assessment instrument
that is used.
Moreover, the readiness assessment studies that have
been conducted by industries’ consultants are based on their
own readiness assessment model which lacks people,
process, technology, and the EA catalyst perspective, as
suggested by many EA scholars [4], [21], [22].
It has been found that the assessment model that is used
in 2014 has solely been based on nine maturity areas from
Togaf 9.1 EA maturity study framework[19]. The result
from this assessment shows that MPS is still very much in its
infancy stage. This is because most of the agencies do not
possess knowledge in EA, and the assessment conducted has
used an EA that has been constructed as a basis to formulate
EA questions. However, based on the preliminary interview
with one of the respondents, the questions from the
assessment are difficult to understand even though a guide
has been given. Hence, the model itself can be disputable
and the result may not represent the actual scenario of EA
establishment in MPS.
Another study has been conducted by a team of
consultants appointed by MAMPU in 2016 [20]. These
consultants have also deployed their own EA readiness
assessment model, which covers only four main factors,
namely commitment, team capability, business case, and
stakeholder. Again, the readiness assessment model being
used does not depict the holistic view of EA readiness as
discussed by EA scholars [4], [8], [21], [23], [24]. Thus, the
result is not accurate enough to provide the overall picture of
EA readiness in MPS. Based on these issues being discussed,
this study proposes an EA Readiness Assessment Model
(EARAM) to overcome the weaknesses of previous
readiness assessment by taking into account all the important
elements that have become the pillars of MPS agencies
namely the people, the process, the technology, and the
catalyst enabler elements, as suggested by previous studies
[4], [21], [22]. Hence, the EA readiness will be assessed
based on factors that are related to these four elements and
EA domain respectively.
Thereafter, an identification of the EA readiness factor is
completed through a developed conceptual model (EARAM).
This study model is based on identified factors from the
systematic literature review (SLR) and interview sessions
with the experts. From the SR four existing readiness
assessment models in the IS field have been identified [25].
From this, the IT/IS Maturity Model [26] has been selected
as a based theory for the development of a proposed model
(EARAM). Also, additional factors that are related to EA
readiness have been identified from the SR [25] and are
consolidated together with the based theory. Table 1 depicts
the elements and factors of EARAM based on studies that
are mentioned earlier.
TABLE I
ELEMENTS AND FACTORS OF EARAM
Element Factor
EE-Catalyst Enabler EE1-EA Vision
EE2-EA Culture
EE3-EAChange management
EE4-EA Resources
EE5-EA Governance
PP-People PP1-Stakeholder support
PP2-Competency and skills
PP3-Management commitment
PP-Process PS1-Business Motivation
PS2-Communication
PS3-Policy and rules
TC-Technology TC1-EA repository
TC2-Security
TC3-EA tools
These elements and factors are developed into EARAM. The
proposed conceptual model of EARAM to be validated in
this study is depicted in Figure 1.
158

--- PAGE 3 ---
Fig 1. Proposed EA readiness assessment conceptual model for MPS
II. MATERIALS AND METHOD
In order to resolve the issues that are highlighted in the
previous section, this study develops a new EA readiness
assessment model (EARAM) by using the Delphi technique.
The Delphi experiment was performed in 1948 as the first
application of the method. After the first article describing it
was published in 1963, the method became popular [27].
Numerous Delphi experiments were conducted between
1950 and 1963 by Rand as an effort to reduce the negative
effects of group interactions in decision making. Most of
these experiments were defence-related, thus, they were kept
confidential [28]. This study organizes the Delphi technique
into three phases, they are (i) Planning and Preparation for
Delphi, (ii) Execution of Delphi Technique, and (iii)
Finalisation and Closure of Delphi.
A. Planning and preparation for the Delphi Technique
The first phase involved the planning and preparation of
the Delphi technique execution. Experts need to be identified
in the first place. Experts are defined as people who are very
knowledgeable in a particular area, who are experienced and
can influence policy [29]. Since expert opinion was
obtained, purposive sampling was necessary where the
sample was selected not to represent the general population
but rather their expert ability to answer the research
questions [30]. There were four requirements for expertise:
(i) knowledge and experience pertaining to the issues under
investigation; (ii) capacity and willingness to participate, (iii)
sufficient time to participate in the three rounds of Delphi,
and (iv) effective communication skills [31]. Thirteen
experts based in Malaysia, United Kingdom and India, from
various professions such as academicians, policy-makers,
consultants and practitioners were invited to take part in the
process.
Before the study was conducted, fifteen experts had been
contacted via email to request for their participation in the
study. The communication channel via email was to ensure
the anonymity and confidentiality of the feedback so as to
prevent biases or influence by other experts. Thirteen experts
replied, giving their agreement to participate. This was
almost similar to two doctoral types of research done by
Adams [32] and Choong [33] respectively, which involved
ten experts and Al-araibi [34] which involved eleven experts.
B. Execution of Delphi Technique
The second phase was the execution of the Delphi
technique. Questionnaires were used for data collection. The
duration was four months for data collection processes,
which commenced from Oct 2017 to Feb 2018. The reason
for this rather long period was due to the fact that the process
involved the conceptualization of the EARAM, which
required an in-depth analysis of the elements that were to be
included in the model. Furthermore, many of the experts’
feedbacks that were received from the beginning of the first
round were valuable, hence they needed to be analyzed
accordingly. Round 1 was intended to get as many inputs as
possible regarding the factors and items identified, based on
the SR and interviews. Before the questionnaire was
distributed, it needs to be validated. Content validity is a
crucial aspect in the questionnaire development. The content
validity results revealed that this questionnaire had an
appropriate level of content validity.
Each expert received the questionnaire via email together
with a formal invitation letter for participation. A brief
description of the Delphi procedure, instructions on
completing the questionnaire, and a request to send the
completed questionnaire back to the researcher within two
weeks via email were all indicated. Each expert was
assigned with a code name (i.e. E1=Expert One; E2=Expert
159

--- PAGE 4 ---
Two etc.) to allow for tracking of the returned responses and
individual feedback. All tracking information and code
name were separated from the data collected to protect the
anonymity of the participants' responses.
1) Delphi Round One (R1): As mentioned earlier, the
questionnaires were emailed to all experts together with an
official letter of invitation and a feedback form. This
questionnaire was constructed with a list of factors and items
which we rated using a 5-point Likert-type scale. This
questionnaire was categorised based on three sections
namely: ‘Respondent profile’, ‘Factors that Influence
Readiness of EA Establishment in MPS’, and lastly ‘The
proposed EARAM for EA Establishment in MPS’. There
were altogether 14 factors with descriptions and 42 new
items derived from the SR and input of experts in the
interview session. The summary of items is shown in Table
II.
TABLE II
SUMMARY OF FACTORS AND ITEMS FOR EAREADINESS FOR ROUND 1
Factors No. of items
Element: EE-Catalyst Enabler
EE1-EA Vision 6
EE2-EA Culture 4
EE3-EA Change Management 4
EE4-EA Resources 3
EE5-EA Governance 3
Element: PP-People
PP1-Stakeholder support 3
PP2-Competency and skills 3
PP3-Management commitment 4
Element: PS-Process
PS1-Business motivation 2
PS2-Communication 3
PS3-Policy and rules 2
Element: TC- Technology
TC1-EA repository 2
TC2-EA tools 1
TC3-Security 2
TOTAL 42
The experts were given two weeks to verify the items and
factors of EA readiness and to comment on the proposed
EARAM for EA establishment in MPS [35]. A follow up
email was sent one week after the first email to remind them
of the task. The follow-up emails proved to be effective
because after the reminder six experts replied to inform
about their commitments (outstation, busy or will reply
soon). All thirteen experts successfully responded with their
feedback, even though some of them had exceeded the
dateline. The expert was also allowed to give comments in
the blank spaces given in the tables on the proposed factors,
items, and model. The panel members were required to rate
the items based on the five-point Likert-type scale of
relevance [36] as shown in Table III.
TABLE III
SCALE OF RELEVANCE
Scale Definition
1 Extremely
irrelevant
Not important at all to the readiness factors that
affect readiness in MPS
2 Irrelevant Not significantly important to the readiness
factors that affect readiness in MPS
3 Uncertain It may or may not be important to the readiness
factors that affect readiness in MPS
4 Relevant It is important to the readiness factors that
affect readiness in MPS
5 Extremely
relevant
It is most important to the readiness factors that
affect readiness in MPS
2) Delphi Round 2 (R2): The suggestions and feedback
given in Round 1 were taken into consideration in
constructing the Round 2 questionnaire. The Round 2
questionnaire consisted of 45 items of which 42 items were
rated in the previous round and three new items derived from
Round 1 were added. Of these, one new item was added for
EA change management factor namely performance
management framework, one new item was added for policy
and rules factor namely customised standard EA
methodology, and one new item was added for security
factor namely continues EA review for accountability. The
division of items in Round 2 is shown in Table IV.
TABLE IV
DIVISION OF ITEMS IN ROUND 2
Factors No. of items
Element: EE-Catalyst Enabler
EE1-EA Vision 6
EE2-EA Culture 4
EE3-EA Change Management 4 (+) 1 New Item
EE4-EA Resources 3
EE5-EA Governance 3
Element: PP-People
PP1-Stakeholder support 3
PP2-Competency and skills 3
PP3-Management commitment 4
Element: PS-Process
PS1-Business motivation 2
PS2-Communication 3
PS3-Policy and rules 2 (+) 1 New Item
Element: TC- Technology
TC1-EA repository 2
TC2-EA tools 1
TC3-Security 1 (+) 1 New Item
TOTAL 45
The experts were requested to rate the importance of the
factors and items using a 5-point Likert scale (1=Extremely
irrelevant and 5= Extremely relevant). For round 2, two
weeks were given to the experts to respond as in Round 1.
After a given date, a few follow-up emails, messages via
SMS and/or telephone calls, all the thirteen experts
responded with their answers.
Participants were requested to provide their underlying
comments or reasons for any statement(s) where they might
have taken exception from the converging group view; for
example, where the group median is 5 but the expert’s rate is
1, then he or she was required to provide a justification or a
comment for the difference. An open-ended column was
provided next to each item in the Round 2 questionnaire for
160

--- PAGE 5 ---
the participants to provide their comments or reasons for any
exceptions.
3) Delphi Round 3 (R3): Delphi Round 3 was employed
to confirm the ratings of experts for three new items derived
in Round 1 and were first rated in Round 2. The
questionnaire consisted of two parts. Part one consisted of
the results of new items for the panel members to re-rate the
items, and part two is for the validation of the final EARAM
for MPS. Part two consisted of options for the panel to
validate the model without comments and with comments in
the open-ended space given. Two weeks were given to the
panel to respond. After the stipulated duration, thirteen
experts replied. The most successful studies were the results
of the three rounds of data collection as “three rounds proved
sufficient to attain stability in the responses; further rounds
tended to show very little change and excessive repetition
was unacceptable to participants” [37]. Thus, the three-
round conducted in this research were sufficient to achieve
the objective and also to enrich the data.
C. Finalisation and Closure of Delphi
The final phases involved data analysis and report. The
returns of the Delphi Round 1 to Round 3 questionnaires
were analysed and evaluated qualitatively and quantitatively
since it involved the level of agreement of the experts
pertaining to factors of readiness, their justifications on the
chosen level of agreement and suggestions of elements to be
added. The following are the related analysis conducted.
1) Quantitative Analysis: The feedback from the
questionnaires of Delphi Rounds 1, 2 and 3 were analysed
using the Frequency of Central Tendency to calculate its
median and Inter Quartile Range (IQR). Median was used to
investigate the majority of experts (experts’ consensus)
while IQR was conducted to identify the relationships
between each of the items or experts [38]. The stages of
consensus were fixed based on IQR as follows: 1) High
consensus = IQR is 0 to 1; 2) Moderate consensus = IQR is
1.01 to 1.99, and 3) Without consensus = IQR is 2.0 and
above.
2) Qualitative Analysis: Questionnaire for each round of
Delphi had included a column for comments that allow any
feedback from the experts. Each of the comments was
analysed qualitatively using thematic analysis [32].
3) Final Report: The final report consisted of preparation,
process, and results that had been achieved in the Delphi
Technique. The initial model was improved based on
feedback from the Delphi members. The result of the final
round of Delphi (Round 3) was the validated EA readiness
assessment model by the experts.
III.RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The results consist of a statistical analysis of factors that
affect the readiness of EA establishment and EARAM. The
detail explanations are given in the following sub-sections.
A. Statistical Analysis: Factors that affect readiness of EA
establishment
For Delphi R1, all items had a median value of 4 and 5.
Therefore, the levels of agreement among the panelists for
all items were at ‘agree’ and ‘strongly agree’. In terms of
stage of consensus among the experts, all factors and items
had an IQR value of 0 to 1 which interpreted that a high
consensus was achieved.
Based on the feedbacks from the experts in Delphi R1,
three new items were suggested to be added as stated below:
• EE3-5 Item: Performance Management framework
under EE3-Change Management factor
• PS3-3 Item: Standard EA Methodology under PS3-
Policy and Rules factor
• TC2-2 Item: Consistent review of EA to ensure
accountability (i.e. integrity and accuracy of outcome)
under TC2- Security factor.
Expert 3 also suggest to revise term PS1-business case
factor to business motivation and purpose. There are 14
factors and 45 items were proposed and analysed to
formulate Delphi R2 questionnaire. In order to confirm these
findings, the questionnaires together with the summation of
Delphi R1 data analysis was circulated again among the
panel of experts at Delphi R2.
For Delphi R2 and R3, all 14 items and 45 items
including the new items suggested had a median value of 4
and 5, with the levels of agreement among the experts at
‘agree’ and ‘strongly agree’. For stage of consensus, all
items had a high degree of consensus (IQR value of 0 to 1).
The Delphi technique ended when the results reached the
saturation points, which is the convergences of the
consensus criteria.
Based on the findings from 13 expert panels of all three
rounds of the Delphi technique, there was no item that
achieved an IQR of more than one or a value of median
which was less than four. In other words, no item was rated
as not important or no consensus. Eventually, the experts
reached the consensus to accept all 14 factors and 45 items
in the final round of the Delphi technique (Delphi
R3). From statistical analysis, through the median score and
IQR values in Round 1 until Round 3, the findings showed
that all proposed factors could affect the readiness of the EA
establishment. Detailed analysis of Round 1 until Round 3 of
the Delphi techniques that is based on the proposed factors
are:
B. EE1-EA Vision
Based on the generic items, all the experts agree that the
EA vision is an important factor in the readiness of EA
establishment. Before EA is established in an organization, a
consensus of definition and vision must be derived from all
affected parties. EA vision must also clearly address the
scope that is intended to be accomplished with the
measurable business value. However, the critical element of
having an EA vision is that the vision should be
understandable and shared among people in an organization
because the vision acts as a driver and guidance for EA
practices.
C. EE2-EA Culture
Based on the generic items, all the experts agree that an
EA culture is important in readiness for an EA establishment.
A culture of EA within an organization will increase the
chances of a successful EA initiative.
161

--- PAGE 6 ---
D. EE3-EA Change Management
In the public sector, change management must be driven
from top and middle management through directives,
policies and work instructions. This will provide immediate
change effects, and gradually work on the soft skills to
promote positive attitudes and beliefs in EA.
E. EE4-EA Resources
EA resources are important towards readiness of EA
establishment. Sufficient EA resources include finance,
people and assets that are needed to be reallocate
accordingly to make the best used of them. Thus, resources
directly affect the readiness of an organization in the public
sector to successfully embark on EA practice.
F. EE5-EA Governance
It is important to define the roles of people who are
involved before the establishment of EA practices. This is an
early part of setting up an EA governance for the
organization, to be prepared or equipped for EA
establishment. Setting up an EA governance does not mean
that the organisation needs to set up a new EA governance
board or body or committee. It can be embraced into the
existing Governance body with a suitable stakeholder who is
EA savvy, and by adding an additional role and
responsibility to govern the EA.
G. PP1-Stakeholder support
All experts agree that the stakeholder support is an
important factor of readiness in EA establishment. However,
it is crucial for the stakeholder to have good knowledge and
understanding on how to govern EA. The stakeholder must
also constantly engage with the EA practitioner to ensure
that he or she is able to play his or her role in order to
support the EA practices
H. PP2-Competency and Skills
All the experts agree that competency and skill are
important factors in EA establishment. Having a competent
EA architect is crucial as the organization must have a
person who is well versed with the core business to be the
lead architect. Thus, organizations need to equip their EA
team with suitable architecture skill to ensure smooth
adoption of EA in MPS.
I. PP3- Management Commitment
All experts agree that management commitment plays a
major role towards readiness of EA establishment. However,
although this factor is necessary, it is not a sufficient
condition for readiness. The key is to enable and ensure
direct and active management involvement.
J. PS1- Business Motivation and purpose
In Delphi R1, terms “business case” is suggested by one
of the experts to be revised into “business motivation and
purpose”, which is more understandable by employees in
the organisation. This revision of terms is agreed by all
experts in Delphi R2 and R3. Business motivation and
purpose factor is critical for EA establishment that acts as a
contract to be referred and as a consent for the start and
review of the EA programs and activities. It helps EA
practitioner to communicate at the same “language’ with
business stakeholder.
K. PS2-Communication
Ensuring a common understanding of the architecture,
methodology and artefacts is crucial in executing a
successful EA initiative. Thus, all the experts agree that
communication is an important factor in avoiding
misunderstanding of the EA general terms and acronyms
across the organization. The use of standard notations and
standard EA language at the earlier stage of EA
establishment is to ensure everyone understands the
architecture description and models that are being used to
represent the enterprise and the roadmap towards achieving
the target architecture or business vision.
L. PS3-Policy and rules
Policy and rules factor were agreed upon by all the
experts as one of the important factors towards EA readiness.
In MPS or almost all of the other countries public sectors,
the policy and rules are effective ways to implement certain
initiatives and programs. Therefore, policies and rules need
to be formulated to ensure EA practices are in place and
being adhered.
M. TC1-EA Repository
All experts agreed EA repository is important towards
readiness of an EA establishment. EA repository helps to
store the EA artefact in a manageable way and acts as a
centralised repository. EA repository should be defined up
from with the creation of an EA board so that exactitude is
placed early in terms of documenting and storing EA
artefacts.
N. TC2-EA Tools
EA tools are important and should be decided at the
creation of an EA Governance board or committee, however,
EA artefacts can be documented without specific EA tools.
Appropriateness of the tool and tool selection to the needs of
the organisation is the most important, and training on the
use of tools is a must.
O. TC3-Security
All experts agree that security is an important factor of the
readiness towards EA establishment. EA often documents
the Intellectual Property of the organization – keeping all of
the EA content secured is vital in ensuring the direction and
reputation of the organization. Thus, security is to ensure
that the artefacts are intact, reliable and accessible. This part
discusses the readiness factors and items that are validated
from the Delphi technique. In R1, 14 factors and 42 items
are proposed. From the experts’ feedback in R1, the items
that have emerged total to 45 items and are allocated to the
factors accordingly. The result from R2 shows that all 14
factors and 45 items have received high consensus from the
experts. Thus, the results lead to the development of EA
readiness model and are validated by an expert in R3. The
result concluded that towards three rounds of Delphi, all
factors and items had generated a high consensus among the
experts and are therefore considered for the development of
the EA Readiness Assessment Model (EARAM).
162

--- PAGE 7 ---
IV.CONCLUSION
Enterprise architecture (EA) has been proven to be a
holistic strategy in aligning business and information
technology. An increasing number of organisations,
especially in the public sector, have adopted EA in order to
take advantage of the opportunities that it offers. Through
EA, the efficiency of the organisation is improved with
optimisation of resources and the elimination of duplication
and redundancy.
The Delphi technique is used to verify the identified
elements and factors, this is followed by developing and
validating the proposed model. It consists of 14 factors and
45 items that have received high consensus from experts.
This EARAM incorporates all suggested elements with
the aim to provide managers with a model to assess the EA
readiness of their organizations, prior to the EA
establishment, by highlighting the areas that are likely to
require improvements. It can also help the decision makers
to set a vision and a strategic statement action plan for the
establishment of EA in their agencies.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is financially supported by a Fundamental
Research Grant Scheme (Vote No. 5F072) awarded by
Ministry of Higher Education of Malaysia and University
Teknologi Malaysia.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Witarsyah, T. Sjafrizal, M. F. MD Fudzee, and M. A. Salamat,
“The Critical Factors Affecting e-Government Adoption in Indonesia:
A Conceptual Framework,” Int. J. Adv. Sci. Eng. Inf. Technol., vol. 7,
no. 1, p. 160, 2017.
[2] D. Simon, K. Fischbach, and D. Schoder, “Enterprise architecture
management and its role in corporate strategic management,” Inf.
Syst. E-bus. Manag., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 5–42, 2014.
[3] N. Banaeianjahromi and K. Smolander, “Understanding Obstacles in
Enterprise Architecture Development,” in European Conference on
Information Systems (ECIS), 2011, vol. 7, no. 3.
[4] D. D. Dang and S. Pekkola, “Root Causes of Enterprise Architecture
Problems,” Pacific Asia Conf. Inf. Syst., 2016.
[5] F. Rahimi, J. Gøtze, and C. Møller, “Enterprise Architecture
Management: Toward a Taxonomy of Applications,” vol. 40, 2017.
[6] P. Desfray and G. Raymond, “Togaf®,” Model. Enterp. Archit. with
TOGAF, pp. 1–24, 2014.
[7] N. M. Aziz and H. Salleh, “Managing Organisation / Business
Readiness towards IT / IS Implementation: A Model Comparison,”
Aust. J. Basic Appl. Sci., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 215–221, 2011.
[8] B. Jahani, S. R. S. Javadein, and H. A. Jafari, “Measurement of
enterprise architecture readiness within organizations,” Bus. Strateg.
Ser., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 177–191, 2010.
[9] D. D. Dang and S. Pekkola, “Institutionalising Enterprise
Architecture in,” in The 2016 European Conference on Information
Systems (ECIS). İstanbul, Turkey., 2016.
[10] D. A. Purnawan and K. Surendro, “Building enterprise architecture
for hospital information system,” 2016 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Commun.
Technol. ICoICT 2016, vol. 4, no. c, pp. 1–6, 2016.
[11] M. Yusoff, “Steering commitee meeting for development of ea in
malaysian public sector (1GovEA) phase 1 NO. 2/2017,” 2017.
[12] V. Seppänen, K. Penttinen, and M. Pulkkinen, “Key Issues in
Enterprise Architecture Adoption in the Public Sector,” vol. 16, no. 1,
pp. 46–58, 2018.
[13] H. Al-Kharusi, S. Miskon, and M. Bahari, “Factors Influencing the
Engagement Between Enterprise Architects and Stakeholders in
Enterprise Architecture Development,” p. paper 262, 2016.
[14] M. Ylinen and S. Pekkola, “Enterprise Architecture as a Scapegoat
for Difficulties in Public Sector Organizational Transformation,” pp.
1–13, 2018.
[15] N. Banaeianjahromi, “Where Enterprise Architecture Development
Fails,” 2018 12th Int. Conf. Res. Challenges Inf. Sci., pp. 1–9, 2018.
[16] T. Hope, E. Chew, and R. Sharma, “The failure of success factors:
Lessons from success and failure cases of enterprise architecture
implementation,” SIGMIS-CPR 2017 - Proc. 2017 ACM SIGMIS
Conf. Comput. People Res., pp. 21–27, 2017.
[17] T. Hope, “The Critical Success Factors of Enterprise Architecture,”
University of Technology, Sydney, 2015.
[18] D. Dang, “Enterprise Architecture and Organizational Reform: A
Project Debrief,” 2017.
[19] MAMPU, “Kajian Pembangunan Enterprise Architecture Sektor
Awam : Current Assessment Report,” no. March, 2014.
[20] MAMPU, “Readiness of government agencies for Enterprise
Architecture,” 2016.
[21] N. A. A. Bakar, N. Kama, and S. Harihodin, “Enterprise architecture
development and implementation in public sector: The Malaysian
perspective,” J. Theor. Appl. Inf. Technol., vol. 88, no. 1, pp. 176-
188i, 2016.
[22] A. Ojo, T. Janowski, and E. Estevez, “Improving Government
Enterprise Architecture practice - Maturity factor analysis,” Proc.
Annu. Hawaii Int. Conf. Syst. Sci., pp. 4260–4269, 2011.
[23] A. Sobczak, “Methods of the assessment of enterprise architecture
practice maturity in an organization,” Lect. Notes Bus. Inf. Process.,
vol. 158 LNBIP, pp. 104–111, 2013.
[24] B. Van Der Raadt, M. Bonnet, S. Schouten, and H. Van Vliet, “The
relation between EA effectiveness and stakeholder satisfaction,” J.
Syst. Softw., vol. 83, no. 10, pp. 1954–1969, 2010.
[25] S. S. Hussein et al., “Towards designing an EA readiness instrument:
A systematic review,” in Colloquium in Information Science and
Technology, CIST, 2017.
[26] M. Alshawi and H. Salleh, “IT/IS Readiness Maturity Model,” Cases
Perform. Meas. Product. Improv., pp. 23–37, 2011.
[27] U. G. Gupta and R. E. Clarke, “Theory and applications of the Delphi
technique: A bibliography (1975–1994),” Technol. Forecast. Soc.
Change, vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 185–211, 1996.
[28] N. Dalkey and O. Helmer, “An experimental application of the
Delphi method to the use of experts,” Manage. Sci., vol. 9, no. 3, pp.
458–467, 1963.
[29] J. Baker, K. Lovell, and N. Harris, “How expert are the experts? An
exploration of the concept of ‘expert’ within Delphi panel
techniques.,” Nurse Res., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 59–70, 2006.
[30] J. Kosecoff et al., “General medical care and the education of
internists in university hospitals: an evaluation of the teaching
hospital general medicine group practice program,” Ann. Intern.
Med., vol. 102, no. 2, pp. 250–257, 1985.
[31] M. Adler and E. Ziglio, Gazing into the oracle: The Delphi method
and its application to social policy and public health. Jessica
Kingsley Publishers, 1996.
[32] M. K. Adams, “Defining creative scholarship and identifying criteria
for evaluating creative scholarship using a modified delphi
technique.,” 2004.
[33] Y. C. Choong, “A mapping approach to investigating Information
and Communication Technology (ICT) implementation during the
building design process,” Dr. Philos. Sch. Prop. Constr. Proj. Manag.
RMIT Univ., 2006.
[34] A. A. M. Al-araibi, M. Naz, M. Naz’ri bin Mahrin, and R. C. M.
Yusoff, “Technological aspect factors of E-learning readiness in
higher education institutions: Delphi technique,” Educ. Inf. Technol.,
pp. 1–24, 2018.
[35] A. L. Delbecq, H. Van de Ven, David H. Gustafson, A. H. de Ven,
and D. H. Gustafson, Group techniques for program planning: A
guide to nominal group and Delphi processes, vol. 12. Scott
Foresman, 1975.
[36] I. A. Jillson, “The national drug-abuse policy delphi: progress report
and findings to date,” Delphi Method Tech. Appl., pp. 124–158, 1975.
[37] H. A. Linstone, M. Turoff, and others, The Delphi method:
Techniques and applications, vol. 29. Addison-Wesley Reading, MA,
1975.
[38] S. Siraj, A. R. Zakaria, N. Alias, D. Dewitt, P. Kannan, and J.
Ganapathy, “Future Projection on Patriotism among School Students
Using Delphi Technique,” Creat. Educ., vol. 03, no. 06, pp. 1053–
1059, 2012.
163