--- PAGE 1 ---
1 Jonnagaddala J, et al. BMJ Health Care Inform 2020;27:e100136. doi:10.1136/bmjhci-2020-100136
Open access
Adoption of enterprise architecture for
healthcare in AeHIN member countries
Jitendra Jonnagaddala ﻿﻿‍ ‍ ,1,2
Guan N Guo,1,2
Sean Batongbacal,3
Alvin Marcelo,4
Siaw-­Teng Liaw1,2
To cite: Jonnagaddala J,
Guo GN, Batongbacal S,
et al. Adoption of enterprise
architecture for healthcare
in AeHIN member countries.
BMJ Health Care Inform
2020;27:e100136. doi:10.1136/
bmjhci-2020-100136
► ► Additional material is
published online only.To view
please visit the journal online
(http://​dx.​doi.​org/​10.​1136/​
bmjhci-​2020-​100136).
Received 11 February 2020
Revised 17 April 2020
Accepted 01 June 2020
1
School of Public Health and
Community Medicine, UNSW
Sydney, Sydney, New South
Wales,Australia
2
WHO Collaborating Centre for
eHealth, UNSW Sydney, Sydney,
New South Wales,Australia
3
School of Computer Science
& Engineering, UNSW Sydney,
Sydney, New South Wales,
Australia
4
Standards and Interoperability
Lab for Asia, University of the
Philippines Manila, Manila,
Metro Manila, Philippines
Correspondence to
Dr Jitendra Jonnagaddala;
​z3339253@​unsw.​edu.​au
Original research
© Author(s) (or their
employer(s)) 2020. Re-­ use
permitted under CC BY-­ NC. No
commercial re-­ use. See rights
and permissions. Published by
BMJ.
Summary
What is already known?
► ► Healthcare organisations are facing business strat-
egy alignment and interoperability issues as they
move towards the adoption of digital health resourc-
es and systems.
► ► Enterprise architecture (EA) is a conceptual para-
digm, healthcare organisations can leverage to ad-
dress these critical issues systematically.
► ► In the last decade healthcare organisations have
started to evaluate and adopt EA, majority with a
final objective of improvement in patient care.
► ► Asia eHealth Information Network (AeHIN) is a col-
laborative network of individuals and country rep-
resentatives from the Asia-­ Pacific region committed
to the use of IT to strengthen healthcare and health
systems.
What does this paper add?
► ► Our findings highlight that adoption of EA in health-
care organisations is still in very early stages in the
AeHIN member countries.
► ► We identified that the key driver for adopting EA in
healthcare organisations is to address interoperabil-
ity issues in the digital health era.
► ► Lack of senior management experience and involve-
ment in EA is a major challenge for the adoption of
EA in these countries.
Abstract
Background Healthcare organisations are undergoing
a major transformational shift in the use of information
and digital health technologies. Enterprise architecture
(EA) has been incrementally adopted in many healthcare
organisations globally to facilitate this change. EA can
increase the effectiveness of an organisation’s digital
health capabilities and resources. However, little is known
about the status of EA adoption in low-­ income and
middle-­ income countries.This study aimed to evaluate the
challenges, goals and benefits associated with adoption of
EA for healthcare in the Asia eHealth Information Network
(AeHIN) member countries .
Methods We developed an EA Adoption Evaluation
framework with four principal layers: governance,
strategy, EA and performance.The framework guided
the development of a questionnaire to investigate the
goals, challenges and benefits faced before and during EA
adoption by healthcare organisations.
Sample 26 participants from 18 healthcare organisations
in the Asia-­ Pacific region representing 11 countries.
Organisations included Ministries of Health, Universities,
Non-­ Governmental Organisations and Technical Advisory
Groups.
Findings Only 5 of the 18 organisations had begun
adopting EA.The goals expressed for EA adoption were to
address issues such as interoperability, lack of technical
infrastructure and poor alignment of business and
information technology strategies. Cost reduction was
less emphasised.The main challenges to adopting EA was
the lack of EA knowledge, leadership and involvement of
senior management.
Conclusion The adoption of EA is incipient in AeHIN
member healthcare organisations.To encourage EA
adoption, these organisations need to invest in internal
capacity building, senior management training and seek
independent EA expert advice to systematically identify
and address the barriers to adopting EA.
Introduction
Healthcare is currently experiencing a major
transformation in its use of information and
digital health technologies.1
Many organisa-
tions are increasingly adopting more infor-
mation technology (IT) systems to assist in
providing care. However, these organisations
are facing issues such as standardisation,
integration and alignment with the business
strategy. Enterprise architecture (EA) is a
blueprint—a coherent framework of prin-
ciples, methods and models—used in the
design and realisation of the enterprise’s
organisational structure, business process,
information systems and digital health infra-
structure.2
EA is also commonly described
as a master plan providing a holistic view
of the entire enterprise as a system of
systems.2 3
Its implementation provides
several benefits to organisations.4
It primarily
addresses complexity management, allowing
for standardisation and consolidation of the
organisational units and components holisti-
cally. Removing complexity from the organi-
sation’s overall architecture is the paramount
benefit of EA. It also provides transparency
to the organisation by simplifying the organ-
isational structure and internal interactions.
BMJ Health & Care Informatics: first published as 10.1136/bmjhci-2020-100136 on 2 July 2020. Downloaded from https://informatics.bmj.com on 7 July 2026 by guest.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

--- PAGE 2 ---
2 Jonnagaddala J, et al. BMJ Health Care Inform 2020;27:e100136. doi:10.1136/bmjhci-2020-100136
Open access
Figure 1 Technology Acceptance Model (TAM).
This, in turn, can assist management in making better
and more informed decisions. This allows for improved
business and IT alignment by ensuring that business
requirements and IT implementation are appropriately
matched. A mismatch between business requirements
and IT implementation can result in compounded diffi-
culties.5
Improved transparency and reduced complex-
ities can optimise operations and help reduce IT and
business-­related costs.
Many healthcare organisations that have adopted EA
have experienced several benefits.6
There are many
different approaches to implementing EA. A common
approach is to reuse an existing EA framework. Some
well-­ known EA frameworks include The Open Group
Architecture Framework,7
Zachman8
and federal enter-
prise architecture framework.9
EA implementation
involves creating a coherent and structured model of the
enterprise, which systematically documents the structures
within the enterprise and their dependencies.10
This
complex task is performed by employing architectural
layers and views to describe and present the organisation
at different levels and from the perspectives of different
stakeholders.4
Successful implementation of EA requires both adop-
tion and evaluation frameworks.11 12
One such framework
is the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) framework
(figure 1) .TAM presents how users accept a new tech-
nology using perceived usefulness, perceived ease of
use, attitude towards using, intent to use, actual use and
external variables.13
Generally, TAM has been used to
judge the acceptance and use of new technologies such as
the adoption of handheld computers in healthcare.14
For
example, TAM has been used to develop a questionnaire
to evaluate the adoption of technology.15
TAM can be
used across various domains16
but may require modifica-
tion for better applicability in the healthcare context.17
In
the context of EA, TAM has been used as both adoption
(to assist with implementation of EA) and evaluation (to
assess the planned or preplanned implementation of EA)
frameworks.18
Previous studies on EA in healthcare have mostly eval-
uated the EA implementation framework used; a few
studies examined the overall adoption of EA by organi-
sations.4 5 19 20
Frameworks have been developed to specif-
ically analyse EA adoption, content and governance.21
The framework developed by Janssen and Hjort-­ Madsen3
to evaluate EA in governments used five aspects: policies,
actors and structures; governance; architecture frame-
works and methodologies; architecture principles and
standards; implementations. Liimatainen et al22
extended
this framework with two additional aspects: benefits and
evaluation. This suggested a possible approach to eval-
uate EA adoption concerning its constituent aspects.
The United States General Accounting Office23
evalu-
ated the adoption of EA using the EA Maturity Model.18
Hjort-­Madsen and Pries-­Heje24
studied the adoption of
EA in government regarding the reasons and effects of
adoption.19
In another study, Lange and Mendling inves-
tigated the goals and benefits of EA adoption Lange and
Mendling.4
AlthoughtherearemanystudiesrelatedtoEAadoption
inothersectorsthereislittleevidenceonevaluationofEA
adoption in healthcare organisations. On top of that, the
existing evidence fails to discuss the benefits, challenges
and primary goals associated with the adoption of EA for
healthcare in in low-­ income and middle-­ income coun-
tries (LMICs). With this in mind, we aimed to systemat-
ically investigate factors associated with the adoption of
EA in LMICs healthcare organisations in the Asia-­ Pacific
region through the Asia eHealth Information Network
(AeHIN) . AeHIN is a collaborative network of individ-
uals and country representatives from the Asia-­ Pacific
region committed to the use of IT to strengthen health-
care and health.25
AeHIN has over 30 member countries,
primarily consisting of LMICs in the Asia-­ pacific region.
We developed a robust evaluation framework to investi-
gate the key aspects associated with EA adoption based
on the TAM framework. As per our knowledge, TAM has
not been previously applied to EA for healthcare organ-
isations. The developed framework is used to design a
structured questionnaire to collect the data.
Methods
Development of EAAE framework
We have used the TAM framework to devise the EA Adop-
tion Evaluation (EAAE) framework. The TAM framework
assisted us to focus not only on the perceived usefulness
and performance of EA but also on perceived ease of
EA use, attitude towards EA and intent to use EA in the
BMJ Health & Care Informatics: first published as 10.1136/bmjhci-2020-100136 on 2 July 2020. Downloaded from https://informatics.bmj.com on 7 July 2026 by guest.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

--- PAGE 3 ---
3 Jonnagaddala J, et al. BMJ Health Care Inform 2020;27:e100136. doi:10.1136/bmjhci-2020-100136
Open access
Table 1 Integration of EAAE and TAM framework components into the questionnaire
TAM framework components
External
variables
Perceived
usefulness Perceived ease of use
Attitude towards
usage Intention to use
EAAE framework components
 Governance 9, 10 9, 10 11
 Business strategy 3, 4 3, 5 5 5, 6
 Adherence 17 17 18 18
 Performance 14, 15 16 16
 Objectives 1 1 2 2
 Architecture 12 12 12 12 12
 IT strategy 8 8 8 8
 Interoperability 13 13 13 13 13
Each cell in the table refers to question number in the questionnaire. Please refer to the online supplementary appendix 2 for individual
questions.
EAAE, EA Adoption Evaluation; IT, information technology; TAM, Technology Acceptance Model.
context of a healthcare organisation. Although the TAM
framework can be directly used to develop an evaluation
strategy, it might not be flexible and reusable without an
intermediate framework such as the EAAE framework.
Unlike many other studies,26 27
wherein the TAM frame-
work was used to quantitatively assess the usability, we
have only used it as a basis to develop a generic evalu-
ation framework because EA adoption is multifactorial
and often complex covering several components beyond
the TAM framework components. Similar approach of
using the TAM framework as a basis and developing a
more robust framework has been demonstrated in other
studies.28–31
The EAAE framework was developed systematically in
an iterative manner. We determined the components to
be evaluated in the EA adoption based on existing litera-
ture.WefocusedonEAadoptionstudiesinthehealthcare
sector to identify relevant components. The components
identified through this process were then devised into a
logical framework. All the authors have iteratively revised
the framework based on feasibility, usability and suit-
ability. Feedback on the EAAE framework and question-
naire was also obtained from the relevant stakeholders
at the AeHIN Workshop held in Nanjing, China in 2016.
This resulted in improvements, such as refining inade-
quately covered components or eliminating overlapping
components. Finally, the components of the TAM frame-
work were compared with the EAAE framework to ensure
that it appropriately accounted for the issues covered by
the TAM framework.
Questionnaire design and study setting
A questionnaire developed using the approach explained
intheprevioussectionwasusedfordatacollection.Table1
illustrates how the items in the questionnaire align with
TAM and EAAE frameworks. The questionnaire collected
responses in the form of Likert scale-­ based ratings and
open-­ ended responses, where applicable, to explore
the rationale behind the participants’ responses.32
We
recruited the participants through the AeHIN at the
AeHIN general meeting in Myanmar in 2017. First,
participants were briefed about the study and consent
was obtained from the eligible participants. The key eligi-
bility criteria was, participants need to be digital health
decision-­ makers in their organisations who are familiar
with EA. Where necessary, individual respondents were
followed up to seek clarity on their responses or obtain
additional comments. This was followed by analysis and
triangulation of data to deduce key findings. Please refer
to the online supplementary appendix A for additional
information on the methods and materials employed as
part of this study.
Data analysis
The data collected was systematically analysed and
summarised to highlight the challenges associated with
the EA adoption in healthcare organisations in the
Asia-­ Pacific region. The participants’ responses were
subjected to data quality checks and any erratic responses
were omitted. The open-­ ended text responses were anal-
ysed thematically using the NVivo V.12 Pro software. Key
themes were identified independently by two authors by
verifying the participants’ responses. This was followed by
characterisation of participant demographics. Due to the
small sample size, the analyses were primarily performed
for the overall data. Participants were then subjected to
subgroup analysis to understand the heterogeneity of
organisations they represent. Finally, we summarised the
EA adoption challenges by triangulating the data with
participant characteristics.
Results
EAAE framework
The framework consisted of four main layers, each of
which contained several components (figure 2). The
BMJ Health & Care Informatics: first published as 10.1136/bmjhci-2020-100136 on 2 July 2020. Downloaded from https://informatics.bmj.com on 7 July 2026 by guest.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

--- PAGE 4 ---
4 Jonnagaddala J, et al. BMJ Health Care Inform 2020;27:e100136. doi:10.1136/bmjhci-2020-100136
Open access
Figure 2 EAAE evaluation framework. EAAE, EA Adoption Evaluation; IT, information technology.
governance layer and its components of leadership and
communication encompassed an organisation’s gover-
nance; how the organisation is led and controlled. The
strategy layer and its component goals, business and IT
strategy encompassed the organisation’s strategy. The
EA layer encompassed the organisation’s EA, their meth-
odology/framework, and its interoperability. Finally,
the performance layer encompassed the organisation’s
performance regarding their EA and the adherence to
their EA throughout the organisation. Additionally, the
arrows in the framework demonstrate the relations and
interactions between each layer. Specifically, governance
and strategy affect each other, while strategy dictates the
EA, which eventually dictates the performance. These
connections can be used to further analyse an organisa-
tion’s EA adoption by assisting in determining the factors
influencing and influenced by an area of interest. Each
layer of the framework represents a major factor associ-
ated with EA adoption, and each component represents
additional factors of specific importance within the
layers. By analysing and addressing each of these layers
and components, a multifaceted view and evaluation of
the state of EA adoption can be made.
To use the EAAE framework, each layer of the frame-
work and their components must be analysed while
considering the relations between layers when appro-
priate. This analysis could be performed by creating
surveys or interviews with questions intended to address
and evaluate each layer and component described by
the framework and using these surveys or interviews
with appropriate individuals who would be able provide
sufficient detail, such as senior managers or enterprise
architects.33
These results may then be combined and
analysed together with any other evaluation of the state
of EA adoption in the organisation. We recommend that
the framework be used and employed by an independent
expert familiar with EA and strategy to avoid bias. It may
also be utilised by internal enterprise architects and exec-
utives. Our framework should be used when there are
expectations of critical or radical changes to a healthcare
organisation,suchaslargegrowthorfundingchangesand
those who are planning to or have adopted EA. A better
understanding of the situation of the organisation(s) can
be obtained by using this framework to evaluate EA adop-
tion, thus enabling better decision-­ making regarding the
expected changes. This framework provides a holistic
view of major factors influencing EA adoption at various
layers. This allows identification of areas of interest about
the state of EA adoption for a given organisation, such as
components that had a positive or negative effect.
Participant characteristics
This study included a total of 26 participants(table 2).
Four participants who did not complete the survey
and another four who were not familiar with EA were
excluded from the analysis. The remaining 18 partici-
pants’ responses were analysed. Participating organisa-
tions were from 11 different countries in the Asia-­ Pacific,
most of which were low to middle-­ income developing
countries. One Australian organisation was an exception.
We identified 13 organisations who were in the process
of adopting or had already adopted EA. The participants
were mostly male (61.1%) aged 41–60 years, with an expe-
rience of more than 10 years in healthcare. Nine partic-
ipants had an experience of more than 20 years. Half of
the participants were from large organisations with more
than 10 000 employees. Most (66.6%) of the participants
came from the Ministry of Health (MoH), while others
came from a range of organisations such as University,
Non-­ Governmental Organisation, Consultancy or tech-
nical advisor group. Most participants were familiar with
EA, and some were also professionally trained in EA. The
TOGAF (1GovEA based on TOGAF) model was the most
widely used EA framework. Only one participant has
implemented all the four layers of TOGAF, namely busi-
ness,data,applicationandtechnology.Othersusedeither
just business, or application and data, or business, data
and application layers. In other words, only 1 participant
BMJ Health & Care Informatics: first published as 10.1136/bmjhci-2020-100136 on 2 July 2020. Downloaded from https://informatics.bmj.com on 7 July 2026 by guest.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

--- PAGE 5 ---
5 Jonnagaddala J, et al. BMJ Health Care Inform 2020;27:e100136. doi:10.1136/bmjhci-2020-100136
Open access
Table 2 Participant characteristics and status of EA
adoption
Category
Number of
participants
Percentage of
participants
Country
 Australia 2 11.1
 Cambodia 2 11.1
 Vietnam 1 5.6
 India 2 11.1
 Indonesia 1 5.6
 Laos 1 5.6
 Malaysia 5 27.8
 Mongolia 1 5.6
 Myanmar 1 5.6
 Sri Lanka 1 5.6
 Thailand 1 5.6
 Age
 <40 3 16.7
 41–50 7 38.8
 51–60 5 27.8
  61 or older 3 16.7
Gender
 Male 11 61.1
 Female 7 38.8
Experience in years
 0–5 2 11.1
 5–10 2 11.1
 10–20 8 44.4
 Over 20 6 33.3
Type of organisation
 MoH 12 66.6
 University 3 16.7
 NGO 2 11.1
 Technical Advisor 1 5.6
Number of employees in
the organisation
 0–50 3 16.7
 51–200 3 16.7
 201–1000 2 11.1
 1001–5000 1 5.6
 5001–10000 1 5.6
  More than 10 000 8 44.4
 Highest educational
qualification
 Diploma 1 4.5
 Bachelors 13 59.1
 Masters 3 13.6
 Doctoral 5 22.7
Continued
Category
Number of
participants
Percentage of
participants
  Status of EA adoption
  Not adopted/plan to
adopt EA
14 77.8
 Adopting EA 4 22.2
  EA framework (planned/
In use)
 TOGAF/1GovEA 6 33.3
 Others 4 22.2
 Unknown/not yet
decided
8 44.4
EA, enterprise architecture; MoH, Ministry of Health; TOGAF, The
Open Group Architecture Framework.
Table 2 Continued
had fully adopted EA, 14 participants were planning
to adopt EA and 4 were in the process of adopting EA.
Since most of the participants had not yet adopted EA,
the postadoption responses such as the benefits and chal-
lenges were analysed based on perceived usefulness and
perceived ease of use components from TAM framework.
Primary goals for adopting EA
The questionnaire assessed the EA preadoption phase
covering the objectives, goals, vision and mission of
EA. The objectives presented by the respondents were
consistent, with the major goals for EA adoption being
to achieve (1) interoperability through standardisation,
consolidation and effective management of complexities;
(2) governance and (3) business and IT strategy align-
ment (table 3). Other goals, including cost reduction,
agility, innovation, transparency and regulatory compli-
ance, were also deemed as important. Business process
re-­ engineering and support to the health system reform
were the two other goals identified.
Challenges to EA adoption
Participants reported that before EA adoption, there
were issues with their business and IT alignment, interop-
erability, governance, standardisation, ownership and
knowledge. Interoperability was also identified as a very
important factor across all organisations. Sixteen partic-
ipants also reported that interoperability affected their
decision to adopt EA. Throughout our thematic analysis,
funding, interoperability and lack of EA awareness were
consistently identified as the key difficulties faced by the
organisations before adoption.
Participants identified the lack of EA experience in the
leadership as the key challenge during the EA adoption
process. This is consistent with existing perceptions that
theadoptionofEAisparticularlydifficultinorganisations
where the senior management does not have adequate
experience with EA. Participants strongly felt a need for
effective communication between the senior manage-
ment and EA implementers for successful adoption and
BMJ Health & Care Informatics: first published as 10.1136/bmjhci-2020-100136 on 2 July 2020. Downloaded from https://informatics.bmj.com on 7 July 2026 by guest.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

--- PAGE 6 ---
6 Jonnagaddala J, et al. BMJ Health Care Inform 2020;27:e100136. doi:10.1136/bmjhci-2020-100136
Open access
Table 3 Primary goals for adopting EA
Goals Number of participants Percentage of participants
Business and IT strategy alignment 13 16.5
Cost reduction 9 11.4
Interoperability/standardisation 16 20.3
Governance 14 17.7
Agility 5 6.3
Innovation 7 8.9
Transparency 8 10.1
Regulatory compliance 7 8.9
EA, enterprise architecture; IT, information technology.
implementation. Half of the participants said they were
willing to hire external EA experts to address this issue.
However, they would also like to use any free resources
that can assist with EA adoption.
Benefits of EA
Since most of the participants did not adopt EA in their
organisations, their perceived benefits of EA adoption
wereanalysedinsteadofbenefitsobserved.Allparticipants
concurred that EA would have a positive effect on their
organisation. Among these participants, the interopera-
bility aspect was perceived as the most significant benefit
of EA, followed by reliability and security. Nearly all the
participants also agreed that EA adoption had or will have
a positive impact on the business strategy. However, when
asked specifically about infrastructure, the opinions were
mixed. Seven participants responded that EA would not
improve infrastructure regarding reliability, maturity or
scalability, while eight responded that it would improve.
Among those who had begun EA adoption, all partici-
pants reported a positive effect on their organisation.
They also noted improvements in the management and
utilisation of IT infrastructure. Please refer to the online
supplementary appendix A for additional results.
Discussion
Our findings highlighted the primary goals for EA adop-
tion and revealed the difficulties and benefits before and
after EA adoption by healthcare organisations in the
AeHIN. The relevance of the primary goals of EA will be
a major determinant of the successful adoption of EA by
the organisations. Sharing these goals widely will provide
a holistic view of the rationale behind EA adoption across
the healthcare system.
Most of the reported primary goals for EA adop-
tion were consistent with those expressed in previous
studies.4 34
For example, EA’s core defining features like
the business and IT strategy alignment and complexity
management remained consistent with previous find-
ings. However, unlike these previous studies, we found
that transparency and cost reduction were not priori-
tised as being more important than other goals such as
interoperability.4
There are a few possible explanations
for this observation. It could demonstrate a paradigm
shift in EA goals in public healthcare organisations as
compared with private organisations, which were often
studied in previous studies.35
It is more likely to demon-
strate a more mature understanding of EA as a mecha-
nism for safety and quality of healthcare as opposed to a
mistaken view that EA is a means to reduce costs.
The participants identified interoperability as a key
challenge in their organisation before adopting EA. The
primary goals discussed previously also echo the same
finding. Interoperability is a key issue for healthcare
organisations.36
Although this is not a new finding and
has been well documented, we can infer from our study
results that interoperability remains a major challenge
in both developing and developed countries’ healthcare
systems. As organisations adopt more health informa-
tion systems, both internal and external interoperability
issues arise. With maturity in healthcare standards and
regulation of vendors supplying health information
systems, most of these systems are now capable of interop-
erating internally to some extent. However, organisa-
tions still suffer from a lack of seamless standardisation
and communication between these information systems
internally. External interoperability allows the exchange
of data and information with other organisations. The
need for information exchange drives external interop-
erability demand.19 37
However, external interoperability
remains a major issue due to lack of economic or polit-
ical incentives in the healthcare sector, both in developed
and developing countries. Our thematic analysis of the
responses also identified external interoperability as a
major issue. Government healthcare organisations in the
AeHIN countries are also reluctant to exchange informa-
tion due to issues such as lack of appropriate standards,
privacy concerns, policies and legislation.
We also discovered many non-­ technical challenges
related to EA adoption. Leadership and communication
appeared as one of the key challenges for EA adoption in
our study. Leadership is a key factor in EA adoption as it
provides direction and management foundation required
for successful EA adoption.38
Most of our participants
BMJ Health & Care Informatics: first published as 10.1136/bmjhci-2020-100136 on 2 July 2020. Downloaded from https://informatics.bmj.com on 7 July 2026 by guest.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

--- PAGE 7 ---
7 Jonnagaddala J, et al. BMJ Health Care Inform 2020;27:e100136. doi:10.1136/bmjhci-2020-100136
Open access
believed that senior management demonstrated very
little knowledge or experience in EA. This is an important
issue which can be addressed in the short-­ term through
appropriate training and providing additional resources
and support to the senior management. This, in turn,
can improve engagement among all the stakeholders
in EA adoption. We found that half of the organisa-
tions were not willing to hire external consultants due
to costs. Another issue is that there are communication
gaps between the senior management and the employees
implementing EA. Continuous communication between
all stakeholders is vital for the successful development
and adoption of EA.39
The lack of communication would
make the adoption process more difficult and less effi-
cient. In an earlier study, the lack of soft skills, such as
people skills and leadership skills among practitioners has
been attributed to poor communication during EA adop-
tion.40
Our thematic analysis also confirmed that 30%
of our participants, who are mostly senior management,
have experienced similar issues with EA practitioners. We
also presented the benefits of adopting EA. The adoption
is perceived to have positive effects on the organisations.
While there have been improvements in IT infrastruc-
ture and business and IT strategy alignment among those
implemented, it has been reported that EA benefits are
difficult to achieve and measure in short-­ term.41 42
Overall, our findings show a very incipient and super-
ficial application of EA for healthcare within the AeHIN
member countries. Only a handful of organisations have
begun the adoption while most are yet to start the adop-
tion process. Most of the participants are from MoH
or equivalent government bodies, who perceive the EA
benefits. However, these organisations’ internal capability
maturity appears to be a huge limiting factor. It is recom-
mended that besides building internal capacity for EA in
health organisations, they should also consider knowl-
edgeexchangewithotherorganisationsintheAsia-­pacific
region. Also explore the option of obtaining expert EA
services from certified EA consultants with experience
and understanding of the local health systems and organ-
isations. The investment on the foundational blueprint
will easily outweigh the costs and risks of trying to imple-
ment a poorly architected public healthcare system.26
This study is subjected to several limitations. The EAAE
framework proposed in this study assumed that EA could
be considered as a technology to which the TAM frame-
work could be applied. The EAAE framework assumed
that all the major steps of the EA implementation life-
cycle were captured and was an adequate representation
of the lifecycle for this framework. The framework was
targetedtowardsseniormanagementathealthcareorgan-
isations (ie, any evaluation to be undertaken using this
framework requires seeking information from the senior
management). Future work could include data collection
from other members of the organisation and consumers/
customers, in this case, patients. Additionally, the EAAE
framework assumed that certain factors were critical for
healthcare organisations. These include sensitive patient
information and external influences, such as regulators,
legislations and compliance. It was also assumed that
participants were familiar with their healthcare organ-
isation’s business and IT strategy, and had functional
knowledge of IT usage in their organisations. It is also
important to note that most of the participants have not
fully implemented EA, and their responses were based on
perceived usefulness. The results from this study should
also be interpreted in the context of IT usage in low
resource health systems as reported by a limited number
of participants from a selective AeHIN countries. AeHIN
though is a very good representative sample for LMICs
in the region but does not cover all the Asia-­ Pacific coun-
tries. In other words, the findings in this study might not
apply to the Asia-­ Pacific region which includes several
high-­ income countries too. The limited sample size with
reduced statistical power in this study does not allow to
draw any firm conclusions.
Conclusion
We developed the EAAE framework to assess the adop-
tion of EA in healthcare organisations. This generic
framework guided the development of an instrument to
assess EA adoption in 18 Asia-­ Pacific healthcare organi-
sations across 11 different countries. Most organisations
reported challenges with interoperability, technical infra-
structure and alignment of business and IT strategies.
These challenges determined the primary goals of these
organisations for adopting EA. Cost reduction was less
emphasised as an EA adoption goal. All organisations
believed that their interoperability and infrastructure
would improve after adopting EA. Lack of EA knowledge
and leadership among senior management is a major
issue that needs to be addressed for a successful EA adop-
tion. This study highlights the need for capacity building
in the areas of EA implementation, adoption and eval-
uation targeted towards the senior management in the
first instance. This study is subjected to several limita-
tions such as small sample size with reduced statistical
power resulting in preliminary findings. However, the
study identified high-­ level challenges in the regions that
require further investigation.
Twitter Siaw-­ Teng Liaw @ElAstee
Acknowledgements We would like to acknowledge the study participants,Asian
eHealth Information Network (AeHIN) for support and Diane Bool for assistance
with the preliminary analyses.This study was conducted as part of the WHO
Collaborating Centre on eHealth and the UNSW Electronic Practice Based Research
Network (ePBRN) research program.The ePBRN is supported by the UNSW School
of Public Health & Community Medicine and Centre for Primary Health Care &
Equity, and the Ingham Institute of Applied Medical Research.
Contributors JJ conceived and designed the study, conducted the survey,
analysed and interpreted the data and wrote the manuscript. GNG analysed and
interpreted the data and wrote the manuscript. SB undertook literature review
and wrote the manuscript.AM and STL supervised and were responsible for the
funding.
Funding The authors have not declared a specific grant for this research from any
funding agency in the public, commercial or not-­ for-­ profit sectors.
Competing interests None declared.
BMJ Health & Care Informatics: first published as 10.1136/bmjhci-2020-100136 on 2 July 2020. Downloaded from https://informatics.bmj.com on 7 July 2026 by guest.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

--- PAGE 8 ---
8 Jonnagaddala J, et al. BMJ Health Care Inform 2020;27:e100136. doi:10.1136/bmjhci-2020-100136
Open access
Patient consent for publication Not required.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Data availability statement Data are available upon reasonable request.
Open access This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-­ NC 4.0) license, which
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-­ commercially,
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is
properly cited, appropriate credit is given, any changes made indicated, and the use
is non-­commercial. See: http://​creativecommons.​org/​licenses/​by-​nc/​4.​0/.
ORCID iD
Jitendra Jonnagaddala http://​orcid.​org/​0000-​0002-​9912-​2344
References
1 Wilson EV, Lankton NK. Interdisciplinary research and
publication opportunites in information systems and health care.
Communications of the Association for Information Systems
2004;14:51.
2 Jonkers H, Lankhorst MM, ter Doest HWL, et al. Enterprise
architecture: management tool and blueprint for the organisation. Inf
Syst Front 2006;8:63–6.
3 Janssen M, Hjort-­ Madsen K. Analyzing enterprise architecture in
national governments: the cases of Denmark and the Netherlands.
System Sciences, 2007. HICSS 2007. 40th Annual Hawaii
International Conference on, 2007.
4 Lange M, Mendling J. An experts' perspective on enterprise
architecture goals, framework adoption and benefit assessment.
Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Conference Workshops
(EDOCW), 2011 15th IEEE International, 2011.
5 Tang A, Han J, Chen P. A comparative analysis of architecture
frameworks. Software Engineering Conference, 2004, Asia-­Pacific,
2004.
6 Bradley RV, Pratt RME, Byrd TA, et al. Enterprise architecture, it
effectiveness and the mediating role of it alignment in US hospitals.
Inf Syst J 2012;22:97–127.
7 Josey A. An introduction to the TOGAF standard, version 9.2, 2018.
8 Zachman JA. A framework for information systems architecture. IBM
Systems Journal 1987;26:276–92.
9 Federal Chief Information Officers Council. Federal enterprise
architecture framework version 1.1, 1999.
10 Winter R, Fischer R. Essential layers, artifacts, and dependencies
of enterprise architecture. Enterprise Distributed Object Computing
Conference Workshops, 2006. EDOCW'06. 10th IEEE International,
2006.
11 Nikpay F, Ahmad R, Yin Kia C. A hybrid method for evaluating
enterprise architecture implementation. Eval Program Plann
2017;60:1–16.
12 Lange M, Mendling J. An experts' perspective on enterprise
architecture goals, framework adoption and benefit assessment.
2011 IEEE 15th International Enterprise Distributed Object
Computing Conference Workshops, 2011.
13 Davis FD. A technology acceptance model for empirically testing new
end-­ user information systems: theory and results. Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, 1985.
14 Lu Y-­ C, Xiao Y, Sears A, et al. A review and a framework of handheld
computer adoption in healthcare. Int J Med Inform 2005;74:409–22.
15 Gao S, Krogstie J, Siau K. Developing an instrument to measure
the adoption of mobile services. Mobile Information Systems
2011;7:45–67.
16 Alharbi S, Drew S. Using the technology acceptance model in
understanding academics’ behavioural intention to use learning
management systems. IJACSA 2014;5:143–55.
17 Holden RJ, Karsh B-­ T. The technology acceptance model: its past
and its future in health care. J Biomed Inform 2010;43:159–72.
18 Bernaert Met al. Enterprise Architecture for Small and Medium-­ Sized
Enterprises: A Starting Point for Bringing EA to SMEs, Based on
Adoption Models. In: Devos J, van Landeghem H, Deschoolmeester
D, et al, eds. Information systems for small and medium-­ sized
Enterprises: state of art of is research in SMEs. Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2014: 67–96.
19 Hjort‐Madsen K. Institutional patterns of enterprise architecture
adoption in government. Transforming Government: People, Process
and Policy 2007;1:333–49.
20 Urbaczewski L, Mrdalj S. A comparison of enterprise architecture
frameworks. Issues in Information Systems 2006;7:18–23.
21 Aziz Set al. Enterprise architecture: a governance framework, 2005.
22 Liimatainen K, Hoffmann M, Heikkilä J. Overview of enterprise
architecture work in 15 countries. Ministry of finance, state it
management unit, research reports 6B, 2007.
23 United States General Accounting Office. Enterprise architecture
use across the federal government can be improved. Report to
Congressional Committees, 2002.
24 Hjort-­ Madsen K, Pries-­ Heje J. Enterprise architecture in government:
FAD or future? System Sciences, 2009. HICSS'09. 42nd Hawaii
International Conference on, 2009.
25 Marcelo PGF, Evangelista AL, Orjalo CS. Webinars as a knowledge
sharing platform for ehealth in South and Southeast Asia. Journal of
the International Society for Telemedicine and eHealth 2016;4:1–16.
26 Higman S, Dwivedi V, Nsaghurwe A, et al. Designing interoperable
health information systems using enterprise architecture approach
in resource-­ limited countries: a literature review. Int J Health Plann
Manage 2019;34:e85–99.
27 Ahadzadeh AS, Sharif SP, Ong FS. Online health information seeking
among women: the Moderating role of health consciousness, 2018.
28 Ramkumar M, Schoenherr T, Wagner SM, et al. Q-­ TAM: A quality
technology acceptance model for predicting organizational buyers’
continuance intentions for e-­ procurement services. Int J Prod Econ
2019;216:333–48.
29 Al-­ Somali SA, Baghabra H. Investigating the determinants of
it professionals' intention to use cloud-­ based applications and
solutions: an extension of the technology acceptance. Cloud
Security: Concepts, Methodologies, Tools, and Applications,
2019:2039–58.
30 Monkman H, Kushniruk AW. The consumer health information
system adoption model. Stud Health Technol Inform 2015;218:26–31.
31 Sahin C. Rules of engagement in mobile health: what does
mobile health bring to research and theory? Contemp Nurse
2018;54:374–87.
32 Bandara Wet al. Major issues in business process management: an
expert perspective, 2007.
33 Pinsonneault A, Kraemer K. Survey research methodology in
management information systems: an assessment. J Manag Inf Syst
1993;10:75–105.
34 Schöenherr M. Towards a common terminology in the discipline of
enterprise architecture. International Conference on Service-­ Oriented
Computing, Springer, 2008.
35 Lan Z, Rainey HG. Goals, rules, and effectiveness in public, private,
and hybrid organizations: more evidence on frequent assertions
about differences. J Public Adm Res Theory 1992;2:5–28.
36 Ducq Y, Chen D, Vallespir B. Interoperability in enterprise modelling:
requirements and roadmap. Adv Eng Inform 2004;18:193–203.
37 Hjort-­ Madsen K. Enterprise architecture implementation and
management: a case study on interoperability. System Sciences,
2006. HICSS'06. Proceedings of the 39th Annual Hawaii International
Conference on, 2006.
38 General Accounting Office (GAO). Leadership remains key to
agencies making progress on enterprise architecture efforts, 2003.
39 Lankhorst M. Enterprise architecture at work: modelling,
communication and analysis. Springer, 2009.
40 Chuang C-­ H, van Loggerenberg J. Challenges facing enterprise
architects: a South African perspective. System Sciences (HICSS),
2010 43rd Hawaii International Conference on, 2010.
41 Grembergen Wv, Saull R. Aligning business and information
technology through the balanced Scorecard at a major Canadian
financial group: it. in hicss. IEEE, 2001.
42 Niemi E. Enterprise architecture benefits: perceptions from
literature and practice. Tietotekniikan tutkimusinstituutin julkaisuja
2008;18:1236–615.
BMJ Health & Care Informatics: first published as 10.1136/bmjhci-2020-100136 on 2 July 2020. Downloaded from https://informatics.bmj.com on 7 July 2026 by guest.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.