--- PAGE 1 ---
ScienceDirect
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Procedia Computer Science 232 (2024) 903–912
1877-0509 © 2024 TheAuthors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 5th International Conference on Industry 4.0 and
Smart Manufacturing
10.1016/j.procs.2024.01.090
© 2024 TheAuthors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-reviewunderresponsibilityofthescientificcommitteeofthe5thInternationalConferenceonIndustry4.0andSmartManufacturing
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
^ĐŝĞŶĐĞŝƌĞĐƚ
Procedia Computer Science 00 (2023) 000–000
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia
1877-0509 © 2023 The Authors. Published by ELSEVIER B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 5th International Conference on Industry 4.0 and Smart Manufacturing
5th International Conference on Industry 4.0 and Smart Manufacturing
A Comparative Analysis of Digital Maturity Models to Determine
Future Steps in the Way of Digital Transformation
Zeynep Tuğçe Kalendera,b,
* , Miroslav Žilkaa
a
Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Department of Enterprise Management and Economics, Czech Technical University in Prague, Prague,
12135, Czech Republic
b
Faculty of Engineering, Department of Industrial Engineering, Marmara University, Istanbul,34854, Turkey
Abstract
Adapting to the ever-increasing digital business dynamics by leveraging digital technologies to improve operations is one of the
key goals for almost any modern business. In this process of change, businesses need to update their ways of doing business and
design new models, to avoid falling behind in competition with their rivals. Digital maturity models play a crucial role in guiding
organizations in their approach to digital transformation, outlining the typical ways in which these transformations are
accomplished. In this study, the development of digital maturity models, which are becoming more important day by day in today's
business world conditions, is examined. Within the scope of the study, 42 maturity models were examined, criteria-based
comparisons of the models were made, and priority areas and trends were analyzed. Thus, it is aimed to better understand the
development of digital maturity models and to guide future studies by determining current model trends.
© 2023 The Authors. Published by ELSEVIER B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 5th International Conference on Industry 4.0 and Smart
Manufacturing
Keywords: Digital maturity; Industry 4.0; technology; strategic management
1. Introduction
The fourth industrial revolution refers to a process in which the whole process, from order to delivery, is kept under
full control within the framework of the life cycle of a product demanded by consumers, all kinds of functions and
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: zeyneptugce.kalender@fs.cvut.cz / tugce.simsit@marmara.edu.tr
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
^ĐŝĞŶĐĞŝƌĞĐƚ
Procedia Computer Science 00 (2023) 000–000
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia
1877-0509 © 2023 The Authors. Published by ELSEVIER B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 5th International Conference on Industry 4.0 and Smart Manufacturing
5th International Conference on Industry 4.0 and Smart Manufacturing
A Comparative Analysis of Digital Maturity Models to Determine
Future Steps in the Way of Digital Transformation
Zeynep Tuğçe Kalendera,b,
* , Miroslav Žilkaa
a
Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Department of Enterprise Management and Economics, Czech Technical University in Prague, Prague,
12135, Czech Republic
b
Faculty of Engineering, Department of Industrial Engineering, Marmara University, Istanbul,34854, Turkey
Abstract
Adapting to the ever-increasing digital business dynamics by leveraging digital technologies to improve operations is one of the
key goals for almost any modern business. In this process of change, businesses need to update their ways of doing business and
design new models, to avoid falling behind in competition with their rivals. Digital maturity models play a crucial role in guiding
organizations in their approach to digital transformation, outlining the typical ways in which these transformations are
accomplished. In this study, the development of digital maturity models, which are becoming more important day by day in today's
business world conditions, is examined. Within the scope of the study, 42 maturity models were examined, criteria-based
comparisons of the models were made, and priority areas and trends were analyzed. Thus, it is aimed to better understand the
development of digital maturity models and to guide future studies by determining current model trends.
© 2023 The Authors. Published by ELSEVIER B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 5th International Conference on Industry 4.0 and Smart
Manufacturing
Keywords: Digital maturity; Industry 4.0; technology; strategic management
1. Introduction
The fourth industrial revolution refers to a process in which the whole process, from order to delivery, is kept under
full control within the framework of the life cycle of a product demanded by consumers, all kinds of functions and
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: zeyneptugce.kalender@fs.cvut.cz / tugce.simsit@marmara.edu.tr

--- PAGE 2 ---
904 Zeynep Tuğçe Kalender et al. / Procedia Computer Science 232 (2024) 903–912
2 Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2023) 000–000
activities are carried out with autonomous systems, thus the demands and expectations of customers can be met at the
highest level [1]. However, Industry 4.0 is expected to cause a holistic change not only in one area, but also in the
systems of individuals, businesses, and countries. It is foreseen that all scientific fields will experience a radical
transformation by being influenced by each other. In this dynamically changing business environment, a rapid
digitalization era is started. Businesses have realized that to keep up with the digital age, they need to start their
transformation efforts quickly. With digitalization, the concept of digital transformation has taken its place in the
visions of businesses. In this context, “Digital Transformation” is defined as a process carried out to redesign
organizations, economies, companies and people through digital tools [2, 3]. Beyond operational efficiency, digital
transformation provides a tangible competitive advantage. Organizations effectively can differentiate themselves by
offering innovative products, personalized services, and exceptional customer experiences that set them apart in
markets. Moreover, digital transformation equips organizations with the agility to swiftly adapt to changing
circumstances. The ability to pivot business models, supply chains, and customer engagement strategies becomes
essential for survival and growth. On the other hand, according to the research [4], only a quarter of the enterprises
were able to achieve the desired output in their digital transformation efforts, since it is a complex issue that affects
the entire company [5].
Companies need agility, speed, flexibility, and rapid transformation ability to follow new business opportunities
and adapt to the rapidly changing global business market. However, all units in businesses must have awareness in
order to start digital transformation and be effective during transformation. Therefore, it is vital to determine the right
strategiesand makeanappropriate actionplan.Inthisframework,tocreateasuccessful digitaltransformationstrategy,
it is important to know the current level of the organization [6]. It is possible to measure how close businesses are to
the level of digital transformation they are targeting, with digital maturity. Thus, businesses can see what has been
achieved regarding the transformation and what kind of digitalization process has been determined in order to exist in
a competitive environment.
Maturity models are tools that enable the assessment of the current situation and show a potential, possible, and
typical development path towards the targeted situation. Especially in the digital transformation process, it supports
businesses in terms of effectively managing and directing their digitalization efforts. However, although academic
researchers have started to focus more on this subject since 2016, the literature on digital maturity is still less [7]. For
this purpose, in this study, the development of digital maturity models, which are becoming more important day by
day, is examined. The primary goal is to analyze the question of “How have digital maturity models evolved over
time?”, so that to answer the question “How can these findings potentially guide future research and the development
of new digital maturity models?”. Therefore, within the scope of the study, 42 models were examined, criteria-based
comparisons of the models were made, and priority areas and trends were analyzed. These analyses revealed the
answers to the questions “What are the key similarities and differences?” and “Are there any emerging trends or shifts
in focus among these models?”. In this regard, the study provided a solid ground to better understand the development
of digital maturity models and to guide future studies by determining current model trends. In the following parts,
firstly the literature on digital maturity models is given, then the comparison of the selected models and the analyses
based on these comparisons are presented.
2. Literature Review of Digital Maturity Models
Digital maturity is simply about adapting the organization to compete effectively in the increasingly digital
environment [8]. Digital maturity models aim to provide both the level of digitalization of businesses and a way to
reach digital maturity. Planning the process by creating a prioritization and roadmap is an indispensable requirement
in order for the digital transformation to be carried out in a healthy way and to reach the determined targets within the
stipulated time.
The first phase of digital transformation is the digitization phase. According to Gartner [9], “Digitization is the
process of transition from analog to digital”. Basically, it is the process of taking an analog process and converting it
into a digital form without any change in the process itself [10]. Balık et al. [11] stated that digitization enables the
computer system to convert the value of a certain sound, image, or picture into a digital form and transfer it to the
virtual environment. During these conversions, data capture technologies like scanners, and sensors; data storage

--- PAGE 3 ---
Zeynep Tuğçe Kalender et al. / Procedia Computer Science 232 (2024) 903–912 905
Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2023) 000–000 3
solutionssuchasdatabasesandclouds;document managementsystems,and basicdigitalinfrastructurelikecomputers,
networks, and internet connectivity are prerequisites for digitization. Sezen and Şenaras [12] also highlighted the
differences between terminologies by comparing concepts of digitization, digitalization and digital transformation. In
this regard, businesses can switch to the digitalization phase after the digitization phase is completed. In other words,
after the data has been digitized, the process for digital transformation has begun. Digitalization is the use of digital
technologies to change a business model and provide new revenue and value-generating opportunities [9]. Li et al.
[13] defined digitalization as the attempt of businesses to use new talents by leveraging digital technologies to
transform their organizational strategies and operations. In this sense, digital maturity forms the basis of digital
transformation. Businesses that want to increase the level of digital maturity have to perform a digital transformation
in all their activities [14]. It is seen that businesses that consider digitalization as a part of their corporate strategy and
make prioritization, roadmap, performance target and yield calculations accordingly are more successful in digital
transformation. But digital maturity is the gradual integration of business processes, people and other resources into
digital processes. From this framework, digital maturity goes far beyond implementing new technology by aligning
the company's strategy, workforce, culture, technology and structure to meet the digital expectations of customers,
employees and business partners. Digital maturity is a continuous and ongoing process of adaptation to the changing
digital landscape [8].
In the literature, there are different models to measure the digital maturity level of businesses. Models are often
based on analysis of specific sets of criteria, and each has its own strengths and limitations. Today, many digital
maturity models have been developed in recent years by both academicians and practitioners.
From the practitioners’ point of view, one of the earliest digital maturity models is developed by consulting firm
Capgemini in 2012 [16]. This model is often referenced as one of the earliest attempts to structure the stages of digital
transformation, gaining recognition in both academic and business circles. By focusing on five dimensions such as
strategy, organization, process, technology and culture, the model pointed out that besides information technology
capabilities also transformational capabilities are necessary for a successful digital transformation [7]. Since then,
numerous other digital maturity models have been developed and are still being developed by various organizations
and researchers as the concept of digital transformation continues to evolve. One of the pioneers’ models developed
by Boston Consulting Group (BCG) and released in 2013 [17], considered four main dimensions such as strategy,
organization,capabilities,andtechnology. BCG’s focusonthesedimensionsaligned well withbusinesstransformation
concerns and made it a relevant choice for practitioners. Besides, the model’s origin froma respected consulting group
lent its authority and ensured its wide dissemination. In the digital business model developed by the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (MIT) [18] the importance of creating new digital business models is emphasized. MIT’s
model holds a reputation for cutting-edge research and innovative insights, making it a prominent reference in both
academic and industrydiscussions. In 2015, Forrester Research's Digital Business Transformation Model is developed
[19] and emphasized the importance of aligning digital initiatives with business goals. The model’s applicability to
various industries further solidified its fame as a practical guide for digital transformation.
Over the years dimensions and/or their contexts are evolved considering the dynamic changes. Capgemini
Consultingdeveloped their initial model [20] and released an updated versionin2016 considering six dimensions such
as customer experience, operations, business model innovation, workforce enablement, digital technology integration,
and data-driven insights. The expansion to six dimensions acknowledged the multidimensional nature of digital
transformationand made it more appealingto organizations seekinga holistic view. In this model, five stages ofdigital
maturity are developed from “beginner” to “transformer”. The introduction of maturity stages provided a clear
roadmap, making it a practical guide for organizations progressing through digital transformation. In this regard, the
digital maturity model developed by Deloitte in 2018 [21], allowed organizations to customize their digital
transformation journey according to their specific strengths, weaknesses, and industry demands. In the model, the
combination of strategy, operations, customer engagement, and workforce enablement provides a balanced framework
that considers both external and internal factors influencing digital transformation.
A comprehensive literature review conducted by Teichert in 2019 [7] highlighted that practitioners were one step
ahead in the development of digital maturity models until 2015. However, academicians have started to pay more
attention to the topic since 2016 and this situation has accelerated the number of developed models. In the academic
studies focused on the development of a digital maturity model, sector-based models come to the fore. In the early

--- PAGE 4 ---
906 Zeynep Tuğçe Kalender et al. / Procedia Computer Science 232 (2024) 903–912
4 Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2023) 000–000
studies, researchers mostly focused on the manufacturing sector [3, 22-25]. Considering the increasing technological
advancements by Industry 4.0 this is quite an expected result. Since each sector has different dynamics, it is critical to
determine the most appropriate model according to the sectors in order to find the appropriate result. On the other
hand, some researchers developed more general models, in other terms domain-specific models [6, 26, 27].
Regardless of the sector, every digital maturity model consists of several dimensions and criteria that define the
field of activity and measurements at different levels that show the maturation path. These dimensions are specific,
measurable and independent components that show an important, fundamental and different aspect of digital maturity
and express an area of action. But digital transformation is an ongoing process and achieving digital maturity requires
continuous effort and adaptation to changing circumstances. However, in this continuity, considering these changing
conditions of the business world, it is seen that digital maturity models have been revised over time. Both practitioners
and academicians continue to update existing models and/or develop new models. Although the studies carried out in
recent years are mostly sector-based, there are basic models that can be applied to all sectors in general.
3. Comparison of Digital Maturity Models
In this study, initially, a general review of the premier online databases such as Science Direct, JSTOR, Web of
Science, Emerald, ProQuest online, etc. is conducted starting from 2012. During the review, Science Direct, JSTOR,
Web of Science and Emerald were used for academic studies, while Google search engines were used to find models
developed by consultancy firms. Then ProQuest database is searched for global dissertations and theses. “Digital
Maturity”, “Digital Transformation”, “Digital Maturity Assessment”, “Digital Transformation Maturity”, “Digital
Readiness”, “Digital Readiness Model”, and “Digital Readiness Assessment” keywords are used. Therefore, 42
models selected among the highly cited digital maturity models were examined, criteria-based comparisons of the
models were made, and priority areas and trends were analyzed.
Theselected modelsandframeworksfordigital maturity vary intermsoftheirorigin,industryandtheir background
whether developed by academia, international organizations or consultancy firms. Moreover, these models can be in
a self-assessment structure or an assessment through a third party. Since each model has its unique characteristics,
strengths, and weaknesses, the comparison led to several challenges. One of them is dimension variation. The
conducted analysis showed that some criteria are considered as main/primary dimension in some models whereas the
same criteria can be considered as a sub/secondary dimension in other models. In such cases, sub-criteria are taken
into account to avoid missing information situations. However, it should be noted that if sub-criteria of the model are
considered, their connected main criteria are not covered to avoid duplication. The second major challenge is
terminological differences. In the models, there are some criteria referring to the same meaning however used in
slightly different terminologies by different models. After the first review, 55 basic criteria are listed. However, some
of these listed criteria are merged since the terminologies refer to the same approach. In the final status ,43 criteria are
listed. But to not forget these differences, the title/definition of the criteria is designed to show all terminologies. In
Figure 1, the distribution of all listed criteria is presented.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Zeynep Tuğçe Kalender et al. / Procedia Computer Science 232 (2024) 903–912 907
Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2023) 000–000 5
Techonology /IT
30
71.43%
Operating Model/Organization
27
64.29%
Strategy
25
61.90%
Processes /Value Chain/ Operations/Supply
Chain
24
57.14%
User experience /Customer focus
23
54.76%
Culture
23
54.76%
Work source/ People /Human
Capital
20
47.62%
Leadership
12
28.57%
Business models/
Products&Service Portfolio
12
28.57%
Governance
10
23.81%
Innovation
9
21.43%
Risk Management
8
19,05%
Cloud & data
management
8
19.05%
Training
7
16.67%
Fiscal management
7
16.67%
Policyand
standarts
6
14.29%
Marketing
5
11.90%
Agility
5
11.90%
Collaboration
5
11.90%
Lifecyle
development
4
9.25%
Monitoing /
Control
4
9.25%
Cybersecurity--4
9.25%
Documentation--3
7.14%
Communication--3
7.14%
Legal requirements--3
7.14%
Omni-chanel--3
7.14%
Information--3
7.14%
Decision making--3
7.14%
Procurement--3
7.14%
Insights--3
7.14%
Support
2
4.76%
Complianc
e
2
4.76%
Validation--2
4.76%
Transformation--2
4.76%
Digitalenvironment--2
4.76%
Energy management--
2
4.76%
Ownership
-1
2.36%
Testing
1
2.36%
Merchandi
se
1
2.36%
Tax
1
2.36%
Values--1
2.36%
Competition-
-1
2.36%
Tasks
1
2.36%
Fig. 1. Overview of listed criteria set based on selected models
After the criteria set is determined, the frequency of each criterion according to their usage in the selected maturity
models is determined with a matrix structure in which the criteria list is marked whether they are mentioned in the
model or not. According to the first analysis, the top ten criteria mentioned in all models are listed in Table 1.

--- PAGE 6 ---
908 Zeynep Tuğçe Kalender et al. / Procedia Computer Science 232 (2024) 903–912
6 Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2023) 000–000
Table 1. Top 10 criteria in digital maturity models
Criteria Definition
# of mentions
models
% in mentioned
studies
% in overall
mentions
Technology /Information Technologies 30 71,43% 9,32%
Operating Model /Organization 27 64,29% 8,39%
Strategy 26 61,90% 8,07%
Processes /Value chain / Operations /supply chain 24 57,14% 7,45%
User Experience /Customer focus 23 54,76% 7,14%
Culture 23 54,76% 7,14%
Work source /people /Human capital 20 47,62% 6,21%
Leadership 12 28,57% 3,73%
Business Models, Product & Service Portfolio 12 28,57% 3,73%
Governance 10 23,81% 3,11%
This initial analysis proves that criteria in the first 10 rank are very important for companies. However, there is a
wide time frame as the selected databases vary between 2011 and 2023. It is a well-known fact that there have been
important business shifts between these years in terms of technological advancement. Considering this situation, in
order to better analyze the change in the methods used, 3-time intervals as 2015-2017; 2018-2020; 2021-2023 were
determined and the analysis was carried out again. It should be noted that in this interval base comparison 3 digital
maturity models between 2012 and 2014 are eliminated to create equal sized intervals. Among the list top 10 tools are
selected as presented in Table 2. The change in their visibility is compared with Figure 2.
Table 2. Selected top ten criteria from the year-based frequency analysis
Criteria Definition 2015-2017 2018-2020 2021-2023
Technology /Information Technologies 51,72% 20,69% 27,59%
Operating Model /Organization 55,56% 25,93% 18,52%
Strategy 46,15% 23,08% 30,77%
Processes /Value chain / Operations /supply chain 40,91% 27,27% 31,82%
User Experience /Customer focus 52,38% 23,81% 23,81%
Culture 66,67% 14,29% 19,05%
Work source /people /Human capital 60,00% 20,00% 20,00%
Leadership 63,64% 9,09% 27,27%
Business Models, Product & Service Portfolio 60,00% 10,00% 30,00%
Governance 55,56% 11,11% 33,33%
Table 2 shows that some of the criteria that are widely mentioned in maturity models both in academic studies and
practical assessment models lose their visibility over time. In fact, the point to be noted in this analysis is that these
data do not mean that the listed criteria are no longer used, used less or become less important. The data presented
here is that the popularity of the relevant criteria may have decreased, and/or since it is now used very well in the
sector sub-criteria of them are created rather than main overview. As is mentioned before, in such cases where sub-
criteria are considered the main category of the related criteria is not marked again to avoid duplication. For that
reason,visibilityhasdecreased.Ontheotherhand,thissituationformed anewquestion: “Whichcriteriaare mentioned
more in today's business environment?”. To answer the question, the analysis has been revised to show increased
visibility and the top 10 more recently mentioned criteria are listed. These are, Cybersecurity, Energy management,
Monitoring /control, Digital Training, Fiscal management, Digital policy and standards, Development lifecycle,
Agility, Collaboration, and Validation.
Considering the shift in the business environment, it is not surprising that criteria that support digitalization are at
the forefront in the models. From a managerial perspective, it is obvious that proper implementation of the Industry

--- PAGE 7 ---
Zeynep Tuğçe Kalender et al. / Procedia Computer Science 232 (2024) 903–912 909
Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2023) 000–000 7
4.0 is going to affect maturity levels of all the classic criteria. But today, companies gained many technical
advancements by implementing disruptive technologies and these increase the level of their digital maturity in more
technical criteria set. However, adopting modern trends and technologies is not just the application of these new
technologies but also creates changes in all management aspects. In this study, analysis proved that the visibility of
criteria that are used to define strategies of companies changes over time. However, the analysis also revealed the
must-haves for digital maturity models. In the following section, achieved results are presented via discussion with
existing literature.
Fig. 2. Criteria change over time
4. Results and Discussions
In order for companies to step into the digital world, besides digitizing their products and services, they also need
to digitize their strategies, working methods and business models through digital transformation. Digitalization makes
it necessary to make changes in the management processes of companies such as decision-making, planning,
organization, communication, coordination and supervision. However, the roadmap to Industry 4.0 is not only
complex but also multifaceted [28]. As the application areas expand [29], it is not enough to stay in factory-level
applications, and it is necessary to focus on changes in all internal systems, management systems and even all partners
alongthe supplychain [30]. Automation, optimization, and streamlined processes facilitated bydigital transformation
result in enhanced operational efficiency, cost reduction, and resource allocation. However, beyond that, rapid
technological advancements continuously reshape industries. Digital tools have erased geographical boundaries,
enabling businesses to tap into global markets and empower employees to collaborate, innovate, and work remotely,
fostering a more engaged and productive workforce. In this regard, to achieve a successful digital transformation,
organizations should utilize a digital transformation framework that serves as both guidance and a roadmap [31]. This
framework will help them navigate the complexities of the transformation process and ensure that they are on the right
tracktoward achievingtheir digital goals. Byleveraginga well-defined framework, organizations caneffectivelyplan,

--- PAGE 8 ---
910 Zeynep Tuğçe Kalender et al. / Procedia Computer Science 232 (2024) 903–912
8 Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2023) 000–000
implement, and monitor their digital transformation initiatives, leading to improved outcomes and increased chances
of success.
In this study, a total of 42 models are covered to better represent the changes in the digital maturity models over
time. However, the analysis also revealed the most common criteria in other words must-haves in the models such as
leadership, strategy, business model, customer focus, human capital etc. Safadi [32] conducted a similar analysis with
considering 20 digital maturity models and the study also revealed the same must-have criteria. In an earlier analysis
conducted by Safadi [33] 18 digital maturity model is examined, and results showed the importance of strategy,
organization, culture, technology, customer focus and human capital. Additionally, conducted literature review also
highlighted that the most common dimensions are listed as (i) culture, (ii) technology, (iii) operations & processes,
(iv) strategy, (v) organization, (vi) innovation, (vii) customer focus and (viii) leadership. In 2023, Aras and
Büyüközkan [34] examined the literature in detail and determined 6 basic dimensions such as (i) strategy, (ii) value,
(iii) processes, (iv) technology and data, (v) digital work and (vi) governance. From this point of view, the results that
are achieved inthis studyare considered as compatible withexistingliterature. However, since the analyses conducted
inthis studyfocus ona broader time interval and examine the latest models, the studyprovides beneficial data to guide
future studies bydeterminingcurrent model trends. Inother words, focusingona longer time period notonlyprovided,
a better understandingofhowbusinesses changed but also revealed howthey’ve started to thinkabout digital maturity.
By looking at these changes, this study contributes new insights to what is already known from other research.
Especially answering a new question “Which criteria are mentioned more in today's business environment?”, by
comparing time intervals, it is believed that this study directly contributed to future models.
It should be noted that the frequencies of the dimensions used vary depending on whether the models are sector-
based or not. In this respect, it is seen that different dimensions come to the fore in sector-oriented studies [35].
According to the sector of the company, digital technologycapabilities can be added including sub-criteria of big data,
cloud technologies, intelligent automation, artificial intelligence, robotics etc. [35] Moreover, managers can evaluate
their digital ecosystem including external users, resources and value chains. In this sense, type of the company will
affect the usage of criteria set such as agility management, digital marketing, assets management etc. Analysis show
that, more recently Cybersecurity, Energy management, Monitoring /Control, Digital Training, Fiscal management,
Digital policy and standards, Development lifecycle, Agility, Collaboration, and Validation gaining more importance.
However, usage of these dimensions should be carefully added to the maturity model. Although this study highlights
the changing structure of the models, this change should be evaluated by managers in terms of organizations’ own
capabilities.
The current landscape of digital maturity models and frameworks is flooded with numerous options, originating
from digital transformation communities, consulting firms, and governmental entities. This abundance often leads to
confusion among executives, leaders, and implementation managers who are seeking practical guidance for their
digital transformation initiatives. Digital maturity models, which are usually created by consultants, aim to provide
both the level of digitalization of businesses and a way to reach digital maturity. However, Merzlov and Shilova [36]
statedthatthebasic limitationofthe modelsistheirsubjectiveevaluationandcomplexapplication. Moreover, whether
the model is developed by academia or by a consultancy firm, many of these models primarily focus on assessing an
organization's digital readiness and progress in the digital age, but unfortunately, they often lack pragmatic validation
and fail to provide actionable guidance for businesses. In this regard, it is suggested that organizations looking to
improve their digital capabilities should adapt specific contexts and goals of an organization to the developed maturity
model although digital maturity models provide a useful starting point.
Digital maturity models offer a valuable initial framework, however tailoring these models to an organization's
specific circumstances is crucial for optimal outcomes. The true power lies in their adaptability to individual
organizational contexts and aspirations. Customization allows organizations to capitalize on the strengths theyalready
possess while addressing their unique areas of growth. It permits alignment between the model's dimensions and the
organization's strategic priorities. Moreover, customization serves as a catalyst for stakeholder engagement, fostering
ownership and commitment to the transformation journey. In these newly designed models, dimensions which have
gained more importance recently based on the comparison of the models have an essential role. However, it's really
important to find a balance. Even though this study shows how the models are changing, managers should be
thoughtful about how these changes fit with their organization's abilities. Organizations need to be careful not to

--- PAGE 9 ---
Zeynep Tuğçe Kalender et al. / Procedia Computer Science 232 (2024) 903–912 911
Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2023) 000–000 9
change the basic ideas in the maturity model too much. Customization should make the model better, not make it
weaker.
5. Conclusion
Nowadays, companies all over the world face great challenges due to environmental, social, economic and
technological developments. In these changing business conditions, companies need virtual and physical structures
that allow close collaboration and rapid adaptation throughout the entire lifecycle, from innovation to production and
distribution. Especially in the 20th and 21st centuries, the change process experienced in the rapidly developing
information technologies, together with the decrease in the costs of accessing technology and its easy accessibility,
made it necessary for businesses to keep up with this change.
Digitalization has emerged as a major destructive force that has transformed the way of thinking and looking at
business processes and applications, triggered by the internet of things after the fourth industrial revolution. In this
increasingly digital age, customer and organizational relationships are redesigned and new business models are
created. It is inevitable that businesses that cannot keep up with the change cannot benefit from the flexibility, speed,
innovation and opportunities brought by digital technologies and fall behind their competitors. In addition to
technological transformation in digital transformation, one of the main goals should be for the managers leading the
transformation to combine the process with creativity and innovation, and to create the infrastructure for future
technologies with a visionary perspective.
In this regard, digital maturity models provide assessments for the current situation and beyond that show a
development path towards the targeted situation. Comparison of these existing models as it is done in this study
provides a better understanding of the current business landscape and the requirements of the models considering the
current managerial focus but it is also possible to use these insights to develop new models. In future studies, an
investigation of how digital maturity models differ in application across various industries and/or an examination of
how cultural, regulatory, and economic differences impact the adoption and adaptation of digital maturity models in
different countries and regions would be potential research areas.
References
[1] Görçün, Ömer Faruk (2016) “The fourth Industrial Revolution: Industry 4.0” [in Turkish: Dördüncü endüstri devrimi endüstri 4.0.] Beta
Yayıncılık, İstanbul (2016).
[2] Rachinger, Michael, Romana Rauter, Christiana Müller, Wolfgang Vorraber, and Eva Schirgi (2018) “Digitalization and its influence on
business model innovation.” Journal of Manufacturing Technology Management 30 (8): 1143-1160.
[3] Schumacher, Andreas, Wilfried Sihn, and Selim Erol (2016) “Automation, digitization and digitalization and their implications for
manufacturing processes.” In Innovation and sustainability conference Bukarest, 1-5.
[4] Eren, Çağla (2022) “Evaluation of digital maturity level in the retail industry with the AHP” [in Turkish: Perakende Sektöründe Dijital
Olgunluk Seviyesi Kriterlerinin AHP Analizi ile Değerlendirilmesi] MSc. Thesis, İstanbul Commerce University, Graduate School of Social
Sciences, Industrial Policies and Technology Management, Istanbul, Turkey.
[5] Hess, Thomas, Christian Matt, Alexander Benlian, and Florian Wiesböck. (2016) “Options for formulating a digital transformation strategy.”
MIS Quarterly Executive 15 (2).
[6] Berghaus, Sabine, and Andrea Back (2016) “Stages in Digital Business Transformation: Results of an Empirical Maturity Study” MCIS 2016
Proceedings. 22.
[7] Teichert, Roman (2019). “Digital transformation maturity: A systematic review of literature.” Acta Universitatis Agriculturae et Silviculturae
Mendelianae Brunensis. 67(6), 1673-1687.
[8] Kane, Gerald. C., Doug Palmer, Anh Nguyen Phillips, David Kiron, and Natasha Buckley (2017) “Achieving Digital Maturity - Adapting
Your Company to a Changing World.” 2017 Digital Business Report, MIT SMR and Deloitte. Retrieved from:
https://sloanreview.mit.edu/projects/achieving-digital-maturity/ (Reached: 02.05.2023)
[9] Gartner Inc. (2023) “Gartner Glossary Information Technology Glossary” Available from: https://www.gartner.com/en/information-
technology/glossary (Reached: 02.05.2023)
[10] Yüce, Gökçe (2020). “Digital transformation and Industry 4.0 maturity model: An application on Turkish cement sector” [in Turkish: Dijital
Dönüşüm ve Endüstri 4.0 Olgunluk Modeli: Türkiye Çimento Sektörü Üzerine Bir Uygulama] PhD Thesis, Mersin University, Institute of
Social Sciences, Business Administration, Mersin, Turkey.
[11] Balık, İsmet, Aydin, Sonay Zeki and Bitiktaş, Fevzi (2019). “Digitization in Ports: Reflections from Online Media” [in Turkish: Limanlarda
Dijitalleşme: Çevrim İçi Medyadan Yansimalar] In 4. National Port Congress “Küresel Eğilimler-Yerel Stratejiler” Izmir

--- PAGE 10 ---
912 Zeynep Tuğçe Kalender et al. / Procedia Computer Science 232 (2024) 903–912
10 Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2023) 000–000
[12] Sezen, Hayrettin Kemal and Eren Şenaras (2022). “A Discussion on Concepts of Digitization, Digitalization, Digital Transformation” [in
Turkish: Dijitizasyon, dijitalizasyon, dijital dönüşüm kavramlarina ilişkin bir değerlendirme] Pamukkale University Journal of Social
Sciences Institute (51), 49-59.
[13] Li, Liang, Fang Su, Wei Zhang, and Ji‐Ye Mao (2018) “Digital transformation by SME entrepreneurs: A capability perspective.” Information
Systems Journal 28 (6): 1129-1157.
[14] Aslanova, Irina. Vladimirovna, and Alexandra Ilinichna Kulichkina (2020) “Digital maturity: Definition and model” Proceedings of 2nd
International Scientific and Practical Conference “Modern Management Trends and the Digital Economy: from Regional Development to
Global Economic Growth” (MTDE 2020) (443-449). Atlantis Press.
[15] Kane, Gerald. C., Doug Palmer, Anh Nguyen Phillips, David Kiron, and Natasha Buckley (2017) “Achieving Digital Maturity - Adapting
Your Company to a Changing World.” 2017 Digital Business Report, MIT SMR and Deloitte. Retrieved from:
https://sloanreview.mit.edu/projects/achieving-digital-maturity/ (Reached: 02.05.2023)
[16] Westerman, George, Maël Tannou, Didier Bonnet, Patrick Ferraris, and Andrew McAfee (2012) “The Digital Advantage: How digital leaders
outperform their peers in every industry.” MIT Sloan Management and Capgemini Consulting, MA, 2 (2-23).
[17] Manyika, James, Gary Pinkus, and Sree Ramaswamy (2016) “The most digital companies are leaving all the rest behind.” Harvard Business
Review, 21.
[18] Westerman, George, Didier Bonnet, and Andrew McAfee (2014) “Leading digital: Turning technology into business transformation.”
Harvard Business Press, USA.
[19] Gill, Martin,and SharVanBoskirk (2016)“Thedigital maturitymodel 4.0.Benchmarks:digitaltransformation playbook.” Forrester research
Inc., Cambridge, USA.
[20] Westerman, George, Maël Tannou, Didier Bonnet, Patrick Ferraris, and Andrew McAfee (2016) “The Digital Advantage: How digital leaders
outperform their peers in every industry.” MIT Sloan Management and Capgemini Consulting, MA, 2 (2-24).
[21] Deloitte Inc. (2018) “Digital Maturity Model – Archiving Digital Maturity to Drive Growth.” Retrieved from:
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/global/Documents/Technology-Media-Telecommunications/deloitte-digital-maturity-
model.pdf (Reached: 02.05.2023)
[22] Lichtblau, Karl, Volker Stich, Roman Bertenrath, Matthias Blum, Martin Bleider, Agnes Millack, Katharina Schmitt, Edgar Schmitz, and
Moritz Schröter (2015) “Industry 4.0 Readiness” [in German: Impuls. Industrie 4.0-Readiness]. 1st Edition. Achen, Köln: Institut der
deutschen Wirtschaft Köln, RWTH Achen.
[23] Leyh, Christian, Katja Bley, Thomas Schäffer, and Sven Forstenhäusler (2016) “SIMMI 4.0-a maturity model for classifying the enterprise-
wideit and softwarelandscapefocusing on Industry4.0.” In2016 federated conferenceon computerscienceand information systems (fedcsis)
(pp. 1297-1302). IEEE.
[24] Colli, Michele, Ole Madsen, Ulrich Berger, Charles Møller, B. Vejrum Wæhrens, and Markus Bockholt (2018) “Contextualizing the outcome
of a maturity assessment for Industry 4.0.” Ifac-papersonline, 51(11), 1347-1352.
[25] Canetta, Luca, Andrea Barni, and Elias Montini (2018) “Development of a digitalization maturity model for the manufacturing sector.” In
2018 ieee international conference on engineering, technology and innovation (ICE/ITMC) (pp. 1-7). IEEE.
[26] Uhl, Axel, and Lars Alexander Gollenia (2016) “Digital Enterprise Transformation” in Uhl, Axel, and Lars Alexander Gollenia (eds.), Digital
Enterprise Transformation: A Business-Driven Approach to Leveraging Innovative IT. Gower Publishing, Ltd., United Kingdom
[27] Remane,Gerrit,AndreHanelt,RobertC.Nickerson,and Lutz M.Kolbe(2017)“Discoveringdigitalbusinessmodelsin traditionalindustries.”
Journal of Business Strategy, 38(2): 41–55.
[28] Hughes, Laurie, Yogesh K. Dwivedi, Nripendra P. Rana,Michael D. Williams, and Vishnupriya Raghavan (2022) “Perspectives on the future
of manufacturing within the Industry 4.0 era.” Production Planning & Control, 33(2-3), 138-158.
[29] Liao, Wenzhu, and Tong Wang (2019)“Anovel collaborativeoptimization modelfor job Shop production–deliveryconsidering timewindow
and carbon emission.” Sustainability, 11(10), 2781.
[30] Ivanov, Dmitry, Alexandre Dolgui, and Boris Sokolov (2019) “The impact of digital technology and Industry 4.0 on the ripple effect and
supply chain risk analytics.” International Journal of Production Research, 57(3), 829-846,
[31] McKinsey & Company (2018) “Unlocking success in digital transformations” Retrieved from:
https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/people-and-organizational-performance/our-insights/unlocking-success-in-digital-transformations#/
(Reached: 25.08.2023)
[32] Safadi Ayman (2021a) “Part-2: The Top 5 Digital Transformation Frameworks – 2021 Independent Review,” [White Paper] Retrieved from:
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/part-2-top-5-digital-transformation-frameworks-2021-review-el-safadi/ (Reached: 18.05.2023)
[33] Safadi Ayman (2021b) “Part-1:Digital Transformation Maturity Models and Frameworks - Point of View,” [White Paper] Retrieved from:
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/part-1-digital-transformation-maturity-models-point-ayman-el-safadi/ (Reached: 15.05.2023)
[34] Aras, Arzu, and Gülçin Büyüközkan (2023) “Digital Transformation Journey Guidance: A Holistic Digital Maturity Model Based on a
Systematic Literature Review.” Systems 11(4): 213-244.
[35] Akter, Shahriar, Katina Michael, Muhammad Rajib Uddin, Grace McCarthy, and Mahfuzur Rahman (2022). “Transforming business using
digital innovations: The application of AI, blockchain, cloud and data analytics.” Annals of Operations Research 308, 1-33.
[36] Merzlov, Igor, and Elena Shilova (2022) “A Digital Maturity Model for Organizations: an Approach to Assessment and Case Study.”
International Journal of Systematic Innovation, 7(2), 22-36.