--- PAGE 1 ---
Digital transformation as a multi-phase process: a longitudinal study of
corporate strategy and business unit adaptation
Solmaz Filiz Karabaga,*
, Johan Simonssonb
, Christian Berggrena
, Martin Andreassona
,
Robin Erikssonc
a
Department of Management and Engineering, Linköping University, SE-581 83 Linköping, Sweden
b
Unit of Integrated Product Development and Design, School of Industrial Engineering and Management, Royal Institute of Technology KTH, Lindstedtsvägen 30, 114 28
Stockholm, Sweden
c
Linköping Science Park AB, C/o DoSpace, Teknikringen 10583 30 Linköping, Sweden
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Digital transformation
Corporate strategy
Organizational tension
Structural adjustment
Organizational adaptation
Process perspective
A B S T R A C T
This study investigates how digital transformation unfolds over time within a multi-business manufacturing firm.
Drawing on a longitudinal case study of SweX—a global industrial firm—we trace the dynamics of digital
transformation across three empirically derived phases: experimentation, consolidation, and acceleration. Five
interrelated patterns shape the process: (1) digital transformation unfolds recursively rather than linearly; (2)
tensions arise between corporate strategy and business unit adaptation; (3) monetizing digital innovation re­
mains challenging; (4) structural adjustments are needed to balance stability and change; and (5) temporal
asymmetry—misalignments between technology deployment and customer readiness—can hinder digital
transformation. We organize these insights around three overarching themes—organizational tension, structural
adjustment, and organizational adaptation—developed through iterative analysis across corporate and business
unit levels. The study advances process-oriented perspectives on strategy by showing how recursive patterns of
tension, structural change, and organizational adaptation drive digital transformation in complex, multi-level
firms.
1. Introduction
Emerging digital technologies create disruptive challenges for firms
with physical product portfolios (Andreasson et al., 2024; Vial, 2019),
but also present opportunities for innovation and growth in new markets
(Ceipek et al., 2021; Herrmann et al., 2018; Oroh, 2021; Pizzo et al.,
2022) and access to new revenue streams (Forkmann et al., 2017). Many
such firms, which have historically excelled in developing and
manufacturing physical products, are now committing to digital trans­
formation to capitalize on opportunities and mitigate risks associated
with digital technologies (Fernandez-Vidal et al., 2022; Verhoef et al.,
2021; Vial,2019). The theoreticaland empiricalperspectives have lately
shifted in favor of viewing digital transformation as a multi-level process
that reshapes strategic intent, organizational structure, and capabilities
across all levels of the firm, instead of viewing digitalization as a discrete
technological shift (Hanelt et al., 2021a; Langley et al., 2013; Warner &
Wäger, 2019). Digital transformation affects all business operations,
including strategic decision-making, organizational structures, techno­
logical adoption, business models, and firm innovation ecosystems
(Hanelt et al., 2021a).
Despite growing academic and managerial interest, digital trans­
formation often fails to deliver on its promise (Oludapo et al., 2024). The
McKinsey Global Survey in 2022 found that nine out of ten executives
reported initiating a major digital transformation since 2020, but only
one in eight achieved their intended outcomes (Smaje et al., 2022).
Similarly, nearly 80 % of digital transformation projects seem to fail to
deliver expected functionality or fall short owing to persistent integra­
tion and alignment challenges (Dhall & Kanungo, 2023). These figures
underscore that digital transformation is a complex organizational
challenge, particularly in firms with legacy systems, physical products,
and multi-level structures.
These failure rates have prompted researchers to explore how firms
approach digital transformation in both theory and practice. Thus, the
extant literature on digital transformation strategies can be grouped into
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: solmaz.filiz.karabag@liu.se (S.F. Karabag), johan_simonsson@yahoo.com (J. Simonsson), Christian.berggren@liu.se (C. Berggren), 93andmar@
gmail.com (M. Andreasson), robin.eriksson@linkopingsciencepark.se (R. Eriksson).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Business Research
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jbusres
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2025.115796
Received 26 February 2024; Received in revised form 14 October 2025; Accepted 16 October 2025
Journal of Business Research 202 (2026) 115796
Available online 27 October 2025
0148-2963/© 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

--- PAGE 2 ---
(a) conceptual frameworks that analyze digital transformation at a
theoretical level (Menz et al., 2021; Vial, 2019) and (b) empirical studies
that examine actual digital transformation initiatives in firms (Chanias
et al., 2019; Ferreira et al., 2019). While conceptual studies offer valu­
able models and high-level perspectives, empirical research tends to
emphasize successful cases and enabling conditions, such as business
model innovation (Sohl et al., 2020), digital technological innovation
(Hanelt et al., 2021b), and big data capabilities (Xie et al., 2021). A
recurring finding is that firms struggle to move from strategy formula­
tion to execution, resulting in unrealized or only partially realized
transformation efforts (Andreasson et al., 2024; Tabrizi et al., 2019).
More broadly, digital transformation, in practice, is marked by ongoing
uncertainty, misalignment, and the need for continuous recalibration to
achieve desired outcomes (Andreasson et al., 2024;Oludapo et al., 2024;
Verhoef et al., 2021).
Much of this empirical research focuses on digital-native or service-
sector firms (Chanias et al., 2019; Merkus et al., 2019; Sebastian et al.,
2020), offering limited insight into the challenges faced by
manufacturing firms, especially those with legacy product portfolios,
complex supply chains, and embedded industrial routines (Björkdahl,
2020; Menz et al., 2021). Among manufacturing firms, multi-business
firms (also known as multidivisional firms) pose particular challenges
and opportunities, as semi-autonomous business units interpret and
enact strategies within distinct technological, operational, and market
contexts (Argyres et al., 2020; Argyres & Silverman, 2004; Sengul & Yu,
2024). These organizational arrangements introduce tensions in coor­
dination, timing,resource allocation, cross-businesscompetition, aswell
as strategic misalignment (Karabag, 2019) but may also facilitate
innovation capability building, cross-business learning, and internal
knowledge exploitation if effectively orchestrated (Björkdahl, 2020;
Karabag & Berggren, 2023; Sebastian et al., 2020). Yet, we know rela­
tively little about how digital transformation strategies are interpreted,
adapted, and coordinated across levels within suchfirms (Correani et al.,
2020).
These dual dynamics, namely, organizational friction and integrative
potential, make multi-business firms a particularly rich but underex­
plored and complicated research setting for studying digital trans­
formation. To address this gap, the present study investigates how
corporate-level digital initiatives are interpreted and enacted across
business units, and how evolving coordination mechanisms influence
the firm’s transformation trajectory. More specifically, this paper seeks
to answer the following research question:
How does the digital transformation process evolve within a multi-
business manufacturing firm, and what patterns characterize its pro­
gression across corporate and business unit levels?
2. Literature review
2.1. Digital transformation strategies
Strategy defines how an organization positions itself and shapes its
future actions (Mintzberg & McHugh, 1985). An effective digital trans­
formation strategy is closely tied to how firms reconfigure their value
creation and value capture activities (Matt et al., 2015). It does not
merely support existing business models but challenges, complements,
or even replaces them by reshaping the underlying “rules of the game”
within firms and ecosystems (Hinings et al., 2018, p. 53). Achieving this
requires moving beyond technology upgrades. Firms must undertake
more profound changes that affect their business models and how value
is delivered to customers (Imran et al., 2021). Such transformation often
involves building digital platforms, deploying interconnected products,
and investing in digital assets across organizational boundaries (Aversa
& Hueller, 2023).
A key activity involves leveraging digital technologies to develop
new products, services, and solutions. Porter and Heppelmann (2015)
highlight three core elements of a digital product: a physical component,
sensors for data collection, and connectivity technology to enable
communication and data transfer between products and platforms.
These components enhance user experience and enable firms to monitor
product conditions, improve performance, and develop data-driven
business models (Lerch & Gotsch, 2015; Nylén & Holmström, 2015).
The adoption of digital technologies is both a technical challenge and
requires firms to rethink their strategic direction and organizational
design. Müller et al. (2018) argue that shifting from a product-oriented
to a service- or solution-based approach necessitates new business
models, requiring firms to redefine how they create and deliver value to
customers. A business model can be defined as the way a firm creates
and delivers value to customers (Rachinger et al., 2018). Such shifts may
range from incremental adjustments to a radical overhaul of how value
is created and monetized (Frank et al., 2019).
At the organizational level, digital transformation affects firms’ re­
sources, capabilities, processes, and structures (Kane et al., 2015; Vol­
berda et al., 2021). Singh et al. (2020) discuss two critical parameters in
digital transformation: the balance between corporate control and local
business unit autonomy, and the modes of coordination and collabora­
tion within the firm. Here, firms involved in digital transformations need
to remove barriers between functional departments to enable collabo­
ration between previously separated departments (Svahn et al., 2017;
Volberda et al., 2021) and decentralize to enable business units to
respond rapidly and flexibly to technology and market changes (Verhoef
et al., 2021).
Despite these insights, most empirical research has concentrated on
digital transformation within either single-business firms (Björkdahl,
2020) or service industries where digitalization is already deeply
embedded (Chanias et al., 2019; Pizzo et al., 2022). There is still limited
research on how multi-business manufacturing firms, often structured
around legacy product portfolios, implement digital transformation
strategies across diverse business units (Argyres & Silverman, 2004;
Hanelt et al., 2021a; Svahn et al., 2017; Vial, 2019).
2.2. Digital transformation strategy as process
The literature on digital transformation strategies underscores the
multifaceted complexity of these initiatives and their extensive effect on
various aspects of an organization’s operations and structure (Björkdahl,
2020). Rather than being a static, one-off change, digital transformation
is an ongoing, iterative process, unfolding over time through experi­
mentation and organizational learning (Burgelman et al., 2018; Langley
et al., 2013; Yoo et al., 2012).
Adopting a process perspective allows researchers to examine how
strategic intentions, technological advancements, and organizational
responses unfold dynamically rather than as a linear trajectory (Cloutier
& Langley, 2020). In contrast to models that assume clear-cut strategic
planning and execution (Correani et al., 2020; Hess et al., 2016),
process-based approaches emphasize fluidity, adaptability, and the
recursive interactions between actors, structures, and external envi­
ronments (Garud et al., 2020).
Studies examining stepwise transformation models focus on pre­
dictable stages and capabilities such as technology acquisition, assimi­
lation, and integration (Correani et al., 2020). However, recent work
challenges this perspective, emphasizing that digital transformation
unfolds through trials, resistance, and adaptation rather than through
preplanned steps (Andreasson et al., 2024).
Although such process perspectives have been applied to digital-
native firms and service industries (Lopez et al., 2021; Pizzo et al.,
2022), they remain underexplored in studies of manufacturing firms
with decentralized structures and legacy systems. The recursive nature
of digital transformation (Andreasson et al., 2024) is likely heightened
in firms with multiple business units operating at different levels of
digital maturity, which suggests more flexible and adaptive coordina­
tion mechanisms (Singh et al., 2020).
S.F. Karabag et al. Journal of Business Research 202 (2026) 115796
2

--- PAGE 3 ---
Thus, understanding how digital transformation unfolds over time
within multi-business manufacturing firms requires further investiga­
tion. Suchcontexts demand aprocessual approachthat captures tensions
between centralized corporate strategies and locally adapted business-
unit initiatives, including the variation of local initiatives.
2.3. Synthesis of literature and research gaps
As summarized above, the literature on digital transformation stra­
tegies has examined how firms integrate new technologies into their
business models and organizational structures (Vial, 2019). Researchers
have also explored the importance of digitalization for competitiveness,
strategic decision-making involved in digital transformation, and
required shifts in business operations and value-creation mechanisms
(Imran et al., 2021; Kohnke et al., 2023). Much of this research assumes
that digital transformation is implemented as a unified and homoge­
neous process across the firm, paying limited attention to the frag­
mented and contested dynamics that characterize transformation in
large, diversified organizations (Aversa & Hueller, 2023; Correani et al.,
2020; Singh et al., 2020).
In contrast, manufacturing firms with multiple product lines and
diverse business units face unique transformation challenges, often
requiring piecemeal adaptation and sustained organizational negotia­
tion (Björkdahl, 2020; Oludapo et al., 2024; Simonsson, 2021). While
some process-based studies acknowledge the iterative nature of trans­
formation, few explore how corporate strategies are translated, adapted,
or resisted at the business-unit level across time (Andreasson et al.,
2024). Thus, multi-business manufacturing firms have received far less
attention in the existing literature (Leiting et al., 2022). In contrast to
service-driven industries, where digitalization often enhances existing
value chains, manufacturing firms must navigate both technological
upgrades and fundamental shifts in product design, production, and
business models (Björkdahl, 2020). The literature still lacks systematic
analyses of how firms handle the tensions between existing product lines
and digital business models while navigating technological uncertainty
and corporate realignment (Andreasson et al., 2024; Simonsson, 2021;
Simonsson et al., 2020).
To address this gap, the present study applies a process-based
perspective to analyze how digital transformation strategies evolve
within a multi-business manufacturing firm. Rather than treating
transformation as a top-down shift, we explore how tensions between
corporate ambition and business unit execution shape the unfolding
strategy. We trace how strategic direction, structural adjustments, and
digital initiatives evolve across organizational levels and over time­
—sometimes independently, sometimes in integration, sometimes in
conflict, and often at different speeds (Oludapo et al., 2024; Paroutis &
Pettigrew, 2007). This theoretical framing informs the study’s meth­
odological approach, which adopts a longitudinal case study design to
capture the processual nature of digital transformation and investigate
these unfolding dynamics.
3. Data and methodology
3.1. Research design and researcher role
Digital transformation strategies are rarely linear or predictable;
instead, they unfold through dynamic and uncertain processes
(Björkdahl, 2020; Oludapo et al., 2024). As external researchers, we
avoided intervening in or influencing the strategy formation or imple­
mentation processes within the firm (Yin, 2018). This required a flexible
research design capable of capturing the temporal and organizational
complexity of the transformation as it unfolded; accordingly, we adop­
ted a longitudinal qualitative case study grounded in a process meth­
odology (Garud et al., 2020; Langley, 2009). By following critical
events, business unit responses, and organizational adjustments that
either enabled or constrained transformation, this approach allowed us
to trace how digital strategies were translated into practice over time
(Tisdell et al., 2025).
This study is part of a long-term research program investigating the
digital transformation of Swedish manufacturing firms. One focal case,
referred to here as “Firm SweX,” enabled an extended examination of
how digital transformation strategies are formed, executed, and adapted
over time (Schriber & Löwstedt, 2018). SweX is a representative
example of a multi-business manufacturing firm, defined as a large or­
ganization operating across multiple industries and geographies through
semi-autonomous divisions (Greve, 2003). Such firms manage diverse
product and service portfolios via business units with distinct strategies,
resources, and goals, while remaining coordinated under a shared
corporate governance structure (Paroutis & Pettigrew, 2007). SweX
conforms to this structure, with business units targeting different in­
dustrial segments while aligning under a centralized corporate strategy.
The longitudinal qualitative case study approach provided both
analytical depth and methodological flexibility, which are essential for
investigations of the dynamic interplay between corporate-level initia­
tives and business unit responses in a context of technological uncer­
tainty (Ghosh et al., 2022; Yoo et al., 2012). The design also enabled
close observation of how digital transformation efforts were initiated,
adjusted, and evaluated across time and organizational levels. Finally,
the case offered strong empirical access, including interviews with
managers, ranging from vice presidents and directors to managers of
digital transformation teams directly engaged in strategic execution – or
adaptation.
3.2. Case selection and research setting
The study began in 2017 with conversations with managers in four
firms which were invited to participate in the longitudinal study.
Initially, two of these firms agreed to participate; but as the study pro­
gressed, one of them provided only limited interview opportunities,
restricting our ability to conduct multiple complementary interviews
and an in-depth analysis.
Firm SweX offered extended access to study digital transformation
strategies over time, making it the most viable and information-rich case
(Schriber & Löwstedt, 2018). Given our focus on understanding how
digital transformation strategies are formed, executed, and adapted, we
developed a longitudinal study approach, which allowed us to examine
how digital transformation initiatives unfolded at multiple organiza­
tional levels: corporate and business units (Ghosh et al., 2022). The
selected firm constituted a rich research environment, allowing us to
capture multiple managerial perspectives. Our study included in­
terviews across organizational levels—directors, product managers, and
digital-transformation team members—which ensured a comprehensive
understanding of strategy implementation. By following Firm SweX over
an extended period, we were also able to document how strategic digital
initiatives evolved and were reconfigured in response to technological
advancements and organizational shifts (Yin, 2018).
Firm SweX is a publicly listed, multi-business manufacturing firm,
majority-owned and controlled by a Swedish shareholder. It specializes
in industrial equipment and machinery and operates across multiple
sectors, including construction, forestry, and professional landscaping.
The company follows a global strategy in which product development,
business model innovation, and strategic coordination are concentrated
at corporate and business unit headquarters, while market offerings are
distributed internationally through centralized or shared sales channels,
with limited local adaptation (Bartlett & Beamish, 2018; Rašković et al.,
2013).
This structure enables both corporate level and business units to
serve as drivers of the digital transformation, with international opera­
tions primarily focused on sales and product distribution, which aligns
with a global strategy of limited local market adaptation. Our analysis
centers on the transformation processes at the corporate level and two
business units, where strategic and organizational change initiatives
S.F. Karabag et al. Journal of Business Research 202 (2026) 115796
3

--- PAGE 4 ---
originate. The corporate level does not provide products or services to
external customers whereas the business units serve diverse customer
bases, from large contracting firms to outdoor power product users.
Table 1 provides an overview of the Business Units’ core industries,
customer segments, and product focus areas.
We selected Business Units C and H because they offered both
comparability and variation within the same corporate structure. Both
units operated under the same top-level governance and shared similar
technological knowledge bases. They relied on business models centered
on product sales and customer ownership, with after-sales services
managed mainly by external partners. They differed in terms of product
offerings, customer segments, and distribution channels: Business Unit C
focused on heavy-duty equipment in the construction industry, while
Business Unit H offered outdoor power equipment to a mix of profes­
sional and consumer markets via intermediaries.
The two business units have similar knowledge bases and received
comparable corporate-level digital support, which facilitates cross-unit
comparisons by minimizing trivial variations (Voss, 2010). Both busi­
ness units also operated with a high degree of financial and strategic
autonomy, making independent decisions on investments, resource
allocation, and product development. This autonomy—combined with
shared corporate support and overarching governance—allows us to
examine how different business units within the same firm interpret and
respond to a common transformation strategy. Given SweX’s multi-unit
structure, exposure to industry-wide digitalization pressures, and
ongoing transformation efforts, the firm provides a relevant setting for
analyzing how digital transformation evolves across differentiated yet
connected organizational contexts.
3.3. Data collection
The field study began with a pre-study phase in 2017 wherein two
interviewees discussed challenges with the ongoing digital trans­
formation, such as concerns about damaging the profitability of existing
business activities and reluctance to experiment with digitalization
instead of focusing on the improvements for existing physical products.
This early stage provided essential insights that shaped the focus of the
subsequent research project and data collection, which intensified in
2019–2024.
During this period, we conducted 38 interviews across four rounds,
supplemented by participant observations, document analysis, and
direct participation in digitalization projects’ team and management
meetings. Data collection took place in four rounds: Round 1 (August
2019 – June 2020), Round 2 (April – June 2021), Round 3 (September –
November 2021), and Round 4 (September – October 2022 and March –
April 2023). In the first round, the interviewees were selected, using the
snowball technique, based on recommendations from our project con­
tact at SweX (Jia et al., 2023). In subsequent rounds, we expanded the
selection process by incorporating insights from our initial corporate
contact, suggestions from interviewees, and names that emerged spon­
taneously during the interviews. After submitting the first version of this
paper, we gained access to additional interviews in 2024–2025 through
a complementary research project. These interviews were used pri­
marily to validate and refine our emerging findings.
Our initial research design aimed to interview the same set of in­
terviewees across multiple stages of the digital transformation process,
while adding new interviewees when necessary (Synn et al., 2023;
Wanat et al., 2024). As in other longitudinal studies, participant reten­
tion varied over time (Hermanowicz, 2016). Some left the organization,
others were promoted into roles no longer involved in digital trans­
formation, and a few declined further participation (Goyes & Sandberg,
2025). Our use of remote interviews may have further limited poten­
tially long-term follow-up engagement.
To ensure analytical rigor, we adapted our recruitment strategy to
include new participants whose roles had become central to the digital
transformation efforts. Thus, while a few managers participated only
once, others were interviewed multiple times depending on their
continued involvement and willingness to participate. This approach
aligns with process research principles, which emphasize a dynamic
view and the involvement of diverse actors over time (Langley et al.,
2013). Ensuring that participant recruitment and retention strategies
reflect evolving roles and engagement levels allows for a contextually
grounded analysis of digital transformation as a dynamic, unfolding
process with changing actor constellations (Paroutis & Pettigrew, 2007).
Overall, the number of interviewees from each unit provides insight
into the distribution of perspectives within the study. We conducted
interviews with three participants from the Corporate level and seven
from Business Unit C. In the earlier stage, we interviewed two managers
from Business Unit H, followed by five additional managers in the later
stage. Fiveinterviewees were done at the AILab, which initially was part
of the Corporate level. Duringan organizational redesign, the AI Lab was
dissolved and split between the business units: three team members
moved to Business Unit H’s robotics group and two joined Business Unit
C’s digitalization department. One of them later returned to the
Corporate IT department, while another took a managerial position in
another firm. Considering these movements, we tracked each in­
terviewee’s organizational role and affiliation as of late 2024, either by
asking participants directly or by consulting their available LinkedIn
profiles. This provides a transparent and accurate picture of how in­
terviewees’ roles evolved over time and across organizational bound­
aries. For an overview of the fieldwork, please refer to Table A1 in the
appendix.
The interview guide was based on literature on digital trans­
formation strategies and designed to examine how firms navigate digi­
talization in strategy, implementation, and organizational structure. The
guide covered several sub-themes, including digital strategies and
implementation, new digital technologies, business models, organiza­
tional aspects, key challenges, and ecosystem shifts. For example, we
asked: “Do you have an overall digitalization strategy? If yes, how would
you define it?” and “How do you implement digitalization in your
department, such as in products, services, and business model?” For
follow-up interviews, we iteratively refined the guide to capture changes
Table 1
Overview of SweX & its studied Business Units.
Unit Industry focus Main customer
segments
Product and service
focus
Corporate
Level*
Multi-industry
coordination and
strategic
oversight
Internal business
units; external
stakeholders (e.g.,
investors, regulators,
strategic partners)
Strategy formulation,
capital allocation,
portfolio
management, digital
transformation
leadership, group-
wide governance,
shared services (e.g.,
IT, HR, Legal)
Business
Unit C
Construction &
Infrastructure
Solutions
Large contractors,
infrastructure
operators, and
industrial retailers
Integrated heavy-duty
mechanical
equipment, digital
fleet management
tools, and efficiency-
enhancing services for
high-demand
construction
environments
Business
Unit H
Forest & Green
Space
Management
Professional service
providers, rental
firms, public service
providers, and
private consumers
Outdoor power
equipment, forestry
and landscape tools,
maintenance services,
and sustainability-
oriented offerings (e.
g., electrified
equipment, low-
emission solutions)
*In this study, the terms “corporate level”, “corporation”, “corporate unit”, and
“multi-business firm” are used interchangeably.
S.F. Karabag et al. Journal of Business Research 202 (2026) 115796
4

--- PAGE 5 ---
over time. While maintaining the original questions, we added: “How
has your digitalization strategy changed since our previous interview?”
(See the Supplementary Material for the interview guides).
To gain insight into ongoing digitalization efforts, we also conducted
participant observations, reviewed internal digitalization project re­
ports, and observed the prototyping of digital products and services. The
second author was the principal researcher responsible for the obser­
vations, while the other authors participated in three study visits. Since
the information and data could be sensitive, we signed a confidentiality
agreement with SweX, and did not record any of the discussions during
the participant observations. Focusing on digital transformation aspi­
rations, we also analyzed public interviews with the CEOs, corporate
press releases, annual reports, podcasts featuring SweX, public Business
Unit manager interviews, promotional videos of SweX’s current and
future digital products and services, and related media coverage. This
additional data led us to more informed questions for the interviews. In
the later stage, it provided an opportunity for the triangulation of our
data used in the analysis. Table 2 provides an overview of the data,
description, types of information, limitations, and strengths.
3.4. Data analysis
To analyze our combined historical and contemporary data, we
adopted an iterative, process-oriented methodological strategy
comprising multiple techniques, including open coding, temporal
bracketing, and narrative analysis. This made it possible to systemati­
cally capture the evolving dynamics and complexities of digital trans­
formation within Firm SweX (Gibbs, 2018; Langley et al., 2013; Lerman
et al., 2022).
3.4.1. Stage 1: Open coding and code integration (2021–2022)
In the analytical stage following the first round of data collection, the
first and second authors engaged in open and in vivo coding (Corbin &
Strauss, 2014; Holton, 2007) to identify and develop an initial set of
themes grounded in the empirical material. Coding was guided by
sensitizing concepts related to digital product and service development,
business model experimentation, and organizational process change,
reflecting both relevant literature and the firm’s own framing of digital
transformation. This approach allowed for inductive openness while
maintaining alignment with our theoretical perspective. The coding was
Table 2
Data overview*.
Data Items Archival data
Data from diverse company sources Data from external
sources
Interview
(2019–2024)
Annual Reports
(2010–2023)
Product Videos (various
years)
Interviews & Podcasts
Featuring SweX
Managers
(2017, 2021, 2022 and
2024)
Selective press releases
(2010–2024)
Media Coverage
(various years)
Quantity 41 interviews 14 reports 50 short & 2 long videos 4 audios 16 documents 35 (34 web-based media
coverage + 1 podcasts)
Description of
the data
One-on-one interviews with
managers and engineers at
different levels discussing
corporate and business
units’ digitalization
strategy, and digitalization
programs, innovation, and
challenges.
Corporate documents
detailing financial
performance, strategic
initiatives, market
trends, and
sustainability efforts.
Short promotional and
informational videos
showcasing product
features, use cases,
technological
advancements, and
sustainability aspects.
Audio interviews
featuring company
managers discussing
strategic initiatives,
digital transformation,
sustainability, and
market trends.
Public announcements
covering company
initiatives, product
launches, strategic
investments, and market
positioning.
News articles, industry
reports, and external
analyses covering SweX’s
digital transformation,
strategic partnerships,
and technology adoption.
Types of
information
Managerial decision-
making, strategic priorities,
digital transformation
insights, product change,
business model,
organization, and
ecosystem.
Financial performance,
strategic priorities,
sustainability
initiatives, digital
transformation,
corporate governance.
Product specifications,
automation capabilities,
digital features,
sustainability
messaging, user
guidance, and market
positioning.
Leadership perspectives,
corporate strategy,
digital innovation,
sustainability efforts,
industry trends, outlook.
Automation, AI-driven
solutions, sustainability
efforts, electrification
strategies, digital
transformation, corporate
partnerships.
Digital strategy, AI
integration, automation
trends, sustainability
innovations, competitive
positioning.
Limitation of
the data*
Possible subjective views.
Focus on own unit/
products/area with limited
knowledge of other parts of
the
organization.Post
hoc and may involve
rationalization.
May reflect company-
selected narratives.
Limited real-time
insights.
Variations in reporting
standards across years.
Marketing-focused
content.
Lacks in-depth technical
details.
May highlight strengths
while omitting
limitations or
challenges.
May reflect personal
opinions rather than
official corporate stance.
Potential bias in framing
company success.
Focused on external
communication and
branding.
May lack detailed
financial data or internal
challenges; Selective
reporting on key topics.
It may reflect journalistic
biases and can focus on
high-profile events rather
than internal strategy.
The journalist or host
might lack deep technical
and product knowledge
details.
Strengths of
the data*
Provides direct insights
from strategic
implementation.
Captures strategic thinking
and decision-making
processes.Allows
exploration of digitalization
processes, innovation, and
change
efforts.As
participation is voluntary
and anonymous, managers
may share genuine insights
and critical views beyond
official narratives.
Provides a structured,
longitudinal view of
corporate performance
and strategy.
Offers verifiable
financial data.
Reflects long-term
trends in digitalization,
sustainability,
financial, and market
positioning.
Widely used for
investor and
stakeholder decision-
making.
Visually demonstrates
product functionality
and technological
advancements.
Provides insight into
how the company
markets innovation and
sustainability.
Accessible to a broad
audience and reflects
key messaging
strategies.
Provides first-hand
insights from company
managers on strategic
direction and industry
trends.
Allows for nuanced
discussions beyond
formal reports.
Captures leadership
perspectives on
challenges and
opportunities in
digitalization and
sustainability.
Provides timely insights
into corporate
developments, product
launches, and strategic
initiatives.
Reflects how the
company positions itself
in the market; Offers a
public-facing view of
innovation,
sustainability, and digital
transformation efforts.
Provides independent
external perspectives,
highlights real-world
impact and industry
trends, and verifies
corporate claims.
They might offer critical
public views on SweX, its
business units, and
products, which can lead
to high-quality data.
* The strengths and limitations of the data are the authors’ elaborations, inspired by Granqvist and Gustafsson (2016).
S.F. Karabag et al. Journal of Business Research 202 (2026) 115796
5

--- PAGE 6 ---
interpretive rather than purely descriptive, and meaning was developed
through collaborative discussion between the first and second authors.
Ambiguous or conceptually rich statements were jointly reviewed and
interpreted in context, with ongoing reflection on emerging patterns
across interviews.
The first round of coding, conducted in NVivo 12, generated 288
first-order abstractions and 51 s-order abstractions, with between 14
and 27 codes per interview. These abstractions were documented in a
structured codebook embedded in a case study database, which included
metadata such as interview source, date, role, unit, and transformation
context. Among the analytically central second-order abstractions were
Unclear Digital Transformation Strategies, Uncoordinated Digitalization
Implementation, Organizational Resistance, Digital Platform Activities,
and Transforming Organization. Those 51 s-order abstractions appeared
across business units and time periods and were considered analytically
central because they consistently recurred in interview narratives as
cross-cutting concerns or mechanisms shaping key aspects of the digital
transformation process. The abstractions were provisionally grouped
into seven aggregated conceptual themes: Intended Digitalization Strate­
gies, Realized Digitalization Strategies, Uncoordinated Digitalization Imple­
mentation, Coordinated Digitalization Implementation, Transforming
Organization, Digital Innovations, and Barriers–Challenges–Misalignment.
Later, these themes served as an intermediate structure for orga­
nizing the results of the first round. Following the second round of in­
terviews, which generated 215 additional first-order abstractions
(between 18 and 31 codes per interview), we employed a focused coding
approach guided by the existing codebook (Charmaz, 2014). Rather
than reapplying open coding, this round aimed to confirm, refine, and
elaborate upon the existing categories. Logical, theoretical, and se­
mantic overlaps were resolved, and second-order abstractions were
consolidated or subdivided as new patterns emerged, related to business
model experimentation and organizational restructuring. This refine­
ment led to a reduction from 51 to 48 s-order abstractions. As part of this
process, the seven intermediate themes were further synthesized into
three overarching domains: Digitalization Implementation, Barriers–Chal­
lenges–Misalignment, and Transformational Outcomes. These domains
structured the findings and discussion in the first submitted version of
the paper.
In parallel, we maintained the case study database with supple­
mentary materials, including internal reports, press releases, product
videos, and other archival documents, which were descriptively coded
and used for triangulation purposes. Each artifact was catalogued with
metadata (e.g., source, date, unit, type of material) to ensure traceability
and analytical consistency. Descriptive labels (e.g., “fleet service
demonstration”) were applied to relevant media artifacts and cross-
referenced with interview-derived themes. However, these materials
were not interpreted with the same depth as the interviews. The themes
and insights generated in Stage 1 laid the foundation for the temporal
bracketing in Stage 2 and the narrative construction in Stage 3.
3.4.2. Stage 2: Temporal bracketing (2023–2024)
In the second stage, the first and second authors were joined by the
fourth author. During the second round of data collection, the team
identified that SweX had restructured both its organizational hierarchy
and the governance of digital transformation within and across its
business units. To make sense of these dynamics and processes, we
applied a temporal bracketing strategy which helped us to identify key
episodes in SweX’s transformation process (Berends et al., 2011; Lang­
ley, 1999, 2009; Lerman et al., 2022). The temporal brackets were not
predefined but were derivedinductivelyfrom observed shifts instrategic
direction, coordination logic, and digital transformation activities across
organizational levels. This allowed us to structure the unfolding trans­
formation as a multi-stage process while preserving the recursive and
context-sensitive nature of the empirical material.
Accordingly, we moved from a code-centric view to an episode-based
analysis, focusing on temporally bounded shifts in structure, strategy,
Table 3
Summary of Digital Transformation Phases, Organizational Tensions, Structural
Adjustments, and Organizational Adaptation.
Unit / Phase Phase I:2010–2016
(Experimentation)
Phase II:
2017–2020
(Consolidation)
Phase III:
2021–2024
(Acceleration)
Corporate
Level
Connectivity Hub
and Digital Services
unit established
Early exploration of
connected products
and digital
platforms
No shared technical
standards across
units
Strategic programs
launched:
connectivity, fleet
management, e-
commerce
CTO group led a
future-oriented
digital strategy, but
failed to align with
BU needs
AI Lab established
Centralized
programs
launchedShift
toward
decentralization
(2019–2020)
as BUs took on a
larger role in digital
projects
Programs initiated
for services and
adjacent
innovations
Subscription and
pay-per-use tested,
but weak customer
uptake limited
revenue
Leadership
turnover and
removal of the
CDO role
Full
decentralization
of digital
innovation
Corporate is
redefined as an
infrastructure
enabler
Reduced strategic
visibility but
continued
backend support
Business Unit C Slow, cautious
experimentation
Low urgency; high
strategic ambiguity
across categories
Emerging customer
interest in data-
driven
services“Not-
invented-here”
mindset limited
collaboration
Connectivity
integrated as a
product add-on;
dependent on BU
H’s fleet platformE-
commerce
launched;
experimentation
with subscription
and pay-per-use
Organizational
resistance to new
service models
Agile pilots
initiated to
overcome the
waterfall
legacyCross-
category steering
introduced to
accelerate
coordination
E-commerce
launched; early
monetization
attempts via
subscription/pay-
per-use.
High
connectivity rate
but very low user
activation
Persistent
difficulty
monetizing
digital services
and justifying
added value
Dependency on
fleet platform
slowed service
innovation
Digital features
bundled into
products; limited
willingness to
pay separately
Business Unit H Rapid
experimentation in
one product
category
Incompatible
digital
infrastructure
created technical
friction
Strategic tension
between speed-to-
market and
profitability
Early e-commerce
and data-driven
service exploration
Fleet and service
platforms expanded
Push for products-
as-a-service and
lifecycle value
creation
Profit margin logic
limited business
model
experimentation
Separate digital
departments
created to “escape
legacy”
Structural
separation
increased speed but
reduced integration
with R&D and other
In-house digital
platform praised
Outcome-based
service models
piloted
Broader digital
capability and
integration
agenda emerging
Digital service
platforms tested
in collaboration
with professional
users
Outcome-based
service models
piloted, but
adoption lagged
among users
(continued on next page)
S.F. Karabag et al. Journal of Business Research 202 (2026) 115796
6

--- PAGE 7 ---
and execution. Analytical attention turned to the transformative mech­
anisms within each episode. We examined how participants described
(a) outcomes of digital initiatives, (b) enabling conditions, (c) barriers
and tensions encountered, and (d) how practices were adapted or
resisted (Yeow et al., 2018). This led to the identification of three
distinct transformation episodes:
• Experimentation Phase (2010–2016): Characterized by fragmented,
centralized experiments and early corporate-level initiatives.
• Consolidation Phase (2017–2020): Marked by coordinated programs,
strategic alignment, and organizational restructuring.
• Acceleration Phase (2021–Present): Defined by decentralized and
widespread digital adoption, selective business model innovation,
and challenges related to financial outcomes and scaling.
3.4.3. Stage 3: Narrative construction and validation (2024)
After completing the last round of data collection, we proceeded to
the final analytical stage, in which the first, third, and fourth authors
iteratively synthesized insights into a coherent, chronologically struc­
tured narrative (see section 4). This narrative was organized using the
temporal brackets developed in Stage 2 and drew selectively on the
coding structure produced in Stage 1, focusing on second order cate­
gories that supported a processual understanding of digital trans­
formation. Not all second-order codes were included; instead, we
focused on those that highlighted the unfolding dynamics across stages
and organizational levels. The resulting narrative was an integrated
account that illustrated continuity and transformation across SweX’s
evolving digital strategy (Abdallah et al., 2011).
To support coherence and external validity, we revisited supple­
mentary materials, including public reports, press releases, product
sheets, and podcasts featuring SweX’s leadership. While not analyzed
with the same depth as interviews, these sources helped validate core
themes and highlight discrepancies or silences (e.g., between strategic
messaging and internal implementation). To further validate the
narrative presented in section 4, we conducted member checks with two
senior managers: (a) the Vice President (VP) of Digital Business Trans­
formation at SweX; and (b) a former business unit leader who had since
transitioned to the role as VP with digital transformation responsibility
in another firm. Both respondents confirmed the analytical relevance
and practical resonance of our findings (Lincoln & Guba, 1985).
Structuring our analysis through three interlinked stages—open
coding, temporal bracketing, and narrative construction—enabled us to
develop a coherent, multi-level process account of digital trans­
formation at SweX, in line with established practices in process-oriented
qualitative research (Berends et al., 2011; Lerman et al., 2022). The
themes presented in Table 3 build directly on the findings from the first
version of the paper, which included more granular categories such as
strategic misalignment, organizational barriers, execution challenges, role
ambiguity, and unrealized digital initiatives. During the review process, the
aggregate themes were relabeled as organizational tension, structural
adjustment, and organizational adaptation to communicate a process-
oriented nature of the empirical material. These relabeled and aggre­
gate themes (see Table 3) were developed through interpretive synthesis
and reflection during the review process of the paper, drawing
conceptually on the submitted version of the paper. These changes also
involved slightly refining existing categories, while maintaining their
underlying content and narrative structure, to enhance the clarity and
precision of the discussion section. This refinement aligns with the re­
flexive and communicative nature of qualitative analysis, in which
theme names and structures may evolve to strengthen analytical
coherence and reader understanding (Braun & Clarke, 2006; Nowell
et al., 2017).
4. Digital transformation journey of a multi-business
manufacturing firm
This section provides a detailed empirical account of the digital
transformation strategy at SweX at the corporate level and in the two
business units. From the data analysis, we identified three main phases
of the digital transformation: an experimentation phase (2010–2016), a
consolidation phase (2017–2020), and an acceleration phase
(2021–2024).
These phases were empirically derived using a temporal bracketing
approach (Langley, 1999) and serve as an analytic lens to structure how
digital transformation unfolded over time at different organizational
Table 3 (continued)
Unit / Phase Phase I:2010–2016
(Experimentation)
Phase II:
2017–2020
(Consolidation)
Phase III:
2021–2024
(Acceleration)
categories
Profit margin
constrained the
adoption of service-
based models.
Organizational
Tension
Strategic
disconnect between
the corporate
ambitions and BU
legacy
routinesCultural
resistance (“not
invented here”)
and siloed product
categories
Technical
misalignment
across early
connectivity
initiatives
Unclear value logic
of digital services
vs. product
profitability
Strategic tension
between future-
oriented corporate
vision and short-
term BU needsInter-
unit friction over
shared platforms
(BU C vs. BU H)
Business model
tension:
subscription vs.
traditional
ownership
Structural
separation created
agility–integration
trade-offs
Strategic drift
from corporate
vision
Difficulty
monetizing
digital offerings
due to low uptake
and value
misalignment
Coordination
limits across
platforms
Structural
Adjustment
Creation of the
Connectivity Hub
and Digital Services
unit as a structural
recalibrationCross-
unit meetings were
initiated to
compensate for
rigid organizational
boundaries
Units start to
involve in the
digitalization
AI Lab established
to bridge
innovation and
execution;
reassigned under
Corporate IT in
2020 (see Phase III)
2020
reorganization
placed
responsibility for
digitalization in
BUs
Structural
separation of
“legacy-free” digital
teams within BU
HCross-category
steering
mechanisms
introduced in BU C
CDO role
eliminated
Corporate-level
governance
scaled down
AI Lab reassigned
in prior phase,
then split and
absorbed into
BUs
Corporate-level
governance
scaled down
BUs assumed full
control of
digitalization
Organizational
Adaptation
Digital capabilities
imported via
recruitment from IT
and automotive
sectors
Grassroots
collaboration
emerged
Digital
experimentation
normalized
New units formed
for digital support
Evolving strategic
language: from
‘connectivity’ to
‘digital platforms’
Trial-and-error
learning and agile
practices expanded
Development cycles
shortened in BU
CBU H built digital
capabilities in
separate
departments
Focus on services
and digital business
models has
increasedE-
commerce and
customer
engagement
capabilities scaled
BU H absorbed
non-product
services
BU C refined
digital priorities
Corporate Level
refocused on
backend IT
infrastructure
and internal
platform
standardization
S.F. Karabag et al. Journal of Business Research 202 (2026) 115796
7

--- PAGE 8 ---
levels, rather than representing a predefined or normative trans­
formation model. Each phase was marked by a distinct coordination
logic and transformation dynamic: the experimentation phase was
characterized by early, loosely coordinated trials; the consolidation
phase involved centralization of digital efforts and the formalization of
platforms and roles; and the acceleration phase reflected more wide­
spread but decentralized implementation, where structural tensions and
timing challenges became more salient.
4.1. Phase I (2010–2016): Experimentation with digital transformation
4.1.1. Corporate level: Navigating technological ambiguity and fragmented
coordination
In 2010, the corporate IT director started recruiting personnel from
aviation, automotive, and IT consultancy firms specializing in connec­
tivity, IT system development, and digitalization to create a Connec­
tivity Hub. The hub’s members examined ways the company and its
business units could leverage emerging digital technologies. These ef­
forts led the team to focus on product connectivity. They observed a
strong industry trend in this area, even though no business unit in SweX
yet had any connected products. A new Primary Development Depart­
ment began experimenting with digital technologies and developed a
roadmap for connectivity. The goal was to add connectivity to existing
products and gather basic data on runtime and geolocation. However,
because SweX offers a wide variety of products, there was no single
connectivity technology suitable for all. The hub identified several op­
tions, including Bluetooth and Wi-Fi, but hesitated.
Finding the best technological option for connectivity was time-
consuming. I had to talk with several product managers and teams
at the business units to develop a technological strategy for con­
necting our products. Almost all product managers thought that their
products were so unique that they could not use the technologies
used by other product groups. Their insistence created variations in
connectivity technologies. (Software Architect Engineer, Corporate
Level, 2023)
This situation reflected early technological tension and coordination
problems, as no unified standard could accommodate the diverse
product portfolio, which complicated strategic corporate alignment.
In 2014, the Primary Development team was complemented by a
Digital Services and Solutions department at the corporate level. Its task
was to develop new digital offerings and push new ways of working with
digital technologies. One manager from the new department expressed
the following:
From an R&D or process perspective, we built a completely new way
of working with DevOps teams and an agile setup. I think we still
have work to do there because we are still a very product-oriented
firm. (Director, Digital Services and Solutions, Business Unit H,
2021)
This new department was intended to be responsive and experi­
mental, bringing together the necessary competences to develop digital
products, services, and business models. SweX hired people with back­
grounds as data scientists, software engineers, and programmers, who
were not the kind of people SweX usually hired. Despite the establish­
ment of the Digital Services and Solutions department, digital service
development was still slow. This revealed a structural tension between
the experimental mandate of the new department and the rigid legacy
roles and responsibilities embedded in the existing organization.
SweX also needed to adjust its structure to align the digital programs
experiments with its legacy product systems and governance practices.
However, the strictly defined roles and responsibilities in the existing
organization made collaborations between the product categories diffi­
cult, and the established structure mandated separate R&D and inno­
vation in each business unit. To address this, managers initiated cross-
category and cross-business unit meetings to share experiences and
learn from one another. The interviewees considered these grassroots
initiatives valuable, despite sometimes being unfocused and unclear.
In spring 2016, SweX officially launched three strategic digitaliza­
tion programs in addition to the connectivity program. One of them
concerned the development of fleet managementservices. It was the first
large digital program and focused on developing a digital platform that
could be used for a wide range of Firm SweX’s products. The idea behind
the digital platform was to facilitate the development of new businesses,
such as by providing customers with a fleet management system that
could track the geolocation of products and support preventive main­
tenance. A second program focused on a new digital system for spare-
parts reordering, which informs customers when parts should be pur­
chased, while the third program concerned monitoring the operating
environment of SweX’s products. These digital programs consolidated
SweX’s intentions for digital transformation, demonstrating the firm’s
seriousness about moving toward integrated digital products and ser­
vices. Before the launch of the three digital programs, SweX used terms
such as “connectivity” and “cloud computing” in its annual report to
describe its digital innovation ambitions. After 2016, they instead
referred to terms such as “digitalization” and “digital platforms”. This
indicated a broader understanding of, and intention to use, digital
technologies, evolving from the previous product focus. According to
the annual reports in these years, digitalization was a crucial part of the
corporate strategy and the basis for new business models, aimed at
creating added customer value.
4.1.2. Business Unit C: Low urgency, internal silos, and cautious
experimentation
The new corporate programs were complemented by several busi­
ness unit initiatives. Before SweX initiated its digital transformation
strategy, the products of Business Unit C had been renewed every ten
years and lacked digital technology and connectivity. The unit utilized
two types of business models: (1) product sales through their network of
retailers and (2) product sales to large contracting firms, who rent them
out to users. These two transactional models were based on different
product categories and created easy-to-calculate revenue streams.
Business Unit C managed all its processes in a hierarchical organiza­
tional structure in which product categories operated independently and
financially separated. There was little or no cross-category collabora­
tion, and several interviewees referred to a “not invented here” mentality,
meaning that the employees of each category in the business unit took
pride in doing things themselves. This reflected cultural and coordina­
tion tensions across product categories that hindered early digitalization
efforts and limited cross-category collaboration.
The transformation activities at the business unit were related to
“improving digital capability” and the development of digital products.
The managers and engineers participated in the development of
corporate-level connectivity and observed a change in the behavior of
their large contracting customers, who began requesting connected
products with data collection capabilities to reduce their servicing costs.
The response from Business Unit C was “slow and steady,” as the man­
agers wanted to preserve their current competitive edge:
So, we have been a little bit conservative when it comes to [digital]
technology. But what we launch is quite solid and is, at least, a good
first step. (VP Department CS&D, Business Unit C, 2019)
The slow and steady approach meant that Business Unit C struggled
to get started on its digital transformation. While the slogan “easy to use,
effortless to own” was coined during a strategy conference in 2016 to
promote digitalization and the sales of products as a service, the unit did
not accelerate its own digital transformation. Some interviewees
referred to a lack of urgency, meaning that managers considered digital
technologies to be strategically important, but not in the near term.
There also seemed to be differences between the different product
categories within Business Unit C, where some were more proactive than
others. For instance, an interviewee from one product category stated
S.F. Karabag et al. Journal of Business Research 202 (2026) 115796
8

--- PAGE 9 ---
that there was no initiative related to digital technologies before 2017,
while another interviewee extensively discussed the importance of the
Connectivity and Aftermarket Department, which was formed in 2016.
There was also a lack of clarity regarding targets for the initial digital
transformation. Whereas some interviewees cited a target of having 80
% of products connected, others referred to 100 %, but the timeline for
achieving these targets was unclear to them. This ambiguity signals a
lack of strategic coherence across categories during the early stages of
transformation.
4.1.3. Business unit H: Rapid experimentation and early platform
fragmentation
Business Unit H has a long history in various product categories and
industries, and its product portfolio is typically updated every 5–10
years. Like Business Unit C, Business Unit H has used a transactional
business model, selling its products either through its own professional
sales team or via an extensive retailer network. In this model, the re­
tailers take care of services, such as maintenance and supplying con­
sumables, and appropriate the service revenues.
Business Unit H’s users include private consumers, self-employed
contractors, large rental providers, and professional firms. They span
segments from home users to professional users with an interest in
digital technology. Around 2010, some customers started to request
connected products that they could monitor through their smartphones.
This inspired managers at some of the business unit’s product categories
to initiate the development of digital products. The overall intention in
these early years was to be quick to the market with new digital features.
However, according to the interviewees, they engaged in experimenta­
tion without any agreement on the business unit’s purpose for using
digital technologies and which products to connect. This resulted in a
lack of coordination between departments, which hampered Business
Unit H’s ability to integrate connectivity into the products. After a few
years, the initial confusion began to ease. One interviewee explained
these years in the following way:
If we look at the connected products, that was really rushed. We were
not mature in terms of production, business case, or anything. It fell
short when we started launching products, as the service offering
behind sales was relatively thin. Since then, we have reevaluated and
taken a healthier approach to what we want to do. (Director of
Product Management, Business Unit H, 2021)
One solution was to focus on adding connectivity to specific products
which were believed to have good potential. Around 2015, the managers
of one product category started investing heavily in digitalization,
adding connectivity technologies that suited their product, without
considering synergies with other product categories. The result was a
digital product and a digital platform for data storage and analysis that
were ideally suited for this product but incompatible with SweX’s other
products. This created both technical and organizational friction,
revealing the absence of shared governance mechanisms for digital
infrastructure, and pushing the corporate level to establish a develop­
ment protocolto governthe general use of connectivitytechnologies and
make all products compatible with the new fleet management platform.
This process created internal friction, and the pioneering product cate­
gory continued to focus on its own needs. However, no change was made
because corporate managers considered the business case for the prod­
uct category to be very strong and, therefore, allowed its managers to do
things their own way.
Parallel to the development of connected products, Business Unit H
launched an e-commerce channel to get closer to customers and collect
sales data. As the perceived value of customer data increased, the unit
began identifying future service offerings based on that data. These of­
ferings did not fit within the existing transactional business models,
which were not designed to support subscriptions or recurring services.
This prompted experimentation with alternative business models aimed
at supporting service- and solution-oriented offerings.
These new models were aligned with an ambition to integrate digital
technologies into all products, such as sensors for data collection and
connectivity for data transfer. However, managers found it difficult to
justify the additional cost of embedding connectivity and digital ser­
vices, particularly when the value contribution of those services
remained uncertain. This illustrates a strategic tension between the
prevailing short-term product logic—focused on immediate profit—and
the longer-term shift toward service-based business models. As a result,
the expected transformation did not gain traction. As one manager
noted, it was much easier to justify connectivity in next-generation
products.
It is complicated to be paid [for adding connectivity] to the old
(petrol-based) products, which meant that they were cutting our
profit margins. It was easier to be paid for new generation products.
With a new generation product, we recognized that we did not have
the same margins as before. Then it was more important to be first
and take our market position. (Product Manager, Business Unit H,
2021)
4.2. Phase II (2017–2020): Consolidation of digital transformation
4.2.1. Corporate level: Centralization, experimentation, and emerging push
for decentralization
In 2017, the newly appointed Chief Technology Officer (CTO) and
his team spent most of their time identifying new digital technologies
and their potential use. They aimed to accelerate digital transformation
and inspire the rest of the organization. However, their approach
backfired, as one manager explained:
The CTO group was leading digitalization, and I was part of it. We
were really spearheading, and we were three to five years in the
future. The rest of [SweX] was like… ‘Why don’t you use the re­
sources and money to help us with what we need next year?’ It
created some polarization between the CTO and the existing business
unit activities. And we never succeeded in balancing this. That
spelled the end of that organization. (VP Applied Digital Innovation,
corporate level, 2021)
This quote reflects a strategic coordination tension, where the
forward-looking orientation of the corporate-level CTO clashed with
business units’ immediate operational priorities. Numerous digital
innovation initiatives had been started but without coordination and
alignment between them. Therefore, in 2018, the CTO established the AI
Lab with the mission of driving digital transformation forward. The AI
Lab focused its work on building new business cases through exper­
imenting with digital technologies and business models. The intention
was to nurture digital business cases that the business units could take
over if they found them promising. This structural adjustment was
intended to bridge the gap between centralized innovation and decen­
tralized execution, but it also highlighted early tensions around
ownership and integration of digital initiatives. However, our in­
terviewees also highlighted several successful cases that originated
within the AI Lab. They later evolved into large-scale programs within
the business units, such as a platform utilizing satellite data to monitor
and assess cities. This platform did not use any of the business units’
products but was the first launch of a non-product service from SweX.
Up until this point, the corporate level had emphasized central dig­
ital initiatives. However, in 2019, the corporate level recognized the
need to transfer some of the responsibility for accelerating digital
transformation to the business units. One manager explained this
change:
The general principle is that each business unit is autonomous… We
have been trying to transform their logic and attitudes from trans­
actional to digital businesses. This has been great, but very difficult.
The business units’ focus is on securing revenue for the coming year.
S.F. Karabag et al. Journal of Business Research 202 (2026) 115796
9

--- PAGE 10 ---
But, in the end, our digitalization strategy is in soft services, service
solutions, or new business models. And that was not on the map a
couple of years ago. (VP Applied Digital Innovation, corporate level,
2019)
The transformation continued; in 2020 a major reorganization was
initiated at SweX. This time most of the development of digital products
and services was decentralized to the business units, whereas the AI Lab
was moved from the corporate level and absorbed by the business units.
This marked a significant structural recalibration aimed at resolving
earlier tensions but also raised new concerns about fragmentation and
coordination across units. The overall aim was to activate the business
units and motivate them to push digitalization activities. However, the
managers involved in the corporate level’s digital activities were critical
since they feared they would not work closely with the team that
managed the digital platforms. One corporate manager elaborated on
this point:
The strategy that we have followed now for a couple of years is to
have strong business units. They should be very standalone and make
their own decisions, including strategies, road maps, and innovation.
Until now, the corporate level has been more explorative and focused
more on adjacent digital areas where the business units are not
working today. This new organizational structure [implemented in
2020] requires the business units to do their own exploration and
spearheading. I would say that the new organization is a step back­
ward. (VP Applied Digital Innovation, Corporate Level, 2021)
4.2.2. Business Unit C: Structural resistance and slow transition to digital
service models
Around 2017, Business Unit C started to increase the use of con­
nectivity and other digital technologies in its products. Initially, con­
nectivity was an add-on, where customers could purchase and fit an
electronic device that collected basic data from the machines. This
meant that the fleet management platform, now developed within
Business Unit H, became an important part also of Business Unit C’s
connected products. However, the collaboration between the units did
not work smoothly, which hampered the ability of Business Unit C to
create value from the platform products. This reflected an inter-unit
coordination tension, where differing priorities and technological ap­
proaches limited the effectiveness of shared platforms. The managers
who were interviewedin ourstudy considered thistobe amajor obstacle
to the digitalization of their products.
Business Unit C also applied digital technologies in its sales pro­
cesses, such as launching an e-commerce platform which enabled online
sales—first in a few selected countries and later expanded to more
markets. This sales channel created a new revenue stream and enabled
the business unit to get closer to its customers. Business Unit C also
experimented with new sales and pricing models, such as subscription
and pay-per-use. Interviewees noted the benefits and opportunities of
these models. One interviewee expressed the following:
We have a straightforward distribution model, where we distribute
products throughout our logistics network, and they reach a retailer.
By using e-commerce, subscription, and pay-per-use, the relationship
with the customers will change. Now we start to engage directly with
them [customers]. (Services Business Development Manager, Busi­
ness Unit C, 2021)
This shift revealed a strategic tension between the traditional
retailer-based sales model and emerging digital service logics, particu­
larly in terms of pricing, ownership, and channel relationships. Some
managers feared that e-commerce and subscription models could
alienate retailers or cannibalize existing revenue streams. The estab­
lished transactional model had been highly profitable, and moving to­
ward service-based offerings would require the business unit to take
ownership of products, manage maintenance, and establish structures to
capture recurring revenues. As expressed by one interviewee:
Some say we are not going to change our organizational structure,
whereas others—who are pushing us to develop new structures and
processes—see the need for a completely different organizational
design to take advantage of e-commerce, subscriptions, and pay-per-
use models. (Services Business Development Manager, Business Unit
C, 2021)
These divergent views signaled internal structural resistance,
complicating the transition toward integrated digital offerings. While
the corporate level favored autonomous business units and product
categories, Business Unit C’s managers argued that separating categories
and departments was no longer appropriate. Instead, interviewees
emphasized the importance of more cross-category collaborations and
cross-functional digital development. One way expressed by the Product
Director of Digital Service was to “force” department managers to attend
meetings, as those managers would otherwise push digitalization aside.
One interviewee admitted that forcing people to come to meetings was
not ideal, but at least it put digitalization on the agenda. Another
manager interviewed in 2019 stated that his team still questioned
whether digitalization was necessary. This manager explained that he
often found himself having to clarify that digitalization was no longer a
question— “it is a must.” The manager offered several reflections on why
it was challenging to change employees’ perceptions, one being:
With a traditional product, there is a process for everything, and
everybody knows who is responsible for what. But when it comes to
digitalization, you do not have that framework, which means you do
not know how to start. And that has been very frustrating. (Director,
Product and Service Management, Business Unit C, 2019)
To reduce uncertainty, R&D managers encouraged their employees
to engage more in trial-and-error approaches and conduct tests to see
what worked and what did not work. This was completely different from
the traditional approach of lengthy sequential development cycles,
where prototypes were not built until the engineers were convinced that
their solution would work. Now, Business Unit C sought to reduce
product and service development time through a shift away from
waterfall project management toward agile methods and to integrate
internal and external actors. New cross-category steering groups,
meetings, and goals were initiated to speed up this digital development
model:
I think we are getting to that point where we have reached an un­
derstanding: OK, let us go for this minimally viable product, just to
get started. And then you improve it incrementally, and I think that is
the right approach. (VP department CS&F, business unit C, 2021)
4.2.3. Business unit H: Service platform development and structural
separation
At this stage, the development of the fleet-management platform
reached a critical stage. The initial business case was to utilize the
platform to create services such as a subscription service that would
provide customers with access to the platform via their smartphones.
However, when one of its main competitors launched a similar platform
free of charge to their customers, SweX was forced to reconsider the
business case of having a fleet-management platform. Despite the in­
vestments already made in the platform, it still did not work as intended,
and the interface between the internal and external platform modules
was unstable. This exposed a technical and operational tension in
aligning system architecture with business model expectations. The
business units had to decide whether to keep developing the platform,
knowing that it might be unable to generate sufficient subscription
revenues, or suspend its development. The decision was to continue
developing the platform, as it was a key part of digital transformation
and to create digital products compatible with the platform. In 2020, the
annual report showed that the total number of users of SweX’s other
S.F. Karabag et al. Journal of Business Research 202 (2026) 115796
10

--- PAGE 11 ---
digital platforms exceeded one million, indicating its potential to have a
fleet management platform.
In addition to the fleet management platform, Business Unit H
developed a service platform that allowed customers to rent rather than
buy a selection of their products. This platform was intended to enable
the business unit to reach new customers and increase the revenue from
each product. While some managers considered this business model to
be positive, customers were reluctant to try new pricing models and
ownership options. A manager interviewed in 2021 expressed that they
struggled to develop the idea of selling products as a service in the
following way:
Long term, we need to consider the entire PLM [Product Lifecycle
Management] flow and see that, if we sell the product with a service
or if we lease it, we need to look at the overall business and what we
are getting, and maybe give discountsto secure the deal. Now, weare
not allowed to compromise on the profit margins. And that is tough
because then you are just building a classic cost-plus model, and that
is not attractive. (Business Development and Service Manager,
Business Unit H, 2021)
Despite the investments made in services and new subscription
models, the interviewees agreed that they had minimal impact on the
overall revenue of the business unit. However, in 2020, the e-commerce
channel grew due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The business unit’s high profit margins allowed it to invest in new
departments, developing the competencies needed for the future. These
departments were separated from the existing ones to give the teams the
freedom to pursue new business models outside the traditional streams.
One interviewee working in such a department expressed that they
should be “free of legacy” and not be affected by the unit’s heritage.
Our department has been detached from ongoing categories, and we
are working with digitalization that is not weighed down by
everyday operations. We have more freedom and are not burdened
by legacy considerations. We do not need to look backwards, but
only forward and adjust quickly. (Director of Business Development
Digitalization and Innovation, Business Unit H, 2021)
However, this structural separation, which was designed for agility,
also created a new tension by disconnecting digital innovation teams
from mainstream product development. Although this separation
seemed possible in theory, the new department struggled to operate in
this manner and found itself too detached from regular R&D and
insufficiently involved in mainstream product development.
Irrespective of these problems, the decentralization process
continued. Instead of a centralized department working on the entire
picture, each product category focused on its specific products. This
accelerated development and increased customer focus, but made co­
ordination and learning across categories difficult. One interviewee ar­
ticulated the following concerns:
We are very distributed in our decision-making within [Business Unit
H], which makes the product categories very strong. And if they see a
need for any type of digital [service] platform around one or several
of their products, they will develop it without considering what is
happening in other product categories or in SweX or other busi­
nesses. (Business Development and Service Manager, Business Unit
H, 2021)
This illustrates how structural decentralization enabled speed but
also led to fragmentation and reduced cross-unit learning.
4.3. Phase III (2021–2024): Acceleration of digital transformation
4.3.1. Corporate level: Strategic retreat and repositioning as an
infrastructure enabler
In this phase, the corporate level shifted its focus from initiating
digital transformation programs to overseeing IT systems and
infrastructure across the company. All digitalization programs and
innovation projects were transferred to the business units. This organi­
zational shift was partly shaped by top management changes. The CEO
who had championed digital transformation left the company, and a
new CEO with a different strategic focus was appointed. Following this
change in leadership, the Chief Digitalization Officer (CDO) also left the
company and the CDO role was subsequently removed from the corpo­
rate structure.
Several interviewees suggested that these departures reflected
growing tensions between the centralized digital transformation agenda
and the operational priorities of the business units. According to some
respondents, the corporate-level strategy had become increasingly
misaligned with local realities, resulting in friction and hindering
coordination.
After the CDO’s departure, the AI Lab, previously positioned as a
central innovation hub, was dismantled and its activities distributed to
Business Units C and H. This marked the decentralization of digital
innovation capabilities, bringing them closer to product development
teams and daily operations. As the former director of the AI Lab
reflected:
The divided AI Lab now reports to product managers, which ensures
alignment with product goals, but frankly, I worry that digitalization
is being deprioritized. It feels like it is slipping down the list in favor
of immediate business concerns.
The former project owner of the AI Lab, who moved to Business Unit
C as a manager, noted:
A lot of digital ambitions were being driven from the top, but the
business units did not always feel ownership over them. This
restructuring will hopefully improve the ownership and the sense of
what digitalization actually requires.
The former VP of Applied Digital Innovation, who became the VP
with the responsibility for IT in January 2022, reflected on the broader
challenge of transforming an established product-oriented firm:
We have spearheaded digital transformation in our industry—shift­
ing to a digital business model and restructuring the organ­
ization—well ahead of many competitors. But in a highly successful
corporation with successful business units, it’s hard to convince
managers who are deeply embedded in the daily work. I worry that
we will lose competitiveness and fail to value the digital capabilities
we have built over the past decade.
These statements reflect a deeper organizational tension—the clash
between a centrally driven digital transformation vision and the
embedded routines and daily priorities of the business units. What began
as a top-down push gradually encountered resistance and inertia,
resulting in decreased ownership, strategic drift, and a growing
disconnect between digital ambition and day-to-day reality.
While digital initiatives were delegated to the business units, the
corporate level retained a centralized IT function. This unit focused on
strengthening the company’s digital backbone by maintaining enter­
prise systems, managing network services and databases, ensuring
cybersecurity and data protection, and overseeing software licensing
and hardware procurement.
This represented a structural adjustment in the corporate role: from
central orchestrator of innovation to a more limited enabler focused on
back-end infrastructure. The dismantling of the AI Lab and the elimi­
nation of the CDO’s role marked a clear reconfiguration of digital
governance. This adjustment required organizational adaptation. The
corporate level redefined its contribution, to support transformation
indirectly through infrastructure coordination, platform standardiza­
tion, and internal knowledge exchange. This allowed digitalization to
continue but in a more decentralized and less strategically prominent
form.
However, the adaptation did not fully resolve the earlier tensions.
S.F. Karabag et al. Journal of Business Research 202 (2026) 115796
11

--- PAGE 12 ---
The misalignment between corporate-level ambitions and business unit
realities continued to shape how digital capabilities were valued and
used. While Corporate played a stabilizing role, its diminished influence
raised concerns about long-term commitment and coherence in the
company’s digital trajectory.
4.3.2. Business Unit C: Struggles to monetize digital offerings and activate
connected products
The commercial aspect of digitalization at Business Unit C has
matured. Some digital products, usually the more expensive ones,
included embedded connectivity, whereas the simpler products offered
add-on connectivity. This was an intentional choice, as embedding
connectivity is costly, and the expensive products command a price
premium. Despite a high share of connected products, the business unit
still faced two challenges: delivering reliable digital functions to cus­
tomers who want them and demonstrating sufficient benefits to prompt
broader activation of the connectivity features. One manager expressed
the following:
We have—maybe not reached 80 %, but come quite close—with
either add-on or embedded connectivity. But if you look at the rate of
connected products—the share of customers who actually connect
them—it’s ridiculously low. In my latest [product] launch, where
every product has an embedded connectivity module, less than 1 %
have been connected [by customers]. (Director Product and Service
Management, Business Unit C, 2023)
This quote highlights a temporal tension between the technological
maturity of the products and customers’ readiness to adopt them. The
manager explained that their approach had changed in recent years.
Previously, they ran all digital-product activities in parallel; more
recently, the unit focused on fewer concurrent initiatives executed with
greater depth. Despite this shift, Business Unit C still struggled to adapt
the fleet-management platform to its products. The ongoing challenge of
aligning core platforms with product categories reflects both coordina­
tion tensions and structural constraints, as dependence on external
platform development hindered local service innovation. Because the
fleet-management platform was central to the unit’s digital offerings, its
lengthy development slowed service development. Some customers
requested services and subscription models, but most did not activate
the products’ embedded connectivity.
4.3.3. Business Unit H: Advancing outcome-based models amid integration
challenges
The integration of digital technologies and connectivity has been
successful for Business Unit H, particularly in one product category, and
the in-house digital platform has received high praise from customers.
Developing this product was easier than building the fleet-management
system because it initially ran on a standalone platform. However,
rework was later needed to make these products compatible with
Business Unit H’s fleet-management platform, enabling multiple prod­
ucts to be connected and operated remotely. This illustrates a renewed
push for structural integration, yet lingering compatibility issues show
the persistent challenge of aligning decentralized innovation with
shared infrastructure.
In the previous phases, the key question for Business Unit H was what
type of digital technology to include in its products and how to create
value from them. Now, the focus of the business unit has shifted to
capturing value from digital products and services. The business unit has
a history of selling products to private customers through leasing deals,
meaning they retain ownership, whereas customers only pay per hour of
use. The business unit’s managers provided examples of how they uti­
lized the fleet management platform to evaluate new business models in
collaboration with selected professional customers. Rather than having
customers buy and operate a fleet of products, this new way meant that
Business Unit H would sell the desired task of the product as a solution.
This experimentation with outcome-based service models reveals both
strategic innovation and operational tension, especially in managing
ownership, pricing, and lifecycle responsibilities. The customer pays a
monthly fee for having the task done, without investing in expensive
products. By contrast, the business unit is responsible for maintaining
the product and extending its life cycle.
Business Unit H has also taken over responsibility for several non-
product services from the AI lab and has developed them further.
Although this did not yield any financial returns, it demonstrated the
Business Unit’s ambition to utilize more digital technologies in the
future. Interviewees noted that, although much remains to be fixed
before the full potential of digital products and services can be realized,
several achievements have been made in the last few years. These cu­
mulative adjustments also reflect how the business unit has gradually
shifted from fragmented experimentation to a more cohesive and still
evolving digital capability. The following quote highlights this:
If you look historically at where we came from, much has changed in
the last 7–8 years. Compared with how we worked back then, there
was no one to turn to; everything had to be done by the existing
personnel. (Director of Product Management, Business Unit H,
2021).
Table 3 summarizes the digital transformation journey across the
corporate and business unit levels, structured through three trans­
formation phases. In particular, Table 3 distinguishes three theoretically
grounded dimensions — tensions, structural adjustments, and organi­
zational adaptations—that evolved recursively over time during this
process.
5. Discussion
Our study highlights that, contrary to stage-based or top-down
implementation models (see for example: Correani et al., 2020), digi­
tal transformation in multi-business firms unfolds as an iterative and
recursive process shaped by ongoing tensions, recurring structural ad­
justments, and organizational adaptation. While SweX initiated a
centralized transformation strategy at the corporate level, business units
responded through local experimentation, which had to cope with
operational constraints, and shifting market conditions, which created
continuous negotiations between the central strategic direction and
diverse, localized execution. These interactions led to divergent out­
comes across units. While one business unit adapted faster and capital­
ized on digital opportunities, another continued to struggle to align
digital features with its business model (c.f. Karabag & Berggren, 2023).
This recursive transformation unfolded through a pattern of three
interrelated dynamics spanning all phases of the journey. First, organi­
zational tensions emerged as corporate and business unit priorities
diverged. Second, these tensions prompted structural adjustments, such
as shifts between centralization and decentralization. Third, in response,
the firm gradually developed organizational adaptations such as new
practices, team structures, and learning mechanisms that supported new
forms of collaboration required to further digitalization. These findings
extend the digital transformation literature by demonstrating how
iterative and path-dependent interactions between tensions, structural
shifts, and learning processes shape strategic direction, cross-unit co­
ordination, and customer engagement (Andreasson et al., 2024; Langley
et al., 2013).
5.1. Digital transformation as a recursive, multi-phase process
This study contributes to the literature by examining how digital
transformation unfolds within a multi-business firm through recursive
cycles of experimentation, adjustment, and adaptation (Burgelman
et al., 2018; Langley et al., 2013). Rather than following a prescribed
roadmap, SweX engaged in iterative digital initiatives influenced by
internal capabilities, customer responses, and shifting strategic
priorities.
S.F. Karabag et al. Journal of Business Research 202 (2026) 115796
12

--- PAGE 13 ---
Initially, the corporate level pushed for a centralized strategy to
accelerate the speed,rhythm, anddiffusion of thetransformation(Zhang
et al., 2023). However, over time, business units gained increasing au­
tonomy, resulting in a more decentralized or composite approach. This
aligns with process-oriented studies of transformation, which argue that
strategies evolve through iterative and path-dependent interactions
between actors and structures (Mirabeau & Maguire, 2014).
The two studied business units differed significantly: Business Unit C
adopted digital features incrementally while maintaining its core busi­
ness model, whereas Business Unit H engaged in more radical experi­
mentation but struggled with market alignment. These contrasts
reinforce the view that digital transformation in multi-business firms is
uneven and shaped by legacy systems, market positions and organiza­
tional maturity (Björkdahl, 2020). Ultimately, our study shows that
digital transformation strategies are not only contested between
corporate and business units but are continuously reinterpreted and
adjusted in response to shifting conditions, challenging the simple,
stage-based models (Andreasson et al., 2024; Verhoef et al., 2021).
These findings of structural shifts, recurring tensions, and organizational
adjustments are further examined below.
5.2. Navigating structural adjustments in response to implementation
tensions
In response to the organizational tensions outlined above, the digital
transformation at SweX required continuous structural adjustments that
unfolded across phases. The firm shifted between centralized and
decentralized configurations as internal and external pressures
competed. These adjustments were not preplanned but emerged
dynamically inresponse to implementationchallenges, underscoring the
role of organizational agility in enabling transformation (Volberda et al.,
2021).
Our study contributes to the growing discussion on how organiza­
tions restructure to support digital transformation. While some studies
advocate centralization to enhance implementation (Erjavec et al.,
2024) and others emphasize decentralization to unlock local innovation
(Verhoef et al., 2021; Vial, 2019), our findings suggest that firms must
continuously recalibrate between these poles depending on the evolving
needs of digital initiatives, emerging tensions and revealed market op­
portunities (Smith & Beretta, 2021). Initially, the studied corporate level
promoted a centralized digital strategy; however, over time, business
units pushed back, defending their autonomy and favoring greater
separation. The firm then settled on a hybrid structure in which central
initiatives provided an overarching direction, while business units
retained the flexibility to tailor digital solutions to their specific prod­
ucts and markets. This finding supports prior research on structural
ambidexterity (Mustafa et al., 2022), suggesting that transformation
requires managing tensions between control, integration, separation,
and autonomy (Smith & Beretta, 2021).
Two examples of this meandering journey are the creation and
removal of the chief digitalization officer position at the corporate level
and the evolution of the AI Lab from a centralized innovation hub to a
distributed capability across business units. This shift brought digital
development closer to product lines and operational decision-making,
reinforcing the need for internal, horizontal collaboration within busi­
ness units (Smith & Beretta, 2021). Overall, our study shows how multi-
business firms need to navigate organizational and market tensions over
time through fluid and iterative adjustments (Andreasson et al., 2024;
Hinings et al., 2018), rather than advocating a one-size-fits-all solution
(Bohnsack et al., 2021).
However, our findings caution against the assumption that decen­
tralization always leads to greater innovation. While the increased au­
tonomy empowered some business units, it also led to fragmented
strategies and uneven digital uptake across business units, creating a
need to manage trade-offs between corporate control and the autonomy
of business units (Ghosh et al., 2022; Hanelt et al., 2021b). The evolving
structure affected not only the direction, but also the speed and rhythm
of digital initiatives. Timely structural adjustments helped to accelerate
progress, whereas delays created bottlenecks (Zhang et al., 2023). The
evolving configurations studied in this case also seemed to reduce path
dependence and open up new local digital trajectories (Tang & Wang,
2025).
5.3. Balancing corporate strategy and business unit adaptation
Our findings underscore the ongoing negotiations between corporate
digital transformation strategy and business unit-level execution and
their differentiated market opportunities. The corporate team at SweX
initially promoted standardized, cross-unit integration and centralized
platforms. However, business units, especially those closer to product
development and customer interfaces, struggled to fully align with these
corporate directives.
This reflects the broader challenge of balancing digital exploration
with operational continuity and profitability (Hanelt et al., 2021a;
Hanelt et al., 2021b). While the corporate level aimed for a structured
transformation (Correani et al., 2020), business units implemented more
pragmatic strategies tailored to operational constraints and customer
expectations (Mirabeau & Maguire, 2014). Although centralized trans­
formation practices are often framed as more effective (e.g., Erjavec
et al., 2024), our study suggests that, in the case of SweX, negotiated and
context-sensitive implementation proved more viable. Thus, digital
transformation unfolded through mutual shaping between corporate
visions and business unit realities. However, even when organizational
structures and strategic alignment began to converge, challenges per­
sisted around the timing and sequencing of digital initiatives.
5.4. Navigating temporal tensions in digital transformation
In addition to structural and strategic complexities, our study reveals
the role of temporal tensions in shaping the uneven evolution of digital
transformation. Both business units implemented connected products
early but experienced markedly different levels of customer uptake
(Andreasson et al., 2024). One unit, for example, found that only 1 % of
its customers used new features despite their availability, highlighting
the tension and misalignment between technological and market read­
iness (Björkdahl, 2020).
This temporal mismatch stems from two issues. First, business units
may have overestimated customers’ readiness or motivation to adopt
digital offerings (Meuter et al., 2003). Second, early technical deploy­
ment often preceded investment in customer segmentation, education,
and engagement (Ferreira et al., 2019; Loonam et al., 2018). As a result,
SweX faced uncertainty about when to commercialize and how to
evaluate success despite various levels of customer maturity.
These findings reflect temporal tensions, as defined by Slawinski and
Bansal (2015), that is, difficulties in aligning long-term transformation
goals with short-term operational demands and diverse customer
reqirements. Rather than planning failures, these tensions reveal the
need for organizational capabilities in pacing, sequencing, and syn­
chronizing digital initiatives and aligning them with emerging customer
demand (Langley et al., 2013; Reinecke & Ansari, 2015).
5.5. Challenge of monetizing digital innovation
The organizational tensions not only affected internal pacing but also
had tangible consequences for how, and whether, digital innovations
could be monetized. A critical insight from our study is that, while
integrating digital technologies into products was straightforward,
monetizing these innovations proved to be a more difficult and long-
term challenge. Prior research emphasizes that successful digital trans­
formation requires business model innovation and not just technological
advancement (Björkdahl, 2020; Matt et al., 2015). In addition, intro­
ducing a new business model depends on an accurate assessment of
S.F. Karabag et al. Journal of Business Research 202 (2026) 115796
13

--- PAGE 14 ---
customer readiness. Although SweX embedded connectivity features in
its products, customer uptake remained low, particularly in one of its
business units, reflecting challenges observed in other studies on servi­
tization and recurring revenue models (Frank et al., 2019; Rachinger
et al., 2018).
In this context, a specific dilemma emerged: while digital features
were introduced and supported by centralized corporate initiatives,
there was little strategic shift away from selling products toward
providing services and solutions at the business-unit level (Kohtamäki
et al., 2020). The studied business units remained focused on
manufacturing and selling products, aiming to enhance these products
with digital features rather than replacing them. This illustrates how
multi-business firms may engage in digital transformation while
retaining a product-centric focus (Björkdahl, 2020).
Moreover, the expectation that customers would shift toward
subscription-based digital services was met with resistance, leading to
uncertainty about the financial sustainability of digital transformations.
This reflects the broader finding that business model reconfiguration is
often the most challenging aspect of digital transformation because it
requires fundamental shifts in how value is created, delivered, and
captured (Ceipek et al., 2021).
5.6. Organizational adaptation across units
As digital transformation progressed across phases, SweX’s response
extended beyond structural adjustments. Our findings reveal a third
pattern: organizational adaptation, reflected in evolving practices,
mindsets, and capabilities at both the corporate and business-unit levels.
These adaptations emerged through local experimentation, internal
learning loops, and gradual shifts in how teams collaborated, developed
products, and engaged with customers (Garud et al., 2008; Volberda
et al., 2021).
In the early phase, the adaptation was modest but visible. While the
structures remained fragmented, new digital departments were formed,
and grassroots collaboration began to challenge traditional silos. Busi­
ness units began absorbing new competencies, such as data science and
agile development, despite persistent tensions around authority and
prioritization. This reflected an initial adoption of organizational rou­
tines, even if formal structures lagged behind (Andreasson et al., 2024;
Feldman & Pentland, 2003).
During the consolidation phase, business units actively engaged in
digital strategy execution. Agile methods, early-stage experimentation
with simplified digital features, and increased collaboration across de­
partments became more common, even in traditionally structured units,
such as Business Unit C. These shifts reflect what we call embedded
adaptation—not a top-down change program but an evolving internal
capability to work with uncertainty and complexity (Berente et al.,
2019; Hanelt et al., 2021a; Yeow et al., 2018).
In the acceleration phase, adaptation became more deliberate and
visible. While the role of the corporate level in digital transformation
strategies diminished, Business Unit H tested new pricing models and
ownership concepts, and Business Unit C modified the development
processes to shorten product cycles and pilot customer-centric services.
Managers initiated iterative feedback loops and began to institutionalize
cross-unit learning. Although the results varied, these adaptations hel­
ped steer the business units toward a more cohesive, albeit still evolving,
digital capability (Hanelt et al., 2021a).
These findings contribute to the literature on digital transformation
by showing that organizational adaptation is not a one-off adjustment
but an iterative, path-dependent, and embedded process. In multi-
business firms, such adaptation does not occur uniformly; it unfolds
through a mosaic of local responses, shared learning, and progressive
realignment over time. As such, adaptation is not only a response to
structural misalignment, but also an emerging mechanism for sustaining
transformation under conditions of uncertainty and tension (Andreasson
et al., 2024; Berente et al., 2019; Garud et al., 2008; Volberda et al.,
2021).
Taken together, these findings demonstrate that digital trans­
formation in multi-business firms is neither centrally dictated nor fully
emergent (Andreasson et al., 2024; Mirabeau & Maguire, 2014). Rather,
it is recursively shaped by the interplay among various tensions, ad­
justments, and adaptations across levels and over time. This perspective
calls for moving beyond stage gate models of transformation and
recognizing the temporal, organizational, and strategic complexities of
change in distributed corporate structures.
6. Conclusion
This study explores how digital transformation evolves in a multi-
business manufacturing firm and the patterns that characterize its dy­
namics across organizational levels. By tracing the longitudinal trans­
formation of SweX and two of its business units, we show that (a) digital
transformation is not a linear or uniformly executed strategy but rather
an evolving, recursive process of experimentation, consolidation, and
acceleration characterized by multiple patterns; (b) temporary tensions
between corporate-level direction and business unit execution; (c)
continuous monetization tension; (d) structural adjustments in response
to coordination challenges; and (e) organizational adaptation through
localized experimentation and learning. These patterns unfolded un­
evenly across units and time periods, reflecting how transformation is
shapedby shiftingorganizational priorities, digital maturity,and market
responses. Rather than advocating for a single best practice, the findings
call for a more dynamic and responsive approach—one that balances
overarching direction with local experimentation, allows for differen­
tiated speeds of transformation across business units, and supports
ongoing recalibration of strategy and structure at multiple levels over
time.
6.1. Contributions to digital transformation research
This study contributes to the digital transformation literature in
several ways. First, it offers a longitudinal, process-oriented perspective
on digital transformation within a multi-business manufacturing firm,
an empirical setting that remains underexplored in existing research. By
tracing the progression of digital transformation across three distinct
phases—experimentation, consolidation, and acceleration—and across
organizational levels, this study responds to calls for more dynamic
accounts of transformation in complex firms (e.g., Chanias et al., 2019;
Cloutier & Langley, 2020). This contribution is particularly relevant for
understanding how transformation is shaped by recursive dynamics
between corporate control, business unit-level adaptation, and coordi­
nation challenges that vary across different phases.
Second, this study highlights the uneven realization of digital
transformation across business units, even when operating under the
same corporate umbrella. While prior research often focuses on success
stories (e.g., Warner & Wäger, 2019), our case offers a dynamic picture
of both progress and resistance, showing how some business units may
accelerate transformation while others stall or revert. This reinforces the
importance of examining intra-organizational variation in how trans­
formation is initiated, adapted, and received across decentralized
structures.
Third, this study contributes to research on the structural dynamics
of organizations in transformation contexts (e.g., Hanelt et al., 2021a;
Mustafa et al., 2022). We demonstrate how a firm navigates centrali­
zation and decentralization by iteratively adjusting its structures in
response to shifting priorities, tensions, and market maturity levels.
These insights complement debates on structural ambidexterity by
highlighting that successful transformation does not result from a one-
off reorganization but from ongoing structural responsiveness.
Fourth, this study introduces organizational adaptation as a distinct
process dimension that unfolds alongside structural adjustments. This
contribution builds on research that conceptualizes adaptation as an
S.F. Karabag et al. Journal of Business Research 202 (2026) 115796
14

--- PAGE 15 ---
embedded, processual response to internal tensions and environmental
uncertainty (Andreasson et al., 2024; Feldman & Pentland, 2003; Yeow
et al., 2018). We demonstrate how firms adapt through iterative
experimentation, capability development, and intra-organizational
learning loops. These adaptations are not limited to formal structures.
They also require modified routines, coordination practices, and
collaborative behaviors. We highlight adaptation as an emergent capa­
bility that enables firms to navigate digital transformation under con­
ditions of uncertainty and strategic ambiguity.
Finally, we underscore the role of temporal tensions and timing in
digital transformation areas, which are often overlooked in the strategy
literature. Our findings indicate that a misalignment between techno­
logical readiness, market adoption, and organizational pacing can
impede progress in transformation. This adds to process-based per­
spectives by highlighting the importance of timing and sequencing as a
distinct organizational capability.
6.2. Managerial implications
This study offers a range of implications for managers steering digital
transformation in multi-business firms. First, digital transformation is
not a one-size-fits-all initiative. Managers need to recognize that trans­
formation may unfold unevenly across business units because of differ­
ences in legacy systems, customer readiness, and internal capabilities.
This calls for a flexible approach that balances centralized direction with
decentralized experimentation.
Second, while strategic digital transformation often originates at the
corporate level, its realization depends heavily on business unit align­
ment. Our findings show that tensions arise when corporate strategies
are pushed without adequate consideration of local constraints and
differentiated market conditions. Therefore, managers should foster
stronger dialogue and co-development mechanisms between corporate
and business unit actors to ensure buy-in, adaptability, and contextual
relevance.
Third, aligning digital products with new business models is crucial
yet challenging at the business-unit level. Even when digital features are
embedded in products, monetization may lag behind product integra­
tion if customers are not ready to use or pay for digital services. This
shows the need to invest not only in technology and product develop­
ment but also in customer onboarding, value communication, and
pricing strategies aligned with customer expectations and usage
patterns.
Fourth, transformation success requires more than organizational
design; it also depends on building adaptive routines and capabilities
across units. Our findings suggest that local experimentation, cross-unit
learning, and iterative coordination are crucial for sustaining mo­
mentum during transformation. Therefore, organizations need safe
spaces for experimentation and support of capability development at
multiple levels, and encouragement of lateral exchange of experiences
across units.
Fifth, timing matters. The findings reveal that launching digital of­
ferings too early, before customers are ready or internal structures can
support them, can undermine adoption, and create internal uncertainty
and delays. Managers must develop timing and pacing capabilities to
sequence digital initiatives in ways that align technological readiness
with organizational maturity and market pull.
Finally, organizational structures must be responsive and open to
iterative change. Rather than assuming that one reorganization will
suffice, firms should anticipate the need for ongoing structural adjust­
ments as new tensions arise, and their capabilities evolve. Hybrid
structures that combine centralized guidance with local autonomy may
offer a productive balance, particularly in multi-business manufacturing
firms.
While these findings offer practical guidance, they must be inter­
preted in light of certain methodological and contextual limitations,
which we address next.
6.3. Limitations and directions for future research
First, this study is based on a multi-business manufacturing firm with
embedded units of analysis. Rather than viewing this as a limitation, we
see it as a deliberate design choice that enabled us to capture the depth,
complexity, and temporal unfolding of digital transformation within a
specific organizational context. However, certain contextual factors,
such as the firm’s innovation culture, internal resource access, and
relatively stable leadership, may have shaped the transformation pro­
cess in ways that are not fully representative of other firms or industries.
Future research could investigate the extent to which the recursive
patterns, coordination challenges, and adaptation processes identified in
our study apply across different organizational settings and sectors.
Second, although we triangulated the interviews using observations
and documents, potential biases remain. These include memory prob­
lems in retrospective accounts, the influence of interviewees’ evolving
roles over time, and the limited availability of historical records. While
we mitigated some of these limitations through multiple rounds of data
collection and respondent validation, future research could benefit from
the real-time observation of transformation efforts.
Third, although SweX operates globally, this study focused on the
corporate andSwedish business unitlevels,where digital transformation
strategy formation and structural adjustments were most actively initi­
ated. While the business units distribute their offerings internationally,
product and business model innovation efforts remain centralized, with
limited local adaptation. Future research could examine how global
subsidiaries interpret or adapt to centrally developed strategies,
particularly in markets with divergent institutional or customer
conditions.
Fourth, our analysis focused primarily on internal actors: corporate
leaders, middle managers, and digital development teams. While we
captured managerial perceptions of customer response and ecosystem
dynamics, future studies could extend this work by incorporating the
perspectives of customers, platform partners, or suppliers. Doing so
would provide deeper insight into how external readiness, expectations,
and collaboration shape tensions, adjustments, and adaptations.
Finally, while this study focused on the implementation and scaling
of digital transformation efforts, future work could explore the longer-
term institutionalization or abandonment of digital initiatives. Future
studies might also investigate how temporary initiatives become
routinized, abandoned, or leveraged, offering insights into the durability
and long-term impact of digital transformation in industrial firms.
Declaration of Generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the
writing process
During the preparation of this work, we used Copilot to improve the
readability and language of individual sentences and paragraphs. After
using this tool, we reviewed and edited the content as needed and take
full responsibility for the content of the published article.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Solmaz FilizKarabag: Writing –review & editing,Writing –original
draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Resources, Project admin­
istration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal
analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Johan Simonsson: Writing
– review & editing, Validation, Data curation. Christian Berggren:
Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Validation,
Conceptualization. Martin Andreasson: Writing – original draft,
Methodology, Formal analysis. Robin Eriksson: Writing – review &
editing.
Declaration of competing interests
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal
S.F. Karabag et al. Journal of Business Research 202 (2026) 115796
15

--- PAGE 16 ---
relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests:
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relation­
ships which may be considered as potential competing interests: Solmaz
Filiz Karabag reports financial support provided by Vinnova – Sweden’s
Innovation Agency. Johan Simonsson reports financal support provided
by his industrial employer during his PhD education. Christian Berggren
reports financial support provided by Vinnova – Sweden’s Innovation
Agency. Martin Andreasson reports financial support provided by Vin­
nova – Sweden’s Innovation Agency. Robin Eriksson reports financial
support provided by Vinnova – Sweden’s Innovation Agency.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Vinnova – Sweden’s Innovation Agency
(Grant numbers: 2022-00301 and 2024-03735; Grant recipient: Solmaz
Filiz Karabag).
The idea for this paper was first discussed during the R&D Man­
agement Conference in Glasgow and the ScaIEM Conference at KTH
Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm, and the IEM Division’s
Advance Seminar at Uppsala University, Uppsala. We are grateful for
insightful comments on earlier versions of this manuscript from Fabio
Gama (Halmstad University), Ksenia Onufrey (Chalmers University of
Technology), Thomas Magnusson, Viktor Werner, Karin Wigger, Anna
Yström, Ulf Melin, and Andrea Fried (Linköping University), as well as
Miia Martinsuo (University of Turku) and members of the IEM Division
at Uppsala University. We sincerely thank the Senior Editor, Professor
Mariano L. M. Heyden, and the anonymous reviewers for their
constructive, developmental feedback, which greatly improved the
clarity, and process-oriented perspective of this paper.
Appendix
Table A1. Overview of interviewees and data collection rounds.
Position at the first
interview
Round 1
(Aug 2019
– June
2020)
Round 2
(April–June
2021, online)
Round 3
(Sept–Nov
2021, online)
Round 4
(Sept–Oct 2022 &
Mar–Apr 2023,
online)
Complementary
Interviews
(2022–2024)
Position
(Dec 2024)
Organization
(Dec 2024)
Corporate Level ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​
VP Applied Digital
Innovation
19 Sep, 64
min
10 May, 63 min ​ ​ 30 May 2025, 45 min Vice President of IT SweX
VP Accelerated
Innovation &
Venturing
16 Sep, 61
min
​ ​ ​ ​ Head of Global
Product Lifecycle
Management
External
(International)
Software architect
engineer
​ ​ 17 Oct, 65
min
30 Mar, 57 min 13 Sep 2024, 63 min Digital Solutions Team
Leader
BU H
Business Unit H (BU H) ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​
VP Sales and Services 16 Sep, 45
min
5 May, 43 min+
​ ​ ​ President,
International Sales
BU H & A
Director Digital
Solutions & Services
23 Aug, 53
min
28 Apr, 52 min ​ ​ ​ Head of Intelligent
Services
External (Sweden)
Director of Product
Management
​ ​ 22 Nov, 56
min +
​ ​ Director of Product
Manager
BU H
Business Development
and Servitization
Manager
​ ​ 21 Oct, 46
min +
​ ​ Business Development
and Servitization
Manager
BU H
Product Manager ​ ​ 27 Oct, 43
min +
​ ​ Product Manager BU H
Director of Business
Development
​ ​ 8 Nov, 61 min
+
​ ​ Director of Group
Innovation
External (Sweden)
Product Owner #1 ​ ​ ​ 4 Oct, 51 min ​ CEO External (Sweden)
Project Owner I
(Previously worked
at AI Lab)
​ ​ ​ ​ 18 Mar 2024, 85 min
17 Oct 2024,105 min
Project Team Leader BU H
Business Unit C (BU C) ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​
VP Department CS&D 16 Sep, 53
min
28 Apr, 52 min ​ ​ ​ VP Department CS&D BU C
Director Product &
Service Management
6 Dec, 50
min
​ 22 Oct, 52
min
24 Apr, 60 min ​ VP Product & Service
Management
BU C
Services Business
Development
Manager
9 Sep, 81
min
28 Apr, 60 min ​ ​ ​ Manager of
International After-
Sales Division
BU C
VP Department CS&F 23 Aug, 59
min
30 Apr, 57 min ​ ​ ​ Senior VP BU C
VP Aftermarket &
Connectivity
7 Oct, 49
min
20 May, 65 min ​ ​ ​ VP, Digital Solutions BU C
Product Director
Digital Service
6 Dec, 59
min
​ 22 Oct, 63
min
21 Sep, 53 min ​ Director, Digital
Product Services
BU C
Primary Development
Manager
23 Aug, 87
min
29 Apr, 60 min ​ ​ ​ Retired Not applicable
Advance Development ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​
Director of Intelligence ​ 1 Jun, 38 min ​ ​ ​ Manager, Intellectual
Property Strategy
First move to H and
then External (Sweden)
Director of the AI Lab ​ 1 Jun, 62 min 8 Oct, 48 min 6 Apr, 67 min ​ Director of Robotics BU H
(continued on next page)
S.F. Karabag et al. Journal of Business Research 202 (2026) 115796
16

--- PAGE 17 ---
(continued)
Position at the first
interview
Round 1
(Aug 2019
– June
2020)
Round 2
(April–June
2021, online)
Round 3
(Sept–Nov
2021, online)
Round 4
(Sept–Oct 2022 &
Mar–Apr 2023,
online)
Complementary
Interviews
(2022–2024)
Position
(Dec 2024)
Organization
(Dec 2024)
Director of Digital
Business Exploration
​ ​ 7 Oct, 60 min ​ ​ Director of Business
Exploration
First moved to BU C,
then to the Corporate
Level
Product Owner #2 ​ ​ 2 Sep, 68 min ​ ​ Director of AI
Innovation
BU H
Product Owner #3 ​ ​ 12 Oct, 47
min
​ ​ AI Product Leader BU C
+ The interview was conducted in Swedish. ++ Business Unit A of SweX was not part of the study.
Appendix B. Supplementary data
Supplementary Material to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2025.115796.
Data availability
The data that has been used is confidential.
References
Abdallah, C., Denis, J. L., & Langley, A. (2011). Having your cake and eating it too:
Discourses of transcendence and their role in organizational change dynamics.
Journal of Organizational Change Management, 24(3), 333–348.
Andreasson, M., Karabag, S. F., Simonsson, J., & Agarwal, G. (2024). Dynamics of related
and unrelated digital diversification in established firms: Strategies, programs,
process, and outcomes. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 202, Article
123300.
Argyres, N., Rios, L. A., & Silverman, B. S. (2020). Organizational change and the
dynamics of innovation: Formal R&D structure and intrafirm inventor networks.
Strategic Management Journal, 41(11), 2015–2049.
Argyres, N. S., & Silverman, B. S. (2004). R&D, organization structure, and the
development of corporate technological knowledge. Strategic Management Journal,
25(8–9), 929–958.
Aversa, P., & Hueller, F. (2023). Digital diversification. Research Handbook on Digital
Strategy (pp. 18–42). Edward Elgar Publishing.
Bartlett, C. A., & Beamish, P. W. (2018). Transnational Management. Cambridge
University Press.
Berends, H., van Burg, E., & van Raaij, E. M. (2011). Contacts and contracts: Cross-level
network dynamics in the development of an aircraft material. Organization Science,
22(4), 940–960.
Berente, N., Seidel, S., & Safadi, H. (2019). Research commentary—data-driven
computationally intensive theory development. Information Systems Research, 30(1),
50–64.
Björkdahl, J. (2020). Strategies for digitalization in manufacturing firms. California
Management Review, 62(4), 17–36.
Bohnsack, R., Kurtz, H., & Hanelt, A. (2021). Re-examining path dependence in the
digital age: The evolution of connected car business models. Research Policy, 50(9),
Article 104328.
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative
Research in Psychology, 3(2), 77–101.
Burgelman, R. A., Floyd, S. W., Laamanen, T., Mantere, S., Vaara, E., & Whittington, R.
(2018). Strategy processes and practices: Dialogues and intersections. Strategic
Management Journal, 39(3), 531–558. <Go to ISi>://WOS:000424864500001.
Ceipek, R., Hautz, J., De Massis, A., Matzler, K., & Ardito, L. (2021). Digital
transformation through exploratory and exploitative internet of things innovations:
The impact of family management and technological diversification. Journal of
Product Innovation Management, 38(1), 142–165.
Chanias, S., Myers, M. D., & Hess, T. (2019). Digital transformation strategy making in
pre-digital organizations: The case of a financial services provider. Journal of
Strategic Information Systems, 28(1), 17–33. <Go to ISi>://WOS:000463302600003.
Charmaz, K. (2014). Constructing Grounded Theory. Sage.
Cloutier, C., & Langley, A. (2020). What makes a process theoretical contribution?
Organization Theory, 1(1), Article 2631787720902473.
Corbin, J., & Strauss, A. (2014). Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Procedures
for Developing Grounded Theory. Sage Publications.
Correani, A., De Massis, A., Frattini, F., Petruzzelli, A. M., & Natalicchio, A. (2020).
Implementing a digital strategy: Learning from the experience of three digital
transformation projects. California Management Review, 62(4), 37–56.
Dhall, B., & Kanungo, S. (2023). Success In Digital Transformation: When To Call ‘Time
Out’. Forbes.com. https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbesbooksauthors/2023/12/11/
success-in-digital-transformation-when-to-call-time-out/?utm_source=chatgpt.com.
Erjavec, J., Indihar Štemberger, M., & Jaklič, J. (2024). How to develop organizational
forms for a successful digital transformation? Findings from two case studies. Journal
of the Knowledge Economy, 15(2), 9576–9596.
Feldman, M. S., & Pentland, B. T. (2003). Reconceptualizing organizational routines as a
source of flexibility and change. Administrative Science Quarterly, 48(1), 94–118.
Fernandez-Vidal, J., Gonzalez, R., Gasco, J., & Llopis, J. (2022). Digitalization and
corporate transformation: The case of European oil & gas firms. Technological
Forecasting and Social Change, 174, Article 121293.
Ferreira, J. J., Fernandes, C. I., & Ferreira, F. A. (2019). To be or not to be digital, that is
the question: Firm innovation and performance. Journal of Business Research, 101,
583–590.
Forkmann, S., Ramos, C., Henneberg, S. C., & Naudé, P. (2017). Understanding the
service infusion process as a business model reconfiguration. Industrial Marketing
Management, 60, 151–166.
Frank, A. G., Mendes, G. H., Ayala, N. F., & Ghezzi, A. (2019). Servitization and Industry
4.0 convergence in the digital transformation of product firms: A business model
innovation perspective. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 141, 341–351.
Garud, R., Jain, S., & Tuertscher, P. (2008). Incomplete by design and designing for
incompleteness. Organization Studies, 29(3), 351–371.
Garud, R., Jarzabkowski, P., Langley, A., Tsoukas, H., Van de Ven, A., & Lê, J. (2020).
Process research methods: A conversation among leading scholars. In Advancing
Methodological Thought and Practice (pp. 117–132). Emerald Publishing Limited.
Ghosh, S., Hughes, M., Hodgkinson, I., & Hughes, P. (2022). Digital transformation of
industrial businesses: A dynamic capability approach. Technovation, 113, Article
102414.
Gibbs, G. R. (2018). Analyzing Qualitative Data. Sage Publications.
Goyes, D. R., & Sandberg, S. (2025). Trust, nuance, and care: Advantages and challenges
of repeat qualitative interviews. Qualitative Research, 25(2), 330–349.
Granqvist, N., & Gustafsson, R. (2016). Temporal institutional work. Academy of
Management Journal, 59(3), 1009–1035.
Greve, H. R. (2003). Why are there so many multiunit organizations? Strategic
Organization, 1(1), 109–115.
Hanelt, A., Bohnsack, R., Marz, D., & Antunes Marante, C. (2021). A systematic review of
the literature on digital transformation: Insights and implications for strategy and
organizational change. Journal of Management Studies, 58(5), 1159–1197.
Hanelt, A., Firk, S., Hildebrandt, B., & Kolbe, L. M. (2021). Digital M&A, digital
innovation, and firm performance: An empirical investigation. European Journal of
Information Systems, 30(1), 3–26.
Hermanowicz, J. C. (2016). Longitudinal qualitative research. In Handbook of the Life
Course (Volume II, pp. 491–513). Springer.
Herrmann, M., Boehme, P., Mondritzki, T., Ehlers, J. P., Kavadias, S., & Truebel, H.
(2018). Digital transformation and disruption of the health care sector: internet-
based observational study. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 20(3), Article e104.
https://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.9498
Hess, T., Matt, C., Benlian, A., & Wiesböck, F. (2016). Options for formulating a digital
transformation strategy. MIS Quarterly Executive, 15(2), 123–139.
S.F. Karabag et al. Journal of Business Research 202 (2026) 115796
17

--- PAGE 18 ---
Hinings, B., Gegenhuber, T., & Greenwood, R. (2018). Digital innovation and
transformation: An institutional perspective. Information and Organization, 28(1),
52–61.
Holton, J. A. (2007). The coding process and its challenges. The Sage Handbook of
Grounded Theory, 3, 265–289.
Imran, F., Shahzad, K., Butt, A., & Kantola, J. (2021). Digital transformation of industrial
organizations: Toward an integrated framework. Journal of Change Management, 21
(4), 451–479.
Jia, Y., Su, J., Cui, L., Wu, L., & Tan, K. H. (2023). Platform business model innovation in
the digitalization era: A “driver-process-result” perspective. Journal of Business
Research, 160, Article 113818.
Kane, G. C., Palmer, D., Phillips, A. N., Kiron, D., & Buckley, N. (2015). Strategy, not
technology, drives digital transformation. Mit Sloan Management Review, 2015, 3–25.
https://sloanreview.mit.edu/projects/strategy-drives-digital-transformation/.
Karabag, S. F. (2019). Factors impacting firm failure and technological development: A
study of three emerging-economy firms. Journal of Business Research, 98, 462–474.
Karabag, S. F., & Berggren, C. (2023). Dynamics of catching up: exploring national,
sectoral, and ownership influences in two emerging economy firms. Journal of
Management & Organization Studies, 8(2), 121–176.
Kohnke, O., Nieland, T., Straatmann, T., & Mueller, K. (2023). How do management
factors influence digital adoption in the case of a large-scale digital transformation
project–a process perspective. Journal of Management & Organization, 1–21.
Kohtamäki, M., Parida, V., Patel, P. C., & Gebauer, H. (2020). The relationship between
digitalization and servitization: The role of servitization in capturing the financial
potential of digitalization. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 151, Article
119804.
Langley, A. (1999). Strategies for theorizing from process data. Academy of Management
Review, 24(4), 691–710.
Langley, A. (2009). Studying processes in and around organizations. The Sage handbook
of Organizational Research Methods, 409, 429.
Langley, A., Smallman, C., Tsoukas, H., & Van de Ven, A. H. (2013). Process studies of
change in organization and management: Unveiling temporality, activity, and flow.
Academy of Management Journal, 56(1), 1–13.
Leiting, A.-K., De Cuyper, L., & Kauffmann, C. (2022). The internet of things and the case
of Bosch: Changing business models while staying true to yourself. Technovation,
118, Article 102497.
Lerch, C., & Gotsch, M. (2015). Digitalized product-service systems in manufacturing
firms: A case study analysis. Research-Technology Management, 58(5), 45–52.
Lerman, M. P., Mmbaga, N., & Smith, A. (2022). Tracing ideas from Langley (1999):
Exemplars, adaptations, considerations, and overlooked. Organizational Research
Methods, 25(2), 285–307.
Lincoln, Y. S., & Guba, E. G. (1985). Naturalistic Inquiry. SAGE Publications Inc.
Loonam, J., Eaves, S., Kumar, V., & Parry, G. (2018). Towards digital transformation:
Lessons learned from traditional organizations. Strategic Change, 27(2), 101–109.
Lopez, C., Pizzo, A. D., Gupta, K., Kennedy, H., & Funk, D. C. (2021). Corporate growth
strategies in an era of digitalization: A network analysis of the national basketball
association’s 2K league sponsors. Journal of Business Research, 133, 208–217.
Matt, C., Hess, T., & Benlian, A. (2015). Digital transformation strategies. Business &
Information Systems Engineering, 57(5), 339–343.
Menz, M., Kunisch, S., Birkinshaw, J., Collis, D. J., Foss, N. J., Hoskisson, R. E., &
Prescott, J. E. (2021). Corporate strategy and the theory of the firm in the digital age.
Journal of Management Studies, 58(7), 1695–1720.
Merkus, S., Willems, T., & Veenswijk, M. (2019). Strategy implementation as
performative practice: reshaping organization into alignment with strategy.
Organization Management Journal, 16(3), 140–155.
Meuter, M. L., Ostrom, A. L., Bitner, M. J., & Roundtree, R. (2003). The influence of
technology anxiety on consumer use and experiences with self-service technologies.
Journal of Business Research, 56(11), 899–906.
Mintzberg, H., & McHugh, A. (1985). Strategy formation in an adhocracy. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 160–197.
Mirabeau, L., & Maguire, S. (2014). From autonomous strategic behavior to emergent
strategy. Strategic Management Journal, 35(8), 1202–1229.
Mustafa, G., Solli-Sæther, H., Bodolica, V., Håvold, J. I., & Ilyas, A. (2022). Digitalization
trends and organizational structure: Bureaucracy, ambidexterity or post-
bureaucracy? Eurasian Business Review, 12(4), 671–694.
Müller, J. M., Buliga, O., & Voigt;, K.-I. (2018). Fortune favors the prepared: How SMEs
approach business model innovations in Industry 4.0. Technological Forecasting and
Social Change, 132, 2–17.
Nowell, L. S., Norris, J. M., White, D. E., & Moules, N. J. (2017). Thematic analysis:
Striving to meet the trustworthiness criteria. International Journal of Qualitative
Methods, 16(1), 1609406917733847.
Nylén, D., & Holmström, J. (2015). Digital innovation strategy: A framework for
diagnosing and improving digital product and service innovation. Business Horizons,
58(1), 57–67.
Oludapo, S., Carroll, N., & Helfert, M. (2024). Why do so many digital transformations
fail? a bibliometric analysis and future research agenda. Journal of Business Research,
174, Article 114528.
Oroh, A. N. H. (2021). Does diversification strategy play an eminent role in the current
turbulence of digital economy: A strategic approach. International Journal of
Industrial Management, 12(1), 378–388.
Paroutis, S., & Pettigrew, A. (2007). Strategizing in the multi-business firm: Strategy
teams at multiple levels and over time. Human Relations, 60(1), 99–135.
Pizzo, A. D., Kunkel, T., Jones, G. J., Baker, B. J., & Funk, D. C. (2022). The strategic
advantage of mature-stage firms: Digitalization and the diversification of
professional sport into esports. Journal of Business Research, 139, 257–266.
Porter, M. E., & Heppelmann, J. E. (2015). How smart, connected products are
transforming companies. Harvard Business Review, 93(10), 96–114.
Rachinger, M., Rauter, R., Müller, C., Vorraber, W., & Schirgi, E. (2018). Digitalization
and its influence on business model innovation. Journal of Manufacturing Technology
Management, 30(8), 1143–1160.
Rašković, M., Makovec Brenčič, M., & Jaklič, M. (2013). Antecedents and evolution of
the Bartlett and Ghoshal transnational typology. Multinational Business Review, 21(2),
148–173.
Reinecke, J., & Ansari, S. (2015). When times collide: Temporal brokerage at the
intersection of markets and developments. Academy of Management journal, 58(2),
618–648.
Schriber, S., & Löwstedt, J. (2018). Managing asset orchestration: A processual approach
to adapting to dynamic environments. Journal of Business Research, 90, 307–317.
Sebastian, I. M., Ross, J. W., Beath, C., Mocker, M., Moloney, K. G., & Fonstad, N. O.
(2020). How big old companies navigate digital transformation. In Strategic
Information Management (pp. 133–150). Routledge.
Sengul, M., & Yu, T. (2024). A socio-cognitive explanation of organizational grouping
decisions: Multidivisional firms and the formation of their divisions. Journal of
management, 50(5), 1772–1796.
Simonsson, J. (2021). Towards Digital Product-Service Platforms in Manufacturing Firms:
Exploring Organizational and Managerial Aspects [Doctoral dissertation. KTH Royal
Institute of Technology] KTH Royal Institute of Technology. https://kth.diva-portal.
org/smash/get/diva2:1640757/FULLTEXT01.pdf.
Simonsson, J., Magnusson, M., & Johanson, A. (2020). Organizing the Development of
Digital Product-service Platforms. Technology Innovation Management Review, 10(3),
36–47.
Singh, A., Klarner, P., & Hess, T. (2020). How do chief digital officers pursue digital
transformation activities? the role of organization design parameters. Long Range
Planning, 53(3), Article 101890.
Slawinski, N., & Bansal, P. (2015). Short on time: Intertemporal tensions in business
sustainability. Organization Science, 26(2), 531–549.
Smaje, K., LaBerge, L., & Rodney, Z. (2022). Three new mandates for capturing a digital
transformation’s full value. McKinsey.com. https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/
mckinsey-digital/our-insights/three-new-mandates-for-capturing-a-digital-
transformations-full-value.
Smith, P., & Beretta, M. (2021). The gordian knot of practicing digital transformation:
Coping with emergent paradoxes in ambidextrous organizing structures. Journal of
Product Innovation Management, 38(1), 166–191.
Sohl, T., Vroom, G., & McCann, B. T. (2020). Business model diversification and firm
performance: A demand-side perspective. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal, 14(2),
198–223. <Go to ISi>://WOS:000507499400001.
Svahn, F., Mathiassen, L., & Lindgren, R. (2017). Embracing digital innovation in
incumbent firms. Mis Quarterly, 41(1), 239–254.
Synn, A. J., Menson, K. E., Carnethon, M. R., Kalhan, R., Sugar, E. A., Washko, G. R., &
Eakin, M. N. (2023). “It’s a cause I believe in”: Factors motivating participation and
engagement in longitudinal, respiratory-focused research studies. BMC Pulmonary
Medicine, 23(1), 285.
Tabrizi, B., Lam, E., Girard, K., & Irvin, V. (2019). Digital transformation is not about
technology. Harvard Business Review, 97(2), 1–6.
Tang, R. W., & Wang, Y. (2025). The length of historical path and the digitalization speed
of record labels: A path dependence perspective. Journal of Business Research, 189,
Article 115150.
Tisdell, E. J., Merriam, S. B., & Stuckey-Peyrot, H. L. (2025). Qualitative Research: A Guide
to Design and Implementation. John Wiley & Sons.
Verhoef, P. C., Broekhuizen, T., Bart, Y., Bhattacharya, A., Dong, J. Q., Fabian, N., &
Haenlein, M. (2021). Digital transformation: A multidisciplinary reflection and
research agenda. Journal of Business Research, 122, 889–901.
Vial, G. (2019). Understanding digital transformation: A review and a research agenda.
The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 28(2), 118–144.
Volberda, H. W., Khanagha, S., Baden-Fuller, C., Mihalache, O. R., & Birkinshaw, J.
(2021). Strategizing in a digital world: Overcoming cognitive barriers, reconfiguring
routines and introducing new organizational forms. Long Range Planning, 54(5),
Article 102110.
Voss, C. (2010). Case research in operations management. In Researching Operations
Management (pp. 176–209). Routledge.
Wanat, M., Weller, S., Borek, A. J., Newhouse, N., & McNiven, A. (2024). Crafting Tempo
and timeframes in qualitative longitudinal research: Case studies from health
research. International Journal of Qualitative Methods, 23, 16094069241270399.
Warner, K. S., & Wäger, M. (2019). Building dynamic capabilities for digital
transformation: An ongoing process of strategic renewal. Long Range Planning, 52(3),
326–349.
S.F. Karabag et al. Journal of Business Research 202 (2026) 115796
18

--- PAGE 19 ---
Xie, Z. Y., Wang, J., & Miao, L. (2021). Big data and emerging market firms’ innovation
in an open economy: The diversification strategy perspective. Technological
Forecasting and Social Change, 173, Article 121091.
Yeow, A., Soh, C., & Hansen, R. (2018). Aligning with new digital strategy: A dynamic
capabilities approach. The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 27(1), 43–58.
Yin, R. K. (2018). Case Study Research and Applications: Design and Methods (6 ed.). SAGE
Publishing.
Yoo, Y., Boland, R. J., Jr., Lyytinen, K., & Majchrzak, A. (2012). Organizing for
innovation in the digitized world. Organization Science, 23(5), 1398–1408.
Zhang, P., Priem, R., Wang, D., & Li, S. (2023). Strategic rhythms: Insights and research
directions. Journal of Management, 49(6), 1939–1964.
Solmaz Filiz Karabag is a professor at the Department of
Managementand Engineering at LinköpingUniversity,Sweden.
Her research focuses on how businesses, industries, and na­
tional innovation systems transform during periods of eco­
nomic, political, technological, and environmental disruption.
Her recent projects examine how multi-business manufacturing
firms respond to digital disruption, how start-up–corporate
partnerships can be improved to support transformative inno­
vation policy in Sweden, and how firms can design business
models for transformation in complex systems such as energy.
She has studied these dynamics in sectors including energy,
telecommunications, automotive, white goods, manufacturing,
defense, and the event and meeting industry, with empirical
work in Turkey, Brazil, and Sweden.
Johan Simonsson conducts research on digital servitization,
with a specific interest in business model innovation and key
enablers, such as digital product-service platforms. Johan also
held several managerial positions in large industrial firms and
led product and service management, R&D and new solution
innovation based on Artificial Intelligence and Machine
Learning. He is a corporate R&D director at a multinational
corporation, focusing on warehouse systems and digital
innovation.
Christian Berggren is Professor Emeritus in Industrial Man­
agement at Linköping University. His research began with new
work and production methods in the Swedish engineering in­
dustry, particularly the automotive sector, and later expanded
to innovation processes and the organization of global R&D
across industries such as automotive, telecommunications, and
energy. He has studied how these processes shape firms in both
emerging and established economies. He also served as Pro­
gram Director of the KITE research group, a major initiative on
innovation and knowledge integration in globally competitive
firms, funded by the Bank of Sweden Tercentenary Foundation
(Riksbankens Jubileumsfond).
Martin Andreasson completed his Licentiate degree in Indus­
trial Engineering and Management at Linköping University and
is currently working as a Quality Engineer at a consultancy
firm. During his time as a PhD student, he conducted research
on digital transformation and strategic management. His work
focused broadly on transformation in established firms, with
particular attention to how organizations adapt technologies,
business models, and structures in response to digitalization.
Robin Eriksson is the IndX Project Coordinator at Linköping
Science Park. His primary interest lies in exploring how inno­
vation ecosystems can support sustainable transformation
through effective collaboration between startups, established
firms, and academia. He also conducts research on outside-in
innovation and corporate–startup collaboration. Robin has
extensive experience in innovation strategy, ecosystem devel­
opment, and startup-driven innovation processes.
S.F. Karabag et al. Journal of Business Research 202 (2026) 115796
19