--- PAGE 1 ---
Models and Capabilities for Supporting Transformation based on
Enterprise Dimensions with Enterprise Engineering
Shoji Konno and Junichi Iijima
Tokyo Institute of Technology, 2-12-1 Ookayama, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 152-8550, Japan
Keywords: Enterprise Transformation (ET), Enterprise Engineering (EE), Enterprise Capability, Enterprise
Transformation Management (ETM), Enterprise Dimension, Capability Maturity Framework (CMF),
Evaluate/Direct/Monitor (EDM).
Abstract: In response to changes in the environment surrounding an enterprise, many occasional To-Be models like IT
Governance models and IT service management models have been proposed. Recently, digital enterprise
model has attracted attention. The concepts, frameworks, and methodologies dealing with the enterprise have
also changed in response to the movement. While we are leading enterprises to the transformation to the To-
Be model and/or ambitious picture from various perspectives, and it is difficult to promote transformations
that maintain interoperability across them, while viewing the enterprise from various perspectives. It seems
that we are working on the closed framework of individual frameworks and methodologies that deal with the
same enterprise. The purpose of this position paper is to propose the commonly available dimensions related
to the enterprise and ET-CMF. The mechanism will aim to analyze the influence of the change based on those
dimensions collaborate with the concept of enterprise engineering on enterprise transformation as connectors.
The mechanism, currently in development, could be a holistic management framework to support the
transformation by using Enterprise Engineering.
1 INTRODUCTION
In the enterprise transformation (Purchase et al.,
2011), there are so many ideal models, blueprints and
situations (Goerzig and Bauernhansl, 2018). The
ideal pictures are provided by practitioners and
researchers one picture by one change is predicted or
occursonbusinessenvironment,forexample, “digital
enterprise transformation (Weill and Woerner,
2015)” by “business model at digital age”, etc.
Indeed, a variety of approaches were proposed in the
literature concerned with the solution for treating
those transformation. Various ideal frameworks
and/or big pictures are drawn but transformation has
failed (Flyvbjerg and Budzier, 2011) (Kotter, 1995)
(Westerman, 2018) (Davenport and Westerman,
2018) (Bughin et al., 2018). Rather than promoting
change with ad-hoc way blindly, we think that we
should incorporate ideas to support the practice of
enterprise transformation (Labusch, 2017) capability
based on multi-dimensional impact analysis.
On the other hand, under our preliminary
literature survey, existing management frameworks
are addressing one specific perspective of enterprise
management and focusing on one kind of
improvement.Thereis nosignificantadoptioninstate
of the enterprise transformation management systems
based on relationship between architecture and
transformation practices yet. Companies try to
improve and transform in silos according to
individual frameworks and concepts. Evaluate As-Is
in assessments and interviews based on previously
created ideals, and highlight To-Be and Ambition.
Close to the frameworks and concepts used at that
time, it seems that the assessment and subsequent
plans have been successfully done. However, isn't
there a situation where the enterprise transformation
that should be achieved does not progress because the
enterprise's interoperability with other related things
is lacking or not? Even if individual frameworks have
formed completed forms, I thought that frameworks
that can be transformed and transformation operation
platforms that embody them would be necessary
while maintaining their interoperability.
The goal of this work is, therefore, to propose a
holistic management framework to support the
transformation based on enterprise dimensions by
using enterprise engineering (EE) (Dietz and
Hoogervorst, 2017) thinking-frame. All the
Konno, S. and Iijima, J.
Models and Capabilities for Supporting Transformation based on Enterprise Dimensions with Enterprise Engineering.
DOI: 10.5220/0008350603750382
In Proceedings of the 11th International Joint Conference on Knowledge Discovery, Knowledge Engineering and Knowledge Management (IC3K 2019), pages 375-382
ISBN: 978-989-758-382-7
Copyright c 2019 by SCITEPRESS – Science and Technology Publications, Lda. All rights reserved
375

--- PAGE 2 ---
dimensions, analysis perspectives, impact analysis of
those change practices together support among
adaptable enterprise architecture world and real
transformation world. In our research, Enterprise
dimensions is defined as “A collection of elements
related to enterprise that cannot be reconstructed as a
whole if one is missing”.
This paper is structured as follows: section 2
presents the context of this research alongside the
related work and the problem state. section 3 puts
down background theory, hypothesis and the
objectives. In section 4, we describe the models we
propose for supporting enterprise transformation
based on enterprise engineering. Lastly, section 5
includes the conclusions and some reasoning about
our work.
2 RESEARCH CONTEXTS
2.1 Current State of Enterprise
In a nutshell, enterprise is reforming towards digital
transformation. We can find five major states of the
transformation that we found out through paper
research.
 Management scope is shifted from IT to digital
(business technology)
 Management perspective is shifted from IT
organization to customer
 Focus point is shifted from solo Function to
extended enterprise
 Strategy scope is shifted from IT strategy to
digital strategy
 There are so many blueprints for the
transformation
In these cases, enterprise has faced major issues
described below.
 Nobodyknows right direction for To-Be blueprint,
 No right steps for transformations,
 There are so many tools and methods for
supporting the transformation,
 There are different perspectives and dimensions
for describing the transformation,
 Thereisnounified waytodesignand manageeach
blueprint and the transformation,
As the state of enterprise transformation project,
we can summary the target for transformation
management is complicated and mysterious. It is
difficult to control and lead enterprise transformation
with fully orchestrating each activity. Now, many
enterprises are applying existing frameworks to
siloed and/or specific enterprise elements, separated
by architecture, process, model, capability, HR, etc.
Around enterprise transformation projects, we cannot
be done without considering various things, which
requires a lot of time and effort. We think there are no
inter-solution, inter-framework and/or inter-
operability for managing enterprise transformation.
2.2 Related Research Activities
EAM (Enterprise Architecture Management) has the
holistic perspective of enterprise architecture
management (Labusch, 2017). It is a framework for
successful implementation of ETM, and it is effective
for capturing activities to be implemented. From a
program and project management perspective, ETM
sees the following as a summary of how to proceed
with change in enterprise. ACET (Architectural
Coordination of Enterprise Transformation) (Proper
et al., 2017) (de Kinderen, 2017) is one of the
practices to coordinate enterprise transformation.
Adaptive Enterprise Architecture (Korhonen et
al., 2016) has four perspectives derived fromthe need
for and underpinnings of a reconceptualization of
enterprise architecture from the enterprise ecological
adaptation (i.e. adaptive enterprise) point of view. It
is considered to be the latest among the existing EA
forms. At the beginning of the history of enterprise
model, the model formed like a pyramid separated
with several layers, for example infrastructure layer,
technology layer, data layer, information layer,
business process layer.
(Korhonen, 2018) has proposed “enterprise
transformation capability”. The proposal is to
associate the CIO's capability with the enterprise’s
capability in transformation. The CIO's capability
mainly focuses on skill dimension. This model has
lined up the patterns of capabilities that organizations
and individuals should have during enterprise
transformation. There is no mention of the capability
maturity framework model that we propose.
2.3 Problem Statement
At the research area of enterprise modelling, the
formation of the capturing the enterprise has
influenced by the change of business environments.
For example, at the digital age the form of enterprise
has shift from traditional pyramid style to networked
ecosystem style. At the scene, several research
activities have proposed each sophisticated and
specific framework for representing the structure of
ideal enterprise structure.
Those frameworks mentioned above has hard
barriers between each thinking methodology. We are
thinking the combination those method and theories
KEOD 2019 - 11th International Conference on Knowledge Engineering and Ontology Development
376

--- PAGE 3 ---
at the management scene. At the management
activities of those transformation, we must clarify the
mechanism that how to influence the activities for the
transformation to enterprise model at each
transformation scenario. It is important to connect
various frameworks and theory about enterprise
through enterprise dimensions (Bernus et al., 2012)
for supporting the transformation.
3 BACKGROUND CONCEPTS
ANDASSUMPTIONS
3.1 Background Concepts
Enterprise Transformation Management.
According to (Purchase, 2011), enterprise
transformation concerns change, not just routine
change but fundamental change that substantially
alters an organization’s relationships with one or
more key constituencies, e.g., customers, employees,
suppliers, and investors. ET management (ETM) is
concerned with the establishment and coordinated
development of EA in order to consistently respond
to business and IT goals, opportunities, and
necessities (Labusch, 2017).
Enterprise Engineering.
Enterprise engineering (Dietz, 2011) (Dietz and
Hoogervorst, 2017) is conceptual thinking
methodology to apply engineering approach to
enterprise architecture management by describing the
model of enterprise, governance model and business
model. Enterprise engineering have the potential for
solve those problems describer in Section 1 between
enterprise model and enterprise transformation
activities on the real business world and/or physical
enterprise. For example, we can use enterprise
engineering concept to clarify the influenced area of
enterprise on ETM activities.
Enterprise Capability.
The definition of “capability” is published by past
research papers and books. In (Wißotzki, 2018), the
definition is focus on “perform a set of coordinated
tasks, utilizing organizational resources, for the
purposes of achieving a particular end result”. In
(Wißotzki, 2015), the types of capability are already
summarized by literature review. Those capabilities
have individual perspective and organization
perspective. In our research activities, the target is
organization perspective. In (Michell, 2011), the
capability is linked with enterprise resources and
processes. In (Teece, 2010), dynamic capabilities are
based on “the skills, procedures, organizational
structures, and decision rules that firms utilize to
create and capture value”. We think that the dynamic
capability will be the core engine in enterprise
transformation management because transformation
is not to mature but to change the company's routine
business processes to other suitable ones.
Dimensions of Enterprise.
According to (Bernus et al., 2012), “Structure”,
“Behaviour” and “Value” are illustrated as the major
dimensions of architecture. Bernus et al. also pointed
out “all of which are interrelated and understanding
these should improve the enterprise”. At (Bernus et
al., 2012), the focus was on how to subdivide the
enterprise model for improvement in the company's
performance. It has not been defined in anticipation
ofrelationships or impacts inline withtransformation
or other elements.
Foundation for Execution and Operating Model.
In (Ross et al., 2006), J.Ross has defined the
foundation for execution model for traditional
enterprise. They say that an organization’s operating
model should determine its enterprise architecture,
which, in turn, should guide the building of its
foundation for execution (i.e., the operating
platform). As with other concepts and frameworks,
the operating model has also changed in response to
changes in the environment surrounding the
enterprise, such as digital transformation (Goerzig
and Bauernhansl, 2018) (Weill and Woerner, 2015).
In this study, although the relationship between EA
and capability is illustrated, but dimensions on
enterprise transformation has not been mentioned. In
(Hafsi and Assar, 2016), Hafsi, M. etc. pointed out
that execution model should be changed align with
causing digital transformation at enterprise.
Enterprise Transformation Lifecycle.
According to (Giachetti, 2016), the enterprise life-
cycle describes the history of the enterprise from the
initial concept of a business in the mind of an
entrepreneur, through a series of phases as the
enterprise grows, until the business venture ends. The
enterprise life-cycle consists of three generals,
distinct stages: development, deployment, and
operation. Enterprise lifecycle is strongly focusing on
“Enterprise System”. Development covers the
engineering phases to create an enterprise system,
deployment is the change management process to
implement the enterprise system, and operation is the
management of the enterprise system and its
continuous improvement. In our work, it is necessary
to form an enterprise transformation lifecycle in
relation to the existing life cycle definitions.
Models and Capabilities for Supporting Transformation based on Enterprise Dimensions with Enterprise Engineering
377

--- PAGE 4 ---
3.2 Assumptions
Based on the preliminary paper research, we define
the following main proposition:
Main Proposition.
Improvements in enterprise capability maturity has a
positive impact ontheoutcomes of all the components
associated with enterprise transformation with less
effort and faster.
Based on above, we formulate the following
hypotheses for conducting our research:
Hypothesis 1 (H1).
There are relationships between enterprise
transformation capabilities and others concerned
with enterprise.
Hypothesis 2 (H2).
There are unified enterprise dimensions and
influencers for enterprise transformation.
Hypothesis 3 (H3).
Capturing the influence between dimensions is what
we are trying to bring about enterprise
transformation to success.
3.3 Our Goal
At the end of this work, we will establish the
framework for supporting platform and solution as a
service (Figure 1). At the scene, the start point of the
solution will be definition the requirements for a
transformation activity (Labusch, 2017) by using
requirements engineering think-frame (Ivarsson and
Gorschek, 2009), etc (Figure 1).
The solution will take next steps for supporting
the enterprise transformation management;
(Step-1) Clarify requirements of the transformation
(Step-2) Co-create expectation tree of the
transformation
(Step-3) Target IT/business capability for the
transformation based on enterprise engineering
think-frame
(Step-4) Visualize the value network
(Step-5) Take an impact analysis
(Step-6) Execute ETM.
We will divide the main goal into the following
three parts: (i) Targeting method for transformation
with enterprise engineering, (ii) Perspectives and
dimensions for ET, and (iii) ET-CMF model. In (i),
we expect to use EE for clarifying the difference
between before transformation and after
transformation. We also expect to see to what extent
the dimensions expressed in other perspectives are
affected. In (ii), we expect to use enterprise
perspectives and dimensions to identify related
perspectives and/or dimensions. For example,
capability maturity framework has practices for
capability improvement. Those practices are related
to some artefacts for the improvement. Other
perspectives and dimensions related to enterprise has
some artefacts. Now we are thinking that some of the
artefacts will be able to connect related perspectives
and dimensions. In(iii), we expect to use enterprise
transformation capability maturity framework model
to lead and support the transformation with low cost
and lightspeed.
Figure 1: Our Goal.
Ultimately, weaimtodesign, developandprovide
a platform for digital twin on enterprise
transformation management realized on the own
framework proposed in this work. This will reduce
costs and labours on achieving various types of
transform from the traditional ETM world to the new
fully digitally ETM world. We think that the core
components of the platform are to have the ability to
connect with change capability, business model,
architecture and so on.
4 ENTERPRISE ENGINEERING
FOR TRANSFORMATION
4.1 EE for Transformation
In this research, we will apply enterprise engineering
think-frame to enterprise transformation
management. Rather than promoting modelling and
governance focused on a single point of view, we
need enterprise engineering theory that can take into
account the hidden interoperability, interdependence,
and impact of change. As a core engine of the
transformation, we will extend EE collaborate with
enterprise transformation capability maturity
framework model to make the transformation more
KEOD 2019 - 11th International Conference on Knowledge Engineering and Ontology Development
378

--- PAGE 5 ---
effective. We propose to support ET at the following
points with EE:
 Govern from single enterprise to virtual
extended enterprise,
 Support for various style of business with
lightspeed,
 Support business innovation rather than control,
 Visualization of business value and information
stream,
 Interoperable modelling and management rather
than siloed and limited.
4.2 Perspectives and Dimensions
As first step, we summarised the candidate of
enterprise transformation dimensions (Figure 2):
Enterprise Model: models related enterprise, like
business models.
Enterprise Capability:
capabilities related enterprise, like IT
capability/business capability.
Enterprise System: systems related enterprise, like
“System of Record/Engagement”.
Enterprise Formation: organic styles of enterprise,
like hierarchy/networked/ecosystem/…
Enterprise Resource: resources of enterprise, like
platform/infrastructure/staff…
Enterprise Architecture: architecture of enterprise,
like traditional/…/adaptive.
Enterprise Execution: capability and competency,
like IT-CMF/IT management competency.
Figure 2: Enterprise Perspectives and Enterprise
Transformation Dimensions.
Based on the preliminary historical literature
review (Kotusev, 2016), we can describe the history
of the transformation in the real business world. We
will extract the characteristics of each representation
for clarifying what dimension is changing by
transform the shape (Rigdon et al., 1989) (Halley and
Bashioum, 2005) (Ferronato, 2007) (De Vries and
Van Rensburg, 2008) (Fritscher and Pigneur, 2011)
(Lazarov et al., 2015) (Korhonen et al., 2016).
According to (Korhonen and Halen, 2017),
traditionally enterprise architecture has focused on
process standardization and integration, not on
continuous adaptation to the changing business,
information, social and technological landscape.
Furthermore, (Haffke et al., 2016) has described
about “changing role of EA and technological
catalysis along different phases of the adaptive loop”.
We define the characteristics of each enterprise
formation byreferring (Chui et al., 2012) (Srivastava,
2015) (Moreira et al., 2018). In (Hay, 2011),
enterprise model patterns have summarized. Those
patterns are focused on data centric descriptions of
enterprise activities by using some predefined parts.
We think this work is not suitable for our research
because there are no specific patterns on enterprise
transformation. In (Gassmann et al., 2013) and
(Fleisch, 2015), business model patterns have
summarized. As you can see the model patterns, wet
think those patterns are depends on the requirements
for enterprise transformation. In (Agostinhoa, 2014)
and (Santa and Nurcan,2016), we can find the
patterns of organization model. We think the
organization model is similar with “Types of
Enterprise Organizational Formation” in this paper.
We will define the dimensions related enterprise
governance based on (DeLone et al., 2018) as
business-IT alignment (BITA) perspective. In the
paper, they described it as stages of governance
model, do not mention dimensions in the context of
transformation among business-it alignment focus
point. In our future study, we will define the details
of those dimensions’ specifications.
In (Kapoor et al., 2015), they described the
difference between SoR (Systems of Record), SoE
(Systems of Engagement) and SoI (Systems of
Insight). Based on the description, we can define the
as enterprise systems innovation dimensions. SoR is
a traditional business support system like an ERP
package for recording the DIK (Data, Information,
Knowledge) of the activities on the enterprise. In next
innovated system world, SoE is the key infrastructure
in a connected world like IoT. SoE has different
system architecture and characteristics between SoR
and SoI. The transition from SoR to SoE will
influence to EA, models, capabilities and so on
related to enterprise transformation will be changed.
SoI is one of cutting-edge architecture based on
analytics function like AI (Artificial Intelligence) and
cognitive computing. SoI must take a collaboration
Models and Capabilities for Supporting Transformation based on Enterprise Dimensions with Enterprise Engineering
379

--- PAGE 6 ---
Figure 3: Overview of Enterprise Transformation Capability Maturity Framework.
Figure 4: Relationship between Ross’s Execution model and our ET-CMF and dimensions.
with SoR and SoE, closely. In the case of transition
fromSoRandSoE,thedirectionofthetransformation
is “Business Value” centric.
We will define the dimensions related enterprise
transformation based on existing several dimensions
and models. From some literature review concerned
with enterprise transformation, there are so many
styles of representation for figuring out the
characteristics of To-Be picture of future enterprise.
We think the dimensions is keyrole among enterprise
transformation management with multi-directions
connected influencers. The influencers will be
derived from several theories, frameworks, existing
dimensions and models referred in this paper.
In Figure 2, “Enterprise Governance” represents
the high-level dimension for decision-making style.
The detailed dimensions will be defined in our future
study. Same as “Enterprise Governance”, we can
define the relationship between each high-level
dimension with specific perspective on enterprise
transformation. From the recognition that there is
confusion of viewpoints, perspectives and
dimensions, we will formulate our enterprise
transformation dimensions.
KEOD 2019 - 11th International Conference on Knowledge Engineering and Ontology Development
380

--- PAGE 7 ---
4.3 ET-CMF
As the concept of IT capability maturity was
introduced by (Ross et al., 1996) (Curley, et al.,
2016). We select IT-CMF as the material to consider
practices for enterprise transformation. IT-CMF is
representing maturity model with two axes, vertical
axis is divided into five levels of the transformation
from initial state to optimizing state and horizontal
axis is divided into four key strategic areas for the
management of IT. The perspective of IT-CMF is
business and IT alignment. By referencing that
framework, we will clarify what is necessary to
consider practices with our dimensions in the future,
based on the relationship between artefacts treated at
each capability and another dimensions. Finally, we
will propose ET-CMF model (Figure 3).
ET-CMF consists of three layers, (i) ET
Governance, (ii) ET Management, and (iii) ET
Operation. ET Governance will be based on It
Governance EDM model. ET Management will be
established based on enterprise dimensions and
related models. Management issues will be changed
flexibly due to the increase or decrease of dimension.
ET Operation will be conducted like a lifecycle
management of enterprise. Those activity will be
“Define”, “Visualize”, “Analyse”, “Optimize” and
“Control” on physical enterprise.
5 CONCLUSIONS
As summary message, we describe the relationship
Ross’s “foundation of execution” (Ross et al., 2006)
and our ET-CMF and dimensions in Figure 4. We
believe that the models described in this paper
promote strategic transformation of complex entities,
such as digital enterprise transformation.
Many companies are focusing digital
transformation at all industries around the world. On
the other hand, many existing issues concerned with
current business model and/or enterprise formation
are still remain. This paper provides overview of
ongoingresearchresultsand plantheremainingsteps.
It aims to enable the framework to be used in state-
of-the-art enterprise change environments.
As future work, we intend to (i) accelerate
literature review on perspectives and dimensions
related to enterprise transformation based on the
related frameworks and models; (ii) propose full
scope of ET-CMF in detail; (iii) examine the
clarifying the relationship on influencing between
architecture world and transformation world by using
common dimensions and influencers for leading the
transformation; and finally, (iv) formalize the
prototype management support tool for the
transformation.
REFERENCES
Agostinhoa, O. L. (2015). Proposal of Organization
Framework Model, using Business Processes and
Hierarchical Patterns to provide Agility and Flexibility
in Competitiveness Environments. In Procedia
Engineering. 131, 401-409.
Bernus, P., Nemes, L., Schmidt, G. (Eds.). (2012).
Handbook on enterprise architecture. Springer Science
& Business Media.
Bughin, J., Catlin, T., Hirt, M., Willmott, P. 2018. Why
digital strategies fail. In McKinsey Quarterly, January.
Chui, M., Manyika, J., Bughin, J., Dobbs, R., Roxburgh, ...,
Westergren, M. (2012). The social economy:
Unlocking value and productivity through social
technologies. In McKinsey Global Institute. 4, 35-58.
Curley, M., Kenneally, J., & Carcary, M. (2016). IT
Capability Maturity Framework (IT-CMF). Van Haren.
Davenport, T. H., Westerman, G. (2018). Why so many
high-profile digital transformations fail. In Harvard
Business Review, 9.
DeLone, W., Migliorati, D., Vaia, G. (2018). Digital IT
governance. In CIOs and the Digital Transformation
(pp. 205-230). Springer, Cham.
Dietz, J. L. G. Enterprise Engineering Manifesto (2011).
Dietz, J. L., Hoogervorst, J. A. (2017). Foundations of
enterprise engineering.
Ferronato, P. (2007). Architecture for Digital Ecosystems,
beyond Service Oriented Architecture (IEEE-DEST
2007).In2007InauguralIEEE-IESDigitalEcoSystems
and Technologies Conference. (pp. 660-665). IEEE.
Fleisch, E., Weinberger, M., & Wortmann, F. (2015).
Business models and the internet of things. In
Interoperability and Open-Source Solutions for the
Internet of Things. (pp. 6-10). Springer, Cham.
Fritscher, B., Pigneur, Y. (2011). Business IT alignment
from business model to enterprise architecture. In
International Conference on Advanced Information
Systems Engineering. pp. 4-15. Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg.
Flyvbjerg, B., Budzier, A. (2011).WhyyourITproject may
be riskier than you think. In Harvard Business Review,
89(9), 23-25.
Gassmann, O., Frankenberger, K., Csik, M. (2013). The St.
Gallen business model navigator. University of St.
Gallen.
Giachetti, R. E. (2016). Design of enterprise systems:
Theory, architecture, and methods. CRC Press.
Goerzig, D., Bauernhansl, T. (2018). Enterprise
architectures for the digital transformation in small and
medium-sized enterprises. In Procedia CIRP, 67, 540-
545.
Haffke, I., Kalgovas, B., Benlian, A. (2016). The Role of
the CIO and the CDO in an Organization’s Digital
Models and Capabilities for Supporting Transformation based on Enterprise Dimensions with Enterprise Engineering
381

--- PAGE 8 ---
Transformation. In Proceedings of the 37th
International Conference on Information Systems
(ICIS), pp. 1-20.
Hafsi, M., Assar, S. (2016). What enterprise architecture
can bring for digital transformation: An exploratory
study. In 2016 IEEE 18th Conference on Business
Informatics (CBI) (Vol. 2, pp. 83-89). IEEE.
Halley, M. R., Bashioum, C. (2005). Enterprise
transformation to a service-oriented architecture:
successful patterns. In IEEE International Conference
on Web Services (ICWS'05). IEEE.
Hay, D. C. (2011). Enterprise Model Patterns: Describing
the World. Technics Publications.
Ivarsson, M., Gorschek, T. (2009). Technology transfer
decision support in requirements engineering research:
a systematic review of REj. In Requirements
engineering, 14(3), 155-175.
Kapoor, S., Mojsilovic, A., Strattner, J. N., Varshney, K. R.
(2015, September). From open data ecosystems to
systems of innovation: A journey to realize the promise
of open data. In Bloomberg Data for Good Exchange
Conference.
de Kinderen, S. (2017). ACET Constructs. In Architectural
Coordination of Enterprise Transformation. pp. 169-
173. Springer, Cham.
Korhonen, J. J., Lapalme, J., McDavid, D., Gill, A. Q.
(2016, August). Adaptive enterprise architecture for the
future: Towards a reconceptualization of EA. In 2016
IEEE 18th Conference on Business Informatics (CBI).
Vol. 1, pp. 272-281. IEEE.
Korhonen, J.J. Halén, M. (2017). Enterprise Architecture
for Digital Transformation. In Business Informatics,
2017 IEEE 19th Conference on, pages 349-358. IEEE.
Korhonen, J. J. (2018). Enterprise transformation
capability for the digital era-Demands for
organizations and CIOs (Doctoral dissertation, Aalto
University).
Kotter, J. P. (1995). Leading change: Why transformation
efforts fail. In Harvard Business Review, 73(2), 59-67.
Kotusev, S. (2016). The history of enterprise architecture:
An evidence-based review. In Journal of Enterprise
Architecture. Volume, 12(1), 29.
Labusch, N. (2017). Information Requirements for
Enterprise Transformation. In Architectural
Coordination of Enterprise Transformation, (pp. 111-
121). Springer, Cham. Flyvbjerg
Lazarov, B., Kirov, G., Zlateva, P., Velev, D. (2015).
Network-Centric Operations for Crisis Management
Due to Natural Disasters. In International Journal of
Innovation, Management and Technology, 6(4), 252.
Michell, V. (2011, July). A focussed approach to business
capability. In First International Symposium on
Business Modelling and Software Design BMSD
Bulgaria. pp105-113.
Moreira, F., Ferreira, M. J., Seruca, I. (2018). Enterprise
4.0–the emerging digital transformed enterprise?. In
Procedia computer science. 138, 525-532.
Proper, H. A., Winter, R., Aier, S., de Kinderen, S. (Eds.).
(2017). Architectural Coordination of Enterprise
Transformation. Springer.
Purchase, V., Parry, G., Valerdi, R., Nightingale, D., Mills,
J. (2011). Enterprise transformation: Why are we
interested, what is it, and what are the challenges? In
Journal of Enterprise Transformation, 1(1), 14-33.
Rigdon, W.B. (1989). Architectures and Standards. In
Information Management Directions: The Integration
Challenge (NIST Special Publication 500-167), E.N.
Fong and A.H. Goldfine (eds.). Gaithersburg, MD:
National InstituteofStandardsand Technology(NIST),
pp. 135-150.
Ross, J. W., Beath, C. M., Goodhue, D. L. (1996). Develop
long-term competitiveness through IT assets. In Sloan
management review. 38(1), 31-42.
Ross, J. W., Weill, P., Robertson, D. (2006). Enterprise
architecture as strategy: Creating a foundation for
business execution. Harvard Business Press.
Santa, M., Nurcan, S. (2016). Learning organization
modelling patterns. In Knowledge Management
Research & Practice. 14(1), 106-125.
Srivastava, A. (2015). Excuse Me, Can You Tell Me the
Way to Become an Enterprise 3.0?
https://us.nttdata.com/en/blog/2015/september/way-to-
become-an-enterprise-3-dot-0
Teece, D. J. (2010). Technological innovation and the
theory of the firm: the role of enterprise-level
knowledge, complementarities, and (dynamic)
capabilities. In Handbook of the Economics of
Innovation. (Vol. 1, pp. 679-730). North-Holland.
De Vries, M., Van Rensburg, A. C. (2008). Enterprise
Architecture-Newbusinessvalueperspectives. In South
African Journal of Industrial Engineering. 19(1), 1-16.
Weill, P., Woerner, S. L. (2015). Thriving in an
increasingly digital ecosystem. In MIT Sloan
Management Review, 56(4), 27.
Westerman, G. (2018). Your Company Doesn't Need a
Digital Strategy. In MIT Sloan Management Review,
59(3), 1-5.
Wißotzki, M. (2015). An exploration ofcapabilityresearch.
In 2015 IEEE 19th InternationalEnterpriseDistributed
Object Computing Conference. (pp. 179-184). IEEE.
Wißotzki, M. (2018). The Notion of Capability in
Literature. In Capability Management in Digital
Enterprises. (pp. 27-39). Springer, Cham.
KEOD 2019 - 11th International Conference on Knowledge Engineering and Ontology Development
382