--- PAGE 1 ---
Mastering the digital transformation through organizational capabilities:
A conceptual framework
Jens Konopik a,⁎, Christoph Jahna
, Tassilo Schustera
, Nadja Hoßbacha
, Alexander Pﬂaumb
a
Fraunhofer Institute for Integrated Circuits IIS, Fraunhofer Center for Applied Research on Supply Chain Services SCS, Nordostpark 84, 90411 Nuremberg, Germany
b
Chair of Supply Chain Management, Otto-Friedrich-University Bamberg, Kapuzinerstr. 16, 96047 Bamberg, Germany
A B S T R A C T A R T I C L E I N F O
Article history:
Received 8 April 2021
Received in revised form 16 November 2021
Accepted 16 November 2021
As digital transformation is changing entire industries, organizations are struggling to keep up with these changes.
Scholars are viewing organizational capabilities as a central mean for organizations to master digital transformation.
Basedonacomprehensiveliteraturereview,thisstudyidentiﬁesabroadsetofrelevantorganizationalcapabilitiesand
introduces a conceptual framework in which organizational capabilities are clustered into seven relevant themes for
managing digital transformation. These capabilities are then embedded in the logic of the dynamic capability theory,
highlighting the development of organizational capabilities throughout the digital transformation process. The results
revealthatadifferentiatedperspectiveonthedigitaltransformationprocessisbeneﬁcialtoaccountforchangingneeds
of organizational capabilities during the transformation process. Just as organizations themselves change during the
process, various capabilities at different time points are needed to support and enable organizations during digital
transformation. The developed conceptual framework gives organizations guidance for the development of organiza-
tional capabilities throughout the digital transformation process.
Keywords:
Organizational capabilities
Digital transformation
Dynamic capabilities
Conceptual framework
1. Introduction
Digital technologies have transformed entire industries and created
challenges for numerous traditional business models (Lansiti & Lakhani,
2014). Established organizations that neglected the transformative power
of digital technologies were dared by innovative digital start-ups, lost
their competitiveness or were driven out of business (Downes & Nunes,
2013; Hess, Matt, Benlian, &Wiesböck,2016).For others,whichhave will-
ingly embraced digital technologies, novel market opportunities have
emerged and so far, unsolved problems have come within reach to be
solved. The far-reaching disruptive power of digital technologies has cre-
ated the mantra that spotting disruptive new technologies and ﬁnding ben-
eﬁcial ways to employ them is imperative for corporate survival. O'Reilly
and Tushman turn to the underlying question of this mantra by asking:
“How do organizations survive in the face of change?” (O'Reilly &
Tushman, 2008, p. 185) and emphasize that organizations can create per-
formance differences by learning and adjusting their existing business
models to a changing (digital) world.
However, digital transformation goes beyond digital technologies
(Henriette, Feki, & Boughzala, 2015) and – as socio-technical systems the-
oryinformsus–affectsemployees,structures,tasksandorganizationalpro-
cedures alike. Therefore digital transformation needs to be understood as a
“holistic socio-technical challenge” (Schnasse, Menzefricke, & Dumitrescu,
2021, p. 160) that has drastic consequences for economies, societies, orga-
nizations, and individuals. This viewpoint suggests that the competitive-
ness of companies does not exclusively depend on integrating the latest
technologies but also depends on how well companies address additional
ﬁelds like the interactions with customers and partners (Loebbecke &
Picot, 2015; Shaikh, Karjaluoto, & Chinje, 2015), the adjustment of organi-
zational routines, and the creation of an appropriate organizational culture
(Goran, LaBerge, & Srinivasan, 2017; Schuchmann & Seufert, 2015).
The dynamic capabilities theory provides a valuable answer to O'Reilly
and Tushman's central question as it argues that the key to succeed in a dis-
ruptive (digital) world is rooted in organizations' abilities to sense changes
in the environment, to seize upcoming opportunities, and to adapt, inte-
grate, and reconﬁgure the current resource base (Helfat et al., 2009;
Teece, 2007; Teece, Pisano, & Shuen, 1997). These abilities have been
named dynamic capabilities by the strategic management literature and
are considered as the central mean for organizations to cope with new dig-
ital realities (Eisenhardt & Martin, 2000; Peteraf, Di Stefano, & Verona,
2013; Teece et al., 1997).
Duetotheirimportance,literaturehascreatedvariousdeﬁnitionsofdy-
namic capabilities (see e.g. Eisenhardt and Martin (2000), Helfat and
Peteraf (2003), Teece et al. (1997), Zollo and Winter (2002)). Central to
all deﬁnitions is that in its highest order, dynamic capabilities can be cate-
gorized as sensing, seizing, and transforming activities (Teece, 2018),
Digital Business 2 (2022) 100019
⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: konopijs@iis.fraunhofer.de (J. Konopik), tassilo.schuster@iis.fraunhofer.de (T. Schuster).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.digbus.2021.100019
2666-9544/© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Digital Business
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/digbus

--- PAGE 2 ---
which refertothe identiﬁcationof technological opportunitiesinthe exter-
nal environment (sensing), the mobilization of a company's own resources
to exploit these opportunities (seizing), and the continuous renewal of the
organizationbyadapting,reconﬁguring,andrenewingthecurrentresource
base(transforming)(Albort-Morant,Leal-Rodríguez,Fernández-Rodríguez,
& Ariza-Montes, 2018). Various empirical studies reveal positive effects of
dynamic capabilities on competitive advantages of organizations, in partic-
ular when confronted with dynamic environments (Døving & Gooderham,
2008; Drnevich & Kriauciunas, 2011; Li & Liu, 2014). As a result, dynamic
capabilitieshavebeenconsideredasausefullenstounderstandandexplain
competitive advantages among ﬁrms engaged in the digital transformation
(Nadkarni & Prügl, 2021; Soluk & Kammerlander, 2021; Vial, 2019). For
instance, Soluk and Kammerlander state that dynamic capabilities can
“faithfully reﬂect and guide ﬁrms' digital transformation processes”
(Soluk and Kammerlander, 2021, p. 6). In this matter, the authors refer to
a stream of research that breaks down the concept of dynamic capabilities
into “hierarchies of capabilities” (Ambrosini, Bowman, & Collier, 2009,
p. 10) with abstract dynamic capabilities at the top and a larger set of orga-
nizational capabilities at the bottom (Ambrosini et al., 2009; Collis, 1994;
Danneels, 2002; Winter, 2003; Zahra, Sapienza, & Davidsson, 2006)
which are crucial for managing digital transformation (Matt, Hess, &
Benlian, 2015; Morakanyane, Grace, & O'Reilly, 2017).1
A large body of
the existing literature identiﬁes necessary organizational capabilities for
digital transformation, like big data analytics capabilities (Hausladen &
Zipf, 2018; Nadkarni & Prügl, 2021), however, without differentiating
what kind of organizational capabilities are needed at which point in
time during the transformative process (e.g. Nadeem, Abedin, Cerpa, and
Chew (2018), Henriette et al. (2015)).
However, recent discussions on digital transformation recognize that
digital transformation is a process consisting of various stages (Nwankpa
& Roumani, 2016; Soluk & Kammerlander, 2021; Zaoui & Souissi, 2020),
and call for a process-oriented perspective (Soluk & Kammerlander,
2021) as existing literature still falls comparably short on examining the
role and development of organizational capabilities in those stages of the
digital transformation process (Forstner, Kamprath, & Röglinger, 2014;
Warner & Wäger, 2019). Notable exceptions are the studies of Fischer,
Gebauer, Gregory, Ren, and Fleisch (2010), Jenkins (2010), and Soluk
and Kammerlander (2021) that investigate the development of capabilities
and their contribution to growth in the capital goods sector, motorsport in-
dustry,andinthecontextoffamily-ownedSMEsrespectively.Thesestudies
implicitlyconnect the digital transformationprocesswith dynamiccapabil-
ities by describing the digital transformation process as a sequence of sens-
ing changes, seizing opportunities and transforming the resource base. In
this matter, Warner and Wäger (2019) describe digital transformation as
aprocessofbuildingdynamiccapabilitiesfortheongoingstrategicrenewal
of organizations. However, these studies indicate a need for a more sophis-
ticated conceptual framework of organizational capabilities by taking dif-
ferent stages of the transformative process into account (Konlechner,
Müller, & Güttel, 2018; Vial, 2019). Referring to this, Schilke et al. outline
thatsigniﬁcantresearchopportunities“tomorecarefullyunpackindividual
stages” (Schilke, Hu and Helfat, 2018, p. 407), along with their sequencing
and potentially reciprocal nature of capabilities exist and that a process-
oriented approach may prove particularly useful for practitioners
attempting to implement such capabilities.
Based on the outlined current state of literature, this study aims to ﬁll
important research gaps by identifying necessary organizational capabili-
ties for digital transformation and exploring the importance of particular
organizationalcapabilitiesfor different phases of the digital transformation
process. To do so, a systematic literature review was conducted and a
process-oriented conceptual framework was developed that segments the
digital transformation processintothreestagesbased on the dynamic capa-
bility theory, thus taking the successive nature of strategic change into ac-
count. This conceptual approach seems reasonable as process-related
empirical evidence on how organizations are digitally transformed and
what organizational capabilities were decisive in each phase of the digital
transformation process is largely missing (Warner & Wäger, 2019) and em-
pirical studies of such a general concept are problematic (Schilke, Hu, &
Helfat, 2018). Building on this differentiated view, this study contributes
to this understanding by revealing a recommended sequence of organiza-
tional capability development as a function of a phase's necessities during
digital transformation.
Thereby, this study can make several contributions. First, it highlights
the importance of organizational capabilities as a function of the digital
transformation process that organizations undergo. Second, it provides a
more sophisticatedanddetailedviewonorganizationalcapabilitiesneeded
to master the digital transformation process. Third, it provides clear guid-
ance for managers and decision makers on how to prioritize the develop-
ment of the necessary organizational capabilities and therefore enriches
the knowledge of organizational development in dynamic environments.
Asaresult,fromapracticalviewpoint,thisstudycanserveasatoolfora
capability development roadmap and provide guidance through descrip-
tion of practical actions required to develop, acquire, or access key capabil-
ities at the right point in time.This way, its focus oncapabilitiescanhelp to
steer strategic leadership efforts (Nadkarni & Prügl, 2021) and strategic
human resource development (Garavan, Shanahan, Carbery, & Watson,
2016) to achieve competitive advantages.
From a theoretical viewpoint, the study adds value by creating a
process-oriented conceptual model that outlines the importance of a
broad set of organizational capabilities according to different phases of
the digital transformation process. Thereby, the study enriches past re-
search on organizational capabilities for digital transformation and the
emergentﬁeldofdigitalcapabilitiesbyincorporatingelementsofthesocial
subsystemoforganizations(digitalleadership,digitalstrategy,digitalorga-
nizational culture) and thus overcomes the current technological focus.
The remainder of the study is structured as follows: First, the concept of
organizational capabilities and their relationship to dynamic capabilities is
introduced. Second, a literature review was carried out to identify existing
categorizations of capabilities for digital transformation. Third, the identi-
ﬁed capabilities were embedded into a model that allows to account for a
capabilitydevelopmentperspective.Fourth,theresultsarepresentedbyde-
scribing the main characteristics of the developed structuring model for or-
ganizational capabilities for digital transformation and its importance
during the digital transformation process by applying dynamic capability
theory (Teece, 2007; Teece, Pisano, & Shuen, 1997). Finally, the ﬁndings
are discussed and implications for a purposeful development of organiza-
tional capabilities in times of digital transformation are provided.
2. Theoretical background
2.1. Dynamic capabilities as a view for generating competitive advantages
The challenges ﬁrms face in the area of digital transformation raise the
question of what causes performance differences among ﬁrms in competi-
tive environments (Schilke et al., 2018). The dynamic capability theory
puts dynamic capabilities in the center of attention. They allow organiza-
tions to systematically generate and modify their organizational capabili-
ties (Zollo & Winter, 1999) to gain long-term competitive advantages
(Cavusgil, Seggie, & Talay, 2007).
Dynamic capabilities allow organizations to “address rapidly changing
environments” (Teece et al., 1997, p. 516), hereby guiding them through
the digital transformation process (Battleson, West, Kim, Ramesh, &
Robinson, 2016; Yoo, Boland, Lyytinen, & Majchrzak, 2012). As shown
by empirical studies, organizations fostering dynamic capabilities “hold
1
In this study, the term „organizational capabilities“is used to describe capabilities that are
comparable to what Teece (2014, p. 330) calls “ordinary capabilities”. Schilke (2014, p. 369)
and Zahra et al. (2006, p. 918) refer to the term “substantive capabilities”. Consistent with
Karimi and Walter (2015), this study argues that organizational capabilities are necessary in
everyday business routines to develop dynamic capabilities. Following Helfat and Peteraf
(2003),thisstudydeﬁnesorganizationalcapabilitiesasthecollectiveskills,abilitiesandexper-
tiseofan organization toperform a coordinated setoftasks,utilizing organizationalresources,
for the purpose of achieving a particular end result.
J. Konopik et al. Digital Business 2 (2022) 100019
2

--- PAGE 3 ---
the potential for a sustained competitive advantage, especially in a turbu-
lent environment” (Breznik & Lahovnik, 2016, p. 182).
2.2. The relationship between dynamic capabilities and organizational
capabilities
HelfatandPeterafdeﬁneorganizationalcapabilitiesas“theabilityofan
organization to perform a coordinated set of tasks, utilizing organizational
resources, for the purpose of achieving a particular end result” (Helfat and
Peteraf, 2003, p. 999). These organizational capabilities are combinations
of the resources that are available, owned, or controlled by the ﬁrm (Amit
&Schoemaker,1993)aswellasroutineslearnedthroughrepeatedpatterns
of behavior (Feldman, 2000; Nelson, 1982; Zollo & Winter, 2002). Organi-
zationalcapabilitiesvaryamongﬁrms,thusallowingsomeﬁrmstoperform
static, dynamic, or creative activities in a more effective manner than their
competitors (Collis, 1994).
Intheacademicliterature,thereisaconsensusthatdynamiccapabilities
arebasedon organizationalcapabilities(Eisenhardt& Martin, 2000; Helfat
et al., 2009; Teece et al., 1997; Winter, 2003; Zollo & Winter, 1999) and
cannot originate from a purely formal learning process (Nayak, Chia, &
Canales, 2020). For instance, Wilden, Gudergan, Nielsen, and Lings
(2013) indicate that dynamic capabilities inﬂuence performance through
speciﬁc organizational capabilities. Moreover, the connection of dynamic
and organizational capabilities is also reﬂected in hierarchical typologies
developed by various scholars with abstract dynamic capabilities at the
top and a larger set of organizational capabilities at the bottom
(Ambrosini et al., 2009; Collis, 1994; Danneels, 2002; Winter, 2003;
Zahra et al., 2006). In this matter, Schilke et al. outline that dynamic capa-
bilities consist of a set of organizational capabilities “that can effect change
intheﬁrm'sexistingresourcebases(andtheassociatedsupportsystemsuch
as the ﬁrm's organizational and governance structure), its ecosystem and
external environment, as well as its strategy” (Schilke, Hu and Helfat,
2018, p. 393).
2.3. Three mechanism of dynamic capabilities
At its highest order, according to Teece (2007, 2014), dynamic capabil-
ities can be structured into three distinct mechanisms: sensing, seizing, and
transforming capabilities. He describes the ﬁrst mechanism, sensing capa-
bilities, as the ability of internalized analytical systems to detect changes,
ininternalorexternalstructures,that couldposethreatsor offeropportuni-
ties for existing or new business models (Teece, 2007).
Based on these insights, sensing capabilities allow the organization to
develop, co-develop, and assess technological opportunities in relationship
to customer needs (Teece, 2014). According to Teece (2018), the sensing
mechanismidentiﬁescustomerswithunmetneedsanddevelopstechnolog-
ical opportunities. The required capabilities are therefore threefold. Before
directing innovation efforts, organizations have to identify target market
segments, customer needs, and they must be able to assess developments
inthebusinessecosystem.Furthermore,organizationshavetoexploitinter-
nal innovations and to direct internal innovation processes. Accordingly,
external sources for innovation must be tapped too, which are suppliers
and complementors, exogenous science, and the engagement of customers
in open innovation. (Teece, 2007, 2018).
Seizing capabilities refer to the ability to mobilize resources, to address
needs and toexploitbusiness opportunitiesin order tocapture value and to
mitigate risks for the own organization. Seizing capabilities give special at-
tention to the value of partnerships, realign the boundaries of the enter-
prise, and integrate these concepts into the business model (Teece, 2007,
2014). Within this mechanism, the organization realigns the business
model by designing value-capturing mechanisms, managing partnerships,
designing cost structures, and selecting the composition of technologies
and features to be “embedded in the product and service” (Teece, 2007,
p. 1329). With the integration of external partners and sources of informa-
tiontheneedfordecisionmakingprotocolsemerges.Organizationshave to
avoid decision errors and anti-cannibalization proclivities while removing
non-value yielding assets and activities. All while recognizing inﬂexion
pointsand complementaries aswell aslearning from mistakes.Also, the or-
ganizationhastodeterminetheboundariesinwhichitisoperating.Thisin-
cludes decisions about the arrangement of alliances to develop capabilities
as well as the management of integration, in- and outsourcing, and the
valueofco-specializationwithinthe value network.Allwhileprotectingin-
tellectual properties and designing an organizationalculturefor innovation
(Teece, 2007, 2014).
The last building block, transforming capabilities, refers to the continu-
ous recombination and reconﬁguration of resources and structures under
changing environments to support the business models (Teece, 2007).
This mechanism highlights that organizations need to continuously renew
their resource base. Via decentralization, decomposition, and co-
specialization,organizationscanstrategicallyﬁtassetswithinthevaluenet-
work,e.g.byembracingopeninnovation.Aneffectivegoverningofinternal
and external resources as well as the management of knowledge allows for
an effective and continuous realignment of resources (Teece, 2007, 2014).
It is widely recognized that the sensing mechanism is followed by the
seizing mechanism, which are both prerequisites for the transforming
mechanism. This sequential order can be understood as a gradual process-
oriented perspective (Teece, 2007). Rooted in the evidence that dynamic
capabilities are a crucial mean for organizations in environments impacted
by digital transformation, this study uses the three mechanisms sensing,
seizing, and transforming (Teece, 2007, 2014) to theorize on the digital
transformation process. Empirical studies (e.g. Breznik, Lahovnik, and
Dimovski (2018), Tallon and Pinsonneault (2011), Ellonen, Janutunen,
and Kuivalainen (2011), Wilhelm, Schlömer, and Maurer (2015)) or the
theoretical works of Yeow, Soh, and Hansen (2018) and Matysiak,
Rugman, and Bausch (2018) indicate that these mechanisms are essential
to explain the development of competitive advantages. Following Warner
and Wäger (2019) who describe digital transformation as a process of
buildingdynamiccapabilitiesfortheongoingstrategicrenewaloforganiza-
tions,thisstudy takes ina gradualprocess-orientedperspective onthe sens-
ing, seizing, and transforming mechanisms and argues that organizations
rely on these mechanisms when coping with digital transformation.
In the following, the methodology of study is described, which com-
prises a comprehensive literature analysis.
3. Methodology
To develop a conceptual framework of organizational capabilities for
digital transformation, a four-step approach was followed. First, a system-
atic literature review was conducted tocollect a broad set oforganizational
capabilities that are relevant for organizations when dealing with digital
transformation. Second, based on aggregated categories, seven selective
themesoforganizationalcapabilitiesfordigitaltransformationwereidenti-
ﬁed. Third, to develop a process-oriented framework, identiﬁed organiza-
tional capabilities were matched with Teece's (2007, 2014) three
mechanisms of sensing, seizing, and transforming. Finally, the relative im-
portance of the mechanisms for each theme was calculated.
3.1. A structured literature review to identify organizational capabilities for
digital transformation
To identify organizational capabilities for digital transformation, a sys-
tematic literature review was performed by following the recommenda-
tions of Cooper (2015) and Fink (2019). The recommended steps are
described in the following.
Time horizon of selection of articles: The year 2010 was set as the starting
point because here, the emergence of digital technologies started the plat-
form disruption of industries and, according to Reis, Amorim, Melão, and
Matos (2018), the vast majority of high quality publications on digital
transformation emerged only after 2010. The year 2020 set the endpoint
to include the latest academic journal publications.
Selectionofdatabases:Inordertoprovideacomprehensiveviewonorga-
nizational capabilities in the interdisciplinary literature on digital
J. Konopik et al. Digital Business 2 (2022) 100019
3

--- PAGE 4 ---
transformation, two well-established online databases were used as search
tools: Web of Science (WoS) and EBSCOhost. WoS is one of the most popu-
lar multidisciplinary databases (Waltman, 2016) and with the large size of
EBSCOhost(Gusenbauer, 2019) the combination of bothdatabases ensures
a sufﬁcient coverage of the topic.
Articleidentiﬁcation:Tocreateareproducibleandtransparentanalysis,a
systematic article selection process was applied. First, keywords were de-
ﬁned as search criteria in online databases. As this study aims to generate
abroadandcomprehensive picture oforganizationalcapabilities fordigital
transformationmoregeneralsearchtermswerechosen.Tobemoreprecise,
the combined search terms “competenc*” or “skill*” or “capabilit*” and
“organization*” in the full-text in both databases were used in order to
ensure the identiﬁcation of all relevant articles.2
Whiletechnologiesareanessentialpartofthemostaccepteddeﬁnitions
for digital transformation, extensive reviews of deﬁnitions for digital trans-
formation reveal the importance of other aspects such as the human factor
and leadership (Gong & Ribiere, 2021; Vial, 2019).
Although this area of digital transformation isn't much focused on in
current discussions (Verina & Titko, 2019), some researchers highlight
the necessity of the human and cultural factors for a successful transforma-
tion(DelRowe,2017;Schwertner,2017).Thisstudy'sviewondigitaltrans-
formation is centered on a fundamental change in thinking and strategy
(Rogers, 2016) which goes beyond functional or technological thinking
(Singh & Hess, 2017). Because of the ambiguity of deﬁnitions for digital
transformationinthe speciﬁedtime horizon,the inclusionofthe term “dig-
ital transformation”, or relating terms, was avoided in order to obtain re-
sults that fall into the area of interest but do not depend on being
classiﬁed as for digital transformation by the authors.
Articlescreening:Thefollowingcriteriawereusedtoevaluatetheresults.
An initial search on the subject revealed that there is a broad set of articles
which only mentions a particular skill or competence or assesses capabili-
ties from an individual's perspective. The study's objective is to provide a
holistic view on capabilities for digital transformation, therefore, as a ﬁrst
inclusion criteria, the identiﬁed articles must have a clear and comprehen-
siveviewonorganizationalcapabilities,aimingatprovidingaholisticover-
view of organizational capabilities. Second, to reach a wide variety of the
academic literature, the results are not limited to a speciﬁc journal ranking
toopen up the possibility totake inmore practicalcontributions tothe sub-
ject,likeconferencepapers.Third,theidentiﬁedorganizationalcapabilities
must address the spectrum of digital transformation. Fourth, the articles
must be written in English language. As a result, the articles must aim to
provide a comprehensive overviewoforganizational capabilitiesfor digital
transformation. After eliminating duplicates, the titles and abstracts of
2992 articles were screened to judge the relevance of the articles regarding
organizational capabilities for digital transformation. In this step, 2814 re-
sultswere excluded.Themainreasonwasthe lackof indicationof thematic
coherence, e.g.no mentioningof capabilitieson an organizational levelbut
ratherrelatingtoindividual-levelcompetences,andnoindicationoftheap-
plication of the concept of organizational capabilities in a digital transfor-
mation setting. Noteworthy, the literature search resulted in a large
amount of resultsrelated tothe medical-ﬁeld, withno connectionto digital
transformation. Consequently these articles were excluded.
As recommended by Wolfswinkel, Furtmueller, and Wilderom (2013),
the results were further augmented through backward and forward search.
This step resulted in the inclusion of 11 further articles that were addition-
ally screened. In a further step, the possibility to link the articles to Teece's
framework was evaluated. In two instances, however, even after extensive
discussions, it was not possible to connect the context to the sensing, seiz-
ing, or transforming mechanism. As a consequence, these results were
also excluded from further analysis. Finally, as recommended by Paré,
Tate, Johnstone, and Kitsiou (2016), the authors assessed the quality of
the four identiﬁed articles that did not run through a double-blind review
process. The quality of these four articles has been considered as satisfac-
tory by all authors, resulting in the inclusion of these articles. In total, 22
articles were included for an in-depth analysis.
Fig. 1 provides a summary of the conducted literature review process
and Table 1 shows the articles included in the literature review.
3.2. Coding of journal articles on organizational capabilities
Inaccordancewiththestudy'sresearchobjectives,theassessmentofthe
identiﬁed articles was twofold. First, organizational capabilities relevant
for digital transformation had to be identiﬁed. Therefore, the articles
were analyzed line by line to detect statements that refer to speciﬁc valu-
able organizational capabilities (open coding). Whenever possible in-vivo
codes (i.e., terms and language used by the authors) or a simple descriptive
term were used when an in-vivo code was not available (Strauss & Corbin,
1998). The identiﬁed capabilities during the open coding phase ranged
from very speciﬁc technology-related (e.g., robot process automation) to
broad and general aspects (e.g., managerial foresight). In a second step,
axial coding was used to examine similarities and differences between the
generated codes. In this axial coding phase similar codes were aggregated
in higher-order codes (categories). For instance, the codes “ensuring IT
and information security” (Lin & Hsia, 2011), “digital security” (Hoberg,
Krcmar,Oswald, & Welz, 2017), and“digital security and security manage-
ment” (Andriole, 2018) were grouped into the higher–order code (cate-
gory) “data security”. Finally, selective coding was used, which has the
goal to integrate different categories that have been developed, elaborated,
and mutually related during axial coding into one cohesive conceptual
framework or theory. As no cohesive conceptual framework exists for digi-
tal transformation, 26 deﬁnitions (see Appendix A - Deﬁnitions) of digital
transformation were analyzed and seven distinct themes were deduced.3
Building on these identiﬁed themes, the categories of organizational capa-
bilities derived from the axial coding were assigned to themes with the-
matic coherence in this phase. For instance, the categories “data
understanding”, “data analytics”, “data security” and “data visualization”
among others were assigned to the theme “data”.
Second, the context of each identiﬁed organizational capability had
been investigated and embedded in the logic of Teece's (2007) dynamic ca-
pabilitytheory.Inthisstep,itwasassessedwhetheracertainorganizational
capability is beneﬁcial for spotting changes in the environment such as
transformed consumer habits(sensing mechanism), exploiting business op-
portunities (seizing mechanism), or recombining and reconﬁguring re-
sources and structures of an organization (transforming mechanism). In
34 instances, however, the context of the described capabilities was too
vague to match it exclusively to one mechanism of Teece's (2007) dynamic
capability theory, and it was agreed on multiple mechanisms.
3.3. Calculation approach for the relative importance of the themes during the
digital transformation process
To realize the research objective regarding the changing characteristics
of the organizational capabilities, a relative relevance of each theme of
organizational capabilities for digital transformation was calculated. For
the relative relevance (rr), of each theme (c) the number of matchings of
each theme in the respective mechanism of the Teece (2007, 2014) frame-
work (t) was divided by the absolute number of entries across all of Teece’
mechanisms for the respective theme. See the following formula for a
mathematical representation of this process.
rr ct ð Þ ¼
ct
∑
3
t¼1
ct
2
TheoperatorNEAR/5inEBSCOhostandN5inWoSwasused.Thisoperatorforcesthatthe
combined terms need to be in a distance of 5 words from each other. Moreover, the terms
(medic* OR nurs* OR physician*) were excluded when using the EBSCOhost database, as a
broad set of irrelevant articles for this study's purposes has been found in a test run.
3
To deduce the distinct themes, the content of each deﬁnition was analyzed and clustered
into higher-order categories, using open and axial coding (Williams & Moser, 2019).
J. Konopik et al. Digital Business 2 (2022) 100019
4

--- PAGE 5 ---
Records identified through database searching
(n = 3207)
Records screened
(n = 2992)
Removal of duplicates
(n = 215)
Records excluded based on title and
abstract (n = 2814)
Records removed (n = 143) due to
- unavailability of full-text (n = 6)
- Not fulfilling the inclusion criteria
(n = 137)
Full-text articles assessed for eligibility
(n = 178)
Records retrieved through backward and
forward search (n = 11)
Relevant records
(n = 24)
Records removed due to incompatibility
with Teece’s framework (n = 2)
Records included in the review
(n = 22)
Search in electronic databases
(Keywords: “competenc*” or “skill*” or “capabilit*” and “organization*”)
Records identified in WoS
(n = 1477)
Records identified in EBSCOhost
(n = 1730)
Fig. 1. Summary of the article selection process.
Table 1
Included articles in the literature review.
Author (year)
(alphabetical)
Title Journal
Akroush (2012) Organizational capabilities and new product performance Competitiveness Review
Ali et al. (2012) An organizational learning perspective on conceptualizing dynamic and substantive
capabilities
Journal of Strategic Marketing
Andriole (2018) Skills and Competencies for Digital Transformation IT Professional
Berkowitz (2018) Meta-organizing ﬁrms' capabilities for sustainable innovation: A conceptual framework Journal of Cleaner Production
Breznik and Lahovnik (2016) Dynamic Capabilities and Competitive Advantage: Findings from Case Studies Management: Journal of Contemporary Management
Issues
Chang et al. (2012) How do established ﬁrms improve radical innovation performance? The organizational
capabilities view
Technovation
Day (1994) The Capabilities of Market-Driven Organizations Journal of Marketing
Evans et al. (2016) Organizational Context and Capabilities for Integrating Care: A Framework for Improvement International Journal of Integrated Care
Fernandes et al. (2017) The dynamic capabilities perspective of strategic management: a co-citation analysis Scientometrics
Guo et al. (2014) The Development of Organizational Capabilities and Corporate Entrepreneurial Processes:
The Case of Chinese Automobile Firms
Thunderbird International Business Review
Hoberg et al. (2017) Skills for digital transformation –
Lampel (2001) The core competencies of effective project execution International Journal of Project Management
Lin and Hsia (2011) Core capabilities for practitioners in achieving e-business innovation Computers in Human Behavior
Martelo et al. (2013) The use of organizational capabilities to increase customer value Journal of Business Research
O'Connor (2008) Major Innovation as a Dynamic Capability: A Systems Approach Journal of Product Innovation Management
Orji (2019) Digital business transformation: towards an integrated capability framework for digitization
and business value generation
Journal of Global Business & Technology
Osmundsen (2020) Competences for Digital Transformation: Insights from the Norwegian Energy Sector Proceedings of the 53rd Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences
Pavlou and El Sawy (2006) From IT Leveraging Competence to Competitive Advantage in Turbulent Environments: The
Case of New Product Development
Information Systems Research
Sousa and Rocha (2019) Digital learning: Developing skills for digital transformation of organizations Future Generation Computer Systems
Verona (1999) A Resource-Based View of Product Development The Academy of Management Review
Warner and Wäger (2019) Building dynamic capabilities for digital transformation: An ongoing process of strategic
renewal
Long Range Planning
Whitley (2003) The Institutional Structuring of Organizational Capabilities: The Role of Authority Sharing
and Organizational Careers
Organization Studies
J. Konopik et al. Digital Business 2 (2022) 100019
5

--- PAGE 6 ---
The relative relevance of the mechanisms for each theme can now di-
rectly be translated into a prioritization for the development of organiza-
tional capabilities depending on the current state of an organization
regarding digital transformation, which helps to achieve the abovemen-
tioned research objective.
4. Results and discussion
The conducted coding process of the deﬁnitions of digital transforma-
tionresultedinseventhemesoforganizationalcapabilitiesfordigitaltrans-
formation: (1) Strategy and Ecosystem, (2) Innovation Thinking, (3) Digital
Transformation Technologies (DT Technologies in the following), (4) Data,
(5)Operations,(6)OrganizationalDesign,(7)DigitalTransformationLead-
ership (DT Leadership in the following).
Strategy and Ecosystem: The ﬁrst theme relates to the strategy and eco-
system of the organization. Organizational capabilities in this theme refer
to abilities to adapt the business models during the digital transformation
(Henriette et al., 2015; Verhoef et al., 2019; Warner & Wäger, 2019).
They also enable the formation and management of ecosystems spanning
across multiple organizations, functions, and industries, initiated by the
digital transformation (Berman & Marshall, 2014).
Innovation Thinking: Innovation thinking refers to organizational capa-
bilities that enable the emergence of innovation from inside or outside
theorganization(openinnovation).Theinclusionofthe customerinthein-
novation processes (co-creation) is a key element of innovation thinking,
especially by focusing efforts on the enhancing of customer experience
(Fitzgerald, Kruschwitz, Bonnet, & Welch, 2014; Morakanyane et al.,
2017; Paavola, Hallikainen, & Elbanna, 2017; Piccinini, Hanelt, Gregory,
& Kolbe,2015). This alsoincludesthe abilitytoenhanceproducts withdig-
italtechnologies(Berghaus&Back,2016;Nwankpa&Roumani,2016).All
of this requires a solid understanding of formal innovation processes and
methodologies (Mazzone, 2014) as well as abilities to scan, analyze, and
evaluate the competitive environment (Nwankpa & Roumani, 2016;
Stalk, Evans, & Shulman, 1992).
DTTechnologies:Technologies wereidentiﬁedasamaindriverofdigital
transformation by Morakanyane et al. who stated that technologies “play a
vital role in the digital transformation process” (Morakanyane, Grace and
O'Reilly, 2017, p. 432). Indicated by the preﬁx “DT” for digital transforma-
tion, for this theme, only capabilities relating to new and/or disruptive
technologies by relying on Danneels' deﬁnition: “A disruptive technology
is a technology that changes the bases of competition by changing the per-
formance metrics along which ﬁrms compete” (Danneels, 2004, p. 249)
were considered.
Data:Thisthemeisreferringtoorganizationalcapabilitiesregardingthe
handling,security,andcapitalizationof data.Datahas adecisive role inthe
digital transformationprocess (Schallmo, Williams, & Boardman,2017).In
fact, the broad literature outlines that even strategic decision-making will
be based on data driven insights (Haffke, Kalgovas, & Benlian, 2017;
Nwankpa & Roumani, 2016), resulting that organizations need to develop
capabilities regarding the exploitation of data.
Operations:IncontrasttothethemeofDTTechnologies,thisthemecom-
prisesorganizationalcapabilitiesthatarerelatedtoordinarybusinessactiv-
itiesandvaluecreationalongwithbasictechnologies.Asliteratureteaches,
existing business operations need to remain competitive and proﬁtable to
fund exploratory processes (Du, Pan, & Zuo, 2013; O'Reilly & Tushman,
2004).
Organizational Design: The structural and procedural organization must
adapt to support digital transformation strategies (Verhoef et al., 2019).
Changes can be triggered by new or adjusted business models (Hess et al.,
2016) or new technologies (Li, Su, Zhang, & Mao, 2018). As a result, the
themeOrganizationalDesignisproposed,thatreferstocapabilitiesrelating
to the design of the organizational structure, infrastructure, and the ﬂow of
information and knowledge.
DTLeadership:Thelastthemecomprisesaspectsonleadershipandorga-
nizational culture. The importance of leadership and culture for digital
transformation, indicated by the preﬁx “DT” for digital transformation, is
widelyacceptedintherelevantliterature(Brown,Fishenden,&Thompson,
2014; Eisenhardt, Furr, & Bingham, 2010; Gong & Ribiere, 2021; Goran
et al., 2017; Ismail, Khater, & Zaki, 2017; Matt et al., 2015; Schwertner,
2017; Sow & Aborbie, 2018) but largely neglected in the dynamic capabil-
ities literature (Schilke et al., 2018; Vogel & Güttel, 2012). Yet, a suitable
organizational culture is a key requirement for the successful transforma-
tion of businesses (Nadkarni &Prügl,2021) and toovercome internalresis-
tance from various stakeholders during the transformational processes
(Matt et al., 2015). A brief overview of the identiﬁed themes is displayed
in Table 2.
The results, see Fig. 2, also point to major differences in the relative rel-
evance of the themes duringthe digital transformationprocess (e.g.,for the
threemechanismsofdynamiccapabilities).Whiletheﬁndingsdonotresult
in a rankingof thethemesthemselves, they give valuable advice forthe de-
velopment process of organizational capabilities.
The results outline how organizational capabilities vary throughout
the transformation process and provide ﬁrst insights on how organiza-
tions should manage the capability development over time. To do so,
the key ﬁndings of the study are outlined in the following by presenting
the seven themes differentiated for each of the three mechanism of
dynamic capabilities.
4.1. Strategy and ecosystem
Sensing: Strategy and Ecosystem capabilities set the direction of the
transformationprocessbydeﬁningalong-termvisionandrelatedstrategies
for the organization (Martelo, Barroso, & Cepeda, 2013; Warner & Wäger,
2019). More tangible capabilities are involved in the building of strong ex-
ploitable relationships with external entities such as potential customers
(Chang,Chang,Chi,Chen,&Deng,2012;Whitley,2003)andbusinesspart-
ners(Changetal.,2012;Guo,Jiang,&Yang,2014;Lampel,2001),withthe
intention to harvest information for innovation projects from multiple ex-
ternal sources, which can be used to leverage relationships to build a supe-
rior value network (Lin & Hsia, 2011) later in the transformation process.
Seizing: Inside the Strategy and Ecosystem theme, the seizing mecha-
nism accounts for the greatest relative relevance of organizational capabil-
ities. Here, Strategy and Ecosystem capabilities enable organizations to
establish strong relationships with relevant external entitiesand to manage
the value network. Capabilities relating to the management of the collabo-
rative ecosystem include the selection of foreign and domestic business
partners (Andriole, 2018; Guo et al., 2014), research institutes and univer-
sities (Guo et al., 2014) as well as the government (Guo et al., 2014). This
also includes the development of appropriate evaluation frameworks to es-
timate risks in the partner-ecosystem (Lampel, 2001). Having integrated
new partners into the ecosystem (Whitley, 2003), organizations must be
able to continuously govern the value network (Lampel, 2001; Lin &
Hsia, 2011) and constantly review the driving forces (e.g., interests and
needs)oftheirbusinesspartners(Whitley,2003).Thisallowsorganizations
Table 2
Themes of organizational capabilities for digital transformation.
Themes of
organizational
capabilities
Description
Strategy and Ecosystem Capabilities relating to the strategy and ecosystem of the
organization.
Innovation Thinking Capabilities relating to the emergence of innovation in the
organization,
focusing open innovation and co-creation.
DT Technologies Capabilities relating to new and/or disruptive technologies.
Data Capabilities relating to the handling, security, and
capitalization of Data.
Operations Capabilities relating to ordinary business activities and
value creation.
Organizational Design Capabilities relating to the design of the structural and
procedural organization.
DT Leadership Capabilities relating to the management and culture of the
organization.
J. Konopik et al. Digital Business 2 (2022) 100019
6

--- PAGE 7 ---
tobuildonnovelideasfromthewholeecosystemandtodevelopinnovative
solutions(Lin&Hsia,2011).Anotherimportantelementisthecapabilityto
create a strong link between the envisioned strategy and the business
model. This means in addition to the capability of formulating a suitable
and sustainable corporate strategy (Day, 1994; Martelo et al., 2013;
Warner & Wäger, 2019) organizations need adequate capabilities to rein-
vent or realign their business models (Lin & Hsia, 2011; Warner & Wäger,
2019). Portfolio management (Osmundsen, 2020) and product/service in-
tegration capabilities (Hoberg et al., 2017) complement this process.
Transforming: In this mechanism, the focus shifts from pure manage-
ment of the ecosystem to a stronger strategic and long-term perspective
that allows organizations to deﬁne their role in the value network. As busi-
ness areas are subject to sudden and constant changes in the digital trans-
formation, organizations can improve their resilience engaging in strong
ecosystems. Organizations must have the capability to be open to redeﬁne
their position in the value network and to recognize the value of co-
creation and complementary assets that partners in the ecosystem can pro-
vide (Lin & Hsia, 2011; Teece, 2007). In this context, Warner and Wäger
(2019)mentionthesocalled“unlearning”ofexistingpracticesasanimpor-
tant capability to effectively interact and collaborate with partners in the
ecosystems. As emphasized by Berkowitz (2018), Guo et al. (2014),
Lampel (2001), and Lin and Hsia (2011), organizations need to develop a
deep understanding of one's own role and those of business partners
(Whitley, 2003) and explicit linkages between the organization itself and
the environment inordertoabsorb spilloverlearning from external sources
(Guo et al., 2014; Lampel, 2001).
Therefore, organizations need the ability to create appropriate inter-
faces(e.g.,collaborationpossibilities)betweentheorganizationandknowl-
edge sources in the ecosystem through informal relationships and formal
alliances(O'Connor,2008).Inthis matter,Berkowitz(2018) arguesthator-
ganizations which coordinate and align own innovations with ecosystem
activitiescanincreasetheresilienceoftheirownbusinessmodels.Onagen-
eral level, organizations mustalsokeepthe triplebottom line frameworkin
mindand,inadditiontotheeconomicperspective,reﬂectaboutimpactson
environment health and safety, and society (Berkowitz, 2018; Day, 1994).
4.2. Innovation thinking
Sensing:Duringthesensingmechanism,theabilitytocreateprocessesto
support and enable the emergence of innovation in the organization is a
basic prerequisite. It is outlinedthat organizations need to develop capabil-
ities that allow them to detect changes in the society and environment
(Akroush, 2012; Berkowitz, 2018; Breznik & Lahovnik, 2016; Chang
et al., 2012; Day, 1994; Guo et al., 2014; Verona, 1999; Warner & Wäger,
2019) as well as capabilities that create a deep understanding of current
and future needs of customers (Akroush, 2012; Ali, Peters, & Lettice,
2012; Pavlou & El Sawy, 2006; Warner & Wäger, 2019; Whitley, 2003).
Moreover, it is emphasized that organizations need capabilities to antici-
pate future states of the environment (Berkowitz, 2018; Breznik &
Lahovnik, 2016). This harvesting of information from a wide array of
sources (more known as the fuzzy front-end) is critical for successful inno-
vation(Changetal.,2012).Thesecapabilitiesenableorganizationstomake
proper design choices for products and services (Whitley, 2003), to formu-
late effective marketing strategies (Pavlou & El Sawy, 2006), and to guide
innovation projects into promising directions. Gathering external informa-
tion can also reveal areas in which the organization lacks necessary organi-
zational capabilities (Breznik & Lahovnik, 2016; Guo et al., 2014) and
guide the development of these capabilities throughout the transformation
process. The results show that the sensing mechanism has the highest rele-
vance for the Innovation Thinking theme. This ﬁnding emphasizes that or-
ganizations must develop Innovation Thinking capabilities from the
beginning of the digital transformation journey.
Seizing: While Innovation Thinking capabilities in the sensing mecha-
nismlargelyrefertothedetectionofinnovation,theformalizationofthein-
novation processes is emphasized in the seizing mechanism. Here,
organizations require capabilities that enable them to repeatedly develop
new technologies, products, and services (Day, 1994) and to integrate
and align corporate R&D units and existing lines of business (Chang et al.,
2012; Lampel, 2001). The ability to learn, to probe, and to experiment
with new ideas (Chang et al., 2012) requires capabilities in ideation pro-
cesses and methodologies like testing of prototypes (Pavlou & El Sawy,
2006), minimum viable products, lean start-up, innovation labs (Warner
& Wäger, 2019), as well as a certain scientiﬁc expertise in R&D (Verona,
1999). The literature especially highlights the importance of customer in-
clusion in the innovation processes and points to capabilities that enable
long term relationships with customers (Martelo et al., 2013) for obtaining
information that allow to align with customer experiences (Whitley, 2003)
and to make appropriate design choices to meet current and future needs
(Martelo et al., 2013; Whitley, 2003).
Transforming: Innovation Thinking capabilities in the transforming
mechanism allow the organization to embrace open innovation in ideation
processes and methodologies. To achieve this, it is outlined that organiza-
tions need to have capabilities to actively integrate external innovations
into the value network and to converge internal innovation with impulses
from the ecosystem (Day, 1994; Lin & Hsia, 2011). The engagement of cus-
tomers, research institutes, strategic partners, and universities (Guo et al.,
2014) enables organizations to better adapt own technologies, products,
and services to environmental changes (O'Connor, 2008) and to better de-
sign, deliver, and advertise new products and services (Lin & Hsia, 2011).
Internal innovation processes must keep up with these changes and need
capabilities that allow quick responses to external inﬂuences (Guo et al.,
2014) through adaptive processes and methodologies.
Fig. 2. Relative relevance of themes throughout the digital transformation process.
J. Konopik et al. Digital Business 2 (2022) 100019
7

--- PAGE 8 ---
4.3. DT technologies
Sensing: The analysis shows that the organizational capabilities related
to the sensing mechanism are of the highest relevance for this theme.
Thismeansthatorganizationsshouldpredominantlydevelopthesecapabil-
ities at the beginning of the digital transformation process in order to best
exploit new technical possibilities throughout the entire transformational
process. The experiences in different industries have shown that the emer-
gence of new technologies led to fundamental changes and made existing
business models obsolete (see Hoberg et al. (2017) and Sousa and Rocha
(2019) for examples of speciﬁc technologies for digital transformation).
Many researchers emphasize that organizations need to acquire compre-
hensive knowledge of disruptive technologies (Hoberg et al., 2017; Sousa
& Rocha, 2019) and competitive technology intelligence to secure long-
term survival (Andriole, 2018; Osmundsen, 2020) resulting in organiza-
tional capabilities to understand and assess new technologies that can trig-
ger innovation processes within the organization (Osmundsen, 2020).
Seizing: Regarding the seizing mechanism, this theme is mainly con-
cernedwithtechnology adoption capabilities, leveraging the previously ac-
quired capabilities in technology knowledge and intelligence and
effectively using technological assets and engineering know-how (Lampel,
2001).Technologyadoptionsupposesthecommitmentofemployeestouti-
lize new technology in their work tasks and the belief that those technolo-
gies will add value to it (Osmundsen, 2020). New product and service
designs, tests of prototypes, and the evaluation of technical feasibilities or
technical speciﬁcations are manifestations of an adoption of disruptive
technologies in an organization (Ali et al., 2012; Pavlou & El Sawy,
2006). As disruptive technologies promise huge beneﬁts for business pro-
cesses (Lin & Hsia, 2011) organizations often seek a pioneer role (Orji,
2019), even though the alignment of operations with disruptive technolo-
gies continuestobeamajor challenge for organizations (Lin& Hsia,2011).
Transforming: As organizations are confronted with a high uncertainty
whether disruptive technologies will be accepted by the market, capabili-
ties of DT Technologies from previous mechanisms remain relevant. For
this reason, it is imperative that organizations are prepared for current
and future realities of constant technological change. They are far less tan-
giblethanothercapabilitiesfromthistheme,astheypredominantlyreferto
thehumanfactor,oftenoverlookedattechnologydecisionsduringbusiness
transformations (Orji, 2019). Organizations must keep their workforce
open-mindedandpreferablyenthusiastic(Osmundsen,2020)aboutcontin-
uous changes. Capabilities in knowledge management that facilitate, col-
laboration, peer learning, and know-how transfer are important elements
for the transforming mechanism (Osmundsen, 2020). This is not only rele-
vant for technical tasks, but also for nontechnical ones such as managing
projects (Lampel, 2001).
4.4. Data
Sensing: Capabilities related to the Data theme mainly leverage analyti-
cal capabilities (Andriole, 2018) to support insight-generating processes.
Data-science capabilities can utilize internal and external data to acquire
knowledge, e.g. about markets and customers (Osmundsen, 2020).
Seizing: The seizing mechanism has the highest relevance for the Data
capabilities, which highly focus on the protection of innovation. Since in-
dustrial value chains are highly integrated with information and communi-
cations technology, organizations are frequently confronted with cyber-
attacks(Hoberg etal., 2017).Therefore, data-security capabilitiesare men-
tioned by various researchers (Andriole, 2018; Hoberg et al., 2017) which
can trigger the installation of state-of-the-art IT architectures including
cloud computing, decentralized data, and data lakes as well as access and
identity management (Lin & Hsia, 2011).
Transforming: Data capabilities in the transforming mechanism are nec-
essary to deal with the increasing amounts of data (Osmundsen, 2020) and
to adapt the storage mechanisms across organizational units (Evans,
Grudniewicz, Baker, & Wodchis, 2016).Datacapabilitiesare especially im-
portant to support all other lines of business with data driven insights.
Capabilities for data management, data understanding, data analysis, and
data security are existential to transform organizations.
4.5. Operations
Sensing: Operations capabilities, relating to ordinary business activities
and value creation, are often overlooked in the transformation process, as
innovation efforts are pursued at the expense of existing business activities
(Birkinshaw & Gibson, 2004). In line with literature on ambidexterity in
business innovation (Markides, 2013), Operations capabilities focus on
theperformanceofexistingvaluechains.Theyenabletheanalysisofpoten-
tial inefﬁciencies in the value chain (Ali et al., 2012) and increase the efﬁ-
ciency of existing business processes (Andriole, 2018; Verona, 1999;
Whitley, 2003).
Seizing: The seizing mechanism accounts for the highest number of
Operations capabilities. While they continue to focus on the analysis and
improvement of internal business processes, external insights are increas-
ingly considered. This requires capabilities to gather information about in-
ternal and external processes (Whitley, 2003) and to analyze (Osmundsen,
2020) and evaluate (O'Connor, 2008) the results. These insights lead the
efforts to improve business processes (Lampel, 2001; Whitley, 2003) and
to reallocate resources (Warner & Wäger, 2019). These capabilities are
not limited to a speciﬁc functional area but can range from ﬁnancial
(Day, 1994; Lampel, 2001), human resource (Day, 1994), purchasing
(Day, 1994) over manufacturing (Ali et al., 2012; Day, 1994; Verona,
1999), to logistics-related processes (Ali et al., 2012; Day, 1994).
Transforming: Regarding the transforming mechanism, the focus of the
Operations capabilities shifts from process analysis and improvement to
the integration and connection of operations with other lines of business.
Especially in the context of ambidexterity, operational processes must not
be neglected, as they provide management with the ability to monitor,
analyze, control, and improve the organization's workﬂow and activities
(Orji, 2019). Because knowledge is subject to sudden changes, it is crucial
to develop the necessary capabilities for restructuring operations
(Whitley, 2003). Impulses for restructuring may come from other business
lines including research labs or marketing - highlighting the beneﬁts
of inter-connected operations and cross-organizational collaboration
(Chang etal., 2012).In particular, capabilitiesrelated toinnovation greatly
beneﬁt from knowledge about current processes (Breznik & Lahovnik,
2016) as collective knowledge of the organization can be applied to incre-
mental and radical improvements of existing operational activities
(Akroush,2012).Asaresult,nomattertheexploringorexploitingactivities
of organizations, the capabilities to interconnect operations with other
business lines and to adequately align processes are existential to the
transforming mechanism.
4.6. Organizational design
Sensing: In the sensing mechanism, the main objectives of Organiza-
tional Design capabilities are to support the information and knowledge
ﬂow across organizational units through infrastructural and knowledge
management related initiatives (Breznik & Lahovnik, 2016; Lampel,
2001; Martelo et al., 2013).
Seizing: Organizational Design capabilities in the seizing mechanism le-
verage the intra-organizational infrastructure to facilitate the ﬂow of infor-
mation inside the organization and with external entities. Prerequisites for
this are a clearly recognizable organizational structure (O'Connor, 2008)
and the ability to plan and implement the necessary infrastructure, espe-
cially IT infrastructure (Ali et al., 2012; Lin & Hsia, 2011). Formal capabil-
itiesthatallowtostructureinformation(Andriole,2018)andtodistributeit
across business lines (Martelo et al., 2013) are necessary to develop, just as
an organizational understanding and open, transparent, and valuing com-
munication (Breznik & Lahovnik, 2016).
Transforming: The transforming mechanism has the highest relative rel-
evance for Organizational Design capabilities, which mainly relate to the
adoption of internal structures and knowledge management. The adoption
J. Konopik et al. Digital Business 2 (2022) 100019
8

--- PAGE 9 ---
of internal structures refers to structural and functional characteristics. The
creation of team-based structuresand the decentralization of business units
enablesorganizations tobetterrespond tounforeseensituations (Warner &
Wäger, 2019). These entities must be equipped with proper capabilities to
operate without being held back by outdated structures (O'Connor,
2008). The need of capabilities to integrate these new structures into
existing lines of business is apparent. Innovation must be transferred into
the existing strategy as well as the relevant areas of the organization
(Changetal.,2012).Thisultimatelyleadstothenecessityofcapabilitiesen-
abling organizations to be capable to adapt to changing circumstances
(Berkowitz, 2018) and to form ambidextrous structures that allow explora-
tion and exploitation to coexist (Chang et al., 2012). Knowledge manage-
ment is well recognized as an organizational capability (Gold, Malhotra,
& Segars, 2001) and is seen as a lever to raise the potential for competitive
advantages (Fernandes et al., 2017). Capabilities in the Organizational De-
sign theme facilitate the distribution of knowledge in the organization and
the value network to ensure its appropriate use (Chen & Huang, 2009).
Structures enable the quick codiﬁcation and diffusing of knowledge
throughout the organization (Lampel, 2001; Whitley, 2003).
4.7. DT leadership
Sensing: Only a fraction of the DT Leadership capabilities is relevant in
the sensing mechanism. Here, the main purpose of the capabilities is to in-
troduce the right mindset for the transformational process into the organi-
zation. This includes the capability to promote experimentation with and
learning from new technology and ideas (Chang et al., 2012; Osmundsen,
2020), as well as to facilitate entrepreneurial aspirations among the mem-
bers of the organization (Hoberg et al., 2017; Warner & Wäger, 2019).
Seizing: DT Leadership capabilities for the seizing mechanism primarily
refer to an innovation-promoting culture. Creating a culture that fosters
risk-taking, freedom, and self-management is crucial to the emergence of
innovation inside the organization (Chang et al., 2012). This requires lead-
ership capabilities that introduce soft skills-based practices such as open,
transparent, and valuing communication at all levels of an organization,
open-door policies, and trust-based relationships between employees and
management (Breznik & Lahovnik, 2016). Of course, culture is not an end
in itself, but rather instrumental to achieve long-term success (Orji,
2019). In fast-changing environments, unforeseen contingencies are inevi-
table and require continuous redirection. These constant redirections and
adjustmentsmay result in conﬂictsthat threatenthe foundations of the col-
laborative process (Lampel, 2001; Warner & Wäger, 2019), such conﬂicts
must be mitigated through adequate capabilities.
Transforming: The transforming mechanism has the highest relevance
for this theme. Continuous adoption to volatile environments relies on the
abilities of the workforce as well as on the right culture. DT Leadership ca-
pabilities allow organizations to engage in a balanced capability develop-
ment from both externally appointed and internally promoted employees
(Warner&Wäger,2019).Here,DTLeadershipcapabilitiesenabletheorga-
nization to recognize the best candidate to succeed in their internal envi-
ronment and to contribute to the work culture (Breznik & Lahovnik,
2016). While managers in established organizations rely much more on
known routines and smooth, predictable operations to deal with highly un-
certain environments (O'Connor, 2008), others must be able to restructure
their operations and routines radically (Whitley, 2003). Proper incentives
for the workforce may also increase the adaption of individual skills
(Pavlou & El Sawy, 2006; Verona, 1999). As a result, the adoption of a
new mindset within the organization is required - based on a customer-
oriented and change-embracing culture (Chang et al., 2012; Day, 1994).
A summary of selected major ﬁndings of the themes for digital transfor-
mation for the respective mechanisms is displayed in Table 3.
5. Theoretical implications, limitations, and further research
Thisstudyproposesasoundconceptualframeworkoforganizationalca-
pabilities for digital transformation consisting of seven themes of organiza-
tional capabilities related to (1) Strategy and Ecosystem, (2) Innovation
Thinking, (3) Digital Transformation Technologies, (4) Data, (5) Opera-
tions, (6) Organizational Design, (7) Digital Transformation Leadership.
ByintegratingTeece's (2007,2014,2018) dynamiccapabilitytheorytodif-
ferentiate phases of the digital transformation process, this study helps to
overcome the so far oversimplistic representation in the face of digital
transformation. As a result, this study contributes to the literature by pro-
vidingamorenuancedpictureoforganizationalcapabilitiesneededtomas-
ter the digital transformation process by creating a process-oriented
framework.Theﬁndingspointtothefactthatthescopeandrelevanceofor-
ganizational capabilities varies along the digital transformation process.
The developed process-oriented framework can therefore serve scholars
andpractitionersasastructuredpathforthedevelopmentoforganizational
capabilities during digital transformation and helps exploring the effects of
certain organizational capabilities to master the digital transformation.
Organizations beneﬁt from this structured approach as it helps them to
create a capability development roadmap for different actors in the organi-
zation and to align processes, structures, and systems to the new digital re-
ality. As the necessary organizational capabilities vary throughout the
transformational process, it is recommended for organizations to engage
in a digital maturity assessment (Klötzer & Pﬂaum, 2017; Remane,
Hanelt, Wiesboeck, & Kolbe, 2017). With the results from the digital matu-
rity assessment, organizations can identify current gaps and get indications
of which phase they are in and what kind of organizational capabilities are
underrepresented or missing.
Drawingontheﬁndings,organizationscanstartameaningfulcapability
development that helps them to efﬁciently allocate their resources. The ef-
ﬁcient allocation of resources and the prioritization on certain organiza-
tional capabilities are important as many organizations are confronted
with resource constraints and idiosyncrasies, which impede a successful
Table 3
Selected major ﬁndings of the themes for digital transformation.
Theme Mechanism
Sensing Seizing Transforming
Strategy and
Ecosystem
Setting a long-term vision and strategies,
establishment of long-term relationships
Managing and leveraging long-term relationships by
creating a network for value creation
(Re)deﬁning the organization's role in the collaborative
ecosystem and alignment of business activities
Innovation
Thinking
Monitoring changes in society, technology, and
business environments
Developing open, ﬂexible, and innovation-friendly
processes
Embracing open and collaborative innovation
DT
Technologies
Acquiring comprehensive knowledge of
(disruptive) technologies
Adopting appropriate technologies Managing technical knowledge and staying open-minded for
new technologies
Data Generating data-driven insights Ensuring the protection of innovation and leveraging
data-driven insights
Preparing for effective handling of data volume
Operations Managing existing operations efﬁciently Leveraging external insights to improve operational
performance
Interconnecting operations with other business lines
Organizational
Design
Supporting information and knowledge ﬂows Establishing a supporting organizational structure Continuously adapting internal structures to changing
requirements / market needs
DT Leadership Promoting experimentation and the readiness
for change
Embracing an innovation-promoting culture Incentivizing entrepreneurial behavior
J. Konopik et al. Digital Business 2 (2022) 100019
9

--- PAGE 10 ---
digital transformation process (Soluk & Kammerlander, 2021). Moreover,
the ﬁndings canserve tobuilda top-downorientated roadmap for develop-
ing organizational capabilities by operationalizing the organization's vi-
sion. By knowing the bigger picture, an organization's future including
the mainpurposeforcreatingvalue,itis possible todetermine andconcret-
izetheorganization'sfuturecorecapabilities.Derivedfromthesecorecapa-
bilities, a roadmap for targeted development of organizational capabilities
can be built.
As with every study, this one is not without limitations. The rigorous
criteria for the literature review process resulted in a ﬁnal set of 22 studies.
While this could be considered as a narrow coverage of articles, the ana-
lyzed articles enabled us to identify more than 200 statements of organiza-
tional capabilities and to connect them to the sensing, sizing, and
transforming mechanism. To the best of the authors' knowledge, there is
no similar literature review that takes in an interdisciplinary view of dy-
namic capabilities and organizational capabilities with digital transforma-
tion.
Given the novelty of this study, the sufﬁciency of the number of results
was judged by two measures. First, abstracting reviews on dynamic and or-
ganizational capabilities with different foci. Empirical studies (see Evans
et al. (2016), Jenkins (2010), and Soluk and Kammerlander (2021)) relied
on 23, 15, and 10 interviews to develop or validate their capability-based
models. Theoretical works from Nadeem et al. (2018) and Knobbout and
van der Stappen (2020) used samples of 28 and 15 studies to develop
models on business strategy and analytics adoption. Literature reviews fre-
quently connect digital transformation with various kinds of capabilities
(e.g. Morakanyane et al. (2017), Vial (2019)), but present only a limited
number of sources (7 and 3 respectively).
Second, the total number of identiﬁed capabilities was well over 200.
During the codiﬁcation process, a point in the category development was
reached, at which no further capability, theme, or relationship emerged
(e.g. “theoretical saturation” (Strauss & Corbin, 1998, p. 143)). In fact,
the last quarter of results did not enhance the results in a signiﬁcant way,
but rather strengthened the existing ﬁndings.
To further enrich the identiﬁed themes, a fruitful avenue of future re-
search is to focus on single organizational capabilities for digital trans-
formation, hence providing an in-depth view on speciﬁc organizational
capabilities for each theme, and to explicate how organizations can ad-
vance the particular capability in a systematic and appropriate matter.
By doing so, future research could connect the organizational capability
literature with research on digital maturity models. Researchers such as
Klötzer and Pﬂaum (2017) or Soluk and Kammerlander (2021) focus on
the company itself as the target entity (for an overview of various other
maturity models in technology-driven environments see Angreani,
Vijaya, and Wicaksono (2020) or Hizam-Hanaﬁah, Soomro, and
Abdullah (2020)). Research on digital maturity models of organizations
regards its processes, products/services, and business models, and de-
ﬁnes the necessary development of corresponding capabilities to achieve
a desirable future state (Lee & Kim, 2001; Schumacher, Erol, & Sihn,
2016). This approach is rooted in convergence theory, which assumes
an “ideal” state (Poeppelbuss, Niehaves, Simons, & Becker, 2011). The
themes proposed in this study follow the logic of divergence theory in
which it is argued that there is no known ideal state for the target entity
per se, except for its capabilities to deal with the dynamics of change that
are the central point of digital transformation (Hanelt, Bohnsack, Marz,
& Antunes Marante, 2020).
In both ﬁelds a dominance of technological aspects can be observed,
whereas other elements that are affected by the digital transformation
such as strategy, people, culture among others are only peripherally con-
sidered (Goran et al., 2017; Henriette et al., 2015). The wide-ranging
perspective of recent reviews (e.g. Gong and Ribiere (2021),
Morakanyane et al. (2017), Vial (2019)) as well as the ﬁndings in this
study encourage further studies to take in a socio-technical systems per-
spective (Trist, 1963) on digital transformation and to include organiza-
tional capabilities that go beyond technological aspects. Based on the
ﬁndings, the merit to consider the socio-technical systems-theory as a
useful framework can be seen as it stresses the importance of joint opti-
mization of both, the technical and the social subsystem of an organiza-
tion (Appelbaum, 1997). By recognizing interdependencies between the
social and technical subsystem within the development process of orga-
nizational capabilities (Spanos & Prastacos, 2004), future research
would further advance the understanding of the cause-effect relation-
ships of various organizational capabilities.
As a result, this study also contributes to an emerging stream of re-
search on digital capabilities, which started to incorporate digital data
and information technologies into organizational capabilities (Hanelt
et al., 2020; La Calle, Freije, Ugarte, & Larrinaga, 2020). According to
Hanelt et al. (2020), ﬁrms might favor the development of digital capa-
bilities as their dynamic nature (Kallinikos, Aaltonen, & Marton, 2013)
allows for a fast adaption to turbulent environments (Hirvonen &
Majuri, 2020). Despite the ambiguity regarding deﬁnitions of digital ca-
pabilities (da Silva Freitas, Maçada, Brinkhues, & Montesdioca, 2016)
and the blurry line of distinction from other types of capabilities (de
Vasconcellos, da Silva Freitas, & Junges, 2021),4
this study encourages
further discussions on digital capabilities by expanding the discussion
to the social subsystem (digital leadership, digital strategy or digital
organizational culture).
As outlined before, organizations must recognize their current state in
the transformational process, with special attention on their capabilities
in order to develop capabilities in a targeted manner. While numerous
models to assess the digital transformation maturity have been developed
over the past decade (see Teichert (2019) for an overview on assessment
models), there is still a lack of a consistent concept of describing the matu-
ritylevels (Teichert,2019),whichmakesitchallengingfororganizationsto
assess their current state in the transformational process and to combine
them with a capability development roadmap. As a result, future research
may build on the conceptual framework of this study to adapt existing dig-
ital maturity models and to better integrate a capability building perspec-
tive. Another limitation of the study is that only capabilities on the
organizationallevelhadbeenconsidered,resultinginthefactthatonlylim-
ited insight on how to develop employee-level individual competences is
given. Some researchers already identiﬁed individual-level competences
as an explanation for organization level heterogeneities (Fallon-Byrne &
Harney, 2017; Rothaermel & Hess, 2007), indicating that research should
focus on the connection of organizational capabilities for digital transfor-
mationwithemployee-levelcompetences.Whiletheconceptualframework
of organizational capabilities can serve as a blueprint for personal develop-
ment paths of members of the organization, future research is needed to
translate them into employee-level knowledge, skills, and abilities. This
leads to the ability to create an actionable HR development roadmap that
helps HR managers to impart the necessary knowledge, to initiate attitude
changes, and to alter staff behavior.
This study is a further step to provide organizations with the neces-
sary understanding and instruments to master the digital transformation
process.
Funding sources
This work was supported by the Bavarian Ministry of Economic Affairs,
RegionalDevelopmentandEnergyundertheproject“TechnologiesandSo-
lutions for Digitalized Value Creation”, grant 0703/685 69/6/1 5/12/17/
13/1 8/14/19/15/20. The funder, however, did not participate in the de-
sign of the study, the collection and analysis of data, and the writing of
the study. In addition, the funder did not inﬂuence in any way the decision
to submit the article to this journal for publication.
4
KorhonenandGilldeﬁnedigitalcapabilityasan“enterprise'scapacitytointegrateanduti-
lize digital data and information technologies in its products, services, business processes, and
organizational systems and practices to create added value to its constituents and beneﬁcia-
ries” (Korhonen & Gill, 2018, p. 2).
J. Konopik et al. Digital Business 2 (2022) 100019
10

--- PAGE 11 ---
Declaration of Competing Interest
Theauthors declare thattheyhavenoknown competingﬁnancialinter-
ests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence the
work reported in this paper.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.digbus.2021.100019.
References
Akroush, M. N. (2012). Organizational capabilities and new product performance.
Competitiveness Review, 22(4), 343–365. https://doi.org/10.1108/10595421211247178.
Albort-Morant,G., Leal-Rodríguez, A. L., Fernández-Rodríguez, V., & Ariza-Montes,A. (2018).
Assessing the origins, evolution and prospects of the literature on dynamic capabilities: A
bibliometric analysis. European Research on Management and Business Economics, 24(1),
42–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iedeen.2017.06.004.
Ali, S., Peters, L. D., & Lettice, F. (2012). An organizational learning perspective on conceptu-
alizing dynamic and substantive capabilities. Journal of Strategic Marketing, 20(7),
589–607. https://doi.org/10.1080/0965254X.2012.734845.
Ambrosini, V., Bowman, C., & Collier, N. (2009). Dynamic capabilities: An exploration of how
ﬁrms renew their resource base. British Journal of Management, 20, S9–S24. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1467-8551.2008.00610.x.
Amit, R., & Schoemaker, P. J. H. (1993). Strategic assets and organizational rent. Strategic
Management Journal, 14(1), 33–46. https://doi.org/10.1002/SMJ.4250140105.
Andriole, S. J. (2018). Skills and competencies for digital transformation. IT Professional, 20
(6), 78–81. https://doi.org/10.1109/MITP.2018.2876926.
Angreani, L. S., Vijaya, A., & Wicaksono, H. (2020).Systematic literature review of industry 4.
0 maturity model for manufacturing and logistics sectors. Procedia Manufacturing, 52,
337–343. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.promfg.2020.11.056.
Appelbaum, S. H. (1997). Socio-technical systems theory: An intervention strategy for organi-
zational development. Management Decision, 35(6), 452–463. https://doi.org/10.1108/
00251749710173823.
Battleson, D. A., West, B.C., Kim, J., Ramesh, B., & Robinson,P.S.(2016). Achievingdynamic
capabilities with cloud computing: An empirical investigation. European Journal of Infor-
mation Systems, 25(3), 209–230. https://doi.org/10.1057/ejis.2015.12.
Berghaus, S., & Back, A. (2016). Stages in digital business transformation: Results of an empir-
ical maturity study. MCIS 2016 proceedings. AIS Electronic Library (AISeL).
Berkowitz, H. (2018). Meta-organizing ﬁrms’ capabilities for sustainable innovation: A con-
ceptual framework. Journal of Cleaner Production, 175, 420–430. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jclepro.2017.12.028.
Berman, S., & Marshall, A. (2014). The next digital transformation: From an individual-
centered to an everyone-to-everyone economy. Strategy & Leadership, 42(5), 9–17.
https://doi.org/10.1108/SL-07-2014-0048.
Birkinshaw, J., & Gibson, C. (2004). Building ambidexterity into an organization. MIT Sloan
Management Review, 45(4), 47–55.
Breznik, L., & Lahovnik,M.(2016). Dynamic capabilities andcompetitiveadvantage: Findings
from case studies. Management: Journal of Contemporary Management, 21, 167–185.
Breznik, L., Lahovnik, M., & Dimovski, V. (2018). Exploiting ﬁrm capabilities by sensing. Seizing
and Reconﬁguring Capabilities: An Empirical Investigation. https://doi.org/10.15458/
85451.72.
Brown, A., Fishenden, J., & Thompson, M. (2014). Organizational structures and digital trans-
formation. In A. W. Brown, M. Thompson, & J. Fishenden (Eds.), Business in the digital
economy. Digitizing government: Understanding and implementing new digital business models
(pp. 165–183). Palgrave Macmillan. https://doi.org/10.1057/9781137443649_10.
Cavusgil, E., Seggie, S. H., & Talay, M. B. (2007). Dynamic capabilities view: Foundations and
research agenda. Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice, 15(2), 159–166. https://doi.
org/10.2753/MTP1069-6679150205.
Chang, Y. -C., Chang, H. -T., Chi, H. -R., Chen, M. -H., & Deng, L. -L. (2012). Howdo established
ﬁrms improve radical innovation performance? The organizational capabilities view.
Technovation, 32(7-8, SI), 441–451. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.technovation.2012.03.001.
Chen, C. -J., & Huang, J. -W. (2009). Strategic human resource practices and innovation per-
formance - the mediating role of knowledge management capacity. Journal of Business
Research, 62(1), 104–114. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2007.11.016.
Collis, D. J. (1994). Research note: How valuable are organizational capabilities? Strategic
Management Journal, 15(S1), 143–152. https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.4250150910.
Cooper, H. M. (2015). Research synthesis and meta-analysis: A step-by-step approach (5th ed.).
Sage.
Danneels, E. (2002). The dynamics of product innovation and ﬁrm competences. Strategic
Management Journal, 23(12), 1095–1121. https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.275.
Danneels, E. (2004). Disruptive technology reconsidered: A critique and research agenda.
Journal of Product Innovation Management (JPIM), 21(4), 246–258. https://doi.org/10.
1111/j.0737-6782.2004.00076.x.
Day,G.S. (1994).The capabilities ofmarket-driven organizations.Journal of Marketing, 58(4),
37–52. https://doi.org/10.1177/002224299405800404.
Del Rowe, S. (2017). Digital transformation needs to happen: The clock is ticking for compa-
nies that have been unwilling to embrace change. Customer Relationship Management,
30–33.
Døving, E., & Gooderham, P. N. (2008). Dynamic capabilities as antecedents of the scope of
related diversiﬁcation: The case of small ﬁrm accountancy practices. Strategic
Management Journal, 29(8), 841–857. https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.683.
Downes, L., & Nunes, P. F. (2013). Big-bang disruption. Harvard Business Review, 91(3),
44–56.
Drnevich, P. L., & Kriauciunas, A. P. (2011). Clarifying the conditions and limits of the contri-
butions of ordinary and dynamic capabilities to relative ﬁrm performance. Strategic
Management Journal, 32(3), 254–279. https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.882.
Du, W., Pan, S. L., & Zuo, M. (2013). How to balance sustainability and proﬁtability in tech-
nology organizations: An ambidextrous perspective. IEEE Transactions on Engineering
Management, 60(2), 366–385. https://doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2012.2206113.
Eisenhardt, K. M., Furr, N. R., & Bingham, C. B. (2010). Microfoundations of performance:
Balancing efﬁciency and ﬂexibility in dynamic environments. Organization Science, 21
(6), 1263–1273. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1100.0564.
Eisenhardt, K. M., & Martin, J. A. (2000). Dynamic capabilities: What are they? Strategic
Management Journal, 21(10−11), 1105–1121. https://doi.org/10.1002/1097-0266
(200010/11)21:10/11<1105::AID-SMJ133>3.0.CO;2-E.
Ellonen, H. -K., Janutunen, A. R., & Kuivalainen, O. (2011). The role of dynamic capabilities
in developing innovation-related capabilities. International Journal of Innovation
Management, 15(03), 459–478. https://doi.org/10.1142/S1363919611003246.
Evans, J. M., Grudniewicz, A., Baker, G. R., & Wodchis, W. P. (2016). Organizational context
and capabilities for integrating care: A framework for improvement. International Journal
of Integrated Care, 16. https://doi.org/10.5334/ijic.2416.
Fallon-Byrne, L., & Harney, B. (2017). Microfoundations of dynamic capabilities for innova-
tion: A review and research agenda. The Irish Journal of Management, 36(1), 21–31.
https://doi.org/10.1515/ijm-2017-0004.
Feldman,M.S.(2000). Organizational routines asa source ofcontinuouschange. Organization
Science, 11(6), 611–629. https://doi.org/10.1287/ORSC.11.6.611.12529.
Fernandes, C., Ferreira, J.J., Raposo, M.L., Estevao, C., Peris-Ortiz, M., & Rueda-Armengot, C.
(2017). The dynamic capabilities perspective of strategic management: A co-citation
analysis. Scientometrics, 112(1), 529–555. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-017-2397-8.
Fink, A. (2019). Conducting research literature reviews: From the internet to paper. (Fifth edition).
Sage.
Fischer,T., Gebauer, H., Gregory, M.,Ren,G., & Fleisch, E.(2010). Exploitation orexploration
in service business development? Journal of Service Management, 21(5), 591–624. https://
doi.org/10.1108/09564231011079066.
Fitzgerald, M., Kruschwitz, N., Bonnet, D., & Welch, M. (2014). Embracing digital technology:
A new strategic imperative. MIT Sloan Management Review, 55(2), 1–12.
Forstner, E., Kamprath, N., & Röglinger, M. (2014). Capability development with process ma-
turity models – Decision framework and economic analysis. Journal of Decision Systems,
23(2), 127–150. https://doi.org/10.1080/12460125.2014.865310.
Garavan, T., Shanahan, V., Carbery, R., & Watson, S. (2016). Strategic human resource devel-
opment: Towards a conceptual framework to understand its contribution to dynamic ca-
pabilities. Human Resource Development International, 19(4), 289–306. https://doi.org/10.
1080/13678868.2016.1169765.
Gold, A. H., Malhotra, A., & Segars, A. H. (2001). Knowledge management: An organizational
capabilities perspective. Journal of Management Information Systems, 18(1), 185–214.
https://doi.org/10.1080/07421222.2001.11045669.
Gong, C., & Ribiere, V. (2021). Developing a uniﬁed deﬁnition of digital transformation.
Technovation, 102, Article 102217. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.technovation.2020.
102217.
Goran, J., LaBerge, L., & Srinivasan, R. (2017). Culture for a digital age. The McKinsey
Quarterly, 3, 56–67.
Guo, C., Jiang, C. X., & Yang, Q. (2014). The development of organizational capabilities
and corporate entrepreneurial processes: The case of Chinese automobile ﬁrms.
Thunderbird International Business Review, 56(6), 483–500. https://doi.org/10.1002/
tie.21651.
Gusenbauer, M. (2019). Google scholar to overshadow them all? Comparing the sizes of 12
academic search engines and bibliographic databases. Scientometrics, 118(1), 177–214.
https://doi.org/10.1007/S11192-018-2958-5.
Haffke, I., Kalgovas, B., & Benlian, A. (2017). The transformative role of bimodal IT in an era
of digital business. Proceedings of the annual Hawaii international conference on system sci-
ences, proceedings of the 50th
Hawaii international conference on system sciences (2017)
(pp. 5460–5469). Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. https://doi.org/
10.24251/HICSS.2017.660.
Hanelt, A. A., Bohnsack, R., Marz, D., & Antunes Marante, C. (2020). A systematic review of
the literature on digital transformation: Insights and implications for strategy and organi-
zational change. Journal of Management Studies. https://doi.org/10.1111/joms.12639
Advance online publication.
Hausladen, I., & Zipf, T. (2018). Competitive differentiation versus commoditisation: The role
of big data in the European payments industry. Journal of Payments Strategy & Systems, 12
(3), 266–282.
Helfat, C. E., Finkelstein, S., Mitchell, W., Peteraf, M., Singh, H., Teece, D., & Winter, S. G.
(2009). Dynamic capabilities: Understanding strategic change in organizations. John Wiley
& Sons.
Helfat, C. E., & Peteraf, M. A. (2003). The dynamic resource-based view: Capability lifecycles.
Strategic Management Journal, 24(10), 997–1010. https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.332.
Henriette, E., Feki, M., & Boughzala, I. (2015). The shape of digital transformation: A system-
atic literature review. Mediterranean conference on information systems (MCIS).
Hess, T., Matt, C., Benlian, A., & Wiesböck, F. (2016). Options for formulating a digital trans-
formation strategy. MIS Quarterly Executive, 15(2), 123–139.
Hirvonen, Juha, & Majuri, Matti (2020). Digital capabilities in manufacturing SMEs. Procedia
Manufacturing, 51, 1283–1289. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.promfg.2020.10.179.
Hizam-Hanaﬁah, M., Soomro, M. A., & Abdullah, N. L. (2020). Industry 4.0 readiness models:
A systematic literature review of model dimensions. Information, 11(7), 364. https://doi.
org/10.3390/info11070364.
J. Konopik et al. Digital Business 2 (2022) 100019
11

--- PAGE 12 ---
Hoberg, P., Krcmar, H., Oswald, G., & Welz, B. (2017). Skills for digital transformation: Re-
search report 2017. http://www.corporate-leaders.com/sitescene/custom/userﬁles/
ﬁle/Research/sapskillsfordigitaltransformation.pdf.
Ismail, M. H., Khater, M., & Zaki, M. (2017). Digital business transformation and strategy: What
do we know so far. Cambridge Service Alliance, 10.
Jenkins, M. (2010). Technological discontinuities and competitive advantage: A historical
perspective on formula 1 motor racing 1950-2006. Journal of Management Studies, 47
(5), 884–910. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-6486.2010.00928.x.
Kallinikos, J., Aaltonen, A., & Marton, A. (2013). The ambivalent ontology of digital artifacts.
MIS Quarterly, 37(2), 357–370. http://www.jstor.org/stable/43825913.
Karimi, J., & Walter, Z. (2015). The role of dynamic capabilities in responding to digital dis-
ruption: A factor-based study of the newspaper industry. Journal of Management
Information Systems, 32(1), 39–81. https://doi.org/10.1080/07421222.2015.1029380.
Klötzer, C., & Pﬂaum, A. (2017). Toward the development of a maturity model for digitaliza-
tion within the manufacturing industry’s supply chain. Hawaii international conference on
system sciences 2017 (HICSS-50) (pp. 4210–4219).
Knobbout, J., & van der Stappen, E. (2020). A capability model for learning analytics adop-
tion: Identifying organizational capabilities from literature on learning analytics, big
data analytics, and business analytics. International Journal of Learning Analytics and
Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Education (IJAI), 2(1), 47. https://doi.org/10.3991/ijai.v2i1.
12793.
Konlechner,S., Müller,B., & Güttel, W. H. (2018). A dynamic capabilities perspective onman-
aging technological change: A review, framework and research agenda. International
Journal of Technology Management, 76(3–4), 188–213. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJTM.
2018.091285.
Korhonen, J. J., & Gill, A. Q. (2018). Digital capability dissected. ACIS 2018 - 29th
australasian
conference on information systems.
La Calle, A. D., Freije, I., Ugarte, J. V., & Larrinaga, M.Á. (2020). Measuring the impact of dig-
ital capabilities on product-service innovation in Spanish industries. International Journal
of Business Environment, 11(3), 254. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJBE.2020.110904 Article
110904.
Lampel, J. (2001). The core competencies of effective project execution. International Journal
of Project Management, 19(8), 471–483. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0263-7863(01)00042-
4.
Lansiti, M., & Lakhani, K. R. (2014). Digital ubiquity: How connections, sensors, and data are
revolutionizing business. Harvard Business Review, 92(11), 90–99.
Lee, J. -H., & Kim, Y. -G. (2001). A stage model of organizational knowledge management: A
latent content analysis. Expert Systems with Applications, 20(4), 299–311. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S0957-4174(01)00015-X.
Li, D., & Liu, J. (2014). Dynamic capabilities, environmental dynamism, and competitive ad-
vantage: Evidence from China. Journal of Business Research, 67(1), 2793–2799. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2012.08.007.
Li, L., Su, F., Zhang, W., & Mao, J. -Y. (2018). Digital transformation by SME entrepreneurs: A
capability perspective. Information Systems Journal, 28(6), 1129–1157. https://doi.org/
10.1111/isj.12153.
Lin, L. -M., & Hsia, T. -L. (2011). Core capabilities for practitioners in achieving e-business in-
novation. Computers in Human Behavior, 27(5), 1884–1891. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chb.2011.04.012.
Loebbecke, C., & Picot, A. (2015). Reﬂections on societal and business model transformation
arisingfrom digitization and big data analytics:A research agenda. The Journal ofStrategic
Information Systems, 24(3), 149–157. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis.2015.08.002.
Markides, C. C. (2013). Business model innovation: What can the ambidexterity literature
teach US? The Academy of Management Perspectives, 27(4), 313–323. https://doi.org/10.
5465/amp.2012.0172.
Martelo, S., Barroso, C., & Cepeda, G. (2013). The use of organizational capabilities to in-
crease customer value. Journal of Business Research, 66(10), 2042–2050. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2013.02.030.
Matt, C., Hess, T., & Benlian, A. (2015). Digital transformation strategies. Business &
Information Systems Engineering, 57(5), 339–343. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12599-015-
0401-5.
Matysiak, L., Rugman, A. M., & Bausch, A. (2018). Dynamic capabilities of multinational en-
terprises: The dominant logics behind sensing, seizing, and transforming matter!
Management International Review (MIR), 58(2), 225–250. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11575-017-0337-8.
Mazzone, D. M.(2014).Digital or death: Digitaltransformation: The only choice for business tosur-
vive smash and conquer. Smashbox Consulting Inc.
Morakanyane, R., Grace, A. A., & O’Reilly, P. (2017). Conceptualizing digital transformation
in business organizations: A systematic review of literature. Bled eConference.
Nadeem, A., Abedin, B., Cerpa, N., & Chew, E. (2018). Editorial: Digital transformation & dig-
ital business strategy in electronic commerce - the role of organizational capabilities.
Journal of Theoretical and Applied Electronic Commerce Research, 13(2), I–VIII. https://
doi.org/10.4067/S0718-18762018000200101.
Nadkarni, S., & Prügl, R.(2021). Digital transformation: A review, synthesis and opportunities
for future research. Management Review Quarterly, 71(2), 233–341. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s11301-020-00185-7.
Nayak, A., Chia, R., & Canales, J. I. (2020). Noncognitive microfoundations: Understanding
dynamic capabilities as idiosyncractically reﬁned sensitivities and predispositions. The
Academy of Management Review, 45(2), 280–303. https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.2016.
0253.
Nelson, R. R. (1982). An evolutionary theory of economic change. Harvard University Press.
Nwankpa, J. K., & Roumani, Y. (2016). IT capability and digital transformation: A ﬁrm perfor-
mance perspective. International conference of information systems Dublin, Ireland.
O’Connor, G. C. (2008). Major innovation as a dynamic capability: A systems approach.
Journal of Product Innovation Management (JPIM), 25(4), 313–330. https://doi.org/10.
1111/j.1540-5885.2008.00304.x.
O’Reilly, C. A., & Tushman, M. L. (2004). The ambidextrous organization. Harvard Business
Review, 82(4), 74–81.
O’Reilly, C. A., & Tushman, M. L. (2008). Ambidexterity as a dynamic capability: Resolving
the innovator’s dilemma. Research in Organizational Behavior, 28, 185–206. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.riob.2008.06.002.
Orji, C. I. (2019). Digital business transformation: Towards an integrated capability frame-
work for digitization and business value generation. Journal of Global Business &
Technology, 15(1), 47–57.
Osmundsen, K. (2020). Competences for digital transformation: Insights from the Norwegian
energy sector. Proceedings of the 53rd
Hawaii international conference on system sciences.
Paavola, R.,Hallikainen, P., & Elbanna, A.R.(2017). Roleofmiddle managersinmodulardig-
ital transformation: The case of SERVU. Association for information systems (Chair), Pro-
ceedings of the 25th
european conference on information systems (ECIS) Guimarães, Portugal.
Paré, G., Tate, M., Johnstone, D., & Kitsiou, S. (2016). Contextualizing the twin concepts of
systematicity and transparency in information systems literature reviews. European Jour-
nal of Information Systems, 25(6), 493–508. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41303-016-0020-3.
Pavlou, P. A., & El Sawy, O. A. (2006). From IT leveraging competence to competitive advan-
tage in turbulent environments: The case of new product development. Information
Systems Research, 17(3), 198–227. https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.1060.0094.
Peteraf, M., Di Stefano, G., & Verona, G. (2013). The elephant in the room of dynamic capa-
bilities: Bringing two diverging conversations together. Strategic Management Journal, 34
(12), 1389–1410. https://doi.org/10.1002/SMJ.2078.
Piccinini, E., Hanelt, A. A., Gregory, R., & Kolbe, L. (2015). Transforming industrial business:
The impact ofdigital transformation onautomotive organizations.Internationalconference
of information systems (ICIS).
Poeppelbuss, J., Niehaves, B., Simons, A., & Becker,J. (2011). Maturity models in information
systems research: Literature search and analysis. Communications of the Association for
Information Systems, 29. https://doi.org/10.17705/1CAIS.02927.
Reis, J., Amorim, M., Melão, N., & Matos, P. (2018). Digital transformation: A literature re-
view and guidelines for future research. World conference on information systems and tech-
nologies.
Remane, G., Hanelt, A. A., Wiesboeck, F., & Kolbe, L. (2017). Digital maturity in traditional
industries - an exploratory analysis. Association for information systems (Chair), Proceedings
of the 25th
european conference on information systems (ECIS) Guimarães, Portugal.
Rogers, D. L. (2016). The digital transformation playbook: Rethink your business for the digital age.
Columbia Business School Publishing. Columbia Business School Publishing.
Rothaermel, F. T., & Hess, A. M. (2007). Building dynamic capabilities: Innovation driven by
individual-, ﬁrm-, and network-level effects. Organization Science, 18(6), 898–921.
https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1070.0291.
Schallmo, D., Williams, C. A., & Boardman, L. (2017). Digital transformation of business
models - best practices and roadmap. International Journal of Innovation Management, 21
(08), 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1142/S136391961740014X.
Schilke, O. (2014). Second-order dynamic capabilities: How do they matter? The
Academy of Management Perspectives, 28(4), 368–380. https://doi.org/10.5465/
amp.2013.0093.
Schilke, O., Hu, S., & Helfat, C. E. (2018). Quo Vadis, dynamic capabilities? A content-analytic
review of the current state of knowledge and recommendations for future research.
Academy of Management Annals, 12(1), 390–439. https://doi.org/10.5465/annals.2016.
0014.
Schnasse, F., Menzefricke, J. S., & Dumitrescu, R. (2021, April 23). Identiﬁcation of socio-
technical risks and their correlations in the context of digital transformation for the
manufacturing sector. IEEE 8th
international conference on industrial engineering and applica-
tions (ICIEA) (pp. 159–166). IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICIEA52957.2021.9436799.
Schuchmann, D., & Seufert, S. (2015). Corporate learning in times of digital transformation: A
conceptual framework and service portfolio for the learning function in banking organi-
sations. International Journal of Advanced Corporate Learning, 8(1),31–39. https://doi.org/
10.3991/ijac.v8i1.4440.
Schumacher, A., Erol, S., & Sihn, W. (2016). A maturity model for assessing industry 4.0 read-
inessand maturity ofmanufacturing enterprises. ProcediaCIRP, 52, 161–166. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.procir.2016.07.040.
Schwertner, K. (2017). Digital transformation of business. The Journal of Supercomputing, 15,
388–393. https://doi.org/10.15547/tjs.2017.s.01.065.
Shaikh, A. A., Karjaluoto, H., & Chinje, N. B. (2015). Continuous mobile banking usage and
relationship commitment – A multi-country assessment. Journal of Financial Services
Marketing, 20(3), 208–219. https://doi.org/10.1057/fsm.2015.14.
da Silva Freitas, J. J. C., Maçada, A. C. G., Brinkhues, R., & Montesdioca, G. P. Z. (2016). Dig-
ital capabilities as driver to digital business performance. AMCIS: Digital Commerce –
eBusiness and eCommerce (SIGeBIZ).
Singh, A., & Hess, T. (2017). How chief digital ofﬁcers promote the digital transformation of
their companies. MIS Quarterly Executive, 16(1), 1–17.
Soluk, J., & Kammerlander, N. (2021). Digital transformation in family-owned Mittelstand
ﬁrms: A dynamic capabilities perspective. European Journal of Information Systems, 30,
1–36.
Sousa, M. J., & Rocha, Á. (2019). Digital learning: Developing skills for digital transformation
of organizations. Future Generation Computer Systems, 91, 327–334. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.future.2018.08.048.
Sow, M., Aborbie, S., & others (2018). Impact of leadership on digital transformation. Business
and Economic Research, 8(3), 139–148.
Spanos, Y. E., & Prastacos, G. (2004). Understanding organizational capabilities: Towards a
conceptual framework. Journal of Knowledge Management, 8(3), 31–43. https://doi.org/
10.1108/13673270410541024.
Stalk, G., Evans, P., & Shulman, L. E. (1992). Competing on capabilities: The new rules of cor-
porate strategy. Harvard Business Review, 70(2), 57–69.
Strauss, A. L., & Corbin, J. M. (1998). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures
for developing grounded theory. Sage Publ.
J. Konopik et al. Digital Business 2 (2022) 100019
12

--- PAGE 13 ---
Tallon, P. P., & Pinsonneault, A. (2011). Competing perspectives on the link between strategic
information technology alignment and organizational agility: Insights from a mediation
model. MIS Quarterly, 35(2), 463–486. https://doi.org/10.2307/23044052.
Teece, D. J. (2007). Explicating dynamic capabilities: The nature and microfoundations of
(sustainable) enterprise performance. Strategic Management Journal, 28(13), 1319–1350.
https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.640.
Teece, D. J. (2014). The foundations of Enterprise performance: Dynamic and ordinary capa-
bilities in an (economic) theory of ﬁrms. The Academy of Management Perspectives, 28(4),
328–352. https://doi.org/10.5465/AMP.2013.0116.
Teece, D. J. (2018). Business models and dynamic capabilities. Long Range Planning, 51(1),
40–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lrp.2017.06.007.
Teece, D. J., Pisano, G., & Shuen, A. (1997). Dynamic capabilities and strategic management.
Strategic Management Journal, 18(7), 509–533. https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266
(199708)18:7<509::AID-SMJ882>3.0.CO;2-Z.
Teichert, R. (2019). Digital transformation maturity: A systematic review of literature. Acta
Universitatis Agriculturae Et Silviculturae Mendelianae Brunensis, 67(6), 1673–1687.
https://doi.org/10.11118/actaun201967061673.
Trist, E. L. (1963). Organizational choice: Capabilities of groups at the coal face under changing
technologies; the loss, rediscovery & transfomation of a work tradition. Tavistock Publications.
deVasconcellos, S.L., da Silva Freitas,J.C., & Junges, F.M. (2021). Digital capabilities:Bridg-
ing the gap between creativity and performance. In S. H. Park, M. A. Gonzales-Perez, & D.
E. Floriani (Eds.), The Palgrave handbook of corporate sustainability in the digital era
(pp. 411–427). Palgrave Macmillan. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-42412-1_21.
Verhoef, P. C., Broekhuizen, T., Bart, Y., Bhattacharya, A., Qi Dong, J., Fabian, N., & Haenlein,
M. (2019). Digital transformation: A multidisciplinary reﬂection and research agenda.
Journal of Business Research. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2019.09.022 Advance on-
line publication.
Verina, N., & Titko, J. (2019). Digital transformation: Conceptual framework. Contemporary
issues in business, management and economics Engineering’2019 Vilnius, Lithuania.
Verona, G. (1999). A resource-based view of product development. The Academy of
Management Review, 24(1), 132–142. https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.1999.1580445.
Vial, G. (2019). Understanding digital transformation: A review and a research agenda. The
Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 28(2), 118–144. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis.
2019.01.003.
Vogel, R., & Güttel, W. H. (2012). The dynamic capability view in strategic management: A
bibliometric review. International Journal of Management Reviews, 15(4), 426–446.
https://doi.org/10.1111/ijmr.12000.
Waltman, L. (2016). A review of the literature on citation impact indicators. Journal of
Informetrics, 10(2), 365–391. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JOI.2016.02.007.
Warner, K. S., & Wäger, M. (2019). Building dynamic capabilities for digital transformation:
An ongoing process of strategic renewal. Long Range Planning, 52(3), 326–349. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.lrp.2018.12.001.
Whitley, R. (2003). The institutional structuring of organizational capabilities: The role of au-
thority sharing and organizational careers. Organization Studies, 24(5), 667–695. https://
doi.org/10.1177/0170840603024005001.
Wilden, R., Gudergan, S. P., Nielsen, B. B., & Lings, I. (2013). Dynamic capabilities and perfor-
mance: Strategy, structure and environment. Long Range Planning, 46(1–2), 72–96.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lrp.2012.12.001.
Wilhelm, H.,Schlömer,M., & Maurer,I.(2015).Howdynamic capabilities affect the effective-
ness and efﬁciency of operating routines under high and low levels of environmental dy-
namism. British Journal of Management, 26(2), 327–345. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-
8551.12085.
Williams, M., & Moser, T. (2019). The art of coding and thematic exploration in qualitative
research. International Management Review, 15(1), 45–55.
Winter, S. G. (2003). Understanding dynamic capabilities. Strategic Management Journal, 24
(10), 991–995. https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.318.
Wolfswinkel, J. F., Furtmueller, E., & Wilderom, C. P. M. (2013). Using grounded theory as a
method for rigorously reviewing literature. European Journal of Information Systems, 22
(1), 45–55. https://doi.org/10.1057/ejis.2011.51.
Yeow, A., Soh, C., & Hansen, R. (2018). Aligning with new digital strategy: A dynamic capa-
bilities approach. Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 27(1), 43–58. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jsis.2017.09.001.
Yoo, Y., Boland, R. J., Lyytinen, K., & Majchrzak, A. (2012). Organizing for innovation in the
digitized world. Organization Science, 23(5), 1398–1408. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.
1120.0771.
Zahra, S. A., Sapienza, H. J., & Davidsson, P. (2006). Entrepreneurship and dynamic capabil-
ities: A review, model and research agenda. Journal of Management Studies, 43(4),
917–955. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-6486.2006.00616.x.
Zaoui, F., & Souissi, N. (2020). Roadmap for digital transformation: A literature review.
Procedia Computer Science, 175, 621–628. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2020.07.090.
Zollo, M., & Winter, S. G. (1999). From organizational routines to dynamic capabilities. INSEAD.
Zollo, M., & Winter, S. G. (2002). Deliberate learning and the evolution of dynamic capabili-
ties. Organization Science, 13(3), 339–351. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.13.3.339.2780.
J. Konopik et al. Digital Business 2 (2022) 100019
13