--- PAGE 1 ---
ScienceDirect
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Procedia Computer Science 176 (2020) 2497–2506
1877-0509 © 2020 TheAuthors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the KES International.
10.1016/j.procs.2020.09.326
© 2020 TheAuthors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the KES International.
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
Procedia Computer Science 00 (2020) 000–000
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia
1877-0509 © 2019 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Peer-review under responsibility of KES International.
24th International Conference on Knowledge-Based and Intelligent Information & Engineering
Systems
Industry 4.0 Impact Propagation on Enterprise Architecture Models
Elena Kornyshovaa,
*, Judith Barriosb
a
Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers, CEDRIC Lab, 2, rue Conté, Paris, 75003, France
b
University of Los Andes, Systems Engineering School, Núcleo La Hechicera, Mérida, 5101A, Venezuela.
Abstract
Industry 4.0 (I4.0) brings a new revolution into the enterprises world, but this phenomenon is larger and covers organizations of
different kinds: governmental, educational, cultural, healthcare, and other institutions. Enterprise Architecture (EA) provides a
whole vision, using sets of models or blueprints, of an organization along with its information technologies, business processes
and strategies. Many research and practical works are made to clarify the I4.0 impact on organizations or to guide EA
practitioners through the transformation process that allows them to maintain the organizational alignment, performance, and
competitiveness. However, in the reviewed literature we have not identified any conceptual work describing the I4.0 impact on
enterprise architectures models. In this paper, we present an approach of propagation of I4.0 impacts through EA models. Our
proposal includes an Industry 4.0 Impact Propagation Model and a process to apply it. In order to evaluate the completeness of
the model and test the process, we applied it to one of the most known EA frameworks TOGAF (The Open Group Architecture
Framework). We use the extended conceptual model of TOGAF version 9.2 to detail what would be the direct impact of an I4.0
transformation and how it can be propagated to identify all elements of EA models which should be adapted following the
introduction of an I4.0 component into an organization. We discuss the results of this evaluation.
© 2019 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Peer-review under responsibility of KES International.
Keywords: Enterprise Architecture; Digitalization; Industry 4.0; Impact Propagation
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +33-1-4027-2551; fax: +33-1-4027-2709.
E-mail address: elena.kornyshova@cnam.fr
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
Procedia Computer Science 00 (2020) 000–000
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia
1877-0509 © 2019 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Peer-review under responsibility of KES International.
24th International Conference on Knowledge-Based and Intelligent Information & Engineering
Systems
Industry 4.0 Impact Propagation on Enterprise Architecture Models
Elena Kornyshovaa,
*, Judith Barriosb
a
Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers, CEDRIC Lab, 2, rue Conté, Paris, 75003, France
b
University of Los Andes, Systems Engineering School, Núcleo La Hechicera, Mérida, 5101A, Venezuela.
Abstract
Industry 4.0 (I4.0) brings a new revolution into the enterprises world, but this phenomenon is larger and covers organizations of
different kinds: governmental, educational, cultural, healthcare, and other institutions. Enterprise Architecture (EA) provides a
whole vision, using sets of models or blueprints, of an organization along with its information technologies, business processes
and strategies. Many research and practical works are made to clarify the I4.0 impact on organizations or to guide EA
practitioners through the transformation process that allows them to maintain the organizational alignment, performance, and
competitiveness. However, in the reviewed literature we have not identified any conceptual work describing the I4.0 impact on
enterprise architectures models. In this paper, we present an approach of propagation of I4.0 impacts through EA models. Our
proposal includes an Industry 4.0 Impact Propagation Model and a process to apply it. In order to evaluate the completeness of
the model and test the process, we applied it to one of the most known EA frameworks TOGAF (The Open Group Architecture
Framework). We use the extended conceptual model of TOGAF version 9.2 to detail what would be the direct impact of an I4.0
transformation and how it can be propagated to identify all elements of EA models which should be adapted following the
introduction of an I4.0 component into an organization. We discuss the results of this evaluation.
© 2019 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Peer-review under responsibility of KES International.
Keywords: Enterprise Architecture; Digitalization; Industry 4.0; Impact Propagation
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +33-1-4027-2551; fax: +33-1-4027-2709.
E-mail address: elena.kornyshova@cnam.fr

--- PAGE 2 ---
2498 Elena Kornyshova et al. / Procedia Computer Science 176 (2020) 2497–2506
2 Elena Kornyshova and Judith Barrios / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2020) 000–000
1. Introduction
Nowadays, enterprises are immersed in a continuous evolution process because they have to cope with forced
changes induced by the appearing of new challenges in their economic and competitive contexts. Most of these
challenges are caused by the need of renovating current Information Technology (IT) and Information Systems (IS)
architectures in order to support new organizational goals and strategies [1], [2], [3], [4]. For instance, the technical
revolution named Industry 4.0 (I4.0), disrupts all enterprise functions related to product distribution,
commercialization, and the way enterprise interacts with clients, suppliers, and competitors [5].
In order to face all these challenges, managers should know and control the current and potential capacities of the
whole organization. Correspondingly, to assure changes implementation agility, managers need to have models of
what are the current and potential IT platforms and business processes capacities, along with what is the degree of
organizational flexibility to implement the required changes. In this context, Enterprise Architecture (EA) models
are appreciated management and technical tools because they describe organizations from complementary
viewpoints: Business, Information Systems (including software applications and data) and their Technology
platform [6], [7]. These models represent the main enterprise elements from business goals and strategies to
technical production platform passing through business and production processes, enterprise actors and their roles,
information systems and their IT support platform [8], [9]; accordingly, when a demand for a business change
arrives, managers may well calculate, based on the knowledge stocked in EA models, what are the possibilities of
change and analyze them. Likewise, existing I4.0 models describe main industry elements, essentially, at operational
and production levels [5], including product life cycle, without neglecting some elements involved in tactical
decisions at managerial level [10]. For instance, the enterprise hierarchical levels axe allows industry managers and
technicians to coordinate execution and monitor current performance in order to analyze and take decisions about
the operational and production changes required by the industrial context; i.e. those coming from the connected
world [11].
Our long-term goal is to specify how companies with established enterprise architectures should progress towards
an EA state including components from Industry 4.0. In our previous work [12], we detected that the element called
I4.0 component impacts almost all of the EA elements at all architecture perspectives. Considering that EA models
are related to each other and they constitute the basis of EA approaches [13], [14], [15], [16], our intermediate
research goal is to identify which elements of EA models are impacted by the introduction of an I4.0 component,
and what is the severity of this impact. The analysis of the impact should take into account complex relationships
between different EA models. Thus, in this paper, we study the impact from immediate interactions of I4.0
components with the corresponding EA elements to the indirect impact progressively identified though the
connections between EA models and their elements. Our intention is to guide EA leaders through the progressive
evolution of EA when integrating I4.0 components without substantial cost and time investment.
Our research goal in this paper is to identify which of the EA models and their elements should be adapted when
introducing an I4.0 component into an existing EA. To deal with this problem we introduce a propagation approach
in order to emphasize this piecemeal consideration of the I4.0 component impact. The propagation approach
includes an I4.0 Impact propagation conceptual model and a process for helping its application.
To evaluate our proposal, we use a mixed approach: we establish a descriptive scenario to specify how and why
we apply our proposal to an EA framework, more precisely to The Open Group Architecture Framework (TOGAF)
9.2 [16]. Within this scenario, we apply an analytical evaluation method by means of a static analysis to “examine
structure of artifact for static quality” [17]. The main quality we want to check is the model completeness: whether
the proposed propagation model includes all needed concepts to represent the Industry 4.0 impact propagation. In
addition, we test our application process during this evaluation with regards to its feasibility and utility.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents an excerpt of works associated with our research.
Section 3 describes the I4.0 impact propagation model and the associated process. In Section 4, we evaluate our
proposal by its application to TOGAF 9.2 and we discuss the results. We conclude and outline our future work in
Section 5.

--- PAGE 3 ---
Elena Kornyshova et al. / Procedia Computer Science 176 (2020) 2497–2506 2499
Elena Kornyshova and Judith Barrios / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2020) 000–000 3
2. Related Works
According to [18], the term digital transformation (DT) is referred as the process of transforming resources to
digital. A DT process implies to convert main organizational resources from manual or physical to digital (virtual or
abstract); consequently, it prompts enforced modifications on the organizational structure, business and production
processes. This means that any change in the way of working, any inclusion of new objects and resources or the
updates of them, any enhancement of the collaboration between machines (virtual or physical) and humans,
modifying their roles and responsibilities, is a transformation that distresses the internal and external environment of
the enterprise.
I4.0 initiative aims to transform the way industries and business organizations generate value, products and
services by combining many new technologies, especially, artificial intelligent features. For instance, among the
new combined and embedded technologies linked to I4.0 and this new way of creating business value, are: Internet
of Things for interconnecting business objects with the standardization of digital tools, Cyber-Physical-Systems
(CPS), cloud computing, the exploitation of organizational data for monitoring and increasing cooperative business
functioning, called data analytics [19], [20], [21], and so on.
We present in this section an excerpt of main works concerning our topic. First, we mention the research and
practical works related to the impact of digital transformation on the enterprise architecture approach as well as its
future trends; then, we present the works associated with I4.0 model extensions to better fit the evolution of smart
technologies.
The research work described in [22] investigates the evolution of EA considering new defined value-oriented
mapping between digital strategies, digital business models and an improved digital enterprise architecture. The
authors make a proposition for architecting digital services and products following, both, a value-oriented and a
service perspective. The paper presented in [15] discusses the “Grand Challenges” of organizations in the future and
exposes some theories and models for addressing them, especially, by enterprise architecture frameworks. The
research presented in [23] explores the implications of digital transformation on EA; authors emphasize that
enterprises increase their complexity by pertaining to digital ecosystems. They conclude that today’s digital
environment demands enterprise adaptive capabilities in order to have an EA flexible et resilient. The work
described in [24] present a set of concepts of digital transformation and EA; the work is based on selected
publications taken from the literature for discussing the potential role of EA in supporting digital transformation and
the existing gap in research on how to leverage EA for digital transformation. In the same way, the work in progress
described in [25] aims to a speciﬁcation of a conceptual architecture of smart systems for supporting the
management of disruptions in the manufacturing domain. This approach is focused on software systems architecture
based on a number of interrelated viewpoints according to the ISO 42010 standard. Finally, and almost in a
technological direction, [26] presents a proposal to identify and analyze technical and technological gaps between
existing and new emerging technologies for developing new reference models and architectures adjusted to next-
generation enterprises. These works are specific to several architecture perspectives, thus, they do not consider EA
models and perspectives within an integrated whole.
Subsequently, we reviewed more technical approaches that propose how to integrate new IT elements into EA
models and, to solve explicit interoperability problems related to them. The research work described in [27] extends
the EA data architecture with fine grained guidelines to include data analytic and other operational elements to
capture, process and exploit the whole organizational and production data. A Service-Oriented Enterprise
Architecture (SOEA) approach is proposed by [28] as a new holistic EA paradigm; it is based on a multi-layered and
value-chained service-based scenario to cope with I4.0 technology revolution. [29] describes a proposal for
adaptable EA, thus engineers can better cope with software and service-oriented applications development and
maintenance. Later and, in order to make transparent the impact of business and IT changes over the enterprise
architectural capabilities, same authors, introduce the Enterprise Services Architecture Reference Cube (ESARC)
[30], which constitutes a meta-model to integrate architectural objects of Internet-of-Things into a holistic digital EA
environment to leverage and extend previous EA efforts and, enable business value.
To complete the research works review, we revised I4.0 research works discussed in conferences, workshops and,
on dedicated blogs and webpages. As mentioned, I4.0 proposes a reference architecture that arranges business
functioning and new smart technology into the same structure. The architecture is represented by the model

--- PAGE 4 ---
2500 Elena Kornyshova et al. / Procedia Computer Science 176 (2020) 2497–2506
4 Elena Kornyshova and Judith Barrios / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2020) 000–000
RAMI4.0 proposed by the Standardization Council I4.0 (SCI4.0) and published by [14]. Many of research works are
application scenarios of the framework [31], adaptations or extensions of RAMI4.0 in order to fit industrial
particular requirements [32], the addition of security elements to the reference architecture [33] and, a
standardization model for services [34]. There are other works that evaluate the RAMI4.0 architecture model in
order to define its precision and fitness to assume enterprises digitalization needs, or to align it to an Intelligent
Manufacturing Systems Architecture [15], [35], [36]. Same way, the work of [37] propose a simplification of the
reference architecture in order to better apply I4.0 in enterprise situations. The work described in [38] considers the
enterprise digital evolution through the integration between RAMI4.0 and the Industrial Internet Reference
Architecture (IIRA). As the I4.0 component is the central element of the RAMI4.0 model, the works of [39] and
[40] describe in detail, at technical level, how to implement and insert new I4.0 components into an IT infrastructure
according to RAMI4.0. Finally, we refer to the work reported in [5] and suggesting to represent new business
processes after the impact caused, by the I4.0 change, in the existing enterprise functioning model. This paper
extends BPMN, a standard process modelling notation, to better represent the gap between current and future
business process architecture states. The proposal excludes other management business features and their
interactions; and, there is not a conceptual model that would allow a comparative analysis between the old and new
business process models.
Summing up this section, we conclude that most of the revised works concern how enterprises and industries,
immersed in a continuous changing context called digital transformation, apply either EA or I4.0 models. Some
works recommend how to adapt I4.0 or EA models to context transformations, independently. Nevertheless, none of
these works proposes an integrated approach about how to adapt EA models to I4.0. As digital transformation is
driven by operational and technical initiatives that take advantage of a variety of intelligent and autonomous digital
technologies, we consider that these technologies must be included as key elements into current enterprise and
industry working models in order to better understand and face the disruption challenges.
Finally, we are aware that some of the works mentioned in this section, present their own conceptual models,
most of them justified by practical needs and by the instantiation of business cases; but, the described models are
still placed at a technical and operational enterprise production levels. As a result, they do not provide an explicitly
conceptual or practical connection between the technical and operational levels on the one side and higher
coordination, management and decisional levels one the other side. Therefore, we hold that there is a clear need for
establishing what are the correspondences between concepts representing EA elements and those representing I4.0
components. These correspondences will make explicit the enterprise knowledge required, as EA models elements,
for supporting leaders’ and EA architects’ project decisions as well as business managers´ transformation decisions.
3. Industry 4.0 Impact Propagation Model and its Application Process
As mentioned before, the core of EA approaches is represented by conceptual models, reflecting enterprise
elements at different levels: business processes, data, applications, and IT models. Conceptual links should be
established in order to highlight possible relationships between an introduced I4.0 component and the corresponding
elements of the EA models. By means of these established relationships, it will be feasible to identify all the
impacted existing EA elements already included in EA models. As the impacted EA model elements are identified
in a progressive manner following connections existing within the set of EA models, we call it a Propagation Model
and we represent it using the UML class diagram depicted in Fig. 1. To respect the artifacts design principles [17]
and to produce better guidelines while applying the propagation model, we add a description of its application
process (Fig. 2).

--- PAGE 5 ---
Elena Kornyshova et al. / Procedia Computer Science 176 (2020) 2497–2506 2501 Elena Kornyshova and Judith Barrios / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2020) 000–000 5
Model_Element
Name
EA_Model
Name
Perspective
Name
*
I4.0_Component
Descriptor
Body
*
*
Impact
Type{direct,indirect}
Effect{introduce,update,maintain,drop}
*
*
* Relationship
Name
Type{association,aggregation,composition,generalization}
corresponds_to
1
0..*
Fig. 1. Industry 4.0 Impact Propagation Model.
The propagation model is composed of the following elements:
Perspective. The EA models are grouped into perspectives described by their names. The perspectives list
depends on the selected EA framework. For instance, the TOGAF EA framework [16] includes the Business,
Information Systems (Application and Data), and Technology perspectives called Architectures. Each EA model
belongs to a perspective (the corresponds_to association). However, in a concrete organization, a perspective could
be not implemented.
EA Model. An EA model groups different model elements of the same type. EA models could be business process
models, data models, applications models, technology models, and so on. An EA model (characterized by a name) is a
composition of EA model elements (the composition link on the EA model class in the propagation model).
Model Element. A model element represents each single enterprise element included as part of any of EA models.
It could represent a process, an object, an actor, a system or a technological enterprise component. Each model
element has at least a name. Other characteristics depend on the model type.
Relationship. Model elements are related to each other. Possible relationship types are a simple association, an
aggregation, a composition or a generalization. We use here the basic relationships type from UML [41], but this list
is not exhaustive, it could be completed with others like sequence or exclusivity link. Each relationship has a name
to characterize its nature.
I4.0 Component. I4.0 components correspond to various elements or components of digital technologies
introduced into an organization. An I4.0 component could be an atomic or a composite one. To express the latest
one, we use a recursive aggregation link on the I4.0 component. The I4.0 component has two main attributes:
descriptor and body. A descriptor allows to identify the given component. For instance, in the RAMI4.0 framework,
it corresponds to the Administration Shell [11]. The body is the core of the I4.0 component like in RAMI4.0 [11].
Impact. The impact represents an association class between a I4.0 component and an EA model element. Each
I4.0 component can impact a number of EA model elements and each Model element can be impacted by several
I4.0 components. For each, we can identify the type of impact: direct or indirect, and the effect of impact. With
regard to the impact type, the direct impact is when the I4.0 component touches directly a model element. The
indirect impact is deduced from the directly impact model element and from other model elements related to the
directly impacted element by different relationships. Direct or indirect impacts may have different effects on model
elements. Inspired from [42], the effect caused on model elements could be introduce new element, update element,
maintain element, or drop element. Introducing a new element means that a new EA element should be added
following the introduction of an I4.0 component. Update element implies that the corresponding EA element ought
to be revised in order to extend or modify some of its attributes, functionalities and/or its interactions with other

--- PAGE 6 ---
2502 Elena Kornyshova et al. / Procedia Computer Science 176 (2020) 2497–2506
6 Elena Kornyshova and Judith Barrios / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2020) 000–000
elements. A maintained EA element remains the same (no impact). An EA element can be dropped if it is not
required anymore after the introduction of the an I4.0 component.
In order to identify propagated impact through the whole set of the EA models within an organization, we suggest
using the process presented in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2. Process of the Industry 4.0 Impact Propagation Model Application.
Identify the direct impact(s). Depending on the description of the I4.0 component, define the EA model
element(s) which are directly touched and associate the corresponding impact effect. The EA Models and the
proposed propagation model constitute the Inputs of this step.
Identify the indirect impact(s). Using the relationships between different model elements, deduce the related
impacted elements and associate the corresponding impact effect.
Group the identified impacts by EA model. Put together the identified impact within the corresponding EA model
and check consistency within each model (verify the presence of contradictory or double impacts within the same
EA model and arbitrate).
Group the impacted EA models by perspective. Gather the impacted EA models within the corresponding EA
perspective and check the consistency (verify the presence of contradictory or similar modifications within the same
EA perspective and arbitrate). This step produces the final document containing the identified I4.0 impact.
4. Application to TOGAF 9.2
To validate the conception of the propagation model and to test the associated process, we have established the
following scenario. Firstly, we selected The Open Group Architecture Framework (TOGAF) 9.2 [16] as one of the
most known EA frameworks. TOGAF is an Open framework, thus it is accessed easily. Secondly, we reviewed its full
content meta-model (cf. [16], p. 287) to check whether the EA model elements are clearly identified. The TOGAF 9.2
content meta-model “provides a definition of all the types of building blocks that may exist within an architecture,
show how these building blocks can be described and related to one another” [16], thus it contains all EA entities
(corresponding to model elements from the propagation model) and the relationships between them. Based on this, we
confirmed our intention to use TOGAF 9.2 as EA framework for validation. Thirdly, we applied the propagation
process step by step by carrying out a detailed analysis of all meta-model elements and their relationships (from both
meta-model from p. 287 of TOGAF 9.2 and its detailed description given on pages 301-303 and 314-317 of TOGAF
9.2 [16]). Finally, we analyzed the obtained result to state about completeness of the proposal.
Identify direct impacts. We checked all TOGAF 9.2 meta-model entities (cf. Section 30.5 of TOGAF 9.2 [16],
pages 301-303) to select the most complete list of entities which could be impacted directly by an I4.0 component

--- PAGE 7 ---
Elena Kornyshova et al. / Procedia Computer Science 176 (2020) 2497–2506 2503
Elena Kornyshova and Judith Barrios / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2020) 000–000 7
and qualify them as direct impacts. The inclusion criteria are (i) the TOGAF entity is an independent atomic
component, (ii) it could be easily replaced by a new component of I4.0, (iii) it encapsulates a chunk of an
application, data, or infrastructure. For instance, we have included the Physical Technology Component as it is “a
specific technology infrastructure product or technology infrastructure product instance” [16] as a Commercial Off-
The-Shelf (COTS) solution. We have excluded the Physical Data Component (“a boundary zone that encapsulates
related data entities to form a physical location to be held” [16]) as it represents a sub-set of data entities, thus it
does not correspond to an independent component easily replaceable. Another example of exclusion is the Logical
Application Component which is “an encapsulation of application functionality that is independent of a particular
implementation” [16]: as it is not implemented, it could not be replaced by an I4.0 component. The used strategy
was to take each TOGAF entity and to check it with regards to the established criteria. The list of the identified
direct impacts comprises seven (7) from 35 TOGAF 9.2 meta-model entities: Data Entity, Information System
Service, Logical Technology Component, Physical Application Component, Physical Technology Component,
Process, and Technology Service.
Identify indirect impacts. To identify indirect impacts, we used the TOGAF 9.2 meta-model relationships (cf.
Section 30.7 of TOGAF 9.2 [16], pages 314-317). For each previously identified direct impact, we have repeated the
following procedure: enumerate all other entities related by at least one relationship from the meta-model and its
textual description (more complete than the graphical representation of the meta-model); if more than one
relationship is present between two entities, enumerate all of them; qualify them as indirect impacts; for each
indirect impact, select one or more possible impact effects; for impact, identify the corresponding EA model and EA
perspective. For instance, Process is related to Control by “Is guided by” relationship. Due to the nature of this
relationship, we deduce that the Control entity could only by updated further to the changes in a Process Entity. In
TOGAF, the Control entity is a part of the Process Modelling Extension (EA model) within the Business
Architecture perspective. Table 1 illustrates the first-level impact. The next levels are done in the same manner.
Group the identified impacts by EA model. Identified impacted TOGAF Entities were grouped into TOGAF
Models (illustrated in Table 1). This step corresponds to the simple identification of the corresponding EA model
from the TOGAF documentation. The consistency could be checked only in a case of a concrete project.
Group the impacted EA models by perspective. Identified impacted TOGAF Models were grouped into
perspectives (shown in Table 1). This step includes the identification of EA perspectives from the TOGAF
documentation. As for the previous step, the consistency could be checked in a given case.
Based on the application of the propagation approach to TOGAF 9.2, we have obtained the following evaluation
results:
• The concepts of the propagation model (EA Element, I4.0 Component, Relationship classes, and Impact
association class) are sufficient to represent links between an introduced I4.0 component and directly and
indirectly impacted EA elements. This model proposes a quite simple but concise way to trace the I4.0 impact.
• In the whole, the initial propagation model was not sufficient as we did not include EA perspective as a class. Based
on the first iteration of the application process, we noticed that it is important to have this additional aggregation
level to check the global consistency at least for the EA frameworks containing this granularity level as TOGAF 9.2.
But it could be optional, especially for small and medium organizations. As a result, the class EA perspective was
added.
• With regards to the application process, we confirmed that it is useful to have main steps guiding in the propagation
model application, In addition, we stated that first two steps could be applied on the EA framework; but, the third
and fourth steps could be completely checked only in a given project of the I4.0 component introduction into EA
models.
• Finally, we noticed as the major limitation of our proposal, that the feasibility of our approach depends on the
solid knowledge about EA concepts and related technology, that EA leaders and practitioners ought to have in
order to well apply it in real EA projects. Further, this background and expertise is essential to take advantage of
the results attained after the application of the propagation model.
Overall, the evaluation of our proposal by applying it to TOGAF 9.2 allowed us to complete the model, to
confirm its utility, and to identify its limitations. We aim to overcome these limitations as part of our future work.

--- PAGE 8 ---
2504 Elena Kornyshova et al. / Procedia Computer Science 176 (2020) 2497–2506
8 Elena Kornyshova and Judith Barrios / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2020) 000–000
Table 1. Industry 4.0 Impact Propagation Model Applied to TOGAF
Direct Impacts Indirect Impacts Possible Impact Effects Corresponding EA Model EA Perspective
Data Entity Logical Data Component Update Data Modeling Extension Data Architecture
Business Service Update Core Model/ Behavior Business Architecture
Information System Service Introduce, Update Service Extension IS Architecture
Data Entity Introduce, Update, Maintain, or Drop* Core Model/ Data Model Data Architecture
Information
System Service
Data Entity Introduce, Update, Maintain, or Drop* Core Model/ Data Model Data Architecture
Business Service Introduce, Update, Maintain, or Drop* Core Model/ Behavior Business Architecture
Technology Service Introduce, Update, Maintain, or Drop* Core Model Technology
Architecture
Logical Application
Component
Introduce, Update, Maintain, or Drop* Core Model Application
Architecture
Logical
Technology
Component
Logical Application
Component
Update Core Model Application
Architecture
Logical Technology
Component
Introduce, Update, Maintain, or Drop* Infrastructure Consolidation
Extension
Technology
Architecture
Physical Technology
Component
Introduce, Update, Maintain, or Drop* Core Model Technology
Architecture
Technology Service Update Core Model Technology
Architecture
Business Service Update Core Model/ Behavior Business Architecture
Physical
Application
Component
Logical Application
Component
Introduce, Update, Maintain, Drop* Core Model Application
Architecture
Physical Data Component Introduce, Update, Maintain, Drop* Data Modeling Extension Data Architecture
Physical Technology
Component
Introduce, Update, Maintain, Drop* Core Model Technology
Architecture
Physical Application
Component
Introduce, Update, Maintain, Drop* Infrastructure Consolidation
Extension
Application
Architecture
Physical
Technology
Component
Physical Application
Component
Update Infrastructure Consolidation
Extension
Application
Architecture
Logical Technology
Component
Introduce, Update, Maintain, Drop* Infrastructure Consolidation
Extension
Technology
Architecture
Physical Technology
Component
Introduce, Update, Maintain, Drop* Core Model Technology
Architecture
Process Control Update Process Modeling Extension Business Architecture
Event Introduce, Update, Maintain, Drop* Process Modeling Extension Business Architecture
Function Introduce, Update, Maintain, Drop* Core Model/ Behavior Business Architecture
Organization Unit Update Core Model/ Organization Business Architecture
Product Introduce, Update, Maintain, Drop* Process Modeling Extension Business Architecture
Role Introduce, Update, Maintain, Drop* Core Model/ Organization Business Architecture
Business Service Introduce, Update, Maintain, Drop* Core Model/ Behavior Business Architecture
Process Introduce, Update, Maintain, Drop* Core Model/ Behavior Business Architecture
Technology
Service
Logical Technology
Component
Introduce, Update, Maintain, Drop* Infrastructure Consolidation
Extension
Technology
Architecture
Information System Service Update Service Extension IS Architecture
* The choice between these effects is made depending on the nature of the direct impact.

--- PAGE 9 ---
Elena Kornyshova et al. / Procedia Computer Science 176 (2020) 2497–2506 2505
Elena Kornyshova and Judith Barrios / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2020) 000–000 9
5. Conclusion and Future Works
In this paper, we propose an impact propagation model and the associated process to use when introducing an
Industry 4.0 component into current EA models. The outcome of the proposal application is the identification of the set
of EA models and their elements, that should be revised and adapted after the inclusion of new I4.0 components. In
order to assure that the proposition is complete and viable, we examine it, as a general strategy, through the TOGAF
9.2 meta-model. This validation process was based on the detailed analysis of each of the meta-model concepts as well
as of their relationships. Initially, we identified the direct impacts caused by I4.0 components over TOGAF meta-model
entities; then, we determine those entities that may be impacted as a result of their relationships and dependencies, with
those entities already identified as direct impacted entities. The obtained results will provide EA leaders and
practitioners with practical guidelines and, EA researchers with a theoretical propagation model along with its
associated application process. EA practitioners can use the proposal to optimize the existing EA models and, to make
them up to date with regards to the digital evolution. From the theoretical point of view, the propagation model will
serve as a building block for approaches of Enterprise Architecture 4.0 and their related conceptual models.
In our future research we envisage several directions: first, it is imperative to validate the propagation approach
in a real EA project. Second, we envisage the possibility to provide a support tool to help practitioners to apply the
propagation approach. Third, we will continue to prepare different building blocks to adapt EA frameworks to the
I4.0 evolution. Finally, we intent to explore the flexibility of our approach to transcend from a single enterprise
context to a business consortium like in a I4.0 business ecosystem.
References
[1] “IT Governance Audit Guide for Companies in the Digital Era.” (2019) Cigref, Afai-Isaca, Ifaci, 2nd Edition.
[2] O'Donnell, Jim (2018) “Smart manufacturing technology is changing business processes” https://searcherp.techtarget.com/feature/Smart-
manufacturing-technology-is-changing-business-processes?vgnextfmt=print (Accessed September 2018).
[3] Kagermann, Henning, Wolfgang Wahlster, and Johannes Helbig. (2013) “Recommendations for implementing the strategic initiative
INDUSTRIE 4.0. Final report of the Industrie 4.0 Working Group.” https://www.din.de/blob/76902/
e8cac883f42bf28536e7e8165993f1fd/recommendations-for-implementing-industry-4-0-data.pdf (Accessed March 2020).
[4] Tapia, Roberto Santana, Maya Daneva, Pascal van Eck, Nicte-Há Castro Cárdenas, and Leida van Oene. (2008) “Business-IT Alignment
Domains and Principles for Networked Organizations: A Qualitative Multiple Case Study”, in Meersman R., Tari Z., Herrero P. (eds) On the
Move to Meaningful Internet Systems: OTM 2008 Workshops, vol 5333. Berlin, Heidelberg.
[5] Petrasch, Roland, and Roman Hentschke. (2016) “Process Modeling for Industry 4.0 Applications. Towards an Industry 4.0 Process Modeling
Language and Method”, in 13th
International Joint Conference on Computer Science and Software Engineering (JCSSE), Khon Kaen, pp. 1-5.
[6] Schwarz, Johannes, Nicola Terrenghi, and Christine Legner. (2017) “Towards Comparable Business Model Concepts: Resource Description
Framework (RDF) Schemas for Semantic Business Model Representations”, in 12th
International Conference on Design Science Research in
Information Systems and Technology (DESRIST), Karlsruhe, Germany.
[7] Wieringa, Roel (2019). “Business modeling for blockchain applications.” Internal Report University of Twente. The Value Engineers.
www.thevalueengineers.nl (Accessed October 2019).
[8] Antunes, Gonzalo, Artur Caetano, Marzieh Bakhshandeh, Rudolf Mayer, and José Borbinha. (2013) “Using ontologies for enterprise
architecture model alignment”, in 4th
Workshop on Business and IT Alignment (BITA), Poznan, Poland.
[9] Neto Granjo, José (2014) “Validating Value Network Business Models.” Master thesis, Lisbon, Portugal.
[10] Alcácer, Vítor, and Virgilio Cruz–Machado. (2019) “Scanning the Industry 4.0: a literature review on technologies for manufacturing
systems.” Engineering Science and Technology: International journal 22: 899-919.
[11] “The Reference Architectural Model RAMI 4.0 and the Industrie 4.0 Component” (2015) https://www.zvei.org/en/subjects/industrie-4-0/the-
reference-architectural-model-rami-40-and-the-industrie-40-component/ (Accessed January 2020).
[12] Kornyshova, Elena, and Judith Barrios. (2019) “Exploring the Impact produced by the Industry 4.0 on Enterprise Architecture Models”, in
13th
International Conference on Research Challenges in Information Science (RCIS), Brussels, Belgium, pp. 1-6.
[13] Zachman, John (2008) “The Concise Definition of The Zachman Framework by: John A. Zachman.” John A. Zachman, Founder, Zachman
International®, Inc. https://www.zachman.com/about-the-zachman-framework (Accessed January 2020).
[14] Cameron, Brian, and Eric McMillan. (2013) “Analyzing the Current Trends in Enterprise Architecture Frameworks.” Journal of Enterprise
Architecture, http://ea.ist.psu.edu/documents/journal_feb2013_cameron_2.pdf (Accessed January 2020).
[15] Lapalme, James, Aurona Gerber, Alta Van der Merwe, John A. Zachman, Marne de Vries, and Knut Hinkelmann. (2016) “Exploring the
future of enterprise architecture: A Zachman perspective.” Computers in Industry 79: 103–113.
[16] “The Open Group Architecture Framework.” https://publications.opengroup.org/i182 (Accessed December 2019)

--- PAGE 10 ---
2506 Elena Kornyshova et al. / Procedia Computer Science 176 (2020) 2497–2506
10 Elena Kornyshova and Judith Barrios / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2020) 000–000
[17] Hevner, Alan, Salvatore March, Jinsoo Park, and Sudha Ram. (2004) “Design Science in Information Systems Research”. in Information
Systems Research. MIS Quarterly; 28(1): 75-105.
[18] Bockshecker, Alina, Sarah Hackstein, and Ulrike Baumöl. (2018) “Systematization: digital transformation and phenomena”, in 26th
European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS), Portsmouth, United Kingdom.
[19] Adolphs, Peter, Heinz Bedenbender, Dagmar Dirzus, Martin Ehlich, Ulrich Epple, Martin Hankel, Ronald Heidel, Michael Hoffmeister,
Haimo Huhle, Bernd Kärcher, Heiko Koziolek, Reinhold Pichler, Stefan Pollmeier, Frank Schewe, Armin Walter, Bernd Waser, and Martin
Wollschlaeger. (2015) “Reference Architecture Model Industrie 4.0 (RAMI4.0).” Status Report. Germany.
[20] Yang, Lu (2017) “Industry 4.0: A survey on technologies, applications and open research issues.” Journal of Industrial Information
Integration 6: 1–10.
[21] “Livre blanc: Industrie 4.0.” (2017) USITAB, https://usitab.com/livre-blanc-industrie-40-usitab-2/ (Accessed January 2020).
[22] Bhattacharya, Prithvi (2017) “Modelling Strategic Alignment of Business and IT through Enterprise Architecture: Augmenting Archimate
with BMM”, in International Conference on ENTERprise Information Systems (CENTERIS), Barcelona, Spain.
[23] Korhonen, Janne, and Marco Halén. (2017) “Enterprise Architecture for Digital Transformation”, in IEEE 19th
Conference on Business
Informatics (CBI), Thessaloniki, Greece, pp. 349-358.
[24] Hafsi, Mouaad, and Said Assar. (2016) “What Enterprise Architecture can bring for digital transformation? An exploratory study”, in IEEE
18th
Conference on Business Informatics (CBI), Paris, France, pp. 83-89.
[25] Kavakli, Evangelia, Jorge Buenabad-Chávez, Vasilius Tountopoulos, Pericles Loucopoulos, and Rizos Sakellariou. (2018) “WiP: An
Architecture for Disruption Management in Smart Manufacturing”, in IEEE International Conference on Smart Computing (SMARTCOMP),
Taormina, Italy, pp. 279-281.
[26] Moghaddam, Mohsen, C. Robert Kenley, Julia M. Colby, Marissa N. Cadavid Berns, Randy Rausch, Joel Markham, Wesley M. Skeffington,
John Garrity, Alok R. Chaturvedi, and Abhijit V. Deshmukh. (2017) “Next-Generation Enterprise Architectures Common Vernacular and
Evolution Towards Service-Orientation”, in IEEE 15th
International Conference on Industrial Informatics (INDIN), Emden, Germany, pp. 32-37
[27] Aldea, Adina, Maria-Eugenia Iacob, Andreas Wombacher, Marlon Hiralal, and Thijs Franck. (2018) “Enterprise Architecture 4.0 – A vision,
an approach and software tool support”, IEEE 22nd
International Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Conference (EDOC), Stockholm,
Sweden, pp. 1-10.
[28] Rabelo, Ricardo, Ovidiu Noran, and Peter Bernus. (2015) “Towards the Next Generation Service Oriented Enterprise Architecture", in IEEE
19th
International Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Workshop, Adelaide, SA, pp. 91-100.
[29] Zimmermann, Alfred, Bilal Gonen, Rainer Schmidt, Eman El-Sheikh, Sikha Bagui, and Norman Wilde. (2014) “Adaptable Enterprise
Architectures for Software Evolution of SmartLife Ecosystems”, in IEEE 18th
International Enterprise Distributed Object Computing
Conference Workshops and Demonstrations, Ulm, Germany, pp. 316-323.
[30] Zimmermann, Alfred, Rainer Schmidt, Kurt Sandkuhl, Matthias Wißotzki, Dierk Jugel, and Michael Möhring. (2015) “Digital Enterprise
Architecture - Transformation for the Internet of Things”, in IEEE 19th
International Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Workshop,
Adelaide, SA, pp. 130-138.
[31] Plattform Industrie 4.0. (2016a) “Aspects of the Research Roadmap in Application Scenarios.” Working paper. Federal Ministry for
Economic Affairs and Energy (BMWi), Public Relations, Berlin.
[32] Wang, Yubo, Thilo Towara, and Reiner Anderl. (2017) “Topological Approach for Mapping Technologies in Reference Architectural Model
Industrie 4.0 (RAMI 4.0)”, in 25th
World Congress on Engineering and Computer Science, San Francisco, CA, USA, pp. 982-990.
[33] Sharpe, Richard, Katherine Van Lopik, Aaron Neal, Paul Goodall, Paul Conway, and Andrew West. (2019) “An industrial evaluation of an
Industry 4.0 reference architecture demonstrating the need for the inclusion of security and human components.” Computers in Industry:
Journal 108: 37-44.
[34] Usländer, Thomas, and Christian Diedrich. (2018) “Services in Industrie 4.0 –Interaction-based Architecture as defined in the DIN SPEC
16593-1.” https://ifak.eu/de/EKA2018 (Accessed January 2020).
[35] Frysak, Josef, Claudia Kaar, and Chris Stary. (2018) “Benefits and Pitfalls Applying RAMI4.0,” in IEEE Industrial Cyber-Physical Systems
(ICPS), St. Petersburg, Russia, pp. 32-37.
[36] Sino-German I4.0/Intelligent Manufacturing Standardization Sub-Working Group (2018) “Alignment Report for Reference Architectural Model
for Industrie 4.0/Intelligent Manufacturing Systems Architecture.” Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy (BMWi), Berlin, Germany.
[37] Resman, Matevž, Miha Pipan, Marco Šimic, and Niko Herakovič. (2019) “A new architecture model for smart manufacturing: A performance
analysis and comparison with the RAMI 4.0 reference model.” Advances in Production Engineering & Management: Journal 14(2): 153–165.
[38] Lin, Shi-Wan, Brett Murphy, Erich Clauer, Ulrich Loewen, Ralf Neubert, Gerd Bachmann, Madhusudan Pai, and Martin Hankel. (2017)
“Architecture Alignment and Interoperability. An Industrial Internet Consortium and Plattform Industrie 4.0.” Whitepaper. Industrial Internet
Consortium.
[39] Platform Industry 4.0 (2016b) “Interaction Model for Industrie 4.0 Components.” Working paper. Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs
and Energy (BMWi), Public Relations, Berlin.
[40] Platform Industry 4.0 (2016c) “Relationships between I4.0 Components – Composite Components and Smart Production. Continuation of
the Development of the Reference Model for the I4.0. SG Models and Standards.” Working paper. Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and
Energy (BMWi), Public Relations, Berlin.
[41] Unified Modeling Language. https://www.omg.org/spec/UML/About-UML/ (Accessed January 2020).
[42] Barrios, Judith. (2001) Une méthode pour la définition de l'impact organisationnel du changement, PhD Thèses, Paris, France.