--- PAGE 1 ---
2021, Vol. 36(3)  275 –315
https://doi.org/10.1177/0268396220977873
Journal of Information Technology
  
© Association for Information 
Technology Trust 2020
Article reuse guidelines: 
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/0268396220977873
Journals.sagepub.com/jinf
JIT
Introduction
Nowadays, IT can be viewed as an essential competitive 
business asset. However, effective utilization of IT 
resources in organizations requires achieving close busi-
ness and IT alignment (Coltman et al., 2015; Gerow et al., 
2014). Enterprise architecture (EA) is a collection of spe-
cial documents, typically called artifacts, describing vari-
ous aspects of an organization from an integrated business 
and IT perspective (Kotusev, 2019a; Niemi and Pekkola, 
2017). Practicing EA in organizations implies using these 
EA artifacts to facilitate information systems planning and 
improve business and IT alignment (Kotusev, 2018b; Tamm 
et al., 2015).
The phenomenon of EA is far from new and exists 
essentially as long as information systems themselves. In 
fact, various flowcharts and models depicting the relation-
ship between system components and business operations 
that today would have been called “enterprise architecture” 
had been used even by the designers of LEO (Lyons 
Electronic Office), the very first business information sys-
tem initiated by J. Lyons and Company in the late 1940s 
(Aris, 2000; Mason, 2004). In the mainstream literature, the 
roots of EA can be traced back at least to the Business 
The theoretical basis of enterprise 
architecture: A critical review and 
taxonomy of relevant theories
Svyatoslav Kotusev1  and Sherah Kurnia2
Abstract
Enterprise architecture is a collection of artifacts describing various aspects of an organization from an integrated business 
and IT perspective. Practicing enterprise architecture in organizations implies using these artifacts to facilitate information 
systems planning and improve business and IT alignment. Despite its long history, the enterprise architecture discipline 
still remains largely atheoretical and lacks a solid theoretical basis. Based on our previous empirical studies of the practical 
usage of enterprise architecture artifacts in multiple organizations and broad literature analysis, this conceptual article 
identifies and discusses in detail 10 theories that can be considered key for understanding how an enterprise architecture 
practice works: actor-network theory, boundary objects theory, cognitive fit theory, communities of practice theory, 
decision-making theories, information processing theory, knowledge management theory, management fashion theory, 
media richness theory, and uncertainty principle. Taken together, these theories offer a comprehensive theoretical 
view of an enterprise architecture practice explaining the role of enterprise architecture artifacts, their usability, and 
participation of stakeholders and, therefore, may constitute a theoretical basis of the entire enterprise architecture 
discipline. Although this article does not elaborate on any of these theories, it brings these theories to light, establishes 
their critical importance for comprehending an enterprise architecture practice, and positions them as central to the 
enterprise architecture discourse. Each of these theories can be leveraged by enterprise architecture scholars in their 
future studies for analyzing enterprise architecture practices through respective theoretical lenses. This article intends 
to provide fresh theoretical insights on enterprise architecture, spark new waves of theoretical enterprise architecture 
research, and contribute to the development of a sound theoretical foundation for the enterprise architecture discipline.
Keywords
Enterprise architecture, theoretical basis, boundary objects theory, cognitive fit theory, management fashion theory, 
literature review
1National Research University Higher School of Economics, Russia
2University of Melbourne, Australia
Corresponding author:
Svyatoslav Kotusev, National Research University Higher School of 
Economics, Moscow 101000, Russia. 
Email: kotusev@kotusev.com
977873 JIN Journal of Information TechnologyKotusev and Kurnia
Research Paper


--- PAGE 2 ---
276 Journal of Information Technology 36(3)
2 Journal of Information Technology 00(0)
Systems Planning (BSP) methodology initiated by IBM in 
the end of the 1960s (Kotusev, 2016), if not to some earlier 
planning approaches, for example, Study Organization 
Plan (SOP) promoted also by IBM (Kotusev, 2018b). Since 
then, the discourse in the EA discipline had been dominated 
by prescriptive approaches originating mostly from consul-
tancies (Kotusev, 2018a; Langenberg and Wegmann, 2004). 
As Khoury and Simoff (2004) put it, “contemporary 
approaches to [EA] have been largely hijacked by the con-
sulting classes” (p. 65).
Unsurprisingly, as a discipline highly influenced by the 
publications of consultancies, the stream of EA research 
has been mostly atheoretical in nature (Al-Kharusi et al., 
2017; Langenberg and Wegmann, 2004; Schoenherr, 2008; 
Weiss et al., 2012). Although some theories, including the 
general systems theory (GST; Hoyland, 2011; Kloeckner 
and Birkmeier, 2009; Syynimaa, 2017) and institutional 
theory (Brosius et al., 2018; Dang, 2017; Hjort-Madsen, 
2007; Weiss et al., 2013), have been leveraged relatively 
widely by EA researchers as theoretical lenses for analyz-
ing EA practices, these theories do not address the core 
meaning of an EA practice, that is, creation and usage of 
EA artifacts by various organizational actors for communi-
cation and decision-making purposes. In other words, these 
theories fail to explain the regularities driving the practical 
usage of EA artifacts and how this usage helps improve 
business and IT alignment in organizations.
Taking into account that the EA discipline under differ-
ent titles (e.g. information systems planning, data architec-
ture, and information systems architecture) exists for 
decades, it would be fair to say that the theory of EA is 
developing very slowly, if not stuck in the dead end. On one 
hand, this fact suggests that the essence of an EA practice 
still remains insufficiently understood. On the other hand, 
this fact partially explains the undeserved scarcity of publi-
cations on EA, as a relevant, contemporary, and widely 
adopted practice, in the leading academic IS journals 
(Kotusev, 2017c; Mykhashchuk et al., 2011; Tamm et al., 
2011).
Our observations gained from our previous extensive 
empirical analysis of EA practices in multiple organizations 
(Kotusev, 2018c, 2019a; Kotusev et al., 2017, 2020) suggest 
that an EA practice, as a very multifaceted organizational 
phenomenon, actually has many relevant theoretical inter -
pretations explaining its various aspects, but these interpre-
tations have been mostly unnoticed, overlooked, or ignored 
by the EA research community. Hence, the research ques-
tion of this article can be formulated as follows: “What theo-
ries can be considered as the basis of the EA discipline?”
In order to attract the attention of EA researchers to the 
theories that may be necessary for understanding the mean-
ing of an EA practice, this conceptual article highlights the 
existing gap in selecting appropriate theoretical lenses for 
studying EA practices, identifies and discusses in detail 10 
theories directly related to the usage of EA artifacts, and 
demonstrates their applicability, potential, and value for the 
EA discipline. All these 10 theories are immediately rele-
vant to EA artifacts and their practical usage in organiza-
tions and, therefore, address the very essence of an EA 
practice, which presently remains “theoretically shallow.” 
Taken together, these theories offer a holistic theoretical 
view of an EA practice and its key aspects, including the 
general role of EA artifacts, their usability for decision-
making purposes, and participation of stakeholders.
Importantly, this article does not intend to elaborate in 
detail on any of these theories, but rather to bring these 
theories to light, establish their critical importance for 
understanding an EA practice, demonstrate their applicabil-
ity to EA studies, and position them as central to the EA 
discipline. The purpose of this article is to provide fresh 
theoretical insights into EA, spark new waves of theoretical 
EA research, stimulate future “theory-rich” EA studies, and 
thereby contribute to the development of a sound theoreti-
cal basis for the EA discipline.
This article continues as follows: (1) we discuss the 
existing situation with the use of theories in the EA disci-
pline and explain why the current situation is unsatisfac-
tory, (2) we describe our underlying empirical basis, key 
elements of an EA practice, and the process that was fol-
lowed to identify relevant theories explaining the meaning 
of an EA practice, (3) we discuss in detail 10 theories that 
can arguably be considered as a theoretical basis of the 
entire EA discipline, but are currently underutilized or not 
utilized at all, (4) we provide a comprehensive summary of 
the 10 identified theories demonstrating their relevance, 
potential, and value, (5) we discuss the key findings of this 
study, its theoretical and practical contribution to the EA 
discipline, and (6) we conclude the article by describing its 
limitations and outlining directions for future research.
Current theoretical views of EA
Traditionally, the EA discipline was largely atheoretical, 
disconnected from other disciplines and developed in a stan-
dalone manner. For instance, the authors of the first compre-
hensive EA literature review reported that “to us it was 
surprising that very few [EA] papers used the value of other 
disciplines to build up their theories” (Langenberg and 
Wegmann, 2004: 7). In a similar vein, Schoenherr (2008) 
concluded that “there is a lack of theoretical foundation, 
stringent definitions or a common understanding within the 
authors, who publish in the context of EA” (p. 403).
More recent analyses of the EA discipline also came to 
analogous conclusions (Al-Kharusi et al., 2017; Syynimaa, 
2017; Weiss et al., 2012). Specifically, Weiss et al. (2012) 
notice that “a theoretical foundation for [EA management] 
seems to be lacking” (p. 461). Syynimaa (2017) reports that 
“despite its popularity and 30 years of age, the literature 
review conducted on top information and management sci-
ence journals revealed that EA is still lacking the sound 
Kotusev and Kurnia 3
theoretical foundation” (p. 400). Likewise, Al-Kharusi 
et al. (2017) report that “one of the main findings of [our 
literature review] is the lack of theory utilization in EA 
studies” (p. 7).
Nevertheless, there were a number of deliberate attempts 
either to identify the theories that have been used in EA 
research (Al-Kharusi et al., 2017; Schilling, 2018), or to 
propose relevant theories to be used by researchers in the 
future (Syynimaa, 2017; Weiss et al., 2012). An independ-
ent search of the utilized theories had also been undertaken 
by the first author (S.K.) during a comprehensive review of 
the EA literature (Kotusev, 2017c). These efforts resulted in 
a combined exhaustive list of 32 theories that are used or 
proposed to be used in EA research provided in Appendix A 
(Theories Used in EA Research).
Taking into account the existence of more than a thou-
sand various EA publications (Kotusev, 2017c), the utiliza-
tion of theories in EA research can indeed be considered as 
pretty low (see Table 7 in Appendix A). Moreover, some of 
the theories are only proposed to be used, rather than actu-
ally used, for example, cognitive load, administrative 
behavior, and agency theories (Weiss et al., 2012). Some 
theories are employed only sporadically, for example, 
UTAUT (Hazen et al., 2014), living systems theory 
(Wegmann and Preiss, 2003), and dominant design theory 
(Bui et al., 2015). Some theories can be considered as 
“exotic,” for example, morphogenetic theory (Alwadain 
et al., 2014, 2016), or as very narrow-focused and single-
purposed, for example, IS success model (Lange et al., 
2016; Niemi and Pekkola, 2009). Some theories arguably 
offer little explanatory power, at least in the context of the 
EA discipline, for example, chaos theory (Saat et al., 2009) 
and contingency theory (Aier et al., 2011; Haki et al., 2012; 
Lahrmann et al., 2010; Leppanen et al., 2007; Riege and 
Aier, 2008). Other theories, though can be considered as 
explanatory, and are still employed only by separate authors 
or groups of authors, for example, boundary objects theory 
(Abraham, 2013, 2018; Abraham et al., 2013, 2015) and 
actor-network theory (Sidorova and Kappelman, 2010, 
2011a, 2011b).
At the same time, “grand” theories found relevant by 
many different authors and rather widely discussed in the 
context of the EA discipline, for example, institutional the-
ory (Aier and Weiss, 2012; Brosius et al., 2018; Dang, 
2017; Hjort-Madsen, 2007; Weiss et al., 2013) and GST 
(Hoyland, 2011; Kloeckner and Birkmeier, 2009; Syynimaa, 
2017; Weiss et al., 2012), may help understand only the 
notion of EA or an EA practice in general at a very high 
level, but these theories barely explain the internal mecha-
nisms constituting the essence of an EA practice at the level 
of specific actors, documents, and decisions. For instance, 
all the 16 studies by different groups of authors using the 
institutional theory (see Table 7 in Appendix A) analyze EA 
practices on an organization-wide scale, not at the level of 
specific EA artifacts and their usage scenarios, while the 
applicability of the GST in relation to EA is an evident tru-
ism and tautology since this theory by its very definition 
applies to all systems of physical, biological, social, or any 
other nature ranging from separate atoms to transcendental 
systems (Boulding, 1956; von Bertalanffy, 1968). 
Consequently, the theoretical foundation of the EA disci-
pline still seems to be rather rudimentary and is developing 
very slowly, arguably showing little or no substantial pro-
gress over the years.
On one hand, this lack of a sound theoretical under -
standing may signify that the core meaning of an EA prac-
tice is still poorly understood beyond certain abstract 
generalities, for example, thinking systematically, creating 
some EA artifacts, making optimal planning decisions, and 
managing complexity. Most importantly, the existing EA 
literature does not explain clearly what theoretical mecha-
nisms enable business and IT alignment in organizations, 
how these mechanisms work together as part of an EA prac-
tice, in which circumstances they may not work as expected, 
and why EA practices in organizations often fail. Although 
EA initiatives are infamously known for their low success 
rates (DiGirolamo, 2009; Jacobson, 2007; Roeleven, 2010; 
Zink, 2009), the existing EA literature rarely goes beyond 
the superficial identification of various success factors and 
pitfalls of an EA practice (Ambler, 2010; Jusuf and Kurnia, 
2017; Kurnia et al., 2020a; Lange et al., 2016; Levy, 2014) 
and does not provide any deeper insights or coherent theo-
ries explaining the underlying mechanisms of these suc-
cesses and failures. For example, stakeholder involvement 
is widely recognized as one of the most critical success fac-
tors of an EA practice (Bricknall et al., 2006; Kotusev and 
Kurnia, 2019; Schmidt and Buxmann, 2011; van der Raadt 
et al., 2010), but it is barely understood why stakeholder 
involvement is so critical.
On the other hand, the lack of theoretical foundation for 
the EA discipline can be partially accountable for the fact 
that EA research is scarcely represented in the leading aca-
demic IS journals (Kotusev, 2017c; Mykhashchuk et al., 
2011; Tamm et al., 2011), which welcome mostly “theory-
rich” papers (Dennis, 2019; Hirschheim, 2019). As noted 
by Al-Kharusi et al. (2017):
[the lack of theory utilization in current EA studies] gives an 
opportunity for future studies to take advantage of theories to 
enhance their understanding of EA phenomena. This is in 
alignment with IS journals recommendation of grounding 
researchers work on theory. (p. 10)
In light of these considerations, developing a consistent 
theoretical foundation for the EA discipline can be consid-
ered as an important goal for the EA research community. 
As Saint-Louis and Lapalme (2016) put it, “without a com-
mon structure and a core theory, it will be always compli-
cated to talk about EA as a discipline” (p. 75).

--- PAGE 3 ---
Kotusev and Kurnia 277
Kotusev and Kurnia 3
theoretical foundation” (p. 400). Likewise, Al-Kharusi 
et al. (2017) report that “one of the main findings of [our 
literature review] is the lack of theory utilization in EA 
studies” (p. 7).
Nevertheless, there were a number of deliberate attempts 
either to identify the theories that have been used in EA 
research (Al-Kharusi et al., 2017; Schilling, 2018), or to 
propose relevant theories to be used by researchers in the 
future (Syynimaa, 2017; Weiss et al., 2012). An independ-
ent search of the utilized theories had also been undertaken 
by the first author (S.K.) during a comprehensive review of 
the EA literature (Kotusev, 2017c). These efforts resulted in 
a combined exhaustive list of 32 theories that are used or 
proposed to be used in EA research provided in Appendix A 
(Theories Used in EA Research).
Taking into account the existence of more than a thou-
sand various EA publications (Kotusev, 2017c), the utiliza-
tion of theories in EA research can indeed be considered as 
pretty low (see Table 7 in Appendix A). Moreover, some of 
the theories are only proposed to be used, rather than actu-
ally used, for example, cognitive load, administrative 
behavior, and agency theories (Weiss et al., 2012). Some 
theories are employed only sporadically, for example, 
UTAUT (Hazen et al., 2014), living systems theory 
(Wegmann and Preiss, 2003), and dominant design theory 
(Bui et al., 2015). Some theories can be considered as 
“exotic,” for example, morphogenetic theory (Alwadain 
et al., 2014, 2016), or as very narrow-focused and single-
purposed, for example, IS success model (Lange et al., 
2016; Niemi and Pekkola, 2009). Some theories arguably 
offer little explanatory power, at least in the context of the 
EA discipline, for example, chaos theory (Saat et al., 2009) 
and contingency theory (Aier et al., 2011; Haki et al., 2012; 
Lahrmann et al., 2010; Leppanen et al., 2007; Riege and 
Aier, 2008). Other theories, though can be considered as 
explanatory, and are still employed only by separate authors 
or groups of authors, for example, boundary objects theory 
(Abraham, 2013, 2018; Abraham et al., 2013, 2015) and 
actor-network theory (Sidorova and Kappelman, 2010, 
2011a, 2011b).
At the same time, “grand” theories found relevant by 
many different authors and rather widely discussed in the 
context of the EA discipline, for example, institutional the-
ory (Aier and Weiss, 2012; Brosius et al., 2018; Dang, 
2017; Hjort-Madsen, 2007; Weiss et al., 2013) and GST 
(Hoyland, 2011; Kloeckner and Birkmeier, 2009; Syynimaa, 
2017; Weiss et al., 2012), may help understand only the 
notion of EA or an EA practice in general at a very high 
level, but these theories barely explain the internal mecha-
nisms constituting the essence of an EA practice at the level 
of specific actors, documents, and decisions. For instance, 
all the 16 studies by different groups of authors using the 
institutional theory (see Table 7 in Appendix A) analyze EA 
practices on an organization-wide scale, not at the level of 
specific EA artifacts and their usage scenarios, while the 
applicability of the GST in relation to EA is an evident tru-
ism and tautology since this theory by its very definition 
applies to all systems of physical, biological, social, or any 
other nature ranging from separate atoms to transcendental 
systems (Boulding, 1956; von Bertalanffy, 1968). 
Consequently, the theoretical foundation of the EA disci-
pline still seems to be rather rudimentary and is developing 
very slowly, arguably showing little or no substantial pro-
gress over the years.
On one hand, this lack of a sound theoretical under -
standing may signify that the core meaning of an EA prac-
tice is still poorly understood beyond certain abstract 
generalities, for example, thinking systematically, creating 
some EA artifacts, making optimal planning decisions, and 
managing complexity. Most importantly, the existing EA 
literature does not explain clearly what theoretical mecha-
nisms enable business and IT alignment in organizations, 
how these mechanisms work together as part of an EA prac-
tice, in which circumstances they may not work as expected, 
and why EA practices in organizations often fail. Although 
EA initiatives are infamously known for their low success 
rates (DiGirolamo, 2009; Jacobson, 2007; Roeleven, 2010; 
Zink, 2009), the existing EA literature rarely goes beyond 
the superficial identification of various success factors and 
pitfalls of an EA practice (Ambler, 2010; Jusuf and Kurnia, 
2017; Kurnia et al., 2020a; Lange et al., 2016; Levy, 2014) 
and does not provide any deeper insights or coherent theo-
ries explaining the underlying mechanisms of these suc-
cesses and failures. For example, stakeholder involvement 
is widely recognized as one of the most critical success fac-
tors of an EA practice (Bricknall et al., 2006; Kotusev and 
Kurnia, 2019; Schmidt and Buxmann, 2011; van der Raadt 
et al., 2010), but it is barely understood why stakeholder 
involvement is so critical.
On the other hand, the lack of theoretical foundation for 
the EA discipline can be partially accountable for the fact 
that EA research is scarcely represented in the leading aca-
demic IS journals (Kotusev, 2017c; Mykhashchuk et al., 
2011; Tamm et al., 2011), which welcome mostly “theory-
rich” papers (Dennis, 2019; Hirschheim, 2019). As noted 
by Al-Kharusi et al. (2017):
[the lack of theory utilization in current EA studies] gives an 
opportunity for future studies to take advantage of theories to 
enhance their understanding of EA phenomena. This is in 
alignment with IS journals recommendation of grounding 
researchers work on theory. (p. 10)
In light of these considerations, developing a consistent 
theoretical foundation for the EA discipline can be consid-
ered as an important goal for the EA research community. 
As Saint-Louis and Lapalme (2016) put it, “without a com-
mon structure and a core theory, it will be always compli-
cated to talk about EA as a discipline” (p. 75).

--- PAGE 4 ---
278 Journal of Information Technology 36(3)
4 Journal of Information Technology 00(0)
Identification of theories explaining 
EA
The identification of theories explaining the phenomenon 
of EA has been conducted by means of comparing our 
observations on the practical usage of EA artifacts in multi-
ple organizations made as part of our previous extensive 
empirical studies (Kotusev, 2018b, 2018c, 2019a, 2020; 
Kotusev and Kurnia, 2019; Kotusev et al., 2015, 2016, 
2017, 2020; Kurnia et al., 2020a, 2020b) with the list of 
theories widely used in IS research (Larsen et al., 2015) and 
other conceptual lenses found in the EA literature (see 
Table 7 in Appendix A).
Underlying empirical basis of this study
This study leverages an extensive empirical base of obser -
vations on EA practices accumulated by the authors of this 
article during the past 5 years as part of the previous qualita-
tive EA studies addressing the core of an EA practice (i.e. 
usage of EA artifacts for communication and decision-mak-
ing) in which the authors were directly involved. Specifically, 
in these studies the authors fulfilled the roles of both data 
collectors and data analysts, that is, we interviewed EA 
practitioners and analyzed all the incoming data ourselves. 
In total, our empirical basis includes more than 130, 1-h 
interviews with practicing architects, architecture managers, 
and some other participants closely involved in EA practices 
from more than 50 diverse organizations (not to mention 
some other qualitative EA studies in which the authors par-
ticipated only partially, for example, only as data analysts). 
This experience provided a broad, deep, and firsthand expo-
sure to the empirical realities of an EA practice and the work 
of architects in organizations. The underlying empirical 
basis of this study in terms of our primary research focus, 
time periods, and the numbers of organizations involved and 
interviews taken is briefly summarized in Table 1.
Key elements and reference model of EA 
practice
This study intends to identify theories describing the very 
core of an EA practice, that is, use of EA artifacts in organi-
zations for communication and decision-making purposes. 
To achieve this goal, it is important to clarify what elements 
constitute the core of an EA practice, explicitly define 
them, and explain their relationship. The vast body of the 
available EA literature, as well as our own empirical 
analysis of EA practices (see Table 1), suggest that the 
overall meaning of an EA practice can be explicated 
through three essential elements: EA artifacts, EA stake-
holders, and usage of EA artifacts by stakeholders.
First, EA artifacts are descriptive documents providing 
certain views of an organization from the perspective of its 
business and IT (Abraham, 2013; Kotusev et al., 2015; 
Winter and Fischer, 2006). They are distinguishing ele-
ments of an EA practice without which it cannot be consid-
ered as such. EA artifacts can be very diverse in nature and 
differ in various important properties, for example, their 
representation formats, levels of granularity, organizational 
scopes, relevant domains, and time focus (Kotusev, 2018b; 
Niemi and Pekkola, 2017). Although organizations employ 
different sets of EA artifacts as part of their EA practices, 
most popular EA artifacts widely adopted in industry 
include business capability models, guidelines, landscape 
diagrams, principles, roadmaps, solution designs, solution 
overviews, and technology reference models (EA on a 
Page, 2018; Kotusev, 2017b).
Second, EA stakeholders are organizational actors rep-
resenting certain interests and dealing with EA artifacts, 
that is, involved in some or the other way in their creation 
and usage (Fairhead and Good, 2009; Thornton, 2007; 
Verley, 2007). Although the full list of potential EA stake-
holders might be very long, organization-specific, and it is 
almost impossible to define clearly who exactly can be con-
sidered as an EA stakeholder, most typical stakeholder 
groups include business leaders, CIOs, and other senior IT 
managers, project managers, and other members of IT pro-
ject teams, business analysts, and system users, as well as 
different denominations of architects (Fairhead and Good, 
2009; Kotusev, 2018c; Niemi, 2007). Architects represent a 
special category of EA stakeholders, who both represent 
their own interests (e.g. simplification and optimization of 
the organizational IT landscape) and act as chief owners of 
EA artifacts. Generally, all EA stakeholders can be classi-
fied according to their functional areas of expertise (e.g. 
marketing, finance, IT development, and IT support) and 
their levels in the organizational hierarchy (e.g. corporate, 
division, department, and project) (Fonstad and Robertson, 
2006; van der Raadt et al., 2008, 2010).
Third, usage of EA artifacts is a broad set of activities 
performed by EA stakeholders leveraging EA artifacts for 
communication and decision-making purposes (Kotusev, 
2019a; Niemi and Pekkola, 2017). Essentially, usage con-
nects EA artifacts and their stakeholders. EA artifacts have 
multiple applications and usage scenarios in organizations 
T able 1. Underlying empirical basis of this study.
Primary research focus Time period Organizations Interviews
EA artifacts and their practical usage 2014–2017 35 in total 87 in total
Engagement between architects and EA stakeholders 2016–2019 26 in total 46 in total
EA: Enterprise architecture.
Kotusev and Kurnia 5
(Kotusev, 2018b; Niemi and Pekkola, 2017). These scenar-
ios range from facilitating corporate strategic planning 
(Radeke and Legner, 2012; Simon et al., 2014) to support-
ing IT investment portfolio management (Emery et al., 
2007; Makiya, 2008) to achieving harmonious fit of sepa-
rate IT projects in the overall organizational context 
(Foorthuis and Brinkkemper, 2007; Lux and Ahlemann, 
2012).
The three elements described above represent the main 
pillars of an EA practice defining its meaning in organiza-
tions. The essence of an EA practice can thus be illustrated 
graphically with these elements and their relationship. 
Specifically, EA artifacts can be placed in the center and 
surrounded by different stakeholder groups using them. For 
demonstrational purposes, all EA stakeholders can be 
grouped according to their specialization into business and 
IT stakeholders and separated into two organizational lev-
els (though the model can be easily extended to any number 
of occupational communities and organizational levels). 
The resulting reference model of an EA practice with its 
three key elements is shown in Figure 1.
The schematic view presented in Figure 1 depicts an EA 
practice, its three essential elements, and their relationship. 
These three elements will be referred extensively in further 
theoretical discussions, while this view as a whole will be 
implicitly taken as a simple reference model of an EA prac-
tice underpinning respective interpretations.
Identification of theories relevant to EA
As a potential theoretical base for the EA discipline, we 
took the well-known list of theories used in IS research 
(Larsen et al., 2015) and then supplemented it with the 
additional theories that have been utilized earlier specifi-
cally in EA research (see Table 7 in Appendix A). In total, 
we produced a combined list of 123 theories, including all 
the 113 theories from the original list of Larsen et al. 
(2015) and 10 other theories identified in the EA literature. 
The full list of theories considered in this study as the 
potential theoretical basis for the EA discipline is provided 
in Appendix B (Theories Considered as the Potential 
Theoretical Basis). Then, we compared the theories from 
this list with our empirical observations and ensuing 
understanding of an EA practice (see Table 1) in order to 
determine their relevance to the EA discipline. Specifically, 
the assessment of theories’ relevance has been guided pre-
dominantly by three factors.
First, the assessment was guided by the perceived “prox-
imity” of a theory to the core of an EA practice, that is, to 
the creation and usage of EA artifacts for communication 
and decision-making. In particular, relevant theories should 
explain in some or the other explicit form the relationship 
between all the three key elements of an EA practice: EA 
artifacts, EA stakeholders, and usage of EA artifacts by 
stakeholders (see Figure 1). For example, the institutional 
theory may address EA stakeholders, their behavior, and 
decision-making aspects, but it fails to provide any specific 
suggestions regarding EA artifacts, as distinguishing ele-
ments of an EA practice, and their usage. Although the 
institutional theory may be applicable, for instance, for ana-
lyzing the acceptance and institutionalization of EA-related 
processes in organizations (Aier and Weiss, 2012; Brosius 
et al., 2018; Dang, 2017; Hjort-Madsen, 2007; Weiss et al., 
2013), this theory does not clarify the meaning of an EA 
practice itself, that is, usage of EA artifacts by organiza-
tional actors for decision-making purposes. For this reason, 
Figure 1. The reference model of an EA practice with its three key elements.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Kotusev and Kurnia 279
Kotusev and Kurnia 5
(Kotusev, 2018b; Niemi and Pekkola, 2017). These scenar-
ios range from facilitating corporate strategic planning 
(Radeke and Legner, 2012; Simon et al., 2014) to support-
ing IT investment portfolio management (Emery et al., 
2007; Makiya, 2008) to achieving harmonious fit of sepa-
rate IT projects in the overall organizational context 
(Foorthuis and Brinkkemper, 2007; Lux and Ahlemann, 
2012).
The three elements described above represent the main 
pillars of an EA practice defining its meaning in organiza-
tions. The essence of an EA practice can thus be illustrated 
graphically with these elements and their relationship. 
Specifically, EA artifacts can be placed in the center and 
surrounded by different stakeholder groups using them. For 
demonstrational purposes, all EA stakeholders can be 
grouped according to their specialization into business and 
IT stakeholders and separated into two organizational lev-
els (though the model can be easily extended to any number 
of occupational communities and organizational levels). 
The resulting reference model of an EA practice with its 
three key elements is shown in Figure 1.
The schematic view presented in Figure 1 depicts an EA 
practice, its three essential elements, and their relationship. 
These three elements will be referred extensively in further 
theoretical discussions, while this view as a whole will be 
implicitly taken as a simple reference model of an EA prac-
tice underpinning respective interpretations.
Identification of theories relevant to EA
As a potential theoretical base for the EA discipline, we 
took the well-known list of theories used in IS research 
(Larsen et al., 2015) and then supplemented it with the 
additional theories that have been utilized earlier specifi-
cally in EA research (see Table 7 in Appendix A). In total, 
we produced a combined list of 123 theories, including all 
the 113 theories from the original list of Larsen et al. 
(2015) and 10 other theories identified in the EA literature. 
The full list of theories considered in this study as the 
potential theoretical basis for the EA discipline is provided 
in Appendix B (Theories Considered as the Potential 
Theoretical Basis). Then, we compared the theories from 
this list with our empirical observations and ensuing 
understanding of an EA practice (see Table 1) in order to 
determine their relevance to the EA discipline. Specifically, 
the assessment of theories’ relevance has been guided pre-
dominantly by three factors.
First, the assessment was guided by the perceived “prox-
imity” of a theory to the core of an EA practice, that is, to 
the creation and usage of EA artifacts for communication 
and decision-making. In particular, relevant theories should 
explain in some or the other explicit form the relationship 
between all the three key elements of an EA practice: EA 
artifacts, EA stakeholders, and usage of EA artifacts by 
stakeholders (see Figure 1). For example, the institutional 
theory may address EA stakeholders, their behavior, and 
decision-making aspects, but it fails to provide any specific 
suggestions regarding EA artifacts, as distinguishing ele-
ments of an EA practice, and their usage. Although the 
institutional theory may be applicable, for instance, for ana-
lyzing the acceptance and institutionalization of EA-related 
processes in organizations (Aier and Weiss, 2012; Brosius 
et al., 2018; Dang, 2017; Hjort-Madsen, 2007; Weiss et al., 
2013), this theory does not clarify the meaning of an EA 
practice itself, that is, usage of EA artifacts by organiza-
tional actors for decision-making purposes. For this reason, 
Figure 1. The reference model of an EA practice with its three key elements.

--- PAGE 6 ---
280 Journal of Information Technology 36(3)
6 Journal of Information Technology 00(0)
the institutional theory was considered “distant” from the 
core of an EA practice. At the same time, the theory of 
boundary objects directly explains the role of EA artifacts 
as communication devices helping diverse EA stakeholders 
cooperate and, therefore, was considered as very “close” to 
the core of an EA practice.
Second, the assessment was guided by the presence of 
articulate manifestations of a theory in the practical usage 
of EA artifacts. In particular, these manifestations should be 
observable in the behavior of organizational actors work-
ing with EA artifacts. For example, the GST provides some 
abstract suggestions for interpreting organizations as com-
plex systems with interconnected components and these 
interpretations may implicitly stimulate internal thinking 
processes of various participants of EA practices (e.g. 
uncovering hidden dependencies between business pro-
cesses, information systems, and other objects), but this 
theory has no visible external manifestations or a clearly 
observed traceability to their actions in relation to EA arti-
facts. Although the GST may be applicable for analyzing 
organizations and their IT landscapes as complex, interre-
lated systems of systems in the context of an EA practice 
(Hoyland, 2011; Kloeckner and Birkmeier, 2009; Syynimaa, 
2017; Weiss et al., 2012), it cannot be helpful for under -
standing the essence of actual activities constituting an EA 
practice. For this reason, the GST was considered as a the-
ory having no noticeable practical manifestations. At the 
same time, the theory of media richness is clearly mani-
fested in routine actions (selection of communication 
approaches) of organizational actors working with EA arti-
facts and, therefore, was considered as a theory having evi-
dent traceability to practice.
Third, the assessment was guided by the analytical, 
explanatory, predictive, and prescriptive potential of a the-
ory.1 Gregor (2006) distinguishes four distinct goals of 
theories in IS research: analysis and description, explana-
tion, prediction, and prescription. Accordingly, the existing 
theories have been evaluated based on their ability to accu-
rately describe what actually works in practice, explain 
why it works in the way it does, predict which approaches 
may or may not work hypothetically, and formulate some 
actionable recommendations for practitioners. 2 For exam-
ple, the contingency theory only suggests that there may be 
no single best approach to organize an EA practice (Aier 
et al., 2011; Haki et al., 2012; Lahrmann et al., 2010; 
Leppanen et al., 2007; Riege and Aier, 2008), but this the-
ory fails to provide any more detailed clarifications regard-
ing how these approaches are different, why they are 
different, when they are likely or unlikely to work, and 
which approach should be selected in a particular situation. 
For this reason, the valuable potential of the contingency 
theory for the EA discipline was considered as low. At the 
same time, the theory of cognitive fit describes what infor-
mation presentation formats in EA artifacts are suitable for 
different decision-making tasks, explains the underlying 
reasons for this relationship, allows predicting which for -
mats can be suitable or unsuitable for different tasks, and 
formulating certain guidelines regarding the selection of 
appropriate information presentation formats for EA practi-
tioners. Therefore, this theory was considered as a powerful 
one. The three criteria for assessing the relevance of theo-
ries to the EA discipline described above are summarized in 
Table 2.
The theoretical basis of EA
The process of theories identification and assessment 
according to the three criteria described above (see Table 2) 
resulted in a set of 10 theories: actor-network theory, 
boundary objects theory, cognitive fit theory, communities 
of practice theory, decision-making theories, information 
processing theory, knowledge management theory, man-
agement fashion theory, media richness theory, and uncer -
tainty principle. Although the inclusion or non-inclusion of 
theories in the resulting set was certainly partly subjective 
as their degree of relevance cannot be assessed by any 
objective means, high relevance of the selected theories to 
the EA discipline seems to be largely self-evident and is 
arguably beyond question.
Each of the 10 identified theories clearly satisfies all the 
three established selection criteria (see Table 2). First, each 
of these theories is immediately relevant to the usage of EA 
artifacts and addresses the core of an EA practice. Taken 
together, these theories explain the very meaning of an EA 
practice as a complex organizational practice of social 
nature that implies using EA artifacts for improving com-
munication between diverse organizational actors and deci-
sion-makers. Second, each of these theories has rather 
obvious and clearly observable manifestations in the practi-
cal usage of EA artifacts described in the corresponding 
T able 2. Three criteria for assessing the relevance of theories 
to the EA discipline.
Criterion Explanation
Proximity The immediate relevance of a theory to the 
usage of EA artifacts for communication 
between stakeholders and decision-making
Manifestations The presence of articulate, traceable, and 
clearly observable manifestations of a 
theory in the practical usage of EA artifacts 
in organizations
Potential The ability of a theory to describe what 
works in practice, explain why it works, 
predict what may work, and shape 
actionable recommendations
EA: Enterprise architecture.

--- PAGE 7 ---
Kotusev and Kurnia 281
Kotusev and Kurnia 7
sections below. Moreover, each of these theories also has 
articulate confirmations in the available industry literature 
on EA. Finally, all these theories are rooted in other estab-
lished scientific disciplines (e.g. psychology, sociology, 
and organizational behavior) and offer sound theoretical 
lenses for understanding an EA practice powerful from the 
perspective of their analytical, explanatory, predictive, and 
prescriptive potential.
Although each of the 10 identified theories directly relates 
to the usage of EA artifacts in an EA practice, these theories 
can still be conditionally grouped into four different catego-
ries based on which particular aspects of their usage they 
address.3 First, the boundary objects theory and actor-net-
work theory4 can be related to role theories, since both theo-
ries clarify the general role of EA artifacts in an EA practice 
as a means of horizontal and vertical communication. 
Second, the cognitive fit theory, information processing the-
ory, and uncertainty principle can be related to usability theo-
ries since all these theories clarify the properties of EA 
artifacts that make them helpful or useless for decision-mak-
ing purposes. Third, the communities of practice theory, 
knowledge management theory, media richness theory, and 
decision-making theories can be related to stakeholder theo-
ries since all these theories clarify the involvement, partici-
pation, and communication between stakeholders of EA 
artifacts. Finally, the management fashion theory can be 
related to contrast theories since this theory clarifies the 
sharp contrast between how EA artifacts allegedly ought to 
be used, as prescribed by the mainstream EA literature, and 
how they are actually used in established EA practices.
Role theories
Role theories include the boundary objects theory and 
actor-network theory since both theories clarify the general 
role of EA artifacts in an EA practice as a means of horizon-
tal and vertical communication. In particular, the boundary 
objects theory conceptualizes EA artifacts as boundary 
objects enabling communication between diverse business 
and IT communities, while the actor-network theory inter -
prets EA artifacts as elements of an actor-network into 
which the interests of human actors are inscribed and which 
then represent these interests on behalf of humans.
Boundary objects theory. Boundary objects are special 
objects that help diverse social communities cooperate, col-
laborate, and successfully pursue shared goals despite their 
different expertise, concerns, and backgrounds (Star, 2010; 
Star and Griesemer, 1989). Boundary objects are “both 
adaptable to different viewpoints and robust enough to 
maintain identity across them” (Star and Griesemer, 1989: 
387). They exist in multiple social worlds and have differ-
ent identities in each of these worlds. Boundary objects 
provide different information to representatives of different 
social groups they intend to connect. Boundary objects 
“both inhabit several intersecting social worlds [. . .] and 
satisfy the informational requirements of each of them” 
(Star and Griesemer, 1989: 393). Thereby, boundary 
objects help represent and transform knowledge on the 
boundaries of different communities (Carlile, 2002, 2004). 
Creating and managing boundary objects is considered as 
“a key process in developing and maintaining coherence 
across intersecting social worlds” (Star and Griesemer, 
1989: 393). Boundary objects are naturally developed in 
the process of collaboration when groups of people from 
heterogeneous communities work together (Nicolini et al., 
2012). Typical examples of boundary objects include aero-
space system design documents (Bergman et al., 2007), 
project management documents (Doolin and McLeod, 
2012), software architectures (Smolander et al., 2008), and 
ubiquitous Gantt charts (Yakura, 2002).
In the EA discipline, the theory of boundary objects has 
been leveraged essentially by a single group of researchers 
(Abraham, 2013, 2018; Abraham et al., 2013, 2015) and only 
briefly mentioned in relation to EA by a few other authors 
(Dreyfus, 2007; Korhonen and Poutanen, 2013; Magalhaes 
et al., 2007; Poutanen, 2012; Valorinta, 2011). Abraham 
(2013, 2018) and Abraham et al. (2013, 2015) studied the 
role of EA models as boundary objects in the context of 
enterprise transformations. Specifically, Abraham et al. 
(2013) analyzed how EA artifacts “can become boundary 
objects that span knowledge boundaries and alleviate com-
munication defects among heterogeneous stakeholder groups 
in enterprise transformations” (p. 27) and identified a set of 
boundary object properties required to mitigate different 
types of communication defects and span different knowl-
edge boundaries (Abraham, 2013, 2018; Abraham et al., 
2015).
Our extensive empirical analysis of the practical usage 
of EA artifacts in organizations (see Table 1) suggests that 
the importance of the boundary objects theory for the EA 
discipline is greatly underestimated. Although the conclu-
sions of Abraham et al. (2013) regarding the role of EA 
artifacts as boundary objects in enterprise transformations 
are perfectly valid, these conclusions can be generalized to 
an EA practice as a whole. In fact, most EA artifacts identi-
fied in established EA practices (EA on a Page, 2018; 
Kotusev, 2019a), with the exception of purely technical ref-
erence materials intended primarily for architects (e.g. 
landscape diagrams and inventories), are boundary objects 
and actively used as such for communication between busi-
ness and IT stakeholders.
Probably the most illustrative example of a boundary 
object is an EA artifact often titled as a solution overview 
(EA on a Page, 2018; Kotusev, 2019a). On one hand, solu-
tion overviews provide the essential business information 
about proposed IT solutions, for example, goals, expected 
process changes, overall impact and value, estimated costs, 
and timelines. On the other hand, the solution overviews 
also provide the essential technical information regarding 

--- PAGE 8 ---
282 Journal of Information Technology 36(3)
8 Journal of Information Technology 00(0)
these solutions, for example, key technologies, high-level 
structure, involved partners, and associated risks. Therefore, 
solution overviews represent classical boundary objects 
helping business and IT stakeholders agree on the optimal 
solution implementation options acceptable from both the 
business and IT perspectives. Analogous conclusions are 
also valid for principles, business capability models, road-
maps, and all other business-focused types of EA artifacts 
(EA on a Page, 2018; Kotusev, 2019a). For example, the 
boundary-spanning capacity of architecture principles had 
been long-recognized in the industry literature:
Principles are simple, direct statements of an organization’s 
basic beliefs about how the company wants to use IT over the 
long term. By translating the main aspects of a company’s 
business strategy into the language of technology managers, 
these principles bridge the communication gap between top 
managers and technical experts. This way, business strategy 
drives technical strategy, as conventional wisdom says it 
should. (Davenport et al., 1989: 131)
Similarly, the role of business capability models as 
boundary objects between business and IT leaders is also 
acknowledged in the industry literature:
[Business capability] models create a “Rosetta stone” that 
provides the translation between business and IT concerns. [. . 
.] Capabilities close the gap between business interests and IT 
concerns providing the right level of detail and consistency to 
facilitate an ongoing dialogue between business and IT leaders. 
[. . .] Taken together they form a model representing all the 
functional abilities a business needs to execute its business 
model and fulfill its mission. From an IT perspective, capability 
models provide a stable overarching view of what is important 
to business leaders that can link business and IT initiatives 
together. These relatively simple views of the business provide 
the foundation for complex discussions on strategy and resource 
allocation. (Scott, 2009: 1–2)
The theory of boundary objects can arguably be consid-
ered as the single most important theory for the EA disci-
pline. The ability of EA artifacts to serve as boundary 
objects between business and IT communities is absolutely 
essential for a successful EA practice since it is this very 
property that actually leads to business and IT alignment. 
Specifically, EA artifacts as boundary objects enable the 
“horizontal” communication between business and IT 
stakeholders acting at the same level of the organizational 
hierarchy, for example, between C-level business and IT 
executives or between business and IT stakeholders of sep-
arate change initiatives (see Figure 1). If EA artifacts are 
not used as boundary objects, then they cannot help improve 
business and IT alignment and, in this case, an EA practice 
simply cannot work successfully and fulfill its goals.5
Actor-network theory. Actor-networks can be defined as 
“dynamic configurations of actors engaged in and performed 
by particular sociomaterial practices that produce differences 
that matter” (Cecez-Kecmanovic et al., 2014b: 566), where 
an actor can be understood broadly as “any element which 
bends space around itself, makes other elements dependent 
upon itself and translates their will into the language of its 
own” (Callon and Latour, 1981: 286). In the actor-network 
theory “actors are taken to include both human beings and 
nonhuman actors such as technological artifacts” (Walsham, 
1997: 468). Therefore, actor-networks can contain not only 
people, but also computing devices, tangible objects, abstract 
concepts, or even entire organizations since all these entities 
can be viewed as actors from the perspective of the actor-
network theory (Hanseth and Monteiro, 1997; Sarker et al., 
2006). The actor-network theory explains the creation and 
evolution of socio-technical networks through the interaction 
of independent actors (Callon and Latour, 1981; Mitev, 
2009; Walsham, 1997). Key concepts of this theory include 
the notions of inscription and irreversibility (Hanseth and 
Monteiro, 1997; Sarker et al., 2006; Walsham, 1997). 
Inscription is “a process of creation of artifacts that would 
ensure the protection of certain interests” (Sarker et al., 2006: 
56), while irreversibility is “the degree to which it is subse-
quently impossible to go back to a point where alternative 
possibilities exist” (Walsham and Sahay, 1999: 42). As noted 
by Gasson (2006), nonhuman elements of actor-networks 
often represent both boundary objects between their human 
elements and inscriptions of human interests.
In the EA discipline, the theory of actor-networks has 
been leveraged only in a few conceptual papers produced 
by a single group of researchers (Sidorova and Kappelman, 
2010, 2011a, 2011b), but did not attract noticeable attention 
among the broader research community and has not been 
explicitly mentioned or referred to by other authors. 
However, Kotusev (2017a) conceptualized an EA practice 
as a decentralized network of independent but interacting 
processes, artifacts, and actors, which implicitly resembles 
an actor-network. Sidorova and Kappelman (2010) argue 
that an EA practice involving multiple independent stake-
holders interacting through using EA artifacts can be inter-
preted as a complex actor-network. In particular, Sidorova 
and Kappelman (2011a) explain that “enterprise architec-
ture work helps to achieve agreement and thus alignment of 
the interests of internal actors within the context of enter -
prise interests and inscribes such agreement into architec-
tural artifacts” (p. 39).
Our extensive empirical analysis of the practical usage 
of EA artifacts in organizations (see Table 1) suggests that 
the importance of the actor-network theory for the EA dis-
cipline may be greatly underestimated. As hypothesized by 
Sidorova and Kappelman (2011a), EA practices in organi-
zations can indeed be viewed as actor-networks consisting 
of multiple organizational stakeholders and EA artifacts. 
Moreover, very articulate inscription processes and irre-
versibility relationships can be identified within these net-
works. In fact, virtually all EA artifacts used in EA practices 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Kotusev and Kurnia 283
Kotusev and Kurnia 9
(EA on a Page, 2018; Kotusev, 2019a) can be considered as 
products of the inscription of their stakeholders’ interests at 
higher organizational levels, which then become essentially 
irreversible at lower organizational levels and start to guide 
subsequent “downstream” decision-making and implemen-
tation processes. Put simply, stakeholder interests get 
inscribed into EA artifacts, which then protect these inter -
ests for the respective stakeholders without their physical 
presence.
The processes of initial inscription and subsequent repre-
sentation of stakeholder interests, as well as the effects of 
irreversibility, conceptualized by the actor-network theory 
can be clearly observed and easily described for most EA 
artifacts. For example, business capability models, value 
chains, target states, and roadmaps are created with the 
involvement of C-level business stakeholders, who inscribe 
their interests regarding the desired strategic business devel-
opment direction into these EA artifacts (Kotusev, 2019a). 
After being developed, these EA artifacts represent the 
interests of executives inscribed in them by means of steer-
ing lower level portfolio management, investment prioriti-
zation, and initiative launch activities, which may not 
require the direct presence of C-level executives and during 
which their strategic decisions are largely irreversible. 
Likewise, technology reference models, guidelines, and pat-
terns are created by enterprise architects, who inscribe their 
views on the optimal solution implementation approaches 
into these EA artifacts (Kotusev, 2019a). After being devel-
oped, these EA artifacts represent the interests of enterprise 
architects inscribed in them via guiding lower level initia-
tive delivery processes driven by solution architects, during 
which strategic technology selection and other similar deci-
sions cannot be reversed back. Finally, solution overviews 
and solution designs are created with the involvement of 
solution architects and business representatives, who 
inscribe their interests regarding the desired business func-
tionality and technical structure of new IT solutions into 
these EA artifacts (Kotusev, 2019a). After being developed, 
these EA artifacts represent the interests inscribed in them 
through guiding the system implementation activities car -
ried out by project teams under only limited supervision of 
architects and during which architecturally significant deci-
sions cannot be reversed. Hence, an EA practice can cer -
tainly be viewed as an actor-network, where more global 
stakeholder interests get inscribed into some higher level 
EA artifacts and then “trickle down” to shape local views 
which, in their turn, also get inscribed into some lower level 
EA artifacts, and so forth.
The ability of EA artifacts to capture stakeholder inter -
ests and then protect these interests without the actual 
stakeholder presence, as well as the importance of this abil-
ity, is also acknowledged in the industry EA literature, for 
instance, regarding architecture principles:
Principles address the perpetual management problem of 
influence at a distance. Though the decision maker cannot be 
everywhere, and neither can nor should make every decision, 
agreed-to principles provide influence without presence. This 
is very important if one hopes to promote coordinated but 
independent actions across a large and often quite opinionated 
organizational community over time. (Boar, 1999: 39)
The theory of actor-networks can be considered as the 
key theory for understanding the coordination mechanisms 
of an EA practice and specifically the alignment of archi-
tectural decisions at different levels of the organizational 
hierarchy, where lower level decisions are aligned to higher 
level decisions. The actor-network theory explains the 
propagation of planning decisions down the organizational 
hierarchy, from C-level executives to project teams work-
ing on the ground, via inscribing these decisions into 
respective EA artifacts and then using these artifacts as the 
basis for creating “next,” more detailed EA artifacts. In 
other words, the theory of actor-networks clarifies the pro-
cess of gradual translation of the abstract business strategy 
formulated at the top into concrete IT projects implemented 
at the bottom through the inscription and subsequent repre-
sentation of stakeholder interests in EA artifacts. From this 
perspective, the actor-network theory complements the 
theory of boundary objects. While the boundary objects 
theory addresses the “horizontal” communication between 
business and IT stakeholders acting at the same organiza-
tional level, the actor-network theory addresses the “verti-
cal” communication between stakeholders occupying 
different organizational levels (see Figure 1).
Usability theories
Usability theories include the cognitive fit theory, informa-
tion processing theory, and uncertainty principle since all 
these theories clarify the properties of EA artifacts that 
make them helpful or useless for decision-making pur -
poses. In particular, the cognitive fit theory explains the 
importance of adequate information presentation formats in 
EA artifacts correlating with mental problem representa-
tions, the information processing theory explains the need 
for restraining complexity of EA artifacts for their usability, 
while the uncertainty principle explains the relationship 
between the abstractness of EA artifacts, their scopes, and 
appropriate planning horizons.
Cognitive fit theory. Cognitive fit is the degree of correspon-
dence, or match, between the task being solved and the pre-
sentation of information relevant to this task (Vessey, 1991; 
Vessey and Galletta, 1991). The cognitive fit between men-
tal representations of tasks and information presentation for-
mats tends to increase the performance of problem-solvers 
(Smelcer and Carmel, 1997; Vessey, 1994; Vessey and Gal-
letta, 1991). Vessey (1991) explains that “matching repre-
sentation to task leads to the use of similar, and therefore 
consistent, problem-solving processes [. . .]. Hence, prob-
lem solving with cognitive fit leads to effective and efficient 

--- PAGE 10 ---
284 Journal of Information Technology 36(3)
10 Journal of Information Technology 00(0)
problem-solving performance” (p. 221). For example, for 
certain types of problem-solving tasks, considerable differ-
ences in performance have been demonstrated for various 
information presentation formats including tables, graphs, 
and maps (Smelcer and Carmel, 1997; Vessey, 1991; Vessey 
and Galletta, 1991). Different approaches to information 
presentation render different effects on problem-solving 
performance in the analysis of financial statements (Frown-
felter-Lohrke, 1998), accounting information (Dull and 
Tegarden, 1999), and geographic information (Dennis and 
Carte, 1998; Mennecke et al., 2000). Moreover, Hungerford 
and Eierman (2005) demonstrate that the selection of differ-
ent modeling languages and notations for drawing system 
design diagrams (e.g. UML, data flow diagrams, and entity-
relationship diagrams) affects the communication effective-
ness of these diagrams for people with different levels of 
expertise in modeling. Berinato (2016) argues that different 
types of information and demonstration purposes require 
different visualization approaches.
In the EA discipline, the theory of cognitive fit, to the 
best of the authors’ knowledge, has not been leveraged in 
any studies. However, this theory was briefly mentioned by 
Weiss et al. (2012), along with the theory of cognitive load, 
as potentially relevant to EA.
Our extensive empirical analysis of established EA prac-
tices in organizations (see Table 1) suggests that the cogni-
tive fit theory can actually be considered as essential for 
understanding the practical usage of EA artifacts. In par -
ticular, the information presentation formats used in EA 
artifacts in most cases closely correlate with the types of 
decisions and tasks these artifacts are intended to support. 
Furthermore, in mature EA practices the presentation for -
mats of all EA artifacts are constantly optimized for the 
purposes of more effective decision-making.
Probably the most articulate manifestation of the cogni-
tive fit theory in relation to an EA practice is the broad 
industry adoption of EA artifacts typically called business 
capability models, or maps (Bondel et al., 2018; EA on a 
Page, 2018; Khosroshahi et al., 2018; Kotusev, 2019a, 
2019b; Scott, 2009; Swindell, 2014). These EA artifacts 
provide hierarchical graphical views of all organizational 
business capabilities on a single page for the purposes of 
prioritizing and focusing future IT investments on the most 
strategically important business areas. Business capability 
models are widely adopted in organizations arguably 
because their presentation format clearly correlates with the 
mental representation of the problem they intend to address, 
that is, decide where future IT investments should go. At 
the same time, hierarchical capability decompositions in 
other formats (e.g. nested lists), as well as highly similar 
process decompositions, advocated by some consultants 
(Holcman, 2013; Spewak and Hill, 1992) were not adopted 
in industry. Although “technically” they contain exactly the 
same information as business capability models, its presen-
tation format seems to be inconvenient for the purposes of 
allocating IT investments.
Another clear manifestation of the cognitive fit theory 
observed in practice is the difference between landscape 
diagrams and inventories from the perspective of their pres-
entation formats (graphical and tabular, respectively) and 
typical use cases (EA on a Page, 2018; Kotusev, 2019a). 
This difference almost identically repeats the abstract of the 
seminal paper introducing the cognitive fit theory:
The fundamental aspects of the theory are: (1) although 
graphical and tabular representations may contain the same 
information, they present that information in fundamentally 
different ways; graphical representations [i.e. landscape 
diagrams] emphasize spatial information, while tables [i.e. 
inventories] emphasize symbolic information; [. . .] (3) 
performance on a task will be enhanced when there is a 
cognitive fit (match) between the information emphasized in 
the representation type and that required by the task type; that 
is, when graphs [i.e. landscape diagrams] support spatial tasks 
[e.g. integration of new IT solutions into the existing IT 
environment] and when tables [i.e. inventories] support 
symbolic tasks [e.g. reuse of existing IT assets in new IT 
initiatives]. (Vessey, 1991: 219)
Evident correlation between their presentation formats 
and practical purposes can be observed for other popular 
EA artifacts as well, for example, roadmaps, enterprise sys-
tem portfolios, and technology reference models (EA on a 
Page, 2018; Kotusev, 2019a). Moreover, the critical impor-
tance of convenient presentation formats, rather than only 
relevant informational contents, is also explicitly empha-
sized in the industry EA literature:
The problem is EA information often is unintelligible. The 
necessary data might be there, but the presentation is so poor 
that the decision-maker’s ability to use it is impaired. If 
information is not understandable [. . .], then it quickly 
becomes “shelfware,” meaning it sits on a shelf collecting 
dust. Of course, the result is unsatisfied stakeholders. 
(Blumenthal, 2007: 63)
Relationship matrices, or CRUD matrices, actively pro-
moted by most pre-EA information systems planning meth-
odologies (BSP, 1975; Finkelstein, 1989; Martin, 1982), 
early EA methodologies (Spewak and Hill, 1992), and even 
modern EA frameworks (TOGAF, 2018) provide a perfect 
example of EA artifacts providing rich informational con-
tents, but using inadequate presentation formats. Despite 
their ability to accurately reflect very complex relationships 
between different objects (e.g. business processes and data 
entities), matrices had been long-recognized as an incon-
venient form of information presentation even for IT spe-
cialists (Periasamy, 1994; Periasamy and Feeny, 1997) and 
are currently not adopted in industry despite their broad 
advocacy in the literature (Kotusev, 2019a).
The theory of cognitive fit arguably represents the cen-
tral theory for understanding the practical usability of EA 
artifacts. Specifically, the cognitive fit between information 
presentation formats and mental problem representations 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Kotusev and Kurnia 285
Kotusev and Kurnia 11
determines whether particular EA artifacts can be helpful 
for certain types of decision-making activities. On one 
hand, this theory explains the inextricable connection 
between the common presentation formats and purposes of 
EA artifacts clearly observable in practice (Kotusev, 
2019a). On the other hand, this theory also questions the 
value of creating some “general-purpose” EA artifacts that 
are not optimized specifically for concrete decision-making 
tasks or problems (and were actually missing in organiza-
tions). The notion of cognitive fit can be considered as one 
of the enablers of an EA practice reflecting the ability or 
inability of EA artifacts to facilitate decision-making.
Information processing theory. Information processing (not 
to be confused with organizational information processing 
(Galbraith, 1973, 1974, 1977; Tushman and Nadler, 1978) 
is the capacity of people to perceive, handle, and compre-
hend information. The emergence of the information pro-
cessing theory is usually attributed to the seminal article of 
Miller (1956), who summarized the evidence from multiple 
previous studies and demonstrated that humans’ short-term 
working memory at any moment can hold and process no 
more than 5–9 distinguishable chunks of information, or 
objects. Miller (1956) concluded that “the span of absolute 
judgment and the span of immediate memory impose 
severe limitations on the amount of information that we are 
able to receive, process, and remember” (p. 95). Miller 
(1956) also noticed that humans’ information processing 
capacity can be increased by means of chunking the infor-
mation and structuring it into multiple dimensions: “By 
organizing the stimulus input simultaneously into several 
dimensions and successively into a sequence of chunks, we 
manage to break (or at least stretch) this informational bot-
tleneck” (p. 95). The information processing theory imposes 
significant limitations on the ability of people to receive, 
process, and remember information as well as to use this 
information for decision-making purposes. Unsurprisingly, 
this theory has countless implications in various areas of 
human activity.
In the EA discipline, the theory of information process-
ing, to the best of the authors’ knowledge, has not been lev-
eraged explicitly in any studies. Moreover, even implicit 
attempts to use various aspects of this theory without refer-
ring to it seem to be missing in the EA literature.
Our extensive empirical analysis of established EA prac-
tices in organizations (see Table 1) suggests that the human 
limitations articulated by the information processing theory 
significantly influence the design of EA artifacts and deter-
mine their practical usability. Specifically, all EA artifacts 
intended for decision-making purposes, with the exception 
of extensive reference materials on the current state of the 
IT landscape (e.g. inventories), are developed with an idea 
of restraining their complexity. For this purpose, relevant 
objects in EA artifacts are often grouped into several higher 
level categories (dimensions), or even multiple separate EA 
artifacts are created relevant to different audiences of 
decision-makers.
Simplicity-driven designs can be observed in all popular 
graphical EA artifacts (EA on a Page, 2018; Kotusev, 
2019a). For example, business capability models and enter-
prise system portfolios are normally structured hierarchi-
cally and have only a limited number of nested 
sub-capabilities at each level. Gartner even explicitly rec-
ommends to “limit the number of capabilities at each level 
to eight to 10, which is the number of items the average 
person can recall from short-term memory” (Cantara et al., 
2016: 10). Roadmaps are rarely developed to encompass the 
whole organization, but rather on a per-business unit basis, 
and IT initiatives in these roadmaps are typically organized 
according to different business capabilities or areas having 
only a few initiatives related to each of them, which highly 
correlates with the suggestion of Miller (1956) to “arrange 
the task in such a way that we make a sequence of several 
absolute judgments in a row” (p. 90). However, large com-
panies may produce aggregated organization-wide road-
maps via extracting only the most significant IT initiatives 
from local roadmaps of their business units. Likewise, tech-
nology reference models are usually structured into differ -
ent technology layers (e.g. end-user applications, system 
software, databases, and networks) or even split into 2–3 
separate reference models (e.g. application and infrastruc-
ture reference models). Even purely technical landscape 
diagrams often cover separate business areas with a limited 
number of underlying IT assets, for example, systems and 
databases. Furthermore, all EA artifacts intended for deci-
sion-making purposes tend to use simplistic notations (e.g. 
color-coded rounded rectangles) and focus only on the most 
essential information relevant for decision-makers in order 
to avoid unnecessary complexity.
At the same time, excessive complexity can render EA 
artifacts incomprehensible for their stakeholders, make 
them virtually unusable, and eventually become disastrous 
for an EA practice. For instance, a vivid description of this 
situation can be found in the industry EA literature:
An organization that shall remain nameless established a large, 
award-winning architecture, which it documented in minute 
detail [. . .]. There was just one problem: It was so involved 
and complicated that no one attempting to use it had any idea 
where to start. [. . .] After several well-publicized project 
failures, with multimillion dollar consequences, the 
organization eventually reorganized its EA efforts and put new 
leadership into place. They discarded the elaborate target 
architecture in favor of a much simpler and more pragmatic 
approach. (Hobbs, 2012: 85)
Historically, the critical importance of simplicity for the 
usability of EA artifacts can be best illustrated based on the 
example of data models. While formal and comprehensive 
corporate data models (CDMs) prescribed by once-popular 
Information Engineering (Finkelstein, 1989; Martin and 

--- PAGE 12 ---
286 Journal of Information Technology 36(3)
12 Journal of Information Technology 00(0)
Finkelstein, 1981) and Strategic Data/Information Planning 
(Martin, 1982; Martin and Leben, 1989) approaches turned 
out to be unusable because “many people withdrew in hor-
ror when it (CDM) was presented to them” (Periasamy and 
Feeny, 1997: 201), much simpler data models focused pri-
marily on a few core data entities with their most essential 
attributes proved useful in some companies (Kotusev, 
2019a).
Along with the theory of cognitive fit, the theory of 
information processing also plays one of the central roles in 
understanding the practical usability of EA artifacts. 
Simplicity-related considerations affect the designs of most 
EA artifacts in successful EA practices. However, unlike 
cognitive fit, which greatly contributes to the usability of 
EA artifacts, simplicity on its own cannot make any EA 
artifacts useful, but excessive complexity can still under -
mine their usability. Therefore, simplicity of EA artifacts 
can be considered as a necessary, but not sufficient condi-
tion for establishing a successful EA practice that should 
complement cognitive fit, but cannot substitute it. In other 
words, complexity of EA artifacts represents one of the 
inhibitors, or “hygiene factors,” of an EA practice.
Uncertainty principle. Although to the best of the authors’ 
knowledge (and surprise) it was never explicitly formulated 
as a consistent theoretical principle in the EA discipline, 
our extensive empirical analysis of established EA prac-
tices in organizations (see Table 1) suggests that due to the 
inherent uncertainty of the business environment, organiza-
tions can be either planned for wider scopes and longer 
horizons in less detail, or planned for narrower scopes and 
shorter horizons in more detail, but they cannot be planned 
for wide scopes and long horizons in great detail.
This “uncertainty theory” formulated above may be very 
important for understanding the practical utility of different 
types of EA artifacts for planning. In particular, the level of 
granularity and organizational scopes covered in EA arti-
facts directly correlate with the planning horizons for which 
these EA artifacts are intended. The most abstract EA arti-
facts are used for long-range organization-wide planning, 
while the most detailed artifacts are used for short-term 
project-specific planning. At the same time, the attempts to 
define the desired long-term future state in detail, as recom-
mended by popular EA frameworks and methodologies 
(Bernard, 2012; Spewak and Hill, 1992; TOGAF, 2018; 
van’t Wout et al., 2010), are not practiced.
For example, the long-range global planning in organi-
zations is most often accomplished via identifying and 
highlighting strategically important areas in business capa-
bility models or value chains (EA on a Page, 2018; Kotusev, 
2019a), but without specifying any additional details. The 
mid-term planning is typically accomplished through 
developing more detailed investment roadmaps for specific 
business areas which often only outline planned IT initia-
tives, but do not provide any more detailed descriptions. 
The short-term planning is usually accomplished via high-
level solution overviews or other similar EA artifacts cre-
ated for separate IT initiatives and describing only their 
most essential components. Finally, the planning for an 
immediately actionable perspective is normally accom-
plished via detailed solution designs developed for concrete 
IT projects and depicting their technical components. 
Moreover, futility of the efforts to define and document the 
long-term future state in detail had been recognized ages 
ago in the industry literature on information systems 
planning:
In 1971, the company [Trans World Airlines] underwent some 
major changes, switching dp [date processing] hardware 
vendors and moving headquarters from New York to Kansas 
City. As a result, its two-volume LRP [long-range information 
systems plan], specifying five years worth of hardware, 
software, and applications, ended up in the wastebasket. 
(Lasden, 1981: 102)
Detailed architectural drawings of business processes and 
systems applications—apart from a specific business process 
initiative –can make companies feel as if someone is doing 
something about complexity, but they are rarely acted upon. 
(Ross et al., 2006: 65)
An important aspect of designing transitional architectures is 
to define them at the appropriate level of detail. Keep in mind 
that business drivers, priorities, technologies, and organizations 
change. Consequently, spending an enormous amount of time 
detailing every step of a transitional architecture is a wasted 
effort. We recommend documenting only the first plateau at an 
immediately actionable level of detail. (Erder and Pureur, 
2006: 16)
[Enterprise architects] focus on documenting the current state 
or what the future state should be. By the time they are done 
with their architectural artifact, a new technology has already 
killed whatever they are working on. (Tucci, 2011: 1)
Along with the theories of cognitive fit and information 
processing, the “theory of uncertainty” also plays an impor-
tant role in understanding the practical utility of EA artifacts. 
Specifically, the environmental uncertainty associated with 
different organizational scopes and planning horizons deter-
mines and essentially limits the maximum level of granular-
ity that can be reasonably achieved in respective EA artifacts. 
On one hand, this theory explains the inextricable connection 
between the abstractness of EA artifacts and planning hori-
zons for which the use of these artifacts is appropriate clearly 
observable in practice. On the other hand, this theory also 
questions the very possibility of defining and documenting 
the desired long-term future state for the whole organization 
in fair detail so widely advocated in the literature (Bernard, 
2012; Boar, 1999; Spewak and Hill, 1992; TOGAF, 2018; 
van’t Wout et al., 2010). The inherent environmental uncer-
tainty can be considered as one of the natural constraints of 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Kotusev and Kurnia 287
Kotusev and Kurnia 13
an EA practice which limits the potential possibility of 
describing the future state in EA artifacts beyond a certain 
horizon-specific reasonable level of granularity.
Stakeholder theories
Stakeholder theories include the knowledge management 
theory, media richness theory, and decision-making theo-
ries since all these theories clarify the involvement, partici-
pation, and communication between stakeholders of EA 
artifacts. In particular, the knowledge management theory 
explains the required level of personal communication 
between stakeholders of EA artifacts, the media richness 
theory explains the selection of appropriate communication 
approaches for this purpose, while the decision-making 
theories explain the critical necessity of direct stakeholder 
participation in developing EA artifacts defining the future 
course of action.
Communities of practice theory. Communities of practice 
can be understood as “groups of people who share a con-
cern, a set of problems, or a passion about a topic, and who 
deepen their knowledge and expertise in this area by inter-
acting on an ongoing basis” (Wenger et al., 2002: 4). The 
concept of communities of practice has diverse implica-
tions for multiple aspects of organizational life including 
apprenticeship, learning, working, and innovating, as well 
as for the identity of individuals (Brown and Duguid, 1991, 
1998; Lave and Wenger, 1991; Wenger, 1998). Since each 
of the publications deemed seminal for this theory (Brown 
and Duguid, 1991; Lave and Wenger, 1991; Wenger, 1998; 
Wenger et al., 2002) provides rather different perspectives 
on communities of practice (Cox, 2005), in our discussions 
of this theory we will refer predominantly to the work of 
Wenger (1998) as the most comprehensive, theoretically 
accomplished, and relevant for our purposes, and especially 
to its description of boundaries and connections between 
different communities. For instance, Wenger (1998) argues 
that spanning the boundaries between communities of prac-
tice requires implementing two distinct mechanisms: bro-
kering and boundary objects. Brokering implies direct 
participation of individuals in the work of different com-
munities (or multi-membership), while the use of boundary 
objects implies producing physical documents moving 
across communities. As boundary objects may be ineffec-
tual without face-to-face interaction (Sapsed and Salter, 
2004), these two mechanisms naturally complement and 
even reinforce each other:
In order to take advantage of the complementarity of [brokering 
and boundary objects], it is often a good idea to have artifacts 
and people travel together. Accompanied artifacts stand a 
better chance of bridging practices. A document can give a less 
partial view of a topic, and a person can help interpret the 
document and negotiate its relevance. When combined, the 
ambiguity of [boundary objects] and the partiality of 
[brokering] can compensate for each other by becoming 
productive interactional resources. Given enough legitimacy, 
visitors with a carefully composed paraphernalia of artifacts 
can provide a substantial connection indeed. (Wenger, 1998: 
111–112)
Wenger (1998) also argues that some practices can be 
considered as boundary practices that “deal with bounda-
ries and sustain a connection between a number of other 
practices by addressing conflicts, reconciling perspectives, 
and finding resolutions” (p. 114). He warns that boundary 
practices “present the danger of gaining so much momen-
tum of their own that they become insulated from the prac-
tices they are supposed to connect” (Wenger, 1998: 115).
In the EA discipline, the theory of communities of prac-
tices has been leveraged only recently by Dale and Scheepers 
(2020), who viewed different groups of EA stakeholders as 
communities of practice. They analyzed the interpersonal 
factors influencing the ability of architects to establish effec-
tive connections with their stakeholders through three 
essential dimensions of communities of practice: mutual 
engagement, joint enterprise, and shared repertoire.
Our extensive empirical analysis of established EA prac-
tices in organizations (see Table 1) suggests that the impor-
tance of the communities of practice theory for the EA 
discipline may be greatly underestimated. As proposed by 
Dale and Scheepers (2020), different groups of participants 
of EA practices in organizations can indeed be conceptual-
ized as communities of practice consisting of people who 
possess similar knowledge and share analogous concerns. 
Especially, articulate characteristics of communities of 
practice can be observed at the boundaries between different 
participant groups involved in an EA practice. In particular, 
organizations with EA practices always implement both 
brokering mechanisms, in the form of direct face-to-face 
conversations between representatives of different commu-
nities, and boundary objects mechanisms, in the form of 
various EA artifacts used by their members. Furthermore, 
from the perspective of the communities of practice theory, 
the occupation of architects can be viewed as a boundary 
practice that intends to connect other practices together. On 
one hand, architects act as brokers communicating with 
members of other communities, resolving conflicting inter-
ests and proposing mutually acceptable solutions. On the 
other hand, architects are also chief owners of the parapher-
nalia of EA artifacts serving as boundary objects helping 
formalize and stipulate the reached agreements.
Organizationally, boundary-spanning processes between 
different communities of practice are most vividly mani-
fested in constant meetings happening as part of an EA prac-
tice. These meetings usually involve representatives of 
multiple different communities and often result in new or 
updated EA artifacts. For example, strategic meetings nor -
mally include business leaders with different profiles, senior 

--- PAGE 14 ---
288 Journal of Information Technology 36(3)
14 Journal of Information Technology 00(0)
IT managers, and architects. These meetings are often sup-
ported by business capability models, roadmaps, or some 
other high-level EA artifacts (EA on a Page, 2018; Kotusev, 
2019a) as boundary objects and, if any significant planning 
decisions are made, lead to updates of these artifacts. Project-
level meetings may include, depending on the current project 
phase, business sponsors of respective IT initiatives, solution 
architects, project managers, system end users, and senior 
representatives of IT delivery and support teams. These 
meetings typically revolve first around developing abstract 
solution overviews at the early project stages and then around 
creating more detailed solution designs at the later project 
stages (EA on a Page, 2018; Kotusev, 2019a) as boundary 
objects. During these meetings, each community of practice 
voices its key concerns to be satisfied. For example, senior 
business executives advocate strategic value, product man-
agers—time-to-market, program, and project managers—
resources and deadlines, delivery teams—solution feasibility 
and support teams—its maintainability.
The criticality of using both personal brokering and 
physical boundary objects for bridging the boundaries 
between different communities in an EA practice is also 
acknowledged in the industry EA literature:
The Strategic Dialogue determines which business objectives 
will be pursued [. . .]. This dialogue defines a business objective 
in a business case and then elaborates the objective as a concrete 
project proposal. This process is a collaboration of business and 
IT management who together determine which business 
objectives should be pursued. (Wagter et al., 2005: 71)
The theory of communities of practice can be consid-
ered as the key theory for understanding different stake-
holder groups in an EA practice, their boundaries and the 
ways of connecting them with the help of EA artifacts. 
Most importantly, the communities of practice theory 
explains the necessity of combining boundary objects 
mechanisms (i.e. EA artifacts) and brokering mechanisms 
(i.e. direct personal contacts) for aligning the interests of 
different communities. Essentially, this theory largely mir-
rors and is reciprocal to the theory of boundary objects. 
While the boundary objects theory focuses on boundary 
objects themselves and explains why they are so valuable 
for communication between different communities, the 
communities of practice theory, on the contrary, focuses 
specifically on communities and explains why they need 
boundary objects for productive collaboration. Moreover, 
this theory also explains the general role of the community 
of architects as a boundary practice aimed at linking other 
communities. Among other implications, it effectively pre-
dicts one of the most widely reported problems with an EA 
practice: the so-called “ivory tower” syndrome, when 
architects start to focus excessively on their own practice 
instead of connecting other communities together, create 
irrelevant EA artifacts and eventually become isolated from 
the rest of the organization (Ambler, 2010; Burton, 2009; 
Hauder et al., 2013b; Hobbs, 2012; Kotusev and Kurnia, 
2019; Levy, 2014; van der Raadt and van Vliet, 2008; van 
der Raadt et al., 2010).
Knowledge management theory. Knowledge management 
can be defined as “a systemic and organizationally speci-
fied process for acquiring, organizing and communicating 
[. . .] knowledge of employees so that other employees may 
make use of it to be more effective and productive in their 
work” (Alavi and Leidner, 1999: 6). The knowledge man-
agement theory suggests that knowledge can take two dif-
ferent forms, which require different strategies and systems 
for managing it. Specifically, knowledge tends to be either 
explicit, which can be easily formalized and documented, 
or tacit, which is embedded in the human brain and cannot 
be easily formalized (Alavi and Leidner, 1999, 2001; Gro-
ver and Davenport, 2001; Polanyi, 1966; Sambamurthy and 
Subramani, 2005). Two different strategies for managing 
knowledge are codification, which relies on recording 
knowledge in documents and sharing them between people, 
and personalization, which relies on organizing direct inter-
action between people possessing knowledge (Grover and 
Davenport, 2001; Hansen et al., 1998). Finally, knowledge 
management systems can be classified into repositories, 
which provide searchable document databases for captur-
ing knowledge, and maps, which provide catalogs of peo-
ple possessing necessary expertise (Gray, 2000; Kankanhalli 
et al., 2005; Ruggles, 1998; Wu and Wang, 2006). The 
codification strategy is more suitable for managing explicit 
knowledge and can be supported by knowledge reposito-
ries, while the personalization strategy is more appropriate 
for tacit knowledge and can be based on using knowledge 
maps (Grover and Davenport, 2001; Hansen et al., 1998; 
Kankanhalli et al., 2005).
In the EA discipline, the theory of knowledge manage-
ment has been leveraged only by a single group of research-
ers (Buckl et al., 2009c; Struck et al., 2010), but did not 
attract noticeable attention among the broader research 
community. Buckl et al. (2009c) and Struck et al. (2010) 
consider an EA practice as a way of managing knowledge 
and analyzed the existing EA frameworks from the per -
spective of a typical knowledge management lifecycle.
Our extensive empirical analysis of established EA prac-
tices in organizations (see Table 1) suggests that the knowl-
edge management theory may be very important for 
understanding the practical usage of EA artifacts. In par -
ticular, EA artifacts representing explicit and tacit knowl-
edge in different proportions require different knowledge 
management strategies and storage approaches. On one 
hand, EA artifacts depicting predominantly explicit knowl-
edge (e.g. the structure of the existing IT landscape inde-
pendent of people’s interpretation) are managed according 
to the classical codification strategy and stored in searcha-
ble document repositories. On the other hand, EA artifacts 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Kotusev and Kurnia 289
Kotusev and Kurnia 15
reflecting highly tacit knowledge (e.g. based on executives’ 
understanding of the market environment and business 
needs) are managed more according to the personalization 
strategy and very closely associated with specific people 
who contributed to their creation.
The form of knowledge most susceptible to codification 
is the knowledge on the current IT landscape most often 
captured in landscape diagrams and inventories (EA on a 
Page, 2018; Kotusev, 2019a). Both these EA artifacts essen-
tially represent classical codified knowledge repositories, 
where the comprehensive information on the existing IT 
assets and their relationship can be easily looked up by eve-
ryone when needed. On the contrary, the form of knowl-
edge least susceptible to codification is the knowledge of 
the external market environment, business opportunities, 
problems, and needs, which in most cases is present only 
implicitly in business-focused types of EA artifacts (EA on 
a Page, 2018; Kotusev, 2019a). For example, business 
capability models and value chains often reflect strategic 
priorities of a small group of C-level executives, but do not 
explain explicitly how and why these priorities have been 
identified leaving this tacit knowledge in the heads of busi-
ness executives. Similarly, solution overviews typically do 
not provide a comprehensive description of the business 
motivation behind respective IT initiatives, but rather refer 
to business sponsors of these initiatives from whom the 
necessary information can be obtained essentially repre-
senting knowledge maps. A generalized observation regard-
ing the relationship between EA artifacts and respective 
knowledge management approach can arguably be formu-
lated as follows: more personalization and less codification 
are required for EA artifacts that reflect more tacit knowl-
edge, and vice versa.
The impossibility of capturing tacit business goals and 
strategy in formal architectural diagrams in the same way 
in which the existing landscape structure can be depicted is 
acknowledged by reflective EA practitioners as well:
I have my doubts that modeling intentions and strategy are 
actually very useful. Modeling strategy cannot be much more 
than illustrative for what in reality is a narrative that has many 
aspects that practically can’t be modeled at all in the same way 
that intelligent behavior cannot be caught in rules. Both 
intentions and strategy are domains that are far from logical in 
the real world and trying to map them onto a logical structure 
[in a way similar to regular modeling of the IT landscape] will 
have serious limitations. (Wierda, 2017: 17)
The theory of knowledge management arguably plays a 
critical role in understanding the stakeholder-related 
aspects of the practical usage of EA artifacts. Specifically, 
this theory explains the degree of immediate stakeholder 
involvement required for using EA artifacts as part of an 
EA practice. Most importantly, it establishes the necessity 
of direct contact with stakeholders for EA artifacts reflect-
ing tacit knowledge, that is, essentially for all EA artifacts 
having subtle meaning and allowing subjective interpreta-
tion. The knowledge management theory helps understand 
why some EA artifacts can be simply retrieved from docu-
ment repositories and studied to obtain knowledge, while 
for other EA artifacts identification and communication 
with their stakeholders might be critical for their usage. 
From this perspective, the knowledge management theory 
complements the theory of communities of practice. While 
the communities of practice theory explains the very neces-
sity of combining EA artifacts and personal communica-
tion, the knowledge management theory explains in which 
cases one of these two mechanisms can be more appropri-
ate than the other.
Media richness theory. Media richness is the capacity of a 
communication medium to transmit rich information, which 
is characterized by four main criteria: instant feedback, mul-
tiple cues, language variety, and personal focus (Daft and 
Lengel, 1984, 1986; Daft et al., 1987). Various communica-
tion media range in their richness, in increasing order, from 
unaddressed numerical reports and written letters to tele-
phone calls and personal face-to-face conversations (Daft 
and Lengel, 1984, 1986; Daft et al., 1987). Daft et al. (1987) 
demonstrate that managers tend to prefer less rich commu-
nication media for unequivocal messages and richer media 
for equivocal messages since “equivocality leads to the 
exchange of subjective views among managers to define the 
problem and resolve disagreements” (p. 357) (equivocality 
is understood specifically as “the existence of multiple and 
conflicting interpretations about an organizational situa-
tion” (Daft and Lengel, 1986: 556). In other words, neces-
sary media richness directly correlates with the equivocality 
of conveyed messages (Daft and Lengel, 1984; Trevino 
et al., 1987). Daft et al. (1987) also explain that
the organization reduces equivocality by pooling opinions and 
overcoming disagreement. This leads to a shared understanding 
and social agreement about the correct response. The response 
to equivocality comes from within the management group in 
the form of defining what events mean and enacting a solution. 
(p. 357)6
In the EA discipline, the theory of media richness, to the 
best of the authors’ knowledge, has not been leveraged in 
any studies. Put simply, in the existing EA literature, com-
munication between architects and other EA stakeholders 
was never analyzed or differentiated from the perspective 
of its media.
Our extensive empirical analysis of established EA prac-
tices in organizations (see Table 1) suggests that the media 
richness theory may be very important for understanding 
the practical usage of EA artifacts. In particular, EA arti-
facts of different equivocality require adequate means of 
communication corresponding to their equivocality. On one 
hand, EA artifacts associated with less equivocality (e.g. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
290 Journal of Information Technology 36(3)
16 Journal of Information Technology 00(0)
focused on the current state) are often exchanged via 
emails, shared electronically, or published on document 
portals to be studied. On the other hand, EA artifacts associ-
ated with great equivocality (e.g. focused on the long-term 
future) are always discussed during personal meetings, 
group workshops, and presentations. Essentially, these EA 
artifacts only support and complement conversations, but 
never substitute them.
Probably the least equivocal of all widely used EA arti-
facts are landscape diagrams and inventories (EA on a 
Page, 2018; Kotusev, 2019a). Both these EA artifacts aim 
primarily to accurately depict the existing IT landscape and 
imply little or no ambiguity and controversy. Accordingly, 
these EA artifacts are most often stored in shared drives, 
corporate portals, or specialized architectural repositories, 
typically accessed electronically and discussed only occa-
sionally. By contrast, two of the most equivocal EA arti-
facts are business capability maps and roadmaps (EA on a 
Page, 2018; Kotusev, 2019a). Both these EA artifacts focus 
on the long-term future and deal with strategic investment 
priorities of organizations, which normally represent the 
subjects of major debates, disagreements, and disputes 
between senior executives. Unsurprisingly, these EA arti-
facts are never distributed electronically simply to be 
downloaded and studied, but rather are very intensively 
discussed with the involvement of all their stakeholders. A 
generalized observation regarding the relationship between 
EA artifacts and respective media richness can arguably be 
formulated as follows: greater media richness is required 
for EA artifacts that reflect more opinions and less facts, 
and vice versa.
The necessity of using rich communication media for 
EA artifacts reflecting far-reaching planning decisions that 
naturally imply considerable ambiguity is also acknowl-
edged in the industry EA literature:
[The CIO] estimated that the management team at Delta Air 
Lines required sixty iterations [of meetings and discussions] to 
complete the drawing of its core diagram. (Ross et al., 2006: 66)
Generally, effective communication and mutual under -
standing between business and IT stakeholders have been 
long-recognized as core enablers of business and IT align-
ment in organizations (Chan and Reich, 2007; Luftman and 
Brier, 1999; Nath, 1989; Preston and Karahanna, 2009; 
Reich and Benbasat, 2000; Teo and Ang, 1999).
The theory of media richness arguably plays a critical 
role in understanding the communicational aspects related 
to the practical usage of EA artifacts. Specifically, this the-
ory explains the selection of suitable communication 
approaches required for using EA artifacts as part of an EA 
practice. Most importantly, it establishes the primacy of per-
sonal verbal communications over electronic documents 
exchange for all EA artifacts dealing with ambiguity, that is, 
essentially for all EA artifacts focused on the future. The 
media richness theory helps understand why some EA arti-
facts can be simply uploaded to corporate web portals or 
distributed to their stakeholders remotely, while other EA 
artifacts might be effectively useless without direct face-to-
face conversations between their stakeholders. From this 
perspective, the media richness theory complements the 
theories of communities of practice and knowledge man-
agement. While these two theories explain, respectively, the 
very necessity and relative degree of direct interaction with 
stakeholders, the media richness theory explains the choice 
of appropriate communication media for this purpose.
Decision-making theories. Decision-making is the process of 
formulating managerial decisions in organizations. Tradi-
tionally, decision-making has been a subject of intense aca-
demic research conducted at least for several decades 
(Cyert and March, 1992; Lindblom, 1959; March and 
Simon, 1993; Mintzberg et al., 1976; Simon, 1960), which 
produced a vast body of literature on strategic decision-
making processes (Eisenhardt and Zbaracki, 1992; Huff 
and Reger, 1987; Hutzschenreuter and Kleindienst, 2006; 
Papadakis et al., 2010; Rajagopalan et al., 1993; Schwenk, 
1995). For this reason, there may be no single theory of 
decision-making, but rather a broad family of theories 
related to decision-making and addressing various aspects 
of decision-making processes in organizations including, 
among others, such well-known theories as the theory of 
administrative behavior, or the so-called bounded rational-
ity (Simon, 1997), and the garbage can theory (Cohen et al., 
1972).
In the EA discipline, the theories on decision-making, to 
the best of the authors’ knowledge has not been leveraged 
in any studies. However, the administrative behavior theory 
was identified by Weiss et al. (2012) as potentially relevant 
to EA and some elements of decision-making theories have 
been mentioned in the recent study of van den Berg et al. 
(2019).
Our extensive empirical analysis of established EA prac-
tices in organizations (see Table 1) suggests that the family 
of decision-making theories may actually be considered as 
very relevant for understanding the practical usage of EA 
artifacts. In particular, all EA artifacts shaping the future 
course of action essentially represent formalized and 
explicitly documented planning decisions and, therefore, 
all theories explaining decision-making processes in organ-
izations relate to the development processes of these EA 
artifacts.
The literature on decision-making typically conceptual-
izes the process of strategic decision-making in organiza-
tions as two separate phases, formulation and implementation 
(Huff and Reger, 1987; Hutzschenreuter and Kleindienst, 
2006; Papadakis et al., 2010; Pettigrew, 2003), often with 
the formal approval gate between them (Mintzberg et al., 
1976; van den Berg et al., 2019). This generic process accu-
rately describes the lifecycle of all EA artifacts focused on 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Kotusev and Kurnia 291
Kotusev and Kurnia 17
the future. Specifically, all these EA artifacts emerge and 
undergo through the formulation stage, where the corre-
sponding planning decisions are developed, then the deci-
sions reflected in these artifacts are officially authorized by 
relevant architecture governance bodies, and finally these 
decisions are implemented either via influencing some 
lower level planning decisions, or directly in concrete IT 
systems. For example, architecture principles get initially 
formulated, then endorsed by the top-level governance com-
mittee (e.g. architecture governance council), and finally 
implemented via aligning all subsequent architectural deci-
sions to their suggestions (EA on a Page, 2018; Kotusev, 
2019a). Business capability models get “heatmapped,” then 
the corresponding investment priorities get approved by the 
senior governance committee (e.g. strategy board), and 
finally implemented via guiding lower level portfolio shap-
ing and prioritization processes. In a similar vein, solution 
designs are formulated, then endorsed by the low-level tech-
nical committee (e.g. architecture review board), and finally 
implemented directly by IT project teams.
Evident similarity between organizational decision-
making processes and lifecycles of future-focused EA arti-
facts suggests that many or even most conclusions of the 
theories on decision-making may be directly applicable to 
EA artifacts representing planning decisions. However, 
arguably the single most important lesson from these theo-
ries for the EA discipline is that significant decisions and 
plans should not be created by architects on behalf of other 
EA stakeholders, but rather developed collectively by 
architects and all these stakeholders together. Undermined 
productivity and satisfaction from executing decisions and 
plans made by others, as well as their underlying reasons, 
had been recognized long ago, for instance, by Bass (1970):
Productivity and satisfaction are lower when planning for 
others because (1) sense of accomplishment is less when 
executing someone else’s plan; (2) there is less tendency to try 
to confirm the validity of another’s plan by executing it 
successfully—less confidence that it can be done; (3) there is 
less commitment to see that the plan works well; (4) there is 
less flexibility and less room for modification and initiative to 
make improvements in an assigned plan; (5) there is less 
understanding of an assigned plan; (6) human resources are not 
so well utilized; (7) there are more communications problems 
and consequent errors and distortions in following instructions; 
(8) there are competitive feelings aroused between planners 
and doers, to such an extent that it appears that if the former 
“win,” the latter “lose.” (p. 159, 163)
Bass (1970) concludes that “ideally, planners should be 
those who execute the plans” (p. 163). In the context of an 
EA practice, the problems associated with the attempts to 
plan for others may be especially acute and exacerbated by 
the fact that planners (i.e. architects) have lower status, 
authority, and power than many other stakeholders of the 
resulting plans (e.g. C-level executives and other business 
leaders). Furthermore, stakeholder involvement can be nec-
essary to ensure their commitment to the decisions being 
made: “Involvement of some constituency in decision mak-
ing, even if the involvement is symbolic rather than actual, 
can have effects on developing commitment to the deci-
sions that are reached” (Pfeffer, 1981: 207).
These conclusions suggest that in order to maximize the 
success rate of EA efforts, all EA artifacts reflecting certain 
planning decisions should be produced collaboratively by 
architects and other stakeholders, never by architects alone. 
Moreover, involving others in decision-making processes 
also helps develop more balanced plans, minimize the 
harmful influence of cognitive biases, and avoid dangerous 
decision-making traps inherent even to experienced and 
highly qualified individuals (Davenport, 2009; Hammond 
et al., 1998; Kahneman et al., 2011; Lovallo and Kahneman, 
2003; Sibony et al., 2017). Unsurprisingly, stakeholder par-
ticipation and buy-in are widely recognized among the 
most critical success factors of EA practice in the academic 
EA literature (Bricknall et al., 2006; Kotusev and Kurnia, 
2019; Schmidt and Buxmann, 2011; van der Raadt et al., 
2010). The need for the collective development of architec-
tural plans is recognized in the industry EA literature as 
well:
The idea that enterprise architecture discussions should 
involve senior management will not be a surprise to most IT 
executives. But many IT leaders find themselves taking the 
lead. We have seen two successful strategies to involve senior 
executives: IT-facilitated senior management discussions and 
senior management approval of IT-led designs. (Ross et al., 
2006: 65–66)
Besides involving EA stakeholders in architectural 
decision-making processes as part of in-house EA prac-
tices, analogous conclusions are also valid for the relation-
ships between external EA consultancies and client 
organizations and the consequences of insufficient involve-
ment of clients in consultants-driven EA efforts may be 
very disappointing:
Gartner has observed [. . .] clients who have derailed the EA 
effort [and any subsequent attempts] through improper use of 
consultants. This usually happens when the client engages a 
consultant to do the architecture “to them” rather than “with 
them.” Without the active participation of the client in the EA 
effort, the critical link to the business is lost. (Lapkin and 
Allega, 2010: 3)
The theories on decision-making are critical for under -
standing the decision-making aspects related to the practi-
cal usage of EA artifacts representing some planning 
decisions, that is, essentially all EA artifacts having certain 
articulate implications for the future. Specifically, these 
theories interpret the process of creation and usage of 
future-focused EA artifacts as the process of organizational 

--- PAGE 18 ---
292 Journal of Information Technology 36(3)
18 Journal of Information Technology 00(0)
decision-making. Most importantly, they establish the 
necessity of active involvement and participation of stake-
holders in the development of EA artifacts shaping the 
future course of action. The decision-making theories help 
understand why it is impractical to create EA artifacts for 
someone, but only together with someone, as well as why 
EA artifacts are often ignored by the stakeholders who did 
not participate in their development. From this perspective, 
the decision-making theories complement the theories of 
communities of practice, knowledge management, and 
media richness. While these three theories explain the 
necessity and degree of personal communication as well as 
the selection of communication media, the decision-mak-
ing theories explain the necessity of involving EA stake-
holders in defining the future course of action.
Contrast theories
Contrast theories include only the management fashion 
theory since this theory clarifies the sharp contrast between 
how EA artifacts allegedly ought to be used, as prescribed 
by the mainstream EA literature, and how they are actually 
used in established EA practices. In particular, the manage-
ment fashion theory explains the wide presence of EA 
frameworks in the current EA discourse, despite the fact 
that these frameworks actually proved their practical inef-
fectiveness long ago.
Management fashion theory. Management fashions are inef-
ficient managerial innovations promoted by fashion-setting 
networks (e.g. consultancies, gurus, and business mass-
media) and temporarily adopted by organizations under 
conditions of high uncertainty (Abrahamson, 1991, 1996). 
Fashion-setters create “transitory collective beliefs that cer-
tain management techniques are at the forefront of manage-
ment progress” (Abrahamson, 1991: 254). The resulting 
management fashions “tend to have a lifecycle character-
ized by a long latency phase followed by a wave-like, often 
asymmetrical and ephemeral popularity curve” (Abraham-
son and Fairchild, 1999: 731). Although the theory man-
agement fashions is often credited to the seminal work of 
Abrahamson (1991), the very tendency of organizations to 
blindly follow questionable managerial approaches and 
techniques without sufficient rational justifications had 
been noticed by many authors much earlier (Hackman, 
1975; Horton, 1977; Lawler and Mohrman, 1985; Mintz-
berg, 1981). Widely acknowledged management fashions 
that emerged unexpectedly, enjoyed broad adoption, then 
proved their practical ineffectiveness, and faded away 
without a trace include, among others, business process 
reengineering (BPR), Japanese management (Theory Z), 
job enrichment, management by objectives (MBO), self-
managed teams (SMT), quality circles (QC), and total qual-
ity management (TQM) (Abrahamson and Fairchild, 1999; 
Carson et al., 1999, 2000; Gibson and Tesone, 2001; Kie-
ser, 1997; Miller et al., 2004).
In the EA discipline, the theory of management fashions 
has been leveraged only once by Hjort-Madsen and Pries-
Heje (2009) to investigate whether the adoption of EA in 
governmental organizations can be considered as a tempo-
rary passing fashion or as a genuine long-lasting trend.
Our extensive empirical analysis of established EA prac-
tices in organizations (see Table 1) suggests that the man-
agement fashion theory may be critical for understanding 
the complex situation in the EA discipline and the curious 
relationship between superficial EA rhetoric and actual EA 
practice. On one hand, rhetoric in the EA discipline has 
been traditionally dominated by EA frameworks (Bui, 
2017; Matthes, 2011; Schekkerman, 2004; Simon et al., 
2013), which describe in great detail what steps should be 
followed by architects, what EA artifacts should be created, 
and how these artifacts should be structured. On the other 
hand, our in-depth studies of the practical usage of EA arti-
facts in multiple organizations demonstrate the absence of 
any observable correlation between the prescriptions of EA 
frameworks and real activities of architects, even when the 
use of EA frameworks is formally declared. Put simply, 
successful EA practices do not resemble the recommenda-
tions of EA frameworks in any aspect, with the exception of 
trivial generalities, for example, some EA artifacts are 
developed which may describe different domains of organi-
zations from business and applications to infrastructure and 
security.
First, successful EA practices do not resemble linear 
step-wise processes described by popular EA frameworks 
and methodologies (Armour et al., 1999; Bernard, 2012; 
Bittler and Kreizman, 2005; Boar, 1999; Carbone, 2004; 
Covington and Jahangir, 2009; Federal Enterprise 
Architecture Framework (FEAF), 1999; Holcman, 2013; 
IBM, 2006; Longepe, 2003; Niemann, 2006; Schekkerman, 
2008; Spewak and Hill, 1992; TAFIM, 1996; Theuerkorn, 
2004; TOGAF, 2018; van’t Wout et al., 2010), but rather 
represent much more complex constellations of activities. 
Second, established EA practices are based on pragmatic 
collections of EA artifacts that only slightly overlap with 
the lists of EA artifacts recommended by the mainstream 
EA literature for practitioners (Bernard, 2012; Spewak and 
Hill, 1992; TOGAF, 2018; van’t Wout et al., 2010). Third, 
real EA artifacts used in organizations are not structured 
(and even cannot be structured hypothetically) according to 
some logical taxonomies widely advocated in the literature 
(Bernard, 2012; Connor, 1988; PRISM, 1986; Pulkkinen, 
2006; Schekkerman, 2006; Sowa and Zachman, 1992; 
TEAF, 2000; van’t Wout et al., 2010; Wardle, 1984; 
Zachman, 1987).
These and some other significant differences between 
the suggestions of mainstream EA literature and established 
industry practices pose a number of important questions 
regarding the status of the EA discipline and the theory of 
management fashions helps answer these questions. On one 
hand, all popular EA frameworks and methodologies either 
originate directly from fashion setting networks, including 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Kotusev and Kurnia 293
Kotusev and Kurnia 19
major consulting companies (Bittler and Kreizman, 2005; 
Covington and Jahangir, 2009; IBM, 2006; van’t Wout 
et al., 2010), specialized EA consultancies (Holcman, 2013; 
Schekkerman, 2008; Spewak and Hill, 1992), individual 
gurus (Bernard, 2012; Boar, 1999; Carbone, 2004; Longepe, 
2003; Niemann, 2006; Theuerkorn, 2004; Zachman, 1987), 
and industry consortia (TOGAF, 2018), or are inspired by 
these networks (Armour et al., 1999; FEAF, 1999; TAFIM, 
1996). The practical applicability and effectiveness of these 
approaches were implicitly assumed, but never explicitly 
proven with evidence. For instance, regarding the Zachman 
Framework, which is considered by some authors as semi-
nal for the entire EA discipline (Simon et al., 2013), Ylimaki 
and Halttunen (2006) concluded that “there is a lack of sci-
entific studies on the application of the Zachman frame-
work—and analyzing its applicability—in practice” (p. 
190). Similar observations have also been made regarding 
TOGAF: “There is a pressing need for some detailed 
worked examples and use cases. Although these were 
requested, they were not forthcoming from TOGAF train-
ers or The Open Group” (Anderson et al., 2009: 66). The 
later comprehensive EA literature review (Kotusev, 2017c) 
confirmed these conclusions and made analogous observa-
tions regarding other popular EA frameworks as well.
On the other hand, negative evidence against popular 
EA frameworks is abundant (Kotusev, 2018a). For exam-
ple, case studies demonstrate that the Zachman Framework 
was not found helpful by EA practitioners (Buckl et al., 
2009a; Janssen and Hjort-Madsen, 2007). Attempts to 
implement DoDAF wasted up to US$400 million in the 
Department of Defense (U.S. Government Accountability 
Office (U.S. GAO), 2004, 2005, 2013, 2015): “Hundreds of 
millions of dollars had been spent on a business enterprise 
architecture (BEA) that had limited use” (U.S. GAO, 2007: 
1–2). FEAF wasted up to US$1 billion dollars in the US 
Federal Government (U.S. GAO, 2011): “Literally more 
than a billion dollars have been spent so far on Enterprise 
Architecture by the federal government, and much, if not 
most of it has been wasted” (Gaver, 2010: 52). Lohe and 
Legner (2014) report that the attempts to follow the pre-
scriptions of EA frameworks in organizations lead to sig-
nificant practical problems. Buckl et al. (2009a) conclude 
that EA frameworks “appear theoretical and impossible to 
implement” (p. 15). Unsurprisingly, recent case studies 
demonstrate that EA frameworks are either not used in 
organizations at all (Fallmyr and Bygstad, 2014; Haki et al., 
2012; Kotusev et al., 2016; Molnar and Proper, 2013), or 
used purely declaratively (Kotusev, 2018c; Kotusev et al., 
2020; Smith et al., 2012). Obvious inconsistencies between 
the “promises” of EA frameworks and realities of their 
practical implementation are also noticed by reflective EA 
practitioners:
Let’s face our own inconvenient truth: enterprise architecture 
doesn’t really work the way we have assumed for thirty years 
it would. (Wierda, 2015: 31)
For a subject that is over thirty years old, there is pretty little 
empirical proof that any of the proposed methods of 
frameworks actually work. (Wierda, 2015: 65)
Most EA methods and frameworks claim that [their 
prescriptions] can be applied to the development of an EA for 
an entire organization, but attempts to develop architecture on 
this scope routinely fail. (Trionfi, 2016: 40)
All these observations suggest that the EA discipline 
has suffered from an uncritical acceptance of faddish 
ideas promoted by fashion-setters without their appropri-
ate empirical validation. In fact, modern step-by-step EA 
methodologies closely resemble all previous information 
systems planning approaches, including IBM’s BSP 
(1975, 1984), Arthur Andersen’s Method/1 (Arthur 
Andersen, 1979, 1987), James Martin’s Strategic Data 
Planning (Martin, 1982; Martin and Leben, 1989) and 
Information Engineering (Arthur Young, 1987; Davids, 
1992; Finkelstein, 1989), and the first EA methodology 
Enterprise Architecture Planning (EAP) (Spewak and 
Hill, 1992: 53) even explicitly acknowledged its origina-
tion from these approaches: “EAP has its roots in IBM’s 
BSP. Strategic Data Planning, Information Engineering, [. 
. .] have also contributed techniques and ideas to EAP.” 
However, all these pre-EA methodologies also proved 
their practical ineffectiveness (Beynon-Davies, 1994; 
Goodhue et al., 1988, 1992; Kotusev, 2018d; Lederer and 
Sethi, 1988; Periasamy, 1994; Shanks, 1997) and faded 
away like all management fashions.
The theory of management fashions can be considered 
as the key theory for understanding the curious situation 
that can be observed in the EA discipline today, which is 
manifested in considerable discrepancies between the 
mainstream EA literature and practice. Although these 
inconsistencies have been reported earlier by many 
researchers (Haki et al., 2012; Holst and Steensen, 2011; 
Niemi and Pekkola, 2017; Tanigawa, 2004; Ylimaki and 
Halttunen, 2006), no explanations regarding the underlying 
root cause of these differences have been provided. The 
unique perspective on the diffusion of inefficient manage-
rial innovations offered by the management fashion theory 
helps explain the wide presence of unmotivated beliefs on 
the practical value, utility and importance of popular EA 
frameworks disseminated by commercially motivated fash-
ion-setters. Being aggressively promoted, these EA frame-
works create a deceptive illusion of understanding an EA 
practice in great detail including its artifacts, activities, 
steps, and maturity, though their prescriptions actually 
never proved practical and even discredited themselves in 
industry long ago.
Generally, the tendency of academic researchers to 
enthusiastically embrace management fashions without 
appropriate skepticism has been noticed earlier, for 
instance, by Aldag (1997): “[Management fashions], in 
fact, often are seen [by academics] as self-evidently cor -
rect, somehow above the need for empirical proof” (p. 13). 

--- PAGE 20 ---
294 Journal of Information Technology 36(3)
20 Journal of Information Technology 00(0)
Donaldson and Hilmer (1998) argue that “faddism in man-
agement studies has created an impediment to greater intel-
lectual productivity by allowing unproven and incorrect 
ideas to go unchallenged” (p. 18).
Summary of the 10 identified 
theories
The 10 theories discussed above explain the meaning of the 
complex organizational phenomenon of an EA practice. 
Unlike most other theories leveraged previously in the EA 
discipline (see Table 7 in Appendix A), these theories focus 
on the very essence of an EA practice, that is, creation and 
usage of EA artifacts by various organizational actors for 
communication and decision-making purposes. The sche-
matic reference model of an EA practice explained earlier 
(see Figure 1) with the 10 identified theories related to the 
key elements of an EA practice is shown in Figure 2.
Due to their immediate relevance to the practical usage of 
EA artifacts for communication and decision-making pur -
poses in organizations (see Figure 2), the 10 identified theo-
ries can arguably be considered as core theories for the entire 
EA discipline. However, in the current academic EA litera-
ture these theories are either mentioned only superficially 
Figure 2. The reference model of an EA practice with the 10 relevant theories.

--- PAGE 21 ---
Kotusev and Kurnia 295
Kotusev and Kurnia 21
and not considered as central to the EA discipline, or not 
mentioned at all (see Table 7 in Appendix A). The 10 identi-
fied theories, their general meaning, proximity to the core of 
an EA practice, and observable practical manifestations are 
summarized in Table 3.
The 10 identified theories also have a considerable 
capacity to accurately describe what works in practice, 
explain why it works in the way it does, predict what may 
work hypothetically, and formulate actionable recommen-
dations for EA practitioners. The 10 identified theories and 
their analytical, explanatory, predictive, and prescriptive 
potential are summarized in Table 4.
An understanding of the relevance (see Table 3) and 
theoretical power (see Table 4) of the 10 identified theories 
allows contrasting their deserved positions in the EA disci-
pline with their current status in the literature (see Table 7 
in Appendix A). The 10 identified theories and their 
deserved and current places in the EA discipline are sum-
marized in Table 5.
Discussion of findings
This article was intended to answer the following research 
question: “What theories can be considered as the basis of 
the EA discipline?” Based on the observations gained from 
our previous in-depth empirical studies of EA practices in 
multiple organizations (Kotusev, 2018c, 2019a; Kotusev 
et al., 2017) and the analysis of the common theories rele-
vant to IS research (Larsen et al., 2015), we identified 10 
theories that can be considered as the theoretical foundation 
of the EA discipline (see Figure 2). These theories are 
directly related to the core of an EA practice (i.e. to the 
T able 3. Summary of the identified theories, their proximity and manifestations.
Theory Meaning of the theory Proximity to the core Practical manifestations
Boundary objects 
theory
Boundary objects meaningful to 
diverse social communities facilitate 
communication between these 
communities
Views EA artifacts as boundary 
objects between business and IT 
communities
Most EA artifacts are 
used as instruments for 
communication between 
business and IT stakeholders
Actor-network 
theory
Human actors inscribe their interests 
in inanimate objects, which then 
represent these interests for them in 
actor-networks
Views EA artifacts as elements 
of an actor-network into which 
human interests are inscribed
EA artifacts tend to represent 
the interests of their creators 
without their physical 
presence
Cognitive fit theory Cognitive fit between the 
mental representations of tasks 
and information presentation 
formats increases problem-solving 
performance
Addresses the relationship 
between the presentation formats 
and use cases of EA artifacts
Presentation formats of EA 
artifacts closely correlate with 
their usage scenarios
Information 
processing theory
Information processing capacity of 
people is limited to memorizing and 
processing only about 5–9 distinct 
chunks of information simultaneously
Addresses the relationship 
between complexity and usability 
of EA artifacts
All EA artifacts intended for 
decision-making purposes have 
limited numbers of elements 
often organized hierarchically
Uncertainty 
principle
Organizations can be planned either 
for wider scopes and longer horizons 
in less detail, or for narrower scopes 
and shorter horizons in more detail
Addresses the relationship 
between the abstractness of EA 
artifacts, scopes and planning 
horizons
All EA artifacts intended for 
global long-range planning are 
very abstract, and vice versa
Communities of 
practice
Organizations can be viewed 
as configurations of diverse but 
interacting communities of practice
Addresses the overall stakeholder 
context in which EA artifacts are 
used
Communication between 
different stakeholder groups 
involves both EA artifacts and 
direct contacts
Knowledge 
management theory
Explicit and tacit knowledge require 
different management strategies and 
systems
Addresses the degree of direct 
stakeholder involvement required 
for using EA artifacts
All EA artifacts reflecting tacit 
knowledge are discussed with 
their stakeholders
Media richness 
theory
Necessary media richness directly 
correlates with the equivocality of 
conveyed messages
Addresses the selection of suitable 
communication approaches 
required for using EA artifacts
All EA artifacts that imply 
equivocality are discussed 
during face-to-face meetings
Decision-making 
theories
Most importantly, decision 
implementers should participate in 
its formulation (among many others)
Addresses the need for 
stakeholder participation in the 
development of EA artifacts
All EA artifacts defining the 
future course of action are 
developed collaboratively
Management fashion 
theory
Inefficient management innovations 
can be temporarily adopted by 
organizations when promoted by 
fashion-setters
Addresses the gap between the 
prescribed and actual usage of EA 
artifacts
Prescriptions of popular EA 
frameworks are ignored, even 
if their usage is declared
EA: Enterprise architecture; IT: Information Technology.

--- PAGE 22 ---
296 Journal of Information Technology 36(3)
22 Journal of Information Technology 00(0)
creation and usage of EA artifacts for communication and 
decision-making) and have evident practical manifestations 
in organizations (see Table 3). These theories also have 
considerable analytical, explanatory, predictive, prescrip-
tive potential, and therefore, offer powerful theoretical 
lenses for understanding an EA practice (see Table 4). For 
these reasons, the 10 identified theories arguably deserve to 
occupy the central place in the EA discourse, as opposed to 
the marginal role that these theories play now (see Table 5). 
By bringing these theories to light, this article makes a sig-
nificant theoretical and practical contribution to the EA 
discipline.
Theoretical contribution
The 10 theories discussed in this article open plenty of 
opportunities for future interpretations of an EA practice 
and its core activities. Each of these theories offers a solid 
T able 4. Summary of the identified theories and their theoretical potential.
Theory Analytical Explanatory Predictive Prescriptive
Boundary 
objects theory
Describes the usage 
of EA artifacts for 
communication 
between business and IT 
stakeholders
Explains the value of EA 
artifacts through their 
boundary-spanning 
capacity
May predict which 
informational contents 
can span communication 
boundaries
Can help formulate certain 
guidelines for creating 
boundary-spanning EA 
artifacts
Actor-network 
theory
Describes the usage 
of EA artifacts for 
communication between 
different organizational 
levels
Explains the value of EA 
artifacts through their 
ability to protect the 
inscribed interests
May predict the 
situations where high-
level decisions are not 
translated downwards
Can help formulate certain 
guidelines for establishing 
uninterrupted translation 
networks
Cognitive fit 
theory
Describes what 
presentation formats in EA 
artifacts are suitable for 
different tasks
Explains the correlation 
between formats and 
tasks through the 
notion of cognitive fit
May predict which 
formats can be suitable 
or unsuitable for 
different tasks
Can help formulate certain 
guidelines for the selection 
of best presentation formats
Information 
processing 
theory
Describes the fact that 
complex EA artifacts are 
not used for decision-
making purposes
Explains the uselessness 
of complex EA artifacts 
by inherent limitations 
of the human brain
May predict which EA 
artifacts can be suitable 
or unsuitable for 
decision-making
Can help formulate certain 
guidelines for the creation 
of simple EA artifacts for 
decision-making
Uncertainty 
principle
Describes the fact that 
global, long-term planning 
is supported by very 
abstract EA artifacts
Explains the inability 
to plan the future in 
detail by the inherent 
uncertainty of the 
environment
May predict which 
granularity can be 
appropriate for specific 
scopes and planning 
horizons
Can help formulate certain 
guidelines for EA artifacts 
intended for specific scopes 
and horizons
Communities of 
practice
Describes the place and 
usage of EA artifacts in 
the organizational social 
landscape
Explains both the 
necessity of using EA 
artifacts and their 
futility without personal 
contacts
May predict the need 
for using EA artifacts at 
the boundaries between 
communities
Can help formulate certain 
guidelines for effective inter-
community communication
Knowledge 
management 
theory
Describes different usage 
of EA artifacts capturing 
IT landscapes and business 
visions
Explains different usage 
through the difference 
between explicit and 
tacit knowledge
May predict which usage 
scenarios of EA artifacts 
can potentially work in 
practice
Can help formulate certain 
guidelines for the usage 
of different types of EA 
artifacts
Media richness 
theory
Describes different 
communication patterns 
for EA artifacts reflecting 
opinions and facts
Explains different 
patterns through 
different requirements 
to media richness
May predict which 
communication medium 
can be appropriate for 
specific EA artifacts
Can help formulate certain 
guidelines for communicating 
around different types of EA 
artifacts
Decision-making 
theories
Describe the participation 
of stakeholders in the 
creation of future-focused 
EA artifacts
Explain the need for 
participation by the 
reluctance of people to 
execute plans created 
by others
May predict the problems 
with the implementation 
of plans reflected in EA 
artifacts
Can help formulate certain 
guidelines for the creation 
of EA artifacts defining the 
course of action
Management 
fashion theory
Describes dramatic 
differences between 
recommended and actual 
usage of EA artifacts
Explains the flood 
of impractical 
recommendations as 
management fashions
May predict the problems 
with the attempts to 
follow prescriptions of 
EA frameworks
Can help formulate certain 
guidelines for dealing 
with faddish EA-related 
prescriptions
EA: Enterprise architecture; IT: Information Technology.

--- PAGE 23 ---
Kotusev and Kurnia 297
Kotusev and Kurnia 23
theoretical lens leveraging the knowledge accumulated pre-
viously in other mature scientific disciplines, such as psy-
chology, sociology, and organizational behavior, through 
which a fruitful analysis of EA artifacts and their practical 
usage can be produced. For this reason, the set of theories 
identified in this article can guide future EA research in 
selecting the most appropriate theoretical lenses according 
to the study focus (e.g. EA artifacts, their usability, or EA 
stakeholders; see Figure 2) and integrating multiple differ -
ent theoretical perspectives together to provide a more 
holistic and multifaceted view of an EA practice.
Based on a sound theoretical foundation offered by the 
10 identified theories, future EA scholars can benefit from 
having more accurate descriptions of the observed phenom-
ena as well as from reaching deeper conceptual explana-
tions of their underlying reasons. Due to their considerable 
predictive potential (see Table 4), all these theories can also 
be used as the basis for formulating testable theoretical 
propositions regarding the usage of EA artifacts that can be 
verified with quantitative means, for example, via struc-
tured surveys. Furthermore, each of these theories asks a 
number of new questions in the EA discipline the critical 
importance of which becomes evident from the perspective 
of respective theoretical lenses.
Specifically, the boundary objects theory interprets EA 
artifacts as boundary objects between diverse business and 
IT communities and, therefore, raises many important 
questions regarding their desirable informational contents 
and other related properties. By the present moment, no 
empirical analysis of EA artifacts from the perspective of 
their informational contents and respective boundary-span-
ning capacity has been conducted. Although some analysis 
of the properties of EA artifacts as boundary objects in 
enterprise transformations had been already undertaken 
(Abraham, 2013, 2018), this analysis cannot be considered 
as sufficient, taking into account the pivotal role of the con-
cept of boundary objects in an EA practice, as demonstrated 
above.
The actor-network theory interprets an EA practice as a 
complex network of EA stakeholders and EA artifacts con-
nected by the interests inscription and interests representation 
relationships and, therefore, raises many important questions 
regarding the structure of this network. Although some hypo-
thetical discussion of an EA practice as an actor-network has 
T able 5. Summary of the identified theories and their places in the EA discipline.
Category Theory Deserved place in the EA discipline Current place
Role 
theories
Boundary 
objects 
theory
The core theory of the entire EA discipline, explains how EA 
artifacts bridge the horizontal communication gap between 
business and IT
Leveraged by one group 
of authors and only in 
relation to enterprise 
transformations
Actor-
network 
theory
The key theory for understanding vertical communications, 
explains how higher-level EA artifacts shape lower-level decisions
Leveraged by one group 
of authors and only 
hypothetically
Usability 
theories
Cognitive fit 
theory
The central theory for understanding the usability of EA artifacts, 
explains why EA artifacts are able to facilitate decision-making
Essentially not leveraged in 
the EA discipline
Information 
processing 
theory
The theory important for understanding the usability of EA 
artifacts, explains why EA artifacts may be unable to facilitate 
decision-making
Not leveraged in the EA 
discipline at all
Uncertainty 
principle
The principle important for understanding the utility of EA 
artifacts, explains why granularity and scope of EA artifacts 
correlate with their planning horizons
Not even clearly formulated 
in the EA discipline
Stakeholder 
theories
Communities 
of practice
The key theory for understanding the ways of connecting different 
stakeholder groups, explains why EA artifacts are necessary but 
insufficient for this purpose
Leveraged only in one 
publication
Knowledge 
management 
theory
The critical theory for understanding the usage of EA artifacts, 
explains the level of direct stakeholder involvement in an EA 
practice
Leveraged by only one group 
of authors
Media 
richness 
theory
The critical theory for understanding the usage of EA artifacts, 
explains the selection of communication approaches in an EA 
practice
Not leveraged in the EA 
discipline at all
Decision-
making 
theories
The critical theories for understanding the usage of EA artifacts, 
explain the participation of stakeholders in developing EA artifacts 
defining the future
Essentially not leveraged in 
the EA discipline
Contrast 
theories
Management 
fashion 
theory
The key theory for understanding the overall situation in the EA 
discipline, explains the existence of critical differences between 
popular EA literature and practice in relation to EA artifacts and 
their use
Essentially not leveraged in 
the EA discipline
EA: Enterprise architecture; IT: Information Technology.

--- PAGE 24 ---
298 Journal of Information Technology 36(3)
24 Journal of Information Technology 00(0)
been provided (Sidorova and Kappelman, 2010, 2011a), no 
empirical studies have been conducted to analyze an EA prac-
tice as an actor-network in-depth. For this reason, the topol-
ogy of a typical actor-network representing an EA practice 
still remains unclear.
The cognitive fit theory suggests that the information 
presentation formats in EA artifacts should match cogni-
tively to the nature of problems and decisions these arti-
facts are intended to address and, therefore, raises many 
important questions regarding the most convenient presen-
tation formats suitable for different types of decisions and 
problems in the context of an EA practice. However, to the 
best of the authors’ knowledge, no such studies have ever 
been undertaken in the EA discipline.
The information processing theory suggests that exces-
sive complexity of EA artifacts makes them essentially 
unsuitable for decision-making purposes due to the inher -
ent limitations of the human brain and, therefore, raises 
many important questions regarding the relative criticality 
of different information included in EA artifacts as well as 
regarding the practical ways of decreasing their complexity 
without reducing their information richness. However, no 
studies addressing these and other similar questions related 
to the complexity of EA artifacts have been attempted.
The uncertainty principle suggests that the level of gran-
ularity in EA artifacts should correspond to their organiza-
tional scopes and planning horizons due to the inherent 
environmental uncertainty and, therefore, raises many 
important questions regarding the appropriateness of dif-
ferent abstractions for planning specific scopes and time 
horizons. For example, it is not clear from the current EA 
literature which abstractions and notions may be most help-
ful for planning the future up to 5 years ahead, 3 years 
ahead, and 1 year ahead. However, to the best of the authors’ 
knowledge, such analysis was never undertaken in the EA 
discipline.
The communities of practice theory views an EA practice 
as a social configuration of diverse communities of practice 
and suggests that these communities need both personal 
interaction and EA artifacts as boundary objects to establish 
inter-community communication. Moreover, the commu-
nity of architects, as a boundary practice, can be considered 
as the link between other communities. Therefore, this the-
ory raises many important questions on various aspects of 
communities involved in an EA practice and especially on 
cross-boundary knowledge transfer and organizational 
learning. However, the available analysis of an EA practice 
from the perspective of communities of practice is very 
scarce (Dale and Scheepers, 2020), it barely covers these 
areas and leaves much to be desired.
The knowledge management theory interprets an EA 
practice as a knowledge management activity and suggests 
that not all knowledge can be codified and documented in 
EA artifacts, while tacit knowledge requires other knowl-
edge management strategies based on knowledge maps and 
personalization of knowledge. Therefore, this theory raises 
many important questions regarding the proper balance 
between explicit and tacit knowledge in the context of an 
EA practice as well as regarding the practical ways of iden-
tifying and involving relevant stakeholders possessing 
required knowledge in discussions of EA artifacts. 
However, the available EA literature offers only a rather 
superficial analysis of an EA practice from the perspective 
of knowledge management that does not address any of 
these questions (Buckl et al., 2009c; Struck et al., 2010).
The media richness theory suggests that EA artifacts of 
different equivocality require different communication 
media ensuring sufficient richness of information and, 
therefore, raises many important questions regarding the 
most appropriate approaches for dealing with different 
types of EA artifacts in organizations. However, no efforts 
focused specifically on analyzing communication 
approaches in the context of an EA practice have been 
undertaken in the EA discipline.
The decision-making theories interpret the creation of 
EA artifacts defining the future course of action as organi-
zational decision-making processes and suggest that their 
development requires collective participation. Therefore, 
this theory raises many important questions regarding the 
stakeholder participation in EA-related processes, for 
example, who should participate, when the participation is 
required, and how exactly this participation should be 
organized. However, to the best of the authors’ knowledge, 
none of these questions has meaningful answers in the 
existing EA literature or attracted significant attention 
among EA scholars.
Finally, the management fashion theory interprets 
widely known EA frameworks advocating impractical 
ways of using EA artifacts (e.g. TOGAF, FEAF, and 
DoDAF) as typical management fashions promoted by 
fashion-setting networks and, therefore, raises many impor-
tant questions regarding the relationship between the cur -
rent EA literature and actual industry practice. However, 
the faddish nature of popular EA frameworks is arguably 
still not widely recognized in the EA research community 
and the differences between the assumed and actual usage 
of EA artifacts still remain insufficiently understood.
Practical contribution
The 10 theories discussed in this article (see Figure 2) 
have been identified, among other factors (see Table 2), 
based on their theoretical power including their prescrip-
tive potential, that is, for their ability to offer concrete 
actionable recommendations for EA practitioners (see 
Table 4). Consequently, each of these theories has certain 
articulate implications for practicing architects and can 
provide rather specific guidance regarding the usage of 
EA artifacts that can help establish successful EA prac-
tices in organizations. Basic guidelines for EA practition-
ers derived from the suggestions of the ten theories 
discussed in this article are provided in Table 6.

--- PAGE 25 ---
Kotusev and Kurnia 299
Kotusev and Kurnia 25
Guidelines regarding the practical usage of EA artifacts 
provided in Table 6 can be considered as complementary to 
the guidelines regarding the integration of the usage of EA 
artifacts into regular organizational processes formulated 
earlier by Lohe and Legner (2014: 120–131).
Conclusion
The EA discipline was traditionally considered as atheoretical 
in nature (Al-Kharusi et al., 2017; Langenberg and Wegmann, 
2004; Schoenherr, 2008; Weiss et al., 2012), while the vast 
majority of theories leveraged previously by EA researchers 
(see Table 7 in Appendix A) are largely irrelevant to the 
essence of an EA practice, that is, to the creation and usage of 
EA artifacts for communication between stakeholders and 
decision-making (see Figure 1). Hence, the EA discipline 
essentially lacks a sound theoretical basis. In this article, we 
identified 10 theories that can be considered as key for the EA 
discipline (see Figure 2). Taken together, these theories can 
provide a solid theoretical foundation for future EA research.
T able 6. Basic guidelines for EA practitioners.
Theory Theoretical suggestions Resulting guidelines for EA practitioners
Boundary 
objects theory
EA artifacts should represent true 
boundary objects
Create EA artifacts providing relevant information to all their business 
and IT stakeholders, addressing their needs and helping align their 
interests
Actor-network 
theory
An actor-network of an EA 
practice should have no breaches 
in its fabric, that is, all the 
stakeholder interests inscribed in 
EA artifacts should be protected
Establish concrete enforcement mechanisms (e.g. formal governance, 
peer review or direct supervision) for all EA artifacts reflecting certain 
planning decisions to ensure that these decisions are taken into account 
during decision-making processes somewhere at lower organizational 
levels
Cognitive fit 
theory
EA artifacts should be designed 
with an intention to achieve a 
cognitive fit
Align the information presentation format and structure of EA artifacts 
to the nature of tasks, problems and decisions that these artifacts are 
intended to support, make sure that their format is convenient for 
decision-makers
Information 
processing 
theory
Complexity of EA artifacts should 
not exceed the information 
processing capacity of average 
individuals
Simplify all EA artifacts intended for decision-making purposes, focus 
only on the most essential information critical for decision-makers, 
organize information hierarchically with only a limited number of 
significant elements at each level of the hierarchy
Uncertainty 
principle
Granularity of EA artifacts should 
correlate with the associated level 
of uncertainly
Develop EA artifacts using adequate abstractions appropriate for the 
affected organizational scopes and planning horizons, avoid attempts to 
describe the distant future in every detail
Communities of 
practice
Both personal contacts as 
brokering and EA artifacts as 
boundary objects should be used 
to link different communities of 
practice
Establish periodical meetings engaging representatives of different 
groups of stakeholders and also design complementary EA artifacts to 
facilitate these meetings, but avoid overreliance only on one of these 
two approaches
Knowledge 
management 
theory
Tacit knowledge should be sought 
directly from its possessors and 
there should not be any attempts 
to record or obtain it from EA 
artifacts
Do not try to document everything in EA artifacts and do not expect 
to find all the necessary knowledge there, in complex situations and 
questions seek direct conversations with competent people, include in 
EA artifacts the lists of their contributors so that these people can be 
easily identified and contacted when necessary
Media richness 
theory
Rich communication media should 
be used for working with EA 
artifacts of high equivocality
Seek direct face-to-face meetings with relevant stakeholders for 
developing EA artifacts that imply significant planning decisions to 
minimize the chance of misunderstanding, avoid attempts to discuss the 
desired future via electronic communication media, for example, emails, 
corporate portals, wikis, and chats
Decision-
making theories
Creation of EA artifacts reflecting 
future plans should involve their 
executors
Involve all their stakeholders into the development processes of EA 
artifacts defining the future course of action, avoid attempts to make 
planning decisions on behalf of their real stakeholders
Management 
fashion theory
Proliferation of mainstream ideas 
on EA is driven by fashion, rather 
than by their rationality, and these 
ideas thus should be ignored
Understand that all prescriptive step-by-step EA methodologies 
and popular EA frameworks is only a management fashion actively 
promoted by fashion-setters, do not try to implement their 
recommendations in practice, seek realistic information on EA from 
limited evidence-based sources (Ahlemann et al., 2012; Kotusev, 2018b; 
Murer et al., 2011; Ross et al., 2006; Wagter et al., 2005; Wierda, 2015)
EA: Enterprise architecture; IT: Information Technology.

--- PAGE 26 ---
300 Journal of Information Technology 36(3)
26 Journal of Information Technology 00(0)
Limitations of this study
Our study has a number of limitations that should be explic-
itly acknowledged and clearly understood. These limita-
tions relate to (1) the scope of this study and (2) the research 
process that was followed to identify relevant theories.
Scope of the study. As noted earlier, the intention of this 
study was to identify theories addressing specifically the 
core of an EA practice, that is, creation and usage of EA 
artifacts for communication and decision-making. How-
ever, the EA discipline represents an incredibly broad and 
multifaceted area of research encompassing very diverse 
EA-related questions. For example, Kotusev (2017c) iden-
tified 11 general themes and 42 more narrow topics dis-
cussed in the EA literature and these topics include, among 
others, such disparate subjects as benefits and cultural 
aspects of using EA, organization of EA repositories, and 
automated creation of EA documentation, initiation, accep-
tance, and maturity of EA practices, structure of EA func-
tions in organizations, profession of architects and EA 
education, as well as the relationship between EA and other 
management practices (e.g. outsourcing and IT service 
management) and technologies (e.g. cloud and SOA). In 
this light, the questions related to the use of EA artifacts by 
EA stakeholders, though can be viewed as focal to the EA 
discipline, are certainly not all questions relevant to it; they 
do not cover the EA discipline in its entirety. In other 
words, the EA discipline is much broader in its scope and 
diversity than the questions analyzed in this study.
While our study concentrated on the questions “central” 
to the EA discipline, all of its multifarious “peripheral” 
questions (e.g. EA value realization, responsibilities of 
architects, institutionalization of EA practices, and their 
integration with other organizational processes, to name a 
few) remained out of the scope and escaped our analysis. 
These questions deserve separate investigation and are 
likely to need their own relevant theories. For example, the 
institutional theory can be very appropriate and is actually 
used by multiple authors for analyzing the process of estab-
lishing EA practices in organizations (see Table 7 in 
Appendix A). Consequently, our exclusive focus on the 
core of an EA practice represents an obvious limitation of 
this study.
Identification of relevant theories. The research process that 
we followed in this study to identify relevant theories also 
has a number of limitations related to (1) the definition of 
theory, (2) the search for relevant theories, and (3) the over-
all subjectivity of their evaluation. First, there is arguably 
no consensus that exists among researchers on what exactly 
should be regarded as a “theory.” On one hand, some 
authors name various conceptual lenses utilized in their 
studies as “theories,” for example, theory of exit, voice, and 
loyalty (Hylving and Bygstad, 2018, 2019). Similarly, Al-
Kharusi et al. (2017) consider analytic hierarchy process 
(Bakar et al., 2016), chain model (Hauder et al., 2013a), 
and enterprise transformation (Chuang and van Loggeren-
berg, 2010) as “theories” used in EA research, while we did 
not consider any of these notions as full-fledged theories 
during our analysis. For this reason, some ideas, concepts, 
or models considered as “theories” by other authors might 
have remained unnoticed or unrecognized during our anal-
ysis.7 On the other hand, some theories can be viewed as 
elements of hierarchies of related theories, where “grander” 
theories underpin multiple narrower theories. For example, 
the theory of rational choice (March and Simon, 1993), the 
theory of bounded rationality (Simon, 1997), the theory of 
power (Pfeffer, 1981), and the garbage can theory (Cohen 
et al., 1972) all represent constituents of a more general 
theory of decision-making in organizations (March, 1994). 
Likewise, the SECI (socialization, externalization, combi-
nation, internalization) model of knowledge creation (Non-
aka, 1994) can be considered as a sub-theory of the 
overarching theory of knowledge management. For this 
reason, the choice of the right level and “granularity” of 
theories can always be debatable. This uncertainty around 
what can or should be regarded as a theory represents an 
inherent limitation of this study.
Second, there are no exhaustive lists of theories or any 
other perfect sources where relevant theories can be 
searched. On one hand, the list of widely acknowledged 
theories in IS research maintained by Larsen et al. (2015) is 
evidently incomplete as it does not include some of the 
theories used in EA research, for example, viable system 
model (Buckl et al., 2010; Kandjani and Bernus, 2012; 
Kandjani et al., 2013; Zadeh et al., 2014) and communities 
of practice (Dale and Scheepers, 2020), and even some of 
the theories used in IS research, for example, the theory of 
sociomateriality (Cecez-Kecmanovic et al., 2014a). For 
this reason, it cannot be taken as a definitive list or the only 
source of theories (at the same time, no other lists exist on 
the subject). On the other hand, theories utilized in other 
organizational disciplines (e.g. marketing, accounting, 
social psychology, and organizational behavior) can also be 
potentially relevant to the EA discipline, but their search 
will require studying essentially all the available manage-
ment literature and is arguably practically unrealizable. The 
lack of definitive sources of theories to be searched and 
potential incompleteness of every search effort represents 
another limitation of this study.
Finally, since the relevance and potential of a theory 
cannot be evaluated with any objective means, the presence 
of a certain subjective bias in our selection of theories can-
not be avoided. Although we explicitly provided a com-
plete list of considered theories (see Table 8 in Appendix 
B), formulated the adopted set of criteria for assessing theo-
ries for their relevance to the EA discipline (see Table 2), 

--- PAGE 27 ---
Kotusev and Kurnia 301
Kotusev and Kurnia 27
and provided our argumentation, the choice of the 10 result-
ing theories may not be indisputable. Therefore, the overall 
subjectivity of theories’ evaluation also represents a limita-
tion of this study.
Direction for future research
Each of the 10 theories discussed in this article deserves 
further elaboration in the EA discipline. Moreover, since all 
these theories relate to the very essence of an EA practice, 
it would be arguably fair to say that until the questions pro-
voked by these theories have no definite answers in the EA 
literature, the phenomenon of an EA practice cannot be 
considered as sufficiently understood. At the same time, 
developing meaningful views and comprehensive interpre-
tations of an EA practice from the perspective of each of 
these theories can enrich our theoretical understanding of 
EA and eventually turn it into a mature academic discipline. 
For this reason, developing such interpretations can be con-
sidered as an important direction for future theoretical 
research in the EA discipline.
Declaration of conflicting interests 
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with 
respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support 
for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: This 
study is part of a project funded by the Australian Research 
Council, project number DP140100248.
ORCID iD
Svyatoslav Kotusev  https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8339-3561
Notes
1. The properties of a “good” theory are persistently debated in 
the literature for decades and there is still no single widely 
accepted set of quality criteria for theories (Christensen and 
Raynor, 2003; Gregor, 2006; Mueller and Urbach, 2013; 
Rivard, 2014; Sutton and Staw, 1995; Van de Ven, 1989; 
Weber, 2003; Weick, 1989; Whetten, 1989). However, we 
believe that the taxonomy proposed by Gregor (2006) offers 
the most powerful framework for assessing theories. This 
taxonomy is used here and further in this article to evaluate 
the potential of theories in relation to an EA practice.
2. The relationship between theory and practice is also persis-
tently debated in the literature for decades and the ability of 
theory to inform practice has been periodically questioned 
(Alvesson et al., 2017; Benbasat and Zmud, 1999; Buckley 
et al., 1998; Churchman and Schainblatt, 1965; Dennis, 2019; 
Dyckman, 1967; Gill and Bhattacherjee, 2009; Grayson, 
1973; Hirschheim, 2019; Kock et al., 2002; Latham, 2007; 
Moody, 2000; Oviatt and Miller, 1989). Nevertheless, we 
believe that each of the theories identified in this article can 
inform practice (e.g. explain practical successes and failures), 
which is substantiated by the quotes from the industry EA lit-
erature provided in the respective sections and aligned with 
the corresponding theoretical suggestions.
3. The proposed classification into role, usability, stakeholder, 
and contrast theories represents an attempt to organize the 10 
identified theories and fit them into some logical structure. 
Although this classification is rather loose, imperfect, and 
partly subjective, the alternative approach would be only to 
present the identified theories as an unstructured list.
4. Since actor-networks encompass both people (EA stakehold-
ers) and inanimate objects (EA artifacts), the actor-network 
theory can be equally related to both role and stakeholder 
theories. However, it is EA artifacts, not people, that repre-
sent distinguishing elements of an EA practice which roles 
should be better understood. For this reason, the actor-net-
work theory has been allocated specifically to roles theories.
5. Business and the IT alignment literature generally deals with 
very high-level concepts (e.g. structural, functional, and tem-
poral alignment), but barely explains how exactly the align-
ment is operationalized at the “micro” level of specific actors, 
documents, and decisions (Chan and Reich, 2007; Coltman 
et al., 2015; Karpovsky and Galliers, 2015; Negoita et al., 
2013; Sabherwal et al., 2001). For example, Negoita et al. 
(2013) noticed that “beyond studies related to the importance 
of strategic alignment [. . .] as well as establishing a num-
ber of enablers and inhibitors, there is a paucity of research 
on how organizations actually achieve strategic alignment” 
(p. 1) and even added that “essentially we do not know how 
it is achieved” (p. 3). Likewise, Karpovsky and Galliers 
(2015) argued that “we still know little about what it is that 
organizational actors actually do, on a day-to-day basis, to 
align IS and related concerns with business imperatives” (p. 
136). Consequently, the discussion of EA artifacts as bound-
ary objects enabling alignment provided here complements 
the “macro” view of business and IT alignment offered in 
the respective literature and represents one of the practical 
mechanisms for operationalizing alignment in organizations.
6. Since its emergence in the 1980s, the media richness theory 
has been questioned by some authors (Suh, 1999) and a num-
ber of attempts have been made to refine the theory in light 
of new electronic communication technologies (D’ambra 
et al., 1998; Dennis et al., 1998; Rice and Shook, 1990). 
However, recent studies of managerial work and communi-
cation patterns in organizations suggest that the fundamental 
premises of the media richness theory have not been signifi-
cantly affected by new communication media, and remain 
unchanged and valid. For example, the findings of Pentland 
(2012) repeat this theory almost verbatim: “The most valu-
able form of communication is face-to-face. The next most 
valuable is by phone or videoconference, but with a caveat: 
Those technologies become less effective as more people 
participate in the call or conference. The least valuable forms 
of communication are e-mail and texting” (p. 65). Likewise, 
Mintzberg (2009) concludes that the nature of managerial 
work did not change with the emergence of electronic com-
munication technologies and managers still rely primarily 
on face-to-face meetings for equivocal tasks, in the same 
way as before. Besides that, validity of the core ideas of the 
media richness theory is also confirmed by our own empiri-
cal observations on the usage of EA artifacts in organizations 
(see Table 1).

--- PAGE 28 ---
302 Journal of Information Technology 36(3)
28 Journal of Information Technology 00(0)
7. Since most, if not all, submissions to the leading academic 
IS journals are expected to make a strong theoretical contri-
bution, the findings of virtually every article that appears in 
those journals can be considered as a “bigger” or “smaller” 
theory. For this reason, strict and objective boundaries of the-
ory suitable for the purposes of this study are fundamentally 
impossible to define.
References
Abraham R (2013) Enterprise architecture artifacts as boundary 
objects: A framework of properties. In:van Hillegersberg J, 
van Heck E and Connolly R (eds) Proceedings of the 21st 
European Conference on Information Systems. Utrecht: 
Association for Information Systems, pp. 1–12.
Abraham R (2018) Guidelines for architecture models as bound-
ary objects. In:Proper HA, Winter R, Aier S, et al. (eds) 
Architectural Coordination of Enterprise Transformation. 
Cham: Springer, pp. 193–210.
Abraham R, Aier S and Winter R (2012) Two speeds of EAM: 
A dynamic capabilities perspective. In:Aier S, Ekstedt M, 
Matthes F, et al. (eds) Proceedings of the 7th Trends in 
Enterprise Architecture Research Workshop. Barcelona: 
Springer, pp. 111–128.
Abraham R, Aier S and Winter R (2015) Crossing the line: 
Overcoming knowledge boundaries in enterprise transforma-
tion. Business and Information Systems Engineering 57(1): 
3–13.
Abraham R and Aier S (2012) Architectural coordination of 
transformation: Implications from game theory. In:Rahman 
H, Mesquita A, Ramos I, et al. (eds) Proceedings of the 
7th Mediterranean Conference on Information Systems. 
Guimaraes: Springer, pp. 82–96.
Abraham R, Niemietz H, de Kinderen S, et al. (2013) Can bound-
ary objects mitigate communication defects in enterprise 
transformation? Findings from expert interviews. In:Jung R 
and Reichert M (eds) Proceedings of the 5th International 
Workshop on Enterprise Modelling and Information Systems 
Architectures. St. Gallen: Gesellschaft fur Informatik, pp. 
27–40.
Abrahamson E (1991) Managerial fads and fashions: The diffu-
sion and rejection of innovations. Academy of Management 
Review 16(3): 586–612.
Abrahamson E (1996) Management fashion. Academy of 
Management Review 21(1): 254–285.
Abrahamson E and Fairchild G (1999) Management fashion: 
Lifecycles, triggers, and collective learning processes. 
Administrative Science Quarterly 44(4): 708–740.
Ahlemann F, Legner C and Lux J (2020) A resource-based per -
spective of value generation through enterprise architecture 
management. Information and Management. Epub ahead of 
print 23 January. DOI: 10.1016/j.im.2020.103266.
Ahlemann F, Stettiner E, Messerschmidt M, et al. (eds) (2012) 
Strategic Enterprise Architecture Management: Challenges, 
Best Practices, and Future Developments. Berlin: Springer.
Aier S and Weiss S (2012) An institutional framework for ana-
lyzing organizational responses to the establishment of 
architectural transformation. In:Pries-Heje J, Chiasson M, 
Wareham J, et al. (eds) Proceedings of the 20th European 
Conference on Information Systems. Barcelona: Association 
for Information Systems, pp. 1–12.
Aier S, Gleichauf B and Winter R (2011) Understanding enter -
prise architecture management design: An empirical analy-
sis. In:Bernstein A and Schwabe G (eds) Proceedings of 
the 9th International Conference on Wirtschaftsinformatik. 
Zurich: Association for Information Systems, pp. 645–654.
Ajer AK (2018) Enterprise architecture in healthcare and under -
lying institutional logics: A systematic literature review of 
IS research. In:Tanabu M and Senoo D (eds) Proceedings of 
the 22nd Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems. 
Yokohama, Japan: Association for Information Systems, pp. 
1–14.
Ajer AK and Olsen DH (2018) Enterprise architecture challenges: 
A case study of three Norwegian public sectors. In:Bednar 
P, Frank U and Kautz K (eds) Proceedings of the 26th 
European Conference on Information Systems. Portsmouth: 
Association for Information Systems, pp. 1–17.
Alavi M and Leidner D (1999) Knowledge management systems: 
Issues, challenges, and benefits. Communications of the 
Association for Information Systems 1(1): 1–37.
Alavi M and Leidner DE (2001) Knowledge management and 
knowledge management systems: Conceptual foundations 
and research issues. MIS Quarterly 25(1): 107–136.
Aldag RJ (1997) Moving sofas and exhuming woodchucks: On 
relevance, impact, and the following of fads. Journal of 
Management Inquiry 6(1): 8–16.
Al-Kharusi H, Miskon S and Bahari M (2017) Research per -
spective in enterprise architecture. In:Bahri S, Finnegan 
P and Ling SC (eds) Proceedings of the 21th Pacific Asia 
Conference on Information Systems. Langkawi Island, 
Malaysia: Association for Information Systems, pp. 1–13.
Alvesson M, Gabriel Y and Paulsen R (2017) Return to Meaning: 
A Social Science with Something to Say. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Alwadain A, Fielt E, Korthaus A, et al. (2013a) A critical realist 
perspective of enterprise architecture evolution: Preliminary 
findings. In:Deng H and Standing C (eds) Proceedings of 
the 24th Australasian Conference on Information Systems. 
Melbourne, VIC, Australia: Association for Information 
Systems, pp. 1–10.
Alwadain A, Fielt E, Korthaus A, et al. (2013b) Service-oriented 
architecture integration within enterprise architecture: 
A-priori model. In:Deng H and Standing C (eds) Proceedings 
of the 24th Australasian Conference on Information Systems. 
Melbourne, VIC, Australia: Association for Information 
Systems, pp. 1–11.
Alwadain A, Fielt E, Korthaus A, et al. (2014) A critical realist per-
spective of enterprise architecture evolution: Conditioning 
and outcomes. Australasian Journal of Information Systems 
18(3): 213–226.
Alwadain A, Fielt E, Korthaus A, et al. (2016) Empirical insights 
into the development of a service-oriented enterprise archi-
tecture. Data and Knowledge Engineering 105(1): 39–52.
Ambler SW (2010) Enterprise architecture: Reality over rhetoric 
[WWW document]. Available at: https://www.drdobbs.com/
architecture-and-design/enterprise-architecture-reality-over-
rhe/224600174 (accessed 19 November 2020).
Anderson P, Backhouse G, Townsend J, et al. (2009) Doing 
Enterprise Architecture: Enabling the Agile Institution 
(#533). Bristol: Joint Information Systems Committee.
Aris J (2000) Inventing systems engineering. IEEE Annals of the 
History of Computing 22(3): 4–15.

--- PAGE 29 ---
Kotusev and Kurnia 303
Kotusev and Kurnia 29
Armour FJ, Kaisler SH and Liu SY (1999) Building an enterprise 
architecture step by step. IT Professional 1(4): 31–39.
Arthur Andersen (1979) Method/1: Systems Development 
Practices. Chicago, IL: Arthur Andersen.
Arthur Andersen (1987) Foundation-Method/1: Information 
Planning (Version 8.0). Chicago, IL: Arthur Andersen.
Arthur Young (1987) The Arthur Young Practical Guide to 
Information Engineering. New York: Wiley.
Bakar NAA, Selamat H and Kama N (2016) Assessment of enter-
prise architecture implementation capability and priority 
in public sector agency. In:Varajao JEQ, Cruz-Cunha MM, 
Martinho R, et al. (eds) Proceedings of the 8th Conference on 
Enterprise Information Systems. Porto: Elsevier, pp. 198–206.
Bass BM (1970) When planning for others. Journal of Applied 
Behavioral Science 6: 151–171.
Benbasat I and Zmud RW (1999) Empirical research in infor -
mation systems: The practice of relevance. MIS Quarterly 
23(1): 3–16.
Bergman M, Lyytinen K and Mark G (2007) Boundary objects in 
design: An ecological view of design artifacts. Journal of the 
Association for Information Systems 8(11): 546–568.
Berinato S (2016) Visualizations that really work. Harvard 
Business Review 94(6): 92–100.
Bernard SA (2012) An Introduction to Enterprise Architecture 
(3rd edn). Bloomington, IN: AuthorHouse.
Beynon-Davies P (1994) Information management in the British 
National Health Service: The pragmatics of strategic data 
planning. International Journal of Information Management 
14(2): 84–94.
Bittler RS and Kreizman G (2005) Gartner Enterprise Architecture 
Process: Evolution 2005 (#G00130849). Stamford, CT: 
Gartner.
Blumenthal A (2007) The long view: Enterprise architecture plans 
are useless without clear, relevant information. Government 
Executive 39(8): 63.
Boar BH (1999) Constructing Blueprints for Enterprise IT 
Architectures. New York: Wiley.
Bondel G, Faber A and Matthes F (2018) Reporting from the imple-
mentation of a business capability map as business-IT align-
ment tool. In:Nurcan S and Schmidt R (eds) Proceedings of 
the 22nd IEEE International Enterprise Distributed Object 
Computing Conference Workshops. Stockholm: IEEE, pp. 
125–134.
Boulding KE (1956) General systems theory: The skeleton of the 
science. Management Science 2(3): 197–208.
Bricknall R, Darrell G, Nilsson H, et al. (2006) Enterprise archi-
tecture: Critical factors affecting modelling and manage-
ment. In:Ljungberg J and Andersson M (eds) Proceedings 
of the 14th European Conference on Information Systems. 
Goteborg: Association for Information Systems, pp. 1–13.
Brosius M (2016) Motivation for coordination: A complementary 
approach to enterprise architecture management research. 
In:Franke U, Lapalme J and Aier S (eds) Proceedings of the 
11th Trends in Enterprise Architecture Research Workshop. 
Vienna: IEEE, pp. 83–90.
Brosius M, Aier S, Haki K, et al. (2018) Enterprise architecture 
assimilation: An institutional perspective. In:Baskerville R 
and Nickerson R (eds) Proceedings of the 39th International 
Conference on Information Systems. San Francisco, CA: 
Association for Information Systems, pp. 1–17.
Brown JS and Duguid P (1991) Organizational learning and 
communities-of-practice: Toward a unified view of working, 
learning, and innovation. Organization Science 2(1): 40–57.
Brown JS and Duguid P (1998) Organizing knowledge. California 
Management Review 40(3): 90–111.
Buckl S, Ernst AM, Lankes J, et al. (2009a) State of the Art in 
Enterprise Architecture Management. Munich: Software 
Engineering for Business Information Systems (SEBIS), 
Technical University of Munich.
Buckl S, Matthes F and Schweda CM (2009b) A viable system 
perspective on enterprise architecture management. In: 
Unknown (ed.) Proceedings of the 2009 IEEE International 
Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics. San Antonio, 
TX: IEEE, pp. 1483–1488.
Buckl S, Matthes F and Schweda CM (2009c) Future research 
topics in enterprise architecture management: A knowledge 
management perspective. In:Dan A, Gittler F and Toumani F 
(eds) Proceedings of the 4th Trends in Enterprise Architecture 
Research Workshop. Stockholm: Springer, pp. 1–11.
Buckl S, Matthes F and Schweda CM (2010) Towards a method 
framework for enterprise architecture management: A litera-
ture analysis from a viable system perspective. In:Petit M, 
Gal G and Castiaux A (eds) Proceedings of the 5th Business/
IT Alignment and Interoperability Workshop. Hammamet, 
Tunisia: CEUR, pp. 46–60.
Buckley MR, Ferris GR, Bernardin HJ, et al. (1998) The dis-
connect between the science and practice of management. 
Business Horizons 41(2): 31–39.
Bui QN (2017) Evaluating enterprise architecture frameworks 
using essential elements. Communications of the Association 
for Information Systems 41(1): 121–149.
Bui QN and Levy M (2017) Institutionalization of contested prac-
tices: A case of enterprise architecture implementation in a 
US state government. In:Bui TX (ed.) Proceedings of the 
50th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. 
Big Island, HI: Association for Information Systems, pp. 
4867–4876.
Bui QN, Markus ML and Newell S (2015) Alternative designs 
in widespread innovation adoption: Empirical evidence from 
enterprise architecture implementation in US state govern-
ments. In:Carte T, Heinzl A and Urquhart C (eds) Proceedings 
of the 36th International Conference on Information Systems. 
Fort Worth, TX: Association for Information Systems, pp. 
1–18.
Burton B (2009) Thirteen Worst Enterprise Architecture Practices 
(#G00164424). Stamford, CT: Gartner.
Business Systems Planning (1975) Business Systems Planning: 
Information Systems Planning Guide (1st edn) (#GE20-
0527-1). White Plains, NY: IBM Corporation.
Business Systems Planning (1984) Business Systems Planning: 
Information Systems Planning Guide (4th edn) (#GE20-
0527-4). Atlanta, GA: IBM Corporation.
Callon M and Latour B (1981) Unscrewing the big leviathan: 
How actors macro-structure reality and how sociologists 
help them to do so. In:Knorr-Cetina KD and Cicourel A V 
(eds) Advances in Social Theory and Methodology: Towards 
an Integration of Micro and Macro-Sociologies. London: 
Routledge and Kegan Paul, pp. 277–303.
Campbell ARG (2013) Diagnosing the enterprise architecture 
with the viable system model. In:Gotze J and Jensen-Waud 

--- PAGE 30 ---
304 Journal of Information Technology 36(3)
30 Journal of Information Technology 00(0)
A (eds) Beyond Alignment: Applying Systems Thinking in 
Architecting Enterprises. London: College Publications, pp. 
167–187.
Cantara M, Burton B and Scheibenreif D (2016) Eight Best 
Practices for Creating High-Impact Business Capability 
Models (#G00314568). Stamford, CT: Gartner.
Carbone JA (2004) IT Architecture Toolkit. Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Prentice Hall.
Carlile PR (2002) A pragmatic view of knowledge and boundaries: 
Boundary objects in new product development. Organization 
Science 13(4): 442–455.
Carlile PR (2004) Transferring, translating, and transforming: 
An integrative framework for managing knowledge across 
boundaries. Organization Science 15(5): 555–568.
Carson PP, Lanier PA, Carson KD, et al. (1999) A historical 
perspective on fad adoption and abandonment. Journal of 
Management History 5(6): 320–333.
Carson PP, Lanier PA, Carson KD, et al. (2000) Clearing a path 
through the management fashion jungle: Some preliminary trail-
blazing. Academy of Management Journal 43(6): 1143–1158.
Cecez-Kecmanovic D, Galliers RD, Henfridsson O, et al. (2014a) 
The sociomateriality of information systems: Current status, 
future directions. MIS Quarterly 38(3): 809–830.
Cecez-Kecmanovic D, Kautz K and Abrahall R (2014b) Reframing 
success and failure of information systems: A performative 
perspective. MIS Quarterly 38(2): 561–588.
Chan YE and Reich BH (2007) IT alignment: What have we 
learned? Journal of Information Technology 22(4): 297–315.
Christensen CM and Raynor ME (2003) Why hard-nosed exec-
utives should care about management theory. Harvard 
Business Review 81(9): 66–75.
Chuang C-H and van Loggerenberg J (2010) Challenges facing 
enterprise architects: A South African perspective. In:Sprague 
RH (ed.) Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences. Kauai, HI: IEEE, pp. 1–10.
Churchman CW and Schainblatt A (1965) The researcher and 
the manager: A dialectic of implementation. Management 
Science 11(4): 69–87.
Cohen MD, March JG and Olsen JP (1972) A garbage can model 
of organizational choice. Administrative Science Quarterly 
17(1): 1–25.
Coltman T, Tallon P, Sharma R, et al. (2015) Strategic IT align-
ment: Twenty-five years on. Journal of Information 
Technology 30(2): 91–100.
Connor DA (1988) Computer Systems Development: Strategic 
Resource Information Planning and Execution—STRIPE. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Covington R and Jahangir H (2009) The Oracle Enterprise 
Architecture Framework. Redwood Shores, CA: Oracle.
Cox A (2005) What are communities of practice? A compara-
tive review of four seminal works. Journal of Information 
Science 31(6): 527–540.
Cyert RM and March JG (1992) A Behavioral Theory of the Firm 
(2nd edn). Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Daft RL and Lengel RH (1984) Information richness: A new 
approach to managerial behavior and organizational 
design. In:Staw BM and Cummings LL (eds) Research in 
Organizational Behavior: An Annual Series of Analytical 
Essays and Critical Reviews (V ol. 6). Greenwich, CT: JAI 
Press, pp. 191–233.
Daft RL and Lengel RH (1986) Organizational informa-
tion requirements, media richness and structural design. 
Management Science 32(5): 554–571.
Daft RL, Lengel RH and Trevino LK (1987) Message equivocal-
ity, media selection, and manager performance: Implications 
for information systems. MIS Quarterly 11(3): 355–366.
Dale M and Scheepers H (2020) Enterprise architecture imple-
mentation as interpersonal connection: Building support and 
commitment. Information Systems Journal 30(1): 150–184.
D’ambra J, Rice RE and O’connor M (1998) Computer-mediated 
communication and media preference: An investigation of 
the dimensionality of perceived task equivocality and media 
richness. Behaviour and Information Technology 17(3): 
164–174.
Dang D (2019) Institutional logics and their influence on 
enterprise architecture adoption. Journal of Computer 
Information Systems. Epub ahead of print 17 January. DOI: 
10.1080/08874417.2018.1564632.
Dang D and Pekkola S (2016) Institutionalising enterprise archi-
tecture in the public sector in Vietnam. In:Ozturan M, Rossi 
M and Veit D (eds) Proceedings of the 24th European 
Conference on Information Systems. Istanbul, Turkey: 
Association for Information Systems, pp. 1–16.
Dang D and Pekkola S (2020) Institutional perspectives on the 
process of enterprise architecture adoption. Information 
Systems Frontiers 22:1433–1445.
Dang D, Vartiainen T and Pekkola S (2019) Patterns of enter -
prise architecture adoption in the public sector: A resource-
based perspective. In:Johannesson P, Agerfalk PJ and Helms 
R (eds) Proceedings of the 27th European Conference 
on Information Systems. Stockholm: Association for 
Information Systems, pp. 1–16.
Dang DD (2017) Enterprise architecture institutionalization: A tale 
of two cases. In:Ramos I, Tuunainen V and Krcmar H (eds) 
Proceedings of the 25th European Conference on Information 
Systems. Guimaraes: Association for Information Systems, 
pp. 842–857.
Dang DD and Pekkola S (2017) Enterprise architecture and organi-
zational reform: A project debrief. In: Bahri S, Finnegan P and 
Ling SC (eds) Proceedings of the 21th Pacific Asia Conference 
on Information Systems. Langkawi Island, Malaysia, 2017: 
Association for Information Systems, pp. 1–15.
Davenport TH (2009) Make better decisions. Harvard Business 
Review 87(11): 117–123.
Davenport TH, Hammer M and Metsisto TJ (1989) How exec-
utives can shape their company’s information systems. 
Harvard Business Review 67(2): 130–134.
Davids A (1992) Practical Information Engineering: The 
Management Challenge. London: Pitman Publishing.
Dennis AR (2019) An unhealthy obsession with theory. Journal of 
the Association for Information Systems 20(9): 1404–1409.
Dennis AR and Carte TA (1998) Using geographical information 
systems for decision making: Extending cognitive fit theory 
to map-based presentations. Information Systems Research 
9(2): 194–203.
Dennis AR, Valacich JS, Speier C, et al. (1998) Beyond media 
richness: An empirical test of media synchronicity the-
ory. In:Sprague RH (ed.) Proceedings of the 31st Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences. Big Island, 
HI: IEEE, pp. 48–57.

--- PAGE 31 ---
Kotusev and Kurnia 305
Kotusev and Kurnia 31
DiGirolamo V (2009) Gauging the value of strategic IT planning 
and enterprise architecture. Architecture and Governance 
Magazine 5(7): 8–10.
Donaldson L and Hilmer FG (1998) Management redeemed: The 
case against fads that harm management. Organizational 
Dynamics 26(4): 7–21.
Doolin B and McLeod L (2012) Sociomateriality and bound-
ary objects in information systems development. European 
Journal of Information Systems 21(5): 570–586.
Dreyfus D (2007) Information system architecture: Toward a dis-
tributed cognition perspective. In:Gallupe B and Pinsonneault 
A (eds) Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on 
Information Systems. Montreal, QC, Canada: Association for 
Information Systems, pp. 1–15.
Dull RB and Tegarden DP (1999) A comparison of three visual 
representations of complex multidimensional accounting 
information. Journal of Information Systems 13(2): 117–131.
Dyckman TR (1967) Management implementation of scientific 
research: An attitudinal study. Management Science 13(10): 
612–620.
EA on a Page (2018) Enterprise Architecture on a Page (V1.3). 
Available at: http://eaonapage.com (accessed 19 November 
2020).
Eisenhardt KM and Zbaracki MJ (1992) Strategic decision mak-
ing. Strategic Management Journal 13(S2): 17–37.
Emery C, Faison SM, Houk J, et al. (2007) The integrated enter-
prise: Enterprise architecture, investment process and system 
development. In:Sprague RH (ed.) Proceedings of the 40th 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. Big 
Island, HI: IEEE, pp. 1–11.
Erder M and Pureur P (2006) Transitional architectures for enter-
prise evolution. IT Professional 8(3): 10–17.
Fairhead N and Good J (2009) People-led enterprise architec-
ture. In:Saha P (ed.) Advances in Government Enterprise 
Architecture. Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference, 
pp. 285–306.
Fallmyr T and Bygstad B (2014) Enterprise architecture practice 
and organizational agility: An exploratory study. In:Sprague 
RH (ed.) Proceedings of the 47th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences. Big Island, HI: IEEE, pp. 
3788–3797.
Federal Enterprise Architecture Framework (1999) Federal 
Enterprise Architecture Framework (Version 1.1). 
Springfield, V A: Chief Information Officer Council.
Finkelstein C (1989) An Introduction to Information Engineering: 
From Strategic Planning to Information Systems. Sydney, 
NSW, Australia: Addison-Wesley.
Fonstad NO and Robertson D (2006) Transforming a company, 
project by project: The IT engagement model. MIS Quarterly 
Executive 5(1): 1–14.
Foorthuis RM and Brinkkemper S (2007) A framework for pro-
ject architecture in the context of enterprise architecture. 
In:Lankhorst MM and Johnson P (eds) Proceedings of the 
2nd Trends in Enterprise Architecture Research Workshop. 
St. Gallen: Telematica Instituut, pp. 51–60.
Frownfelter-Lohrke C (1998) The effects of differing information 
presentations of general purpose financial statements on users’ 
decisions. Journal of Information Systems 12(2): 99–107.
Galbraith JR (1973) Designing Complex Organizations. Reading, 
MA: Addison-Wesley.
Galbraith JR (1974) Organization design: An information pro-
cessing view. Interfaces 4(3): 28–36.
Galbraith JR (1977) Organization Design. Reading, MA: 
Addison-Wesley.
Gasson S (2006) A genealogical study of boundary-spanning IS 
Design. European Journal of Information Systems 15(1): 
26–41.
Gaver SB (2010) Why Doesn’t the Federal Enterprise Architecture 
Work? McLean, V A: Technology Matters.
Gerow JE, Grover V , Thatcher JB, et al. (2014) Looking toward 
the future of IT-business strategic alignment through the 
past: A meta-analysis. MIS Quarterly 38(4): 1059–1085.
Gibson JW and Tesone DV (2001) Management fads: Emergence, 
evolution, and implications for managers. Academy of 
Management Executive 15(4): 122–133.
Gill G and Bhattacherjee A (2009) Whom are we informing? Issues 
and recommendations for MIS research from an informing 
science perspective. MIS Quarterly 33(2): 217–235.
Goodhue DL, Kirsch LJ, Quillard JA, et al. (1992) Strategic data 
planning: Lessons from the field. MIS Quarterly 16(1): 11–
34.
Goodhue DL, Quillard JA and Rockart JF (1988) Managing the 
data resource: A contingency perspective. MIS Quarterly 
12(3): 373–392.
Gray PH (2000) The effects of knowledge management systems 
on emergent teams: Towards a research model. Journal of 
Strategic Information Systems 9(2): 175–191.
Grayson CJ (1973) Management science and business practice. 
Harvard Business Review 51(4): 41–48.
Gregor S (2006) The nature of theory in information systems. MIS 
Quarterly 30(3): 611–642.
Grover V and Davenport TH (2001) General perspectives on 
knowledge management: Fostering a research agenda. 
Journal of Management Information Systems 18(1): 5–21.
Guo H, Li J and Gao S (2019) Understanding challenges of 
applying enterprise architecture in public sectors: A technol-
ogy acceptance perspective. In:Steffens U and Jung J (eds) 
Proceedings of the 14th Trends in Enterprise Architecture 
Research Workshop. Paris: IEEE, pp. 38–43.
Hackman JR (1975) Is job enrichment just a fad? Harvard 
Business Review 53(5): 129–138.
Haki K and Legner C (2013) The dynamics of IS adaptation 
in multinational corporations: A new theoretical lens. 
In:Baskerville R and Chau M (eds) Proceedings of the 34th 
International Conference on Information Systems. Milan: 
Association for Information Systems, pp. 1–19.
Haki K, Beese J, Aier S, et al. (2020) The evolution of information 
systems architecture: An agent-based simulation model. MIS 
Quarterly 44(1): 155–184.
Haki K, Legner C and Ahlemann F (2012) Beyond EA frame-
works: Towards an understanding of the adoption of enter -
prise architecture management. In:Pries-Heje J, Chiasson M, 
Wareham J, et al. (eds) Proceedings of the 20th European 
Conference on Information Systems. Barcelona: Association 
for Information Systems, pp. 1–12.
Hammond JS, Keeney RL and Raiffa H (1998) The hidden traps 
in decision making. Harvard Business Review 76(5): 47–58.
Hansen MT, Nohria N and Tierney T (1998) What’s your strategy 
for managing knowledge? Harvard Business Review 77(2): 
106–116.

--- PAGE 32 ---
306 Journal of Information Technology 36(3)
32 Journal of Information Technology 00(0)
Hanseth O and Monteiro E (1997) Inscribing behavior in informa-
tion infrastructure standards. Accounting, Management and 
Information Technologies 7(4): 183–211.
Hauder M, Fiedler M, Matthes F, et al. (2013a) Analyzing task 
and technology characteristics for enterprise architecture 
management tool support. In:Bagheri E, Gasevic D, Halle 
S, et al. (eds) Proceedings of the 17th IEEE International 
Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Conference 
Workshops. Vancouver, BC, Canada: IEEE, pp. 267–274.
Hauder M, Roth S, Matthes F, et al. (2013b) An examination of 
organizational factors influencing enterprise architecture 
management challenges. In:van Hillegersberg J, van Heck 
E and Connolly R (eds) Proceedings of the 21st European 
Conference on Information Systems. Utrecht: Association for 
Information Systems, pp. 1–12.
Hazen BT, Kung L, Cegielski CG, et al. (2014) Performance 
expectancy and use of enterprise architecture: Training as an 
intervention. Journal of Enterprise Information Management 
27(2): 180–196.
Hirschheim R (2019) Against theory: With apologies to 
Feyerabend. Journal of the Association for Information 
Systems 20(9): 1338–1355.
Hjort-Madsen K (2006) Enterprise architecture implementa-
tion and management: A case study on interoperabil-
ity. In:Sprague RH (ed.) Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences. Kauai, HI: 
IEEE, pp. 1–10.
Hjort-Madsen K (2007) Institutional patterns of enterprise archi-
tecture adoption in government. Transforming Government: 
People, Process and Policy 1(4): 333–349.
Hjort-Madsen K and Burkard J (2006) When enterprise architec-
ture meets government: An institutional case study analysis. 
Journal of Enterprise Architecture 2(1): 11–25.
Hjort-Madsen K and Pries-Heje J (2009) Enterprise architec-
ture in government: Fad or future? In: Sprague RH (ed.) 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference 
on System Sciences. Big Island, HI: IEEE, pp. 1–10.
Hobbs G (2012) EAM governance and organization. In:Ahlemann 
F, Stettiner E, Messerschmidt M, et al. (eds) Strategic 
Enterprise Architecture Management: Challenges, Best 
Practices, and Future Developments. Berlin: Springer, pp. 
81–110.
Holcman SB (2013) Reaching the Pinnacle: A Methodology of 
Business Understanding, Technology Planning, and Change. 
Pinckney, MI: Pinnacle Business Group Inc.
Holst MS (2013) Enterprise architecture and the viable sys-
tems model. In:Gotze J and Jensen-Waud A (eds) Beyond 
Alignment: Applying Systems Thinking in Architecting 
Enterprises. London: College Publications, pp. 189–198.
Holst MS and Steensen TW (2011) The successful enterprise 
architecture effort. Journal of Enterprise Architecture 7(4): 
16–22.
Horton WW (1977) Information resources management: Fad or 
fact? Journal of Systems Management 28(12): 6–9.
Hoyland CA (2011) An analysis of enterprise architectures using 
general systems theory. In:Tunstel E and Nahavandi S (eds) 
Proceedings of the 2011 IEEE International Conference on 
Systems, Man and Cybernetics. Anchorage, AK: IEEE, pp. 
340–344.
Huff AS and Reger RK (1987) A review of strategic process 
research. Journal of Management 13(2): 211–236.
Hungerford BC and Eierman MA (2005) The communication 
effectiveness of system models using the UML versus struc-
tured techniques: A field experiment. American Journal of 
Business 20(2): 35–44.
Hutzschenreuter T and Kleindienst I (2006) Strategy-process 
research: What have we learned and what is still to be 
explored. Journal of Management 32(5): 673–720.
Huysmans P and Verelst J (2013) Towards an engineering-based 
research approach for enterprise architecture: Lessons 
learned from normalized systems theory. In:Franch X 
and Soffer P (eds) Proceedings of the 25th International 
Conference on Advanced Information Systems Engineering 
Workshops. Valencia: Springer, pp. 58–72.
Hylving L and Bygstad B (2018) Responding to enterprise archi-
tecture initiatives: Loyalty, voice and exit. In:Bui TX (ed.) 
Proceedings of the 51st Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences. Big Island, HI: Association for Information 
Systems, pp. 2363–2372.
Hylving L and Bygstad B (2019) Nuanced responses to enterprise 
architecture management: Loyalty, voice, and exit. Journal 
of Management Information Systems 36(1): 14–36.
IBM (2006) An Introduction to IBM’ s Enterprise Architecture 
Consulting Method. Armonk, NY: IBM Global Services.
Iyamu T (2019) Understanding the complexities of enter -
prise architecture through structuration theory. Journal of 
Computer Information Systems 59(3): 287–295.
Iyamu T and Mphahlele L (2014) The impact of organisational 
structure on enterprise architecture deployment. Journal of 
Systems and Information Technology 16(1): 2–19.
Jacobson I (2007) Enterprise architecture failed big way! 
[WWW document]. Available at: https://web.archive.org/
web/20160401150639/http://blog.ivarjacobson.com/ea-
failed-big-way/ (accessed 19 November 2020).
Janssen M and Hjort-Madsen K (2007) Analyzing enterprise 
architecture in national governments: The cases of Denmark 
and the Netherlands. In:Sprague RH (ed.) Proceedings of the 
40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. 
Big Island, HI: IEEE, pp. 1–10.
Janssen M and Kuk G (2006) A complex adaptive system perspective 
of enterprise architecture in electronic government. In:Sprague 
RH (ed.) Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences. Kauai, HI: IEEE, pp. 1–10.
https://web.archive.org/web/20160401150639/http://blog.
ivarjacobson.com/ea-failed-big-way/
Jusuf MB and Kurnia S (2017) Understanding the benefits and 
success factors of enterprise architecture. In:Bui TX (ed.) 
Proceedings of the 50th Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences. Big Island, HI: Association for Information 
Systems, pp. 4887–4896.
Kahneman D, Lovallo D and Sibony O (2011) Before you make 
that big decision. . . Harvard Business Review 89(6): 50–60.
Kandjani H and Bernus P (2012) Evolution of enterprise archi-
tecture discipline: Towards a unified developing theory of 
enterprise architecture body of knowledge as an evolving dis-
cipline. In:Maciaszek LA, Cuzzocrea A and Cordeiro J (eds) 
Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Enterprise 
Information Systems. Wroclaw: SciTePress, pp. 145–154.
Kandjani H, Bernus P and Nielsen S (2013) Enterprise archi-
tecture cybernetics and the edge of chaos: Sustaining 
enterprises as complex systems in complex business environ-
ments. In:Sprague RH (ed.) Proceedings of the 46th Hawaii 

--- PAGE 33 ---
Kotusev and Kurnia 307
Kotusev and Kurnia 33
International Conference on System Sciences. Maui, HI: 
IEEE, pp. 3858–3867.
Kankanhalli A, Tan B and Wei K-K (2005) Contributing knowl-
edge to electronic knowledge repositories: An empirical 
investigation. MIS Quarterly 29(1): 113–143.
Karpovsky A and Galliers RD (2015) Aligning in practice: From 
current cases to a new agenda. Journal of Information 
Technology 30(2): 136–160.
Khosroshahi PA, Hauder M, V olkert S, et al. (2018) Business capa-
bility maps: Current practices and use cases for enterprise 
architecture management. In:Bui TX (ed.) Proceedings of the 
51st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. Big 
Island, HI: Association for Information Systems, pp. 4603–4612.
Khoury GR and Simoff SJ (2004) Enterprise architecture mod-
elling using elastic metaphors. In:Hartmann S and Roddick 
JF (eds) Proceedings of the 1st Asia-Pacific Conference 
on Conceptual Modelling. Dunedin: Australian Computer 
Society, pp. 65–69.
Kieser A (1997) Rhetoric and myth in management fashion. 
Organization 4(1): 49–74.
Kloeckner S and Birkmeier D (2009) Something is missing: 
Enterprise architecture from a systems theory perspective. 
In:Dan A, Gittler F and Toumani F (eds) Proceedings of the 
4th Trends in Enterprise Architecture Research Workshop. 
Stockholm: Springer, pp. 22–34.
Kock N, Gray P, Hoving R, et al. (2002) IS research relevance 
revisited: Subtle accomplishment, unfulfilled promise, or 
serial hypocrisy? Communications of the Association for 
Information Systems 8(1): 330–346.
Korhonen JJ and Poutanen J (2013) Tripartite approach to enterprise 
architecture. Journal of Enterprise Architecture 9(1): 28–38.
Kotusev S (2016) The history of enterprise architecture: An 
evidence-based review. Journal of Enterprise Architecture 
12(1): 29–37.
Kotusev S (2017a) Conceptual model of enterprise architec-
ture management. International Journal of Cooperative 
Information Systems 26(3): 1–36.
Kotusev S (2017b) Eight essential enterprise architecture arti-
facts [WWW document]. Available at: https://www.bcs.org/
content-hub/eight-essential-enterprise-architecture-artifacts/ 
(accessed 14 September 2020).
Kotusev S (2017c) Enterprise architecture: What did we study? 
International Journal of Cooperative Information Systems 
26(4): 1–84.
Kotusev S (2018a) Enterprise architecture: A reconceptualiza-
tion is needed. Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for 
Information Systems 10(4): 1–36.
Kotusev S (2018b) The Practice of Enterprise Architecture: A 
Modern Approach to Business and IT Alignment. Melbourne, 
VIC, Australia: SK Publishing.
Kotusev S (2018c) TOGAF-based enterprise architecture prac-
tice: An exploratory case study. Communications of the 
Association for Information Systems 43(1): 321–359.
Kotusev S (2018d) TOGAF: Just the next fad that turned into 
a new religion. In:Smith KL (ed.) TOGAF Is Not an EA 
Framework: The Inconvenient Pragmatic Truth. Great 
Notley: Pragmatic EA Ltd., pp. 27–40.
Kotusev S (2019a) Enterprise architecture and enterprise archi-
tecture artifacts: Questioning the old concept in light of 
new findings. Journal of Information Technology 34(2): 
102–128.
Kotusev S (2019b) Fake and real tools for enterprise architecture: The 
Zachman Framework and Business Capability Model [WWW 
document]. Available at: https://eapj.org/fake-and-real-tools-
for-enterprise-architecture/ (accessed 21 August 2019).
Kotusev S (2020) The hard side of business and IT alignment. IT 
Professional 22(1): 47–55.
Kotusev S and Kurnia S (2019) The problem of engagement in 
enterprise architecture practice: An exploratory case study. 
In:Boh WF, Leimeister JM and Wattal S (eds) Proceedings of 
the 40th International Conference on Information Systems. 
Munich: Association for Information Systems, pp. 1–17.
Kotusev S, Kurnia S and Dilnutt R (2020) Roles of different 
artifacts in enterprise architecture practice: An exploratory 
study. In:Karahanna E, Oestreicher-Singer G and Sarker S 
(eds) Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on 
Information Systems. Hyderabad, India: Association for 
Information Systems, pp. 1–17.
Kotusev S, Singh M and Storey I (2015) Investigating the usage 
of enterprise architecture artifacts. In:Becker J, vom Brocke 
J and de Marco M (eds) Proceedings of the 23rd European 
Conference on Information Systems. Munster: Association 
for Information Systems, pp. 1–12.
Kotusev S, Singh M and Storey I (2016) Enterprise architec-
ture practice in retail: Problems and solutions. Journal of 
Enterprise Architecture 12(3): 28–39.
Kotusev S, Singh M and Storey I (2017) A frameworks-free look 
at enterprise architecture. Journal of Enterprise Architecture 
13(1): 15–21.
Kurnia S, Kotusev S and Dilnutt R (2020a) The role of engage-
ment in achieving business-IT alignment through practicing 
enterprise architecture. In:Newell S, Pouloudi N and van 
Heck E (eds) Proceedings of the 28th European Conference 
on Information Systems. Marrakech, Morocco: Association 
for Information Systems, pp. 1–12.
Kurnia S, Kotusev S, Dilnutt R, et al. (2020b) Artifacts, activi-
ties, benefits and blockers: Exploring enterprise architecture 
practice in depth. In:Bui TX (ed.) Proceedings of the 53rd 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. Maui, 
HI: University of Hawaii at Manoa, pp. 5583–5592.
Lahrmann G, Winter R and Fischer MM (2010) Design and engi-
neering for situational transformation. In:Harmsen F, Proper 
E, Schalkwijk F, et al. (eds) Proceedings of the 2nd Working 
Conference on Practice-Driven Research on Enterprise 
Transformation. Delft: Springer, pp. 1–16.
Lange M, Mendling J and Recker J (2012a) A comprehen-
sive EA benefit realization model: An exploratory study. 
In:Sprague RH (ed.) Proceedings of the 45th Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences. Maui, HI: 
IEEE, pp. 4230–4239.
Lange M, Mendling J and Recker J (2012b) Realizing benefits 
from enterprise architecture: A measurement model. In:Pries-
Heje J, Chiasson M, Wareham J, et al. (eds) Proceedings 
of the 20th European Conference on Information Systems. 
Barcelona: Association for Information Systems, pp. 1–12.
Lange M, Mendling J and Recker J (2016) An empirical analysis 
of the factors and measures of enterprise architecture man-
agement success. European Journal of Information Systems 
25(5): 411–431.
Langenberg K and Wegmann A (2004) Enterprise Architecture: 
What Aspects Is Current Research Targeting? (#IC/2004/77). 
Lausanne: Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne.

--- PAGE 34 ---
308 Journal of Information Technology 36(3)
34 Journal of Information Technology 00(0)
Lapkin A and Allega P (2010) Ten Criteria for Choosing an 
External Service Provider for Your EA Effort (#G00174157). 
Stamford, CT: Gartner.
Larsen K, Vance A, Allen G, et al. (2015) Theories used in IS 
research Wiki [WWW document]. Available at: http://
is.theorizeit.org (accessed 23 April 2019).
Lasden M (1981) Long-range planning: Curse or blessing? 
Computer Decisions 13(2): 102–113.
Latham GP (2007) A speculative perspective on the transfer of 
behavioral science findings to the workplace: “The times 
they are a-changin.” Academy of Management Journal 
50(5): 1027–1032.
Lave J and Wenger E (1991) Situated Learning: Legitimate 
Peripheral Participation. New York: Cambridge University 
Press.
Lawler EE and Mohrman SA (1985) Quality circles after the fad. 
Harvard Business Review 63(1): 65–71.
Lederer AL and Sethi V (1988) The implementation of strategic 
information systems planning methodologies. MIS Quarterly 
12(3): 445–461.
Leppanen M, Valtonen K and Pulkkinen M (2007) Towards a 
contingency framework for engineering an enterprise archi-
tecture planning method. In:Tiainen T, Isomaki H, Korpela 
M, et al. (eds) Proceedings of the 30th Information Systems 
Research Seminar in Scandinavia. Tampere: University of 
Tampere, pp. 1–20.
Levy M (2014) “Shelfware” or strategic alignment? An enquiry into 
the design of enterprise architecture programs. In:McLean 
E, Watson R and Case T (eds) Proceedings of the 20th 
Americas Conference on Information Systems. Savannah, 
GA: Association for Information Systems, pp. 1–12.
Levy M and Bui QN (2019) How field-level institutions become 
a part of organizations: A study of enterprise architecture as 
a tool for institutional change. Information and Organization 
29(4): 1–23.
Lindblom CE (1959) The science of “muddling through.” Public 
Administration Review 19(2): 79–88.
Lohe J and Legner C (2014) Overcoming implementation chal-
lenges in enterprise architecture management: A design 
theory for architecture-driven IT management (ADRIMA). 
Information Systems and E-Business Management 12(1): 
101–137.
Longepe C (2003) The Enterprise Architecture IT Project: The 
Urbanisation Paradigm. London: Kogan Page Science.
Lovallo D and Kahneman D (2003) Delusions of success: How 
optimism undermines executives’ decisions. Harvard 
Business Review 81(7): 56–63.
Luftman J and Brier T (1999) Achieving and sustaining busi-
ness-IT alignment. California Management Review 42(1): 
109–122.
Lux J and Ahlemann F (2012) Embedding EAM into the project 
life cycle. In:Ahlemann F, Stettiner E, Messerschmidt M, 
et al. (eds) Strategic Enterprise Architecture Management: 
Challenges, Best Practices, and Future Developments. 
Berlin: Springer, pp. 141–168.
Magalhaes R, Zacarias M and Tribolet J (2007) Making sense 
of enterprise architectures as tools of organizational self-
awareness (OSA). In:Lankhorst MM and Johnson P (eds) 
Proceedings of the 2nd Trends in Enterprise Architecture 
Research Workshop. St. Gallen: Telematica Instituut, pp. 
61–69.
Makiya G (2008) Integrating enterprise architecture and IT 
portfolio management processes. Journal of Enterprise 
Architecture 4(1): 27–40.
March JG (1994) A Primer on Decision Making: How Decisions 
Happen. New York: The Free Press.
March JG and Simon HA (1993) Organizations (2nd edn). 
Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Martin J (1982) Strategic Data-Planning Methodologies. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Martin J and Finkelstein C (1981) Information Engineering (V ols. 
I and II). Carnforth: Savant Institute.
Martin J and Leben J (1989) Strategic Information Planning 
Methodologies (2nd edn). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice 
Hall.
Mason RO (2004) The legacy of LEO: Lessons learned from an 
English tea and cake company’s pioneering efforts in infor -
mation systems. Journal of the Association for Information 
Systems 5(5): 183–219.
Matthes D (2011) Enterprise Architecture Frameworks 
Kompendium: Uber 50 Rahmenwerke fur das IT-Management. 
Berlin: Springer.
Mennecke BE, Crossland MD and Killingsworth BL (2000) Is a 
map more than a picture? The role of SDSS technology, sub-
ject characteristics, and problem complexity on map reading 
and problem solving. MIS Quarterly 24(4): 601–629.
Mezzanotte DM, Dehlinger J and Chakraborty S (2010) On 
applying the theory of structuration in enterprise archi-
tecture design. In:Matsuo T, Ishii N and Lee R (eds) 
Proceedings of the 9th IEEE/ACIS International Conference 
on Computer and Information Science. Yamagata, Japan: 
IEEE, pp. 859–863.
Miller D, Hartwick J and Le Breton-Miller I (2004) How to 
detect a management fad: And distinguish it from a classic. 
Business Horizons 47(4): 7–16.
Miller GA (1956) The magical number seven, plus or minus two: 
Some limits on our capacity for processing information. 
Psychological Review 63(2): 81–97.
Mintzberg H (1981) Organizational design: Fit or fashion? 
Harvard Business Review 59(1): 103–116.
Mintzberg H (2009) Managing. San Francisco, CA: Berrett-
Koehler Publishers.
Mintzberg H, Raisinghani D and Theoret A (1976) The structure 
of “unstructured” decision processes. Administrative Science 
Quarterly 21(2): 246–275.
Mitev N (2009) In and out of actor-network theory: A necessary 
but insufficient journey. Information Technology and People 
22(1): 9–25.
Molnar WA and Proper HA (2013) Engineering an enterprise: 
Practical issues of two case studies from the Luxembourgish 
beverage and tobacco industry. In:Harmsen F and Proper 
HA (eds) Proceedings of the 6th Working Conference on 
Practice-Driven Research on Enterprise Transformation. 
Utrecht: Springer, pp. 76–91.
Moody DL (2000) Building links between IS research and pro-
fessional practice: Improving the relevance and impact 
of IS research. In:Orlikowski WJ, Ang S, Weill P, et al. 
(eds) Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on 
Information Systems. Brisbane, QLD, Australia: Association 
for Information Systems, pp. 351–360.
Mueller B and Urbach N (2013) The why, what, and how of theories 
in IS research. In:Baskerville R and Chau M (eds) Proceedings 

--- PAGE 35 ---
Kotusev and Kurnia 309
Kotusev and Kurnia 35
of the 34th International Conference on Information Systems. 
Milan: Association for Information Systems, pp. 1–25.
Murer S, Bonati B and Furrer FJ (2011) Managed Evolution: 
A Strategy for Very Large Information Systems. Berlin: 
Springer.
Mykhashchuk M, Buckl S, Dierl T, et al. (2011) Charting the land-
scape of enterprise architecture management. In:Bernstein A 
and Schwabe G (eds) Proceedings of the 9th International 
Conference on Wirtschaftsinformatik. Zurich: Association 
for Information Systems, pp. 570–577.
Narman P, Holm H, Hook D, et al. (2012) Using enterprise archi-
tecture and technology adoption models to predict application 
usage. Journal of Systems and Software 85(8): 1953–1967.
Nath R (1989) Aligning MIS with the business goals. Information 
and Management 16(2): 71–79.
Negoita B, Lapointe L and Pinsonneault A (2013) Achieving 
strategic alignment: A decision-making perspective. 
In:Baskerville R and Chau M (eds) Proceedings of the 34th 
International Conference on Information Systems. Milan: 
Association for Information Systems, pp. 1–11.
Nicolini D, Mengis J and Swan J (2012) Understanding the role 
of objects in cross-disciplinary collaboration. Organization 
Science 23(3): 612–629.
Niemann KD (2006) From Enterprise Architecture to IT 
Governance: Elements of Effective IT Management. 
Wiesbaden: Vieweg.
Niemi E (2007) Enterprise architecture stakeholders: A holis-
tic view. In:Hoxmeier JA and Hayne S (eds) Proceedings 
of the 13th Americas Conference on Information Systems. 
Keystone, CO: Association for Information Systems, pp. 
3669–3676.
Niemi E and Pekkola S (2009) Adapting the DeLone and McLean 
model for the enterprise architecture benefit realization pro-
cess. In:Sprague RH (ed.) Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences. Big Island, 
HI: IEEE, pp. 1–10.
Niemi E and Pekkola S (2017) Using enterprise architecture arte-
facts in an organisation. Enterprise Information Systems 
11(3): 313–338.
Nonaka I (1994) A dynamic theory of organizational knowledge 
creation. Organization Science 5(1): 14–37.
Oviatt BM and Miller WD (1989) Irrelevance, intransigence, and 
business professors. Academy of Management Perspectives 
3(4): 304–312.
Papadakis V , Thanos I and Barwise P (2010) Research on strategic 
decisions: Taking stock and looking ahead. In:Nutt PC and 
Wilson DC (eds) Handbook of Decision Making. Hoboken, 
NJ: Wiley, pp. 31–69.
Pentland A (2012) The new science of building great teams. 
Harvard Business Review 90(4): 60–69.
Periasamy KP (1994) Development and Usage of Information 
Architecture: A Management Perspective. Oxford: University 
of Oxford.
Periasamy KP and Feeny DF (1997) Information architecture 
practice: Research-based recommendations for the practi-
tioner. Journal of Information Technology 12(3): 197–205.
Pettigrew A (2003) Strategy as process, power and change. 
In:Cummings S and Wilson D (eds) Images of Strategy. 
Malden, MA: Blackwell, pp. 301–330.
Pfeffer J (1981) Power in Organizations. Cambridge, MA: 
Ballinger Publishing Company.
Polanyi M (1966) The Tacit Dimension. Chicago, IL: University 
of Chicago Press.
Poutanen J (2012) The social dimension of enterprise architec-
ture in government. Journal of Enterprise Architecture 8(2): 
19–29.
Preston DS and Karahanna E (2009) Antecedents of IS strategic 
alignment: A nomological network. Information Systems 
Research 20(2): 159–179.
PRISM (1986) PRISM: Dispersion and Interconnection: 
Approaches to Distributed Systems Architecture. Cambridge, 
MA: CSC Index.
Pulkkinen M (2006) Systemic management of architectural 
decisions in enterprise architecture planning. Four dimen-
sions and three abstraction levels. In:Sprague RH (ed.) 
Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences. Kauai, HI: IEEE, pp. 1–9.
Radeke F and Legner C (2012) Embedding EAM into strategic 
planning. In:Ahlemann F, Stettiner E, Messerschmidt M, 
et al. (eds) Strategic Enterprise Architecture Management: 
Challenges, Best Practices, and Future Developments. 
Berlin: Springer, pp. 111–139.
Rajagopalan N, Rasheed AM and Datta DK (1993) Strategic deci-
sion processes: Critical review and future directions. Journal 
of Management 19(2): 349–384.
Reich BH and Benbasat I (2000) Factors that influence the social 
dimension of alignment between business and information 
technology objectives. MIS Quarterly 24(1): 81–113.
Rice RE and Shook DE (1990) Relationships of job categories 
and organizational levels to use of communication channels, 
including electronic mail: A meta-analysis and extension. 
Journal of Management Studies 27(2): 195–229.
Riege C and Aier S (2008) A contingency approach to enter -
prise architecture method engineering. In:Feuerlicht G 
and Lamersdorf W (eds) Proceedings of the 3rd Trends in 
Enterprise Architecture Research Workshop. Sydney, NSW, 
Australia: Springer, pp. 388–399.
Rivard S (2014) The ions of theory construction. MIS Quarterly 
38(2): iii–xiv.
Roeleven S (2010) Why Two Thirds of Enterprise Architecture 
Projects Fail. Darmstadt: Software AG.
Ross JW, Weill P and Robertson DC (2006) Enterprise Architecture 
as Strategy: Creating a Foundation for Business Execution. 
Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Ruggles R (1998) The state of the notion: Knowledge manage-
ment in practice. California Management Review 40(3): 
80–89.
Saat J, Aier S and Gleichauf B (2009) Assessing the complex-
ity of dynamics in enterprise architecture planning: Lessons 
from chaos theory. In:Nelson ML, Shaw MJ and Strader 
TJ (eds) Proceedings of the 15th Americas Conference on 
Information Systems. San Francisco, CA: Association for 
Information Systems, pp. 1–8.
Sabherwal R, Hirschheim R and Goles T (2001) The dynamics 
of alignment: Insights from a punctuated equilibrium model. 
Organization Science 12(2): 179–197.
Saint-Louis P and Lapalme J (2016) Investigation of the lack 
of common understanding in the discipline of enterprise 
architecture: A systematic mapping study. In:Franke U, 
Lapalme J and Aier S (eds) Proceedings of the 11th Trends 
in Enterprise Architecture Research Workshop. Vienna: 
IEEE, pp. 74–82.

--- PAGE 36 ---
310 Journal of Information Technology 36(3)
36 Journal of Information Technology 00(0)
Sambamurthy V and Subramani M (2005) Special issue on infor-
mation technologies and knowledge management. MIS 
Quarterly 29(1): 1–7.
Sapsed J and Salter A (2004) Postcards from the edge: Local 
communities, global programs and boundary objects. 
Organization Studies 25(9): 1515–1534.
Sarker S, Sarker S and Sidorova A (2006) Understanding busi-
ness process change failure: An actor-network perspective. 
Journal of Management Information Systems 23(1): 51–86.
Schekkerman J (2004) How to Survive in the Jungle of Enterprise 
Architecture Frameworks: Creating or Choosing an 
Enterprise Architecture Framework (2nd edn). Victoria, BC, 
Canada: Trafford Publishing.
Schekkerman J (2006) Extended enterprise architecture frame-
work essentials guide, Version 1.5. Amersfoort: Institute for 
Enterprise Architecture Developments (IFEAD).
Schekkerman J (2008) Enterprise Architecture Good Practices 
Guide: How to Manage the Enterprise Architecture Practice. 
Victoria, BC, Canada: Trafford Publishing.
Schilling RD (2018) Theories to understand the dynamic nature 
of enterprise architecture. In:Franke U, Buschle M and 
Jung J (eds) Proceedings of the 13th Trends in Enterprise 
Architecture Research Workshop. Stockholm: IEEE, pp. 
153–161.
Schilling RD, Beese J, Haki MK, et al. (2017) Revisiting the 
impact of information systems architecture complex-
ity: A complex adaptive systems perspective. In:Soh C, 
Henfridsson O and Yoo Y (eds) Proceedings of the 38th 
International Conference on Information Systems. Seoul, 
South Korea: Association for Information Systems, pp. 1–18.
Schmidt C and Buxmann P (2011) Outcomes and success factors 
of enterprise IT architecture management: Empirical insight 
from the international financial services industry. European 
Journal of Information Systems 20(2): 168–185.
Schoenherr M (2008) Towards a common terminology in the 
discipline of enterprise architecture. In:Feuerlicht G and 
Lamersdorf W (eds) Proceedings of the 3rd Trends in 
Enterprise Architecture Research Workshop. Sydney, NSW, 
Australia: Springer, pp. 400–413.
Schwenk CR (1995) Strategic decision making. Journal of 
Management 21(3): 471–493.
Scott J (2009) Business capability maps: The missing link 
between business strategy and IT action. Architecture and 
Governance Magazine 5(9): 1–4.
Shanks G (1997) The challenges of strategic data planning in 
practice: An interpretive case study. Journal of Strategic 
Information Systems 6(1): 69–90.
Sibony O, Lovallo D and Powell TC (2017) Behavioral strategy 
and the strategic decision architecture of the firm. California 
Management Review 59(3): 5–21.
Sidorova A and Kappelman LA (2010) Enterprise architecture as 
politics: An actor-network theory perspective. In:Kappelman 
LA (ed.) The SIM Guide to Enterprise Architecture. Boca 
Raton, FL: CRC Press, pp. 70–88.
Sidorova A and Kappelman LA (2011a) Better business-IT align-
ment through enterprise architecture: An actor-network 
theory perspective. Journal of Enterprise Architecture 7(1): 
39–47.
Sidorova A and Kappelman LA (2011b) Realizing the benefits of 
enterprise architecture: An actor-network theory perspective. 
In:Hammami O, Krob D and V oirin JL (eds) Proceedings 
of the 2nd International Conference on Complex Systems 
Design and Management. Paris: Springer, pp. 317–333.
Simon D, Fischbach K and Schoder D (2013) An exploration 
of enterprise architecture research. Communications of the 
Association for Information Systems 32(1): 1–72.
Simon D, Fischbach K and Schoder D (2014) Enterprise archi-
tecture management and its role in corporate strategic man-
agement. Information Systems and E-Business Management 
12(1): 5–42.
Simon HA (1960) The New Science of Management Decision. 
New York: Harper.
Simon HA (1997) Administrative Behavior (4th edn). New York: 
The Free Press.
Smelcer JB and Carmel E (1997) The effectiveness of different 
representations for managerial problem solving: Comparing 
tables and maps. Decision Sciences 28(2): 391–420.
Smith HA, Watson RT and Sullivan P (2012) Delivering an 
effective enterprise architecture at Chubb insurance. MIS 
Quarterly Executive 11(2): 75–85.
Smolander K, Rossi M and Purao S (2008) Software architec-
tures: Blueprint, literature, language or decision? European 
Journal of Information Systems 17(6): 575–588.
Sowa JF and Zachman JA (1992) Extending and formalizing 
the framework for information systems architecture. IBM 
Systems Journal 31(3): 590–616.
Spewak SH and Hill SC (1992) Enterprise Architecture Planning: 
Developing a Blueprint for Data, Applications and 
Technology. New York: Wiley.
Star SL (2010) This is not a boundary object: Reflections on the 
origin of a concept. Science, Technology and Human Values 
35(5): 601–617.
Star SL and Griesemer JR (1989) Institutional ecology, “transla-
tions” and boundary objects: Amateurs and professionals in 
Berkeley’s museum of vertebrate zoology, 1907-39. Social 
Studies of Science 19(3): 387–420.
Struck V , Buckl S, Matthes F, et al. (2010) Enterprise architec-
ture management from a knowledge management per -
spective: Results from an empirical study. In:Sansonetti 
A (ed.) Proceedings of the 4th Mediterranean Conference 
on Information Systems. Tel Aviv, Israel: Association for 
Information Systems, pp. 1–12.
Suh KS (1999) Impact of communication medium on task perfor-
mance and satisfaction: An examination of media-richness 
theory. Information and Management 35(5): 295–312.
Sutton RI and Staw BM (1995) What theory is not. Administrative 
Science Quarterly 40(3): 371–384.
Swindell A (2014) Business capability models: Why you might be 
missing out on better business outcomes. Architecture and 
Governance Magazine 10(2): 3–7.
Syynimaa N (2017) The quest for underpinning theory of enter -
prise architecture: General systems theory. In:Hammoudi S, 
Smialek M, Camp O, et al. (eds) Proceedings of the 19th 
International Conference on Enterprise Information Systems. 
Porto: SciTePress, pp. 400–408.
TAFIM (1996) Department of Defense Technical Architecture 
Framework for Information Management, Volume 4: DoD 
Standards-Based Architecture Planning Guide (Version 
3.0). Arlington County, V A: Defense Information Systems 
Agency.

--- PAGE 37 ---
Kotusev and Kurnia 311
Kotusev and Kurnia 37
Tamm T, Seddon PB, Shanks G, et al. (2011) How does enterprise 
architecture add value to organisations? Communications of 
the Association for Information Systems 28(1): 141–168.
Tamm T, Seddon PB, Shanks G, et al. (2015) How an Australian 
retailer enabled business transformation through enterprise 
architecture. MIS Quarterly Executive 14(4): 181–193.
Tanigawa U (2004) Decision processes in enterprise architecture: 
Descriptive study. In:Romano NC (ed.) Proceedings of the 
10th Americas Conference on Information Systems. New 
York: Association for Information Systems, pp. 154–157.
TEAF (2000) Treasury Enterprise Architecture Framework 
(Version 1). Washington, DC: Department of the Treasury.
Teo TS and Ang JS (1999) Critical success factors in the align-
ment of IS plans with business plans. International Journal 
of Information Management 19(2): 173–185.
Theuerkorn F (2004) Lightweight Enterprise Architectures. Boca 
Raton, FL: Auerbach Publications.
Thornton S (2007) Understanding and communicating with 
enterprise architecture users. In:Saha P (ed.) Handbook of 
Enterprise Systems Architecture in Practice. Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference, pp. 145–159.
TOGAF (2018) TOGAF Version 9.2 (#C182). Reading: The Open 
Group.
Trevino LK, Lengel RH and Daft RL (1987) Media symbolism, 
media richness, and media choice in organizations: A sym-
bolic interactionist perspective. Communication Research 
14(5): 553–574.
Trionfi A (2016) Guiding principles to support organization-level 
enterprise architectures. Journal of Enterprise Architecture 
12(3): 40–45.
Tucci L (2011) Two IT gurus face off on value of enterprise archi-
tecture frameworks [WWW document]. Available at: https://
searchcio.techtarget.com/blog/TotalCIO/Two-IT-gurus-
face-off-on-value-of-enterprise-architecture-frameworks 
(accessed 19 November 2020).
Tushman ML and Nadler DA (1978) Information processing as 
an integrating concept in organizational design. Academy of 
Management Review 3(3): 613–624.
U.S. Government Accountability Office (U.S. GAO) (2004) 
DOD Business Systems Modernization: Limited Progress 
in Development of Business Enterprise Architecture and 
Oversight of Information Technology Investments (#GAO-
04-731R). Washington, DC: U.S. GAO.
U.S. Government Accountability Office (U.S. GAO) (2005) 
DOD Business Systems Modernization: Long-Standing 
Weaknesses in Enterprise Architecture Development Need 
to Be Addressed (#GAO-05-702). Washington, DC: U.S. 
GAO.
U.S. Government Accountability Office (U.S. GAO) (2007) 
Business Systems Modernization: Strategy for Evolving 
DOD’ s Business Enterprise Architecture Offers a Conceptual 
Approach, but Execution Details Are Needed (#GAO-07-
451). Washington, DC: U.S. GAO.
U.S. Government Accountability Office (U.S. GAO) (2011) 
Opportunities to Reduce Potential Duplication in Government 
Programs, Save Tax Dollars, and Enhance Revenue (#GAO-
11-318SP). Washington, DC: U.S. GAO.
U.S. Government Accountability Office (U.S. GAO) (2013) DOD 
Business Systems Modernization: Further Actions Needed to 
Address Challenges and Improve Accountability (#GAO-13-
557). Washington, DC: U.S. GAO.
U.S. Government Accountability Office (U.S. GAO) (2015) DOD 
Business Systems Modernization: Additional Action Needed 
to Achieve Intended Outcomes (#GAO-15-627). Washington, 
DC: U.S. GAO.
Valorinta M (2011) IT alignment and the boundaries of the IT 
function. Journal of Information Technology 26(1): 46–59.
Van de Ven AH (1989) Nothing is quite so practical as a good 
theory. Academy of Management Review 14(4): 486–489.
van de Wetering R (2019a) Dynamic enterprise architecture capa-
bilities: Conceptualization and validation. In:Abramowicz W 
and Corchuelo R (eds) Proceedings of the 22nd International 
Conference on Business Information Systems. Seville: Springer, 
pp. 221–232.
van de Wetering R (2019b) Enterprise architecture resources, 
dynamic capabilities, and their pathways to operational 
value. In:Krcmar H and Fedorowicz J (eds) Proceedings of 
the 40th International Conference on Information Systems. 
Munich: Association for Information Systems, pp. 1–17.
van den Berg M, Slot R, van Steenbergen M, et al. (2019) How 
enterprise architecture improves the quality of IT investment 
decisions. Journal of Systems and Software 152(1): 134–150.
van der Raadt B and van Vliet H (2008) Designing the enterprise 
architecture function. In:Becker S, Plasil F and Reussner 
R (eds) Quality of Software Architectures. Models and 
Architectures. Berlin: Springer, pp. 103–118.
van der Raadt B, Bonnet M, Schouten S, et al. (2010) The rela-
tion between EA effectiveness and stakeholder satisfaction. 
Journal of Systems and Software 83(10): 1954–1969.
van der Raadt B, Schouten S and van Vliet H (2008) Stakeholder 
perception of enterprise architecture. In:Morrison R, 
Balasubramaniam D and Falkner K (eds) Proceedings of the 
2nd European Conference on Software Architecture. Paphos, 
Cyprus: Springer, pp. 19–34.
van’t Wout J, Waage M, Hartman H, et al. (2010) The Integrated 
Architecture Framework Explained: Why, What, How. 
Berlin: Springer.
Verley GL (2007) Improving stakeholder communications and 
IT engagement: A case study perspective. In:Saha P (ed.) 
Handbook of Enterprise Systems Architecture in Practice. 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference, pp. 160–171.
Vessey I (1991) Cognitive fit: A theory-based analysis of the 
graphs versus tables literature. Decision Sciences 22(2): 
219–240.
Vessey I (1994) The effect of information presentation on deci-
sion making: A cost-benefit analysis. Information and 
Management 27(2): 103–119.
Vessey I and Galletta D (1991) Cognitive fit: An empirical study 
of information acquisition. Information Systems Research 
2(1): 63–84.
von Bertalanffy L (1968) General System Theory: Foundations, 
Development, Applications. New York: George Braziller.
Wagter R, van den Berg M, Luijpers J, et al. (2005) Dynamic 
Enterprise Architecture: How to Make It Work. Hoboken, 
NJ: Wiley.
Walsham G (1997) Actor-network theory and IS research: 
Current status and future prospects. In:Lee AS, Liebenau J 
and DeGross JI (eds) Information Systems and Qualitative 
Research. Boston, MA: Springer, pp. 466–480.
Walsham G and Sahay S (1999) GIS for district-level adminis-
tration in India: Problems and opportunities. MIS Quarterly 
23(1): 39–65.

--- PAGE 38 ---
312 Journal of Information Technology 36(3)
38 Journal of Information Technology 00(0)
Wardle C (1984) The evolution of information systems architecture. 
In:Nunamaker J, King JL and Kraemer KL (eds) Proceedings 
of the 5th International Conference on Information 
Systems. Tucson, AZ: Association for Information Systems,  
pp. 205–217.
Weber R (2003) Theoretically speaking. MIS Quarterly 27(3): 
iii–xii.
Wegmann A and Preiss O (2003) MDA in enterprise architecture? 
The living system theory to the rescue. In:Duddy K, Steen 
MWA, Bryant BR, et al. (eds) Proceedings of the 7th IEEE 
International Enterprise Distributed Object Computing 
Conference. Brisbane, QLD, Australia: IEEE, pp. 2–13.
Weick KE (1989) Theory construction as disciplined imagination. 
Academy of Management Review 14(4): 516–531.
Weiss S, Aier S and Winter R (2012) Towards a reconstruction of theo-
retical foundations of enterprise architecture management. In:de 
Marco M, Te’eni D, Albano V , et al. (eds) Information Systems: 
Crossroads for Organization, Management, Accounting and 
Engineering. Heidelberg: Physica, pp. 461–468.
Weiss S, Aier S and Winter R (2013) Institutionalization and 
the effectiveness of enterprise architecture management. 
In:Baskerville R and Chau M (eds) Proceedings of the 34th 
International Conference on Information Systems. Milan: 
Association for Information Systems, pp. 1–19.
Weiss S and Winter R (2012) Development of measurement items 
for the institutionalization of enterprise architecture man-
agement in organizations. In:Aier S, Ekstedt M, Matthes 
F, et al. (eds) Proceedings of the 7th Trends in Enterprise 
Architecture Research Workshop. Barcelona: Springer, pp. 
268–283.
Wenger E (1998) Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning, 
and Identity. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Wenger E, McDermott RA and Snyder W (2002) Cultivating 
Communities of Practice: A Guide to Managing Knowledge. 
Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Whetten DA (1989) What constitutes a theoretical contribution? 
Academy of Management Review 14(4): 490–495.
Wierda G (2015) Chess and the Art of Enterprise Architecture. 
Amsterdam: R&A.
Wierda G (2017) Mastering ArchiMate (Edition III): A Serious 
Introduction to the ArchiMate Enterprise Architecture 
Modeling Language. Amsterdam: R&A.
Winter R and Fischer R (2006) Essential layers, artifacts, and 
dependencies of enterprise architecture. In:Vallecillo A 
(ed.) Proceedings of the 10th IEEE International Enterprise 
Distributed Object Computing Conference Workshops. Hong 
Kong, China: IEEE, pp. 30–37.
Wu J-H and Wang Y-M (2006) Measuring KMS success: A respeci-
fication of the DeLone and McLean’s model. Information 
and Management 43(6): 728–739.
Yakura EK (2002) Charting time: Timelines as temporal boundary 
objects. Academy of Management Journal 45(5): 956–970.
Ylimaki T and Halttunen V (2006) Method engineering in practice: 
A case of applying the Zachman framework in the context of 
small enterprise architecture oriented projects. Information, 
Knowledge, Systems Management 5(3): 189–209.
Zachman JA (1987) A framework for information systems archi-
tecture. IBM Systems Journal 26(3): 276–292.
Zadeh ME, Lewis E, Millar G, et al. (2014) The use of viable 
system model to develop guidelines for generating enterprise 
architecture principles. In:Gruver WA and Chen CLP (eds) 
Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE International Conference on 
Systems, Man and Cybernetics. San Diego, CA: IEEE, pp. 
1020–1026.
Zadeh ME, Millar G and Lewis E (2012a) Mapping the enterprise 
architecture principles in TOGAF to the cybernetic concepts: 
An exploratory study. In:Sprague RH (ed.) Proceedings 
of the 45th Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences. Maui, HI: IEEE, pp. 4270–4276.
Zadeh ME, Millar G and Lewis E (2012b) Reinterpreting the 
TOGAF enterprise architecture principles using a cybernetic 
lens. Journal of Enterprise Architecture 8(2): 9–17.
Zink G (2009) How to restart an enterprise architecture program 
after initial failure. Journal of Enterprise Architecture 5(2): 
31–41.
Author biographies
Svyatoslav Kotusev is currently an associate professor at the 
National Research University Higher School of Economics, 
Moscow, Russia. He is an author of the book The Practice of 
Enterprise Architecture: A Modern Approach to Business and IT 
Alignment, many articles and other materials on enterprise archi-
tecture that appeared in various academic journals and confer -
ences, industry magazines and online outlets (visit http://kotusev.
com for more information). Svyatoslav received his PhD in infor-
mation systems from RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia.
Sherah Kurnia is currently an associate professor at the School of 
Computing and Information Systems, the University of Melbourne, 
Australia. Her research areas include electronic commerce, inter -
organisational systems, supply chain management, sustainability, 
strategic IT decision-making, and enterprise architecture. Dr. 
Kurnia has over 140 publications and have published in various 
journals, including Information and Management, Journal of 
Strategic Information Systems, Communications of the Association 
for Information Systems, Journal of Business Research, and 
International Journal of Supply Chain. She has won six Best Paper 
Awards from leading Information Systems conferences.
Appendix A
Theories used in EA research
This appendix provides an exhaustive list of 32 theories used 
in EA research. These theories have been identified based on 
a comprehensive EA literature review conducted by the first 
author (Kotusev, 2017c) and other studies that analyzed 
actual or potential utilization of theories in the EA discipline 
(Al-Kharusi et al., 2017; Schilling, 2018; Syynimaa, 2017; 
Weiss et al., 2012). The most articulate theories used or pro-
posed to be used in EA research are listed in alphabetical 
order with relevant explanations in Table 7.

--- PAGE 39 ---
Kotusev and Kurnia 313
Kotusev and Kurnia 39
(Continued)
T able 7. Theories used in EA research.
Theory Proposals to use Actual usage How it is applied in relation to EA
Actor-network theory 
(ANT)
Weiss et al. 
(2012)
Sidorova and Kappelman (2010), Sidorova 
and Kappelman (2011a) and Sidorova and 
Kappelman (2011b)
Interprets an EA practice as an actor-
network where actors inscribe their 
interests in EA artifacts
Administrative behavior 
theory
Weiss et al. 
(2012)
An EA practice can push the limits of 
rationality in decision-making
Agency theory Weiss et al. 
(2012)
Posits that an EA practice can mitigate 
principal-agent problems
Archetype theory Haki and Legner (2013) Posits that architectural adaptation can 
be structured in different archetypes
Boundary objects 
theory
Abraham (2013), Abraham et al. (2013), 
Abraham et al. (2015) and Abraham 
(2018)
Views EA artifacts as boundary 
objects helping overcome knowledge 
boundaries during enterprise 
transformations
Chaos theory Saat et al. (2009) Views the dynamics of EA planning 
essentially as chaotic in nature
Cognitive load theory Weiss et al. 
(2012)
An EA practice can be considered as a 
means for optimizing cognitive load for 
managers
Communities of 
practice theory
Dale and Scheepers (2020) Interprets different groups of EA 
stakeholders as communities of practice
Complex adaptive 
systems theory
Janssen and Kuk (2006), Schilling et al. 
(2017) and Haki et al. (2020)
Posits the complex and adaptive 
character of IT architecture
Contingency theory Weiss et al. 
(2012)
Leppanen et al. (2007), Riege and Aier 
(2008), Lahrmann et al. (2010), Aier et al. 
(2011) and Haki et al. (2012)
Posits that there is no single “best” way 
to organize an EA practice
Diffusion of innovations 
theory
Weiss et al. 
(2012)
Posits that EA can ease and facilitate 
technology adoption
Dominant design theory Bui et al. (2015) Helps explain the EA adoption patterns 
across the industry
Dynamic capabilities 
theory
Weiss et al. 
(2012)
Abraham et al. (2012), van de Wetering 
(2019a) and van de Wetering (2019b)
An EA practice itself can be considered 
as a dynamic capability
Game theory Abraham and Aier (2012) Interprets coordination in an EA 
practice as a game
General systems theory 
(GST)
Weiss et al. 
(2012) and 
Syynimaa (2017)
Kloeckner and Birkmeier (2009) and 
Hoyland (2011)
Views an enterprise as a complex 
interrelated system of systems, or as 
multiple parts forming a whole
Institutional theory Weiss et al. 
(2012)
Hjort-Madsen (2006), Hjort-Madsen and 
Burkard (2006), Hjort-Madsen (2007), 
Aier and Weiss (2012), Weiss and Winter 
(2012), Weiss et al. (2013), Dang and 
Pekkola (2016), Bui and Levy (2017), Dang 
(2017), Dang and Pekkola (2017), Ajer 
(2018), Ajer and Olsen (2018), Brosius 
et al. (2018), Dang (2019), Dang and 
Pekkola (2020) and Levy and Bui (2019)
Interprets the establishment of an EA 
practice in an organization as a process 
of gradual institutionalization
IS success model Niemi and Pekkola (2009), Lange et al. 
(2012a), Lange et al. (2012b) and Lange 
et al. (2016)
Offers a basis for measuring the success 
of an EA practice
Knowledge 
management theory
Buckl et al. (2009c) and Struck et al. 
(2010)
Views an EA practice as a way of 
managing knowledge
Living systems theory Wegmann and Preiss (2003) Views an enterprise as a multilevel 
hierarchical living system for the 
purposes of modeling
Management fashion 
theory
Hjort-Madsen and Pries-Heje (2009) Questions whether the adoption of EA 
in governmental organizations is only a 
temporary fad
Morphogenetic theory Alwadain et al. (2013b), Alwadain et al. 
(2013a), Alwadain et al. (2014) and 
Alwadain et al. (2016)
Interprets the process of EA evolution 
in organizations as morphogenetic 
cycles

--- PAGE 40 ---
314 Journal of Information Technology 36(3)
40 Journal of Information Technology 00(0)
Appendix B
Theories considered as the potential 
theoretical basis
This appendix provides a united list of 123 theories that 
have been considered in this study as the potential theoreti-
cal basis for the EA discipline. This list combines the 
general list of 113 theories used in IS research provided by 
Larsen et al. (2015) and the list of 32 theories used specifi-
cally in EA research (see Table 7 in Appendix A), where 22 
theories are present in both these lists. All the theories 
assessed in this study for their relevance to the EA disci-
pline are listed in alphabetical order with their sources (IS 
list, EA list, or both lists) in Table 8.
Theory Proposals to use Actual usage How it is applied in relation to EA
Normalized systems 
theory
Huysmans and Verelst (2013) Lessons from the normalized systems 
theory can be used to improve EA 
frameworks
Organizational 
information processing 
theory
Weiss et al. 
(2012)
An EA practice can be considered 
as a means for boosting information 
processing capability
Resource-based view 
(RBV) theory
Dang et al. (2019) and Ahlemann et al. 
(2020)
Views EA-related capabilities and 
prerequisites as organizational 
resources
Social network theory Weiss et al. 
(2012)
Social networks can provide useful 
abstractions for understanding EA
SSM Weiss et al. 
(2012)
SSM can help improve the EA 
development processes representing 
“soft” problems
Stewardship theory Brosius (2016) Views decision-makers in an EA 
practice as collectivistic actors
Structuration theory Mezzanotte et al. (2010), Iyamu and 
Mphahlele (2014) and Iyamu (2019)
Posits that an EA practice as a social 
system depends on both structure and 
agents
Task-technology fit 
model
Narman et al. (2012) Used for analyzing EA diagrams
Technology acceptance 
model (TAM)
Guo et al. (2019) Views organizational acceptance of an 
EA practice as technology acceptance
Unified theory of 
acceptance and use of 
technology (UTAUT)
Hazen et al. (2014) Used to analyze the relationship 
between the use of EA and EA training
Viable system model 
(VSM)
Buckl et al. (2009b), Buckl et al. (2010), 
Kandjani and Bernus (2012), Zadeh et al. 
(2012a), Zadeh et al. (2012b), Campbell 
(2013), Holst (2013), Kandjani et al. 
(2013) and Zadeh et al. (2014)
Views an enterprise as a viable system 
operating according to the laws of 
cybernetics
EA: Enterprise architecture; SSM: Soft systems methodology.
T able 7. (Continued)
T able 8. Theories considered as the potential theoretical basis.
Theory List Theory List
Absorptive capacity theory IS Morphogenetic theory EA
Accountability theory IS Multi-attribute utility theory IS
Actor-network theory (ANT) Both Multi-motive information systems continuance model 
(MISC)
IS
Adaptive structuration theory IS Normalized systems theory EA
Administrative behavior theory Both Organizational culture theory IS
Agency theory Both Organizational information processing theory Both
Archetype theory EA Organizational knowledge creation IS
Argumentation theory IS Organizational learning theory IS
Behavioral decision theory IS Portfolio theory IS
Belief-action-outcome framework IS Process virtualization theory IS
(Continued)

--- PAGE 41 ---
Kotusev and Kurnia 315
Kotusev and Kurnia 41
T able 8. (Continued)
Theory List Theory List
Boundary objects theory Both Prospect theory IS
Chaos theory Both Protection motivation theory IS
Cognitive dissonance theory IS Punctuated equilibrium theory IS
Cognitive fit theory IS Real options theory IS
Cognitive load theory Both Resource dependency theory IS
Communities of practice theory EA Resource-based view (RBV) theory Both
Competitive strategy theory IS Selective organizational information privacy and security 
violations model (SOIPSVM)
IS
Complex adaptive systems theory EA Self-efficacy theory IS
Complexity theory IS Semantic theory of survey response IS
Contingency theory Both SERVQUAL theory IS
Critical realism theory IS Signaling theory IS
Critical social theory IS Social bond theory IS
Critical success factors theory IS Social capital theory IS
Customer focus theory IS Social cognitive theory IS
Customer-based discrepancy theory IS Social comparison theory IS
Deferred action theory IS Social exchange theory IS
Design theory IS Social identity theory IS
Diffusion of innovations theory Both Social influence theory IS
Dominant design theory EA Social information processing theory IS
Dynamic capabilities theory Both Social learning theory IS
Elaboration likelihood model IS Social network theory Both
Embodied social presence theory IS Social penetration theory IS
Equity theory IS Social shaping of technology IS
Evolutionary theory IS Socioemotional selectivity theory IS
Expectation confirmation theory IS Socio-technical theory IS
Feminism theory IS Soft systems methodology (SSM) Both
Fit-viability theory IS Stakeholder theory IS
Flow theory IS Stewardship theory EA
Game theory Both Structuration theory Both
Garbage can theory IS Structured process modeling theory (SPMT) IS
General deterrence theory IS Task closure theory IS
General strain theory IS Task-technology fit model Both
General systems theory (GST) Both Technological frames of reference IS
Hedonic-motivation system adoption model (HMSAM) IS Technology acceptance model (TAM) Both
Hermeneutics IS Technology dominance theory IS
Illusion of control IS Technology threat avoidance theory IS
Impression management theory IS Technology-organization-environment framework IS
Information asymmetry theory IS Theory of collective action IS
Information processing theory IS Theory of organizational creativity IS
Information warfare IS Theory of organizational sensemaking IS
Institutional theory Both Theory of planned behavior IS
International information systems theory IS Theory of reasoned action IS
IS success model Both Theory of slack resources IS
Keller’s motivational model IS Theory of swift trust IS
Knowledge management theory EA Transaction cost economics IS
Knowledge-based view (KBV) theory IS Transactive memory theory IS
Language action perspective IS Unified theory of acceptance and use of technology 
(UTAUT)
Both
Living systems theory EA Usage control model IS
Management fashion theory Both Viable system model (VSM) EA
Media richness theory IS Work systems theory IS
Media synchronicity theory IS Yield shift theory of satisfaction IS
Modal aspects theory IS  
EA: Enterprise architecture.