--- PAGE 1 ---
ScienceDirect
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Transportation Research Procedia 63 (2022) 2710–2718
2352-1465 © 2022 The Authors. Published by ELSEVIER B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the X International Scientific Siberian Transport Forum
10.1016/j.trpro.2022.06.313
© 2022 TheAuthors. Published by ELSEVIER B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the X International Scientific Siberian Transport Forum
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
Transportation Research Procedia 00 (2022) 000–000
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia
2352-1465 © 2022 The Authors. Published by ELSEVIER B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the X International Scientific Siberian Transport Forum
X International Scientific Siberian Transport Forum
Assessment of transport enterprise readiness for digital
transformation
Vladimir Kryukova
, Karina Shakhgeldyana
, Elena Kiykovaa,
*, Daria Kiykovab
, Denis
Saychuka
a
Vladivostok State University of Economics and Service, st. Gogol, 41, Vladivostok 690014, Russia
b
ITMO University, Kronverksky prospect, 49, letter A., St. Petersburg 197101, Russia
Abstract
In the era of Industry 4.0, in order to remain competitive, companies need to adapt to change through digital transformation. The
effectiveness of the transformation of companies directly depends on their readiness for such a transition. The article describes an
approach to assessing the readiness of a transport enterprise for digital transformation. As part of the readiness assessment, the
following work was carried out: assessment of the maturity of management processes, analysis of processes according to the level
of readiness for automation and assessment of the competencies and skills of the company's employees to use modern digital
technologies and solutions. The research methodology is based on the application of the CMMI concept - a methodological
approach to assessing maturity, which combines maturity models of various areas of the enterprise.
© 2022 The Authors. Published by ELSEVIER B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the X International Scientific Siberian Transport Forum
Keywords: digital transformation; digital maturity; maturity assessment methodology; transport; automation; digital competencies
1. Introduction
The transformation of the manufacturing industry involves radical changes - business models are changing, new
companies are emerging, well-known brands with a long history disappear if they did not have time to embark on the
path of digital transformation. The path of these transformations has led to the next technological milestone, the
formation of the concept of Industry 4.0, which is also called the concept of "Smart Manufacturing". By "4.0" we
mean that the potential revolutionary impact of this trend is a direct continuation of the three previous industrial
revolu-tions.Since2011,initiatives haveemerged aroundthe worldtobringtogetherindus-trial manufacturing,digital
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +79024844032
E-mail address: elena_kiykova@list.ru
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
Transportation Research Procedia 00 (2022) 000–000
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia
2352-1465 © 2022 The Authors. Published by ELSEVIER B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the X International Scientific Siberian Transport Forum
X International Scientific Siberian Transport Forum
Assessment of transport enterprise readiness for digital
transformation
Vladimir Kryukova
, Karina Shakhgeldyana
, Elena Kiykovaa,
*, Daria Kiykovab
, Denis
Saychuka
a
Vladivostok State University of Economics and Service, st. Gogol, 41, Vladivostok 690014, Russia
b
ITMO University, Kronverksky prospect, 49, letter A., St. Petersburg 197101, Russia
Abstract
In the era of Industry 4.0, in order to remain competitive, companies need to adapt to change through digital transformation. The
effectiveness of the transformation of companies directly depends on their readiness for such a transition. The article describes an
approach to assessing the readiness of a transport enterprise for digital transformation. As part of the readiness assessment, the
following work was carried out: assessment of the maturity of management processes, analysis of processes according to the level
of readiness for automation and assessment of the competencies and skills of the company's employees to use modern digital
technologies and solutions. The research methodology is based on the application of the CMMI concept - a methodological
approach to assessing maturity, which combines maturity models of various areas of the enterprise.
© 2022 The Authors. Published by ELSEVIER B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the X International Scientific Siberian Transport Forum
Keywords: digital transformation; digital maturity; maturity assessment methodology; transport; automation; digital competencies
1. Introduction
The transformation of the manufacturing industry involves radical changes - business models are changing, new
companies are emerging, well-known brands with a long history disappear if they did not have time to embark on the
path of digital transformation. The path of these transformations has led to the next technological milestone, the
formation of the concept of Industry 4.0, which is also called the concept of "Smart Manufacturing". By "4.0" we
mean that the potential revolutionary impact of this trend is a direct continuation of the three previous industrial
revolu-tions.Since2011,initiatives haveemerged aroundthe worldtobringtogetherindus-trial manufacturing,digital
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +79024844032
E-mail address: elena_kiykova@list.ru

--- PAGE 2 ---
Vladimir Kryukov et al. / Transportation Research Procedia 63 (2022) 2710–2718 2711
2 Vladimir Kryukov et al./ Transportation Research Procedia 00 (2022) 000–000
technologyand the Internet. A characteristic feature of Industry 4.0 is fully automated production, where all processes
are controlled in real time and considering changing external conditions.
The effectiveness of the digital transformation of companies performing digital transformation depends on the
accompaniment of the digital transformation process with the parallel improvement of management, which is directly
related to the proactive management of the operation and its top management. Thus, a company grows by an average
of 26% if technology and new management methods are used together. If only to improve management, without
resorting to digital technologies, then the profits of firms grow by 9%. If company invests only in technology,
forgetting about the necessary changes in management, the profit does not grow at all, but falls by 11% (Garifullin,
Zyabrikov, 2018).
Large Russian companies have already embarked on the path of digital transformation. However, most of them do
not yet have a comprehensive digitalization program - companies are implementing portfolio of pilot projects to
implement separate and often disparate digital solutions. Most often, companies understand this as an implemented
portfolio of pilot projects in the absence of a long-term action plan with an understanding of the target state of the
organization. This approach makes it possible to assess the applicability of certain digital solutions in practice, but
often leads to a shift in emphasis on secondary tasks, dispersal of resources and a point transformation of business
processes.Forfull-scaledigitalization,it is necessarytoimprove(optimize)the maturityofcurrentbusinessprocesses,
to increase the competence of personnel. All activities need to be combined into a single plan or roadmap for digital
transformation.
The issues of the methodology of digital transformation of enterprises are considered by many authors (Mugge et
al., 2020; Baiyere et al., 2020; Kotarba, 2018; Oztemel, Gursev, 2020; Büchi et al., 2020; Verhoef et al., 2021).
The main obstacles to digital transformation that Russian companies face are the lack of maturity of current
business processes and the lack of necessary skills and competencies of employees.
Several approaches are known to assess the readiness for Industry 4.0 of an enterprise.
The "Industry 4.0 Maturity Index" methodology is the development of the Industrie 4.0 Maturity Center design
center, created on the basis of the German Academy of Technical Sciences (Acatech) (Industry 4.0 Maturity Index,
https://www.acatech.de/wpcontent/uploads/2018/03/acatech_STUDIE_rus_Maturity_Index_WEB.pdf, (accessed
14.07.2021)).
Organizational Digital ManufacturingMaturityModel - ODM3 (Digital Manufacturing CompanyMaturityModel)
developed by AUTODESK Inc. and the Moscow School of Management SKOLKOVO.
Maturity model DREAMY (English Digital REadiness Assessment MaturitY model - a model for assessing
readiness for digital transformation), based on the principles of CMMI (Capability Maturity Model Integration - the
integration of maturity models), which defines the technological areas of digital transformation of a manufacturing
company (Macchi, Fumagalli, 2013). In establishing the model, the chain of activities that create added value through
the management of the production cycle was taken into account. The model focuses on production processes, which
are grouped into five main areas of activity: design and engineering, production management, quality management,
maintenance, logistics management.
The main goal of these methods is to help enterprises determine at what stage of digitalization development they
are at the moment and correctly build a strategy for the transition to Industry 4.0. A preliminary assessment of the
feasibility of applying these methods showed that, to accomplish the research tasks, these approaches will not allow
obtaining useful results that would become the basis for preparing a digital transformation plan, taking into account
the objectives of digitalization to be achieved.
The task of digital transformation in this study is to assess the readiness of a transport enterprise for operational
digitalization, which means the introduction of digital technologies and services to improve the efficiency of
management (administrative) business processes of an enterprise within the existing business model. It is necessary
to assess the readiness of enterprise management processes for digital transformation.
The solution to this problem provides for the following works:
 Assessment of the maturity of management processes: organizational planning, financial management,
accounting and management accounting and reporting, personnel management, procurement, inventory.
 Analysis of processes according to the level of readiness for automation.
 Assessment of the competencies and skills of the company's employees to use modern digital technologies and
solutions.

--- PAGE 3 ---
2712 Vladimir Kryukov et al. / Transportation Research Procedia 63 (2022) 2710–2718
Vladimir Kryukov et al./ Transportation Research Procedia 00 (2022) 000–000 3
To assess the readiness of enterprise management processes for digital transformation, it is necessary to solve the
following tasks.
1. Explore approaches to formalizing business processes, select reference models and define a description template.
2. Carry out modeling and describe the management processes of the enterprise.
3. Assess the maturity of the processes described and identify strengths and weaknesses.
4. Assess the maturity of process automation.
5. Develop an action plan and roadmap for digital transformation.
2. Methods
The research methodology is based on the application of the concept of CMMI - Capability Maturity Model
Integration - a methodological approach to assessing maturity, which combines the maturity models of various areas
of the enterprise. The standard IDEF0, GOST 15504 are used. When choosing the areas of digitalization and the
procedure for automating the directions of the production enterprise's activities, the following were used: the
methodology "Index of maturity of Industry 4.0" (developed by the design center Industrie 4.0 Maturity Center);
Manufacturing Enterprise Digital Transformation Manual (AUTODESK Inc.); maturity model DREAMY.
The key task of the work is to assess the state of the enterprise's administrative processes using the concept of
"maturity" based on the recommendations of GOST R 15504-2009. This estimate assumes the description of the
processes proceeding from the “AS-IS” state, taking into account the Customer's proposals for improving the
processes, which do not affect the changes in the current organizational structure of the enterprise. In accordance with
the CMM (Capability Maturity Model), defined in the GOST R 15504 standard, there are five levels of process
maturity, determined depending on the measured ratings of the process attributes.
Description of the business processes of the enterprise are carried out on the basis of the form - Business process
card. In describing the processes, documents of the enterprise are used, as well as regulations, job descriptions, etc.
To assess the level of maturity of business processes, the approach described in GOST 15504 was used. 5 levels of
maturity are allocated.
Level 0: Incomplete process - the level of evidence of systematic possession of at least one of the following process
attributes is absent or insufficient.
Level 1: Performed process- Executable process achieves clearly identified results.
Level 2: Managed process - the process being performed is carried out under a certain target procedure of the
organization (i.e. some organizational cycle is supported - the process is planned, tracked, analyzed and configured).
Level 3: Established process - the previously described repeatable process is performed on the basis of a standard
process-model, based on recognized principles of management and achievement of results.
Level 4: Predictable process - a controlled process runs within specified quantitative limits.
Level 5: Optimizing process - a predictable process dynamically adapts and changes in order to effectively meet
the current and projected business goals of the company.
Each of the levels is revealed by a set of attributes, and those - by a set of metrics that reveal the essence of the
attributes.
For each process, it is necessary to determine the location in accordance with the implemented metrics. If the
process is implemented as presented in the attribute metric, then we assign the process a label 1, otherwise - 0. The
sum of the labels (1 and 0) is the absolute process score. The relative process rating is calculated by dividing the
absolute rating by the total number of metrics corresponding to the level. Then we determine the level of maturity
according to the rating scale proposed in the standard. Processes that are at a certain level of maturity are
simultaneously at a lower level. Thus, the process implemented at Level 3 must be implemented at both Level 2 and
Level 1. Table 1 shows the rating scale, where the corresponding values are marked with letters.
Table 1. Scale of ratings of process achievement of its result
Marker Definition Achievement criterion, %
N Not achieved 0-15

--- PAGE 4 ---
Vladimir Kryukov et al. / Transportation Research Procedia 63 (2022) 2710–2718 2713
4 Vladimir Kryukov et al./ Transportation Research Procedia 00 (2022) 000–000
P Partially achieved 15-50
L Largely achieved 50%-85%
F Fully achieved 85%-100%
The same metrics are used to assess the maturity index of the company's personnel.
The following approach is used to assess the Maturity Index. Each process is assigned labels: 1 if the maturity level
is marked L or F, and 0 otherwise. The process maturity index is calculated as the sum of the labels divided by the
number of levels (5), maturity level 0 is not considered.
To assess the readiness of the process for automation (use of automated control systems), their detailing was
performed using attributes and metrics. The detailing result is shown in Table 2.
Table 2. Maturity levels, attributes and metrics for automation readiness
Maturity level Attributes Metrics
0 Paper Paper Process does not use information technology for its implementation
1 Initial Initial automation The process is carried out using information technology: computer hardware, MS
Office level software
2 Performed Execution of the process
using automated
solutions
To implement the process, systems and services are used that exclude the presence of
paper carriers
corporate data is entered and managed through system interfaces without duplication
3 Managed Process control with
automated solutions
The process is carried out using an automated enterprise management system
The automated system is customized according to the enterprise process
Definition of the
automation process
The implementation of the process using an automated system is reflected in the
enterprise standards
The automated process is integrated with other automated processes in the enterprise
4 Predictable Process measurement To assess the results of the implementation of the process, the services of the
automated process are used
Activity analysis is carried out on the basis of big data analysis technologies, which
automatically generate reports and recommendations in real time
Changes to the automated system are planned
5 Optimizing Process innovation and
optimization
The efficiency of the enterprise process is significantly increased due to its
automation
Changing enterprise processes is carried out by changing its automated
implementations
Integration with external data marts of suppliers and buyers
Using artificial intelligence systems for forecasting, diagnostics and
recommendations
To determine the readiness of an enterprise for digital transformation (operational digitalization), it is necessary to
assess the competencies and skills of the enterprise employees to use modern digital technologies and solutions. One
of the obstacles to digital transformation is insufficient competence and knowledge of employees (Tsifrovaya
transformatsiya v Rossii, 2018, https://komanda-a.pro/blog/dtr_2018, (accessed 14.07.2021); Gileva, 2019).
According to the results of the studies (more than 300 enterprises from 15 industries), it was revealed that 64.1% are
insufficient competencies and knowledge and 60.9% are lack of qualified personnel (Gileva, 2019).
Table 3 shows a fragment of this model for assessing the readiness of personnel for digital transformation.
Table 3. Level maturity model for assessing staff readiness for digital transformation
Maturity level Characteristic

--- PAGE 5 ---
2714 Vladimir Kryukov et al. / Transportation Research Procedia 63 (2022) 2710–2718
Vladimir Kryukov et al./ Transportation Research Procedia 00 (2022) 000–000 5
1. Initial: infrastructure, systems and services do not allow to get
business effects from process automation
Employees don't need additional digital competencies
2. Performed: infrastructure consolidated, basic automation
systems implemented, processes formalized
Employees are trained to work with systems and services in their
area of responsibility
3. Managed: the infrastructure meets the needs of enterprise
management, a corporate management system is implemented,
processes are managed and controlled
Development of a culture of knowledge management; separation of
roles and areas of responsibility in accordance with digital skills;
attracting employees with competencies in data analysis and
artificial intelligence
4. Predictable: a single corporate information space has been
created, systems and services automatically generate reports and
forecasts in real time, the state of processes is predictable
Involvement of employees in the development of a target vision;
training employees to work with data systems, various tools for
extracting and analyzing data
5. Optimizing: infrastructure, systems and services adapt to the
needs of the enterprise, process management is digitized
Development of a culture of continuous improvement and
innovation; appointment of those responsible for a certain direction
of predictive analytics and adaptability based on AI systems
3. Results
3.1. Assessment the level of maturity of processes
The assessment of the level of maturity of the processes of the transport enterprise was carried out in accordance
with the assessment methodologydeveloped within the framework of this project, based on the standard GOST R ISO
/ IEC 15504-2-2009. For each management process, process models were built in the IDEF0 notation, the process
maturity was assessed, strengths and weaknesses were identified, the process automation maturity was assessed,
activities were formed, a plan and roadmap for digital transformation was developed, including the timing and cost of
the activities.
One of the studied processes was the A2 process "Personnel and payroll management", which at the enterprise is
represented by the following sub-processes:
A2.1. Personnel planning and recruiting
A2.2. Personnel development
A2.3. Personnel accounting
A2.4. Payroll preparation
A2.5. Reporting and analysis
Analysis of the business process “Personnel management and payroll” and its sub-processes allowed us to obtain
an assessment of the level of maturity (Fig. 1). Each subprocess was compared with the maturity level metric (from 0
to 5) and recorded in the corresponding cell, if the metric characterizes the analyzed subprocess, otherwise the
subprocess was not recorded in the cell. An example is shown in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1. Assessment of the level of maturity of the process.

--- PAGE 6 ---
Vladimir Kryukov et al. / Transportation Research Procedia 63 (2022) 2710–2718 2715
6 Vladimir Kryukov et al./ Transportation Research Procedia 00 (2022) 000–000
For each sub-process, the number of associated metrics was calculated, which correlated with the total number of
metrics at a given maturity level, according to the methodology developed in this study (see Table 2). The resulting
ratio was expressed in percent and in accordance with the rating scale they were labeled “N”, “P”, “L” or “F” (Table
4). The final rating assessments of the achievement of the attributes of all subprocesses of the business process
“Humanresource management andpayroll” were the mainonesforcalculatingthe maturityindex.The maturityindex,
as well as the assessment of the level of maturity, was calculated on the basis of the methodology proposed during the
implementation of the study (Table 2), as the ratio of the number of tags “L” and “F” to the number of maturity levels
(5), expressed as a percentage (Table 4).
Table 4. Fragment of the table "Rating assessments of subprocesses A2 “Human resources management and payroll”
№
Subprocess name
Maturity level
Incomplete Performed Managed Predictable Optimizing
Maturity
index,
%
А2 HR management and payroll 44%
А2.1 Planning and recruiting L L P N N 40%
А2.1.1 Personnel planning F F L N N
А2.1.2 Staff recruitment F F L
N N
А2.1.3 Maintaining the staffing table N N N N N
Based on the ratings of the A2 subprocesses, Human Resources Management and Payroll, the following
conclusions were drawn:
1. Subprocess A2.1 “Planning and selection of personnel” according to the cumulative estimates of the five levels of
maturity has reached an index value of 40%.
2. Subprocess A2.2 “Personnel development” according to the aggregate estimates of the five maturity levels reached
the index value of 0%.
3. Subprocess A2.3 “Personnel accounting” according to the aggregate estimates of the five levels of maturity has
reached the index value of 60%.
4. Sub-process A2.4 “Payroll preparation” based on cumulative estimates of five levels of maturity has reached the
index value of 60%.
5. Sub-process A2.5 “Reporting and analysis” on the aggregate assessments of the five maturity levels reached an
index value of 60%.
General process index A2 “Human resource management and payroll” based on aggregate estimates of five
maturity levels reached an index value of 44% (Fig. 2)
Subprocesses A2.1 “Planning and recruiting”, A2.3 “Personnel accounting”, A2.4 “Payroll preparation”, A2.5
“Reporting and analysis” have reached level 3 (Managed process).

--- PAGE 7 ---
2716 Vladimir Kryukov et al. / Transportation Research Procedia 63 (2022) 2710–2718
Vladimir Kryukov et al./ Transportation Research Procedia 00 (2022) 000–000 7
Fig. 2. Process Maturity Index A2 Human Resources and Payroll.
3.2. Assessment of the level of maturity of process automation
To analyze the levels of maturity of process automation, the same approach was used as for assessing the level of
maturityandbusinessprocesses.Maturitylevels were marked takingintoaccountthescale,accordingtothedeveloped
methodology (see Table 2).
Based on the ratings of the A2 subprocesses, “Human Resources Management and Payroll”, the following
conclusions were drawn: Processes A2.1 “Planning and Recruitment”, A2.5 “Reporting and Analysis” have partially
reached maturity level 1 (Initial). Process A2.3 “Human Resources” have reached automation maturity level 2
(Performed). Process A2.4 “Payroll preparation” has reached the 3rd level of automation maturity (Managed).
3.3. Assessment of digital competencies of employees of the enterprise.
To determine the level of maturity of the company's personnel, it was necessary, to assess their digital
competencies. To assess the digital competencies of employees of the enterprise's departments, a test questionnaire
was compiled with two blocks of questions. The first block assesses the knowledge and skills of the employee, the
second block assesses the employee's motivation to acquire new knowledge and skills in the field of
infocommunication technologies.
The results of the survey showed that among the respondents there are no employees who do not understand the
importance, do not try to apply and develop digital competencies.
A high degree of digital competencies, interest in its development and effective use was demonstrated by 52% of
the interviewed employees. In 37% of respondents, digital competencies is constantly manifested, which allows the
employee to use it for problems solving. Digital competencies is manifested to a limited extent in the form of
individual elements in 11% of the interviewed employees. For 30% of employees (16 people) who use specialized
software in their work, competence is constantly manifested. 70% (38 people) have a high degree of competence.
As for motivation, 89% believe that timely introduction of technologies is necessary for successful work, 70% try
to use available technologies as much as possible, 78% prefer to use modern information technologies regardless of
the employer (Kiykova, 2021).
Table 5 shows the ratings and the maturity index of the personnel of the enterprise.
Table 5. Fragment of the table “Levels and maturity index of personnel of the enterprise.”
Indicator
Level
Maturity index, %
1 2 3 4 5
Staff F L N N N 40%
Employees don't need additional digital competencies F
Employees are trained to work with systems and services in
their area of responsibility
L
Developing a culture of knowledge management N
Based on the results of the survey, it can be concluded that employees who use specialized software are trained to
work with systems and services that are in their area of responsibility, which corresponds to maturity level 2. At the
time of the study, 43% of employees had specialized software used in the analyzed processes.

--- PAGE 8 ---
Vladimir Kryukov et al. / Transportation Research Procedia 63 (2022) 2710–2718 2717
8 Vladimir Kryukov et al./ Transportation Research Procedia 00 (2022) 000–000
4. Discussion
The goal of digital transformation (“TO-BE” state) was defined by the Customer as the implementation of a
corporate information system for managing administrative processes based on 1C: ERP. In accordance with the
developed maturity model, this means that in all studied areas, the enterprise must move to a state not lower than the
third level of maturity. For each area of digitalization, a list of activities with an expert assessment of the cost and
timing of their implementation is proposed. Activities are grouped into three stages - preparatory, main, and final. The
activities at the stages are shown in Table 6.
Table 6. Fragment of the table of the list of activities.
Preparatory Main Final
Event Result Event Result Event Result
Personnel
Development and
approval of a list of
requirements for
digital competencies
of employees for
each of the positions
Approved list of
requirements for
digital
competencies
Testing personnel
for digital
competencies
assessment
List of
employees for
training
Implementation of
a system of
planned training
for all tasks based
on digitalization
Scheduled personnel
learning
Personnel with the
necessary digital
competencies
Based on the analysis, a roadmap for digital transformation was formed, which includes three stages of one year
each. The stages have quarterly scheduling and contain a list of activities.
5. Conclusion
The study applied a process-based approach to the formation of a digital transformation plan, which implies a
progressive movement from the initial state "as-is" to the state "TO-BE". The initial state, which is the starting point
for digital transformation, was determined in the study for two areas through the assessment of private maturity
indices: processes (51%) and personnel (40%.)
To determine the readiness of an enterprise for digital transformation, it is proposed to assess the maturity of
processes, the level of readiness of processes for automation, an assessment of the personnel maturity index and its
readiness to use moderndigital technologies. For readiness for digital transformation, it is necessarythat all employees
involved in the modernized processes are trained to work with specialized software and hardware and have the
appropriate motivation.
References
Baiyere, A., Salmela, H., Tapanainen. T., 2020 Digital transformation and the new logics of business process management. European Journal of
Information Systems 29, 238–259 DOI: 10.1080/0960085X.2020.1718007
Büchi, G., Cugno, M., Castagnoli, R., 2020. Smart factory performance and Industry 4.0. Technological Forecasting and Social Change 150
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2019.119790.
Industry 4.0 Maturity Index, https://www.acatech.de/wpcontent/uploads/2018/03/acatech_STUDIE_rus_Maturity_Index_WEB.pdf, (accessed
14.07.2021)
Garifullin, B., Zyabrikov, V., 2018. Digital transformation of business: models and algorithms. Creative Economy 12.9, 1345-1358
https://doi.org/10.18334/ce.12.9.39332
Gileva, T., 2019. Digitalmaturityof theenterprise:methods of assessment and management.Вulletin USPTU. Science, еducation, еconomy. Series
еconomy 1.27, 38-52 https://doi.org/10.17122/2541-8904-2019-1-27-38-52
Kiykova, D., Kiykova, E., 2021. Experience in assessment of personnel readiness for digital transformation of an enterprise. Sovremennye
naukoemkie tekhnologii 11.2, 250-254 https://doi.org/10.17513/snt.38919
Kotarba, M., 2018. Digital transformation of business models. Foundations of Management 10, 123–142 DOI: 10.2478/fman-2018-0011

--- PAGE 9 ---
2718 Vladimir Kryukov et al. / Transportation Research Procedia 63 (2022) 2710–2718
Vladimir Kryukov et al./ Transportation Research Procedia 00 (2022) 000–000 9
Macchi, M., Fumagalli, L., 2013. A maintenance maturity assessment method for the manufacturing industry. Journal of Quality in Maintenance
Engineering 19.3, 295–315 https://doi.org/10.1108/JQME-05-2013-0027.
Mugge, P., Abbu, H., Michaelis, T., Kwiatkowski, A., Gudergan, G., 2020. Patterns of Digitization. Research-Technology Management 63.2, 27-
35 https://doi.org/10.1080/08956308.2020.1707003.
Oztemel, E., Gursev, S., 2020. Literature review of Industry 4.0 and related technologies. Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing 31, 127–182
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10845-018-1433-8
Turlakova, S., 2019. Informatsionno-kommunikatsionnye tekhnologii razvitiya "umnykh" proizvodstv. Ehkonomika promyshlennosti 1.85,101-
122. https://doi.org/10.15407/econindustry2019.01.101
Verhoef, P., et al., 2021. Digital transformation: A multidisciplinary reflection and research agenda. Journal of Business Research 122, 889-901
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2019.09.022.