--- PAGE 1 ---
Sustainable Futures 6 (2023) 100119
Available online 5 July 2023
2666-1888/© 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/).
Digital transformation in municipalities for the planning, delivery, use and
management of infrastructure assets: Strategic and
organizational framework
Nawel Lafiounea,*
, Anaïs Desmarestb
, Érik Andrew Poiriera
, Michèle St-Jacquesa
a
Department of Construction Engineering, École de Technologie Supérieure (ÉTS), University of Quebec, Quebec City, Canada
b
Department Smart and Resilient Cities, Hautes Études d’Ingenieur (HEI), University of France, Lille city, France
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Digital transformation
Municipality/city
Government
Barriers and challenges
Urban infrastructure
Asset management
A B S T R A C T
As the acceleration of technological development in the built asset industry brings on waves of digital trans­
formation (DT), traditional ways of doing and organizing are being disrupted, especially on the part of large
public owners such as municipalities. For these owners, these waves of transformation require constant adap­
tation as they compete with existing initiatives and embedded legacy practices.
This paper presents the results of the second part of a longitudinal research project aimed at framing digital
transformation within municipalities to improve urban infrastructure lifecycles. More specifically, the paper
presents the results of work undertaken to operationalize, extend and further validate the digital transformation
framework that has been developed in part 1 and which is presented elsewhere. The theoretical framework acts
as a guide and analysis tool for the digital transformation of municipalities and aims to help them reduce and/or
eliminate the barriers and challenges in this digital transformation. To do so, the results from a survey conducted
within 44 municipalities and interviews conducted with 13 municipalities of different sizes are presented and
discussed through the theoretical framework.
The results show that data and information management remain the key issues, especially in a siloed orga­
nizational context such as those found within municipalities. Moreover, a significant amount of organizations
remain unaware of how to approach digital transformation which in turn leads to disinterest or disengagement in
digital transformation, which results in localized or fragmented initiatives. This in turn can cause delays in
implementing transformational initiatives and contributes to maintaining a low level of digital maturity. The
study also highlights the critical lack of human resources, expertise and appropriate training to support digital
transformation.
1. Introduction
Municipalities across Canada, like many municipalities around the
world, are often forced to play catch up and do more with less, due to the
increasingly poor condition of urban infrastructure assets and a stag­
nation or reduction in available funds [1]. Despite considerable invest­
ment, the rate of asset maintenance deficits continues to grow [2].
Moreover, and as discussed elsewhere, municipalities are at the fore­
front of combatting climate change and ensuring resilience of the built
environment.
Digital transformation is advanced in many sectors in Canada, such
as aerospace, which is a testament to the expertise and skills available in
the country. By leveraging this expertise, Canadian cities will be able to
benefit from an effective and beneficial digital transformation. In
addition, there is a growing interest in digital transformation from Ca­
nadian provincial and federal governments, with initiatives such as the
Canadian Digital Adoption Program, the NovaScience program, and the
Ministry of Economy, Innovation and Energy’s Offensive Digital
Transformation Initiative. However, despite these government initia­
tives, there is a lack of structured digital transformation initiatives at the
local government level, which represents a significant challenge.
Digital transformation within municipalities can potentially help
overcome these challenges, yet this transformation is rife with chal­
lenges [3]. Indeed, as with other domains, municipalities are facing the
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: nawel.lafioune.1@ens.etsmtl.ca (N. Lafioune).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Sustainable Futures
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/sustainable-futures
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sftr.2023.100119
Received 13 December 2022; Received in revised form 29 June 2023; Accepted 29 June 2023

--- PAGE 2 ---
Sustainable Futures 6 (2023) 100119
2
considerable rise in the use of technology to support a variety of business
processes [4]. While these tools allow the collection of data on different
assets and specific types of technologies are increasingly being used,
municipalities lackthe skillsto store, processand use thedata effectively
[5]. This means that the potential wealth of data and information that is
captured, goes largely unused [6]. Part of the reason for this is that
municipalities tend to undertake a digital transformation in a haphazard
and fragmented manner. Indeed, digital transformation of urban infra­
structure assets lifecycle activities rarely find their way into the strategic
planning process within municipalities. To this effect, digital trans­
formation has been shown to require a long-term vision and holistic
understanding of an organization’s needs which is often not the case in
most municipalities.
The research presented in this paper is part of a longitudinal study on
the digital transformation to support integrated urban infrastructure
asset planning, delivery, management and use within municipalities.
This paper focuses on the operationalization, further validation and
extension of a theoretical framework that aims to articulate the criteria
of successful digital transformation supporting urban infrastructure as­
sets lifecycle activities within municipalities. More specifically, this
paper builds on and extends a preliminary theoretical framework that
focused on the identification of barriers and challenges constraining
digital transformation in the municipal context, especially with regards
to urban infrastructure assets lifecycle activities for existing and yet-to-
be-constructed built assets, such as buildings, roads, railways, sewer and
water systems, etc.
The objectives of the research presented in this paper are: (1) to
further validate and refine the barriers and challenges identified within
the preliminary theoretical framework, (2) to operationalize and extend
the constructs within the framework, and (3) to identify and evaluate
trends concerning digital transformation within Canadian municipal­
ities. To achieve this, a mixed-method approach is employed which in­
cludes both survey and interview data. Using data from 135 survey
respondents covering 44 municipalities and 22 interviews covering 13
municipalities of different sizes, the theoretical framework is oper­
ationalized and extended to understand the current state of digital
transformation within Canadian municipalities.
Material and method are first presented. Theory follows including
the summary of the digital transformation theoretical framework used
for this study. These results obtained through by category of framework
are compared and discussed. Subsequently, their implications for
research and practice are exposed. This comparative work is integrated
into the framework to extend it with recommendations for action, which
gives rise to the final framework. Finally, the article concludes with the
importance of the findings of the study, namely for municipalities in
their digital transformation. Potential future research are discussed and
Table 1
Profiles and number of survey respondents.
No. of: Cities in Quebec by size / Cities with respondents / Respondents by city size No. of respondents / level of asset management
City size No. of living No. of cities in
Quebec
No. of cities with
respondents
No. of cities with
respondents
% of
respondents
Level No. of
respondents
% of
respondents
Big > 100 000 10 9 40 29.63 Strategic 34 25
Medium 10 000 < X <
99 999
96 27 83 61.48 Tactical 28 21
Small and very
small
X` <2 000 < X
< 9 999
290 + 711 7 11 8.14 Operational 46 34
Not indicated – – 1 1 0.75 Not
indicated
27 20
Total 8 426 075 hab > 1100 44 135 100 3 135 100
Portrait of cities in Quebec Survey Respondent Profiles
Source: Décret 1214–2019 du 11 décembre 2019.
Note: In Quebec, city and municipality each have their own definition. The word "city" designates both for the present research.
Table 2
Interview respondent profiles.
No. of respondents / city size No.respondents / sex No.respondents / age No.respondents / year of experience No.Interviews
Size No. % Sex No. % age / year No. % year experien No. % interviews No.
Big 5 38.46 Man 16 66.66 20–30 4 16.66 < 5 ans 4 16.66 Individual 20
Medium 6 46.15 30–40 10 41.66 5/10 ans 6 25
Small & very small 2 15.38 Women 8 33.33 40–50 7 29.16 10/20 ans 8 33.33 in pairs 2
Total 13 100 Total 24 100 50–60 3 12.5 > 20 ans 6 25 Total 22
Table 3
Preliminary framework.
06 Categories 22 Subcategories
1 Strategy / Governance / steering /
leadership / Financial resources
Lack of guidance and/or leadership 1
Lack of a strategic plan 2
Unmanaged external pressure 3
Lack of governance 4
Lack of support from senior
management
5
Funding issues 6
2 Process / practice / management Lack of collaboration 7
Absence of data management 8
Misalignment of current practices
and management
9
3 Organization / Structure / Culture Absence of organizational change
management
10
Lack of communication 11
Lack of training 12
Non-conducive organizational
culture
13
4 Policy / standards / regulations /
laws / contracts
Inadequatepolicy and supportfrom
elected officials
14
Lack or incompatible standards /
contracts
15
Incompatible laws and regulations 16
5 People / Community / Network Limited vision 17
Resistance to change 18
Lack of human resources 19
Perceptions from the citizens 20
6 Digital / Information Ecosystem Inadequate technologies and tools 21
Incompatibility and/or inadequacy
of existing information systems
22
Source: From Lafioune & al. [11]. Reproduced with the permission of Lafioune
N.
N. Lafioune et al.

--- PAGE 3 ---
Sustainable Futures 6 (2023) 100119
3
the limitations of the study are exposed.
The paper contributes to the field of research in digital trans­
formation in the built environment through the operationalization of a
theoretical framework and its extension. While other frameworks for
digital transformation have been developed, none have focused on the
urban infrastructure asset management domain. It provides a guide and
analysis tool for the digital transformation of public organisations and
shows the potential to be applied in practice. Using the framework as
such a tool, the results show that management of data and information
consistently rank as the main issue for municipalities. The results also
show that there is a critical lack of human resources, expertise and
appropriate training to support digital transformation.
The description of the methodology and the different methods is
another contribution among others. It shows, in detail, how to draw
reliable conclusions from qualitative data, which is beneficial to both
the theoretical and practical community.
2. Material and method
2.1. Survey
The survey targeted respondents selected according to the following
criteria:
1. Employees from municipalities of all sizes (large, medium, small and
very small).
2. Employees working in different departments within a municipality.
3. Employees holding a position that includes at least one asset man­
agement activity. The distribution of respondents’ functions should
cover an identical portion, ideally, in the three levels of asset man­
agement: strategic, tactical and operational.
4. A minimum number of 40 respondents per asset management level, i.
e. 40 × 3 = 120 targeted respondents.
The survey consisted of 25 multiple choice questions designed
around the sub-categories of the framework, each with a specific pur­
pose. These questions are presented with the results in Section 4.1.1. The
questionnaire was verified, improved and validated through a pre-test.It
was then reformatted using an online platform to facilitate data collec­
tion. The survey was designed to take a maximum of 10 min.
2.1.1. Profile of survey respondents
The number of survey respondents exceeded the target number. The
survey resulted in a high return rate (112.5%), with 135 respondents
working in 44 municipalities instead of 120 respondents working in 40
municipalities. Table 1 summarizes the portrait of municipalities in
Quebec, the number of municipalities and their sizes according to
Ministère des Affaires Municipales et de l’Habitation [7]. It presents the
profile of survey respondents with the distribution rate between the
three levels of asset management.
2.2. Interviews
Semi-structured interviews were conducted in parallel with em­
ployees from several targeted municipalities across Quebec. At the end
of the survey, respondents were asked if they would agree to the inter­
view. Those who accepted and passed represent the sample of in­
terviewees. The interviews served to provide more depth of coverage to
the data collection, which in turn served to operationalize the frame­
work as an analysis tool. Due to the health measures related to COVID
19, the interviews were conducted remotely. Interviews lasted an
average of 20 min and were conducted over a 4-month period.
The first interviews were used to adjust the questionnaire and refine
it accordingly. The interview questions (Section 3.2.3) are organized
according to the framework (Table 3). There are six open-ended ques­
tions that encourage respondents to expand on their responses for each
category.
Data collection was done by taking notes and recording the entire
interview. Before the interview began, the interviewer insists on the
confidentiality of the information, as well as the anonymity of the
Fig. 1. Analysis sequences from a pre-structured framework.
N. Lafioune et al.

--- PAGE 4 ---
Sustainable Futures 6 (2023) 100119
4
municipality and the respondent. The complete and automated tran­
scription of the audio was done at the same time as the interview. The
result of the transcription was adjusted immediately after the interview
to be as accurate as possible.
2.2.1. Interview respondent profiles
22 semi-structured interviews were conducted with 24 respondents
working in 13 municipalities of different sizes from across the Province
of Quebec. The interviewees worked in different departments, for
example: public works, urban planning, engineering, environment, in­
formation technology, general management, etc. Table 2 presents the
profiles of the interview respondents.
3. Theory
Digital transformation has become a key issue for organizations and
governments around the world. The COVID-19 pandemic has high­
lighted its importance, especially with the increasing use of big data,
cloud computing and other digital technologies [8]. “As a core strategy
of many enterprises, digital transformation is no longer a
multiple-choice question but rather a survival issue” [9].
Digital transformation offers many opportunities to improve the
quality of life in cities, notably by improving the operational efficiency
of urban infrastructure, reducing costs and improving the quality of
services.
Digital transformation has become a key area offering new oppor­
tunities but also significant challenges (Nguyen et al., 2018), such as
data security, privacy and digital disparity. Implementing digital
transformation of urban infrastructure can be complex and costly,
especially for smaller cities. In addition, local governments may lack an
understanding of the benefits and risks of this transformation, as well as
the technical knowledge to implement it. The lack of theoretical
frameworks for digital transformation compounds these challenges. Liu
et al. [8] believes that the implementation of digital transformation does
not work well in China because of this lack of theoretical framework.
Moreover, proper preparation and a supportive organisational culture
have a direct and significant impact on the success of digital trans­
formation [10].
Developing a framework for digital transformation aims to provide a
clear structure for organisations and governments seeking to undertake
digital transformation initiatives by identifying key issues and best
practices to follow. Based on a review of existing literature and existing
digital transformation frameworks, the framework presented in 3.1 is
specifically tailored to Canadian municipalities but can also be applied
in other countries and regions of the world.
3.1. Preliminary framework
The framework developed is the result of a broader doctoral research
than the subject of this scientific article. The latter is designed to
improve and validate the components of the framework in the practical
environment and at the same time to draw up a portrait of Quebec cities
in terms of digital technology. Following this stage of the research, a
case study is launched to verify and monitor its applicability.
The research presented in this paper builds off a preliminary theo­
retical framework that identifies the barriers and challenges to digital
transformation that municipalities face. The framework contains 22 sub-
categories structured into six broad categories as shown in Table 3. This
framework was used to design the survey and interview questions.
Each category addresses an issue that can prevent a planned and
structured digital transformation. By unpacking each issue and pro­
posing possible solutions for each element, digital transformation can
succeed. This will enable municipalities to benefit from the full potential
of technology for the benefit of citizens.
With regard to the validation of the framework, it is derived from a
review of the existing literature on digital transformation, as well as
frameworks developed by other researchers in this field. Empirical data
collected from interviews with city employees and policy makers.
Throughout the research, we ensured that our framework was consistent
with current best practice and trends in the field of digital
transformation.
The validity of our framework lies in its adaptability to different city
sizes and its ability to help local governments implement digital trans­
formation in a structured and effective way. By providing specific
practices and assessment measures, this framework can help local gov­
ernments address the challenges of digital transformation of urban
infrastructure assets.
The validity of the research leading to the design of the framework is
ensured by the type of participatory research, the provision of a wide
range of validation procedures and the monitoring of the methodolog­
ical approach. With regard to participatory research, action research is
characterised by a process of knowledge production carried out together
with the actors in the field. Its corollary is that it highlights the potential
of the participants and strengthens the awareness of those involved of
their own capacities to initiate and control action. The fact that the
research is replicated in several Quebec cities increases the external
validity of the research. Internal validity is ensured by the collaboration
of the researchers. The data collected is compiled and analysed by two
researchers, each in turn. The results are then compared, discussed and
heard in a single final result, which was presented to the third
researcher, and validated together. In terms of supporting the validity of
the analysis, this research has drawn on a range of strategies and tech­
niques proposed by various authors, principally Huberman and Miles
[12,13] and Van der Maren [14]. In addition, technological innovations
Table 4
Results of the analysis of survey responses.
Category /Subcategory Question Results
Strategy /
Governance
/ Steering /
Leadership
Vision 1/ Do your managers
have a commonvision
on the digital
transformation of
urban infrastructure
assets?
65% of respondents
say that their
managers do not sare
a common digital
transformation view
of urban
infrastructure assets.
Strategy 2/ Does your
municipality have a
strategic plan for
digital transformation
of urban
infrastructure assets
or related to digital?
67% of respondents
said that their
municipality does not
have a strategic plan
for urban
infrastructure assets.
Application
of the
strategy
3/ Is this strategic
plan reflected in the
municipality’s
activities (actions)?
82% of respondents
who answered "yes" to
question 2 said that
the digital
transformation ’s
strategic plan is
reflected in actions.
Action
follow-up
4/ Is there
accountability
(performance
evaluation) for the
activities of this
strategic plan?
Even for those
municipalities that
have taken action,
70% have no follow-
up.
Financing 5/ During the
planning of your
municipality’s project
portfolio, is there any
funding in the Three-
Year Capital Program
for the digital
transformation
projects?
For 67% of
respondents, digital
transformation is not
included in the Three-
Year Capital Program,
it is not considered a
priority for
investment, digital
transformation is
unknown and the
benefits are not
identified.
N. Lafioune et al.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Sustainable Futures 6 (2023) 100119
5
and their contributions to the processes facilitate the analysis and
meaning of the validated data.
The applicability of such a framework depends on a number of fac­
tors specific to each municipal organization, such as its size, budget,
priorities and objectives, whether it is already engaged in digital
transformation or is considering doing so. It depends on the ability of the
municipal organization toidentifyand implementdigital transformation
initiatives that meet the needs of the community and improve the effi­
ciency, service quality and transparency of the organization.
3.2. Analytical methods and tools
The analysis of the survey data was done for each municipality and
were then reanalyzed according to the size of the municipality. Indeed,
this indicator was often mentioned during the interviews. The data
collected is compiled and then analyzed by two researchers, each on his
own. The results are compared, discussed and heard in a single final
result which was exposed to the third researcher and validated.
The analysis of the interview data was done using four methods, as
shown in Fig. 1. A systemic random analysis of the textual data resulting
from the interview transcripts and grouping by the same meaning was
performed (lexical coding). A content analysis and its measurement by
lexical statistics was done according to the answers to the survey
questions (per-question coding) and according to the framework (per-
barrier coding). An analysis of the opinions, judgments, and emotions of
the discourse, followed by the measurement of the content (sentiment
coding) was also performed.
3.2.1. Sentiment analysis
Sentiment analysis, also known as ’opinion mining’, involves
determining the opinion, judgement and emotions behind the natural
and spontaneous language of respondents. It assesses feelings about
services, issues, individuals, subjects and their properties and other
entities [15]. Its main purpose is to analyze opinions and test emotional
scores. Currently, sentiment analysis is a very popular field of study
according to Elmurngi [16]. For this purpose, Thomas [17] divides this
analysis into three levels: word/term level [18] or aspect level [19],
sentence level [20] and finally, document level [21].
The classification of emotions into fear, frustration, joy, hope, etc. is
based on readings of the existing literature on the psychology of emo­
tions and how they are expressed in natural language. We have identi­
fied these emotions as the most common and relevant to our study on
digital transformation. Of course, there are many other ways of classi­
fying emotions and our approach may not be suitable for all studies.
For textual sentiment analysis, it is possible to identify sentiment
through artificial judgement using natural language processing algo­
rithms, such as Naive Bayes methods and neural networks. Sentiment
analysis in the context of a survey can be difficult, especially in a specific
context such as the Quebec municipal sector. We noticed that the lan­
guage used was different from academic French, with particularities in
Table 5
Results of the analysis of survey responses.
Category /Subcategory Question Results
Process / Practice
/ Management
Current practices
and management
6/ Does your municipality have a set of predefined tasks and
activities for initiating, executing and analyzing digital
transformation of urban infrastructure assets projects?
67% of respondents say that there are no predefined tasks or
activities for initiating digital transformation projects.
Validation of
activities
7/ Does your municipality have a central team that validates all
digital transformation of urban infrastructure assets activities?
79% of respondents said that there is no team that validates
digital transformation activities.
Validation of
activities
8/ In your municipality, do employees have access to professional
training to familiarize them with the digital transformation of
urban infrastructure assets?
60% of respondents do not consider that employees have access to
training to become familiar with digital transformation.
Training 8.a / If yes, do you think that the content of the trainings is
appropriate for digital transformation of urban infrastructure
assets? (Trainings in the areas of professional development and
not only introduction to functionality software like Microsoft
Project)
37% of those who answered "yes" to question 8 think that the
content of the training is appropriate.
However, despite the ownership of the content, 54% of
respondents believe that not enough employees have access to it.
8.b / If yes, do you think that the number of employees who have
access to these trainings is sufficient for the implementation of
digital transformation of urban infrastructure assets?
60% of respondents don’t think that the number of employees
who have access to these trainings is sufficient for the
implementation of digital transformation of urban infrastructure
assets
Collaboration 9/ In your municipality, are there teams that use interdisciplinary
collaborative approaches (e.g. LEAN Management, Integrated
Design Process)?
50% of respondents say that teams use interdisciplinary
approaches in the municipality.
Among the approaches cited, LEAN Management was in first
place, mentioned by 42% of respondents, followed by Integrated
Design Process for 13% of respondents, and continuous
improvement for 8%.
Existing concepts 10 / Are any of the following concepts used (at least one service or activity that advances this concept) in your municipality?
More than half of the respondents consider the digital city concept as the most used in municipalities. 61% of respondents associate their
municipality with one concept, and one in two associate their municipality with several concepts.
To better understand the logic behind these responses, during the interviews, respondents were asked for their definition of smart city
and digital city, as it was found that their definition was either limited or incomplete compared to the definition in the literature.
N. Lafioune et al.

--- PAGE 6 ---
Sustainable Futures 6 (2023) 100119
6
vocabulary, expression and pronunciation, as well as a linguistic di­
versity of respondents’ profiles. They also found that hierarchical levels
influenced discourse. According to Elmurngi [16], existing software for
sentiment analysis generates results that are 85% accurate, which is
insufficient.
In this study, we examined some approaches to sentiment analysis
and finally opted for manual sentiment detection and ranking of text
units for better speech interpretation. Each word in a text was assigned a
positivity or negativity score and these scores were aggregated to obtain
an overall measure of the sentiment expressed. We also used the revi­
sualisation of video recordings to observe gestures and voice intonation
to avoid misclassification of comments.
“NVivo version 12″ was used for the analysis of the collected inter­
view data. It helped identify the frequency, order of words or phrases
used by the respondents.
Fig. 1 presents the methodology and methods of analysis for this
operationalization and extension of the framework.
4. Results
4.1. Overview of results by category
4.1.1. Category 1. Strategy / governance / steering / leadership / financial
resources
Category 1 includes management and support, leadership, defining a
strategic plan, taking steps to mitigate external pressures, developing
effective governance, and addressing funding issues. All of these factors
contribute to an organization’s ability to structure and succeed in its
digital transformation (Table 4).
Question 1: Please explain in your words the extent and current state
of digital transformation in your municipality concerning its urban
infrastructure assets?
The majority of respondents have a limited understanding and vision
of digital transformation for municipal urban infrastructure assets and/
or do notsee the benefits.Indeed, almostthe majorityof respondents(18
Table 6
Results of the analysis of survey responses.
Category /Subcategory Question Results
Organization /
Structure /
Culture
Human resources capacity
and organization
12/ Does your municipality have a sufficient number of competent
staff in the field of digital transformation?
The majority of respondents (80%) consider that
there are not enough competent employees in the
field.
Structural and
organizational change
management
11/ In your municipality, is there a management plan for resource
development in the area of digital transformation of urban
infrastructure assets? (e.g. employment, promotion, reward, etc.)
Only 7% of respondents say that their municipality
has a resource development management plan in
place for digital transformation.
13/ Does your municipality have a list of the skills needed to
effectively advance digital transformation of urban infrastructure
assets?
80% of the respondents (99 people), say that their
municipality does not have a list of skills to move
forward in digital transformation.
15/ Is a change planning adapted and concretely put into action
(including identification of functional and technical needs) for the
digital transformation of urban infrastructure assets?
There is no planning for change for 65% of
respondents. Cities do not identify their needs
regarding the digital shift.
14/ On a scale of 1 to 5, what is the level of support for the digital transformation change projects of the urban infrastructure
perceived within your municipality? (1 = no support, 5 = fully supports).
Across all municipalities (of all sizes), almost half of the respondents consider that there is no support for digital transformation
projects. Only 3% responded that there was full support. Regardless of municipality size, the response rate is similar for each
level of support.
Table 7
Results of the analysis of survey responses.
Category / Subcategory Question Results
Policy / Standards /
Regulations / Laws /
Contracts
Guides and
guidelines
16/ Has your municipality developed its own guides to support digital
transformation of urban infrastructure assets? (e.g. BIM deployment guide,
e-permit delivery guide, GIS user manual).
72% of respondents said that their municipality does
not have a guide supporting digital transformation.
Contracts 17/ Has your municipality revised its bidding criteria, contract clauses
including intellectual property (IP), property rights to harmonize with
digital transformation of urban infrastructure assets projects?
The tender criteria have not been revised for nearly
67% of respondents; 25% are not sure that this has
been done.
Norms and
standards
18/ Does your municipality use its own norms and standards or does it rely
on established national or international norms (e.g. ANSI, BS, AS or ISO)
63% of respondents say that municipalities do not use
their own norms and standards or national and
international standards.
N. Lafioune et al.

--- PAGE 7 ---
Sustainable Futures 6 (2023) 100119
7
out of 24) limit digital transformation to the digitization of data. This
needs to be considered in the activities of the developed framework.
Addressing this issue requires awareness raising and training to raise the
level, skills and capacity.
Respondents mentioned the digitization of data or certain asset
management activities, but none mentioned the term "transformation"
as a major change or planning in current practices. Therefore, this is an
important issue, so there needs to be a clear definition and agreement on
what digital transformation is for municipalities before steps are taken
to achieve it. ‘Nothing done’ is a contribution and a big gap detected and
confirmed by the results that the government must take into
consideration.
Here are some definitions given by the respondents:
“digital transformation is the act of transposing paper data into
digital or computerized data.”
“Have digital databases of municipal urban infrastructure assets. Try
as much as possible to digitize the data as a database, so it’s more
easily manipulated.”
“Having a tool that allows us to go and get all the ’live’ information
there, really live, there, that’s my definition.”
“I’ll be honest, I manage a large department but I’m not very
"technological". This element brings an additional management to
implement the system which can be quite complex. I understand that
afterwards it makes management easier, but I don’t have anything
concrete to show us how it will make day-to-day management
easier.”
However, the implementation of a digital transformation strategy is
not an end in itself. Although 8 respondents said that digital trans­
formation is a necessity, whether planned in advance or done in an as
hoc fashion, respondents agreed that it was inevitable:
“I’m sure it’s coming. It’s an obvious move. Except they don’t know
how to do it.”
“All our archival systems are taking the whole paper vault and
putting it in digital.”
“At the governance level, the strategy is not well defined because it is
not a priority for the municipality’s leadership.”
However, two municipalities in Quebec (large and medium) have
already begun the digital transformation of their urban infrastructure
assets in a more or less structured manner. Compared to other munici­
palities, they stand out, and it seems clear that their level of maturity is
quite advanced. The following is an excerpt from an interview con­
ducted with a pair of respondents, one of whom is the Director of In­
formation Technology and the other the Director of Asset Management
in the Geomatics department.
“The objective in relation to digital transformation is to digitize the
information that the municipality has on its assets and centralize it
for use in databases. To structure the information and to be able to
retrieve functions, replacement values or life cycle times to be able to
plan in future investments.”
“Information management is important for further automation
(urban lighting, citizen services, traffic control, etc.). The goal is to
modulate and measure the service provided.”
4.1.2. Category 2. Process / practice / management
Category 2 involves the review of the organization’s processes,
practices and management methods. It aims to improve collaboration
between different stakeholders, to implement effective data manage­
ment and to align the organization’s practices with its overall manage­
ment strategy (Table 5).
Question 3: Please explain how processes / practices / management
have been transformed through digital tools and technologies, if
applicable?
The data from the interviews highlight the fact that processes and
practices have not been transformed. 33% of responses indicate that
nothing has yet been done, and this is more evident in large munici­
palities as it represents 50% of responses. The responses are more
Table 8
Results of the analysis of survey responses.
Category /Subcategory Question Results
People /
Community /
Network
Citizen
involvement
20/ Is the digital transformation vision of your municipality’s
urban infrastructure and the value they generate communicated
to citizens?
Only 1% of respondents consider that the vision of the digital
transformation is communicated to citizens. 73% say it is not and
23% are not sure.
External
collaboration
21/ Does your municipality belong to a group that works on the
digital transformation of urban infrastructure assets?
57% of respondents say that their municipality is not part of a group
working on digital transformation.
Resistance to
change
19/ On a scale of 1 to 5, at what level do elected officials show leadership and support for the digital transformation of urban
infrastructure assets? (1 = no support, 5 = ongoing support).
In all municipalities (all sizes), more than half consider that elected officials do not support digital transformation, and only 1% speak of
continuous support. For large and medium-sized municipalities, the response rate for levels 1 to 3 is close. For small and very small
municipalities, the response rate for the rest of the levels is slightly different.
N. Lafioune et al.

--- PAGE 8 ---
Sustainable Futures 6 (2023) 100119
8
nuanced are more nuanced for medium-sized municipalities, with 41%
of responses where nothing is being done, and 33% where digital
transformation is said to be in progress.
“Processes are being adapted even though most practices are still
paper based.”
“Processes are going to be developed in the next few years in asset
management but for now there is nothing concrete.”
Although there is little or no change in processes and practices, the
pandemic has been an accelerator of the digital transition within mu­
nicipalities. Indeed, 17% of respondents identify the pandemic and the
shift to remote working as an accelerator of the transition.
“With COVID, we have made it possible to have more certificates and
authorizations for construction permits available online for appli­
cations. Citizens can now do it directly from their homes on the
Internet and we receive the digital documents they file when they
make their request. It makes it easier, it reduces the traffic at the
department.”
“In terms of management, it is more telework that has changed
management. We’ve gone virtual and that’s required a lot of adap­
tation for our managers.”
However, 12.5% of the responses indicate that practices and pro­
cesses are being changed for the implementation of digital either
voluntarily or randomly by the city.
“The city starts with the processes and then the software imple­
mentation follows. The development is done in-house which helps
propel management to integrate asset management into the process.”
4.1.3. Category 3. Organization / structure / culture
Category 3 is about anticipating and solving problems related to the
organization, structure and culture of a company. It provides guidelines
in implementing effective organizational change management,
Table 9
Results of the analysis of survey responses.
Category / Subcategory Question Results
Digital/
information
ecosystem
Systemic
technology watch
24/ Does your municipality have a systemic technology
watch?
54% of respondents say that their municipality does not have a systemic
technology watch.
Dedicated data
management team
25/ In your municipality, is there a team that ensures the
sharing of data on the built environment between
departments?
67% of respondents say that there is no team in place to oversee data sharing.
Systemic
technology watch
22/ Please indicate the technologies most used by
employees involved in the delivery and management of
urban infrastructure in the municipality.
Autocad and GIS are the most used technologies, with
about 15% of responses each, followed by 11.2% for the
query and complaint management system.
The latest technologies used for BIM, CIM, 3D modeling,
etc. are almost not used in municipalities.
To better understand this distribution of responses, it was
necessary to ask respondents in the interviews: why?
Here is the range of answers: not seeing the usefulness;
not knowing the benefit; not knowing the tools; or
"employees prefer to work as usual and don’t like change,
it’s easier and faster". So, according to them, the current
workload is enough, they don’t want to be burdened with
new learning, etc.
Existing
information
systems
23/ On a scale of 1 to 5, how supportive is the Information Technology (IT) department of the digital transformation of urban infrastructure
assets (1 = no support, 5 = ongoing support).
Across all municipalities (regardless of size), almost half of the participants consider the IT department to be unsupportive of the digital
transformation.
The majority (>85%) of large municipalities, as well as small and very small municipalities think that the IT department does not support
the digital transformation enough. But there is an exception for medium-sized municipalities where 26% of respondents think that IT
provides regular or continuous support.
N. Lafioune et al.

--- PAGE 9 ---
Sustainable Futures 6 (2023) 100119
9
improving internal communication, providing training tailored to the
needs of the organization, and creating an organizational culture
conducive to business success (Table 6).
Question 4: Does your municipality have a specific structure in place
to support digital transformation?
The answer to this question is overwhelmingly "no". The most
frequent answer (54%) is that it is not something that is being thought of
at the moment. The proportion of this answer is 40% in large munici­
palities, 66% in medium-sized municipalities and 100% in small and
very small municipalities. The establishment of a specific structure is
underway in some municipalities, representing 20% of responses for
large municipalities and 33% of responses for medium-sized
municipalities.
“No there is no structure, that’s the problem.”
“No, it’s really all individual initiatives. Everyone does a little bit of
initiatives like I do, I do like public works did to give way, to improve
their management, but there’s nothing that federates the whole.”
“Maybe there’s something coming, but to my knowledge, at our
level, there’s nothing. For the last 10 years we’ve been hearing:
we’re going to do it.”
No municipality has a structure in place to support digital trans­
formation. At best, the establishment of the structure is under consid­
eration, but there is little concrete action. There is no structure in place
and it is still too distant a goal for the municipalities interviewed.
4.1.4. Category 4. Policy / standards / regulations / laws / contracts
Category 4 aims to address the legal and regulatory issues that limit
the implementation of a structured digital transformation. It seeks to
identify, review, improve, and develop the contractual and regulatory
context with the objective of establishing an environment conducive to
the implementation of a structured digital transformation. The sub­
categories aim to establish transparent and consistent policies, accurate
and comprehensive contracts and agreements, and regulations that
facilitate digital transformation (Table 7).
Question 2: In what ways has your municipality changed its regu­
lations, policies or contractual documents to facilitate digital
implementation?
"Nothing has been done to date - it’s not a priority," said one respondent
from a largemunicipality, which sums up the general thinking. There
are no changes, and when there are changes, they are minimal. The
other testimonies confirm this:
“No. We’re not there yet.”
“At present, we have no policy for conversion to digital. We have
nothing.”
“On the digital implementation side there is nothing that has been
done yet.”
“I think we’re still far, far, far, far away. It’s all about organization
and purpose.”
80% of the responses from large municipalities and 67% from
medium-sized municipalities state that nothing is in place regarding
digital transformation in terms of regulations and contracts. There is a
need to revise policies, regulations and contracts to enable the different
sectors of the organization to move forward with their digital
transformation.
“Currently, building permit application plans are submitted in paper
form. After they are received at the city, they are sent to a company
that does document scanning and then we receive it on disks or a
flash drive. We can’t simply ask citizens to fileit digitized because we
don’t have the right. We have to change the regulations on permits
Fig. 2. Compilation of survey responses (all municipality sizes).
N. Lafioune et al.

--- PAGE 10 ---
Sustainable Futures 6 (2023) 100119
10
and certificates to require that it be written in. We want to have a
digital copy, right now it says 2 copies, we need to change that
regulation.”
There is no structure in place, it is not a priority according to the
respondents. However, there is a will to change that comes from em­
ployees and citizens (also known as a bottom-up or grass-roots
approach). None of the municipalities participating in the survey have
specific policies or regulations in place to facilitate implementation of
digital practices.
“This change is not happening through a request from the board but
is happening through employee initiative. So there are no processes
or policies that drive the digital transition.”
“It’s the citizens’ demand to be faster and to know the data better but
for the moment nothing legal. No regulation but a political wish.”
“It would be a political thing because it would be the Council that’s
going to have to approve those kinds of changes there, those re­
quirements there. Because they have to be written into the bylaw.”
According to 40% of respondents, the data format is specified and
imposed in contracts. However, only five respondents mentioned the
need to change regulations to facilitate digital implementation.
4.1.5. Categorie 5. People / community / network
Category 5 addresses a variety of people, community, and network
issues such as limited leadership and staff vision, resistance to change,
lack of human resources, and negative citizen perceptions. It proposes
the establishment of mechanisms to engage and support all stakeholders
in planning while monitoring their progress and evaluating their per­
formance.(Table 8)
Question 5: What is the impact of digital transformation of urban
infrastructure assets on employees? And the services offered to citizens?
75% of respondents see a positive impact of digital transformationon
their municipality. However, the interviews did reveal some resistance
or obstacles. These include resistance to change due to advancing age,
lack of staff and lack of expertise. 58% of respondents identify lack of
staff as an important reason holding back digital transformation, this
represents 30% of respondents from large municipalities, 75% from
medium municipalities and 100% from small and very small munici­
palities. Here are some excerpts from the interviews:
“Some people are a bit lost, it stresses them out, especially people
who are close to retirement. They didn’t know what a computer was.
There are many of them. I have a few colleagues who have rushed
into retirement because there are too many changes. It stresses them
out, they are used to writing on a piece of paper, it’s not their
business. There are many who are starting to think about retirement
because of this.”
“Small towns are not able to have their own staff. We can’t afford to
pay them for five days, but we don’t have any work to give them for
five days anyway.”
“The lack of manpower. We digitize but what do we do with it? How
do we manage it afterwards?”
4.1.6. Categorie 6. Digital / information ecosystem
This category aims to create a reliable, efficient and state-of-the-art
digital and information ecosystem. It refers to the set of digital and
technological components that interact with each other to enable the
operation of an information system. The ecosystem may include soft­
ware, hardware, networks, data management practices, methods and
workflows, and end users (Table 9).
Question 6: How has digital transformation of urban infrastructure
Fig. 3. Compilation of survey responses analyzed by municipality size.
N. Lafioune et al.

--- PAGE 11 ---
Sustainable Futures 6 (2023) 100119
11
assets impacted the municipality’s digital ecosystem?
20% of respondents think that digital transformation has had a
positive impact. This represents 20% of responses from large munici­
palities and 40% from medium-sized municipalities.
“These are still relatively small municipalities, but I think that at the
municipal level it would be an added value to have all the infor­
mation digitized.”
A quarter of respondents say that digital transformation is neglected
or not deployed in a structured way due to a lack of expertise on its
implementation.
“There aren’t many vendors, and I’m very concerned about our
dependence on IT vendors. We’re stuck with one vendor’s technol­
ogy for a long contract.”
“It makes us more efficient, I really believe that, but my fear is also
that it can make us vulnerable. I have a fear in terms of the vulner­
ability of organizations, whether it’s a municipality or whatever.”
4.2. Overview of compiled results
4.2.1. Analysis for all municipalities Vs Analysis by municipality size
The first observation is the high rate of negative responses across all
categories. The second highest response rate was "Not sure". These re­
sponses tend more towards the negative according to the majority of
respondents (interview section) who said, "We didn’t want to answer
’no’ to all the questions." However, one exception was noted: response 3
is positive because the strategic plan is reflected in actions when present.
Results of the analysis by municipality size. The survey data was rean­
alyzed to account for the size of the municipality, as this factor, a
municipality’s size, was frequently mentioned during the interviews.
Fig. 3 summarizes the responses from this re-analysis.
When the same response is compared across scales, there is little
difference for the majority of responses. Nevertheless, question 25 (on
the presence of a team to manage and share data) is mostly negative for
small municipalities. However, three responses to questions 3, 8a and 8b
concerning small municipalities were positive, namely, respectively:
whether the strategic plan is reflected in the municipality’s activities;
whether the content of training is appropriate; and whether the number
of people trained is sufficient. These answers differ from one size mu­
nicipality to another, and this is understandable, as the smaller the
municipality, the smaller the number of employees and therefore, in
theory, the easier to manage.
When the set of responses analyzed by municipality size is compared
to the set of responses analyzed for all sizes combined, the number of
negative responses dominate in both Figs. 2 and 3. Thus, there is little
difference between the responses, which leads to the conclusion that
municipality size does not have a significant impact on digital trans­
formation of municipal urban infrastructure assets lifecycle practices.
4.2.2. Coding results by framework category
Table 10 shows the categorization and count of coded instances
organized per the theoretical framework. Subcategories with too low a
percentage are assigned to "Extrant" and can be removed from the
framework. "Intrants" are subcategories that were frequently mentioned
in the interviews and were not included in the original framework.
As shown, analysis and categorization of the coded responses from
the interviews indicate that the most frequently mentioned consider­
ation is "data management". The second consideration is "existing in­
formation systems". The third consideration is "limited vision”. The
fourth consideration is "compatibility of current practices". Finally, the
last important consideration is "availability of human resources".
Asset management, as a process, is not well known or mature enough
in Quebec municipalities. Moreover, among the respondents, those who
think they are familiar with it focus on asset management at the
Table 10
Occurrence of Barriers from Interviews by the theoretical framework.
Categories and subcategories No. of
references
% of
responses
Strategy / Governance / steering / leadership /
Financial resources
48 9%
Lack of guidance and/or leadership 2 0%
Lack of a strategic plan 16 3%
Unmanaged external pressure 6 1%
Lack of governance 9 2%
Lack of support from senior management 0 0%
Funding issues 15 3%
Process / practice / management 151 29%
Lack of collaboration 25 5%
Absence of data management 90 18%
Misalignment of current practices and
management
36 7%
Organization / Structure / Culture 42 8%
Absence of organizational change management 13 3%
Lack of communication 8 2%
Lack of training 15 3%
Non-conducive organizational culture 6 1%
Policy / standards / regulations / laws / contracts 36 7%
Inadequate policy and support from elected
officials
8 1%
Lack or incompatible standards / contracts 12 2%
Incompatible laws and regulations 16 3%
People / Community / Network 95 18%
Limited vision 37 7%
Resistance to change 22 4%
Lack of human resources 35 7%
Perceptions from the citizens 1 0%
Digital / Information Ecosystem 57 11%
Inadequate technologies and tools 6 1%
Incompatibility and/or inadequacy of existing
information systems
51 10%
Intrants 85 16%
Maturity level / Lack of internal expertise 31 6%
Asset management / valuable creation 11 2%
Rhythm / long term / life cycle 34 6%
Terminology 9 2%
Total général 514 100%
Fig. 4. Portion and analysis of feelings according to the interview questions.
N. Lafioune et al.

--- PAGE 12 ---
Sustainable Futures 6 (2023) 100119
12
operational level.
“Everything is to be done, people mix up asset management and
project management. Initiatives are only taken if direction comes from
above.”
In addition, the notion of time came up very often, with more than
half of the interviewees referring to it. The pace and length of initiatives
related to digital transformation urban infrastructure assets de-motivate
municipal employees. digital transformation urban infrastructure assets
is a project that generates its benefits in the long term, whereas most
managers are focused on concrete results in the short term.
Terminology is also an issue with the specific language of the
municipal environment, employees must agree on the same definitions
and names of assets and processes.
4.2.3. Sentiment analysis
Sentiment analysis reveals several elements pertaining to digital
transformation of urban infrastructure assets within municipalities. The
number of positive and negative feelings is very close, 41% and 49%,
respectively. Negative feelings include fear, frustration, misunder­
standing, anger and reluctance. Positive feelings include joy, hope,
motivation and desire. However, the detection of feelings according to
the interview questions is very different (Fig. 4).
Thus, a varying number of reactins and emotions were expressed.
There is no great variation in the number of negative feelings between
all questions (blue line). While the number of positive feelings (orange
line) clearly varies from question to question from its minimum in Q4 to
its maximum in Q5.
Q1 on the definition and vision of digital transformation elicits
contrasting reactions between hope and incomprehension. For instance,
a respondent indicated that:
“Be able to look up all the information live there. Cool! It’s ideal but
hard to pinpoint what’s really important in the face of total disarray
in our business units.”
Q2 on changing the regulations, as well as Q4 on setting up a digital
transformation support structure, provoked much more negative re­
actions that tended towards frustration and anger.
There is a meeting point of feelings in Q3 where respondents express
opposite emotions. On the one hand, there is satisfaction with the ac­
celeration of digital transformation generated by the pandemic. On the
other hand, there was dissatisfaction, as processes and practices were
slightly transformed. Moreover, digital transformation is done in a
random, unstructured and unfederated way by the municipality.
Q5, on the impact of digital transformation on employees and
citizens, elicits many mixed responses, seemingly dominated by age-
related fear.
“There are colleagues who are lost, it stresses them out, especially
those close to retirement. I have a few colleagues who have rushed
into retirement because they are afraid.”
However, after reflection and discussion with the respondents, most
of these negative emotions are not a form of resistance to change. It
has more todo with dissatisfaction withthe current situation because
it is not being addressed:
“…especially, it’s not their role at all, and worse, nobody’s role.”
Therefore, it is a form of municipal employee protest that can really
push towards positive change.
The analysis of the feelings reveals several findings and conclusions.
This analysis allowed us to gain a better understanding of the human
being and the issues at stake in the digital transformation. We noted the
variation in emotions and reactions from one question to another. We
wanted to better understand why frustration and anger is a form of
resistance to change. After reflection and discussion with the re­
spondents, most of these negative emotions are not a form of resistance
to change.
It has more to do with dissatisfaction with the current situation, as it
is not being addressed. Therefore, it is a form of protest by city em­
ployees that can really push for positive change. Sometimes this anger is
related to the administrative burden in the municipal environment,
which has an impact on the behavior of the employees. Time is therefore
an indicator to be taken into consideration to keep employees engaged
and motivated. On the one hand, there is contentment with the accel­
eration of the digital transformation generated by the pandemic. On the
other hand, there is dissatisfaction, as processes and practices are
slightly transformed. In addition, the digital transformation is done in a
random, unstructured and unfederated way by the city. Without the
analysis of feelings, we would never have known the true interpretation
of the respondents’ behavior. Sentences expressing anger would have
been associated with resistance to change, contrary to reality. Also, the
municipal organization must pay attention to its employees and their
behaviours and concerns. Finally, it is the employees who will apply the
activities mentioned in the framework developed in the article.
Sentiment analysis has given us a better understanding of employees’
reactions and attitudes towards digital transformation. This helps us to
identify the main barriers to digital transformation and to propose
effective solutions to overcome them. Using sentiment analysis, it is also
possible to evaluate the effectiveness of different communication and
Table 11
Responses to survey and interview objectives.
Survey objectives Responses to the objectives
To provide an overall picture of digital transformation efforts for urban
infrastructure assets in the Canadian municipal environment.
Few efforts are made, it is not a problem of resistance to change but mainly a lack of knowledge
of the process to follow and its benefits.
None of the 44 municipalities surveyed in Quebec, regardless of size, have undertaken digital
transformation in a systemic and structured manner.
The level of maturity of urban infrastructure assets management and the level of maturity of
digital transformation do not seem to be advanced enough in these municipalities.
Identify the barriers and challenges of digital transformation (buildings + urban
infrastructure) faced by Canadian municipalities.
The brakes categorized in the framework are all confirmed and accentuated.
Understand the organizational structure in place and whether there are any
initiatives taken or thought of to drive organizational change.
No organizational structure is put in place. A few separate initiatives are undertaken such as the
digitization of data. These initiatives are undertaken as pieces of a puzzle scattered in different
departments of the municipality with no structure to bring it all together.
Understand the scope of digital transformation’s strategy for urban infrastructure
assets in the municipality and identify gaps and impact on the following:
No strategic plan, no strategy is undertaken or planned and therefore no impact is identified.
- regulations, policies and contracts No review, so impossible to identify.
- current processes and practices No adopters, so impossible to identify.
- human resources A glaring lack of human resources in the field. No initiative is undertaken to train, develop
internal skills, or to undertake a recruitment plan.
- the municipality’s digital ecosystem It is based on the needs of each department and is considered outdated or obsolete by
respondents. There are also problems with the interoperability of tools, and those that exist do
not keep up with the evolution of technology.
N. Lafioune et al.

--- PAGE 13 ---
Sustainable Futures 6 (2023) 100119
13
awareness strategies for digital transformation. Sentiment analysis is an
important tool to better understand the behaviours and concerns of
employees. Organisations need to pay attention to their employees and
their behaviours to keep them engaged and motivated. Ultimately, it is
the employees who implement the changes, and their satisfaction and
commitment are essential for a successful digital transformation.
4.3. Responses to survey and interview objectives
The responses to the survey and interview objectives are summarized
in Table 11.
5. 4. Discussion
As shown throughout the paper, the preliminary framework served
to structure and guide research activities aimed at operationalizing,
validating and, if applicable, extending it. In large part, the results from
both the survey and interviews confirms and validate the categories
developed in the preliminary framework. However, in an effort to
extend and make the framework more applicable, category and sub-
category titles, which were originally developed as barriers and chal­
lenges, were changed using more neutral terms in the final framework.
For example, "lack of guidance" is replaced by "Guidance and coordi­
nation". Also, some categories were moved and reorganized. Some ele­
ments were removed while others were added based on the research
process. Table 12 presents the mapping between the initial and final
framework.
The encoding of subcategories 1, 4 and 5 (Table 11) is not clear
enough because of the proximity of meaning. In addition, these sub-
categories had very low representation in the analysis of the results
from the workshops and interviews. Therefore, it was decided to
combine them into one subcategory, "Guidance and coordination". The
leadership portion of subcategory 1 refers to a trait and was moved to
category 5 by adding the term "champion". This trait is already observed
in some leaders who are seen to drive municipal innovation.
All of the analytical methods used have identified subcategory 8:
"Data Management" as a key issue in the digital transformation of urban
infrastructure assets in Quebec municipalities. However, as this is an
ever-evolving field, the stakes of digital assets continuously grow as
sources of data grow and reliance upon them becomes more and more
important. New considerations also emerge, namely the evolution of
technologies and the context, especially in the post-COVID period. The
world is now facing massive digitization, especially with respect to asset
data. To this end, some respondents expressed that the pandemic has
accelerated some of the digital transformation processes in their mu­
nicipality. Most of the feedback relating to this aspect relates to
collaboration tools and the ability to work remotely, which has allowed
the use of digital technologies to grow within municipalities. Further­
more, data management includes many aspects that cover a broad
number of domains. As such, it was introduced as a category of its own.
Categories 2 (Process / Practice / Management) and 3 (organization
/ Structure / Culture) are merged, but sub-categories 7 (Collaboration)
and 11 (Communication), although close in meaning, were not merged.
However, it is necessary to make these clarifications: Collaboration is the
action of working with someone to accomplish a certain task or benefit
each other, through cooperation, alliance, association, etc. Communi­
cation means the exchange of information, feelings, etc., transmission by
speech, writing, gestures, etc. Communication may or may not be
beneficial, but collaboration has benefits or expectations.
The subcategory 17 "limited vision" became "systemic vision". In fact,
Table 12
Validation and extension of the framework.
N. Lafioune et al.

--- PAGE 14 ---
Sustainable Futures 6 (2023) 100119
14
Table 13
Digital Transformation Framework supporting the planning, delivery, use and management of municipal urban infrastructure asset.
Category Subcategory Proposed actions/solutions/guidelines Results
Strategy / Governance /
Steering
Systemic vision • Develop a common vision on DT of urban infrastructure
assets and promote this vision to all levels and departments
of the municipality.
• Verify the existence of actions supporting DT of urban
infrastructure assets in existing strategic plans.
• Design an implementation strategy for DT of urban
infrastructure assets.
• Define the activities (actions) of the strategy.
• Schedule these activities over time.
• Implement activities (actions) of the strategy.
• Develop a strategic plan or adapt and enrich the one related
to DT of urban infrastructure assets.
• Follow-up of actions.
• Evaluate the performance (accountability) of the activities
of this Strategic Plan for DT of urban infrastructure assets.
• Include funding for DT of urban infrastructure assets in the
Three-Year Capital Program during project portfolio
planning.
• Seek and provide for various sources of funding.
A shared and communicated vision.
A clear strategy and action plan well undertaken,
monitored and rigorously followed.
Strategic plan
Financing
Steering and
coordination
External pressure
Process / Practice /
Management /
Organization / Structure /
Culture
Collaboration • Review current processes/practices and identify what
reinforces siloed work.
• Identify and re-implement existing interdisciplinary collab­
orative approaches in the municipality (e.g. LEAN Man­
agement, Integrated Design Process).
• Establish and incorporate interdisciplinary collaborative
approaches.
• Join groups (e.g. committee, association) working on the DT
of urban infrastructure assets or related topics and develop
strategic partnerships.
• Define tasks and activities to initiate, execute and analyze
DT of urban infrastructure assets projects.
• Circumscribe and define new roles and responsibilities
supporting the implementation of DT across the urban
infrastructure assets life cycle.
• Establish a core team that validates all activities relating to
DT of urban infrastructure assets.
• Prepare criteria for measuring and monitoring performance,
maturity and organizational capacity. Gökalp & Martinez
[22] have developed a DX-CMM process capability maturity
model based on 18 maturity models. Their model is based on
a holistic and integrated approach applicable to all sectors.
• Plan the change and put it into concrete actions (including
identification of functional and technical requirements) for
the DT of urban infrastructure assets.
• Develop a list of skills needed to effectively advance the DT
of urban infrastructure assets.
• Develop a successful communication strategy: develop a
detailed communication plan, set up clear communication
channels, develop an engaging message.
• Ensure continuous motivation and communication with
stakeholders.
• Plan professional trainings to familiarize them with the DT
of urban infrastructure assets. The content of the trainings
should be appropriate to the DT of urban infrastructure
assets (trainings in the areas of professional development,
not just introduction to software functionality).
• Ensure that a sufficient number of employees have access to
these DT of urban infrastructure assets implementation
trainings.
• To develop recognized and certified training offers, covering
all aspects of NL, in conjunction with key players in the
academic world.
Harmonized practices, processes and management
areas with an efficient flow of information allowing
employees to generate maximum value for the citizen.
Optimized approaches supported by a continuous
improvement process: from planning, to
implementation and maintenance, to life cycle
maintenance.
A framed, structured and organized change.
An increase in competence and capacity to succeed in
the DT of urban infrastructure.
Current practices and
management
Structural and
organizational change
management
Communication
Training
Internal expertise /
maturity level
Organizational culture
Data management Quantity and storage • Understand assetinformation management and differentiate
it from document management.
• Identify information management practices that are
consistent with the urban infrastructure assets management.
• Designate and/or train a dedicated data management team.
• Learn about examples of digital models generated from a
physical model and plan for the beneficial need of the
municipality’s assets. Develop the municipality’s own
components.
• Thoroughly study and implement an effective data
management strategy including: the need for level of detail
Managed, reliable and up-to-date information,
accessible at the click of a button, secure, necessary
for the assets built or to be built throughout their life
cycle.
Sustainability of information and assets.
Effective management of construction projects, and
sound management of urban infrastructure, digital
assets and data as an asset.
Ownership and
accessibility
Reliability and updating
Security and control
Format and sharing
(continued on next page)
N. Lafioune et al.

--- PAGE 15 ---
Sustainable Futures 6 (2023) 100119
15
the analyses revealed that the systemic vision of digital transformation
of municipalities is not developed or well thought out. In addition, its
location in the preliminary framework is not appropriate for category 5,
so it has been moved to category 1. Finally, subcategory 22 has been
renamed "new technologies and collaborative tools".
It is necessary to explain the difference between sub-category 12
"training" and the input "internal expertise/maturity level". Although
lack of expertise is related to lack of training in some respects, it is better
to include lack of expertise as a new sub-category in its own right.
The need for "guidance and guidelines" is an emerging input espe­
cially at the survey level, so its importance is paramount. “Terminology"
is also an emerging input, but at the interview level. The need to create a
dictionary and agree on a common vocabulary is paramount for all
parties to understand each other and for the digital transformation of
urban infrastructure assets to be successful. These two inputs are added
as sub-categories under the category of "policies/standards/regulations/
legislation/contracts".
The input "rhythm/long term/life cycle" refers to the notion of time,
Table 13 (continued)
Category Subcategory Proposed actions/solutions/guidelines Results
and quantity of data, its accessibility, reliability, security,
format, updating, cost, etc.
• Work in collaboration with the different departments of the
municipality, the data requirements for better decision
making.
• Develop information requirements and uses.
• Define roles and responsibilities for information
management.
• Put in place the necessary procedures and mechanisms to
ensure data security.
Policy / Standards /
Regulations / Laws /
Contracts
Policy and support from
elected officials
• Focus on the parameters that frame the various policies and
directions for DT and Asset management both supporting
the shared vision and implementation goals.
• List the norms and standards used by the municipality,
including established national or international standards (e.
g., ANSI, BS, AS or ISO).
• Develop guides and documents to support the application of
the DT of urban infrastructure assets (e.g., a BIM
deployment guide, an e-permit delivery guide, a GIS user
manual). These guides and documents should take into
consideration the specific context of the municipality and
communicate best practices, techniques and strategies.
• Identify and learn about standards covering information
management and data creation for built assets (e.g.
ISO55000 and ISO19650).
• Adapt and adopt standards to facilitate asset management
and asset information management.
• Revise the City’s bidding criteria, contract clauses including
intellectual property (IP), property rights to align with DT of
urban infrastructure assets projects.
• Develop contractual and financial mechanisms adapted to
the new business models supported by the DT of urban
infrastructure assets and clarify data ownership, insurance
and other issues.
• Develop a dictionary (unify the language) of municipal
terms, especially those appropriate to the workforce.
Clear and consistent policies governing the
implementation of DT and regulations to facilitate its
application across the industry.
Clear and comprehensive contracts that facilitate the
use of DT in collaborative ecosystems.
Up-to-date, relevant guides, documents and standards
that facilitate and support effective, quality work.
Standards / Contracts
Guides and guidelines
Laws and regulations
Terminology
People / Community /
Network
Leadership / Champion • Identify and empower leaders and champions for DT of
urban infrastructure assets implementation while preparing
the necessary resources to coordinate and develop DT of
urban infrastructure assets activities.
• Develop strategic partnerships to exchange complementary
skills and provide mutual support and motivation, (local,
national and international partnerships).
• Develop a network of professional relationships that benefit
the municipality.
• Increase the municipality’s skills in asset management and
information management. This can be achieved by
implementing a support plan with a holistic approach.
• Prepare a plan to increase human resource capacity in
sufficient numbers (bank of experts).
• Develop a resourcedevelopment management plan for DT of
urban infrastructure assets (e.g. employment, promotion,
reward, etc.)
Dedicated and competent actors leading DT and
GAIU.
Resilient actors with a capacity for progressive
adaptability.
Resistance to change
Human Resources
Technology / Digital /
Information Ecosystem
Existing technology and
tools
• Mapping existing technologies and identifying needs and
development paths to be prioritized.
• Develop a systemic technology watch that allows for the
integration of information throughout the urban
infrastructure assets lifecycle (potentially affecting service
quality).
• Establish requirements for the implementation of
collaboration platform(s) based on open and neutral
formats.
• Learn about "common data environments" and see the utility
and applicability to the municipality.
A collaborative work environment supported by
reliable technologies that allow employees to
collaborate effectively, to deliver the best service in
less time.
New technologies and
collaborative tools
N. Lafioune et al.

--- PAGE 16 ---
Sustainable Futures 6 (2023) 100119
16
which came up very often in the interviews and workshops. Respondents
pointed out that the pace of public administration is very slow, in
addition to all the hierarchical procedures. They also believe that it is
difficult to sustain digital transformation, being a long-term project
throughout the life cycle of the asset. Therefore, it is not possible to
incorporate this input into the framework, but it is clearly an issue to be
considered and addressed in action planning.
After analysis, the "conviction of citizens" was reconsidered and
removed because its score is zero in different analyses. Previously
considered as obstacles to digital transformation, citizens are, on the
contrary, important elements in the change and the transition to digital.
In most of the municipalities studied, it was found that the change was
brought about by a desire on the part of citizens
From this analysis and subsequent reconfiguration emerged a final
framework that is presented in Table 13.
6. Conclusion
This paper presents the results of the second stage of a longitudinal
research project aimed at helping cities conduct a planned, and struc­
tured digital transformation. This digital transformation will lead to the
integration of information sources and implementation of digital twins
to better meet the needs of citizens and maintain the quality of service
over the long term. The research presented in this paper provides further
insight into the challenges municipalities face today with respect to the
successful digital transformation of urban infrastructure assets. It pro­
vides a framework that outlines in a systemic way how to reduce and/or
eliminate these barriers and challenges. The analyses revealed that data
management is one of the key issues with digital transformation.
Moreover, the findings relate that digital transformation is not well
defined and the systemic vision of digital transformation is not devel­
oped and thought through within municipalities. The analyses show that
little is done to operate digital transformation in a structured and
organized way to accommodate and support change.
The majority ofthe municipalities analyzed, regardless ofsize, do not
understand the benefits of digital transformation.They remain relatively
ignorant on the subject and their lack of knowledge leads to a lack of
interest in digital transformation. All this leads to fragmented initiatives
that hinder effective digital transformation. This lack of effort on the
part of the municipalities generates a backlog and a lack of digital
maturity that is becoming more and more urgent to overcome.
This study also highlights the critical lack of human resources,
expertise and appropriate training to support digital transformation,
regardless of the size of the municipality.
In Canada, municipalities are under the jurisdiction of the provinces,
which make the laws. From the digital transformation perspective of
municipalities, some restrictive laws and regulations do not allow for
simple decisions. They must be revised and adapted. Urban sprawl,
being a characteristic of the Canadian context, further increases the
amount of urban infrastructure to be managed. It is therefore difficult to
implement a systemic approach covering all urban infrastructure, which
justifies the use of technology, such digital twin for municipalities.
Limits
A first limitation of this research is the maturity level of digital
transformation and asset management within the organizations studied.
On the one hand, these two areas are emerging and on the other hand,
the municipal/public sector underestimates digital transformation and
is lagging in digital transformation and urban infrastructure assets
management.
A second limitation of the interviews and workshops was that they
were conducted remotely due to the health context of COVID-19. This
method has its limitations, as the absence of a physical meeting some­
times prevents us from properly observing and taking into account the
respondents’ non-verbal language. This can lead to a possible bias in the
interpretation that can be made by the researchers.
The framework developed provides guidelines that governments can
benefit from by anticipating monitoring in advance. However, this
analysis could not address the prioritization of actions within the
framework. This framework has not been tested given the long time
frame for digital transformation. Future research is needed to test and
adapt it to a specific municipality. The creation of specific guides to
accompany this framework should also be envisioned to support it.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
The authors are unable or have chosen not to specify which data has
been used.
References
[1] E. Champagne, C.É. Beaudry, The special status of large municipalities in Canada:
promises and limitations, Górnośl. Stud. Socjol. 256 (2018).
[2] Pourreaux, S., & Galipeau, R. (2016). Addressing the infrastructure maintenance
deficit. Le Québec économique 06: Le défi des infrastructures, 303.
[3] Creusé, E. (2021). The new challenges of the digital transition of municipalities.
[4] Kaufmann, V. (2014). Back to the City: Motility and Urban Transformations. PPUR
Press.
[5] D.J. Caron, E. Lyall Nelson, S. Bernardi, Municipal governance and information: an
exploratory study of the optimal use of 311 data, Can. Public Adm. 63 (4) (2020)
602–619.
[6] Moritz, M. (2016). Big data and eco-intelligent municipalities. I2D-Information,
data documents, 53(1), 62–63.
[7] Ministère des Affaires municipales et de l’Habitation. (2020). Décret 1214-2019 du
11 décembre 2019.
[8] W. Liu, J. Zhang, Y. Shi, P.T.W. Lee, Y. Liang, Intelligent logistics transformation
problems in efficient commodity distribution, Transp. Res. Part E Logist. Transp.
Rev. 163 (2022), 102735.
[9] W. Liu, S. Wei, K.W. Li, S. Long, Supplier participation in digital transformation of
a two-echelon supply chain: monetary and symbolic incentives, Transp. Res. Part E
Logist. Transp. Rev. 161 (2022), 102688.
[10] N. Halpern, D. Mwesiumo, P. Suau-Sanchez, T. Budd, S. Bråthen, Ready for digital
transformation? The effect of organisational readiness, innovation, airport size and
ownership on digital change at airports, J. Air Transport Manag. (2021) 90,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jairtraman.2020.101949.
[11] N. Lafioune, É.A. Poirier, M. St-Jacques, Managing urban infrastructure assets in
the digital era: challenges of municipal digital transformation, Digital
Transformation and Society review (2023).
[12] M. Huberman, M.B. Miles, Analyse Des Données Qualitatives: Recueil De Nouvelles
Méthodes, De Boeck Université, Bruxelles, 1991.
[13] Miles, M.B., & Huberman, A.M. (2003). Analysis of qualitative data. De Boeck
Supérieur.
[14] Van der Maren, J.-M. (1995). Méthodes de recherche pour l’éducation. Montréal:
presses de l’Université de Montréal/De Boeck Université.
[15] Liu, B. (2012). "Sentiment analysis and opinion mining. Synthesis lectures on
human language technologies," 5(1), 1–167.
[16] Elmurngi, E. (2020). "Approaches based on sentiment analysis and supervised
learning techniques for robust reputation systems in the e-commerce environment"
(Doctoral dissertation, Graduate School of Technology).
[17] Thomas, B. (2013). "What Consumers Think about brands on social media, and
what businesses need to do about it", Report, Keep Social Honest.
[18] N. Engonopoulos, A. Lazaridou, G. Paliouras, K. Chandrinos, ELS: a word-level
method for entity-level sentiment analysis, in: Proceedings of the International
Conference on Web Intelligence", Mining and Semantics, 2011, p. 12.
[19] Zhou, H. & Song, F. (2015). "Aspect-level sentiment analysis based on a generalized
probabilistic topic and syntax model," The Twenty-Eighth I.
[20] N. Farra, E. Challita, R.A. Assi, H. Hajj, Sentence-level and document-level
sentiment mining for arabic texts, in: Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Data Mining Workshops, 2010, pp. 1114–1119.
[21] A. Yessenalina, Y. Yue, C. Cardie, Multi-level structured models for document-level
sentiment classification, in: Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, 2010, pp. 1046–1056.
[22] E. Gökalp, V. Martinez, Digital transformation maturity assessment: development
of the digital transformation capability maturity model, Int. J. Prod. Res. 60 (20)
(2022) 6282–6302.
N. Lafioune et al.