--- PAGE 1 ---
sustainability
Article
Enterprise Architecture for a Facilitated
Transformation from a Linear to a Circular Economy
Felix Laumann 1,* and Torben Tambo 2
1 Centre for Environmental Policy, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK
2 Department of Business Development and Technology, Aarhus University, 7400 Herning, Denmark;
torbento@btech.au.dk
* Correspondence: f.laumann18@imperial.ac.uk; Tel.: +44-74-2462-7886
Received: 25 September 2018; Accepted: 21 October 2018; Published: 25 October 2018


Abstract: The circular economy is central to the agenda of responsible production and consumption
with propositions for the conservation of natural resources and a broader understanding of the
obligations of enterprises and product developers. The circular economy is challenging traditional
operating models of enterprises due to the need to manage larger parts of the product life cycle
and value chains. A linear economy will normally address a smaller part of the life cycle. The
operating models of companies are supported with respect to information and technology with an
enterprise architecture model. This article examines the necessary steps for analysing and designing
the enterprise architecture model, aiming to facilitate the transformation of an enterprise from
operating in a linear to operating in a circular economy model. The fundamentals and requirements
of the circular economy enterprise are extracted to isolate the design requirements for the operating
model, entailing cross-enterprise collaboration, traceability, and a broader value chain understanding.
Furthermore, it conceptualizes enterprise architecture and its role and importance in connecting
business strategies and operating technologies. This article develops an enterprise architecture
framework, named the Circular Economy Enterprise Architecture Framework (CEEAF), which can
form and support the effort of transitioning companies or be embedded into existing enterprise
architecture frameworks. The CEEAF differs from traditional enterprise architecture frameworks
by addressing the broader responsibility of the enterprise, the extended enterprise, the elimination
of end-of-life perspectives and mind-sets, and the capabilities of the individual enterprise and its
design activities.
Keywords: enterprise architecture; circular economy; enterprise capabilities; sustainable operations
1. Introduction
Large corporations, civil communities, and a range of governments are increasingly addressing
the issue of the depletion of commodities, waste management, and consumption. The philosophy
of the circular economy (CE) aims to think about resource consumption in terms of regenerative
processes [1] preserving the objective value, or the capital, of the resource. Companies as well as
governmental organizations must consider CE as a strategic effort rooted in top-level management.
The CE model captures and merges various environmentally sustainable concepts, therefore
making it a much-appreciated model for a sustainable future [2]. As it has been strongly endorsed by
China since 2008, with its CE Promotion Law [3], in addition to other endeavours in Europe [4] as well
as by national governments, for example in the Netherlands [5], the U.S. [6], and France [7], it seems
that a considerable portion, but certainly not all [8], of the world’s most hefty economies are focusing
on the CE as the future model for a sustainable economy.
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3882; doi:10.3390/su10113882 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability

--- PAGE 2 ---
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3882 2 of 16
For a thorough implementation of a CE, its underlying concept must reach every level of any
organization willing to operate according to its principles [1]. Besides the theoretical definitions of
CE business models [9–12], a CE must be connected as a strategic initiative to, and supported by, the
relevant technological systems and processes of the enterprise. Although adopting CE practices in an
organization has been tried by lean methodologies [13] or supply chain management [14], this complex
problem is defined as the enterprise architecture (EA). It is, due to its capabilities, a very promising
methodology to apply CE practices throughout an organization, but has not been studied to-date. This
article aims to close this gap by defining a novel EA framework, specifically defined for CE, as, e.g.,
Yip and Bocken [15] thoroughly emphasise. In EA, the strategic objectives of the enterprise are enacted
as initiatives, products, services, data, information, systems, applications, networks, and infrastructure.
A fundamental hypothesis in this respect is that linkage of flow-of-goods with flow-of-information in
classical industrial thinking must be reformulated into a CE-based industrial thinking. By designing an
appropriate framework for the interrelatedness of CE and the information and technology architecture
of the enterprise, open questions of making CE operational can be answered.
This article argues that appropriate adaption and relevant augmentation must be implemented
within traditional EA frameworks to manage the requirements raised by a CE. The argument is
underpinned by the traditional EA frameworks being both explanatory models for the current
technological portfolio and transitional in terms of acting as a guiding mechanism to enact
new technological solutions. An EA framework that is particularly designed for the successful
implementation of CE business models does not exist to date. In this article, the development of such a
framework, named the Circular Economy Enterprise Architecture Framework (CEEAF), is suggested
to close this research gap. Scholars and practitioners can apply the framework for connecting and
improving the interrelation between business strategy, technology, processes and consumption of
resources [16].
Sincestrategicplanningencompassesthetriplebottomlineofeconomic, social, andenvironmental
positioning regarding sustainability alongside the matter of the growth of environmental awareness
among all continents’ inhabitants [17], this article focuses particularly on the enhancement of the
environmental benefits due to it having been disregarded compared with the other two parts of
the triple bottom line [18]. Nonetheless, CE and consequently the proposed CEEAF consider all
three dimensions of sustainability. Environmental resilience is derived from CE’s opportunities
of conservation of resources [19,20], thus the proposed framework is addressing technological
opportunities, representational systems and information assurance related to creating stronger and
more resilient patterns of consumption.
This article is structured as follows: Firstly, theory necessary to understand the topic area, i.e.,
definitions and elaborations of EA and CE are given (Section 2). Secondly, the methodological approach
is explained (Section 3), before we delineate empirical positions of CE practices in medium to large
corporations (Section 4). Afterwards in Section 5, we define an EA framework for the CE, which is
then discussed (Section 6) and concluded (Section 7).
2. Theoretical Background
2.1. Enterprise Architecture
EA is the ‘analysis and documentation of an enterprise in its current and future states from
an integrated strategy, business, and technology perspective’ [21]. Its quintessence lies in building
an organizing meta-context for the alignment of technology planning and business planning, with
strategic planning as its primary driver [22,23]. Bernard [21] presents EA as a cubic representation
consisting of the dimensions artefacts, segments, and levels as illustrated in Figure 1. Artefacts are
large organizational entities of value creation. Segments are cross-cutting components of the enterprise,
for example a human resource database. Levels are a hierarchical construct with the strategic initiatives
of the enterprise at the top (level 1) and technology and infrastructure as the base layer (level 5).

--- PAGE 3 ---
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3882 3 of 16
Level 4 is systems and applications, level 3 data and information, and level 2 products and services.
Fundamental to the EA philosophy is the transition from a documented present state to an intended
future state. The level-based model serves as an illustration of and support for interrelations within
the enterprise of the distinct technological levels. Each level plays an exclusive role in ensuring that
the operating model of the enterprise, for example products and services, is a representation of the
artefacts required for a business service and thereby a business model [24]. Business models are
defined from the top level but rely on distinctive hierarchical dependencies [25]; business models
might define the enterprise architecture, but the enterprise architecture can also be used in the creation
of business models, for example in switching from delivering physical products to delivering services
for these products.
Enterprise architecture is a complex discipline to master. Korhonen and Molnar [26] discuss
EA as a (fundamental) business capability that is critical to the overall business creation. Ongoing
discussions seek to capture the maturity of the enterprise in respect to EA and EA governance [27].
In the sense of EA representing the systems and applications of the enterprise, it is closely related to
(strategic) software systems’ portfolio management and thereby also decisive in the selection of the
technological elements of the enterprise’s operating model.
Sustainability 2018, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 16
and services. Fundamental to the EA philosophy is the transition from a documented present state to
an intended future state. The level-based model serves as an illustration of and support for
interrelations within the enterprise of the distinct technological levels. Each level plays an exclusive
role in ensuring that the operating model of the enterprise, for example products and services, is a
representation of the artefacts required for a business service and thereby a business model [24].
Business models are defined from the top level but rely on distinctive hierarchical dependencies [25];
business models might define the enterprise architecture, but the enterprise architecture can also be
used in the creation of business models, for example in switching from delivering physical products
to delivering services for these products.
Enterprise architecture is a complex discipline to master. Korhonen and Molnar [26] discuss EA
as a (fundamental) business capability that is critical to the overall business creation. Ongoing
discussions seek to capture the maturity of the enterprise in respect to EA and EA governance [27].
In the sense of EA representing the systems and applications of the enterprise, it is closely related to
(strategic) software systems’ portfolio management and thereby also decisive in the selection of the
technological elements of the enterprise’s operating model.
Figure 1. The basic elements of enterprise architecture (EA) analysis and design [16].
EA is discussed in initiatives on inter-organizational relationships [28,29] and technological
interoperability [30]. As the EA is derived from the single organization’s strategy, there are
limitations to the ability to enact technological design in other enterprises, although most levels of
the EA model rely on external relationships anyway, for example parts from suppliers, products for
the market, and data sent to and from relevant parties. Drews and Schirmer [28] suggest that EA can
be a positive driver for the creation of business eco-systems.
EA is generically supported by the dominant implementation and maintenance framework
TOGAF (The Open Group Architecture Framework) [31]. TOGAF outlines a methodology for
implementation starting with the setting of business objectives and describing the outcome [32] and
structures an enterprise from the business, data, application, and technology architectures, whereby
the reaching out to the business surroundings is addressed by the idea of an ‘enterprise continuum’
[33]. TOGAF strongly addresses enterprises’ ability to adapt and adopt technology from maturity
measurement,statingthereadiness,organization,managementbuy-in,structurationlevel,andmore,
and implementation is considered as a continuous process known as the architecture development
method (ADM) [34].
2.2. From Linear to Circular Economy
The contemporary socio-economic model is referred to in the literature as the linear economy
model [35,36] (see Figure 2) in comparisons with other models, especially the CE model (see Figure
3). Itsmost obviouscharacteristicisthe discarding ofaproductafteritsuse, whichimpliesillusionary
Figure 1. The basic elements of enterprise architecture (EA) analysis and design [16].
EA is discussed in initiatives on inter-organizational relationships [28,29] and technological
interoperability [30]. As the EA is derived from the single organization’s strategy, there are limitations
to the ability to enact technological design in other enterprises, although most levels of the EA model
rely on external relationships anyway, for example parts from suppliers, products for the market, and
data sent to and from relevant parties. Drews and Schirmer [28] suggest that EA can be a positive
driver for the creation of business eco-systems.
EA is generically supported by the dominant implementation and maintenance framework
TOGAF (The Open Group Architecture Framework) [31]. TOGAF outlines a methodology for
implementation starting with the setting of business objectives and describing the outcome [32]
and structures an enterprise from the business, data, application, and technology architectures,
whereby the reaching out to the business surroundings is addressed by the idea of an ‘enterprise
continuum’ [33]. TOGAF strongly addresses enterprises’ ability to adapt and adopt technology from
maturity measurement, stating the readiness, organization, management buy-in, structuration level,
and more, and implementation is considered as a continuous process known as the architecture
development method (ADM) [34].

--- PAGE 4 ---
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3882 4 of 16
2.2. From Linear to Circular Economy
The contemporary socio-economic model is referred to in the literature as the linear economy
model [35,36] (see Figure 2) in comparisons with other models, especially the CE model (see Figure 3).
Its most obvious characteristic is the discarding of a product after its use, which implies illusionary
assumptions of never-ending or even never-diminishing natural resources. Its practices are threefold,
categorized by the extraction of resources (‘take’), the use of them to manufacture a product (‘make’),
and their final disposal (‘dispose’) [37]. Practitioners often speak of a ‘take, make, dispose’ or
‘cradle-to-grave’ mentality [38].
Sustainability 2018, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 16
assumptionsof never-ending or even never-diminishing natural resources. Its practices are threefold,
categorized by the extraction of resources (‘take’), the use of them to manufacture a product (‘make’),
and their final disposal (‘dispose’) [37]. Practitioners often speak of a ‘take, make, dispose’ or ‘cradle-
to-grave’ mentality [38].
Figure 2. Linear economy model.
Figure 3. Circular economy model.
The CE model is entirely based on the fact that the prices for natural resources will rise and
become more volatile in the near future [39,40]. It has emerged from various schools of thought and
synergizes them; the first concrete features, with a focus on industrial economics, are developed by
Stahel and Reday [41]. The most influential theories are cradle-to-cradle [42], the performance
economy [43], biomimicry[44],industrial ecology [45],natural capitalism[46], theblue economy [47],
and regenerative design [48]. Another crucial factor to realize CE business models is that
organizations adopt to the concept of resilience[17,18].It encompasses theissues of businesssecurity,
preparedness for environmental changes, risk analysis, and survivability of the business [49].
Adopting to the concepts of resilience requests an enterprise to have a proactive, beyond a mere
defensive, thriving attitude, inherent strength to withstand any crisis, and knowledge of its situation,
its risks, vulnerabilities and current capabilities to make data-driven decisions [50].
A well-accepted definition of the fairly recently emerged research field of CE is formulated as
‘an industrial economy that is restorative or regenerative by intention and design’ [1]. Similarly, a CE
is defined by other scholars as the ‘realization of [a] closed loop material flow in the whole economic
system’ [51], as an economy that is ‘restorative by design, and which aims to keep products,
components and materials at their highest utility and value, at all times’ [51], or as ‘design and
business model strategies [that are] slowing, closing, and narrowing resource loops’ [11]. In the
authors’ opinion, the most comprehensive definition is proposed by Geissdoerfer et al. [35], who
describe CE ‘as a regenerative system in which resource input and waste, emission, and energy
leakage are minimized by slowing, closing, and narrowing material and energy loops. This can be
achieved through long-lasting design, maintenance, repair, reuse, remanufacturing, refurbishing,
Figure 2. Linear economy model.
Sustainability 2018, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 16
assumptionsof never-ending or even never-diminishing natural resources. Its practices are threefold,
categorized by the extraction of resources (‘take’), the use of them to manufacture a product (‘make’),
and their final disposal (‘dispose’) [37]. Practitioners often speak of a ‘take, make, dispose’ or ‘cradle-
to-grave’ mentality [38].
Figure 2. Linear economy model.
Figure 3. Circular economy model.
The CE model is entirely based on the fact that the prices for natural resources will rise and
become more volatile in the near future [39,40]. It has emerged from various schools of thought and
synergizes them; the first concrete features, with a focus on industrial economics, are developed by
Stahel and Reday [41]. The most influential theories are cradle-to-cradle [42], the performance
economy [43], biomimicry[44],industrial ecology [45],natural capitalism[46], theblue economy [47],
and regenerative design [48]. Another crucial factor to realize CE business models is that
organizations adopt to the concept of resilience[17,18].It encompasses theissues of businesssecurity,
preparedness for environmental changes, risk analysis, and survivability of the business [49].
Adopting to the concepts of resilience requests an enterprise to have a proactive, beyond a mere
defensive, thriving attitude, inherent strength to withstand any crisis, and knowledge of its situation,
its risks, vulnerabilities and current capabilities to make data-driven decisions [50].
A well-accepted definition of the fairly recently emerged research field of CE is formulated as
‘an industrial economy that is restorative or regenerative by intention and design’ [1]. Similarly, a CE
is defined by other scholars as the ‘realization of [a] closed loop material flow in the whole economic
system’ [51], as an economy that is ‘restorative by design, and which aims to keep products,
components and materials at their highest utility and value, at all times’ [51], or as ‘design and
business model strategies [that are] slowing, closing, and narrowing resource loops’ [11]. In the
authors’ opinion, the most comprehensive definition is proposed by Geissdoerfer et al. [35], who
describe CE ‘as a regenerative system in which resource input and waste, emission, and energy
leakage are minimized by slowing, closing, and narrowing material and energy loops. This can be
achieved through long-lasting design, maintenance, repair, reuse, remanufacturing, refurbishing,
and recycling.’
Figure 3. Circular economy model.
The CE model is entirely based on the fact that the prices for natural resources will rise and
become more volatile in the near future [39,40]. It has emerged from various schools of thought
and synergizes them; the first concrete features, with a focus on industrial economics, are developed
by Stahel and Reday [41]. The most influential theories are cradle-to-cradle [42], the performance
economy [43], biomimicry [44], industrial ecology [45], natural capitalism [46], the blue economy [47],
and regenerative design [48]. Another crucial factor to realize CE business models is that organizations
adopt to the concept of resilience [17,18]. It encompasses the issues of business security, preparedness
for environmental changes, risk analysis, and survivability of the business [49]. Adopting to
the concepts of resilience requests an enterprise to have a proactive, beyond a mere defensive,
thriving attitude, inherent strength to withstand any crisis, and knowledge of its situation, its risks,
vulnerabilities and current capabilities to make data-driven decisions [50].
A well-accepted definition of the fairly recently emerged research field of CE is formulated as
‘an industrial economy that is restorative or regenerative by intention and design’ [1]. Similarly,
a CE is defined by other scholars as the ‘realization of [a] closed loop material flow in the whole
economic system’ [51], as an economy that is ‘restorative by design, and which aims to keep products,
components and materials at their highest utility and value, at all times’ [51], or as ‘design and
business model strategies [that are] slowing, closing, and narrowing resource loops’ [11]. In the
authors’ opinion, the most comprehensive definition is proposed by Geissdoerfer et al. [35], who

--- PAGE 5 ---
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3882 5 of 16
describe CE ‘as a regenerative system in which resource input and waste, emission, and energy leakage
are minimized by slowing, closing, and narrowing material and energy loops. This can be achieved
through long-lasting design, maintenance, repair, reuse, remanufacturing, refurbishing, and recycling.’
The overall field has received increasing academic interest with a variety of recently published
reviews [52–54], in addition to more specific research in closed-loop value and supply chains [55],
circular business models [11], and circular product design [56].
2.3. Identifying Enterprise Architecture Requirements for a Circular Economy
By definition, EA is ‘the analysis and documentation of an enterprise in its current and future
states’ [21], of which the documentation can be divided into the aforementioned five basic levels of
analysis and design to propose ways to make them more tangible and steerable [57]. The process begins
with the choice of an appropriate EA framework, that is, defining clear boundaries for the architecture,
since the integration of suppliers into the EA could be beneficial depending on the situation [58]. An
EA framework for a business operating in a CE must encompass the extended business network to the
fullest extent of relevance, while each distinctive line of business must investigate the building of its
segment with its specific business partners, which are subsequently implemented in the overall EA [21].
In cases of organizations belonging to the manufacturing industry, the extended manufacturing
(supplier) network [59] must tentatively be represented in the EA. Additionally, investigations must be
made on the other side of the value chain, that is, gathering data concerning the usage and quality
of the product, because of the CE’s aspiration ‘to keep products, components and materials at their
highest utility and value, at all times’ [51]. As the rationale for successful implementation of the
CE model, changeable EA components, such as goals, processes, standards, and resources, need to
comprehend the CE’s first core principle of customers renting, leasing, or sharing instead of owning
products. The second core principle of merely using cradle-to-cradle materials again aims ‘to keep
products, components, and materials at their highest utility and value at all times’ [51]. Business
models for the CE [11] need to be designed and implemented at that stage. Subsequently, the current
state of the existing architecture must be recorded on each level of the framework; that is, every line of
business with its corresponding supplier, and ideally customer, needs to be represented in conjunction
with its components. Accordingly, a baseline is established that must be acted on contextually towards
the CE’s aforementioned two core principles, ultimately concluding in the fourth element of analysing
and designing an EA, namely the formulization of a future architecture. Ambitiously, no concessions
regarding the utilization and quality loss of products, components, and materials are allowed, which
results in a formulization that seems to anticipate, at that point of time, a utopian ideal final result [60].
How a smooth and efficient ongoing transition from the current to the future state is realizable is
described in a living management plan that clearly states the present capabilities, their performance
gaps, and the future capabilities with resource requirements, planned solutions, a sequencing plan,
a time frame, and a summary of the current and future architecture [21]. If the aforesaid ideal final
result were understood as what needs to be attained, the management plan would outline how those
conditions can be attained [22]. The identified performance gaps need to be minimized by solutions of
which the development and implementation require resources that are predefined and documented in
a sequencing plan that is part of an overall transformation project time frame. Lastly, the threads of
the EA concerning IT-related security, standards, and skill considerations are described. Due to the
increasing complexity and uncertainty of the globally connected world, particularly careful elaboration
must be exercised on the IT-related security. The type of data stored in such an EA would for many
third-party stakeholders be of the greatest interest, since it contains information about the entire
business line of suppliers, organizations, and customers in one single entity. Furthermore, using
international, national, or industry standards at all levels enhances the integration of EA components
and their individual controlling abilities. Another often-observed thread is the concern that employees
are not able to unfold their full skills because of their impression of being tied into too strict guidelines
or other factors that influence productivity, efficiency, or creativity negatively.

--- PAGE 6 ---
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3882 6 of 16
3. Methodology
The chosen methodology for the intended creation of a new EA framework that is customized for
the implementation of CE business models and product designs falls into the scheme of design science
research [61]. Characterizing this methodology are three inherent research cycles that connect the three
indicating fields of any design science research project: Firstly, the contextual environment, that is, an
application domain; secondly, the knowledge base of scientific foundations, experience, and expertise
that informs the research project; and, thirdly, the actual design science research activities of building
artefacts and evaluating them. Those three fields obviously intervene in each other when it comes to
the creation of a new artefact. Hevner [62] entitles these intervention cycles, both a relevance cycle
and a rigor cycle that bridge the contextual environment, respectively, the scientific knowledge base
for the actual design science research activities. Within this field, a design cycle iterates between the
artefacts’ building activities and their subsequent evaluation [61]. By focusing on the defined research
problem while adhering to the methodology of design science research, an EA framework development
methodology is employed, as described by Bernard [21] or TOGAF [63]. Accordingly, a systematic
literature review [64] was conducted to identify, evaluate, and interpret all available research relevant
to find existing EA frameworks in addition to CE business models. As little research exists regarding
EA correlated with the CE, the search expanded into EA in relation to general sustainability, green
technology, inter-organizational relationships, and value/supply chain management. The existing
EA frameworks were then succinctly assessed in relation to their feasibility regarding CE business
models together with recommendations for modifications. Ultimately, the process concluded with the
creation of a new EA framework for organizations operating in a CE model, which we call the Circular
Economy Enterprise Architecture Framework (CEEAF).
4. Empirical Positions of CE Business Models
For the purpose of providing readers with empirical positions of CE business models to see the
requirement of a specific EA framework, we selected three case studies from disparate industries.
Criteria for this particular selection of empirical positions were the diversity of industries, the size
of the enterprise or extended enterprise, and the feasibility in geographically collocated businesses
a novel EA framework must be applicable to. These studies do not only motivate the construction
of an EA framework particularly designed for CE business models, they also show how various
industries benefit from such a framework. In the previously described systematic literature review,
numerous case studies were found (e.g., References [65–67]), but due to the aforementioned arguments
of multi-industrial applicability the three subsequent studies are elaborated more in detail.
4.1. Printed Circuit Boards
Wen and Meng [68] evaluate quantitatively the CE performance of printed circuit boards (PCB)
in an eco-industrial park in China’s Suzhou New District where all enterprises which are required to
realize CE business models are collocated. The strength of the implementation of CE business models
in such an industrial symbiosis is examined by a substance flow analysis and a resource productivity
indicator for the core materials of any PCB (copper, water, energy). The authors define five categories of
enterprises necessary to realize a circular substance flow, i.e., CE business models, which are displayed
in the subsequent Table 1.
Since any for-profit organization measures its uttermost performance in monetary profit, the
resource productivity is given in thousand yuan per ton. Disparate scenarios with and without waste
utilization are examined. Although geographical proximity of involved enterprises is in this case given,
each of the three core materials still have a lower, i.e., more profitable, resource productivity without
waste utilization than with waste utilization. Precisely, 21.38 compared to 23.15 thousand yuan per
ton for enterprises of category 1, 64.15 compared to 71.32 thousand yuan per ton for enterprises of

--- PAGE 7 ---
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3882 7 of 16
category 2, and 176.47 compared to 211.21 thousand yuan per ton for enterprises of category 3. The
two residual categories process PCBs and are hence not taken into account in these calculations.
Table 1. Categories of enterprises in an industrial symbiosis necessary for circular economy (CE)
business models.
Category PCB-Specific Role Generic Role
1 Production of electrolytic copper foil Provide raw materials
2 Usage of electrolytic copper foil to produce copper clad
Refine raw materials to
manufacturing materials
3 Usage of copper clad to produce PCB
Use manufacturing materials to
produce component
4
Usage of PCB to assemble and produce
electronic products
Assemble components in products
5
Collection of waste etching solutions, recover copper
sulphate from the waste, make a regenerated etching
solution, collect and regenerate copper waste
Collection and regeneration of waste
and by-products
4.2. Pay-Per-Use
Business models where consumers pay for a service a given product can perform (e.g., wash)
rather than own a product to have a desired service (e.g., washing machine) are widely known as
pay-per-use business models. Clearly, these business models can be categorized as CE business
models due to the consistent product ownership and the owners’ aspirations to keep products, hence
services, at their highest utility and value at all times. Bocken et al. [69] investigate how strongly
pay-per-use business models foster sustainable consumption. They find a substantial discrepancy
between consumers’ behaviour in the first free month of their subscription to HOMIE, a provider of
pay-per-use washing machines, and the subsequent ones. Since prices of each wash are determined
by the temperature of the wash, consumers considerably reduced washing temperatures besides the
number of washes. Noteworthy, HOMIE is not just another launderette, it combines the comfort
of having an appliance at home with monetarily-encouraged sustainable consumption by charging
consumers per wash while the product is still owned by HOMIE. Results show firstly that the average
temperature per wash decreased from 40.2 ◦C in the first free month to 38.1 ◦C in the second paid
month. Secondly, the average number of washes also decreased from the first free month to the second
paid month by 12.9 to 10.3, respectively.
4.3. Product Sharing Platform
Peerby is a platform that allows neighbours to borrow or rent items from each other which
was originally started as a simple Facebook group to enhance the sharing economy by offering an
alternative for excessive consumption [70]. Due to the proximity to lending neighbours and the
emotional connection one has when a possession is entrusted to one, item borrowers or renters feel
naturally obligated to sustain the item quality on the highest possible level. Product owners have the
freedom to decide individually if any charge should be applied to renting an item or the item can freely
be borrowed by any neighbour. More than 100,000 neighbours are registered on the Dutch website
and items range from electric wheelchairs to cameras and tables.
4.4. Summarizing the Empirical Positions
Empirical positions must be evaluated for relevance according to their offerings in a CE context.
Thismeansthatthereexistsreflectedconsiderationsinresourceconsumptionandpotentialsofstudying
informationandtechnology. Followingthecasespresentedby, e.g., theEllenMacArthurFoundation[1],
it is important to be ambitious to change “non-obvious” industries, as well as it is also significant
to work with suggestions for improvements of “obvious” industries. In this respect, the obvious
industries includes industries with opportunity to control the physical goods all through its life-cycles,

--- PAGE 8 ---
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3882 8 of 16
e.g., laundry rentals, cars, construction materials. Non-obvious industries include companies where
resources transition beyond potentials of re-use like food, oil, digital services, entertainment. It is
argued that the presented empirical cases qualitatively represent a range of industries suited for a
broader generalizability of the findings.
5. An EA Framework for a Circular Economy
EA practice is generally derived from EA frameworks, or EA models as they are also called.
More than 70 frameworks exist for various purposes, for example ease, complexity, responsibility,
IT orientation, investment orientation, or emphasizing formality and rigor versus flexibility and
organizational aspects. This is a matter of design orientation, contrary to design stand domains. Here,
dimensions of sustainability and social responsibility have been introduced gradually since 2011.
The Smart Grid Architecture Model (SGAM) [71] has been developed to ensure positive balancing in
the electricity sector to include more renewable energy sources, for example wind and solar power.
The Smart City Infrastructure Architecture Model (SCIAM) [72] is an architectural model ensuring
interoperability, integration, and balancing between critical elements of modern metropolises in
terms of transportation, energy, security, water, and waste. The Electric Mobility Architecture Model
(EMAM) [73] extends the SGAM to electric vehicles for the management of car fleets, consumer needs,
the car as consumer, the car as storage, and the car as provider. Furthermore, architectural frameworks
have been developed for (sustainable) building management (HBAM) [72], intelligent transportation
systems (FRAME) [74], and industrial rethinking and integration (RAMI 4.0) [75]. Common to all the
frameworks are a multidimensional approach, the top-down structuration of technologies, and the
top-down structuration of the organizational context. In the following, EA frameworks are discussed
and analysed in the context of CE.
Besides suggesting an advanced framework for balancing in energy systems, SGAM is important
for its introduction of enterprise architecture in between resiliency and consumption. Resilience
is encompassing a range of methodologies including reliability, adaption capacity, elasticity, and
evolvability [76]. Resilience must be based on algorithmic approaches to manage demand-response and
central-decentral connectivity through rightful functional decomposition and database designs [76].
The pressure on organizations to divert their business strategy to embrace CE calls for a review
of the key elements of EA to scrutinize the technological fit of the existing operating models to the
CE as a strategy. By considering EA as a model of the key business enablers and a framework for
documentation and planned change, a number of requirements can be refined from the above. The
requirements must aim to create persistent information across any context of judicial ownership and
spatio-temporal context throughout the life cycle of a set of resources until safe reclamation of these
resources is accomplished. RAMI 4.0 contributes well to the understanding of the product in its
‘active’ life cycle of development, manufacturing, and use, but it does not focus on the cross-cutting
responsibilities, end-of-life responsibilities, and potential for the preservation of resources. The
theoretical position of extended enterprise architecture (EEA) [29] is interesting, as it discusses
cross-organizational barriers and enablers for designing architectures involving multiple actors;
Tambo [29] highlights a range of focal points for ensuring qualitative EEA with imprecision, imbalance,
heterogeneity, transformation, temporality, and operational maturity. The CE adds specific needs for:
• Materiality: Understanding resources ecologically and as future resources.
• Ownership: Responsibility in appropriate forms of meaningfulness, such as judicial, ethical,
practical, and power.
• Relationships: Collaboration across life cycles and supply chains.
• Documentation: Knowledge about the quality, age, and place of products or parts.
The CE is mostly interorganizational and is dependent on preserving the capital of resources at
any life cycle stage [38]. Furthermore, it needs persistence in the form of long life cycle management
and requires control elements to assure high quality of the resources throughout any given stage of the

--- PAGE 9 ---
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3882 9 of 16
product’s life cycle. CE is dependent on interoperability to disseminate information on a resource and
its handling, collect information on resources for taking back, pass a resource to business partners for
handling, and eventually source new materials from other CE actors.
A Circular Economy Enterprise Architecture Framework (CEEAF) is introduced, encompassing
dimensions of the life cycle value stream, hierarchy levels, and layers, which are derived in accordance
to RAMI 4.0 and SGAM. Bernard’s [21] five basic layers are increased to seven to involve all the
required aspects. The proposal is presented in Figure 4, whereas Table 2 examines its relatedness to the
RAMI 4.0 and SGAM architectural frameworks.
Sustainability 2018, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 16
the product’s life cycle. CE is dependent on interoperability to disseminate information on a resource
anditshandling,collectinformationonresourcesfortakingback,passaresourcetobusinesspartners
for handling, and eventually source new materials from other CE actors.
A Circular Economy Enterprise Architecture Framework (CEEAF) is introduced, encompassing
dimensions of the life cycle value stream, hierarchy levels, and layers, which are derived in
accordance to RAMI 4.0 and SGAM. Bernard’s [21] five basic layers are increased to seven to involve
all the required aspects. The proposal is presented in Figure 4, whereas Table 2 examines its
relatedness to the RAMI 4.0 and SGAM architectural frameworks.
Figure 4. Circular Economy Enterprise Architecture Framework (CEEAF).
Table 2. CEEAF in comparison with RAMI 4.0 and SGAM.
Dimension RAMI 4.0 SGAM CEEAF
Life Cycle
Value
Stream
Pre-use resource assessment
Type
Development Generation Resource preservation design
Maintenance/usage Transmission Resource allocation
Instance
Production Distribution
Resource renting, leasing,
sharing for application
Maintenance/usage
Demand–response Resource distribution
Consumer premise Resource application
Resource reclamation
Hierarchy
Levels
Connected world Market Global resource pool
Enterprise Enterprise Resource management
Work centres Operation
Resource circularity
technologies
Station Station Reclamation
Control device
Resource tracing and
information
Figure 4. Circular Economy Enterprise Architecture Framework (CEEAF).
Table 2. CEEAF in comparison with RAMI 4.0 and SGAM.
Dimension RAMI 4.0 SGAM CEEAF
Life Cycle Value
Stream
Pre-use resource assessment
Type
Development Generation Resource preservation design
Maintenance/usage Transmission Resource allocation
Instance
Production Distribution
Resource renting, leasing, sharing
for application
Maintenance/usage
Demand–response Resource distribution
Consumer premise Resource application
Resource reclamation

--- PAGE 10 ---
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3882 10 of 16
Table 2. Cont.
Dimension RAMI 4.0 SGAM CEEAF
Hierarchy Levels
Connected world Market Global resource pool
Enterprise Enterprise Resource management
Work centres Operation Resource circularity technologies
Station Station Reclamation
Control device Resource tracing and information
Field device Field Fields of application
Product Process Product using resources temporarily
Layers
Business Business Resource preservation obligation
Functional Functional Resource handling instruction
Information Information Resource information platform
Communication Communication Resource information sharing
Integration
Interorganizational resource
information exchange
Asset Component Resource data
6. Discussion
6.1. Considering Implementation
The proposed CEEAF offers a theoretical basis for organizations to operate according to
CE principles on a large scale using standard (enterprise) architectural management frameworks.
Implementation efforts can be conducted following the industry standards of TOGAF as a dominant
framework for the transition of the technology architecture. TOGAF, with its proposals for business,
data, application, and technology architectures, provides a comprehensive ensemble of all domains,
for which our proposed CEEAF must be the guiding principle. Precisely, the business architecture,
which includes the definition of business processes, must be construed to facilitate the circulation
of materials (through, for example, a disassembling phase, as described in Section 4 on electronics
manufacturing). The data architecture must encompass the supplier, age, materials, transformations,
usages, and so on to efficiently document the material properties or product component quality and
hence their optimal utilization. Technologies that are capable of long traces without the possibility of
being amended, like block-chain, escrow-style services, or the passport regime from the shipping case,
would be ideal to use for this purpose. The application architecture aims to define which sub-systems
are deployed and thus needs to comprise, for example, sub-systems documenting the dissembling
processes in conjunction with the CEEAF. Intelligent design must be placed in the interactions of all
the sub-systems, because the circulation of goods requires the transferring of data among multiple
stages and loosely related stakeholders. The technology architecture must be designed to trace quality
aspects throughout the lifetime of any goods; that is, the aforementioned block-chain technology
seems to be capable of vast advancements in this endeavour. Ross’ [77] perspective of seeing EA
on different maturity levels might provide support, whereas the technology architecture must aim
to be modular. Jonkers et al. [57] describe a well-observable problem of merging business strategists
and digital architects for a respected, appreciated among all the stakeholders, and thus successful
implementation. Crucial to solving this problem is the applied implementation methodology, that is,
the definition of how the proposed changes are satisfactorily realizable. At this point, the difficulties no
longer arise from technological challenges; the management of people with its required persuasion of
scepticism account for more obstacles [78].
As another tool for the enhancement of the chances of successful EA implementation, a capability
model [26] can be constructed to visualize not only the functions that the organization wants to achieve
but also the functions that are possible with its internal capabilities. It facilitates strategic decision

--- PAGE 11 ---
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3882 11 of 16
making through the provision of a common language and a shared understanding of the objectives of
the enterprise. That gives the architect expertise, firstly, to identify and structure capabilities rapidly
that are unique, stable, and abstracted. Secondly, the so-called strategic architect [79] is then qualified
to change the entire enterprise. Prahalad and Hamel [79] define strategic architecture as ‘a road
map of the future that identifies which core competences to build and their constituent technologies.’
Knowledge about residual products, components, or materials that could theoretically be reused
or recycled will enter the spotlight through that procedure. Building an initial capability model is
achieved by pursuing a threefold process as visualised in Figure 5. To begin with, all the entities
that are important to the organization need to be identified. Accordingly, the customer, supplier, and
product and especially the processes operating in a linear economy model count as relevant objects.
Secondly, those entities are turned into capabilities by adding the word ‘management’, that is, customer
management, supplier management, product management, and process management. Lastly, within
each capability, the verbs must be identified that represent the actions that must be conducted for
successful exploitation of each capability. The application of those three steps with the ultimate goal of
transforming an organization operating in a linear economy model into one operating in a CE model
are visualized in the following Figure 5.
Sustainability 2018, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 16
supplier, and product and especially the processes operating in a linear economy model count as
relevant objects. Secondly, those entities are turned into capabilities by adding the word
‘management’, that is, customer management, supplier management, product management, and
process management. Lastly, within each capability, the verbs must be identified that represent the
actions that must be conducted for successful exploitation of each capability. The application of those
three steps with the ultimate goal of transforming an organization operating in a linear economy
model into one operating in a CE model are visualized in the following Figure 5.
Figure 5. Capability model for circular economy business models and designs.
Beyond that initially built capability model, apparently similar capabilities may appear under
various headings, the requests refining the initial model. The services or processes behind those
headings that implement the specific capability together with the corresponding stakeholders must
be identified first. Then, several approaches can be utilized depending on the explicit case.
Exemplarily, the architect could combine multiple instances as the capability model does not see the
necessity for a hierarchy. Otherwise, a new higher-level capability could be created as an umbrella
for all the similar capabilities identified earlier. Conversely, one precise capability could be selected
as that aforementioned umbrella with references to it in other capabilities. Multiple iterations of this
refining process should be applied but can be stopped when the benefits are flattening regarding the
impact of mergers, acquisitions, divestment, strategic differentiation, the leverage of new markets,
resource investments, strategic value-adding technology, or cost-decreasing technologies.
6.2. Critical Reflections
The proposed interpretation of the five basic levels of EA analysis and design according to
Bernard[21],aswellasitsimplementation,requiresanextraordinarilyferventdesireoforganizations
to transform themselves into ones operating within a CE model. Noteworthy are the substantial
interdimensional relations between the resources of the life cycle value stream, the hierarchical levels of
the tangible matters, and the layers of the organization in focus. Architectural frameworks have their
strength in the systemic and generic approach to organizations with both descriptiveness of current
states and aspirations for guidance for transformations to prospective states. By connecting the flow
of resources to relevant business strategies, operational processes and technological systems, the
CEEAF is supposed to be used as a generic and comprehensive organizational transformation tool.
Critical to the proposed framework and a clear limitation is temporality in the form of high
variation between life cycles ranging from hours and days to decades; short cycles are demonstrated
Figure 5. Capability model for circular economy business models and designs.
Beyond that initially built capability model, apparently similar capabilities may appear under
various headings, the requests refining the initial model. The services or processes behind those
headings that implement the specific capability together with the corresponding stakeholders must be
identified first. Then, several approaches can be utilized depending on the explicit case. Exemplarily,
the architect could combine multiple instances as the capability model does not see the necessity
for a hierarchy. Otherwise, a new higher-level capability could be created as an umbrella for all the
similar capabilities identified earlier. Conversely, one precise capability could be selected as that
aforementioned umbrella with references to it in other capabilities. Multiple iterations of this refining
process should be applied but can be stopped when the benefits are flattening regarding the impact
of mergers, acquisitions, divestment, strategic differentiation, the leverage of new markets, resource
investments, strategic value-adding technology, or cost-decreasing technologies.
6.2. Critical Reflections
The proposed interpretation of the five basic levels of EA analysis and design according to
Bernard [21], as well as its implementation, requires an extraordinarily fervent desire of organizations
to transform themselves into ones operating within a CE model. Noteworthy are the substantial
interdimensional relations between the resources of the life cycle value stream, the hierarchical levels of
the tangible matters, and the layers of the organization in focus. Architectural frameworks have their
strength in the systemic and generic approach to organizations with both descriptiveness of current
states and aspirations for guidance for transformations to prospective states. By connecting the flow of

--- PAGE 12 ---
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3882 12 of 16
resources to relevant business strategies, operational processes and technological systems, the CEEAF
is supposed to be used as a generic and comprehensive organizational transformation tool.
Critical to the proposed framework and a clear limitation is temporality in the form of high
variation between life cycles ranging from hours and days to decades; short cycles are demonstrated
as manageable in SGAM, whereas CE overall propose responsibility to the long cycles. Additionally,
the universal information access and societal enablement in responsible resource reclamation are
prone to be critical. The conviction of all the involved stakeholders regarding the necessity for that
transformation must be given, and persistence during the whole process is essential. Furthermore, the
organization must deal with certain financial losses during the transformation process itself, which is
nothing unusual when considering any change processes [80]. This loss will ultimately be redeemed
by the profits gained from new business models. Even cases in which not all the involved stakeholders
are convinced to the fullest extent, the increasing request of customers for products with low negative
environmental influences [81] and NGOs’ efforts to achieve transparency in the entire value/supply
chain [82] will most likely lead to the eventual transformation of those organizations as well.
Another large limitation is the aspect of product or product part ownership, which is particularly
noteworthy in industries like energy, food, or textile. Certainly, tracing a part of an assembled hardware
(e.g., washing machine, automobile, or computer) is accomplishable with certain technologies.
However, ensuring that food or textiles, often produced far away from their place of consumption
in less technologically developed circumstances embodies a major challenge. Attaching the
aforementioned tracing technologies like, e.g., a bar code or chips with a saved blockchain, to a
product or product part can surely facilitate implementing CE business models for many of the
consumable goods. However, the majority of food and textile products, or electricity can most likely
not be adequately and quantitatively be measured. To summarize, the proposed CEEAF is more
accessible to enterprises and extended enterprises producing only theoretically reusable hardware,
henceitcangeneralizedandappliedtothosestraightforwardly. Nevertheless, enterprisesandextended
enterprises in the aforementioned industries of food and textile products, or electricity might have
major difficulties, which is aligned with the six limits and challenges Korhonen et al. [83] outline.
7. Conclusions
The circular economy (CE) is experiencing corporate and political momentum as resources run
scarce and reclamation technologies improve. The CE offers answers in dealing with the future
complexities of resource acquisition, reuse, and waste. This article has discussed the shortcomings of
the strategic design of enterprises and the technological operating models using enterprise architecture
(EA) as a fundamental construct for corporate management. The Circular Economy Enterprise
Architecture Framework (CEEAF) has been proposed, which provides the theoretical basis of an
EA designed to facilitate the transformation of organizations that are aiming to operate in a CE model
but are currently operating in a linear economy model. The activities involved in designing long-lasting
products that can be maintained, repaired, reused, remanufactured, refurbished, and recycled must
be executable immediately in such an EA. Rather, fundamental and strategic guidelines are defined
that necessitate personalized EA designs for each organization in future work. The CEEAF is, as any
EA framework, made to be implemented in corporations with large amounts of data and numerous
stakeholders who manage these. The enterprise-wide commonalities of data handling and accessing
allows transparency throughout the organization which is particularly required for any business acting
according to the CE.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, F.L. and T.T.; methodology, F.L.; investigation, F.L.; data curation, T.T.;
writing—original draft preparation, F.L.; writing—review and editing, T.T.; visualization, F.L.; supervision, T.T.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

--- PAGE 13 ---
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3882 13 of 16
References
1. MacArthur, E. Towards the circular economy. J. Ind. Ecol. 2013, 7, 23–44.
2. Costanza,R.; Daly,H.E.Naturalcapitalandsustainabledevelopment. Conserv. Biol. 1992, 6, 37–46. [CrossRef]
3. Yuan, Z.; Bi, J.; Moriguichi, Y. The circular economy: A new development strategy in China. J. Ind. Ecol. 2006,
10, 4–8. [CrossRef]
4. European Commission (EC). Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the
European Economic and Social Committee of the Regions. Roadmap to a Resource Efficient Europe; COM (2011) 571
Final; European Commission: Brussels, Belgium, 2011.
5. The Netherlands, Ministry of Infrastructure and Water Management. National Agreement on the Circular
Economy; The Government of the Netherlands: The Hague, The Netherlands, 24 January 2017.
6. U.S. Chamber of Commerce Foundation. 21 November 2017. Available online: https://
www.uschamberfoundation.org/event/2017-sustainability-and-circular-economy-summit (accessed on
21 August 2018).
7. Lambert, F.-M. European Commission. 21 November 2017. Available online: https://ec.europa.eu/
environment/ecoap/about-eco-innovation/experts-interviews/20150130_circular-economy-is-making-
good-progress-in-the-regions-of-france_en (accessed on 21 August 2018).
8. Wilts, H. Germany on the Road to a Circular Economy? Friedrich Ebert Stiftung: Bonn, Germany, 2016.
9. Antikainen, M.; Valkokari, K. A framework for sustainable circular business model innovation. Technol. Innov.
Manag. Rev. 2016, 6, 5–12. [CrossRef]
10. Bocken, N.; de Pauw, I.; Bakker, C. Product design and business model strategies for a circular economy.
J. Ind. Prod. Eng. 2016, 33, 308–320. [CrossRef]
11. Lewandowski, M. Designing the Business Models for Circular Economy—Towards the Conceptual
Framework. Sustainability 2016, 8, 43. [CrossRef]
12. Sempels, C. Implementing a Circular and Performance Economy through Business Model Innovation. In A
New Dynamic: Effective Business in a Circular Economy; Ellen MacArthur Foundation: Isle of Wight, UK, 2014.
13. Preston, F. A Global Redesign?: Shaping the Circular Economy; Chatham House: London, UK, 2012.
14. Genovese, A.; Acquaye, A.A.; Figueroa, A.; Koh, S.L. Sustainable supply chain management and the
transition towards a circular economy: Evidence and some applications. Omega 2017, 66, 344–357. [CrossRef]
15. Yip, A.W.; Bocken, N.M. Sustainable business model archetypes for the banking industry. J. Clean. Prod.
2018, 174, 150–169. [CrossRef]
16. Magoulas, T.; Hadzic, A.; Saarikko, T.; Pessi, K. Sustainable Enterprise Architecture: A Three-Dimensional
Framework for Management of Architectural Change. In European Conference on Information Management and
Evaluation; Academic Conferences International Limited: Sonning Common, UK, 2012; p. 178.
17. Dunlap, R.E. A Brief History of Sociological Research on Environmental Concern. Green European: Environmental
Behaviour and Attitudes in Europe in a Historical and Cross-Cultural Comparative Perspective; Routledge:
New York, NY, USA, 2016.
18. Venkatraman, S.; Nayak, R.R. Relationships among triple bottom line elements: Focus on integrating
sustainable business practices. J. Glob. Responsib. 2015, 6, 195–214. [CrossRef]
19. McCarthy, I.P.; Collard, M.; Johnson, M. Adaptive Organizational Resilience: An Evolutionary Perspective.
Curr. Opin. Environ. Sustain. 2017, 28, 33–40. [CrossRef]
20. Armeanu, D.Ş.; Vintilă, G.; Gherghina, Ş.C.; Petrache, D.C. Approaches on Correlation between Board of
Directors and Risk Management in Resilient Economies. Sustainability 2017, 9, 173. [CrossRef]
21. Bernard, S.A. An Introduction to Enterprise Architecture; AuthorHouse: Bloomington, Indiana, 2012.
22. Lankhorst, M. Enterprise Architecture at Work; Springer: Dordrecht, The Netherlands; Heidelberg, Germany;
London, UK; New York, NY, USA, 2009.
23. Simon, D.; Fischbach, K.; Schoder, D. Enterprise architecture management and its role in corporate strategic
management. Inf. Syst. e-Bus. Manag. 2014, 12, 5–42. [CrossRef]
24. Gama, N.; Sousa, P.; da Silva, M.M. Integrating enterprise architecture and IT service management. In
Building Sustainable Information Systems; Springer: Boston, MA, USA, 2013; pp. 153–165.
25. Iacob, M.E.; Meertens, L.O.; Jonkers, H.; Quartel, D.A.; Nieuwenhuis, L.J.; van Sinderen, M.J. From enterprise
architecture to business models and back. Softw. Syst. Model. 2014, 13, 1059–1083. [CrossRef]

--- PAGE 14 ---
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3882 14 of 16
26. Korhonen, J.J.; Molnar, W.A. Enterprise architecture as capability: Strategic application of competencies to
govern enterprise transformation. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Business Informatics (CBI),
Geneva, Switzerland, 14–17 July 2014; pp. 175–182.
27. Jahani,B.; Javadein,S.R.S.; Jafari,H.A.Measurementofenterprisearchitecturereadinesswithinorganizations.
Bus. Strategy Ser. 2010, 11, 177–191. [CrossRef]
28. Drews, P.; Schirmer, I. From Enterprise Architecture to Business Ecosystem Architecture: Stages and
Challenges for Extending Architectures beyond Organizational Boundaries. In Proceedings of the 18th
International Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Conference Workshops and Demonstrations, Ulm,
Germany, 1–2 September 2014; pp. 13–22.
29. Tambo, T. Enterprise Architecture beyond the Enterprise: Extended Enterprise Architecture Revisited. In
International Conference on Enterprise Information Systems; SCITEPRESS Digital Library: Setúbal, Portugal,
2017; pp. 381–390.
30. Guédria, W.; Gaaloul, K.; Naudet, Y.; Proper, H.A. A Modelling Approach to Support Enterprise Architecture
Interoperability. In OTM Confederated International Conferences on the Move to Meaningful Internet Systems;
Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2013; pp. 189–198.
31. Tambo, T.; Bargholz, J.; Yde, L. Evaluation of TOGAF as a Management of Technology Framework. Int. Assoc.
Manag. Technol. 2016, 25, 1–17.
32. Rusli, D.; Bandung, Y. Designing an enterprise architecture (EA) based on TOGAF ADM and MIPI. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Information Technology Systems and Innovation, Bandung,
Indonesia, 23–24 October 2017; pp. 38–43.
33. Kearny, C.; Gerber, A.; van der Merwe, A. Data-driven enterprise architecture and the TOGAF ADM phases.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Budapest, Hungary,
9–12 October 2016; pp. 4603–4608.
34. Cabrera, A.; Abad, M.; Jaramillo, D.; Gómez, J.; Verdum, J.C. Definition and implementation of the
Enterprise Business Layer through a Business Reference Model, using the architecture development method
ADM-TOGAF. In Trends and Applications in Software Engineering; Springer: Berlin, Germany, 2016; pp. 111–121.
35. Geissdoerfer, M.; Savaget, P.; Bocken, N.; jan Hultink, E. The Circular Economy—A new sustainability
paradigm? J. Clean. Prod. 2017, 143, 757–768. [CrossRef]
36. Tukker, A. Product services for a resource-efficient and circular economy—A review. J. Clean. Prod. 2015, 97,
76–91. [CrossRef]
37. International Organization for Standardization (ISO). Environmental Management-Life Cycle
Assessment-Principles and Framework; ISO: Geneva, Switzerland, 2006.
38. Ellen MacArthur Foundation (EMF). 22 November 2017. Available online: https://www.
ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/circular-economy (accessed on 17 July 2018).
39. De Groot, H.L.; Rademaekers, K.; Smith, M.; Svatikova, K.; Widerberg, O.; Obersteiner, M.; Marcarini, A.;
Dumollard, G.; Strosser, P.; de Paoli, G.; et al. Mapping Resource Prices: The Past and the Future; ECORYS:
Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 2012.
40. Von Weizsäcker, E.U.; de Larderel, J.A.; Hargroves, K.; Hudson, C.; Smith, M.H.; Rodrigues, M.A.;
Manalang, A.B.; Urama, K.; Suh, S.; Swilling, M.; et al. Decoupling 2: Technologies, Opportunities and Policy
Options; United Nations Environment Programme: Nairobi, Kenya, 2014.
41. Stahel, W.R.; Reday, G. The Potential for Substituting Manpower for Energy, Report to the Commission of the
European Communities; Commission of the European Communities: Brussels, Belgium, 1976.
42. McDonough, W.; Braungart, M. Cradle to Cradle: Remaking the Way We Make Things; North Point Press:
New York, NY, USA, 2010.
43. Stahel, W. The Performance Economy; Palgrave Macmillan UK: Basingstoke, UK, 2010.
44. Benyus, J.M. Biomimicry: Innovation Inspired by Nature; Perennial: New York, NY, USA, 2002.
45. Thomas, V.M. Industrial ecology: Towards closing the materials cycle. J. Ind. Ecol. 1997, 2, 149–151.
[CrossRef]
46. Hawken,P.; Lovins,A.B.; Lovins,L.H.NaturalCapitalism: TheNextIndustrialRevolution; Routledge: NewYork,
NY, USA, 2013.
47. Pauli, G.A. The Blue Economy: 10 Years, 100 Innovations, 100 Million Jobs; Paradigm Publications: Boulder, CO,
USA, 2010.
48. Lyle, J.T. Regenerative Design for Sustainable Development; John Wiley & Sons: New York, NY, USA, 1996.

--- PAGE 15 ---
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3882 15 of 16
49. Kalmykova, Y.; Sadagopan, M.; Rosado, L. Circular Economy—From Review of Theories and Practices to
Development of Implementation Tools. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 2018, 135, 190–201. [CrossRef]
50. Geng, Y.; Doberstein, B. Developing the circular economy in China: Challenges and opportunities for
achieving ‘leapfrog development’. Int. J. Sustain. Dev. World Ecol. 2008, 15, 231–239. [CrossRef]
51. Webster, K. The Circular Economy: A Wealth of Flows; Ellen MacArthur Foundation Publishing: Isle of Wight,
UK, 2015.
52. Andersen, M.S. An introductory note on the environmental economics of the circular economy. Sustain. Sci.
2007, 2, 133–140. [CrossRef]
53. Ghisellini, P.; Ulgiati, S.; Cialani, C. A review on circular economy: The expected transition to a balanced
interplay of environmental and economic systems. J. Clean. Prod. 2016, 114, 11–32. [CrossRef]
54. Lieder, M.; Rashid, A. Towards circular economy implementation: A comprehensive review in context of
manufacturing industry. J. Clean. Prod. 2016, 115, 36–51. [CrossRef]
55. Stindt, D.; Sahamie, R. Review of research on closed loop supply chain management in the process industry.
Flex. Serv. Manuf. J. 2014, 26, 268–293. [CrossRef]
56. Bakker, C.; den Hollander, M.; van Hinte, E.; Zljlstra, Y. Products That Last: Product Design for Circular Business
Models; TU Delft Library: Delft, The Netherlands, 2014.
57. Jonkers, H.; Lankhorst, M.M.; Doest, H.W.t.; Arbab, F.; Bosma, H.; Wieringa, R.J. Enterprise architecture:
Management tool and blueprint for the organisation. Inf. Syst. Front. 2006, 8, 63–66. [CrossRef]
58. Schekkerman, J. How to Survive in the Jungle of Enterprise Architecture Frameworks: Creating or Choosing an
Enterprise Architecture Framework; Trafford Publishing: Bloomington, IN, USA, 2004.
59. O’Neill, H.; Sackett, P. The Extended Manufacturing Enterprise Paradigm. Manag. Decis. 1994, 32, 42–49.
[CrossRef]
60. Domb, E. Using the ideal final result to define the problem to be solved. TRIZ J. 1998, 6, 1–3.
61. Hevner, A.R. A three cycle view of design science research. Scand. J. Inf. Syst. 2007, 19, 87–92.
62. Hevner, A.R.; March, S.T.; Park, J.; Ram, S. Design science in information systems research. MIS Q. 2004, 28,
75–105. [CrossRef]
63. The Open Group. TOGAF Version 9.1; Open Group Standard G116; The Open Group: San Francisco, CA,
USA, 2011.
64. Kitchenham, B. Procedures for performing systematic reviews. Keele UK Keele Univ. 2004, 33, 1–26.
65. Hu, J.; Xiao, Z.; Zhou, R.; Deng, W.; Wang, M.; Ma, S. Ecological Utilization of Leather Tannery Waste with
Circular Economy Model. J. Clean. Prod. 2011, 19, 221–228. [CrossRef]
66. Molina-Moreno, V.; Leyva-Díaz, J.C.; Llorens-Montes, F.J.; Cortés-García, F.J. Design of Indicators of Circular
Economy as Instruments for the Evaluation of Sustainability and Efficiency in Wastewater from Pig Farming
Industry. Water 2017, 9, 653. [CrossRef]
67. Núñez-Cacho, P.; Molina-Moreno, V.; Corpas-Iglesias, F.A.; Cortés-García, F.J. Family Businesses
Transitioning to a Circular Economy Model: The Case of “Mercadona”. Sustainability 2018, 10, 538. [CrossRef]
68. Wen, Z.; Meng, X. Quantitative assessment of industrial symbiosis for the promotion of circular economy:
A case study of the printed circuit boards industry in China’s Suzhou New District. J. Clean. Prod. 2015, 90,
211–219. [CrossRef]
69. Bocken, N.M.; Mugge, R.; Bom, C.A.; Lemstra, H.J. Pay-per-Use Business Models as a Driver for Sustainable
Consumption: Evidence from the Case of HOMIE. J. Clean. Prod. 2018, 198, 498–510. [CrossRef]
70. Bocken, N.M.; Schuit, C.S.; Kraaijenhagen, C. Experimenting with a Circular Business Model: Lessons from
Eight Cases. Environ. Innov. Soc. Transit. 2018, 28, 79–95. [CrossRef]
71. Simmon, E. Smart Grid Conceptual Architecture Framework. April 2011. Available online: https://
docbox.etsi.org/Workshop/2011/201104_SMARTGRIDS/02_STANDARDS/NIST_SIMMON.pdf (accessed
on 10 July 2018).
72. Uslar, M.; Engel, D. Towards generic domain reference designation: How to learn from smart grid
interoperability. DA-Ch Energieinform. 2015, 1, 1–6.
73. Uslar, M.; Gottschalk, M. Extending the SGAM for Electric Vehicles. In Proceedings of the International ETG
Congress 2015, Bonn, Germany, 17–18 November 2015.
74. Jesty, P.H.; Bossom, R.A. Using the frame architecture for planning integrated intelligent transport systems.
In Proceedings of the 2011 IEEE Forum on Integrated and Sustainable Transportation System (FISTS), Vienna,
Austria, 29 June–1 July 2011; pp. 370–375.

--- PAGE 16 ---
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3882 16 of 16
75. Wang, Y.; Towara, T.; Anderl, R. Topological Approach for Mapping Technologies in Reference Architectural
Model Industrie 4.0 (RAMI 4.0). In Proceedings of the World Congress on Engineering and Computer
Science 2017, San Francisco, CA, USA, 25–27 October 2017; Volume II.
76. Lloret-Gallego, P.; Aragüés-Peñalba, M.; Van Schepdael, L.; Bullich-Massagué, E.; Olivella-Rosell, P.;
Sumper, A. Methodology for the Evaluation of Resilience of ICT Systems for Smart Distribution Grids.
Energies 2017, 10, 1287. [CrossRef]
77. Ross, J. Creating a Strategic IT Architecture Competency: Learning in Stages; MIT Sloan Working Paper No.
4314-03; Center for Information Systems Research Working Paper No. 335; SSRN: Rochester, NY, USA, 2003;
pp. 1–18.
78. Cau-Bareille, D.; Gaudart, C.; Delgoulet, C. Training, age and technological change: Difficulties associated
with age, the design of tools, and the organization of work. Work 2012, 41, 127–141. [PubMed]
79. Prahalad, C.; Hamel, G. The core competence of the corporation. In Strategic Learning in a Knowledge Economy;
Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2000; pp. 3–22.
80. Mellert, L.D.; Scherbaum, C.; Oliveira, J.; Wilke, B. Examining the relationship between organizational
change and financial loss. J. Organ. Chang. Manag. 2015, 28, 59–71. [CrossRef]
81. Laroche, M.; Bergeron, J.; Barbaro-Forleo, G. Targeting consumers who are willing to pay more for
environmentally friendly products. J. Consum. Mark. 2001, 18, 503–520. [CrossRef]
82. Perez-Aleman, P.; Sandilands, M. Building value at the top and the bottom of the global supply chain:
MNC-NGO partnerships. Calif. Manag. Rev. 2008, 51, 24–49. [CrossRef]
83. Korhonen, J.; Honkasalo, A.; Seppälä, J. Circular Economy: The Concept and Its Limitations. Ecol. Econ.
2018, 143, 37–46. [CrossRef]
© 2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).