--- PAGE 1 ---
ScienceDirect
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Procedia CIRP 130 (2024) 736–742
2212-8271 © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 57th CIRP Conference on Manufacturing Systems 2024 (CMS 2024)
10.1016/j.procir.2024.10.157
Guiding The Transformation To A Digital Factory Twin: Towards An
Enterprise-Architecture-Management-based Approach With The Help Of A
Capability Map
Jonas Licka*
, Julian Wellera
, Jonathan Brocka
, Shantanu Pathakb
, Jan-Philipp Disselkampa
,
Arno Kühna
, Roman Dumitrescua, b
a
Fraunhofer Institute of Mechatronic Systems Design, Zukunftsmeile 1, 33102 Paderborn, Germany
b
University of Paderborn –Heinz Nixdorf Institute, Fürstenallee 11, 33102 Paderborn, Germany
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +49 5251 5465-331; E-mail address: jonas.lick@iem.fraunhofer.de
Abstract
The Digital Factory Twin (DFT) is becoming more important in today's manufacturing world, but many companies are struggling to plan for its
successful implementation. As part of an Enterprise Architecture Management (EAM) approach to help systematically implement a DFT this
paper proposes a Capability Map. The Capability Map is developed for one subarea of a DFT, the smart factory (SF) operations. We start by
analyzing existing papers which describe business capabilities of SF operations based on the research method of a Structured Literature Review
(SLR) toderivegenericbusinesscapabilities.Theidentifiedlistof capabilities thanisused asstartingpointforgrouping capabilitiesanddesigning
a hierarchical structured Capability Map. The map is validated with industry experts and gives a starting point for possible relevant business
capabilities that needs to be accomplished in a DFT transformation initiative. The overall research methodology of our paper orientates on the
proposed method for developing generic Capability Maps according to VAN RIEL.
57th CIRP Conference on Manufacturing Systems 2024 (CMS 2024)
Keywords: digital twin; digital factory twin; smart factory operations; smart factory; enterprise architecture; enterprise architecture management; capability map;
capability-based planning
1. Introduction
In today's rapidly evolving manufacturing landscape, the
Digital Factory Twin(DFT)has emerged as aconcept withhigh
potential at the intersection of factory planning, operations, and
production management. A lot of data is generated in factories,
and the DFT is a promising tool for extracting and using useful
information from it [1]. The DFT can display and connect the
right information in the right context of the factory. However,
despite its potential benefits, the successful implementation of
a DFT remains a challenge for many companies [2, 3, 4].
The DFT connects the data of a factories physical systems
into a system of connected IT applications, encapsulating the
entire lifecycle of a factory, from conceptualization to
operations and retirement [5, 6]. By mirroring real-world
factory processes in a virtual environment, the DFT enables
companies to simulate, analyze, and optimize operations [2]. It
integrates data from various sources, including IoT sensors,
production systems, and factory planning systems [3, 7]. By
doing so, a DFT can offer a holistic view of factory planning
and factory operations and facilitating informed decision-
making [8].
To successfully introduce a DFT in a company a digital
transformation initiative will be started in most cases, due to the
amount of involved business processes, IT systems and data
sources [8]. To deal with the complexity of digital
transformation initiatives, capability maps (CMs) areavaluable
tool to guide organizations through the process [9, 10, 11]. By
© 2024 TheAuthors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 57th CIRP Conference on Manufacturing Systems 2024 (CMS 2024)

--- PAGE 2 ---
Jonas Lick et al. / Procedia CIRP 130 (2024) 736–742 737
systematically describing the capabilities required to achieve
strategic objectives, CMs provide clarity, alignment, and
direction to transformation initiatives. In the context of the
DFT, a well-defined CM serves as a resource, guiding
organizations towards the successful implementation of their
DFT initiative [9, 10, 12].
This paper proposes an EAM-based approach to guide the
transformation towards a DFT with the help of a CM. In this
paper, we describe our results based on one of the three sub-
areas of a DFT described before (factory planning, production
management & factory operations) - the area of SF operations.
We begin by analyzing the current state of research and related
work in Section 2. In Section 3, we outline our research design.
Section 4 presents our proposed SF operations CM, followed
by Section 5, which details the procedure model for utilizing
this map in DFT transformation initiatives. Finally, in Section
6, we conclude with a discussion of our results and future work.
2. State of research and related work
A digital twin (DT) is a digital representation of a real system
which sufficiently meet the requirements of a set of use cases
[13, 14, 15]. For the system factory the DFT combines factory
planning, factory operations and factory operations
management [8]. In this section we provide an overview of
maturity models and frameworks regarding DTs and SFs.
Based on that we present the EAM-based methodology of
capability-basedplanning (CBP) as a suitable way of managing
digital transformation initiatives.
Maturity Models and Frameworks for DTs and SFs
The Digital Twin Consortium developed the DT Periodic
Capability Table, which outlines the essential capabilities
required for effective DT implementation [16]. While the table
provides a comprehensive foundation, its generic nature
necessitates further refinement to tailor it to specific domains,
such as SF operations.
Capability maturity models offer a structured framework for
assessing an organization's capabilities and progress along a
continuum. In the context of DTs and SFs, various maturity
models have been proposed, each emphasizing different
dimensions of maturity, such as technological infrastructure,
data integration, and organizational culture [17, 18]. SUSANTO
ET AL. [19] highlight that although publications on maturity
models in manufacturing have increased steadily, but most
models are more descriptive in nature than prescriptive, with
less than 15 percent offering detailed suggestions.
FrameworksforSFsarticulateoverarchinggoals,principles,
and strategies for structuring and realizing SFs. Examples
include frameworks developed by academic institutions,
industry consortia, and standards bodies [20, 21, 22]. For
example, the SF Navigator framework developed by BUDDE ET
AL. [23] provides a structured breakdown of relevant areas in a
SF: Smart Assets, Smart Products, Smart Manufacturing,
Smart Supply Chain and Solution Ecosystems. Smart Assets
describe areas such as intelligent condition monitoring and
consumption monitoring. Smart Products focus on the
interactions with product development and the production of
intelligent technical systems. The Smart Manufacturing area
describes components in relation to manufacturing processes.
The Smart Supply Chain section describes logistical
capabilities in the context of a smart factory. The Solution
Ecosystem area focuses on components related to cross-
organizational production ecosystems.
Capability-based Planning Methodologies
CBP, such as outlined in The Open Group Architecture
Framework (TOGAF), offer structured approaches to aligning
business capabilities needed to achieve business goals [24]. It
involves defining strategic goals, identifying relevant
capabilities, and assessing their importance [10]. CBP also
includes analyzing capability maturity and defining a roadmap
for capability development. Each capability can be assessed
from different perspectives according to TOGAF – e.g. people
dimension (training & know-how, awareness, etc.), process
dimension (business processes) and material dimension
(infrastructure, devices, material, etc.) [24].
In summary various frameworks, models, and
methodologies provide structuring approaches for the field of
SFs, a standardized description of necessary business
capabilities, that are enabled by a SF and the connection of
these to the overarching technology of a DFT is missing. The
EAM-based methodology CBP is a suitable approach
managing digital transformation initiatives like a DFT.
Currently, there is no known CM for a DFT, that is providing
basis for CBP.
3. Research Design
Our research design is based on van Riel's methodology for
developing generic CMs, as articulated in "A Method for
Developing Generic Capability Maps: A Design Science Study
in the Professional Sport Industry." [25]. This framework
provides a structured approach to CM development,
comprising the following key steps. Our instantiation can be
found in Fig 1.
1. Domain Definition
The first step involves defining the scope and boundaries of
the domain under consideration. In our case, we focus on SF
operations, within the broader context of DFTs.

--- PAGE 3 ---
738 Jonas Lick et al. / Procedia CIRP 130 (2024) 736–742
Fig. 1. Research Design for the SF operations CM Design based on Van Riel et al. [25] & Freitag [26] combined with an SLR according to Xiao/Watson [27].
2. Domain Understanding
We proceed to analyze the domain of SF through a
structured literature review (SLR) according to Xiao/Watson
[27]. By synthesizing existing research, frameworks, and
modelsrelatedto SFoperations,weaimtoidentify theessential
business capabilities required for effective SF and DFT
implementation.
3. Initial Map Design
Building upon the insights from the SLR, we develop an
initial CM that hierarchically structures the identified business
capabilities.
4. Stability Criteria Definition
To ensure the robustness and validity of the CM, we define
a stability criterion against which the map will beevaluated and
refined. This criterion is, that no changes in the top two levels
of the CM occur after validation.
5. Case Study Validation
The next step was validating the CM through a case study
with an industry partner, a European manufacturing company
with more than 6.000 employees. During this case study we
validated the contents and structure of the CM. We iteratively
refined the map based on insights gained from the validation
process.
6. Documented Design Process
Throughout the development of the CM, we maintain
documentation of the design process, ensuring transparency,
repeatability, and traceability by documenting key changes in
the map.

--- PAGE 4 ---
Jonas Lick et al. / Procedia CIRP 130 (2024) 736–742 739
Fig. 2. Developed CM for SF operations on level one and level two capabilities, with machine vision as an example level three capability.
4. Proposed Smart Factory Capability Map
Table 1 shows an excerpt of the results of the conducted
SLR. From 1.383 identified sources, 76 business capabilities
were derived. Sources were found in the scopus database with
the following search string:
"capabilities"and("smart production"OR"manufacturing"
OR "factory" OR "operational" OR "smart manufacturing" OR
"Industry 4.0")
Table 1. Examples for the identified SF Capabilities.
Capability Description Source
Machine vision Integrating machine vision with
edge cloud computing ensures
fast data processing, essential for
[28]
the dynamic environment of an
adaptive production system.
Modularity Modularity in hardware and
software allows for the flexible
rearrangement and
reconfiguration of manufacturing
systems
[29]
… … …
Mass customization The capability to integrate
Additive Manufacturing with
ERP platforms is vital for
enabling on-demand
manufacturing capabilities within
a smart factory.
[30]
In Fig 2. our developed capability map is shown. The
capabilitiesaregrouped intothefivetop-levelgroupsdescribed

--- PAGE 5 ---
740 Jonas Lick et al. / Procedia CIRP 130 (2024) 736–742
below. The top-level capabilities are structured with inspiration
to the Smart Factory Framework proposed by BUDDE ET AL. in
the Smart Factory Navigator [23].
The CM comprises five overarching capability groups, the
element solution ecosystem is not part of it. The sub-
capabilities of each top-level capability group are the
following:
1. Smart Assets: This group encompasses capabilities
related to the digitization, monitoring, and management
of physical assets within the factory environment.
Key capabilities include asset tracking, condition
monitoring, predictive maintenance, and digital
twinning of physical assets. This capability-group has
four level two capability-groups, ranging from asset
monitoring (intelligent or prescriptive) to consumption
monitoring of the asset and monitoring of its
environment.
2. Smart Working: Smart Working focuses on
capabilities related to workforce optimization,
collaboration, and empowerment within the SF context.
This includes capabilities such as workforce
scheduling, skills management, augmented reality-
based guidance, and remote collaboration tools. The
level two capability-groups describing scheduling of
the workforce and its skills, remote collaboration,
intelligent workforce augmentation and assistance and
management of workforce conditions.
3. Smart Manufacturing: Smart Manufacturing
encompasses capabilities related to the digitization and
optimization of manufacturing processes and
operations.
This includes capabilities such as real-time production
monitoring, quality management, adaptive production
scheduling, and flexible automation. Level two
capability-groups are the intelligent monitoring of
production status and analysis of the manufacturing
processes, as well as intelligent resource management
and dynamic adaptability of production systems and an
intelligent continuous improvement.
4. Smart Supply Chain: This group focuses on
capabilities related to the integration, visibility, and
optimizationofthesupplychain andlogisticswithinthe
SF ecosystem. Key capabilities include demand
forecasting, supplier collaboration, inventory
optimization, and logistics management. On level two
capability-groups can be found from intelligent route
planning to material tracking, to automatic processing
of deliveries, an intelligent selection of serving strategy
and dynamic storage location allocation.
5. Smart Products: Smart Products encompass
capabilities related to the integration of intelligence and
connectivity into physical products manufactured
withintheSF.Thisincludescapabilitiessuchasproduct
lifecycle management, product customization, and
remote product monitoring. The capability-group has
the following level two capability-groups: intelligent
quality inspection, dynamic workpiece routing and
intelligent connection to production systems.
In designing the CM, we adhere to the following principles
to ensure clarity, coherence, and usability:
▪ Hierarchical Structure: The CM follows a
hierarchical structure, with capability groups at the
top level and sub-capabilities nested within each
group. This hierarchical arrangement facilitates
navigation and understanding of the relationships
between different capabilities.
▪ Limited Sub-capabilities per Group: To
maintain clarity and focus, each capability group
accommodates a maximum of five sub-
capabilities. This constraint encourages
prioritization and ensures that the CM remains
concise and manageable.
▪ Minimum Sub-capabilities per Group: Within
each group, we ensure a minimum of two sub-
capabilities to provide sufficient granularity and
coverage of the capabilities within that domain.
This ensures that the CM captures the diverse
aspects of SF operations effectively.
Each of the level two capability-groups have sub-
capabilities that describe concrete capabilities, that can be
utilized in business processes. An example for this would be
the capability automatic optical tracking of AGVs as part of the
level two group Intelligent route planning as part of the top-
level capability group Smart Supply Chain.
During the design process and the case-study with our
industry partner a few changes occurred. An excerpt of the
documented changes can be found in Table 2.
Table 2. Changes made in Design Cycle with Industry Partner.
Level Action Capability
label
Level 2 Parent
capability
Level 1
Parent
capability
Three Addition Predictive
maintenance
for AGVs
1.2 Prescriptive Asset
Monitoring /
Predictive
Maintenance
1.0 Smart
Assets
Two Addition Dynamic
storage
location
allocation
- 4.0 Smart
Supply
Chain
… … … … …
Two Review Intelligent
Workforce
Scheduling
- 2.0 Smart
Working
5. Proposed Procedure Model to work with the CM
In this section, we outline a systematic procedure model for
using the SF operations CM in the context of DFT
implementation. Our procedure model is grounded in CBP
principles and tailored to the process of aligning capabilities
with strategic objectives and IT implementation.

--- PAGE 6 ---
Jonas Lick et al. / Procedia CIRP 130 (2024) 736–742 741
1. Define Strategic Objectives
The first step in our procedure model is to define strategic
objectives for the DFT initiative. These objectives should align
with broader organizational goals in the operations context and
reflect the desired outcomes of the DFT implementation.
2. Identify Requisite Capabilities
Based on the defined strategic objectives, organizations
identify the capabilities required to achieve these objectives.
These capabilities are drawn from the SF operations CM,
serving as a comprehensive repository of capabilities.
3. Assess Strategic Relevance
Once the requisite capabilities are identified, organizations
assess the strategic relevance of each capability in the context
of their specific objectives and priorities. This assessment may
involve evaluating factors such as business impact, alignment
with organizational strategy, and feasibility of implementation.
4. Conduct Fit-Gap Analysis
Next, organizations conduct a fit-gap analysis to identify
any misalignments between existing capabilities and the
desired state outlined by the strategic objectives. This analysis
entails assessing two perspectives: (a) identifying capabilities
that are currently lacking and need to be developed, and (b)
identifying capabilities that require enhancement to meet the
desired level of maturity.
5. Plan Capability Realization
Based on the findings of the fit-gap analysis, organizations
developaroadmap forcapabilityrealization,outliningthesteps
and milestones required to bridge the identified gaps and
achieve the desired state. This roadmap serves as a strategic
guide,informingresource allocation, investment decisions, and
prioritization of initiatives.
6. Conclusion and outlook
The scientific contribution of our research is, that we
presented a structured approach to guiding the digital
transformation initiatives for the DFT technology, leveraging
CBP principles. Through an SLR and methodological
framework based on VAN RIEL [25], we have developed a
comprehensive SF operations CM tailored to the needs of DFT
implementation. Our proposed methodology offers a
systematic approach to leveraging this CM, enabling
organizations to align capabilities with strategic objectives and
realize the vision of a DFT. Infurtherresearch we will continue
to refine the CM and complement with the two additional sub-
areas of a DFT: factory planning and production management.
By systematically identifying, prioritizing, and
roadmapping the capabilities, we make sure to align business
and IT stakeholders and make sure, that the potentials of the
DFT technology are properly leveraged to help with reaching
strategic objectives in manufacturing companies’ operations
domain.
While our research helps with SF operations as part of a
DFT, there remain several aspects for future research and
exploration:
▪ Extension to other Domains: Our CM approach
has focused primarily on SF operations. Future
research should explore extending this approach to
other domains within the DFT technology, such as
factory planning and production management.
▪ Integration of Supply-Side Capabilities: Our
methodology currently emphasizes capabilities on
the demand side of the business. Future research
could explore the integration of supply-side
capabilities from IT side, that can satisfy the
business demand,such as those necessary to enable
DTs and Prescriptive Analytics, e.g. those
described inthe DTPeriodic Capability Table[16].
▪ Empirical Validation: While we have outlined a
framework for developing and utilizing the SF
operations CM and validated it with one industry
partner, further empirical validation through real-
world case studies and implementations will
provide valuable insights into its effectiveness and
practical applicability.
In conclusion, our paper has presented a systematic
approach to guiding the transformation towards a DFT,
leveraging CM methodologies within an EAM framework. By
developing a comprehensive SF operations CM and proposing
a methodology for its utilization, we aim to provide
organizations with the tools, insights, and guidance needed to
navigate the complexities of DFT implementation and realize
the full potential of Industry 4.0.
Acknowledgements
This work is part of the research project
"Datenfabrik.NRW". The project is funded by the Ministry of
Economic Affairs, Industry, Climate Action and Energy
(MWIDE) of the State of North Rhine-Westphalia and
managed by the Project Management Jülich (PtJ). The authors
are responsible for the content of this publication.
Declaration of Generative AI and AI-assisted technologies
in the writing process
Statement: During the preparation of this work the authors
used ChatGPT and DeepL to enhance language and readability.
After using this tools and services, the authors reviewed and
edited the content as needed and takes full responsibility for the
content of the publication.
References
[1] Cieply, J.; Disselkamp, J.-P.; Kattenstroth, F.; Trienens, M.; Rasor, R.;
Kühn, A.; Dumitrescu, R.: Digital Factory Twin: A Practioner-Driven
Approach for for Integrated Planning of the Enterprise Architecture. CIRP
Design Conference 2024, No. in Press, 2024
[2] Lim, K. Y. H., Pai Z., and Chun-Hsien Ch.; A state-of-the-art survey of
Digital Twin: techniques, engineering product lifecycle management and
business innovation perspectives.; Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing
31; 2020; p. 1313-1337.
[3] Stoll, O., West, S., Gaiardelli, P., Harrison, D., Corcoran, F. J.; The
successful commercialization of a digital twin in an industrial product
service system.; IFIP International Conference on Advances in Production
Management Systems. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2020; p.
275-282

--- PAGE 7 ---
742 Jonas Lick et al. / Procedia CIRP 130 (2024) 736–742
[4] Riedelsheimer, T., Lünnemann, P., Wehking, S., Dorfhuber, L.; Digital
twin readiness assessment - Eine Studie zum Digitalen Zwilling in der
fertigenden Industrie; 2020.
[5] Kattenstroth, F.; Disselkamp, J.-P.; Lick, J.; Dumitrescu, R.: Challenges
in the implementation of simulation models for the digital factory twin - a
systematic literature review. CIRP Design Conference 2024, No. in Press,
2024
[6] Disselkamp, J.-P.; Grothe, R.; Lick, J.; Schütte, B.; Brüne, S.; Schröder,
L.; Dumitrescu, R.: Towards The Digital Factory Twin - Design Guide
For Creating A 3D Factory Model. DESIGN 2024, No. in Press, 2024
[7] Disselkamp, J.-P.; Cieply, J.; Dyck, F.; Grothe, R.; Anacker, H.;
Dumitrescu, R.: Integrated product and production development - a
systematic literature review. Procedia CIRP, Vol. 119, 2023, S. 716-721
[8] Cieply, J., Disselkamp, J. P., Dyck, F., Alturk, W., Kühn, A., Dumitrescu,
R.; A systematic literature review on the Digital Twin of the factory in the
context of the product and factory lifecycle.; Procedia CIRP 119; 2023; p.
834-840.
[9] Cieply, J., Wegel, A., Kühn, A.; Methoden für die Gestaltung der
Unternehmensarchitektur produzierender Unternehmen – EAM als
Enabler für die Konzipierung übertragbarer KI-Lösungen.; IM 391; 2023;
p. 37-42. Online: https://doi.org/10.30844/IM_23-1_37-42
[10] Van Riel, J., Poels, G., Viaene, S.; Exploring Capability Mapping as a
Tool for Digital Transformation: Insights from a Case Study.
In International Conference on Business Process Modeling, Development
and Support Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland.; 2023; pp. 243-255
[11] Teichert, R.; Digital transformation maturity: A systematic review of
literature.; Acta universitatis agriculturae et silviculturae mendelianae
brunensis.; 2019
[12] Aldea, A., Iacob, M. E., Van Hillegersberg, J., Quartel, D., Franken, H.;
Capability-based planning with ArchiMate-Linking motivation to
implementation.; In International Conference on Enterprise Information
Systems (Vol. 2), SciTePress.; 2015; pp. 352-359
[13] Industrial Internet Consortium, IIC vocabulary, https://hub.
iiconsortium.org/vocabulary; 2022; (Accessed on 04/17/2024).
[14] Grieves, M.; PLM Initiatives [Powerpoint Slides].; Product Lifecycle
Management Special Meeting; 2002.
[15] Rasor, R,, Göllner, D., Bernijazov; Towards collaborative life cycle
specification of digital twins in manufacturing value chains.; Procedia
CIRP 98; 2021; p. 229-234.
[16] Digital Twin Consortium; The Digital Twin Capabilities Periodic Table.;
2022; (Accessed on 04/17/2024).
[17] Rüb, J., & Bahemia, H; A review of the literature on smart factory
implementation; In 2019 IEEE international conference on engineering,
technology and innovation (ICE/ITMC, IEEE); 2019; p. 1-9
[18] Davis, J., Edgar, T., Graybill, R., Korambath, P., Schott, B., Swink, D.,
Wang, J., Wetzel, J.; Smart manufacturing. Annual review of chemical and
biomolecular engineering, 6; 2015; p. 141-160.
[19] Susanto, A. H., Simatupang, T., Wasesa, M.; Industry 4.0 Maturity
Models to Support Smart Manufacturing Transformation: A Systematic
Literature Review. Jurnal RESTI (Rekayasa Sistem dan Teknologi
Informasi), 7(2); 2023; p. 334-344.
[20] Chen, B., Wan, J., Shu, L., Li, P., Mukherjee, M., Yin, B; Smart factory
of industry 4.0: Key technologies, application case, and challenges. IEEE
Access, 6; 2017; p. 6505-6519.
[21] Wang, S., Wan, J., Li, D., & Zhang, C.; Implementing smart factory of
industrie 4.0: an outlook; International journal of distributed sensor
networks, 12(1); 2016; p. 3159805
[22] Rößler, M. P., & Haschemi, M.; Smart Factory Assessment (SFA).;
Zeitschrift für wirtschaftlichen Fabrikbetrieb, 112(10); 2017; p. 699-703
[23] Budde, L., Hänggi, R., Friedli, T., Rüedy, A.; Smart Factory Navigator.
In Smart Factory Navigator: Identifying and Implementing the Most
Beneficial Use Cases for Your Company - 44 Use Cases That Will Drive
Your Operational Performance and Digital Service Business; Cham:
Springer International Publishing; 2022; p. 7-31
[24] The Open Group Architecture Framework, Version 9.2; Section 28:
Capability-Based Planning.; 2018; (Accessed on 04/17/2024).
[25] Van Riel, J., Poels, G.; A Method for Developing Generic Capability
Maps: A Design Science Study in the Professional Sport Industry.
Business & Information Systems Engineering, 65(4); 2023; p. 403-424.
[26] Freitag, A.; Applying business capabilities in a corporate buyer M&A
process. Springer.; 2014
[27] Xiao, Y., Watson, M.; Guidance on conducting a systematic literature
review; Journal of planning education and research 39.1; 2019; p. 93-112
[28] Sachs, J., Landernäs, K.; Review of 5G capabilities for smart
manufacturing. In 2021 17th International Symposium on Wireless
Communication Systems (ISWCS, IEEE); 2021; p. 1-6
[29] Morgan, J., Halton, M., Qiao, Y., Breslin, J. G.; Industry 4.0 smart
reconfigurable manufacturing machines, Journal of Manufacturing
Systems, 59; 2021; p. 481-506
[30] Haricha, K., Khiat, A., Issaoui, Y., Bahnasse, A., Ouajji, H.; Recent
technological progress to empower smart manufacturing: Review and
potential guidelines., IEEE Access.; 2023