--- PAGE 1 ---
HAL Id: hal-01765262
https://inria.hal.science/hal-01765262v1
Submitted on 12 Apr 2018
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive
for the deposit and dissemination of scientific re-
search documents, whether they arepublished or not.
Thedocumentsmaycomefromteachingandresearch
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or pri-
vate research centers.
L’archiveouvertepluridisciplinaireHAL,estdes-
tinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents scien-
tifiquesdeniveaurecherche, publiésounon, émanant
des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche
français ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou
privés.
Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 - Attribution - International License
An Analysis of Enterprise Architecture for Federated
Environments
Niklas Lindström, Björn Nyström, Jelena Zdravkovic
To cite this version:
Niklas Lindström, Björn Nyström, Jelena Zdravkovic. An Analysis of Enterprise Architecture for Federated
Environments. 10th IFIP Working Conference on The Practice of Enterprise Modeling (PoEM), Nov 2017,
Leuven, Belgium. pp.156-170, ⟨10.1007/978-3-319-70241-4_11⟩. ⟨hal-01765262⟩

--- PAGE 2 ---
An Analysis of Enterprise Architecture for Federated
Environments
Niklas Lindström1
, Björn Nyström2
, Jelena Zdravkovic2
1
HSB Stockholm, Fleminggatan 41, Sweden
2
Department of Computer and Systems Sciences, Stockholm University, Kista, Sweden
niklas.lindstrom@hsb.se, [bjny7070, jelenaz]@dsv.su.se
Abstract. The challenge of business and IT-alignment has been a major concern
for IT managers over the last few decades, as an increased congruence between
the two aspects improves effectivity and results in organizations. Enterprise
Architecture (EA) addresses the alignment by providing a holistic model-based
view of the organization. However, previous research has revealed some generic
discrepancies in prominent EA frameworks regarding their support towards more
decentralized organizational structures. Following a case study research of a
federated organization this paper analyzesin depth The Open Group Architecture
Framework (TOGAF) EA framework, and based on identified discrepancies how
it should be extended to provide an adequate support. By enabling the
establishment and maintenance of a federated EA, the proposed extension should
further increase the business and IT-alignment for federated organizations.
Keywords: Enterprise Architecture, TOGAF, Organizational structure
1 Introduction
A major concern for IT managers during the last few decades has been business-IT
alignment [1], [2]. The emergence of the global and increasingly complex
organizational environments has entailed a wider use of decentralized structures within
them. Decentralization allows organizations to encounter some of the past decade’s
most important business concerns, including cost reduction, productivity, agility, and
time to market [3]. However, the alignment can become increasingly difficult when
utilizing a decentralized structure due to the decision-power being pushed out into the
organization, increasing the challenge of moving in a unanimous direction [4], [5].
Research has shown that an organization with effective alignment between business
and IT outperform non-aligned organizations in both turnover and growth [2], [6], [7].
To solve the alignment problems, there are multiple theoretical approaches available.
Earlierresearch haspresented approachessuch asdeveloping adigital businessstrategy
[6], [8], following IT governance models [9], and implementing enterprise architecture
frameworks [7]. Enterprise Architecture (EA) is a comprehensive framework that links
an enterprise's main components, e.g. business strategy and goals, processes,
informationsystemsandinfrastructure[10],providingaholistic,model-basedblueprint

--- PAGE 3 ---
of the enterprise. EA frameworks used in today’s organizations are mostly The Open
Group Framework (TOGAF) [11], Federal Enterprise Architecture (FEA) [12],
Department of Defense Architecture Framework (DoDAF) [13], British Ministry of
Defense Architecture Framework (MODAF) [14], and NATO Architecture Framework
(NAF) [15]. Sandkuhl et al. [16] mention that TOGAF is more widely used across
multiplebranchesthantheotherframeworkspreviouslynamed.AccordingtoTheOpen
Group’s blog [17], the amount of TOGAF certified people across the globe has now
exceeded 60 000, compared to 7000 the year 2011 and 13 000 during the year 2013
which gives an indication of its fast-paced growth.
By combining business strategy and goals, processes, and information systems in an
enterprise and not solely focusing on specific aspects (such as strategy or IT
governance), it should be possible to solve the business-IT alignment problem.
However, previous research has shown that there are discrepancies between the EA and
its possibility to solve major CIO concerns, such as decision support for issues related
to the IT organization and estimating and managing costs [18]. Furthermore, Speckert
et al. [19], argue that EA frameworks do not support decentralized organizational
structures. Combined with [20] stating that the frameworks were initially developed
focusing on a centralization of IT and management; it entails an emergenceofproblems
such as governance and decision-making irregularities in decentralized organizations.
The paper presents a case study research conducted in a large Swedish company in
the real estate business domain. The research critically analyzed TOGAF and the way
of working in the organization. Using the elicited knowledge, it attempted to highlight
insufficiencies of TOGAF in contrast to the identified federated structural aspects of
the organization, and suggest potential improvements. The results should facilitate
further harmonization between EA and federated organizations as well as it should
increase the business-IT alignment of organizations with similar characteristics.
The paper is organized as follows: section 2 presents a brief overview of EA and
TOGAF, different organization structures, and related works. Section 3 describes the
organization of the case study, while section 4 provides research results in details.
Section 5 follows with a discussion of the results, and section 6 provides concluding
remarks as well as relevant directions for further research.
2 Background
2.1 EA, TOGAF
Situated at the level of an enterprise, EA regards an interconnected overarching set of
methods, principles, and models utilized in the development and implementation of an
enterprise’s organizational structure, business processes, information systems, and
infrastructure, attempting to align business with IT [21]. Because developing an EA
generates a significant number of architectural components, e.g. artefacts, dividing the
EA into different architecture layers provides a structure among the components and
reduces the number of elements residing in the same model. TOGAF is an EA
framework created by The Open Group [22] defining a subset of architecture layers:

--- PAGE 4 ---
Business Architecture; Information System Architecture (including Data- and
Application Architecture); and Technology Architecture. Furthermore, the framework
enables the inclusion of other architectural styles, such as Security Architecture and
Service Oriented Architecture (SOA). TOGAF is divided into six parts, and each part
isaccountedforasamaincomponent:ArchitectureDevelopmentModel(ADM),ADM
Guidelines and Techniques, Architecture Content Framework, Enterprise Continuum
and Tools, Reference Models and Architecture Capability Framework. Below we
describe the framework’s essences relevant for the results of the study.
ADM describes a process for developing and managing the TOGAF core [11]; the
process is repeatable and an iterative cycle for building and transforming the
organization. Figure 1 below visualizes the ADM process, with the circles representing
the main phases A-H and a continuous Requirements Management phase, and the
arrows representing the flow of artefacts between the phases.
Architecture Capability Framework presents support to establish, operate and
control at the enterprise level the architecture function according to the organization
structure, business processes, roles, responsibilities, and skills, controlled at the
enterprise level [11]. Two vital concepts involving the implementation, development,
and governance of the EA, is Architecture Governance and Architecture Board, both
positioned in the Architecture Capability Framework. The concept of Architecture
Governance [11, Ch. 50] includes a framework and guidelines regarding architecture
governance. TOGAF suggests that architecture governance could be practiced in four
separate domains, including corporate, technology, IT, and architecture governance. In
turn, each domain and their area of responsibility may exist in multiple levels within
the whole enterprise. The Architecture Governance Framework is shown in figure 1.
Fig. 1. TOGAF’s ADM process (left) and Architecture Governance Framework [11]
To increase the success rate of architecture’s governance, TOGAF suggests the
implementation of an Architecture Board. The concept of Architecture Board [11, Ch.
47] refers to a cross-organization group overseeing the implementation of the

--- PAGE 5 ---
architecture strategy. Its main responsibilities include providing the basis for all
decision-making regarding the various architectures, enforcing architecture
compliance, and ensuring compliance and adherence with specified Architecture
Contracts, which details joint requirements regarding the architectures. TOGAF
suggests that the Architecture Board should consist of four or five members.
2.2 Organizational Structure
Enterprise activities are often grouped into subdivisions - departments, such as
marketing, sales, manufacturing. The capabilities, responsibilities, and interconnection
of the various subdivisions are defined in enterprise’s organizational structure referring
to the formal configuration between individuals and groups regarding the allocation of
tasks, responsibilities, and authority within the organization [23, p. 1]. Furthermore,
[24, p. 451] states that organizational structure shapes an ecology of distinct frames that
exist at the level of organizational subunits. Organizations can be distinguished from a
few different dimensions [23], where the relevant for this study is The Type of
Decentralization, referring to where decisions in the organization are conducted.
Deciding upon the degree of decentralization in an organization can be a difficult
task. Typically, different organizations, although facing similar conditions and
environment, will choose different settings of decentralization, as described in [25]. In
figure 2, three main kinds of organizational structures are visualized, including a)
Centralized, b) Federated, and c) Decentralized. The circle shaped forms in the figure
represent various subunits of the organization, and the archs refer to the steering forces
of decision-making power and authority.
Fig. 2. Three types of organizational structure
A centralized structure induces that the steering forces flow from a center unit towards
the various subunits, and with a decision-making process where all authority and power
resides within one center, e.g. a top management group or one specific individual,
providing a tight type of structure with increased coordination and supervision [26]. A
federated structure, similarly to the centralized approach, contains a center; however,
the steering forces between the center and subunits are bidirectional and exist between
thesubunits,makingthecentralunitinformal.Afederatedstructureconsistsofmultiple
(semi-)autonomous subunits sharing a common mission and purpose. Usually, the
subunits together share the control of the central body, and each subunit enters the
larger association voluntarily. A decentralized structure contains no central unit, i.e.
authority and decision power are shared among organizational subunits [26].

--- PAGE 6 ---
Utilizing a centralized structure implies that all decisions are founded on knowledge
relying on the central unit. However, by moving towards a more decentralized
approach, decisions can be made by people with increased knowledge regarding the
specific area of business. Decentralization suits situations when sufficient knowledge
tosupportthedecision-makingprocessistoocumbersometotransferorwhencognitive
limitations exist in the central unit. Furthermore, decentralization enables quicker
adoption to local dynamic environments by reducing steps in the decision-making
process, and it contributes to stimulating creativity and innovation [26]. According to
[27], a trade-off exists between knowledge transfer costs and control costs. Larger
organizations with expanding potential facing volatile and unstable environments tend
to generate more specialized knowledge that is increasingly difficult to transfer to
decision makers, thus making decentralization a more appropriate approach.
Furthermore, according to [25], a more decentralized structure inducesbetter alignment
between the subunits’ ideas and their environment, although at the cost of reduced
learning and improvement between subunits.
2.3 Related Work
A significant amount of research has been conducted in the area of business-IT
alignment and EA, however, the articles related in the same context as ours –
decentralization issue, are very few. [27] emphasizes that the frameworks were initially
developed focusing on a centralization of IT and central management, entailing
emergence of problems such as governance and decision-making irregularities due to
the characteristics of non-centralized organizations. In an article by Lindström et al.
[18], a survey was conducted concluding that the available EA frameworks fulfill the
needs and solve problems in theory, but when compared to actual practical problems,
there are discrepancies. The survey indicated that the major concerns of Chief
Information Officers (CIOs) in Sweden are to decrease the cost of business-related
elements e.g. personnel, increase the interplay between the IT and business parts of the
organization, provide technological solutions supporting the business part of the
organization, and improve the quality of IT systems along with decreasing the costs of
IT related elements. The survey revealed that some of the available EA frameworks
provide insufficient support to solve the top concerns of the CIOs, and the authors
suggested further harmonization between the concerns and EA framework’s foci is
needed. Similar conclusions were derived in [16], [17] stating that discrepancies
between TOGAF and the federated organizational structure exist. Speckert et al. [19]
addressed the challenge of EA for decentralized organizations by investigating and
concluding that commonly utilized EA frameworksneed to be extended to support such
organizations (included even FEA, which despite the recognition of individual units
prescribes standards that are to be followed throughout the organization limiting thus
flexibilityandopinionsoftheunits).However,asfortheaspectofsolvingtheidentified
problems, the results of this paper differ. [19] suggests a more theoretical solution, by
utilizing peer production in the matters of decision making and governance within EA.
The developed artefact of this study is closer aligned to the practical operational
conduct of federated organizations and thus in more depth reflecting the characteristics

--- PAGE 7 ---
ofsuchorganizations.Therefore,theresultscompriseincreasedalignmentbetweenEA,
in particular TOGAF, and federated organization's actual way of working.
3 Business Case
The business case regards a federated Swedish organization concerned in developing,
building and managing real estate. The organization consists of multiple semi-
autonomous subunits. They are autonomous in the sense of having their customer base,
deciding upon what services they provide, and having full ownership of their economy
(figure 2). 28 federated units share a common mission and a purpose defined at a
national level. The enterprise is owned by its members and can be split into two parts,
national level, and regional level.
.
Fig. 3. The organizational structure of the enterprise
At the regional level, the core business is executed. The autonomous subunits own
the deliverables and the results that are produced. To be a member of the
enterprise/federation organization, a membership is needed, as well as compliance with
company’s regulations. The structure and operational concepts deciding how the
subunits conduct and manage their internal business is solely decided upon within each
subunit without the interference of external actors.
At the national level, there exists coordinating and supporting functions. The
National Association is the owner of the company brand and it is responsible for the
company’s vision, public appearances that regard national statements, as well as all
political involvement. AFS is the internal business support organization (swe.
Affärsstöd) merging the IT infrastructure and digital services of the federated
organization into one company to achieve synergy effects. This for example implies
that different IT functions already existing within the federated organization have been
combined into one starting thus to provide a centralized IT service. AFS works with
joint processes and approaches that the subunits within the federated organization
decide upon. Based on the needs of the federated organization, new solutions are
developed with the goal to be competitive as well as customized towards the federated
subunits’ needs. This implies that all necessary joint solutions, whether they are IT- or
business oriented, are developed, delivered and maintained by AFS. However, being

--- PAGE 8 ---
autonomous, it is not mandatory for any subunit of the federated organization to
purchase joint solutions.
Merging of multiple processes and infrastructure into one has entailed several
problems.AFShascentralizedtheITinfrastructure,whileapplicationsandITdecisions
are still decentralized. Business needs in the federated organization are identified
throughalongerdevelopmentprocess,whichincreasesthetimetomarketanddecision-
making times. The CIO of AFS has therefore requested an analysis of how the concept
of EA, and more specifically TOGAF, could solve important practical problems within
the organization such as lack of integration schemes, guidelines regarding data-
handling, architectural and platform documentation, and other, while at the same time
fully adhering to the established federated structure and way of working.
4 Case Study Results
4.1 Data Collection and Analysis
The case study combined document-readings (internal-business) and semi-structured
interviewsasthe main data collection methods. To analyze thewayofworking through
the interviews, it was necessary to determine a representative sampling. Since the
organization is well known to one of the authors, the purposive sampling was used, i.e.
the respondents were picked according to their knowledge regarding the organization
and its operations. The employees positioned as either chief of a business unit or
supporting functions were deemed to have extensive knowledge concerning the
organization, and thus they were able to provide adequate insights and information.
Data collection and sampling were conducted until theoretical saturation was reached,
i.e. when the analysis of new data solely contributed to the confirmation of previously
derived insights, which was achieved after 8 interviews.
The analysis has resulted in a thematic map consisting of the key concepts reflecting
the federated organization's ways of working (figure 4).
Fig. 4. Thematic map from the study analysis
Subunit.Thefederatedorganizationconsistsofmultiplesubunits.Thesubunitsarefully
autonomous economic powers in charge of day-to-day operations, inferring a complete
control and decision mandate, except for certain guidelines and policies specified on
the national level. Induced by the autonomous nature of the subunits, the federated

--- PAGE 9 ---
organization lacks a joint business strategy. The concept denoted Characteristics is
coupled to every Subunit and influence its Needs. Some examples of Characteristics is
the size (number of employees), turnaround, economic strength, amount of
members/customers, business units, way of working, local competition. Various
characteristics infer different needs, such as larger subunits having an expanded need
for automation due to theincreased demand for employees in non-automated processes.
The subunits of the federated organization have different needs, which can be either
unique or shared with other subunits. The subunits desire to have their needs solved by
joint solutions, but not all unique needs in a subunit can be addressed, inducing
complications for the subunits and the federation. Furthermore, investing in
information systems is expensive, and the subunits will not survive the market
competition if they keep moving in separate directions. Developing joint solutions that
work for all subunits is more efficient. To gather the proposals for the development of
joint solutions and to allow each subunit to voice their opinion, the federated
organization has developed and implemented a way of working, further described as
Business Governing.
Business governing. The concept embraces the way of taking federated business
decisions by combining Networks, Steering Committees and Board. The business
governing function in the federated organization embraces all matters, whether they are
IT-related or business-related. The business decisions are empowered, either through
AFS that develops IT solutions to support the business, or through the networks
handling strictly business-oriented matters, such as policy updates. Each core business
areawithinthefederatedorganizationhasitsownNetwork.Thenetworksarepopulated
by representatives from the subunits working in the relevant business areas. By
introducing the concept of networks, the federated organization has simplified the
subunits possibility to voice their opinion and to further increase the anchoring of
proposed ideas, boosting the persuasive force of steering in a common direction. The
concept of network acts as an interface towards the subunits to ensure their possibility
to fulfill their democratic rights. The Steering Committee is democratically chosen and
populated directly from the network representatives. By further aggregating the
networks into smaller groups, proposals can be prioritized and discussed in a
democratic matter, while also reducing the number of stakeholders involved, which
could otherwise distort the attention towards the holistic progress of the federated
organization. The steering committees could be described as filters percolating the
proposals and forwarding prioritized proposals to the board. The Board is populated by
business manager representatives from the subunits. The board's task is to assess the
proposals received from the steering committee. In the assessment process, the board
will check adherence with the federated organization deciding whether the proposal
would induce a positive or negative outcome not solely for individual subunits. An idea
assessed and accepted by the board will eventually lead to development.
Development. The development of common solutions within the federated organization
entails multiple constraints, problems, and considerations. The various Characteristics
and Needs of the individual Subunits and the great span of differentiation among them

--- PAGE 10 ---
produce a challenging way of creating common solutions, as it requires various
reorganizationsin thesubunitsand controlover employees,processdescriptions,which
is a big job especially for larger subunits. The maturity level regarding the subunits
ability to receive and utilize solutions further infers problems to the development
process, as although subunits may require the specific common solutions, their ability
to receive and utilize it correctly could be cumbersome. Furthermore, multiple subunits
possess existing individual solutions, which affect the outcome and their interest in
newly developed common solutions. Additionally, a major concern regarding the
development process involves financing, as it is voluntary for the individual subunits
to participate and purchase the common solutions. The development phase is initiated
by a pilot study, which involves a group of subunit business representatives deemed as
experts within their respective fields. The finalized pilot study suggests a solution
(whether the solution is bought on the market or self-developed) with complete pricing
including user-support, system administration, future adjustments, etc. AFS presents
the solution to all the subunits, which then have a choice to buy the solution, or not. In
the development process, when attempting to solve a common need shared throughout
the whole company, a lack of requirements exists. Often, subunits, as well as AFS, will
haveseparateinformationsystemsthatneedtobeintegratedwiththenewjointsolution.
There is an identified discrepancy between the documentation of requirements fromthe
development unit that eventually hands over the responsibility to the IT governance
unit, causing an inadequate and complicated workflow.
Change. The Change represents how the development of joint solutions affects the
subunits and federation. The subunits’ capability to receive created joint solutions
greatly varies, inducing implications in the implementation process, i.e. how receivable
the change is in the specific subunit. This is due to the subunits’ different existing
solutions, maturity levels (resource pool, commitment, knowledge, etc.), local
strategies, and characteristics. Hence, change management is of great importance and
it can become a major concern for producing desired outcomes of the common
solutions. Furthermore, it is of great importance to persuade as many subunits as
possiblewith thenecessityfor changeinorder todecreasetheoverallcostsandsimplify
future development.
4.2 Business Case and TOGAF
In this section, the derived and analyzed way of working in the federated organization
is compared to relevant propositions and concepts from TOGAF. The ADM process is
the heart of TOGAF, providing a method for developing and managing the EA
lifecycle. However, due to the generic level of the ADM process and its main
components such as Architecture Capability Framework being in the focus of this
study, i.e. their insufficiencies in the support, TOGAF lacks customization towards
organizations of various structures, such as federated organizations.
According to the Architecture Governance, the successfulness of the architecture
function requires certain organizational structures, processes, roles, and
responsibilities. The organizational structures and roles are clearly defined within the

--- PAGE 11 ---
ramification of a centralized organization. However, TOGAF provides less or nearly
no support regarding decision-making power and mandate to organizational structures
not utilizing a centralized, hierarchical structure.
Set in contrast to the federated organization's way of working, some areas of concern
can be identified. In the federated organization, the concept of an enterprise-wide
control system trying to control adherence to the common strategy, would be neglected
due to the autonomous nature of the subunits and the fact that no party within the
federated organization could possibly hold that type of mandate. Requirements
produced within the federated organization require increased involvement of subunits
in order to boost the anchoring, such as IT-security aspects for example. The
Requirement Managements phase is a major component inside the ADM process. Its
main objective is to ensure that requirements are available and managed throughout the
whole ADM process and all of its relevant phases. However, TOGAF does not mention
within the different phases how the requirements should be collected and prioritized
except that the prioritization should be conducted according to the architecture vision.
The concept of Architecture Board is according to TOGAF a key success factor of
Architecture’s governance. Compared to the federated organization's way of working,
multiple concerns can be identified. The suggested size of 4-5 members, would neglect
the subunits' possibility to voice their opinion, as 10 members would not be able to
handle a large quantity of subunits, inducing a decreased level of anchoring regarding
proposals. Furthermore, as the Architecture Board is a major part of the Architecture
Governance, and the fact that it should act as a top management type of group
controlling adherence and compliance regarding the EA, it would be neglected in the
federated organization due the autonomous state of the subunits. Furthermore,
controlling adherence to the architecture vision could be problematic, as there is no
authority holding the ability to supervise the subunits' actions.
Considering the concepts of Change and Development derived in the analysis of the
interviews in comparison to the proposed relevant concepts of TOGAF, the identified
problems involves the areas of governing and decision-making. The proposed relevant
areas regarding change and development in TOGAF, stating what is needed to solve
the practical problems of an organization, such as documentation and integration, is
deemed appropriate for various organizational structures. However, the areas of how it
should be implemented and maintained could become problematic, as mentioned
previouslyinthissection.Asmentionedcontrollingadherencetothearchitecturevision
could be problematic, as there is no authority holding the ability to supervise the
subunits' actions.
Concluding, a gap exists between TOGAF’s proposal for having a governing body
(architecture board, architecture governance), and the ability for a federated
organization to have a governing body that is formed according to the TOGAF
documentation. TOGAF does not provide necessary details to support federated
organizations. Any provided guideline or examples involve a centralized way of
working, such as illustrated Architecture Governance and Architecture Board. From an
enterprise-wide organizational viewpoint, this approach of working is not feasible nor
supportive to a federated organization.

--- PAGE 12 ---
4.3 Proposal
The main requirement of the proposed solution is to support federated organizations to
implement and maintain an EA such as TOGAF by adding an extension according to
the specifics of the federated organizational structure characteristics as it is earlier
described.Twomainalternativesexcelledfromthegeneratedideasthatwerediscussed:
Alternative 1: Design an entity (conceptual) model representing an organizational
structure that will serve as an alternative to the Architecture Board, i.e. an extension to
the Architecture Capability Framework [11, p. Chapter 45]. The organizational
structure will provide guidelines to the decision and governing aspects of an EA, and
support the implementation and maintenance of an EA in federated environments.
Alternative 2: Design a method for supporting an organizational structure change in
the federated organizations using TOGAF. The artefact would provide guidelines on
how the federated organization should restructure in order to adhere to the concepts of
TOGAF, and thus enable a successful transition into utilizing the framework.
Selecting alternative 2 would result in an organization-specific solution, requiring
possibly major restructuring within the enterprise, which in turn would substantially
affect the organization's way of working. In addition, the foundation of the enterprise
is of greater importance than any framework, as it has been developed and refined over
a significant period. The selection of alternative 1 is further validated by the fact that it
would result in a more generalized solution, i.e. trying to fit TOGAF onto the
organization rather than the opposite. The resulting conceptual model will contribute to
federated organizations' ability to adhere and include all relevant subunits, allowing
increased anchoring of proposals throughout the whole enterprise.
In figure 5, the proposed solution (artefact) of alternative 1 is presented. The circles
of the figure represent the entities of the model. The cardinality of the specific entity is
inferred by the amount of circles, i.e. multiple circles imply a higher quantity of the
entity. The arrows in figure 5 refer to how the various entities are related.
Fig. 5. The proposed artefact – an extension to support federated organizations
The Subunits are completely autonomous and control day-to-day operations. They
generate their own revenue, and are enabled to produce ideas commonly influenced by
specific needs and characteristics for new developments. The Network is populated by
representatives from the Subunits. Each core business area within the federated
organization has its own Network. The Steering Committee is democratically chosen
from the Network, by the Network representatives, in order to prioritize the ideas. The
Board consistsof business manager representatives fromtheSubunits in order to accept
or decline ideas imparted from the Steering Committees.

--- PAGE 13 ---
In the model, subunits influence all aspects of business development. The subunits
populate the networks, which in turn populate the steering committees. Furthermore,
the subunits also populate the board. The selection of representatives for the steering
committee is performed utilizing a democratic process, while each subunit decides on
their representative on their own. By involving the subunits in every area and aspect of
the decision making process, an increased anchoring of proposals can be reached.
Increasedanchoringandsubunitinvolvementprovidesgreaterpossibilityofconvincing
subunits to steer in a common direction, benefiting the federated organization as a
whole.
The proposed model can be positioned as an extension within the Architecture
Governance Framework (figure 1, right). The governance framework is a part of the
overarching Architecture Capability Framework, which is an integral part of
successfully operating an architecture function within the enterprise. As an extension
of the Architecture Governance Framework, the artefact will be seen as an alternative
solution, replacing the CIO/CTO function and the Architecture Board. The artefact is
not contradicting or refining any other concepts proposed in TOGAF; in the ADM
process or the content meta-model.
5 Discussion of Results
In this section, an example of a theoretical case utilizing the designed and developed
artefactwillbecomparedtothecurrentTOGAFrecommendations.Thetheoreticalcase
starts with the emergence of multiple needs in the subunits of a federated organization,
and ends with an enterprise-wide impact. In table 1, the managing of the needs by
TOGAF and the proposed solution is presented.
Table 1.Theoretical case comparison
Theoretical
Case Phase
TOGAF Solution artefact
Gather needs No guidance stating how to
collect needs emerging from
various sources.
The needs of a particular subunit are
presented to networks represented by the
subunits of the federated organization
allowing for the gathering of other
subunits' similar needs.
Prioritize needs No guidance stating how to
identify and prioritize needs
other than conducting a gap
analysis detailing benefits
and drawbacks.
Prioritization is performed by the
steering committee, populated by the
subunits. In turn, this allows for
increased subunit involvement.
Furthermore, this enables prioritized
solutions to satisfy a majority of the
needs rather than what is most beneficial
towards one specific unit or enterprise.

--- PAGE 14 ---
Control holistic
adherence
Suggests the utilization of an
Architecture Board in charge
of controlling the holistic
adherence of solutions.
Utilizing the artefact, the concept
denoted Board (Fig. 5) handles the
adherence controlling. The board
increases the enterprise- wide
involvement as it is populated by
subunits.
Solution
acceptance
Using the stated
recommendations, the final
solution suffer from
decreased enterprise-wide
acceptance. Multiple steps in
the process from needs to
solution entails top-
management decision and
decreased involvement of the
subunits of the federated
organization.
As the artefact ensures involvement of
subunits throughout the whole process,
the proposed solution will have
increased enterprise-wide acceptance,
and further the solution will satisfy a
majority of the subunits' needs.
The main goal of implementing a framework such as TOGAF is to optimize an
enterprise'scapabilityto supportchangeand to increasethesuccessfulnessindelivering
business strategy. Its popularity on the market is a sign that it supports that capability.
However, while using examples of typical centralized organizational structures and the
broad generalization given in the framework, it needs to be expanded to giving
examples for other organizational structures. In organizations that are not centrally
controlled, the decision mandate of what and how something should be done cannot be
given to only one group. The solution that is proposed should be seen as an extension
or alternative to TOGAF's Architecture Board [11], and as such will affect the
Architecture Governance and Requirements Management.
The problem is not unique to the examined organization’s domain. There are
multiple businesses in Sweden, both public and private, facing the same governance
and alignment problems. The decision rights are decentralized while the IT is
attempting to be centralized and the whole organization uses a federated structure. One
could always argue that all companies are unique depending on the granularity.
However, this study approaches the federated characteristics and business procedures
with a holistic view. Thus, this proposal is a representative for generalization towards
larger federated organizations.
6 Concluding Remarks
The paper presented a case study research conducted in a large Swedish company in
the real estate business domain. It contrasted TOGAF’s concepts and methods related
to governance with the way of working in the federated organization of the case study.
Usingtheelicitedknowledgefromorganization’sexperts,itemphasizedinsufficiencies

--- PAGE 15 ---
of TOGAF to support the identified federated structural aspects of theorganization, and
suggest potential improvements. In particular, the concepts regarding governing and
decision making in TOGAF, including but not limited to Architecture Governance,
Architecture Board, and Requirements Management, would be neglected in a federated
organization due to the autonomous state and quantity of various subunits.
The resulting solution, with similar areas of impact as the Architecture Board
proposedbyTOGAF,isaimed toactasasupporttoguidefederatedorganizationswhen
implementing and maintaining an EA, such as TOGAF. By ensuring the involvement
of all relevant subunits, and further increasing the anchoring of proposals throughout
the organization, the artefact could increase the alignment between business and IT.
The presented solution should be of a particular interest for the case organization,
as it was produced utilizing its own structure and the way of working as a model. Large
federated organizations would also benefit from the result as it could provide guidance
and increased success rate when implementing TOGAF.
To further confirm the validity and control the functionality of the presented
solution, it should be tested in an actual practical case involving a federated
organization and their implementation of TOGAF. Secondly, as the artefact was
derived utilizing only one specific federated organization, future research should
involve multiple federated organizations in order to increase the credibility of the
results and to further contribute to an increasingly generalized conclusion. Thirdly, as
this research involved a federated organization not utilizing TOGAF, it would be of
interest to analyze a federated organization working with TOGAF to identify concrete
practical problems in their day-to-day business. The focus towards TOGAF can be a
hindrance when researching concerns that focus on organizational forms and concepts.
Finally, a research direction of interest includes analysis for supporting customers’
preferences [28] in different organizational forms.
References
1. Luftman, J. and Ben-Zvi, T. Key Issues for IT Executives 2011: Cautious Optimism in
Uncertain Economic Times. MIS Quarterly Executive, Vol. 10 Issue 4, p203-212 (2011)
2. Silvius, A. J. G., de Waal, B. and Smit, J. Business and IT Alignment; Answers and
Remaining Questions. In PACIS 2009 Proceedings http://aisel.aisnet.org/cgi/
viewcontent.cgi?article=1044&context=pacis2009 (2009)
3. Luftman, J. Assessing Business-IT Alignment Maturity. Communication of Association for
Information Systems, vol. 4, no. 1, Dec. (2000
4. Kearns, G.S. and Sabherwal, R. Strategic Alignment between Business and Information
Technology: A Knowledge-Based View of Behaviors, Outcome, and Consequences. Journal
of Management Information Systems, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 129–162, Dec. (2006)
5. Tarigan, R. An Evaluation of the Relationship between Alignment of Strategic Priorities and
Manufacturing Performance. International Journal of Management, 22(4), 586–597. (2005)
6. Chan, Y. E. and Reich, B. H. IT alignment: what have we learned? .Journal of Information
technology, 22(4), 297-315, (2007)
7. Chan, Y. E. Huff, S., Barclay, D, and Copeland, D. Business Strategic Orientation,
Information Systems Strategic Orientation, and Strategic Alignment. Journal of Information
Systems Research, 125 – 150 June (1997)

--- PAGE 16 ---
8. Bharadwaj, A., Sawy, E., Pavlou, O. and Venkatraman, N. Digital Business Strategy:
Toward a Next Generation of Insights. Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY,
SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2742300, Jun. (2013)
9. Weill, P. Don’t just lead, govern: How top-performing firms govern IT. MIS Quarterly
Executive., Vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1– 17 (2004)
10. Sessions, R. A Comparison of the Top Four Enterprise-Architecture Methodologies. May-
(2007) Available: https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/bb466232.aspx
11. TOGAF® 9.1. Available: http://pubs.opengroup.org/architecture/togaf9-doc/arch/
12. FEA Consolidated Reference Model Document Version 2.3. Available:
https://www.fsa.usda.gov/Assets/USDA-FSA-Public/usdafiles/SDLC-non-secure/
Enterprise-Architecture- Program-/Training/Docs/FEA
13. DODAF - DOD Architecture Framework Version 2.02 - DOD Deputy Chief Information
Officer. Available: http://dodcio.defense.gov/Library/DoD-Architecture-Framework/
14. MOD Architecture Framework - GOV.UK. Available: https://www.gov.uk/guidance/mod-
architecture-framework
15. UK Ministry of Defense. Proposed NAF v4 Meta-Model (MODEM). NATO Architecture
Framework v4.0 Documentation, 2013. Available: http://nafdocs.org/modem
16. Sandkuhl, K., Stirna, J., Persson, A. and Wiotzki, M. Enterprise Modeling: Tackling
Business Challenges with 4EM Method. Springer Publishing Company, Incorporated (2014)
17. TOGAF 9.1 | The Open Group Blog. Available: https://blog.opengroup.org/tag/togaf-9-1/
18. Lindström, Å., Johnson, P, Johansson, E., Ekstedt, M. and Simonsson, M. A survey on CIO
concerns-doEAframeworkssupportthem? InfSystFront,vol.2006,no.8,pp.81–90,(2006)
19. Speckert,T., Rychkova,I.,Zdravkovic,J.andNurcan,S.On the Changing RoleofEnterprise
Architecture in Decentralized Environments: State of the Art. In 17th
IEEE International
Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Conference Workshops, 2013, pp. 310–318 (2013)
20. Rabelo, R. J., Noran, O. and P. Bernus. Towards the Next Generation Service Oriented
Enterprise Architecture. In: IEEE 19th
EDOC Workshop, pp. 91–100 (2015)
21. Jonkers, H., Lankhorst, M., ter Doest, H., Arbab, F., Bosma, H. and Wieringa, R. Enterprise
architecture: Management tool and blueprint for the organization. Journal of Information
Systems Frontier, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 63–66, Feb. (2006)
22. Leading the development of open, vendor-neutral IT standards and certifications | The Open
Group. Available: http://www.opengroup.org/
23. Lunenberg, F.C. Organizational Structure: Mintzberg’s Framework. Int. Journal of Scholar
Acad. Intellect. Divers., vol. 14, no. 1, (2012)
24. Jacobides, M. J. The Inherent Limits of Organizational Structure and the Unfulfilled Role of
Hierarchy: Lessons from a Near-War. Journal Organ. Sci., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 455–477 (2007)
25. Chang, M.H. and Harrington, J. E. Centralization vs. Decentralization in a Multi-Unit
Organization: A Computational Model of a Retail Chain as a Multi-Agent Adaptive System.
Journal of Management Sci., vol. 46, no. 11, pp. 1427–1440, Nov (2000)
26. Mintzberg, H. The Structuring of Organizations: A Synthesis of the Research. Michigan:
Prentice-Hall, (1979)
27. Christie,A.,Joye,M.andWatts,R.Decentralizationofthefirm:theoryandevidence.Journal
of Corp. Finance, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 3–36, (2003)
28. Svee, E.O., Giannoulis, C., and Zdravkovic, J.: Modeling Business Strategy: a Consumer
Value Perspective, Proceedings of Practice of Enterprise Modeling (PoEM 2011), Oslo,
Norway, Springer, LNBIP vol. 92, pp. 67-81. (2011)