--- PAGE 1 ---
Copyright © 2011–2024. This material is presented to ensure timely dissemination of scholarly and
technical work. Authors or other copyright holders retain copyright and all rights therein. All people
copying this information must adhere to the terms and constraints invoked by each author's copyright.
Usually, these works may not be reposted without the copyright holder’s explicit permission. The
following article is the POST-PRINTS version. An updated version will be available when the article
is fully published. You may contact the authors directly for a copy if you do not have access. The
current reference for this work is as follows:
Michelle René Lowry, Paul Benjamin Lowry, Sutirtha (Suti) Chatterjee, Gregory D. Moody, and
Vernon J. Richardson (2024). “Achieving strategic alignment between business and information
technology with information technology governance: The role of commitment to principles and
top-leadership support” European Journal of Information Systems (EJIS) (accepted 06-Aug-
2024) (DOI: 10.1080/0960085X.2024.2390998)
.
If you have any questions, want to request a copy of the final version of the article, or would like
copies of other articles we’ve published, please contact any of us directly as follows:
• Dr. Michelle René Lowry
o Accounting and Information Systems
o Pamplin College of Business, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, USA
o Website: https://acis.pamplin.vt.edu/directory/michelle-lowry.html
o E-mail: michellel@vt.edu
• Prof. Paul Benjamin Lowry
o Business Information tchnology
o Pamplin College of Business, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, USA
o Website: https://sites.google.com/site/professorlowrypaulbenjamin/home
o System to request Paul’s
articles:https://seanacademic.qualtrics.com/SE/?SID=SV_7WCaP0V7FA0GWWx
o E-mail: Paul.Lowry.PhD@gmail.com
• Prof. Sutirtha (Suti) Chatterjee
o Lee Business School
o University of Nevada, Las Vegas
o Website: https://www.unlv.edu/people/sutirtha-chatterjee
o E-mail: sutirtha.chatterjee@unlv.edu
• Prof. Vernon J. Richardson
o Department of Accounting
o University of Arkansas
o Website:
https://walton.uark.edu/departments/accounting/directory/uid/vjricha/name/Vernon+J.+
Richardson/
o E-mail: vjricha@uark.edu

--- PAGE 2 ---
Achieving Strategic Alignment between Business and Information Technology
with Information Technology Governance: The Role of Commitment to
Principles and Top-Leadership Support
Michelle René Lowry*
Assistant Professor
Accounting and Information Systems, Pamplin College of Business
Virginia Polytechnic and State University, Blacksburg, VA, 24061, United States
michellel@vt.edu
Paul Benjamin Lowry
Eminent Scholar and Suzanne Parker Thornhill Chair Professor
Business Information Technology Department, Pamplin College of Business
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University Blacksburg, VA, 24061, United States
Paul.Lowry.PhD@gmail.com
Sutirtha (“Suti”) Chatterjee
Associate Professor of Information Systems
Department of Management, Entrepreneurship, and Technology, Lee Business School
University of Nevada, Las Vegas
sutirtha.chatterjee@unlv.edu
Gregory D. Moody
Associate Professor, Lee Professor of Information Systems
Department of Management, Entrepreneurship, and Technology, Lee Business School
University of Nevada, Las Vegas
gregory.moody@unlv.edu
Vernon J. Richardson
Distinguished Professor of Accounting and the W. Glezen Chair
Department of Accounting, Sam M. Walton College of Business
University of Arkansas
vrichardson@walton.uark.edu
*Corresponding author
Competing interests statement: there are no relevant financial or non-financial competing interests to
report.
Grant funding: No funding was received.

--- PAGE 3 ---
1
Achieving Strategic Alignment between Business and Information Technology
with Information Technology Governance: The Role of Commitment to
Principles and Top-Leadership Support
Abstract
IT governance (ITG) is crucial in achieving IT strategic alignment, but many organizations find this to be
an elusive goal. We thus expand ITG into two components: ITG mechanisms and ITG principles. We
propose that beyond the mere option of ITG mechanisms, organizations must fully embrace the broader
“spirit” of ITG, which occurs when an organization is committed to ITG principles coupled with top
leadership support. To test our theorization, we first developed and validated two new measures. We used
the ITG framework of COBIT to create a measure of commitment to COBIT principles (CCP), and we
found that CCP fully mediates ITG mechanisms’ relationship with strategic alignment. We thus illuminate
a missing link between adopting ITG mechanisms and achieving strategic alignment by demonstrating the
need to focus on ITG principles. We show that top leadership support for IT, including support at the board
level, not only enhances CCP but also directly contributes to improved strategic alignment. Our study
establishes that adopting ITG mechanisms is necessary but insufficient for achieving strategic alignment.
Effective organizations go beyond implementing isolated ITG mechanisms; they fully embrace integrated
COBIT-based principles, guided by a strong infusion of top leadership support, including board-level
support.
Keywords: Information technology governance (ITG), strategic alignment, corporate governance, top
leadership support for IT, COBIT, COBIT principles, latent construct measurement
1. Introduction
Research on contemporary organizations has highlighted two interrelated considerations necessary for
achieving organizational success using information technology (IT): IT governance (ITG) and the
alignment of the organization’s IT with its overall business strategy (i.e., IT strategic alignment, hereafter
“strategic alignment”) (Peppard, 2020). ITG can be understood as the “decision rights and accountability
framework used to ensure the alignment of IT-related activities with the organization’s strategy and

--- PAGE 4 ---
2
objectives” (Gregory et al., 2018, p. 1225). ITG guides the use of IT to create business value—an absolute
necessity in contemporary IT-enabled organizations (Benaroch & Chernobai, 2017; Buchwald et al., 2014;
Wu et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2016). In practice, ITG is often implemented with the aid of an ITG
framework, which can be defined as a principles-based set of best practices that guides an organization’s
design, implementation, and improvement of its ITG system (Rubino & Vitolla, 2014). An ITG framework
provides a set of principles and mechanisms for ITG. ITG mechanisms are operationalized structural,
processual, and relational components of the ITG system (Wu & Saunders, 2016; Zhen et al., 2021).
Notably, an effective ITG system requires the mechanisms to be in place (Wu et al., 2015), but ITG
frameworks include both operational ITG mechanisms and principles that guide ITG design,
implementation, and improvement (ISACA, 2012a).
Strategic alignment—the stated goal of ITG—can be defined as the extent to which there is a fit
between the business strategy and IT strategy (Chan et al., 1997; Coltman et al., 2015; Queiroz, 2017;
Tallon et al., 2016).1
It has been argued that strategic alignment is how an organization achieves IT-enabled
performance and sustainable competitive advantage (Gerow et al., 2014; Gerow et al., 2015; Sabherwal et
al., 2019). Researchers have long theorized that ITG is crucial to achieving strategic alignment. For
example, the literature investigating the link between ITG and strategic alignment has observed that
adopting ITG leads to strategic alignment, which can, in turn, drive organizational success (Schlosser et al.,
2015; Wu et al., 2015). Although this optimistic account of the role of ITG in influencing organizational
success often holds,2
this relationship should be scrutinized because it is frequently challenging to attain
effectiveITG(Tiwanaet al.,2013).Despitethebest intentions,manyorganizationsoftenfindit challenging
to realize ITG’s promise of strategic value (Asgarkhani et al., 2017; Ranesh et al., 2022). Consequently,
strategic alignment—and, ultimately, organizational performance—are compromised.
There is a clear need for more research on why ITG can fail to lead to strategic alignment. Our study
addresses this research gap by problematizing the ITG→strategic alignment relationship. Focusing on this
well-known relationship, we propose that four extant ITG and strategic alignment literature assumptions

--- PAGE 5 ---
3
must be reevaluated.
The first two assumptions relate to ITG and its mechanisms: the first is the conventional wisdom is that
ITG is delivered through the adoption of ITG mechanisms (Huang et al., 2010; Tallon et al., 2013; Tiwana
& Konsynski, 2009; Tiwana et al., 2013; Wu et al., 2015); and the second assumption is that such adoption,
therefore, leads to strategic alignment (De Haes & Van Grembergen, 2009; De Haes et al., 2020b; Tiwana
et al., 2013; Wu et al., 2015). Challenging these two assumptions, we argue that ITG is more than just a set
ofmechanisms: ITGcan bedecomposedintothestructural componentsof ITG—itsmechanisms—andITG
principles, which reflect the spirit of ITG; that is, the system’s underlying values and goals (DeSanctis &
Poole, 1994). We also challenge the assumption that ITG mechanisms are sufficient for obtaining strategic
alignment; instead, we posit that organizations can adopt all the fundamental ITG mechanisms discussed in
the literature (Westphal & Zajac, 1994, 2001) and still fall short of attaining strategic alignment. Adopting
ITG mechanisms is necessary but insufficient for achieving strategic alignment.
The third and fourth assumptions we question involve how top leadership support for IT (hereafter, top
leadership support) relates to the ITG→strategic alignment relationship. We challenge the assumption that
IT management support is sufficient for achieving strategic alignment (Boonstra et al., 2018; Bowen et al.,
2007; De Haes & Van Grembergen, 2009; Huang et al., 2010). While we agree with prior research that
shows the importance of executive support for ITG (Amarilli et al., 2023; Schlosser et al., 2015), we assert
that the phenomenon of interest is enterprise-level governance, and in a governance context, boards should
provide prominent ITG leadership. Consistent with our assertion, researchers have made normative calls
for board involvement in ITG (Andriole, 2009; De Haes et al., 2020a; Huygh & Haes, 2020; Nolan &
McFarlan, 2005), but ITG research has yet to address the effect of board support empirically.
Thefourthassumptionisthat theadoptionofITGmechanismsautomaticallyimpliesthattopleadership
embraces IT and implements ITG faithfully (Benaroch & Chernobai, 2017; Buchwald et al., 2014; Prasad
et al., 2012; Wu et al., 2015). However, we incorporate top leadership support because ITG mechanism
adoption alone might reflect the known phenomenon that organizations often take instrumental,

--- PAGE 6 ---
4
perfunctory, mechanical, or symbolic approaches to governance (Meyer & Rowan, 1977; Shi & Connelly,
2018). In challenging these related assumptions, we assert that top leadership support has a distinct
influence on the ITG→strategic alignment relationship.
Insummary,theprimarychallengeweidentifyinthisresearchdiscourseistheabsenceoftopleadership
support and a unified understanding of the spirit of ITG. In such cases, organizations may superficially
approach ITG symbolically, resulting in a limited realization of the extensive strategic potential inherent in
ITG. Angst et al. (2017), for example, showed that healthcare organizations that mechanically adopted ITG
mechanisms without meaningful integration experienced less effective IT security investments and
infrastructure. Given this problematization, we formally raise our study’s central research question:
RQ. How does ITG facilitate strategic alignment? Specifically, why can merely adopting ITG
mechanisms fail to capture the organizational spirit or vision required for meaningful ITG
implementation?
To address this question and thus augment the extant literature on ITG and strategic alignment, we
identify two considerations that have escaped empirical scrutiny in the existing ITG literature (see
Appendix A, Table A1). First, based on our problematization, we posit that commitment to ITG principles
is crucial in ensuring that adopting ITG mechanisms eventually leads to strategic alignment. That is,
although a perfunctory adoption of ITG mechanisms may satisfy the structural and instrumental
requirementsof ITG, it mayfall short ofrealizingthe actual objectives(or spirit) of ITG, includingstrategic
alignment. The two aspects of ITG work together: ITG values and goals (ITG spirit) govern the
implementation of the IT system, and the ITG mechanisms related to formal processes, decision-making,
and communicative approach (Wu et al., 2015) are the structural features that support the governing
objectives. Our study elaborates on the primacy of ITG principles and theorizes that commitment to those
principles (i.e., faithfulness to the spirit of ITG) plays a vital role in ensuring that an organization realizes
strategic alignment. Specifically, we use the COBIT (Control Objectives for Information and Related
Technology) framework to investigate the role of meaningful engagement with ITG principles in an
organization’s pursuit of strategic alignment. COBIT is the “generally accepted framework for IT

--- PAGE 7 ---
5
governance” (De Haes et al., 2020c, p. 126), and commitment to its tenets encapsulates ITG principles
(Hardy, 2006; Mangalaraj et al., 2014; Mazza & Azzali, 2018).
Our focus on commitment to COBIT principles (CCP) aligns with recent ITG research findings.
Scholars have argued that “IT governance principles will guide the actual design and implementation of IT
governance” and that “these principles will provide handholds to executive management in their
responsibilities of putting in place and maintaining the organization’s IT governance arrangement” (De
Haes et al., 2020a, p. 49, emphasis added). COBIT is one of the most powerful and common ITG
frameworks (Joshi et al., 2018; Noor & Ghazanfar, 2016).3
Thus, it is reasonable and pragmatic to
emphasize the commitment to COBIT principles because this fosters a cohesive ITG vision among an
organization’s leadership (De Haes et al., 2020c). Therefore, we focus on the degree to which organizations
commit to COBIT principles and their underlying ethos. We demonstrate that although adopting ITG
mechanisms can lead to CCP, CCP itself is the crucial antecedent to strategic alignment. Our study shows
that adopting ITG mechanisms can lead to strategic alignment only when CCP is achieved; that is, CCP is
a critical mediatorintherelationship between adoptingITG mechanismsandachievingstrategicalignment.
A second consideration is that top leadership support of IT (hereafter, “top leadership support”) is
crucial to achieving strategic alignment once ITG mechanisms have been adopted. Importantly, our
conception of top leadership support includes not only top management (C-level executives, such as the
chiefexecutiveofficer,chiefoperatingofficer,andchiefinformationofficer)but alsotheboardofdirectors,
the members of which are crucial stakeholders and decision-makers in the organization’s strategic and
governance structures (Fama & Jensen, 1983; Hillman & Dalziel, 2003) especially concerning ITG
(Andriole, 2009; Benaroch & Chernobai, 2017; Jewer & McKay, 2012). This is a crucial consideration
because even when organizations adopt ITG mechanisms, a lack of top leadership support can hinder
effective ITG and strategic alignment (Ang & Teo, 1997). Even when leaders recognize IT’s value, passive
support may fail to overcome typical organizational user resistance (e.g., Kim & Kankanhalli, 2009).
Support for IT implies that top leadership not only endorses the vision of an IT-enabled organization but

--- PAGE 8 ---
6
also actively participates in IT-related decisions and ITG initiatives. We argue that realizing strategic
alignment requires aligned top leadership support because an organization is shaped by its views and
actions.
Our focus on top leadership support reveals two gaps in how prior research—whether on ITG or IS
more broadly—has used this construct. First, the relationship between top leadership support and
commitment to specific ITG frameworks (such as COBIT), which we argue are necessary for attaining
strategic alignment, has escaped the scrutiny of prior research. Second, top leadership support has been
construed mainly as top-management support for IT (Elbanna, 2013; Kulkarni et al., 2017; Liang et al.,
2007; Liu et al., 2015), yet boards lead corporate governance, including ITG and IT decision-making
(Valentine et al., 2016). Thus, focusing only on top-management support for IT is myopic because it omits
a vital leadership group (the board), which has a critical say in how organizations strategize and operate.
We address this shortcoming by including the board of directors in the firm’s top leadership.
Insummary,ourfocusonCCPanditsrelationshipwithtopleadershipsupportrevealsthecontingencies
that may lead to an instrumental (or symbolic) adoption of ITG mechanisms, a substantial contribution to
the ITG literature. A review of contemporary research on ITG emphasized that ITG research neglects these
two important considerations. However, these considerations are highly relevant because organizational IT
can incorporate formal structures and mechanisms while not espousing the technology’s spirit (i.e., the
goals and values intended for the technology by the organization) (DeSanctis & Poole, 1994). The novelty
of our study is that it disentangles the role of top leadership support and the role of commitment to ITG
(COBIT) principles from the adoption of ITG mechanisms and, therefore, highlights the perils of
mechanical or symbolic adoption of ITG mechanisms.
Our study proceeds as follows. In the literature review section, we discuss the conceptual foundations
of ITG and its relation to strategic alignment. We also discuss the two organizational factors that play
crucial roles in ensuring that adopting ITG mechanisms leads to strategic alignment—namely, CCP and top
leadership support. We then develop our model and hypotheses. In the empirical section, we elaborate on

--- PAGE 9 ---
7
the survey development and analytical methods used to test the hypotheses and discuss the results. The
paper concludes with a discussion of the study’s contributions and implications.
2. Literature Review
In this section, we review the literature on ITG and what is known about ITG’s relationship with strategic
alignment. We then summarize the research that has indicated that the two under-investigated elements we
identify above—meaningful commitment to ITG principles (i.e., COBIT principles) and top leadership
support—may play a role in the ITG→strategic alignment relationship.
2.1. ITG and Its Mechanisms
ITG falls into the broader category of firm-level corporate governance. Corporate governance can be
defined as “the determination of the broad uses to which organizational resources will be deployed and the
resolution of conflicts among the myriad participants in organizations” (Daily et al., 2003, p. 371). Under
the umbrella of the multifaceted structures of corporate governance, ITG can be understood as a system of
governance over IT to achieve strategic alignment, which ultimately leads to the creation of business value
(De Haes et al., 2020c).
ITG systems are based on principles that guide the design, implementation, and improvement of
structural, processual, and communication-related elements. The structural, processual, and
communication-related ITG mechanisms were conceptually defined by Wu et al. (2015): (1) decision-
making structure is “the degree to which the organization has established organizational units and roles
responsible for making IT decisions such as committees”; (2) formal processes represent “the degree to
whichtheorganizationhasestablishedformalprocessestomonitorandensurethatITpoliciesareconsistent
with business needs”; and (3) communication approach is “the degree to which the organization has
established channels to ensure proper communication and disseminate IT governance principles” (Wu et
al., 2015, p. A6). Wu et al. presented these ITG mechanisms as prerequisites of effective ITG that have
clear strategic benefits for a firm:
To implement IT governance effectively, a set of IT governance mechanisms is required to encourage
congruence with the organizational mission,strategy, values, norms, and culture … which in turnpromotes
desirable IT behaviors and governance outcomes (Weill & Ross, 2004). Hence, an organization’s IT

--- PAGE 10 ---
8
governance mechanisms often indicate the sophistication of its management (both IT and business)
capability. (Wu et al., 2015, p. 498)
The strategic implications and limitations of ITG mechanisms shape our study’s original
conceptualization and empirical examination.
2.2. Strategic Alignment and ITG Mechanisms
The broader literature has often treated strategic alignment as an unwieldy meta-construct and has defined
it in varying and inconsistent ways (Gerow et al., 2015). Notwithstanding the diverse conceptions of
strategic alignment in extant research, the most prevalent understanding has been that strategic alignment
represents the intellectual alignment between IT and organizational strategy (Gerow et al., 2015; Queiroz,
2017; Tallon et al., 2016; Wu et al., 2015). Our conception of strategic alignment builds on this
understanding. Formally, strategic alignment can be defined as a “state of congruence” between an
organization’s IT and business strategies (Sabherwal et al., 2019) and can be understood broadly as “the
degree to which the information technology mission, objectives, and plans support and are supported by
the business mission, objectives, and plans” (Reich & Benbasat, 1996, p. 56). The predominant view is that
strategic alignment is foundational to fostering better organizational performance (Gerow et al., 2015;
Kappelman et al., 2014; Renaud et al., 2016; Sabherwal et al., 2019). The literature has captured this
alignment using multiple concepts, such as fit, harmony, fusion, or integration, but these concepts are often
synonymous (Luftman et al., 2017). Strategic alignment has been predominantly understood as a holistic,
organization-level construct that represents the realized state of congruence among product, quality, and
marketing strategies (Hussin et al., 2002; Wu et al., 2015).
Strategic alignment is fundamentally grounded in normative principles. Prior studies have established
the influence of ITG on strategic alignment (De Haes & Van Grembergen, 2009; Schlosser et al., 2015;
Turel et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2015), and other research has alluded to this influence (Dawson et al., 2016;
De Haes et al., 2020c; Van Grembergen & De Haes, 2010; Wilkin & Chenhall, 2010; Yudatama et al.,
2017). Our study builds on these findings, but with a crucial distinction: Despite the common assumption
that the mere adoption of ITG mechanisms ensures effective ITG (and thus the attainment of strategic

--- PAGE 11 ---
9
alignment), we posit that the mere adoption of ITG mechanisms is insufficient for fully realizing strategic
alignment.
The crucial distinction here is between the adoption of mechanisms versus commitment to principles.
Adoption (e.g., of rules supporting organizational operation) can be purely symbolic; such a symbolic
adoption of rules often means that an organization just follows the “letter” of the rules but does not
appreciate or work toward achieving the goals for which those rules were defined in the first place (i.e., the
spirit of the rules). In such situations, although the organization has adopted those rules, it is not committed
to the principles that motivate the proposed mechanisms (Wijen, 2014). However, adoption is necessary for
commitment and downstream strategic alignment; we can thus view adoption as necessary but insufficient
to achieve strategicalignment. This is aform of necessary but not sufficient causality (Van de Ven & Poole,
2005).
2.3. The Missing Considerations: Commitment to COBIT Principles and Top-Leadership Support
Based on our formal problematizationprocess (addressed in the Introduction and detailed in Appendix A),
we consider CCP and top leadership support as two features of an ITG system that can influence whether
adopting ITG mechanisms leads to a firm’s achievement of strategic alignment.
2.3.1. Commitment to COBIT Principles
Based on our review of the ITG literature, we conclude that adopting ITG mechanisms and a commitment4
to ITG principles are distinct phenomena. That is, the governance practices that result from an
organization’s adoption of ITG mechanisms may reflect either the organization’s full commitment to ITG
or its symbolic/instrumental adoption of ITG.5
In contrast to the symbolic adoption of ITG, a commitment
to the principles espoused by ITG frameworks is more likely to result not only in a firm’s adoption of ITG
mechanisms but also in itsmeaningfulimplementationof the practice of ITG through goal- and value-based
integration within the organization’s existing structures, processes, and policies. This goal and value
orientation of ITG principles reflects the spirit of ITG, that is, “the general intent with regard to values and
goals underlying a given set of structural features” of ITG (DeSanctis & Poole, 1994, p. 126). Thus, the
ITG spirit reflects the organization’s cohesive purpose regarding the values and goals underpinning the

--- PAGE 12 ---
10
adopted ITG mechanisms. Compared to a merely instrumental adoption of ITG mechanisms, a full
commitment to the spirit of ITG is thus more likely to lead to a meaningful ITG implementation and the
achievement of strategic alignment. Notably, this concept of ITG spirit encapsulates the call for ITG
cohesiveness in Huang et al. (2010) because a cohesive ITG spirit enables “greater uniformity” of ITG
reference frames. A more purposive ITG effort allows “greater consistency in the ‘what, where, how and
why’ of IT-related decision making” (p. 298).
Because a commitment to ITG principles is more challenging than the mere adoption of ITG
mechanisms, the mechanisms are often a starting point in implementing ITG. Although the adoption of
governancemechanismsisthefirststageofmeaningfulITGimplementation(Alreemyetal.,2016),specific
findings in the literature indicate that adopting ITG mechanisms does not necessarily entail a commitment
to ITG best practices. For example, Marnewick and Labuschagne (2011) noted that publicly listed
companies in South Africa adopted the 2009 King Code of Governance for South Africa, Chapter 5, which
laysoutITGprinciples;however,theemployeesoftheseorganizationswereunsurewhetherthegovernance
principles were actually being followed. Likewise, Zaky et al. (2018) emphasized that although many firms
adoptsomeform ofITG,theyfrequentlyfailtoprogresstoanorganizationalcommitmenttoITGprinciples.
Researchers should consider whether adopting ITG mechanisms has led to a commitment to the underlying
philosophy of COBIT.
COBIT, at its core, is a principles-based representation of essential elements of ITG, including
processes to be followed, activities to be undertaken, and practices to be formulated (Goul et al., 2018).
COBIT organizes these elements under five principles: (1) meeting the needs of stakeholders, (2) end-to-
end ITG of the organization, (3) implementing an integrated but continuously evolving ITG framework, (4)
applying a holistic approach to ITG, and (5) ensuring that governance is sufficiently distinguished from
management (ISACA, 2012b). These principles provide normative frames for an ITG system such that a
firm committed to these principles can achieve the ultimate goal of IT-based value creation: balancing
benefits,risklevels,andtheuseofresources(Alramahi et al.,2014; Mulgundet al.,2019).One of thestated

--- PAGE 13 ---
11
objectives of COBIT is strategic alignment (ISACA, 2012b); although IS researchers have alluded to this
relationship, this link has yet to be empirically established (Mangalaraj et al., 2014; Mulgund et al., 2019).
The spirit of ITG is thus reflected in the COBIT principles. It can be understood as an organization’s
purposive commitment to the principles and goals of ITG, the primary goal being strengthening strategic
and innovative value.
2.3.2. Top-Leadership Support for IT
Based on top-management-support research, we define top leadership support for IT as the effortful
participation and involvement of both the board and executives in the organization’s IT vision and strategy
(Liu et al., 2015; Rai et al., 2009). As such, although top leadership support is not specific to ITG, it is
foundational to and can strengthen an organization’s commitment to ITG principles. Therefore,
commitment to ITG principles concerns the principles-based implementation of ITG. In contrast, top
leadership support concerns the degree of organizational-leader support for IT in general, which is likely to
spill over into support for ITG.
Top leadership plays a crucial role in championing a firm’s ITG principles. Research on organizational
changehasindicatedthatthechangeagents’supportforinitiativesleadsafirm beyondinstrumental-process
change to actual firm-level change (Gondo & Amis, 2013). That is, top leadership championing IT leads
firms beyond the mere adoption of ITG mechanisms—simply an instrumental process change—to
organizational change through a principles-based approach to ITG.
Recent research on board and executive IT expertise has suggested that IT should be supported at the
top levels of leadership because the board and top management jointly establish the ITG ethos and enable
its infusion into every facet of the organization (De Haes et al., 2020a; Haislip et al., 2015; Valentine et al.,
2016). Employee commitment comes only with top leadership support (Wang et al., 2019; Wilkin &
Chenhall,2020).However,suchsupportcanbeelusive.Anorganization’stopleadershipmayincludeboard
members who lack IT backgrounds (Adams et al., 2018), and this lack of technical expertise can further
isolate the IT function and diminish ITG legitimacy. Valentine et al. (2016) evocatively captured the

--- PAGE 14 ---
12
challenge of securing top leadership support:
A majority of boards and senior executives know that technology is critical to their enterprises. However,
only a relatively small number of boards worldwide have made the transition from an almost mono focus
on ﬁnance and legal capability as a proxy for corporate governance to incorporating digital leadership into
the new mix of the board’s structure and capability proﬁle. (p. 577)
It is reasonable to conclude that if top leadership fails to emphasize IT, it may be difficult to achieve
effective ITG. That is why, historically, many firms have lacked broad ITG integration due to the board’s
limited involvement in IT matters (Bart & Turel, 2010; De Haes & Van Grembergen, 2005; Huff et al.,
2006; Jordan & Musson, 2004; Trites, 2004). From an analysis of increases in board IT experience after IT
failure,BenarochandChernobai(2017)concludedthattopleadershipinvolvementcontributesto“ITvalue-
creation through better alignment of investments in IT resource strengths with business priorities” (p. 730).
Top leadership support is foundational to promoting IT-enabled organizational learning and overcoming a
firm’s resistance to IT-enabled change (Wang et al., 2019; Yeow et al., 2018), thus facilitating increased
commitment toestablishedITG principles, such asthose of COBIT. We propose that top leadership support
helps the organization move beyond the mere adoption of ITG mechanisms and toward a more meaningful
implementation of ITG. When firms have top leaders who support IT, they are more likely to “adopt [an
IT] practice substantively, integrating it into their core routines and processes,” thereby facilitating positive
outcomes (Angst et al., 2017, p. 896). Top leadership support, thus, leads to better CCP and strategic
alignment.
3. Research Model and Hypothesis Development
Our theorization centers on the two major constructs articulated above: CCP and top leadership support.
We theorize that the adoption of ITG mechanisms leads to CCP (H1), that top leadership support influences
CCP (H2), that bothtopleadershipsupport and CCP influencestrategic alignment(H3 and H4), andfinally,
that top leadership support also moderates the relationship between CCP and strategic alignment (H5).
Figure 1 depicts the overall model.
Figure 1. Proposed Model of the Influence of ITG Mechanisms on Strategic Alignment

--- PAGE 15 ---
13
3.1. Effects of the Adoption of ITG Mechanisms on CCP
Recall that an organization can adopt three primary forms of ITG mechanisms: decision-making structure,
formal process, and communication approach (Wu et al., 2015). We theorize that the adoption of these ITG
mechanisms positively influences CCP. The essential nature of the COBIT framework allows us to infer
that a firm that adopts ITG mechanisms is more likely to be committed to COBIT principles. However, as
noted, this is not a tautological hypothesis—the mere adoption of ITG mechanisms is a necessary but
insufficient condition for the emergence of CCP (Mohr, 1982).
Although the symbolic adoption of ITG mechanisms cannot give rise to CCP alone, adopting any of
thethree ITG mechanisms can help an organization strengthenits CCP. If an organizationlacks the relevant
decision-making structures, it will struggle to fully implement the COBIT principles, such as meeting
stakeholders’ needs. The firm’s structure should provide for close connections between IT executives and
top leadership such that an overall IT policy formulation can be envisioned. For example, an organization
whose units are disconnected and that operates its IT functions in silos cannot envision an overall IT policy
that meets the needs of all stakeholders; it will thus have a lower CCP than a firm that has envisioned such
a policy. Formal processes can also facilitate CCP. Key ITG processes include continuously monitoring IT
projects and resources, acquiring, developing, and implementing IT capabilities, and planning and
organizing those IT investments (Leih, 2006); each activity enables CCP. Organizations with formal
processes are better positioned to commit to the five COBIT principles. For example, formal processes

--- PAGE 16 ---
14
could be designed to embed ITG in all segments of the organization, thus facilitating the organization’s
end-to-end ITG. Alternatively, formal process development could enable a holistic approach to ITG.
Finally, to achieve CCP, an organization should adopt appropriate and effective communication structures.
A firm that adheres to COBIT principles communicates the values, needs, and guidelines in the COBIT
framework across the organization. In discussing how firms can use COBIT to achieve strategic alignment,
Rubino and Vitolla (2014) argued that “a company should elaborate … all that information which
corresponds to its own needs to satisfy the company’s specific business needs” (p. 750, emphasis added).
This highlights the need for a deliberate communication approach to realizing firm-level CCP.
Weproposethat adoptingITGmechanismsisthefirststepindevelopinganorganization’scommitment
to ITG principles. DeSanctis and Poole (1994, p. 127) justify the direction of our hypothesis—ITG
mechanisms precede CCP. That is, the spirit of a system can be fully realized only as part of the
sensemaking process that follows the initial adoption (e.g., Griffith, 1999; Jasperson et al., 2005). Notably,
the spirit of ITG is consensus-oriented (i.e., based on a general commitment to and understanding of the
underlying purpose and values of ITG) rather than regulation-oriented (i.e., oriented toward formal
processes and structures) (Kude et al., 2018) and this consensus is part of the sensemaking process. In
summary, it follows that an organization that adopts ITG mechanisms will be more likely to achieve CCP.
Therefore, we hypothesize:
H1. The adoption of ITG mechanisms in an organization—specifically through (a) ITG decision-
making structures, (b) formal ITG processes, and (c) ITG communication approaches—will positively
influence the firm’s CCP.
3.2. Effect of Top-Leadership Support on CCP
Top-leadership support stimulates organization-wide commitment to governance initiatives (Bass &
Avolio, 1994). As an ITG framework, COBIT presents governance processes that are “in the hands of the
board and the most senior management” (De Haes et al., 2013, p. 321, emphasis added); thus, their support
for IT dramatically increases the likelihood of the firm’s commitment to COBIT principles (Mufti et al.,
2018). Extending the notions of mutual understanding and engagement (Jenkin et al., 2019) to top

--- PAGE 17 ---
15
leadership support, when top leadership supports IT, they facilitate the proper diffusion of IT-related skills,
competency, and work practices (Stafford et al., 2018),spreading awareness and knowledge of IT-intensive
COBIT principles across the firm. In summary, “top leadership support is always a critical success factor
in any … [organizational] initiative” (Ramesh & Gerth, 2015, p. 312), including cultural and structural
changes ushered in by an organization’s efforts to embrace COBIT. Based on the arguments presented, we
hypothesize:
H2. Top leadership support will positively influence the organization’s CCP.
3.3. Effect of CCP on Strategic Alignment
It has long been argued that, in an organizational context, adherence to the spirit of the IT system
implementation can influence the system’s success (Chin et al., 1997; DeSanctis & Poole, 1994; Majchrzak
et al., 2000).6
We leverage this notion to posit that a firm’s CCP reflects the spirit of ITG better than a
merely instrumental approach. In a firm that embraces COBIT principles, IT does not play a merely
supporting role but is instead integrated with other corporate priorities. This embeddedness of IT in the
organizational fabric has profound implications, and it facilitates the convergence of business perspectives
and IT perspectives within a firm (e.g., De Haes et al., 2020c; Gregory et al., 2018). Thus, when
organizations are committed to COBIT principles, they engage seriously with IT to align IT with business
objectives (Fiss & Zajac, 2006; Gregory et al., 2018).
To summarize, an organization with a high CCP goes beyond a symbolic or instrumental adoption of
ITG mechanisms. Instead, it engages in a strategic, integrative, and committed implementation of ITG in
which business and IT leadership share a meaningful vision of the firm’s IT (Wu et al., 2015). In such an
organization, business managers embrace the value of IT and leverage it to advance firm-level objectives
—leading to a solid strategic alignment of business and IT (Marrone & Hammerle, 2017). COBIT was
developed to promulgate “IT best practices, align the IT objectives to the business objectives, and ensure
effective IT governance and management” (Mulgund et al., 2019, p. 67, emphasis added). Thus, it is
unsurprising that CCP is crucial to achieving strategic alignment. We thus hypothesize:

--- PAGE 18 ---
16
H3. CCP will positively influence the organization’s strategic alignment.
3.4. Effect of Top Leadership Support on Strategic Alignment
Building on our problematization, proposing the need for both board and executive support, developed in
Sections 1 and 2.3.2, we now turn to the effect of top leadership support on strategic alignment. In any
organization, when top leadership understands the value of and supports IT, strategic alignment improves
(Ang & Teo, 1997). Formally, when a firm experiences top leadership support for IT, such leadership will
effectively articulate a vision that explains how IT can support the broader business objectives (De Haes et
al., 2020a; Shao et al., 2016). By securing the buy-in and cooperation of organizational stakeholders—
through leadership techniques such as incentives, stimulation, persuasion, and sense-giving—leaders
highlight the need for business objectives to align with a firm’s IT capabilities and vice versa (Awuku-
Gyampoh & Dzisi, 2018; Jenkin et al., 2019; Shao, 2019).
The inference that top leadership support leads to improved strategic alignment also follows from the
strategic management literature, especially strategic leadership theory (Finkelstein et al., 2009). According
to strategic leadership theory, the cognitive values of organizational leaders are reflected in their activities,
in which their leadership techniques facilitate a unified and aligned vision of all business components
(including IT) by promoting cross-firm learning (Vera & Crossan, 2004). To achieve the desired level of
business–IT alignment, top leaders (who support IT) take adequate measures to overcome organizational
resistance (Kim & Kankanhalli, 2009). For example, because Alibaba’s top leadership directed the firm’s
dynamic alignment between IT and business, Alibaba replaced its business strategy of e-commerce with
one of big data and cloud computing (Shao, 2019). In a field study regarding digital strategy adoption,
Yeow et al. (2018) provide similar evidence of the essential role of leadership support. A top leadership
that supports IT continuously monitors IT capabilities and business objectives to steer the alignment of IT
and business objectives (Huygh & Haes, 2020). We thus hypothesize:
H4. Top leadership support in an organization will positively influence the firm’s strategic alignment.

--- PAGE 19 ---
17
3.5. The Moderating Effect of Top-Leadership Support for IT
To achieve a strong CCP, organizations may need a catalyzing influence from top leadership, which we
motivate in Section 2.3.2, which comprises both board and executive management. When top leadership
supports IT, their support and optimism for IT diffuses throughout the firm, thus reinforcing the business
value of IT (Elshandidy & Neri, 2015). Namely, the efficacy of CCP in achieving strategic alignment is
likely positively moderated by top leadership support. This moderation is consistent with the
transformational theory of leadership, which argues that leaders transform organizations by stimulating a
change in beliefs and practices (Judge & Bono, 2000). Top leadership support can promote a compelling
IT vision that accentuates the CCP’s effect and helps the CCP achieve its strategic alignment. Therefore,
H5. Top leadership support will positively moderate the influence of the organization’s CCP on the
firm’s strategic alignment.
4. Materials and Methods
Our empirical study employed an approach based on engaged scholarship and iterative conceptual and
measurement refinement and validation based on MacKenzie et al. (2011). We used the resulting measures
to test the hypotheses.
4.1. Conceptual and Measurement Development with Preliminary Studies
To further develop our conceptualizations, theory, model, and measurement, we grounded our research
methodology in engaged scholarship by performing an extensive review of the relevant literature and
engaging in several rounds of qualitative interviews and surveys with executives and academic experts,
which informed multiple rounds of instrumentation development and empirical testing. Although we
leveraged extant literature to develop our instrument, we took care to iteratively refine existing measures
because it was essential to support our measurement of CCP and top leadership support pragmatically and
conceptually in the context of ITG to ensure the acceptability of our measures to experts and practitioners,
and to demonstrate that the measures had sufficient face and content validity. To create a strong model
backed with valid measures, we followed MacKenzie et al.’s (2011) conceptual and measurement
development approach, which outlines four major stages of content validity: conceptual development and

--- PAGE 20 ---
18
content validity, model specification, scale evaluation and refinement, and validation. To do so, we first
conducted three small-scalepreliminary studies with academic experts, PhD students, senior managers, and
executives as participants. The first study was qualitative, open-ended interviews (n = 13); the second study
was a qualitative survey with open-ended questions that solicited feedback on concepts and proposed
constructs (n = 12), and the third study was a quantitative survey that asked participants to empirically rate
and compare potential measures of constructs generated from the first two studies (n = 57). A critical
conceptual purpose ofthesestudies was to understandbetteracademicand practitioner perspectives on why
ITG mechanisms—as defined and understood in the existing literature—lead or fail to achieve strategic
alignment. Through such engagement, we identified the critical factors involved, specifically CCP,
involvement of top leadership (e.g., the board, executives, senior managers), and other organizational
aspects.
After developing the items with demonstrated content validity for CCP and top leadership support, we
finalized our selection of measures that the literature showed to be valid; we further specified the model,
refined the scales, and validated the measures. These measures specifically included ITG mechanisms and
strategic alignment. Using these measures and extensive demographic variables and covariates, we then
conducted a sizeable preliminary study (n = 402) using an online panel to test these measures. In this fourth
pilot study, we exclusively used a set of IT managers and non-IT managers to strengthen generalizability
and validity across organizations. After refining the instrumentation, we conducted a similar study using an
online panel with an entirely new set of participants (n = 458) with a similar distribution of IT and non-IT
managers; this provided test-retest validity and further instrument refinement.
4.2. Study Design and Approach
We conducted our final study after carefully developing our conceptual definitions and finalizing our
instrumentation(asdetailedinAppendixB).Likethepreliminarystudies, our finalstudyinvolvedasurvey.
Still, this time, we changed our online panel source to a market research firm specializing in market and
academic research involving senior managers, executives, and board members. We worked with the firm

--- PAGE 21 ---
19
to commission a $12,000 study of carefully filtered senior managers, executives, and board members (IT
and non-IT) at publicly traded firms in the US. Following best practices, this was necessary to reach top
executives and leadership across a convenience sample of large US firms.
Participation was confidential and based on informed consent. Working with the IRB and the research
firm, we were allowed to ask the participants to identify the publicly traded firm they worked for
voluntarily. We agreed that all the data would be aggregated and no company-identifying information
would ever be released privately or publicly. We also followed the latest guidelines for increasing the
quality of online panel data by applying advanced filters to the demographic questions, using attention-
check questions, randomizing the order of presentation of the items, and checking for rushed responses
(Lowry et al., 2016; Steelman et al., 2014). Following the leading guidelines developed by Podsakoff et al.
(2003) and Schwarz et al. (2017), we included resentment as a marker variable so that we could test for
potential common method bias (CMB).
4.3. Study Sample
The participants were required to be 25 years of age orolder, work for a publicly traded US firm (on NYSE,
NASDAQ, or AMEX), have knowledge of how IT is used throughout their organization (regardless of their
role), and be in a senior management or higher position (e.g., senior manager, executive, or boardmember).
The market research firm invited a filtered set of 1,000 senior managers and executives from their research
pool to participate. Of these, 383 read the terms of the study and expressed interest in participating, yielding
a 38.3% initial participation rate. Sixty-four of these potential participants were disqualified because they
did not meet the study requirements, did not complete the surveys, or failed attention traps, leaving 319
valid responses and an 83.3% completion rate.
All the study participants worked for large publicly traded firms, which were distributed as follows:
NYSE (190), NASDAQ (108), and AMEX (21). The average total work experience of the respondents was
19.95 years (SD = 11.30). The average work experience in their current organization was 12.92 years (SD
= 9.45). Of the participants, 196 were male, 116 were female, and 7 identified as “other” or did not report

--- PAGE 22 ---
20
their gender. The respondents’ ages were distributed as follows: 25–29 years (34), 30–39 years (138), 40–
49 years (78), 50–59 years (50), and 60+ years (19). The position level was distributed as follows: president
or chief executive officer (33), other C-level IT executive (65), non-IT executive (121), senior manager
(83), partner, managing consultant, or other management positions (10), and other (7). A total of 150 of the
participants (47.0%) were currently serving on at least one corporate board. The people to whom they
directly reported were distributed as follows: chief executive officer or president (95); chief operations
officer or vice president of operations (115); chief financial officer or controller (30); chief marketing
officer or vice president of marketing (10); chief information officer, chief technology officer, or director
of IT (42); and other executive or senior manager type (27). Educational attainment was distributed as
follows: highschool(10),someuniversitybutnotcomplete(10),two-yearassociatedegreeoritsequivalent
(12), four-year university degree (138), master’s degree (120), PhD or some doctoral education (22), and
not reported (7). Table 1 shows the distribution of the represented industries.
5. Analyses and Results
We conducted factor, reliability, AVE, and multicollinearity analyses using STATA (version 17.0) to
establish data quality and validity. We used CB-SEM, which is widely accepted in the methodology
community because it enabled us to generate model fit statistics to compare our models.
Table 1. Distribution of the Participants’ Industries (n = 319)
Industry Freq. %
1. Consumer Nondurables – Food, Tobacco, Textiles, Apparel, Leather, Toys 11 3.4
2. Consumer Durables – Cars, TVs, Furniture, Household Appliances 5 1.6
3. Manufacturing – Machinery, Trucks, Planes, Office Furniture, Paper, Commercial Printing 38 11.9
4. Oil, Gas, and Coal Extraction and Products 7 2.2
5. Chemicals and Allied Products 10 3.1
6. Business Equipment – Computers, Software, and Electronic Equipment 96 30.1
7. Telephone and Television Transmission 14 4.4
8. Utilities 2 6.0
9. Wholesale, Retail, and Some Services (Laundries, Repair Shops) 19 6.0
10. Healthcare, Medical Equipment, and Drugs 15 4.7
11. Finance, Banking, Insurance 55 17.2
12. Others – Mines, Construction, Buildings Management, Transportation, Hotels, Business
Services, Entertainment
19 6.0
13. Others (not listed above) 21 6.6
Not reported 7 2.2
Total 319 100.0

--- PAGE 23 ---
21
Before analysis, we checked the convergent validity and discriminant validity of the constructs, relying
on confirmatory factor analysis as a precursor step before analyzing the structural equation model (Gefen
& Straub, 2005; Henseler et al., 2014; Henseler et al., 2016; Lowry & Gaskin, 2014). All outer model
loadings exceeded the required standards and were highly significant, with each t-value above 10.0. Table
2 summarizes the descriptive statistics and other reliability-related statistics.
Finally, to assess potential multicollinearity, we examined the outer and inner variance inflation factors
(see Tables C1 and C2, respectively; all the factors were below the ideal threshold of 5.0 for reflective
Table 2. Reliabilities and AVEs
Latent Construct α AVE CR
Commitment to COBIT principles (CCP) 0.881 0.595 0.845
ITG mechanisms: Communication approaches (CA) 0.721 0.641 0.727
ITG mechanisms: Decision-making structures (DMS) 0.772 0.685 0.780
ITG mechanisms: Formal processes (FP) 0.806 0.717 0.805
Strategic alignment (SITA) 0.703 0.770 0.870
Top leadership support (TLS) 0.845 0.686 0.849
Resentment 0.898 0.765
α = Cronbach’s alpha; AVE = average variance extracted; CR = construct reliability
constructs). We thus concluded that our data exhibited high factorial validity, exhibited high reliability, and
lacked multicollinearity. Table C3 summarizes the measurement model statistics.
5.1. Confirming Lack of Nonresponse Bias
A fundamental threat to our research design was the nonresponse bias of those who declined the invitation
to participate; thus, we statistically confirmed that nonresponse bias was highly unlikely. The seminal
literature on response bias in organizational surveys has shown that if there is a nonresponse bias among
those who decline to participate, there will be significant differences in the demographic or model variables
between the first and last 20% of the respondents. We grouped the early and late respondents using the
method suggested by Lindner et al. (2001) and Radhakrishna and Doamekpor (2008). We compared all
their primary responses using multivariate analyses of variance (MANOVAs) to determine if there were
any differences. To test this possibility, we ran MANOVA tests of differences between the first and last
20% of the following demographic and model variables: age, position, number of employees, number of
people who work under a person, education, gender, years of career, person to whom an employee reports

--- PAGE 24 ---
22
at the C-level or board level, membership on the board, resentment marker variable, ITG mechanisms,
strategic alignment, CCP, and top leadership support. The overall MANOVA was insignificant at F (15, 98)
= 1.095, and no specific between-subjects effects were significant. We, therefore, concluded that there was
little likelihood that our results were skewed by nonresponse bias.
5.2. Path Model Analyses
Given the high quality of our data, we proceeded to analyze the proposed model. We used the tool STATA
(STATA/SE version 16.1) for our analysis. Per leading standards, our model fit statistics were adequate,
indicating a good fit with the baseline model (X2
(df) = 1,196.54 (341); X2
/df = 3.51; RMSEA = 0.079; CFI
= 0.925; TLI = 0.906; SRMR = 0.045; CD = 0.998) (Hair et al., 2005; Hoe, 2008).
Because our predicted model involvedmediation withmanycovariates and controls, weproducedthree
models to demonstrate the efficacy of the predicted model. Model 1 was an alternative unmediated model;
Model 2 was our predicted mediation model without the covariates and controls; and Model 3 was our final
predicted model with the covariates and controls. Table C4 summarizes the details of our analysis of the
three models.
Model 1 tested the possibility that no mediation existed and that all the key constructs in our model
(decision-making structure, formal process, communication approach, top leadership support, and CCP)
directly predicted strategic alignment. The crucial finding here was that only CCP and top leadership
support remained significant predictors of strategic alignment when all five constructs were used to predict
strategic alignment; notably, this model’s decision-making structure, formal process, and communication
approach were nonsignificant.7
These empirical results pointed to the critical roles of our predicted
mediators.
Model 2 was the mediated model without covariates, and Model 3 was the final mediated model with
covariates and the H5 moderation test (top leadership support * CCP → strategic alignment). All the
predicted results and mediation relationships yielded the same results in these two models; thus, we focus
on explaining Model 3. The Model 3 results are depicted in Figure 2. Model 3 confirmed that most of our

--- PAGE 25 ---
23
hypotheses had the highest equation-level model fit (e.g., R2
) and the best overall path model fit statistics.
Figure 2. Final Path Model Analysis Results
*** = p < 0.001, ** = p < 0.010, * = p < 0.05, n/s = not significant
Crucially, to produce Model 3, we also tested for mediation. The classical tests for mediation were
developed by Baron and Kenny (1986) and Sobel (1982), but advances in computing power have allowed
for the adoption of less biased methods. The bootstrapping method represents one such approach that has
gained popularity (Hayes, 2009; MacKinnon, 2008). This method has several advantages (Vance et al.,
2015): it has greater statistical power, allows for the direct measurement of direct versus indirect effects,
and does not assume a normal distribution, as does the Sobel (1982) method. Table 3 summarizes these
results, which indicated that CCP fully mediated the formal process and communication approach and had
no mediation relationship with the decision-making structure. However, we can pragmatically conclude
that CCP fully mediated all three ITG mechanisms because all three had dramatically higher betas and were

--- PAGE 26 ---
24
highly significant in a direct effects model that did not include CCP and top leadership support.8
Table 3. Bootstrapped Confidence Interval Tests for Full and Partial Mediation for Model 3
Relationship Mediator
Mediation Test (ab)
[Indirect Effects]
Full/Partial Test (c′)
[Direct Effects]
Type of
mediation
2.5%
lower
bound
97.5%
upper
bound
Includes
zero?
2.5%
lower
bound
97.5%
upper
bound
Includes
zero?
DMS → SITA CCP -0.055 0.010 Yes -0.055 0.010 Yes None
FP → SITA CCP 0.024 0.134 No 0.024 0.134 No Full
CA → SITA CCP 0.007 0.088 No 0.008 0.303 No Full
DMS: decision-making structure, FP: formal process, CA: communication approach, SITA: strategic alignment.
In summary, decision-making structure was not associated withCCP (H1a rejected), butformal process
and communication approach were positively associated with CCP (H1b and H1c supported). Top
leadershipsupportwasalsopositivelyassociatedwithCCP(H2supported).CCPandtopleadershipsupport
were positively related to strategic alignment (H3 and H4 supported, respectively). Finally, our positive
moderation prediction of top leadership support and CCP on strategic alignment was not supported in that
the interaction term was highly significant but negative (H5 rejected, reverse direction).
5.3. Testing for Common Method Bias
Recent empirical studies have shown that the adverse impact of CMB may be overstated, and both its
prevention and detection are more feasibly performed than previously suggested (Fuller et al., 2016;
Schwarz et al., 2017). However, because the proposed marker of resentment might serve better as a counter
explanation than as a marker variable, we conducted three further assessments to determine whether CMB
could have influenced our results despite the several precautions taken to ensure factorial validity, data
quality, and minimal multicollinearity.
First, we conducted Harmon’s single-factor model test, which has been criticized, starting with
Podsakoff et al. (2003), for being insensitive to bias. Thus, if Harmon’s test detects bias, then a serious
problem exists; if it does not, one cannot rule out CMB. However, this test is still commonly used (Schwarz
et al., 2017). We conducted factor analysis with principal components on the items, resulting in multiple
componentswithinthemodel.Thelargestcomponentaccountedforamere12.20%ofthemodel’svariance,
suggesting a low likelihood of CMB, though its complete absence cannot be confirmed.

--- PAGE 27 ---
25
Second, we also examined the correlation matrix following Pavlou et al. (2007). The matrix did not
have relationships near the threshold of 0.900 that would indicate serious CMB.
Third, we used resentment as a marker variable, following the approach by Williams and O'Boyle
(2015). The average correlation between resentment and the other variables was -0.189, whereas the
average correlation between the different model variables was 0.588. Although resentment may not be an
ideal marker variable, its pronounced deviation from the direction of the other variables further supports
the absence of significant CMB.
5.4. Post Hoc Interaction Analysis
Given the model’s significant and negative interaction term, we conducted a post hoc analysis to better
understand the interaction’s nature. As a first step, we determined whether the relationship of either CCP
or top leadership support with strategic alignment was curvilinear. We did this in two ways. First, we
examined the scatterplots of the primary constructs of the model (strategic alignment, CCP, and top
leadership support; see Figure 3). As Figure 3 shows, the
Figure 3. Scatterplots of Strategic alignment, CCP, and Top leadership support
The relationship between CCP and strategic alignment was curvilinear, with the left end of the scatterplot
trending more upwards than it would have for a direct effect. Likewise, top leadership support did not
continue its trend in a main direct effect, with the top portion of the scatterplot trending less positive than
we would have expected. To further explore this, we determined the residuals against the fitted scores from

--- PAGE 28 ---
26
the model, shown in Figure 4, and indeed, a trend of curvilinearity between the variables was indicated.
Figure 4. Depiction of Residuals Against Fitted Values
Having established potential curvilinearity in these variables, we tested for curvilinearity in our model
following established procedures for polynomial regression analysis and response surface modeling
(Edwards, 2002; Moody et al., 2017). We reanalyzed the results and included a squared term for the
polynomial regression analysis for the CCP and top leadership support constructs. All the variables in the
model were significant (see Table 4).
Table 4. Testing for Curvilinear Relationships in CCP and Top leadership support
Pathway Coef. Std Error Z / Sig.
CCP → Strategic alignment 0.540 0.075 7.20***
CCP2
→ Strategic alignment 0.508 0.103 4.92***
Top leadership support → Strategic alignment 0.366 0.097 3.78***
Top leadership support2
→ Strategic alignment 0.215 0.116 1.96*
CCP × Top leadership support → Strategic alignment -0.737 0.161 -4.57***
TheseresultsindicatedthateachofthepathsofCCPandtopleadershipsupportwithstrategicalignment
were curvilinear, and this explained why the interaction between the two terms became significant and
negative. Figure 5a–c illustrates the relationship between these three variables and their curvilinear terms
using standardized data (i.e., SITA = βCPP + βTLS + βCPP*TLS+ βCPP
2
+ βTLS
2
+ ε).9
As the figures show, the
lowest portion of the graph (corresponding to the lowest strategic alignment score) occurred when both
CCP and top leadership support became more negative (recall that the data were standardized for these
analyses and visualizations). Contrary to the results of the linear approach, equally positive and high

--- PAGE 29 ---
27
Figure 5a. 3D Response Surface Analysis of Top leadership support and CPP on Strategic alignment
Figure 5b. 3D Response Surface Analysis of Top leadership support and CPP on Strategic alignment

--- PAGE 30 ---
28
Figure 5c. 3D Response Surface Analysis of Top leadership support and CPP on Strategic alignment
levels of CCP and top leadership support did not result in the highest strategic alignment scores, which we
expected in our linear prediction for H5. Instead, on average, the highest strategic alignment scores resulted
either from a balance of high but not extreme levels of CCP and top leadership support, from higher CCP
paired with lower top leadership support, or from the reverse, lower CCP paired with higher top leadership
support.However,theloweststrategicalignmentscorescamefromlowCCPandlowtopleadershipsupport
(as expected).
6. Discussion
The practice of ITG is teeming with serious challenges for organizations, and one prominent conundrum
that practitioners frequently encounter is the elusive nature of strategic alignment. ITG and strategic
alignment are critical factors in an organization’s successful use of IT. Further, ITG has been developed
and promoted as a means by which firms can align their IT strategies with their business strategies, and
empirical findings show that ITG mechanisms are associated with better strategic alignment and firm-level
performance (Wu et al., 2015). However, many organizations find it difficult to fully implement ITG and
thus experience IT failures or fall short of effective strategic alignment despite adopting recommended ITG

--- PAGE 31 ---
29
mechanisms (Jewer & McKay, 2012). Our study answers the call for research on how ITG can lead to
strategic alignment and better firm performance (Chan & Reich, 2007; Jacobson, 2009) by investigating
the role of ITG principles and top leadership support in pursuing strategic alignment. Previous research
primarily relied on conceptualizing and measuring ITG through mechanisms alone (Wu et al., 2015); by
contrast, our study takes a novel approach by breaking ITG into two distinct components: ITG mechanisms
and ITG principles.
The basis of this novel addition is our contention that it is time for organizations to move beyond a
mere adoption of ITG mechanisms and instead fully embrace the broader ethos or “spirit” of ITG. This
profound shift is achievable when organizations wholeheartedly commit to ITG principles and is further
enhanced by unwavering support from top leadership. To further unravel the intricate relationship between
ITG and strategic alignment, we employed a series of qualitative and quantitative preliminary studies to
develop and validate two novel measures: CCP and top leadership support. Next, we summarize our key
findings and contributions to research and practice and discuss the limitations and research opportunities
associated with our work.
6.1. Summary of Findings
Directly informed by our problematization, this study investigates how ITG leads to strategic alignment.
First, we validate prior findings (Wu et al., 2015) that ITG mechanisms are positively associated with
strategic alignment. We then theoretically develop a more complex ITG event space, investigating whether
CCP and top leadership support play a role in this relationship. Our findings support the conclusion that the
ITG mechanisms of communication approach and formal process promote CCP and that CCP fully
mediates the ITG mechanism→strategic alignment relationship. Further, top leadership support leads to
both CCP and strategic alignment directly. However, surprisingly, we find a negative interactive effect on
strategic alignment between CCP and top leadership support. In summary, CCP and top leadership support
are vital determinants of strategic alignment, and the CCP fully mediates the previously documented ITG
mechanism→strategic alignment relationship.

--- PAGE 32 ---
30
6.2. Contributions to ITG Research and Theory
Basedonourproblematization,conceptualization,andfindings,wedelivernovelconceptionswithinamore
complex ITG event space, which we summarize here and further map to contribution benchmarks of Weber
(2012), and Corley and Gioia (2011) in Appendix A, Tables A1–A3. First, we showcase that ITG is not
merely defined in terms of structural aspects of decision-making, processes, and communication. Second,
adopting ITG mechanisms is insufficient to achieve strategic alignment. We expand the notion of IT spirit
to ITG and demonstrate how CCP fully mediates the ITG mechanism→strategic alignment relationship.
Third, we reveal the importance of top leadership support involving management and board support,
providing conceptual specificity for this construct. Finally, we demonstrate that adopting ITG mechanisms
does not necessarily imply that top leadership supports IT. Below, we further discuss these novel insights
for both research and theory.
Unveiling the role of ITG principles in strategic alignment: One of the key contributions of our
research is revealing the critical role of ITG principles in achieving strategic alignment. Whereas previous
research often focused on specific ITG mechanisms, our study emphasizes that effective ITG begins with
the adoption of mechanisms—a view consistent with the extant literature’s understanding of ITG
mechanisms and frameworks (Rubino & Vitolla, 2014; Wu & Saunders, 2016; Zhen et al., 2021), but it
does not end there. We underscore that the mere adoption of these mechanisms falls short of achieving
strategic alignment without a genuine commitment to the underlying ITG principles. This crucial finding
advances the understanding of how and under what conditions ITG contributes to strategic alignment. Our
study is the first to investigate how ITG leads to strategic alignment and why merely adopting ITG
mechanisms can fail to capture the organizational spirit or vision of meaningful ITG implementation.
Introducing ITG spirit: Although research has shown that adherence to the spirit of IT-system
implementations promotesimplementationsuccess(Chin et al., 1997; DeSanctis & Poole,1994; Majchrzak
et al., 2000), ITG studies have tended to emphasize collections of specific ITG mechanisms. We delve
deeper into the spirit of ITG by considering the role of CCP in improving strategic alignment. Related

--- PAGE 33 ---
31
perspectives on commitment to the spirit of ITG include social dimensions of ITG (Chan & Reich, 2007)
or “soft” governance (Smits & van Hillegersberg, 2018). Our findings that ITG principles mediate between
ITG mechanisms and strategic alignment demonstrate that adherence to ITG spirit plays a decisive role in
successful ITG deployment.
Broadening the construct of commitment: Our development of the CCP construct as a novel state
(Weber, 2012) not only contributes to ITG research but also resonates with a wide range of fields, including
management, organizational psychology, and industrial psychology. Commitment is a necessary construct
that has been observed in several critical studies of ITG (e.g., Ali & Green, 2012; Alreemy et al., 2016;
Prasad et al., 2010), and it has been extensively investigated in disciplines such as management and
organization studies (e.g., Klein et al., 2022; Meyer et al., 2004; Organ, 1988; Podsakoff et al., 2009;
Podsakoff et al., 2000). Organizational commitment has been an essential factor in industrial and
organizational psychology since the 1970s because it underlies organizational citizenship behaviors, which
are formally defined as voluntary commitments of an employee in an organization or company that go
beyond their contractual tasks (Organ, 1988; Podsakoff et al., 2000). These commitment-related themes
have been widely emphasized in IS organizational security research on the commitment of organizational
insiders and employees (e.g., D'Arcy et al., 2009; Hanus & Wu, 2016; Hsu et al., 2015; Posey et al., 2015;
Posey et al., 2013). Our focus on commitment should appeal to a wide range of fields, including but not
limited to ITG, IS, security, management, organizational psychology, and industrial psychology. Given the
pervasive evidence of the importance of commitment in various organizational settings, addressing this
“commitment gap” in the ITG literature represents a substantial theoretical and empirical contribution.
Infusion of top leadership support: The findings regarding top leadership support challenge
conventional notions and thus have two direct implications for ITG research. First, although ITG can be
seen as an egalitarian initiative, our top leadership support findings show that leadership support for IT
leads to an organization’s commitment to ITG principles and directly to strategic alignment. The influence
of top-down governance on strategic alignment contradicts the characterization by Smits and van

--- PAGE 34 ---
32
Hillegersberg (2018) of the ITG performance orientation as “bottom-up”; however, our findings align with
their notion of the importance of soft governance, that is, governance beyond structures and processes.
Thus, our results counterbalance contemporary studies that extol the benefits of a decentralized ITG
approach. Although our study cannot single-handedly resolve the argument regarding whether ITG should
be developed in a top-down or bottom-up manner, it does point to the importance of centralized leadership
support and commitment to ITG principles, both of which have a hierarchical and centralized orientation.
Original measurement development: Our study also contributes to the ITG literature in terms of
original measurement development, which is a core product of and contribution to the theory required to
advance any research discourse (Hassan et al., 2022; Hassan et al., 2019). Both CCP and top leadership
support are grounded in prior work, but they are newly developed and validated for our study and provide
new and concrete antecedents for strategic alignment. Given the prevalence of frameworks in various IS
domains beyond ITG (e.g., SOC 2, HIPAA, Six Sigma, ISO/IEC 27001, NIST, ITIL), our CCP measure
can be readily adapted to assess principle-level commitment to other frameworks beyond COBIT.
Contributions to causality: Although our study does not use experimentation, it does provide
theoretical contributionstocausalityandlimitedempirical contributionstocausality.VandeVenandPoole
(2005) discuss various forms of causality as follows: “that from which something was made (material
cause); the pattern by which it is made (formal cause); that from which comes the immediate origin of
movement or rest (efficient cause); and the end for which it is made (final cause)” (p. 1396). These distinct
forms of causalitycan coexist within atheoretical framework (Lowry et al., 2019). In ourstudy, theseforms
of causality of strategic alignment can be understood in multiple respects: (1) Adoption of the ITG
mechanisms can be understood as the material cause of ITG, and ultimately strategic alignment originates
from these mechanisms and their adoption; (2) The mediation by CCP can be understood as the formal
cause, as that is the mechanism by which strategic alignment happens; (3) CCP and the moderation of top
leadership support are the efficient causes because they capture the effectiveness or potency of ITG.
Without these, the strategic alignment would not be realized; merely adopting ITG mechanisms is

--- PAGE 35 ---
33
insufficient—it also must be “effective” (Wilkin & Chenhall, 2020); and (4) as the final objective, strategic
alignment is the final cause of everything in the model.10
6.3. Implications for Practice, Management, and Policy
Should our findings broadly hold, they carry significant implications for practice, management, and
governance policy, particularly in ITG, strategic alignment, COBIT, top leadership support, and corporate
governance. These implications offer valuable insights for organizations seeking to optimize ITG practices
and align IT strategies with broader business goals.
Effective deployment of ITG: Our findings underscore the importance of not just merely adopting
ITG mechanisms but also committing to the underlying ITG principles. Practitioners should view ITG as a
holistic endeavor where mechanisms and principles play vital roles. Specifically, our study suggests that
embracing COBIT principles for ITG can substantially improve strategic alignment. This insight equips
organizations with a tangible approach to ensure the alignment of business and IT strategies, ultimately
creating business value. IBM’s history provides a further working case that supports these findings.11
Enhancing the use of COBIT: Our findings provide further theoretical and empirical support for the
prevalent use of COBIT as an ITG framework. By demonstrating the mediating role of CCP between ITG
mechanisms and strategic alignment, our study reinforces the value of COBIT in the context of ITG. This
contributes to the promotion of COBIT as a significant ITG framework.
Crucial role of top leadership support: Top leadership support emerges as a critical factor in
achieving strategic alignment. Organizations must recognize that top leadership support enables a
commitment to ITG principles and directly enhances strategic alignment. This highlights the significance
of upper-echelon support for IT initiatives,extendingeven to board-level involvement. Acknowledging and
fostering top leadership support can be a strategic move for organizations seeking effective ITG.
Microsoft’s history with leadership in IT provides an example case supporting these claims.12
Addressing the risks of symbolic policy adoption: We highlight the potential pitfalls of symbolic
policy adoptionin ITG. Althoughmanystudies inotherIT contexts have usedmeasures of topmanagement

--- PAGE 36 ---
34
support, ITG research should include executives and the board of directors in such measures to capture IT
governance better. Given the difficulty of involving the board of directors effectively, this is a crucial
distinction (Andriole, 2009; De Haes & Van Grembergen, 2009); top leadership involvement continues to
be a challenge because top leadership support may be related to knowledge of IT (De Haes & Van
Grembergen, 2009), which is still lacking at the board level (Adams et al., 2018; Lowry et al., 2023). Our
findings support the notion that ITG initiatives can fall victim to corporate bids for legitimacy, as predicted
by institutional theory. This study thus offers a warning regarding the hazards of symbolic policy adoption,
which are found in other forms of governance (Edelman, 1990; Westphal & Zajac, 1994; Wijen, 2014).
Some organizationshavelikelyadopted ITG mechanisms as aform of governance“window dressing”; ITG
adoption often decouples formal ITG from the spirit of ITG (Meyer & Rowan, 1977), leading to less
effective governance. Whether this decoupling is purposeful or a product of inadequate implementation,
our central inferences hold that without adherence to ITG principles or top leadership involvement, ITG
mechanisms may not lead to strategic alignment. Organizations should thus prioritize a top-down and
holistic approach to ensure that ITG principles are embraced throughout the organization. GE provides an
excellent case example of these points.13
Policy considerations: The implications of our study extend beyond individual organizations.
Policymakers and regulatory bodies should consider the importance of fostering a conducive environment
for ITG, including encouraging direct board involvement in the governance of IT.
RelevanceintheCOVID-19Era:Ourfindingshaveparticularrelevanceinthecontext oftheCOVID-
19 pandemic. The pandemic has catalyzed a transformative shifttoward remote,technology-mediated work
arrangements. Organizations have realized the advantages of this new organizational form, even for
traditionally centralized structures. Because the pandemic has been what punctuated equilibrium theory
calls a “transformative rare event” or “revolutionary event” (Gersick, 1991), it is likely that many
workplaces will not fully reverse this shift (Henningsson et al., 2021). More than ever, IT is the central
connective tissue of new organizational forms, which are much more challenging to govern than traditional

--- PAGE 37 ---
35
forms.Arguably,thissituationhasincreasedtheneedfor effectiveITG; ourtheorization,conceptualization,
and measurement can thus guide firms seeking to move from mechanical ITG adoption to meaningful ITG
implementation that reflects the organization’s values, vision, and strategy. Zoom not only facilitated this
shift but is also an excellent example of the rewards of effective ITG.14
6.4. Limitations and Future Research Directions
Like any research endeavor, our study presents certain limitations that offer valuable insights into potential
avenues for future research. Here, we address these limitations and propose compelling research
opportunities:
Self-reported measures: Our research relies on self-reported measures subject to inherent limitations
such as response bias and lack of causality. However, an interesting observation was the contrast between
the views of IT professionals and non-IT participants regarding CCP. IT professionals tended to be more
pessimistic, lending credibility to self-reported assessments in this context. Future research could explore
the factors contributing to this disparity and investigate how differing perspectives impact ITG. Moreover,
future research could employ more tightly controlled field experimentation. This approach allows for
manipulating predictor variables, providing a more rigorous assessment of causal relationships in ITG and
strategic alignment. For example, field researchers could manipulate variables like commitment to ITG
principles and top leadership support—or create natural groupings of these—to assess their direct impact
on IT strategic alignment.
Limitations of CMB tests: Although our study employed several tests to address CMB, we
acknowledge their limitations, including not using an ideal marker variable. Nonetheless, our robust CMB
assessment, the ULMC test, and other tests provide reasonable assurance that our findings do not result
from CMB. Future research may develop more advanced methods for mitigating CMB and explore its
effects in different research contexts. Our marker variable, resentment, displayed a strong negative
association with strategic alignment. This result highlights the need to consider cultural or personal aspects
that can undermine support for IT and leadership initiatives like CCP. Future research could explore the

--- PAGE 38 ---
36
intricate relationships between emotional factors, leadership, and ITG outcomes.
Evolutionary dynamics ofITG: Ourmodel does not capture the evolutionary dynamics of ITG within
organizations. Future studies could investigate the iterative influence of top leadership support and CCP on
strategic alignment over time, using qualitative research to develop dynamic models or longitudinal data to
quantify these relationships more precisely.
Generalizability of our findings: There are acknowledged limits to the level of generalizability that a
single study can achieve (Lee & Baskerville, 2003, 2012), especially in light of scholarly discussion on
statistical and practical significance (Mohajeri et al., 2020). However, we arguethat it is possible to abstract
learnings from this study that could be appropriate for other contexts and organizations, thus aiding
generalizability (Sarker, 2016). Our findings are valuable and transferrable to current IS research with a
degree of abstraction. For example, anchored on the concept of transferability (Sarker, 2016), we expect
our CCP measure to be transferrable to other ITG frameworks or other IS frameworks with underlying
principles, and future research can substantiate the importance of principle-based ITG implementations.
Impact of ITG principles on IT agility: Recent studies suggest potential negative consequences of
ITG structures on IT agility. Future research can also delve into the effect of commitment to ITG principles
on IT agility, as recent studies point to potential negative consequences of ITG structures or alignment on
IT agility (Liang et al., 2017; Queiroz et al., 2022; Vaia et al., 2022), a phenomenon that a focus on ITG
principles may mitigate. For further understanding, researchers can explore the relationship between ITG
principles,likethosein COBIT, and IT agilityinvarious industries,developa frameworkthat organizations
can use to strike a balance between governance and agility and conduct case studies in organizations that
have successfully maintained agility while implementing robust governance structures.
Substitutive relationship between CCP and top leadership support: The surprising negative
moderationfindingsbetweenCCPandtopleadershipsupportraiseintriguingquestionsabouttheirpotential
substitutive relationship. Although CCP is rooted in principles, because it is tied to the COBIT framework,
leadersmaybalkattheformalityofsuchframeworksforachievingstrategicalignmentbecausetheeffective

--- PAGE 39 ---
37
use of frameworks may weaken a leader’s ability to steer the organization nimbly or to lead by intuition,
which is a familiar strategic practice of experiencedleaders but also onethat can bea troublesome decision-
making paradigm in technology-based contexts in which the leaders lack deep expertise (Leybourne &
Sadler-Smith, 2006; Miller & Ireland, 2005; Salas et al., 2010). Future research can explore the trade-offs
between these factors in achieving strategic alignment and provide a deeper understanding of their
interactions and curvilinearity. For example, researchers could analyze cases where high CCP coincides
with low top leadership support and vice versa. They could then investigate how these trade-offs impact
strategic alignment and decision-making paradigms in ITG.
7. Conclusion
Firms continue grappling with developing and sustaining competitive advantage through IT. ITG systems,
including various ITG mechanisms, have provided firms with normative structures to pursue strategic
alignment. Our study provides novel evidence of two key factors that can enable firms to achieve strategic
alignment by embracing the spirit of ITG. Using COBIT as an ITG framework, we find that CCP fully
mediates the effect of ITG mechanisms on strategic alignment; ITG mechanisms lead to strategic alignment
only through CCP. We also provide compelling evidence of the impact of top leadership support on both
CCP and strategic alignment; that is, boards of directors and executives play a crucial role in the success of
ITG initiatives. In other words, ITG is unlikely to foster strategic alignment if it is only a middle-
management affair. In providing novel insights into how ITG can lead to strategic alignment, our study
presents new measures of CCP and top leadership support, which can contribute to practical assessments
of effective ITG in contemporary organizations shifting toward remote, IT-mediated work. These findings
can alert organizations to pitfalls that may undermine their pursuit of the business value of IT; that is, ITG
implementations must include a principles-based approach and gain support from the board and the
executive suite.
8. References
Adams, R. B., Akyol, A. C., & Verwijmeren, P. (2018). Director skill sets. Journal of Financial
Economics, 130(3), 641-662. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2018.04.010

--- PAGE 40 ---
38
Ali, S., & Green, P. (2012). Effective information technology (IT) governance mechanisms: An IT
outsourcing perspective. Information Systems Frontiers, 14(2), 179-193.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10796-009-9183-y
Alramahi, N. M., Barakat, A. I., & Haddad, H. (2014). Information Technology Governance Control
Level in Jordanian Banks Using: Control Objectives for Information and Related Technology
(COBIT 5). European Journal of Business and Management, 6(5), 194-206.
Alreemy, Z., Chang, V., Walters, R., & Wills, G. (2016). Critical success factors (CSFs) for information
technology governance (ITG). International Journal of Information Management, 36(6, Part A),
907-916. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2016.05.017
Amarilli, F., van den Hooff, B., & van Vliet, M. (2023). Business-IT alignment as a coevolution process:
An empirical study. The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 32(2), 101776.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis.2023.101776
Andriole, S. J. (2009). Boards of directors and technology governance: The surprising state of the
practice. Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 24(1), 22.
Ang, J., & Teo, T. S. H. (1997). CSFs and sources of assistance and expertise in strategic IS planning: a
Singapore perspective. European Journal of Information Systems, 6(3), 164-171.
https://doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.ejis.3000263
Angst, C. M., Block, E. S., D'arcy, J., & Kelley, K. (2017). When do IT security investments matter?
Accounting for the influence of institutional factors in the context of healthcare data breaches.
MIS Quarterly, 41(3), 893-916.
Asgarkhani, M., Cater-Steel, A., Toleman, M., & Ally, M. (2017). Failed IT projects: Is poor IT
governance to blame? Proceedings of the 28th Australasian Conference on Information Systems
(ACIS 2017), Hobart, Australia.
Awuku-Gyampoh, R. K., & Dzisi, S. (2018). A comparative corporate governance mechanism. Journal of
Public Administration and Policy Research, 10(1), 1-6.
Baron, R., & Kenny, D. (1986). The moderator-mediator variable distinction in social psychological
research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 51(6), 1173-1182. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.51.6.1173
Bart, C., & Turel, O. (2010). IT and the board of directors: An empirical investigation into the
'governance questions' Canadian board members ask about IT. Journal of Information Systems,
24(2), 147-172. https://doi.org/10.2308/jis.2010.24.2.147
Bass, B. M., & Avolio, B. J. (1994). Improving Organizational Effectiveness through Transformational
Leadership. Sage.
Benaroch, M., & Chernobai, A. (2017). Operational IT failures, IT value-destruction, and board-level IT
governance changes. MIS Quarterly, 41(3), 729-762.
Boonstra, A., Yeliz Eseryel, U., & van Offenbeek, M. A. (2018). Stakeholders’ enactment of competing
logics in IT governance: polarization, compromise or synthesis? European Journal of Information
Systems, 27(4), 415-433. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41303-017-0055-0
Bowen, P. L., Cheung, M.-Y. D., & Rohde, F. H. (2007). Enhancing IT governance practices: A model
and case study of an organization's efforts. International Journal of Accounting Information
Systems, 8(3), 191-221. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.accinf.2007.07.002
Buchwald, A., Urbach, N., & Ahlemann, F. (2014). Business value through controlled IT: Toward an
integrated model of IT governance success and its impact. Journal of Information Technology,
29(2), 128-140. https://doi.org/10.1057/jit.2014.
Chan, Y. E., Huff, S. L., Barclay, D. W., & Copeland, D. G. (1997). Business strategic orientation,
information systems strategic orientation, and strategic alignment. Information Systems Research,
8(2), 125-150.
Chan, Y. E., & Reich, B. H. (2007). IT alignment: what have we learned? Journal of Information
Technology, 22(4), 297-315. https://doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.jit.2000109
Chin, W. W., Gopal, A., & Salisbury, W. D. (1997). Advancing the theory of adaptive structuration: The

--- PAGE 41 ---
39
Development of a scale to measure faithfulness of appropriation. Information Systems Research,
8(4), 342-367. https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.8.4.342
Coltman, T., Tallon, P., Sharma, R., & Queiroz, M. (2015). Strategic IT Alignment: Twenty-Five Years
on. Journal of Information Technology, 30(2), 91-100. https://doi.org/10.1057/jit.2014.35
Corley, K. G., & Gioia, D. A. (2011). Building theory about theory building: what constitutes a
theoretical contribution? Academy of Management Review, 36(1), 12-32.
https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.2009.0486
D'Arcy, J., Hovav, A., & Galletta, D. (2009). User awareness of security countermeasures and its impact
on information systems misuse: A deterrence approach. Information Systems Research, 20(1), 79-
98. https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.1070.0160
Daily, C. M., Dalton, D. R., & Cannella, A. A. (2003). Corporate governance: Decades of dialogue and
data. Academy of Management Review, 28(3), 371-382.
https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.2003.10196703
Dawson, G. S., Denford, J. S., Williams, C. K., Preston, D., & Desouza, K. C. (2016). An examination of
effective IT governance in the public sector using the legal view of agency theory. Journal of
Management Information Systems, 33(4), 1180-1208.
https://doi.org/10.1080/07421222.2016.1267533
De Haes, S., Caluwe, L., Huygh, T., & Joshi, A. (2020a). Governing Digital Transformation: Guidance
for Corporate Board Members. Springer.
De Haes, S., & Van Grembergen, W. (2005). IT governance structures, processes and relational
mechanisms: Achieving IT/business alignment in a major Belgian financial group. 38th Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences,
De Haes, S., & Van Grembergen, W. (2009). An exploratory study into IT governance implementations
and its impact on business/IT alignment. Information Systems Management, 26(2), 123-137.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10580530902794786
De Haes, S., Van Grembergen, W., & Debreceny, R. S. (2013). COBIT 5 and enterprise governance of
information technology: Building blocks and research opportunities. Journal of Information
Systems, 27(1), 307-324. https://doi.org/10.2308/isys-50422
De Haes, S., Van Grembergen, W., Joshi, A., & Huygh, T. (2020b). Enterprise Governance of
Information Technology: Achieving Alignment and Value in Digital Organizations (Third ed.).
Springer.
De Haes, S., Van Grembergen, W., Joshi, A., & Huygh, T. (2020c). Enterprise Governance of IT,
Alignment, and Value (Third ed.). Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-030-25918-1_1
DeSanctis, G., & Poole, M. S. (1994). Capturing the complexity in advanced technology use: Adaptive
structuration theory. Organization Science, 5(2), 121-147. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.5.2.121
Edelman, L. B. (1990). Legal environments and organizational governance: The expansion of due process
in the American workplace. American Journal of Sociology, 95(6), 1401-1440.
https://doi.org/10.1086/229459
Edelman, L. B. (1992). Legal ambiguity and symbolic structures: Organizational mediation of civil rights
law. American Journal of Sociology, 97(6), 1531-1576. https://doi.org/10.1086/229939
Edwards, J. R. (2002). Alternatives to difference scores: Polynomial regression analysis and response
surface methodology. In F. Drasgow & N. Schmitt (Eds.), Advances in Measurement and Data
Analysis (pp. 350–400). Jossey-Bass.
Elbanna, A. (2013). Top management support in multiple-project environments: an in-practice view.
European Journal of Information Systems, 22(3), 278-294. https://doi.org/10.1057/ejis.2012.16
Elshandidy, T., & Neri, L. (2015). Corporate governance, risk disclosure practices, and market liquidity:
Comparative evidence from the UK and Italy. Corporate Governance: An International Review,
23(4), 331-356. https://doi.org/10.1111/corg.12095
Fama, E. F., & Jensen, M. C. (1983). Separation of ownership and control. The Journal of Law and

--- PAGE 42 ---
40
Economics, 26(2), 301-325. https://doi.org/10.1086/467037
Finkelstein, S., Cannella, S. F. B., Hambrick, D. C., & Cannella, A. A. (2009). Strategic leadership:
Theory and research on executives, top management teams, and boards. Oxford University Press,
USA.
Fiss, P. C., & Zajac, E. J. (2006). The symbolic management of strategic change: Sensegiving via framing
and decoupling. Academy of Management Journal, 49(6), 1173-1193.
https://doi.org/10.5465/AMJ.2006.23478255
Fuller, C. M., Simmering, M. J., Atinc, G., Atinc, Y., & Babin, B. J. (2016). Common methods variance
detection in business research. Journal of Business Research, 69(8), 3192-3198.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2015.12.008
Gefen, D., & Straub, D. W. (2005). A practical guide to factorial validity using PLS-Graph: Tutorial and
annotated example. Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 16(5), 91-109.
Gerow, J. E., Grover, V., Thatcher, J., & Roth, P. L. (2014). Looking Toward the Future of IT–Business
Strategic Alignment through the Past. MIS Quarterly, 38(4), 1159-1186.
Gerow, J. E., Thatcher, J. B., & Grover, V. (2015). Six types of IT-business strategic alignment: an
investigation of the constructs and their measurement. European Journal of Information Systems,
24(5), 465-491. https://doi.org/10.1057/ejis.2014.6
Gersick, C. J. (1991). Revolutionary change theories: A multilevel exploration of the punctuated
equilibrium paradigm. Academy of Management Review, 16(1), 10-36.
https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.1991.4278988
Gondo, M. B., & Amis, J. M. (2013). Variations in practice adoption: The roles of conscious reflection
and discourse. Academy of Management Review, 38(2), 229-247.
https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.2010.0312
Goul, M., Raghu, T. S., & St. Louis, R. D. (2018). APC Forum: Governing the Wild West of Predictive
Analytics and Business Intelligence. MIS Quarterly Executive, 17(2), 157-183.
Gregory, R. W., Kaganer, E., Henfridsson, O., & Ruch, T. J. (2018). IT Consumerization and the
Transformation of IT Governance. MIS Quarterly, 42(4), 1225-1253.
Griffith, T. L. (1999). Technology features as triggers for sensemaking. Academy of Management Review,
24(3), 472-488. https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.1999.2202132
Hair, J. F., Black, W. C., Babin, B. J., Anderson, R. E., & Tatham, R. L. (2005). Multivariate Data
Analysis. Prentice-Hall.
Haislip, J. Z., Masli, A., Richardson, V. J., & Sanchez, J. M. (2015). Repairing organizational legitimacy
following information technology (IT) material weaknesses: Executive turnover, IT expertise, and
IT system upgrades. Journal of Information Systems, 30(1), 41-70. https://doi.org/10.2308/isys-
51294
Hanus, B., & Wu, Y. A. (2016). Impact of users’ security awareness on desktop security behavior: A
protection motivation theory perspective. Information Systems Management, 33(1), 2-16.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10580530.2015.1117842
Hardy, G. (2006). Using IT governance and COBIT to deliver value with IT and respond to legal,
regulatory and compliance challenges. Information Security Technical Report, 11(1), 55-61.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.istr.2005.12.004
Hassan, N. R., Lowry, P. B., & Mathiassen, L. (2022). Useful products in information systems theorizing:
A discursive formation perspective. Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 23(2),
418-446. https://doi.org/10.17705/1jais.00730
Hassan, N. R., Mathiassen, L., & Lowry, P. B. (2019). The process of information systems theorizing as a
discursive practice. Journal of Information Technology, 34(3), 198-220.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0268396219832004
Hayes, A. F. (2009). Beyond Baron and Kenny: Statistical mediation analysis in the new millennium.
Communication Monographs, 76(4), 408-420. https://doi.org/10.1080/03637750903310360
Henningsson, S., Kettinger, W. J., Zhang, C., & Vaidyanathan, N. (2021). Transformative rare events:

--- PAGE 43 ---
41
Leveraging digital affordance actualisation. European Journal of Information Systems, 30(2),
137-156. https://doi.org/10.1080/0960085X.2020.1860656
Henseler, J., Dijkstra, T. K., Sarsted, M., Ringle, C. M., Diamantopoulos, A., Straub, D., Ketchen, D. J.
J., Hair, J. F., Hult, G. T. M., & Calantone, R. J. (2014). Common beliefs and reality about PLS:
Comments on Rönkkö and Evermann (2013). Organizational Research Methods, 17(2), 182-209.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1094428114526928
Henseler, J., Hubona, G. S., & Ray, P. A. (2016). Using PLS path modeling in new technology research:
Updated guidelines. Industrial Management & Data Systems, 116(1), 2-20.
https://doi.org/10.1108/IMDS-09-2015-0382
Hillman, A. J., & Dalziel, T. (2003). Boards of directors and firm performance: Integrating agency and
resource dependence perspectives. Academy of Management Review, 28(3), 383-396.
https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.2003.10196729
Hoe, S. L. (2008). Issues and procedures in adopting structural equation modelling technique. Journal of
Quantitative Methods, 3(1), 76-83.
Hsu, J. S.-C., Shih, S.-P., Hung, Y. W., & Lowry, P. B. (2015). The role of extra-role behaviors and
social controls in information security policy effectiveness. Information Systems Research, 26(2),
282-300. https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.2015.0569
Huang, R., Zmud, R. W., & Price, R. L. (2010). Influencing the effectiveness of IT governance practices
through steering committees and communication policies. European Journal of Information
Systems, 19(3), 288-302. https://doi.org/10.1057/ejis.2010.16
Huff, S. L., Maher, P. M., & Munro, M. C. (2006). Information technology and the board of directors: Is
there an IT attention deficit? MIS Quarterly Executive, 5(2), 55-68.
Hussin, H., King, M., & Cragg, P. (2002). IT alignment in small firms. European Journal of Information
Systems, 11(2), 108-127. https://doi.org/10.1057/palgrave/ejis/3000422
Huygh, T., & Haes, S. D. (2020, December 13-16). Towards a viable system model-based organizing
logic for IT governance International Conference on Information Systems (ICIS 2020), India.
ISACA. (2012a). COBIT 5: A Business Framework for the Governance and Management of Enterprise
IT. In: Information Systems Audit and Control Association.
ISACA. (2012b). COBIT 5: A Business Framework for the Governance and Management of Enterprise
IT. Information Systems Audit and Control Association.
Jacobson, D. D. (2009, 5-8 Jan. 2009). Revisiting IT governance in the light of institutional theory. 2009
42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences,
Jasperson, J., Carter, P. E., & Zmud, R. W. (2005). A comprehensive conceptualization of post-adoptive
behaviors associated with information technology enabled work systems. MIS Quarterly, 29(3),
525-557.
Jenkin, T. A., Chan, Y. E., & Sabherwal, R. (2019). Mutual understanding in information systems
development: Changes within and across projects. MIS Quarterly, 43(2), 649-671.
https://doi.org/10.25300/MISQ/2019/13980
Jewer, J., & McKay, K. N. (2012). Antecedents and consequences of board IT governance: Institutional
and strategic choice perspectives. Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 13(7), 581-
617.
Jordan, E., & Musson, D. (2004). Corporate Governance and IT Governance: Exploring the board's
perspective. SSRN Working Paper. Retrieved April 19, 2017, from
https://papers.ssrn.com/soL3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=787346
Joshi, A., Huygh, T., De Haes, S., & Van Grembergen, W. (2018). An Empirical Assessment of Shared
Understanding in IT Governance Implementation. Proceedings of the 51st Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences,
Judge, T. A., & Bono, J. E. (2000). Five-factor model of personality and transformational leadership.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 85(5), 751. https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.85.5.751
Kappelman, L., McLean, E., Johnson, V., & Gerhart, N. (2014). The 2014 SIM IT key issues and trends

--- PAGE 44 ---
42
study. MIS Quarterly Executive, 13(4), 237-263.
Kim, H.-W., & Kankanhalli, A. (2009). Investigating user resistance to information systems
implementation: A status quo bias perspective. MIS Quarterly, 567-582.
Klein, H. J., Solinger, O. N., & Duflot, V. (2022). Commitment system theory: The evolving structure of
commitments to multiple targets. Academy of Management Review, 47(1), 116-138.
https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.2018.0031
Kude, T., Lazic, M., Heinzl, A., & Neff, A. (2018). Achieving IT‐based synergies through regulation‐
oriented and consensus‐oriented IT governance capabilities. Information Systems Journal, 28(5),
765-795. https://doi.org/10.1111/isj.12159
Kulkarni, U., Robles-Flores, J. A., & Popovič, A. (2017). Business intelligence capability: the effect of
top management and the mediating roles of user participation and analytical decision making
orientation. Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 18(7), 1.
https://doi.org/10.17705/1jais.00462
Lee, A. S., & Baskerville, R. L. (2003). Generalizing generalizability in information systems research.
Information Systems Research, 14(3), 221-243. https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.14.3.221.16560
Lee, A. S., & Baskerville, R. L. (2012). Conceptualizing generalizability: new contributions and a reply.
MIS Quarterly, 36(3), 749-761.
Leih, M. (2006). The impact of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act on IT project management. Journal of
Information Technology Theory and Application (JITTA), 8(3), 13-14.
Leybourne, S., & Sadler-Smith, E. (2006). The role of intuition and improvisation in project management.
International Journal of Project Management, 24(6), 483-492.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijproman.2006.03.007
Liang, H., Saraf, N., Hu, Q., & Xue, Y. (2007). Assimilation of Enterprise Systems: The Effect of
Institutional Pressures and the Mediating Role of Top Management. MIS Quarterly, 31(1), 59-87.
Liang, H., Wang, N., Xue, Y., & Ge, S. (2017). Unraveling the Alignment Paradox: How Does
Business—IT Alignment Shape Organizational Agility? Information Systems Research, 28(4),
863-879. https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.2017.0711
Liu, G. H., Wang, E. T., & Chua, C. E. (2015). Leveraging social capital to obtain top management
support in complex, cross-functional IT projects. Journal of the Association of Information
Systems, 16(8), 707-737.
Lowry, M., Vance, A., & Vance, M. D. (2023). Inexpert supervision: Field evidence on boards’ oversight
of cybersecurity. Available at SSRN 4002794.
Lowry, P. B., D’Arcy, J., Hammer, B., & Moody, G. D. (2016). Cargo Cult’ science in traditional
organization and information systems survey research: A case for using nontraditional methods of
data collection, including Mechanical Turk and online panels. Journal of Strategic Information
Systems, 25(3), 232-240. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis.2016.06.002
Lowry, P. B., & Gaskin, J. (2014). Partial least squares (PLS) structural equation modeling (SEM) for
building and testing behavioral causal theory: When to choose it and how to use it. IEEE
Transactions on Professional Communication, 57(2), 123-146.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TPC.2014.2312452
Lowry, P. B., Zhang, J., Moody, G. D., Chatterjee, S., Wang, C., & Wu, T. (2019). An integrative theory
addressing cyberharassment in the light of technology-based opportunism. Journal of
Management Information Systems, 36(4), 1142-1178.
https://doi.org/10.1080/07421222.2019.1661090
Luftman, J., Lyytinen, K., & Zvi, T. b. (2017). Enhancing the measurement of information technology
(IT) business alignment and its influence on company performance. Journal of Information
Technology, 32(1), 26-46. https://doi.org/10.1057/jit.2015.23
MacKenzie, S. B., Podsakoff, P. M., & Podsakoff, N. P. (2011). Construct measurement and validation
procedures in MIS and behavioral research: Integrating new and existing techniques. MIS
Quarterly, 35(2), 293-334.

--- PAGE 45 ---
43
MacKinnon, D. P. (2008). Introduction to Statistical Mediation Analysis. Erlbaum.
Majchrzak, A., Rice, R. E., Malhotra, A., King, N., & Ba, S. (2000). Technology adaptation: The case of
a computer-supported inter-organizational virtual team. MIS Quarterly, 24(4), 569-600.
https://doi.org/10.2307/3250948
Mangalaraj, G., Singh, A., & Taneja, A. (2014). IT governance frameworks and COBIT-a literature
review. Twentieth Americas Conference on Information Systems (AMCIS 2014), Savannah, GA.
Marnewick, C., & Labuschagne, L. (2011). An investigation into the governance of information
technology projects in South Africa. International Journal of Project Management, 29(6), 661-
670. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijproman.2010.07.004
Marrone, M., & Hammerle, M. (2017). Relevant research areas in IT service management: An
examination of academic and practitioner literatures. Communications of the Association for
Information Systems, 41(1), 23.
Mazza, T., & Azzali, S. (2018). Information technology controls quality and audit fees: Evidence from
Italy. Journal of Accounting, Auditing & Finance, 33(1), 123-146.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0148558X15625582
Meyer, J. P., Becker, T. E., & Vandenberghe, C. (2004). Employee commitment and motivation: A
conceptual analysis and integrative model. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89(6), 991-1007.
https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.89.6.991
Meyer, J. W., & Rowan, B. (1977). Institutionalized organizations: Formal structure as myth and
ceremony. American Journal of Sociology, 83(2), 340-363. https://doi.org/10.1086/226550
Miller, C. C., & Ireland, R. D. (2005). Intuition in strategic decision making: Friend or foe in the fast-
paced 21st century? Academy of Management Perspectives, 19(1), 19-30.
https://doi.org/10.5465/ame.2005.15841948
Mohajeri, K., Mesgari, M., & Lee, A. S. (2020). When statistical significance Is not enough: Investigating
relevance, practical significance, and statistical significance. MIS Quarterly, 44(2), 525-559.
https://doi.org/10.25300/MISQ/2020/13932
Mohr, L. B. (1982). Explaining organizational behavior (1st ed.). Jossey-Bass. https://bac-
lac.on.worldcat.org/oclc/1033061260
Moody, G. D., Lowry, P. B., & Galletta, D. F. (2017). It’s complicated: explaining the relationship
between trust, distrust, and ambivalence in online transaction relationships using polynomial
regression analysis and response surface analysis. European Journal of Information Systems,
26(4), 379-413. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41303-016-0027-9
Mufti, Y., Niazi, M., Alshayeb, M., & Mahmood, S. (2018). A readiness model for security requirements
engineering. IEEE Access, 6, 28611-28631. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2840322.
Mulgund, P., Pahwa, P., & Chaudhari, G. (2019). Strengthening IT governance and controls using
COBIT: A systematic literature review. International Journal of Risk and Contingency
Management (IJRCM), 8(4), 66-90. https://doi.org/10.4018/IJRCM.2019100104
Nolan, R., & McFarlan, F. W. (2005). Information Technology and the Board of Directors. Harvard
Business Review, 83(10), 96-106.
Noor, U., & Ghazanfar, A. (2016, 19-21 Sept. 2016). A survey revealing path towards service life cycle
management in COBIT 5 2016 Eleventh International Conference on Digital Information
Management (ICDIM),
Organ, D. W. (1988). A restatement of the satisfaction-performance hypothesis. Journal of Management,
14(4), 547-557. https://doi.org/10.1177/014920638801400405
Pavlou, P. A., Liang, H., & Xue, Y. (2007). Understanding and mitigating uncertainty in online exchange
relationships: A principal-agent perspective. MIS Quarterly, 31(1), 105-136.
https://doi.org/10.2307/25148783
Peppard, J. (2020). Rethinking the concept of the IS organization. In R. D. Galliers, D. E. Leidner, & B.
Simeonova (Eds.), Strategic Information Management: Theory and Practice (5th Edition) (Vol.
28, pp. 76-103). Routledge.

--- PAGE 46 ---
44
Podsakoff, N. P., Whiting, S. W., Podsakoff, P. M., & Blume, B. D. (2009). Individual-and
organizational-level consequences of organizational citizenship behaviors: A meta-analysis.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 94(1), 122-141. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0013079
Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., Lee, J. Y., & Podsakoff, N. P. (2003). Common method biases in
behavioral research: A critical review of the literature and recommended remedies. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 88, 879-903. https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.88.5.879
Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., Paine, J. B., & Bachrach, D. G. (2000). Organizational citizenship
behaviors: a critical review of the theoretical and empirical literature and suggestions for future
research. Journal of Management, 26(3), 513-563. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0149-2063(00)00047-
7
Posey, C., Roberts, T. L., & Lowry, P. B. (2015). The impact of organizational commitment on insiders’
motivation to protect organizational information assets. Journal of Management Information
Systems, 32(4), 179-214. https://doi.org/10.1080/07421222.2015.1138374
Posey, C., Roberts, T. L., Lowry, P. B., Bennett, R. J., & Courtney, J. F. (2013). Insiders' protection of
organizational information assets: Development of a systematics-based taxonomy and theory of
diversity for protection-motivated behaviors. MIS Quarterly, 37(4), 1189-1210.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/43825787
Prasad, A., Green, P., & Heales, J. (2012). On IT governance structures and their effectiveness in
collaborative organizational structures. International Journal of Accounting Information Systems,
13(3), 199-220. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.accinf.2012.06.005
Prasad, A., Heales, J., & Green, P. (2010). A capabilities-based approach to obtaining a deeper
understanding of information technology governance effectiveness: Evidence from IT steering
committees. International Journal of Accounting Information Systems, 11(3), 214-232.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.accinf.2010.07.013
Queiroz, M. (2017). Mixed results in strategic IT alignment research: a synthesis and empirical study.
European Journal of Information Systems, 26(1), 21-36.
Queiroz, M., Tallon, P. P., & Coltman, T. (2022). How do shared IT applications influence agility?
Theory and evidence of a convex relationship. Journal of Management Information Systems,
39(4), 1089-1115. https://doi.org/10.1080/07421222.2022.2127452
Rai, A., Brown, P., & Tang, X. (2009). Organizational assimilation of electronic procurement
innovations. Journal of Management Information Systems, 26(1), 257-296.
https://doi.org/10.2753/MIS0742-1222260110
Ramesh, V., & Gerth, A. B. (2015). Design of an integrated information systems master’s core
curriculum: a case study. Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 36(1), 16.
Ranesh, M. M. A., Samuel, S. J., Natchadalingam, R., & Jeyanthi, P. (2022). Information technology (IT)
governance framework with artificial neural network and balance scorecard to improve the
success rate of software projects. 2022 6th International Conference on Electronics,
Communication and Aerospace Technology,
Reich, B. H., & Benbasat, I. (1996). Measuring the Linkage between Business and Information
Technology Objectives. MIS Quarterly, 20(1), 55-81. https://doi.org/10.2307/249542
Renaud, A., Walsh, I., & Kalika, M. (2016). Is SAM still alive? A bibliometric and interpretive mapping
of the strategic alignment research field. The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 25(2), 75-
103. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis.2016.01.002
Rubino, M., & Vitolla, F. (2014). Internal control over financial reporting: opportunities using the COBIT
framework. Managerial Auditing Journal.
Sabherwal, R., Sabherwal, S., Havakhor, T., & Steelman, Z. (2019). How does strategic alignment affect
firm performance? the roles of information technology investment and environmental uncertainty.
MIS Quarterly, 43(2), 453-474.
Salas, E., Rosen, M. A., & DiazGranados, D. (2010). Expertise-based intuition and decision making in
organizations. Journal of Management, 36(4), 941-973.

--- PAGE 47 ---
45
https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206309350084
Sarker, S. (2016). Building on Davison and Martinsons' Concerns: A Call for Balance between
Contextual Specificity and Generality in IS Research. Journal of Information Technology, 31(3),
250-253. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41265-016-0003-9
Schlosser, F., Beimborn, D., Weitzel, T., & Wagner, H.-T. (2015). Achieving social alignment between
business and IT–an empirical evaluation of the efficacy of IT governance mechanisms. Journal of
Information Technology, 30(2), 119-135. https://doi.org/10.1057/jit.2015.2
Schwarz, A., Rizzuto, T., Carraher-Wolverton, C., Roldán, J. L., & Barrera-Barrera, R. (2017).
Examining the impact and detection of the "urban legend" of common method bias. SIGMIS
Database, 48(1), 93–119. https://doi.org/10.1145/3051473.3051479
Shao, Z. (2019). Interaction effect of strategic leadership behaviors and organizational culture on IS-
Business strategic alignment and Enterprise Systems assimilation. International Journal of
Information Management, 44, 96-108. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2018.09.010
Shao, Z., Feng, Y., & Hu, Q. (2016). Effectiveness of top management support in enterprise systems
success: a contingency perspective of fit between leadership style and system life-cycle.
European Journal of Information Systems, 25(2), 131-153. https://doi.org/10.1057/ejis.2015.6
Shi, W., & Connelly, B. L. (2018). Is regulatory adoption ceremonial? Evidence from lead director
appointments. Strategic Management Journal, 39(8), 2386-2413.
https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.2901
Smits, D., & van Hillegersberg, J. (2018). The continuing mismatch between IT governance maturity
theory and practice: a new approach. Procedia Computer Science, 138, 549-560.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2018.10.075
Sobel, M. E. (1982). Asymptotic confidence intervals for indirect effects in structural equation models. In
S. Leinhardt (Ed.), Sociological Methodology (pp. 290-312). American Sociological Association.
Stafford, T., Gal, G., Poston, R., Crossler, R. E., Jiang, R., & Lyons, R. (2018). The Role of Accounting
and Professional Associations in IT Security Auditing: An AMCIS Panel Report.
Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 43(1), 27.
Steelman, Z. R., Hammer, B. I., & Limayem, M. (2014). Data collection in the digital age: innovative
alternatives to student samples. MIS Quarterly, 38(2), 355-378.
Tallon, P., Queiroz, M., Coltman, T. R., & Sharma, R. (2016). Business process and information
technology alignment: construct conceptualization, empirical illustration, and directions for future
research. Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 17(9), 563–589.
https://doi.org/10.17705/1jais.00438
Tallon, P. P., Ramirez, R. V., & Short, J. E. (2013). The information artifact in IT governance: toward a
theory of information governance. Journal of Management Information Systems, 30(3), 141-178.
https://doi.org/10.2753/MIS0742-1222300306
Tiwana, A., & Konsynski, B. (2009). Complementarities between organizational IT architecture and
governance structure. Information Systems Research, 21(2), 288-304.
https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.1080.0206
Tiwana, A., Konsynski, B., & Venkatraman, N. (2013). Special issue: Information technology and
organizational governance: The IT governance cube. Journal of Management Information
Systems, 30(3), 7-12. https://doi.org/10.2753/MIS0742-1222300301
Trites, G. (2004). Director responsibility for IT governance. International Journal of Accounting
Information Systems, 5(2), 89-99. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.accinf.2004.01.001
Turel, O., Liu, P., & Bart, C. (2017). Board-Level Information Technology Governance Effects on
Organizational Performance: The Roles of Strategic Alignment and Authoritarian Governance
Style. Information Systems Management, 34(2), 117-136.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10580530.2017.1288523
Vaia, G., Arkhipova, D., & DeLone, W. (2022). Digital governance mechanisms and principles that
enable agile responses in dynamic competitive environments. European Journal of Information

--- PAGE 48 ---
46
Systems, 31(6), 662-680. https://doi.org/10.1080/0960085X.2022.2078743
Valentine, E., De Haes, S., & Timbrell, G. (2016). The board's role in the governance of enterprise
information and technology. In R. Leblanc (Ed.), The Handbook of Board Governance: A
Comprehensive Guide for Public, Private and Not‐for‐Profit Board Members (pp. 574-596).
Wiley.
Van de Ven, A. H., & Poole, M. S. (2005). Alternative approaches for studying organizational change.
Organization Studies, 26(9), 1377-1404. https://doi.org/10.1177/0170840605056907
Van Grembergen, W., & De Haes, S. (2010). A research journey into enterprise governance of IT,
business/IT alignment and value creation. International Journal of IT/Business Alignment and
Governance (IJITBAG), 1(1), 1-13.
Vance, A., Lowry, P. B., & Eggett, D. (2015). A new approach to the problem of access policy violations:
Increasing perceptions of accountability through the user interface. MIS Quarterly, 39(2), 345-
366.
Vera, D., & Crossan, M. (2004). Strategic leadership and organizational learning. Academy of
Management Review, 29(2), 222-240. https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.2004.12736080
Wang, N., Liang, H., Ge, S., Xue, Y., & Ma, J. (2019). Enablers and inhibitors of cloud computing
assimilation: an empirical study. Internet Research, 29(6), 1344-1369.
https://doi.org/10.1108/INTR-03-2018-0126
Weber, R. (2012). Evaluating and developing theories in the information systems discipline. Journal of
the Association for Information Systems, 13(1), 1-30. https://doi.org/10.17705/1jais.00284
Weill, P., & Ross, J. (2004). IT Governance: How Top Managers Manage IT Decision Rights for
Superior Results. Harvard Business School Press.
Westphal, J. D., & Zajac, E. J. (1994). Substance and Symbolism in CEOs' Long-Term Incentive Plans.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 39(3), 367-390. https://doi.org/10.2307/2393295
Westphal, J. D., & Zajac, E. J. (2001). Decoupling policy from practice: The case of stock repurchase
programs. Administrative Science Quarterly, 46(2), 202-228. https://doi.org/10.2307/2667086
Wijen, F. (2014). Means versus ends in opaque institutional fields: Trading off compliance and
achievement in sustainability standard adoption. Academy of Management Review, 39(3), 302-
323. https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.2012.0218
Wilkin, C. L., & Chenhall, R. H. (2010). A review of IT governance: A taxonomy to inform accounting
information systems. Journal of Information Systems, 24(2), 107-146.
https://doi.org/10.2308/jis.2010.24.2.107
Wilkin, C. L., & Chenhall, R. H. (2020). Information Technology Governance: Reflections on the Past
and Future Directions. Journal of Information Systems, 34(2), 257-292.
https://doi.org/10.2308/isys-52632
Williams, L. J., & O'Boyle, E. H. (2015). Ideal, nonideal, and no-marker variables: The confirmatory
factor analysis (CFA) marker technique works when it matters. Journal of Applied Psychology,
100(5), 1579-1602. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0038855
Wu, S. P.-J., Straub, D. W., & Liang, T.-P. (2015). How information technology governance mechanisms
and strategic alignment influence organizational performance: Insights from a matched survey of
business and IT managers. MIS Quarterly, 39(2), 497-518.
Wu, Y. A., & Saunders, C. S. (2016). Governing the fiduciary relationship in information security
services. Decision Support Systems, 92, 57-67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2016.09.008
Yeow, A., Soh, C., & Hansen, R. (2018). Aligning with new digital strategy: A dynamic capabilities
approach. The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 27(1), 43-58.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis.2017.09.001
Yudatama, U., Nazief, B., & Hidayanto, A. N. (2017). Strategic decisions in the implementation of
Information Technology Governance to achieve business and information technology alignment
using analytical hierarchy process. Information Technology Journal, 16(2), 51-61.
Zaky, A. H. M., Ragab, A. A., Soliman, M. M., & Ragheb, M. A. (2018). Information technology

--- PAGE 49 ---
47
governance effectiveness in organizations. The Business & Management Review, 9(3), 281-289.
Zhang, P., Zhao, K., & Kumar, R. L. (2016). Impact of IT governance and IT capability on firm
performance. Information Systems Management, 33(4), 357-373.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10580530.2016.1220218
Zhen, J., Xie, Z., & Dong, K. (2021). Impact of IT governance mechanisms on organizational agility and
the role of top management support and IT ambidexterity. International Journal of Accounting
Information Systems, 40(March), Article: 100501. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.accinf.2021.100501
1
Thisdefinitionandouroperationalizationalignwiththeintellectualalignmentaspectofstrategicalignment,which
fits well with the ITG definition and measurement we build on, as detailed by Wu et al. (2015).
2
For instance, IBM saved over US$12 billion by strategically updating its supply chain systems. Likewise, the US
Homeland Security Department’s consolidated ID cards and automated checkpoint systems allowed more than 1.7
million vehicles and 2.5 million travelers’ identities to be validated in the first week of the system rollout.
3
Although extant research considers COBIT the dominant ITG framework and is commonly adopted, no studies
cite actual adoption rates; 68.7 percent of our participants indicate their organizations adopt COBIT.
4
See Table A1 for an elaboration of commitment in the literature and its relation to the ITG spirit.
5
A similar decoupling of adopted mechanisms from actual practice and leadership is theorized in institutional
theory and illustrated in other organizational governance contexts (Edelman, 1990, 1992; Westphal & Zajac, 1994,
2001).
6
Other perspectives on the spirit of ITG include the social dimensions of ITG (Chan & Reich, 2007) or “soft”
governance (Smits & van Hillegersberg, 2018).
7
Before analyzing Model 1, we validated Wu et al.’s (2015) finding that decision-making structure, formal process,
and communication approach are significant and strong predictors of SITA when they are the only predictors in the
model and only when combined as one second-order measure (β = 0.687, z = 18.77***
; SITA R2
= 0.472). However,
Wu et al. performed their analysis with PLS, not with CB-SEM. We report the following results when decision-making
structure (DMS), formal process (FP), and communication approach(CA) are run as first-order constructs that directly
predict SITA: βDMS = 0.070, z = 0.76 ns; βFP = 0.385, z = 4.44***; βCA = 0.487, z = 5.37***; SITA R2
= 0.390.
8
In addition to controlling for industry in our presented analyses (which was nonsignificant), we reran the entire
model, excluding the subsample of respondents from the largest industry (BusEq). In brief, no direction of a
relationship changes, nor its significance, and each outcome is within 10 percent of the full sample results; thus, we
determine that this particular industry segment is not unduly influencing the results, and we present the results for the
full sample.
9
The 3D response surface analysis charts were produced at https://www.math3d.org/. The equation was:
0.540x+0.508x2
+0.366y+0.215y2
-0.737xy-0.038. Notably, the equation includes extrapolations of strategic alignment
outside of three standard deviations and reflects high CCP and low top leadership support or vice versa; by contrast,
there were no cases with high CCP and low top leadership support or vice versa. Thus, the upward wings are outside
our data range and provide exciting avenues for future investigation.
10
The concept of final causality indicates that “phenomena are influenced by the ends to which they are tending”
(Van de Ven & Poole, 2005, p. 1397). A final cause is not a generative mechanism but more of an objective for which
everything else exists (ibid). Thus, a final cause is not a “cause” per se, as causality is typically understood. Instead,
it should be thought of as the reason we have other factors in the first place. For example, strategic alignment is the
reason why scholars and practitioners are interested in ITG in the first place. The goal of achieving strategic alignment
is why organizations invest in ITG.
11
We offer IBM’s transformation journey as a prime example of the significance of embracing ITG principles
alongside mechanisms. In the early 2000s, IBM faced challenges aligning its IT strategies with business goals. They
recognized that the mere adoption of ITG mechanisms was insufficient. IBM decided to commit to ITG principles
inspired by industry best practices, including COBIT. By prioritizing a holistic view of ITG, they transformed their
ITG approach. As a result, IBM achieved remarkable IT strategic alignment and became aglobal leader in IT solutions
and services. Their case underscores that adopting ITG mechanisms alone would not have propelled them to success;

--- PAGE 50 ---
48
their commitment to ITG principles, including COBIT, played a pivotal role in their journey.
12
We argue that Microsoft’s success in achieving strategic alignment can be primarily attributed to its strong top
leadership support. Under the leadership of Bill Gates and, subsequently, Satya Nadella, Microsoft emphasized the
strategic importance of IT. The board of directors actively supported IT initiatives, recognizing that IT was not just a
support function but a driver of innovation and business growth. This top-down approach to ITG fostered a holistic
cultureofcommitmenttoITG-relatedprinciples.ItnotonlyimprovedMicrosoft’sstrategicalignmentbutalsoenabled
Microsoft to remain at the forefront of the industry, including leading in generative AI with large-language models.
13
GeneralElectric(GE)exemplifieseffectiveoperationalizationofITGprinciplesthroughCOBITimplementation.
The top leadership at GE, including the board, actively supported COBIT implementation and ensured that ITG
principles were embraced uniformly throughout this conglomerate with diverse businesses. This top-down approach,
combined with a commitment to COBIT principles, led to significant improvements in SITA across GE’s diverse
portfolio of businesses. This embrace of operational and governance excellence also facilitated radical choices to
obtain their strategic advantage through differentiation, such as exiting major businesses that GE originally founded
(e.g., appliances division and lighting).
14
As noted, the COVID-19 pandemic abruptly accelerated the adoption of remote work, emphasizing the need for
effective ITG to sustain this transition. One notable case is Zoom Video Communications. As organizations shifted to
remote work, Zoom’s platform became essential for connectivity and collaboration. Zoom’s success hinged on
effective ITG that ensured their services’ scalability, security, and reliability. Their commitment to ITG principles and
top leadership support enabled them to meet the increased demand during the pandemic effectively. Without this
commitment, an organization cannot be nimble enough to rapidly adapt and scale its business operations and services
in response to radical, unexpected changes in market conditions (i.e., market shocks).

--- PAGE 51 ---
1
Online APPENDIX A. Problematization and Contributions of Our Research
Based upon the well-known problematization approach proposed by Alvesson and Sandberg(2011), we present the detailed problematization of our research in
Table A1.
Table A1. Problematization of Our Research
# Prominent
Assumptions in
ITG Research
Example
Studies
Our challenge to those assumptions How our study answers the challenge of assumptions
1 ITG is delivered
through
mechanisms
related to
decision-making
structures, formal
processes, and
communication
approaches
(Bradley et al.,
2012;
Buchwald et al.,
2014; Huanget
al., 2010;
Tallon et al.,
2013; Tiwana
& Konsynski,
2010;Tiwana et
al., 2013; Wu et
al., 2015; Xue
et al., 2011)
Researchers and practitioners alike have represented
that ITG is delivered through a collection of formal
mechanisms (e.g., Tiwana et al., 2013; Wu et al.,
2015). Whereas these mechanisms are indeed
important, we argue that they are incomplete as they
only represent an outward, mechanistic form of ITG
without fully reflecting two missing and interrelated
components: (1) the purpose or spirit of ITG for an
organization and (2) the organization members
commitment to this purpose or spirit. ITG spirit can be
understood in terms of the concept of the spirit of IT,
which is “the generalintent concerning values and
goals underlying a given set of structuralfeatures [of
IT]” (DeSanctis & Poole, 1994, p. 126). Building upon
this notion of the spirit of IT, the spirit of ITG is the
overallpurpose an organization has in mind in terms
of the values and goals underpinningthe set of ITG
formalmechanisms that they are tryingto implement.
Notably, the spirit of ITG is consensus-oriented—that
is., a generalbelief and understandingof the true
purpose, values, or principles of ITG—rather than a
regulation-oriented approach(i.e., an understandingof
ITG in terms of formalprocesses and structures)
(Kude et al., 2018).
Not only is a shared sense of the purpose or spirit of
ITG crucialto an organization, but it is equally or
more important that the members of the organizations
reflect a commitment to its intended spirit of ITG. Yet,
extant ITG research overlooks this crucialconcept,
even thoughcommitmentis fundamentalto successful
We implement and measure ITG mechanisms as has
been established in the extant literature (Wu et al., 2015).
To these, we add commitment to ITG (COBIT)
principles (CCP) as a key missing construct from the
literature that should be considered. CCP represents the
organization’s members’ commitment to the spirit of the
purpose of an organization’s ITG. We programmatically
position COBIT because it is the best-known ITG
framework, and commitment to its principles
encapsulatesITG principles (Hardy, 2006;Mangalaraj et
al., 2014; Mazza & Azzali, 2018).
Basedon addingCCP to theknown nomologicalnetwork
of ITG mechanisms, we empirically demonstratethat the
adoption of ITG mechanisms is distinct from the
commitment to ITG principles represented by CCP.
Thus, we demonstrate through the study that there is a
much deeper underpinningto delivering ITG than merely
rolling out a set of mechanisms. Instead, organizations
must also have a shared understandingof the spirit of
ITG anda commitment to it, which can be pragmatically
measured through CCP, one of our unique contributions
to the literature.
Our study shows that effective ITG truly happens when
the organization understands the purpose of ITG, which
can be understood as a realization of the spirit of ITG. In
our study, thefact that the spirit of ITG has been realized
is reflected in the construct commitment to COBIT
principles (CCP).

--- PAGE 52 ---
2
# Prominent
Assumptions in
ITG Research
Example
Studies
Our challenge to those assumptions How our study answers the challenge of assumptions
government. Commitment is a necessary construct
observed in severalfundamentalstudies on IT
governance (e.g., Ali & Green, 2012; Alreemy et al.,
2016; Prasad et al., 2010). Commitment has been
widely emphasized in IS organizationalsecurity
research that has highlighted the importance of the
commitment of organizationalinsiders and employees
(e.g., D'Arcy et al., 2009; Hanus & Wu, 2016; Hsu et
al., 2015; Posey et al., 2015; Posey et al., 2013).
Beyond the IS literature, commitment is an important
concept that has been well-investigated in disciplines
such as management and organization studies (e.g.,
Klein et al., 2022; Meyer et al., 2004; Organ, 1988;
Podsakoff et al., 2009; Podsakoff et al., 2000).
In summary, an organization can attempt to deliver
ITG by adoptinga set of ITG mechanisms; however,
such an approach willfallshort as mechanistic or
perfunctory if it is not coupled with (1) a shared
understandingof the underlyingvalues and principles
reflected in the spirit of ITG for the organization, and
(2) an organization-wide commitment to the spirit of
ITG or its principles (Huber et al., 2017).
2 Adoption of ITG
mechanisms is
sufficient to
achieve strategic
alignment
(De Haes &
Van
Grembergen,
2009; De Haes
et al., 2020b;
Tiwana et al.,
2013; Wu et al.,
2015)
Building on the challenge in #1 and extendingthe
argument, we argue the adoption of ITG mechanisms.
However, being an essentialfacet of ITGis not
necessarily the definingaspect of successfulITGthat
will lead to strategic alignment. Instead, the defining
aspect of ITG is a commitment to ITG principles,
reflected in CCP, and this crucialmissing component
is more likely to create strategic alignment.
Commitment to ITG principles implies that the
organization has a cohesive ITG spirit. ITG success is
contingent upon organization-levelcollective action
(Constantinides & Barrett, 2015), which necessitates
thattheorganizationgoes beyonda symbolic adoption
In challenging assumption #2, we build off assumption
#1, wherein we demonstrate that the adoption of ITG
mechanisms is distinct from commitment to ITG
principles represented by CCP. For assumption #2, we
show that adoptingthe ITG mechanism is insufficient to
achieve strategic alignment. Our empiricalresults show
that adoptingITG mechanisms does not directly affect
strategic alignment but is fully mediated by the
commitment to ITG (COBIT) principles. In this way, our
study delivers a vitalpiece of the theoreticalpuzzle of
achievingstrategic alignment, which has been argued to
be challenging to achieve (Chan & Reich, 2007). This is
crucial because, without the addition of the novelCCP
mediator, ITG mechanisms are shown to have a direct

--- PAGE 53 ---
3
# Prominent
Assumptions in
ITG Research
Example
Studies
Our challenge to those assumptions How our study answers the challenge of assumptions
of ITG andembracesa moreprofound commitment to
ITG principles (such as COBIT). Effective ITG
requires appreciatingand infusingecosystem-wide
values (Huber et al., 2017). In such a situation,
organizations develop individualchoices and willful
commitment to ITG—a pivotalpoint in ITG success
(Leclercq-Vandelannoitte & Bertin, 2018). In contrast,
if the ITG mechanisms are adopted only symbolically
or instrumentally, there is little chance that there will
be organization-wide buy-in or commitment to the
ITG spirit or principles, thus underminingITG’s goal
of fosteringstrategic alignment.
positive relationship with strategic alignment. This can
thus mislead research and practice on the theoretical
constructs involved and incorrectly infer that ITG
mechanisms are sufficient.
By expandingnotions of spirit to ITG, we help reframe
the findings of Huanget al. (2010), wherein they theorize
that ITG communication policies improve congruence in
frames of references on IT use. We propose that ITG
spirit, pragmatically conceptualized and measured
through CCP, is an essentialelement of ITG that
improves strategic alignment. Conversely, suppose the
commitment to ITG principles or the spirit of ITG is
absent in the organization. In that case, there willbe an
increased likelihood of ITG misalignment (Gregory et
al., 2018), and strategic alignment will be more
challenging.
3 Only managerial
support of IT is
necessary to
achieve strategic
alignment
through effective
ITG
(Boonstra et al.,
2018; Bowen et
al., 2007; De
Haes & Van
Grembergen,
2009; Huanget
al., 2010)
Managerialsupport of IT is essentialto achieving
effective ITG. Still, we argue that ITG leadership
includes managerialand board leadership, another
missing piece of the ITG literature. While other
studies of management support investigate aspects of
an IS system, such as ERP system implementation
success (Liang et al., 2007; Raiet al., 2009)Our study
focuses on organization-wide IT governance and
strategic alignment. The leadership support for IT that
is relevant for the governance of IT and strategic
alignment should involve top management and the
board of directors. The board and top management
jointly form the ITG vision and ethos and enable its
infusion into every facet of the organizationalfabric.
This is why there have been many calls for board
involvement in ITG (e.g., Andriole, 2009; De Haes et
al., 2020a; Nolan & McFarlan, 2005)—a perspective
that aligns with our challenge.
The weakness in the present literature is that although
Based on our arguments of assumption #3, we enrich the
literature by defining and measuringtop leadership
support for IT (top leadership support) as effortful
participation and involvement of both the board and
executives in the organization’s IT vision and strategy
(Liu et al., 2015; Raiet al., 2009). We empirically
demonstratethatbothboardandexecutive support for IT
load onto the same construct of top leadership support,
and this construct is distinct from both ITG mechanisms
and commitment to ITG principles (CCP). In fact, given
the salience of the construct commitment to COBIT
principles (CCP), the value of top leadership support for
IT is exhibited because it significantly influences CCP.
By focusingon the value of top leadership support for IT
and its influence on CCP, we demonstrate that the
assumption that executive support is fundamentalto
effective ITG is an incomplete formulation of leadership
support.

--- PAGE 54 ---
4
# Prominent
Assumptions in
ITG Research
Example
Studies
Our challenge to those assumptions How our study answers the challenge of assumptions
a few papers normatively state that boards should be
involved in ITG, most extant studies of ITG focus on
managerialinvolvement. For instance, in their
interview-based field study, Bowen et al. (2007)
extensively discuss management involvement in ITG
but are silent about board involvement. Similarly,
discussions of IT steering committees as a major
governance mechanism implicitly focus on
management support of IT initiatives (Huanget al.,
2010; Prasad et al., 2010). In the literature, top
management does not include the board of directors,
yet boards lead corporate governance, includingITG
and IT decision-making(Valentine et al., 2016).
Historically, many firms have lacked broad ITG
integration due tothe limited involvementof theboard
in IT matters (Bart & Turel, 2010; De Haes & Van
Grembergen, 2005; Huff et al., 2006; Jordan &
Musson, 2004; Trites, 2004).
Given these arguments,we proposethattopleadership
support includes not only top management (C-level
executives, such as the CEO, COO, CIO, and CMO)
but also the board of directors, the members of which
are crucialstakeholders and decision-makers in an
organization’s strategic and governance structures
(Fama & Jensen, 1983; Hillman & Dalziel, 2003)—
primarily as such structures are related to ITG
(Andriole, 2009; Benaroch & Chernobai, 2017; Jewer
& McKay, 2012). This is no minor consideration
because, despite adoptingITG mechanisms, an
organizationmayhavetopleadership that fails to fully
appreciate and support the value of IT in the
organization and the salience of IT in organizational
strategy, and such support can be crucialfor effective
ITG (Ang & Teo, 1997). Low leadership support can
thwart more effective ITG implementation and the
achievement of strategic alignment. Even if top

--- PAGE 55 ---
5
# Prominent
Assumptions in
ITG Research
Example
Studies
Our challenge to those assumptions How our study answers the challenge of assumptions
leaders appreciate the value of IT to the organization,
they may not actively support it, even though this
support may be necessary for overcomingtypical
organizationaluser resistance (e.g., Kim &
Kankanhalli, 2009). Support for IT thus implies that
top leadership has bought into the vision of an IT-
enabled organization and demonstrates its support for
IT through active involvement in IT-related decisions
and ITG initiatives.
4 Adoption of ITG
mechanisms
automatically
implies that the
top leadership
embraces IT and
implements ITG
faithfully
(Benaroch &
Chernobai,
2017;
Buchwald et al.,
2014; De Haes
& Van
Grembergen,
2009; Prasad et
al., 2012;
Prasad et al.,
2010; Wu et al.,
2015)
Extant ITG studies often tacitly assume that when an
organization adopts ITG mechanisms, the top
leadership necessarily supports IT. We challenge the
assumption that the adoption of ITG mechanisms
implies that there is top leadership support for IT. For
example, Wu et al. (2015) emphasize how ITG
mechanisms facilitate knowledge sharing, and assume
that executives support IT initiatives and are
enthusiastically involved in the systematic infusion of
ITG principles, vision, and ethos to construct the
organizationalITG bricolage. While this may be true
for some firms, institutionaltheory predicts that firms
often mimic peers due to institutionalpressures to
appear legitimate (Meyer & Rowan, 1977); thus, ITG
mechanisms can be adopted symbolically without
underlying leadership support for IT. Symbolic
governance mechanism adoptions are endemic in
organizations (Westphal& Zajac, 1994, 2001), and
thus allow for a decouplingbetween formalstructures
and the spirit of ITG.
Suppose the top leadership has little interest in or
support of IT. In that case, it can be inferred that they
will have a perfunctory role in adoptingand
implementingITG mechanisms, thus compromising
the overallITG spirit crucial to achievingstrategic
alignment (see challenge 3).
In addressingassumption #4, we provide conceptualand
empirical evidencethattop leadership support is separate
from adoptingITG mechanisms, CCP, and strategic
alignment. Our modelshows that the mere adoption of
ITG mechanismsdoes not necessarily imply that the ITG
spirit has been realized, nor does it mean that top
leadership supports IT.
Our modelinvestigates whether top leadership support
influences our centralconstruct: commitment to COBIT
principles (CCP). By capturingcommitment to ITG
principles, CCP captures the extent to which the spirit of
ITG has been infused within the organization. By linking
top leadership support for IT to CCP, we empirically
demonstrate a need to separately consider top
leadership's role in realizing successfulITG. Our study's
results highlight that if top leadership support for IT is
weak, commitment to ITG principles (i.e., CCP) will be
weakened, thus compromisingstrategic alignment.
Our modeldemonstrates the need to adopt ITG
mechanisms with top leadership support to realize CCP
and achieve strategic alignment.

--- PAGE 56 ---
6
# Prominent
Assumptions in
ITG Research
Example
Studies
Our challenge to those assumptions How our study answers the challenge of assumptions
Instead, we argue that top leadership should
understand the value of IT and demonstrate strong
support for IT and that TSLIT should be studied as a
critical missing component of extant ITG—strategic
alignment models.
We follow Weber’s (2012)guidance on developingandevaluatingtheories, andthus,we mapfundamentalaspects of good theory to demonstrate how our study
contributes beyond the existingliterature. The table's contents draw upon our problematization and the review of existingstudies in Table A.
Table A2. Evaluating and Mapping our Study to Theoretical Contribution using the Approach of Weber
Evaluative
Aspects of a
Theory
Contributions of our theory beyond the existing literature
Construct(s) We propose a fundamentally new construct, which is the keystone of our theoreticalcontribution. That is a commitment to COBIT
principles (CCP). As discussed in the problematization, CCP is a construct that answers our main challenges to the existingITG literature.
Association(s) Table D.1 above shows that the associations we investigate are novel. Drawingupon the value of CCP to extend our understandingof
ITG, we proposenew associationssuchas adoptingIT mechanisms→ CCP and top leadership support → CCP. Because CCP is absent in
the existing literature, yet a valuable construct (as per our problematization), theoreticalrelationships developed around CCP are
significant additions to the literature.
State(s) In our conception – quite different from the existingliterature – effective ITG is a combination of formalstructures, processes, and
mechanisms and a deep infusion of the spirit of ITG. Expressed through CCP, which reflects the levelof organizationalcommitment to
ITG principles and an exhibition of the realization of the spirit of ITG, our study moves beyond existingresearch, which is incomplete in
considering only structures, processes, and mechanisms as key to ITG delivery.
In other words, effective ITG is a composite state and not a monolithic one (as has been considered in prior literature).
Event Space There are three ways in which our study constructs a new event space. First, it argues that for effective ITG, three events must occur:
1. The formaladoption of ITG mechanisms, structures, and organizationalprocesses.
2. The organization’s members must have a commitment to ITG principles (i.e., CCP), which is a demonstration that the
organization shares a vision and values related to its ITG spirit and
3. Top leadership support of IT is a crucialenabler to both CCP and strategic alignment.
Existing ITG literature is confinedchiefly to #1 and rarely to #3. However, conceivingof a study based on allthree events is absent in the
ITG literature. Our more comprehensive modelof how ITG leads to strategic alignment opens the ITG event space for further
investigation.

--- PAGE 57 ---
7
Novelty From a novelty perspective, our study has new constructs, associations, states, and event space. We demonstrate that they are helpful
considerations and show, through our literature review in Table D.1 above, that they have yet to be addressed in prior literature.
In their seminalarticle in the Academy of Management Review, Corley and Gioia (2011), provide a 2X2 matrix (alongthe dimensions of originality and utility)
on which to judge a study’s contribution. In Table A3, we apply their framework and showcase how our study substantially contributes to the ITG literature.

--- PAGE 58 ---
8
Table A3. Establishing a Substantial Theoretical Contribution: Originality and Utility
Establishing a Substantial Theoretical Contribution Beyond Existing ITG Literature
Originality
Revelatory Informed by our problematization, we deliver the following
revelations with practicalITG implications
1. We showcase that ITG is more than merely defined in
terms of structuralaspects of decision-making, processes,
and communication. In seeking effective ITG,
practitioners should view ITG as a holistic endeavor
where bothmechanismsandprinciplesplayvitalroles. To
avoid a symbolic governance approach, our findings
provide practical guidance in illustrating how ITG
mechanisms and commitment to ITG principles work
jointly for strategic alignment.-
2. We present a revelatory take that challenges common
knowledge, implying that adopting ITG mechanisms
automaticallymeanstopleadership supports it. Our study
cautions practitioners that this is not necessarily the case.
3. Because boards have many demands on their time, our
empirical evidence that their support enhances CCP and
strategic alignment is salient to their decisions on
allocatingtheir limited bandwidth.
Theprimaryusefulness of ourstudy—in termsof informingfutureresearch—can
be delineated as follows:
1. We advanceconceptualspecificity to effectiveITG by decomposingITG
into ITG mechanismsandcommitment to ITG principles. In so doing, we
draw attentiontothelimitationof proxyingITG mechanismsforeffective
ITG.
2. ByapplyingtheITspirit concepttotheITGeventspace,weconceptualize
commitment to ITG principles as reflecting an organization’s ITG spirit.
3. We developa helpfulconstruct, CCP, which futureresearchers canuse to
investigate the level of ITG embracement. Even though CCP is
conceptualized around COBIT, the essence of this construct is
transferrable to other ITG frameworks with minor adaptations.
4. We deliver aninstrumentalinsight: commitmentmediatestherelationship
between adopting ITG mechanisms and strategic alignment. Therefore,
we provide an essential mediator for achieving strategic alignment that
futureresearchcanbuild uponandextend(e.g., investigateother potential
mediators) to provide deeper insights into ITG phenomena.
5. We advance conceptualspecificity concerning upper-echelon support by
conceptually and empirically demonstratingthat board and management
support are criticalelements of top leadership support for IT.
6. We conceptuallyandempirically demonstratethattopleadershipsupport
is not in lockstep with ITG mechanism adoption and that top leadership
supportis anessentialelementin theITG-strategic alignmentrelationship.
Incremental
Our findings provide furthertheoreticalandempiricalsupportfor
the prevalent use of COBIT as an ITG framework. Our study
reinforces the value of COBIT in the context of ITG and thus
supports the promotion of COBIT as a significant ITG
framework.
Not Applicable
Practically useful Scientifically useful

--- PAGE 59 ---
9
Utility

--- PAGE 60 ---
10
Online APPENDIX B. Survey Details and Measures for Final Data Collection
Introduction. We invite you to participate in an online survey about information technology (IT) governance. The
primary purpose of this research is to learn about your organization’s IT governance (ITG) practices so that we can
find ways to improve ITG in general. We sincerely appreciate your help in servingthe globalIT community. Our
aim is to gather and provide high-quality information that simply is not currently available. Thus, your confidential
participation is important.
To qualify for this research, you need to be 25 years or older. You also need to be a senior manager or executive
who works in informationtechnology(IT) or havea good understandingof the service and governance of IT in their
firm because of your duties in marketing, finance, operations, and so forth. You also must work for a company that
is publicly traded on one of the three major stock exchanges in the United States (the location of your company’s
headquarters does not matter; it need not be a US-based company).
Please answer carefully and honestly. Participation is voluntary. Your responses to this survey are confidential. No
company-specific data willbe reported or released; likewise, no personalor individual-level information will be
reported or released. That is, your identity will not be obtained in this survey. All data will be reported anonymously
and reported in aggregate form.
The survey should take about 15 minutes to complete. Please respond to allthe survey questions. You may stop the
survey at any time.
Please keep in mind that this is a carefully constructed scientific survey and there are specific reasons for each
question. Thus, please pay close attention and answer to the best of your ability. Filters and mechanisms have been
implemented to reject respondents who answer carelessly or untruthfully. You will only receive compensationif you
complete the entire survey honestly.
The project has been approved by the InstitutionalReview Board at X. (The remainder of the institutionalboard
wording has been redacted to protect blind peer review).
Your participation in this survey indicates your informed consent and your agreement to honestly participate to
provide your valuable, confidentialresponses.
Demographics:
Please complete the following required confidentialdemographic information so that we can combine your
responses with the responses from other participants for additionalinsights.
To quickly go to the next question, simply press the TAB key.

--- PAGE 61 ---
11
Table B1. Demographic questions
Covariate Description (Variable Name) Prompts, Items, Filter Logic, Notes, and Frequencies [Count, %]
Listed?
(n/a)
Prompt: Is your company a publicly traded firm that is listed on one of the three major US stock markets?
(NYSE, NASDAQ, or AMEX)?
[Filter logic: If they select “no,” they will be bumped out of the survey]
Note: everyone in the remainingsample entered “yes,” so this is meaningless for data analysis and thus not
used as a covariate.
Which stock market is the company listed
on?
(stock_market)
Prompt: On which US stock market is your company listed?
• NYSE [190, 59.6%]
• NASDAQ [108, 33.9%]
• AMEX [21, 6.6%]
• Other [0, 0%]
[Filter logic: If they select “Other,” they will be bumped out of the survey]
Company name
(n/a)
Prompt: Please enter your full company’s name [this willnot be reported to anyone and willbe removed,
but allows us to perform valid anonymized, aggregated analysis; it is strictly confidential]:
Stock ticker
(n/a)
Prompt: Please enter your company’s valid stock ticker symbol
Note: This is not reported in the analysis but was used to validate the company’s name.
Age range of participant
(age)
Prompt: Indicate your age range:
• Under 25 [0, 0%]
• 25–29 [34, 10.7%]
• 30–39 [138, 43.3%]
• 40–49 [78, 24.5%]
• 50–59 [50, 15.7%]
• 60 and above [19, 6%]
[Filter logic: if they select “under 25”, they will be bumped out of the survey]

--- PAGE 62 ---
12
Covariate Description (Variable Name) Prompts, Items, Filter Logic, Notes, and Frequencies [Count, %]
In IT-related job or have substantial
knowledge of IT?
(n/a)
Prompt: Do you currently lead or work for your organization's IT (information technology) department or
do you have knowledge of how IT is used, applied, or governed at your organization? (yes/no)
• no
• yes
[Filter logic: If they select “no,” they will be bumped out of the survey]
Note: everyone in the remainingsample entered ‘yes,’ so this is meaningless for data analysis and thus not
used as a covariate.
Level of position
(position)
Prompt: Which of the following best describes your position/title?
• (1) CEO / President [33, 10.3%]
• (2) Executive (IT related; e.g., CIO, CTO ) [65, 20.4%]
• (3) Executive (non-IT related; e.g., CFO) [121, 37.9%]
• (4) Senior manager (IT related) [3, 0.9%]
• (5) Senior manager (non-IT related) [80, 25.1%]
• (6) Manager, supervisor / Team leader (IT related) [10, 3.1%]
• (7) Manager, supervisor / Team leader (non-IT related) [0, 0%]
• (8) Contractor / Consultant [0, 0%]
• (9) Employee (non-management) [0, 0%]
• (10) Other _______ [0, 0%]
[filter logic: if they select 7 through 10, they will be bumped out of the survey, as the study is only targeting
managers who have IT experience (or non-IT senior managers) and higher]

--- PAGE 63 ---
13
Covariate Description (Variable Name) Prompts, Items, Filter Logic, Notes, and Frequencies [Count, %]
Company’s Industry
(industry)
Prompt: Select the industry below that most closely matches your company’s industry.
• (NoDur) Consumer NonDurables—Food, Tobacco, Textiles, Apparel, Leather, Toys [11, 3.4%]
• (Durbl) Consumer Durables—Cars, TVs, Furniture, Household Appliances [5, 1.6%]
• (Manuf ) Manufacturing—Machinery, Trucks, Planes, Office Furniture, Paper, CommercialPrinting [38,
11.9%]
• (Enrgy) Oil, Gas, and CoalExtraction and Products [7, 2.2%]
• (Chems) Chemicals and Allied Products [10, 3.1%]
• (BusEq) Business Equipment—Computers, Software, and Electronic Equipment [96, 30.1%]
• (Telcm) Telephone and Television Transmission [14, 4.4%]
• (Utils) Utilities [2, 0.6%]
• (Shops) Wholesale, Retail, and Some Services (Laundries, Repair Shops) [19, 6.0%]
• (Hlth) Healthcare, MedicalEquipment, and Drugs [15, 4.7%]
• (Money) Finance, Banking, Insurance [55, 17.2%]
• (Other) Other—Mines, Construction, Buildings Management, Transportation, Hotels, Business Services,
Entertainment [19, 6.0%]
• None of the above (please describe) [21, 6.6%]
Organization size by numberof employees
(employees)
Prompt: Approximately how many people are employed in your entire organization (alllocations)?
• 1–99 [2, 0.6%]
• 100–499 [12, 3.8%]
• 500–999 [36, 11.3%]
• 1,000–2,499 [64, 20.1%]
• 2,500–9,999 [85, 26.6%]
• 10,000 or more [113, 35.4%]
Level of education of participant
(education)
Prompt: Indicate your highest levelof education completed:
• Grade schoolor some high school[0, 0%]
• Completed high school[10, 3.1%]
• Some community college, technicalschool, or university but did not complete 10, 3.1%]
• Completed technicalschoolor a community college [12, 3.8%]
• Completed a university or bachelor’s degree [138, 43.3%]
• Completed a post-graduate degree, Master’s [120, 37.6%]
• Completed a doctoraldegree or Ph.D. [22, 6.9%]

--- PAGE 64 ---
14
Covariate Description (Variable Name) Prompts, Items, Filter Logic, Notes, and Frequencies [Count, %]
Gender of participant Prompt: What is your gender?
• Male [196, 61.4%]
• Female [116, 36.4%]
• Other [7, 2.2%]
Totalyears work experience in
participants’ career
(years_career)
Prompt: Using the sliders, indicate your years of work experience, as follows:
Years of work experience for your entire career . . . [19.95 average years]
Totalyears participant has been employed
at organization
(years_org)
Prompt: Years of work experience only at your current organization [12.92 average years]
Position to whom participant reports?
(report)
Prompt: To whom do you directly report?
• CEO/President [206, 64.6%]
• COO (Chief Operating Officer), VP of Operations [83, 26.0%]
• CFO (Chief FinancialOfficer) or Controller [21, 6.6%]
• CIO (Chief Information Officer) and other [9, 2.8%]
On board of directors? Prompt: Do you currently serve on your organization’s board of directors?
• No [162, 50.8%]
• Yes [150, 47.0%]
Number of employees participant directly
manages?
(work_under)
Prompt: Approximately how many people report directly to you in your entire organization (alllocations)?
• None [0, 0%]
• 1–99 [133, 41.7%]
• 100–499 [50, 15.7%]
• 500–999 [39, 12.2%]
• 1,000–2,499 [37, 11.6%]
• 2,500–9,999 [33, 10.3%]
• 10,000 or more [20, 6.3%]
[filter logic: if ‘none’ was chosen, they were bumped out]

--- PAGE 65 ---
15
Covariate Description (Variable Name) Prompts, Items, Filter Logic, Notes, and Frequencies [Count, %]
Organization practices COBIT?
(prac_COBIT)
Prompt: Does your organization use COBIT for the governance and management of enterprise IT?
Note: ControlObjectives for Information and Related Technology (COBIT) is a framework created by
ISACA for information technology (IT) management and IT governance. It is a supportingtoolset that
allows managers to bridge the gap between controlrequirements, technicalissues, and business risks.
• Yes [219, 68.7%]
• No [61, 19.1%]
• Not sure [39, 12.2%]
Resentment (Velicer et al., 1985)
[resent; used as marker variable to show
lack of common-methods bias in survey
data]
Prompt: Enter the degree to which you agree with the following statements:
• At times I feelI get a raw dealout of life.
• When I look back on what's happened to me, I can't help feelingreally resentful.
• Other people always seem to get the breaks that I do not get.
• I dislike the fact that the events in my life are often not fair.
7-point Likert-type scale on agreement; last item added to push for four items
Unless otherwise noted, allnull / non-response values are entered as “#” for null.
Table B2. IT Governance Questions
Second-order
construct
First-order
Construct
Prompts and Items Source(s) and scaling
Adoption of IT
governance
mechanisms
(formative, second
order) (ITG
mechanisms)
Definition: The
major approaches
ITG mechanisms:
Decision-making
structures1
Prompt: For each of the followingIT governance practices, please indicate your
degree of agreement in terms of the extent of implementation within your
company.
DMS1. Our company has a steeringcommittee at the executive or senior
management levelresponsible for determiningIT development prioritization.
[ITM1]
All directly replicated from
Wu et al. (2015); 7-point
Likert-type on agreement
1=strongly disagree
2=disagree
3=somewhat disagree
4=neither agree nor disagree
5=somewhat agree
DMS2. Our company has a steeringcommittee composed of business and IT
people focusingon prioritizing and managingIT projects. [ITM8]

--- PAGE 66 ---
16
Second-order
construct
First-order
Construct
Prompts and Items Source(s) and scaling
that the
organizationadopts
to govern IT, via
its decision-making
structure, formal
processes, and
communication
approach.
DMS3. The CIO has a direct reportingline to the CEO or COO or CFO, or
another executive. [modified ITM9]
Survey logic: If the CIO has c-leveldirect reporting line, we will then follow up
with the following exploratory item because Banker et al. showed that whom
they report to matters:
[itg_cio_report] Prompt: To whom does the CIO directly report: CEO, COO,
CFO, other (explain _____).
• 1=CEO
• 2 =COO
• 3=CFO
• 4=other
6=agree
7=strongly agree
For DMS3: (Banker et al.,
2011)
ITG mechanisms:
Formalprocesses2
FP1. Our company has established a formalprioritization process for IT
investments and projects in which business and IT are involved. [ITM3]
FP2. Our company has established formalprocesses to define and update IT
strategies. [ITM7]
FP3. Our company has established formalprocesses to govern and manage IT
projects. [ITM10]
ITG mechanisms:
Communication
approaches3
CA1. The CIO is a full member of the executive committee. [ITM2]
CA2. Our companyhasa committeeattheboardof directors’ level toensure that
IT is a regular agenda item for the board of directors. [ITM5]
CA3. The CIO or similar role in our companyis able to clearly articulate a vision
for IT’s role in the company. [ITM6]
Commitment to
COBIT principles
(CCP)
n/a COBIT1. “We have a formalprocess in which we clearly identify the needs of all
stakeholders in respect to IT.” [Principle 1: Meetingstakeholders’ needs]
Authors developed based on
COBIT principles and
literature and multiple
preliminary studies for
content and construct
validity (ISACA, 2012;
Mangalaraj et al., 2014).
COBIT2. “We have a comprehensive scorecard (or assessment process) for the
entire IT environment that allows us measure whether we are meeting
stakeholder needs.” [Principle 1: Meetingstakeholders’ needs]
COBIT3. “We treat information and related technologies as assets or capabilities
that need examination alongwith other assets in the enterprise.” [Principle 2:
covering the enterprise end-to-end]
COBIT4. “We use COBIT 5 as the overarchingframework for governance and
management of enterprise IT.” [Principle 3: applyinga single integrated
framework]
COBIT5. “We have defined the organizationalunits and roles that are

--- PAGE 67 ---
17
Second-order
construct
First-order
Construct
Prompts and Items Source(s) and scaling
responsible for makingIT decisions and for enablingcontacts between business
and IT management decision-makingfunctions.” [Principle 4: enablinga holistic
approach]
COBIT6. “We haveformalizedand institutionalized strategic IT decision making
and IT monitoringprocedures and policies to ensure that day-to-day outcomes
are consistent with goals.” [Principle 4: enablinga holistic approach]
COBIT7. “We strongly differentiate between the structures and processes of IT
governance and IT management.” [Principle 5: separatinggovernance from
management]
Top-leadership
support of IT
(TLS)
n/a TLS1: The IT steering committee has a direct and substantialworking
relationship in communicatingwith the board of directors.
Authors developed based on
literature and multiple
preliminary studies for
content and construct
validity (Liu et al., 2015)
TLS2: The CIO clearly articulates a vision for IT’s role, and the other executives
buy into the vision.
TLS3: The CEO clearly expresses how IT supports the company’s strategy.
TLS4: The board cogently communicates how IT supports the company’s
strategy.
Strategic IT
alignment (SITA)
Definition: The
degree to which IT
initiatives and
strategies are
directly aligned
with the firm’s
strategy, especially
in terms of product
orientation, quality
orientation, and
market orientation.
SITA: Product-
oriented
strategic alignment4
[survey logic: those who are IT people are asked the items startingwith “IST”;
those who are not are asked the items startingwith “BST”]
BST4. We attempt to be ahead of our competitors in introducingnew products.
IST4. Our current systems enable us to introduce new products earlier than our
competitors.
Original items from Hussin
et al. (2002), but used as
formativeandasadoptedby
Wu et al. (2015)5; 7-point
Likert-type on agreement
1=strongly disagree
2=disagree
3=somewhat disagree
4=neither agree nor disagree
5=somewhat agree
6=agree
7=strongly agree
BST5. We attempt to be ahead of our competitors by offeringa wide range of
products.
IST6. Our current systems enable our company to diversify our products.
BST3. We attempt to be ahead of our competitors by ensuringthat our products
are distinctively different from our competitors.
IST2. Our current systems help us to distinguish our products from those of
competitors.
SITA: Quality-
oriented strategic
alignment6
BST2. We attempt to be ahead of our competitors by focusingon the quality of
products rather than price.
IST3. Our current systems allow us to improve the quality of our products.
BST6. We constantly improve the efficiency of our production process.
IST5. Our current systems help improve the efficiency of our production
process.
BST7. We attempttobeahead of our competitors by providingquality service to
our customers.
IST7. Our current systems enable our company to provide quality customer

--- PAGE 68 ---
18
Second-order
construct
First-order
Construct
Prompts and Items Source(s) and scaling
service.
SITA: Market-
oriented strategic
alignment7
BST8. We attempt to be ahead of our competitors by intensive marketingof our
products.
IST8. Our current systems enable us to embark on an intensive marketingof our
products.
BST9. We attempt to achieve growth by expandinginto new markets.
IST9. Our current systems assist us in identifying new markets.
Notes. The following prompts were given for these materials:
Instructions: The primary purpose of this research is to learn about your firm’s IT governance (ITG) practices. While ITG is hard to define succinctly, the IT
Governance Institute says, “Effective IT governance helps ensure that IT supports business goals, maximizes business investment in IT, and appropriately
manages IT-related risks and opportunities.”
Warning: although many of these questions might appear to be related, each one has a scientific purpose. Thus, please carefully read and respond to each
question individually.

--- PAGE 69 ---
19
Online APPENDIX C. Analysis Support Details
Multicollinearity
Table C1. Outer VIFs
Latent constructs Items Outer VIFs
CA ITGM: CA1 1.366
ITGM: CA2 1.428
ITGM: CA3 1.494
CCP CCP_1 1.926
CCP_2 2.060
CCP_3 1.751
CCP_4 1.735
CCP_5 1.978
CCP_6 2.095
CCP_7 1.915
DMS ITGM: DMS1 1.683
ITGM: DMS2 1.735
ITGM: DMS3 1.438
FP ITGM: FP1 1.736
ITGM: FP2 1.859
ITGM: FP3 1.671
SITA: PA IST4_BST4 1.559
IST6_BST5 1.521
IST2_BST3 1.387
SITA: QA IST3_BST2 1.942
IST5_BST6 1.784
IST7_BST7 1.709
SITA: MA IST8_BST8 1.415
IST9_BST9 1.415
TLS TLS1 2.038
TLS2 1.591
TLS3 2.030
TLS4 2.001
Resentment resent_1 2.876
resent_2 3.010
resent_3 3.660
resent_4 1.835
CA = ITG mechanisms (ITGM): Communication approaches; CCP = commitment to COBIT principles; DMS =
ITGM: Decision-making structures; FP = ITGM: Formalprocesses; SITA: MA = SITA: market-oriented; SITA: PA
= SITA: product oriented; SITA: QA = SITA: quality-oriented; TLS = top leadership support
Table C2. Inner VIFs
Latent Construct Inner VIF
Commitment to COBIT principles (CCP) 2.887
ITGM: Communication approaches (CA) 3.109
ITGM: Decision-making structures (DMS) 2.658
ITGM: Formalprocesses (FP) 3.242
SITA: market-oriented 1.986
SITA: product oriented n/a
SITA: quality-oriented 2.461
Top leadership support (TLS) 2.755
Resentment 1.475

--- PAGE 70 ---
20
Table C3. Measurement ModelStatistics
Variable Mean SD 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
1. CIO_report n/a n/a n/a
2. CCP 5.584 .950 -.083 .769
3. CA 5.922 .900 -.083 .621 .801
4. DM 5.958 .971 -.119 .511 .730 .829
5. FP 5.986 .913 -.169 .646 .719 .699 .849
6. SITA: MA 5.676 1.043 -.118 .566 .513 .441 .449 .878
7. SITA: PA 5.705 .960 -.112 .606 .506 .404 .477 .703 .812
8. SITA: QA 5.916 .944 -.072 .629 .548 .475 .568 .604 .707 .854
9. TLS 5.714 1.066 -.115 .686 .612 .540 .567 .621 .658 .667 .826
Underlined andbolded numbers down the diagonalof the correlation matrix are the square roots of the AVEs; CA =
ITGM: Communication approaches; CCP = commitment to COBIT principles; DMS = ITGM: Decision-making
structures; FP = ITGM: Formalprocesses; SITA: MA = SITA: market-oriented; SITA: PA = SITA: product
oriented; SITA: QA = SITA: quality-oriented; TLS = top leadership support

--- PAGE 71 ---
21
Table C4. Final Path ModelAnalyses
Model 1: Nonmediated model Model 2: Mediated model Model 3: Mediated model with
covariates
and H5 moderation test
Paths tested β t-statistic p-values β t-statistic p-values β t-statistic p-values
H1a. DMS → CCP n/a n/a n/a -0.106 -1.36 0.173 -0.106 -1.37 0.170
H1b. FP → CCP n/a n/a n/a 0.467 6.37 0.000 0.467 6.36 0.000
H1c. CA → CCP n/a n/a n/a 0.257 2.78 0.005 0.257 2.79 0.005
H2. TLS → CCP n/a n/a n/a 0.580 9.99 0.000 0.581 10.02 0.000
H3. CCP → SITA .370 4.75 .000 0.180 1.82 0.069 0.206 2.22 0.027
H4. TLS → SITA .649 10.64 .000 0.640 8.29 0.000 0.404 4.86 0.000
H5. TLS × CCP → SITA n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a -0.263 -5.79 0.000
Alt. CA → SITA .177 1.94 .053 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a
Alt. DMS → SITA -.028 -0.35 .730 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a
Alt. FP → SITA .111 1.30 .194 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a
Indirect effects. CA → SITA n/a n/a n/a 0.175 1.94 0.051 0.137 1.68 0.094
Indirect effects. DMS → SITA n/a n/a n/a -0.029 -0.38 0.706 0.044 0.63 0.529
Indirect effects. FP → SITA n/a n/a n/a 0.138 1.50 0.132 0.060 0.68 0.495
Covariates and controls
age → SITA n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a -0.161 -2.84 0.004
board → SITA n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 0.111 2.03 0.042
CIO_report → SITA n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a -0.031 -0.70 0.484
education → SITA n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 0.028 0.73 0.467
employees → SITA n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a -0.086 -2.03 0.043
gender → SITA n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 0.034 0.87 0.383
industry → SITA n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 0.065 1.65 0.099
position → SITA n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a -0.024 -0.51 0.608
prac_COBIT → SITA n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 0.046 0.86 0.387
report → SITA n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 0.029 0.49 0.624
resentment → SITA n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a -0.513 -7.42 0.000
stock market → SITA n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 0.011 0.28 0.779
work under → SITA n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 0.078 1.54 0.122
years_career → SITA n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 0.114 1.55 0.122
years_org→ SITA n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a -0.041 -0.69 0.493
SITA variance predicted (R2) 0.602 0.665 0.639
CCP variance predicted(R2) n/a 0.633 0.634
Model Goodness-of-fit statistics
Chi square 1,644 1,366 1,494
RMSEA 0.109 0.097 0.098

--- PAGE 72 ---
22
CFI 0.734 0.790 0.775
TLI 0.709 0.768 0.752
SRMR 0.312 0.260 0.264
CD 1.000 0.999 0.999
Alt. = alternative paths tested to test viability of the alternative, nonmediated model(Model1) versus the mediated modelthat we theorize to exist (Model2).;
SRMR = standardized root mean square residual

--- PAGE 73 ---
23
Appendix References
Ali, S., & Green, P. (2012). Effective information technology (IT) governance mechanisms: An IT
outsourcing perspective. Information Systems Frontiers, 14(2), 179-193.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10796-009-9183-y
Alreemy, Z., Chang, V.,Walters,R., & Wills, G. (2016). Criticalsuccess factors (CSFs) for information
technologygovernance(ITG). InternationalJournalofInformationManagement, 36(6, Part A),
907-916. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2016.05.017
Alvesson,M., & Sandberg, J. (2011). Generatingresearchquestions through problematization. Academy
of Management Review, 36(2), 247-271.
Andriole, S. J. (2009). Boards of directors and technology governance: The surprising state of the
practice. Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 24(1), 22.
Ang, J., & Teo, T. S. H. (1997). CSFs andsources of assistance and expertise in strategic IS planning: a
Singapore perspective. European Journal of Information Systems, 6(3), 164-171.
https://doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.ejis.3000263
Banker, R. D., Hu, N., Pavlou, P. A., & Luftman, J. (2011).CIO reportingstructure,strategic positioning,
and firm performance. MIS Quarterly, 35(2), 487-504. https://doi.org/10.2307/23044053
Bart, C., & Turel, O. (2010). IT and the board of directors: An empirical investigation into the
'governancequestions' Canadianboardmembers askabout IT. Journal of Information Systems,
24(2), 147-172. https://doi.org/10.2308/jis.2010.24.2.147
Benaroch, M., & Chernobai,A. (2017). OperationalITfailures, ITvalue-destruction, and board-level IT
governance changes. MIS Quarterly, 41(3), 729-762.
Boonstra, A.,Yeliz Eseryel, U., & van Offenbeek, M. A. (2018). Stakeholders’ enactment of competing
logics in ITgovernance:polarization,compromise or synthesis? EuropeanJournalofInformation
Systems, 27(4), 415-433. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41303-017-0055-0
Bowen, P. L., Cheung, M.-Y.D., & Rohde, F. H. (2007). Enhancing IT governance practices: A model
and case study of an organization's efforts. International Journal of Accounting Information
Systems, 8(3), 191-221. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.accinf.2007.07.002
Bradley, R. V., Byrd, T. A., Pridmore, J. L., Thrasher, E., Pratt, R. M., & Mbarika, V. W. (2012). An
empirical examination of antecedents and consequences of IT governance in US hospitals.
Journal of Information Technology, 27(2), 156-177. https://doi.org/10.1057/jit.2012.3
Buchwald, A., Urbach,N., & Ahlemann, F. (2014). Business value through controlled IT: Toward an
integrated modelof ITgovernance successand its impact. Journal of Information Technology,
29(2), 128-140. https://doi.org/10.1057/jit.2014.
Chan, Y. E., & Reich, B. H. (2007). IT alignment: what have we learned? Journal of Information
Technology, 22(4), 297-315. https://doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.jit.2000109
Constantinides, P., & Barrett, M. (2015). Information infrastructure development and governance as
collective action. Information Systems Research, 26(1), 40-56.
https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.2014.0542
Corley, K. G., & Gioia, D. A. (2011). Building theory about theory building: what constitutes a
theoretical contribution? Academy of Management Review, 36(1), 12-32.
https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.2009.0486
D'Arcy, J., Hovav,A., & Galletta, D. (2009).User awareness of security countermeasures and its impact
on information systems misuse:A deterrenceapproach.InformationSystemsResearch,20(1),79-
98. https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.1070.0160
De Haes, S., Caluwe, L., Huygh,T., & Joshi, A. (2020a). Governing Digital Transformation: Guidance
for Corporate Board Members. Springer.
De Haes, S., & Van Grembergen, W. (2005). IT governance structures, processes and relational
mechanisms:AchievingIT/business alignmentin a major Belgian financial group. 38th Hawaii

--- PAGE 74 ---
24
International Conference on System Sciences,
De Haes, S., & Van Grembergen, W. (2009).An exploratorystudy into IT governance implementations
and its impact on business/IT alignment. Information Systems Management, 26(2), 123-137.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10580530902794786
De Haes, S., Van Grembergen, W., Joshi, A., & Huygh, T. (2020b). Enterprise Governance of
InformationTechnology: AchievingAlignment and Value in Digital Organizations (Third ed.).
Springer.
DeSanctis, G., & Poole, M. S. (1994). Capturingthe complexity in advanced technology use: Adaptive
structuration theory. Organization science, 5(2), 121-147.
Fama, E. F., & Jensen, M. C. (1983). Separation of ownership and control. The Journal of Law and
Economics, 26(2), 301-325. https://doi.org/10.1086/467037
Gregory, R. W., Kaganer, E., Henfridsson, O., & Ruch, T. J. (2018). IT Consumerization and the
Transformation of IT Governance. MIS Quarterly, 42(4), 1225-1253.
Hanus, B., & Wu, Y.A. (2016). Impact of users’ security awareness on desktop security behavior: A
protection motivation theory perspective. Information Systems Management, 33(1), 2-16.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10580530.2015.1117842
Hardy, G. (2006). Using IT governance and COBIT to deliver value with IT and respond to legal,
regulatory and compliance challenges. Information Security Technical Report, 11(1), 55-61.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.istr.2005.12.004
Hillman, A. J., & Dalziel, T. (2003). Boards of directors and firm performance: Integrating agency and
resource dependence perspectives. Academy of Management Review, 28(3), 383-396.
https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.2003.10196729
Hsu, J. S.-C., Shih, S.-P., Hung, Y. W., & Lowry, P. B. (2015). The role of extra-role behaviors and
socialcontrols in informationsecuritypolicy effectiveness. InformationSystemsResearch,26(2),
282-300. https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.2015.0569
Huang, R., Zmud, R. W., & Price, R. L. (2010).Influencingthe effectiveness of IT governance practices
through steering committees and communication policies. European Journal of Information
Systems, 19(3), 288-302. https://doi.org/10.1057/ejis.2010.16
Huber, T. L., Kude, T., & Dibbern,J. (2017). Governancepractices in platform ecosystems: Navigating
tensions between cocreated value and governance costs. Information Systems Research, 28(3),
563-584. https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.2017.0701
Huff,S. L., Maher,P. M., & Munro,M. C. (2006).Informationtechnology and theboard of directors: Is
there an IT attention deficit? MIS Quarterly Executive, 5(2), 55-68.
Hussin, H., King, M., & Cragg, P. (2002). ITalignmentin smallfirms. EuropeanJournal of Information
Systems, 11(2), 108-127. https://doi.org/10.1057/palgrave/ejis/3000422
ISACA. (2012). COBIT5: ABusiness Framework for theGovernance andManagementofEnterprise IT.
Information Systems Audit and Control Association.
Jewer, J., & McKay, K. N. (2012).Antecedents andconsequences of board IT governance: Institutional
and strategic choice perspectives.JournaloftheAssociation forInformationSystems, 13(7), 581-
617.
Jordan, E., & Musson, D. (2004). Corporate Governance and IT Governance: Exploring the board's
perspective. SSRN Working Paper. Retrieved April 19, 2017, from
https://papers.ssrn.com/soL3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=787346
Kim, H.-W., & Kankanhalli, A. (2009). Investigating user resistance to information systems
implementation: A status quo bias perspective. MIS Quarterly, 567-582.
Klein, H. J., Solinger, O. N., & Duflot,V. (2022). Commitmentsystemtheory:The evolving structure of
commitments to multiple targets. Academy of Management Review, 47(1), 116-138.
https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.2018.0031
Kude, T., Lazic,M., Heinzl, A.,& Neff, A. (2018). Achieving IT‐based synergies through regulation‐
oriented andconsensus‐orientedITgovernance capabilities. Information Systems Journal, 28(5),
765-795. https://doi.org/10.1111/isj.12159

--- PAGE 75 ---
25
Leclercq-Vandelannoitte, A., & Bertin, E. (2018). From sovereign IT governance to liberal IT
governmentality? A Foucauldiananalogy. EuropeanJournalofInformation Systems,27(3), 326-
346. https://doi.org//10.1080/0960085X.2018.1473932
Liang, H., Saraf, N., Hu, Q., & Xue, Y. (2007). Assimilation of Enterprise Systems: The Effect of
InstitutionalPressures andtheMediatingRole of TopManagement. MISQuarterly,31(1),59-87.
Liu, G. H., Wang, E. T., & Chua, C. E. (2015). Leveraging social capital to obtain top management
support in complex, cross-functional IT projects. Journal of the Association of Information
Systems, 16(8), 707-737.
Mangalaraj, G., Singh, A., & Taneja, A. (2014). IT governance frameworks and COBIT-a literature
review. Twentieth Americas Conference onInformationSystems (AMCIS2014),Savannah, GA.
Mazza, T., & Azzali,S. (2018).Informationtechnology controls quality and audit fees: Evidence from
Italy. Journal of Accounting, Auditing & Finance, 33(1), 123-146.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0148558X15625582
Meyer, J. P., Becker, T. E., & Vandenberghe, C. (2004). Employee commitment and motivation: A
conceptual analysis and integrative model. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89(6), 991-1007.
https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.89.6.991
Meyer, J. W., & Rowan, B. (1977). Institutionalized organizations: Formal structure as myth and
ceremony. American Journal of Sociology, 83(2), 340-363. https://doi.org/10.1086/226550
Nolan, R., & McFarlan, F. W. (2005). Information Technology and the Board of Directors. Harvard
Business Review, 83(10), 96-106.
Organ, D. W. (1988). A restatementof the satisfaction-performancehypothesis. JournalofManagement,
14(4), 547-557. https://doi.org/10.1177/014920638801400405
Podsakoff, N. P., Whiting, S. W., Podsakoff, P. M., & Blume, B. D. (2009). Individual-and
organizational-level consequences of organizational citizenship behaviors: A meta-analysis.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 94(1), 122-141. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0013079
Podsakoff,P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., Paine, J. B., & Bachrach, D. G. (2000). Organizational citizenship
behaviors:a criticalreviewof the theoreticalandempirical literature and suggestions for future
research. JournalofManagement, 26(3), 513-563.https://doi.org/10.1016/S0149-2063(00)00047-
7
Posey, C., Roberts, T. L., & Lowry,P. B. (2015).The impactof organizationalcommitment on insiders’
motivation to protect organizational information assets. Journal of Management Information
Systems, 32(4), 179-214. https://doi.org/10.1080/07421222.2015.1138374
Posey, C., Roberts, T. L., Lowry,P. B., Bennett,R. J., & Courtney, J. F. (2013). Insiders' protection of
organizationalinformationassets:Developmentof a systematics-based taxonomy and theory of
diversity for protection-motivated behaviors. MIS Quarterly, 37(4), 1189-1210.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/43825787
Prasad, A., Green, P., & Heales, J. (2012). On IT governance structures and their effectiveness in
collaborative organizationalstructures. InternationalJournalofAccounting InformationSystems,
13(3), 199-220. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.accinf.2012.06.005
Prasad, A., Heales, J., & Green, P. (2010). A capabilities-based approach to obtaining a deeper
understandingof informationtechnology governance effectiveness: Evidence from IT steering
committees. International Journal of Accounting Information Systems, 11(3), 214-232.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.accinf.2010.07.013
Rai, A., Brown, P., & Tang, X. (2009). Organizational assimilation of electronic procurement
innovations. Journal of Management Information Systems, 26(1), 257-296.
https://doi.org/10.2753/MIS0742-1222260110
Tallon, P. P., Ramirez, R. V.,& Short, J. E. (2013).The informationartifact in IT governance: toward a
theory of informationgovernance.JournalofManagementInformation Systems, 30(3), 141-178.
https://doi.org/10.2753/MIS0742-1222300306
Tiwana, A., & Konsynski, B. (2010). Complementarities between organizational IT architecture and
governance structure. Information Systems Research, 21(2), 288-304.

--- PAGE 76 ---
26
https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.1080.0206
Tiwana, A., Konsynski, B., & Venkatraman, N. (2013). Special issue: Information technology and
organizational governance: The IT governance cube. Journal of Management Information
Systems, 30(3), 7-12.
Trites, G. (2004). Director responsibility for IT governance. International Journal of Accounting
Information Systems, 5(2), 89-99. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.accinf.2004.01.001
Valentine, E., De Haes, S., & Timbrell, G. (2016). The board's role in the governance of enterprise
information and technology. In R. Leblanc (Ed.), The Handbook of Board Governance: A
Comprehensive Guide for Public, Private and Not‐for‐Profit Board Members (pp. 574-596).
Wiley.
Velicer, W. F., Govia,J. M., Cherico,N. P., & Corriveau,D. P. (1985).Item format and the structure of
the buss‐durkee hostility inventory. Aggressive Behavior, 11(1), 65-82.
https://doi.org/10.1002/1098-2337(1985)11:1<65::AID-AB2480110108>3.0.CO;2-H
Weber, R. (2012).Evaluatinganddevelopingtheoriesin the information systems discipline. Journal of
the Association for Information Systems, 13(1), 1-30. https://doi.org/10.17705/1jais.00284
Westphal, J. D., & Zajac, E. J. (1994). Substance and Symbolism in CEOs' Long-Term Incentive Plans.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 39(3), 367-390. https://doi.org/10.2307/2393295
Westphal, J. D., & Zajac, E. J. (2001). Decoupling policy from practice: The case of stock repurchase
programs. AdministrativeScience Quarterly, 46(2), 202-228. https://doi.org/10.2307/2667086
Wu, S. P.-J., Straub, D. W., & Liang, T.-P. (2015).How informationtechnologygovernance mechanisms
and strategic alignmentinfluenceorganizationalperformance:Insights froma matched survey of
business and IT managers. MIS Quarterly, 39(2), 497-518.
Xue, L., Ray, G., & Gu, B. (2011). Environmental uncertainty and IT infrastructure governance: A
curvilinear relationship. Information Systems Research, 22(2), 389-399.
https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.1090.0269
1 “The degree to which theorganizationhas establishedorganizationalunits and roles responsible for makingIT
decisions such as committees” (Wu et al., 2015, p. A6)
2 “The degree to which the organization has established formalprocesses to monitor and ensure that IT policies
are consistent with business needs” (Wu et al., 2015, p. A6).
3 “The degree to which the organization has established channels to ensure proper communication and
disseminate IT governance principles” (Wu et al., 2015, p. A6).
4 “The alignment between IS strategy and business strategy in product development” (Wu et al., 2015, p. A6).
5 Strategic alignment is “the degree of coherence between realized business strategy and realized IT strategy”
(Wu et al., 2015, p. A6).
6 “The alignment between IS strategy and business strategy in terms of quality and production efficiency” (Wu
et al., 2015, p. A6).
7 “The alignment between IS strategy and business strategy regardingmarketingactivities” (Wu et al., 2015, p.
A6).