--- PAGE 1 ---
Industrial Marketing Management 97 (2021) 59–70
Available online 7 July 2021
0019-8501/© 2021 Published by Elsevier Inc.
Enlightening the dynamic capabilities of design thinking in fostering
digital transformation
Stefano Magistretti*
, Cristina Tu Anh Pham, Claudio Dell'Era
School of Management, Politecnico di Milano, Piazza L. da Vinci, 32, 20133 Milano, Italy
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Design thinking
Dynamic capabilities
Digital transformation
Digital technologies
Innovation
Design capabilities
A B S T R A C T
Digital transformation describes the deep-seated changes in organizational activities, processes, and capabilities
induced by the advent of digital technologies. Digital transformation requires sensing, seizing, and reconfiguring
the digital technological challenges into opportunities. Academic literature acknowledges the central role of
design as a driver of innovation. Furthermore, recent research discloses the value that design, especially design
thinking, can have in leading digital transformations. In this understanding, design thinking has been proven to
be an approach based on dynamic capabilities. What seems to lack in the current understanding is how the
dynamic capabilities of design thinking can facilitate digital transformation. Thus, the paper aims to shed light on
how dynamic capabilities of design thinking foster discovering the opportunities digital technologies provide to
enact the transformation. This paper investigates four different cases of consulting projects where the adoption of
design thinking dynamic capabilities enhance the value of digital technologies towards a more human centric
digital transformation. By being a business-to-business market, the consulting environment might inform readers
how design thinking dynamic capabilities are salient for digital transformation. Examining them, the paper
proposes five design thinking dynamic capabilities that managers should cultivate: extending, debating, cropping,
interpreting, and recombining. Concerning academic debate, the paper enriches the understanding of digital
transformation by unshadowing the value that design thinking dynamic capabilities might play in it.
1. Introduction
The modern era is increasingly permeated by digital technologies
that are transforming our society, as they are not only at the base of
many companies' products, services and operations, but also at the root
of the radical change in nature of innovations (Yoo, Boland Jr, Lyytinen,
& Majchrzak, 2012). A new kind of firm has emerged in the age of
Artificial Intelligence (AI) and it has deeply affected how value is being
delivered (Iansiti & Lakhani, 2020). Companies such as Google, Face­
book or Alibaba are an exemplification of how value is no longer being
delivered by the traditionally human-operated business processes, but
rather by the system itself and its algorithms (Iansiti & Lakhani, 2020).
This, together with constant connectivity, has enabled new dynamics of
experience for people, and ultimately affected their behaviors and ex­
pectations (Verganti, Vendraminelli, & Iansiti, 2020). In fact, technol­
ogy has empowered people to become increasingly demanding, for they
seek instant gratification from companies that have to provide them
with what they want, where they want it, instantly and effortlessly.
These dynamics of experience, however, have affected not only people's
personal sphere but also their professional one and seems to quest for
different approaches to induce a positive impact.
As a result, businesses are now being confronted both internally and
externally with novel challenges, deeply entangled with digital trans­
formation. Artificial intelligence, big data, and blockchain are just some
of the digital technologies that are transforming our society (Magistretti,
Dell'Era, & Verganti, 2020; Trabucchi, Buganza, Dell'Era, & Pellizzoni,
2018; Williams & Edge, 1996). Consequently, to their emergence in the
business environment, companies are now forced in the run for digital
innovation and transformation (Ghezzi and Cavallo, 2020). Digital
transformation has been conceptualized by Nambisan et al. as “the
creation of (and consequent change in) market offerings, business pro­
cesses, or models that result from the use of digital technology” (Nam­
bisan, Lyytinen, Majchrzak, & Song, 2017). As AI, big data technologies
entail great uncertainty and ambiguity (Nambisan, 2017), companies
facing the digital transformation often struggle to understand how to
adequately develop solutions that are able to sense, seize and recon­
figure the challenges induced by such digital technologies in opportu­
nities and unveiling the true value of technologies (Magistretti et al.,
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: stefano.magistretti@polimi.it (S. Magistretti), cristinatu.pham@polimi.it (C.T.A. Pham), claudio.dellera@polimi.it (C. Dell'Era).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Industrial Marketing Management
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/indmarman
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2021.06.014
Received 16 July 2020; Received in revised form 10 May 2021; Accepted 30 June 2021

--- PAGE 2 ---
Industrial Marketing Management 97 (2021) 59–70
60
2020; Verganti & Öberg, 2013).
Consistently with the general bewilderment of companies on the way
to effectively approach digital transformation, research has placed its
attention in understanding how digital technologies can be adequately
employed for (and in) the development of digital solutions, to be
adopted and accepted by humans (Danneels & Frattini, 2018). In this
direction, both scholars and practitioners have introduced and defined
several approaches to manage digital technologies and guide companies
in developing different solutions (e.g., Cooper, 2019; Cooper & Sommer,
2016; Nowacki & Bachnik, 2016; Ries, 2011). While these researches
have shown the value of technology-oriented approaches, less attention
has been dedicated to the capabilities that firm's should enact in the
pursue of digital transformation that can be more valuable for humans
(Arbesman, 2016; Trabucchi & Buganza, 2019); where more valuable
means more meaningful and useful for humans (Verganti, 2011). Only
few recent studies have unpacked the role that dynamic capabilities
have in chasing such digital transformations (Warner & Wäger, 2019).
Dynamic capabilities are defined as the capacity of firms to dynamically
create and combine resources to sense, seize and reconfiguring oppor­
tunities during transformations (Teece, 2007). Thus, Warner & Wäger,
2019, by studying the digital transformation through the lens of dy­
namic capabilities propose a set of digital sensing, seizing and reconfi­
guring capabilities that managers should embrace to foster
transformation. However, despite such recent evidence, there is scant
research that examines how firms build dynamic capabilities for digital
transformation especially if the focus is not on the digital nature of the
transformation but if the focus is on the value generated to end users.
According to Danneels (2004), the impact of technology should be
assessed by looking at how technology is meeting people's needs. For
this reason, innovation approaches that deal with humans and their
needs (Beckman & Barry, 2007; Brown, 2009) could play an important
role in this, as shown by the growing interest among academics and
practitioners (Micheli, Wilner, Bhatti, Mura, & Beverland, 2019; Ver­
ganti, 2017). However, research along this line have mainly focused on
understanding how human-centred approaches, such as design thinking,
can contribute to crafting innovations and less is known on their role in
digital transformation (Çetinkaya, Johansson-Sköldberg, & Woodilla,
2013; Liedtka, 2015; Micheli et al., 2019). So, even though the value
that design, especially design thinking, can have in innovation is
acknowledged by scholars (Beckman & Barry, 2007; Brown, 2009;
Cankurtaran & Beverland, 2020), design thinking has been proven to be
an approach based on dynamic capabilities for managing creativity and
bias in innovation projects (Liedtka, 2020) and recent publications show
the value that this approach can have on the practices that design
thinkers should embrace to unveil technological opportunities (Pham,
Magistretti, & Dell'Era, 2021; Verganti et al., 2020). Notwithstanding
this, less is known on the value that design thinking, seen as a set of
dynamic capability, can have in the digital transformation field. Thus,
we posit that dynamic capabilities can be a powerful lens to study the
digital transformation phenomenon when firms embrace the design
thinking approach. So, a better understanding is needed of the role that
design thinking dynamic capabilities can have in fostering digital
transformation. Especially when the focus is to ensure that the under­
pinning digital technologies enables a digital transformation that an­
swers to user needs and envision more valuable solutions for end users
(Verganti, 2011).
In order to increase our understanding on this aspect, we adopted an
exploratory approach, as we have analyzed four cases of different
consulting firms employing the design thinking approach to foster dig­
ital transformation. We deemed consulting firms appropriate for the
setting, as they are called upon by firms to manage the development of
digital transformation. The business-to-business (B2B) environment in
which the consulting firms operates can be a very interesting field to
shed lights on the design thinking dynamic capability for digital trans­
formation. This due to the mediation that consultants do in innovation
project (Strike & Rerup, 2016), and thus the support in reinforcing the
ability and capability of firms. More specifically, the paper aims to shed
light on how design thinking dynamic capabilities foster the discovery of
the opportunities underlying digital technologies, thus enacting the
transformation. By studying a B2B environment the research looks at
how the dynamic capabilities are built by the collaborations between the
consulting organization and the client firms. This mediation role that
consulting firms have in the digital transformation pursue, and the
ability to enact design thinking dynamic capability to cope with the
scope is an interesting finding of our research. Examining this interac­
tion between consultants and firm's managers, the paper identifies five
design thinking dynamic capabilities that can support the digital
transformation: (i) extending – i.e., amplifying the shared knowledge
base through constant collaboration diverse stakeholders; (ii) debating –
i.e., questioning the technological challenge by juxtaposing digital and
human perspectives, (iii) cropping – i.e., selecting technological re­
quirements on the basis of the users, (iv) interpreting – i.e., adopting a
different perception frames to investigate the different facets of the
technological challenge, and (v) recombining – i.e., combining techno­
logical and human knowledge within an holistic framing. These five
capabilities reinforce the understanding of design thinking as an
approach routed on dynamic capabilities and how it can help in coping
with digital transformation.
2. Literature review
Researchers recognize digital technologies in the field as the prac­
tices, processes, and principles that underlie the effective orchestration
of digital transformation (Nambisan et al., 2017). In today's society, this
orchestration can be tough, to the point that the external network
perspective is crucial (Leonardi, 2013). Indeed, the most essential
characteristic of digital transformation is the convergence of industries
and firms that collaborate more and more thanks to digital technologies
(Chen, Chiang, & Storey, 2012). Moreover, digital technologies have
introduced three qualitative changes in terms of representation, con­
nectivity and aggregation (Adner, Puranam, & Zhu, 2019). As conse­
quences of these three changes, there are, respectively, a great amount
of new data, the shattering of constraints of informationavailability, and
the possibility to address formerly impossible questions (Adner et al.,
2019). Thus, firms dealing with new digital technologies and the
development of digital transformations have to cope with increasing
complexity and flexibility, as they entail the aforementioned changes
and fast-evolving conditions (Kollmann & Kuckertz, 2010). For this
reason, companies are asked to develop more dynamic capabilities, to
support them in rapidly adapting their business to the change, obtaining
competitive advantage (Teece, Pisano, & Shuen, 1997).
Dynamiccapabilities are definedas the capabilitiesthat firms havein
create and evolve resources they have in their hands (Teece, 2007). In
respect to the development of digital transformation, and ultimately the
adoption of digital technologies these dynamic capabilities might
collapse with the capabilities presented in approaches to new product
development and processes related to digital technologies (Teece,
2012). A recent study unpacks a set of digital sensing, seizing and
reconfiguring capabilities by showing how dynamic capability can
inform digital transformation (Warner & Wäger, 2019). Nevertheless, it
focuses on the correlation between digital dynamic capabilities and the
innovation frameworks that focus on technological impact, thus leaving
untapped the correlation between dynamic capabilities and those
innovation frameworks that focus on user. Indeed, the innovation field
presents many approaches that cope similarly with strategic renewal or
collaborative practice to engage towards innovation (Day, 2011), but
within them the role of dynamic capability is still under researched if the
ultimate goal is to assess the impact that a different set of dynamic
capability might have on the value generate by the solutions in the end
users. The literature about agile and hybrid stage-gate models showed
how capabilities such as flexibility and productivity are central in a
continuous innovation (Cooper & Sommer, 2016). Being able to keep
S. Magistretti et al.

--- PAGE 3 ---
Industrial Marketing Management 97 (2021) 59–70
61
open the development of technology up to the very end of the project
and focus the attention on speed is essential to cope with strategic
renewal and innovation (Gobble, 2018). Notwithstanding this, in such
approaches, it is clear how the perspectives adopted are strategical and
focused on the process and procedures rather than on the dynamic ca­
pabilities needed to manage the digital transformation to create more
value for users and to solve their needs.
This lack of understanding of the role that dynamic capabilities can
have in digital transformation when the focus is not pertaining strategy
and business models (Warner & Wäger, 2019) but concerning the cre­
ation of users' value and solve needs (Liedtka, 2020; Verganti et al.,
2020) requires the consideration of different approaches.
In shifting the focus from firm strategy to users' value, a growing
body of research in innovation literature have shed light on design
thinking as an innovation approach centered around humans and their
needs (e.g., Beckman & Barry, 2007; Brown, 2009; Carlgren, Rauth, &
Elmquist, 2016). Framed in 1987 by Rowe's study. Since then, several
studies have been published, and academic attention has grown expo­
nentially (Çetinkaya et al., 2013; Micheli et al., 2019). In particular, the
most common interpretation of design thinking is based on the idea of
facing wicked problems with creativity and a naïve mind, usually it goes
under the label of creative problem-solving approach (Buchanan, 1992;
Coyne, 2005). Further studies on design thinking as creative problem
solving highlighted different aspects and adopted different perspectives
on processes (Çetinkaya et al., 2013) and people (Liedtka, 2015) but still
few research attempts to look at the dynamic capability needed to enact
this approach. One of the most diffused frameworks describing this kind
of design thinking is the double diamond that the Design Council pro­
posed, characterized by the alternation of divergent phases aimed at
exploring possible alternatives, called problem space, and convergent
phases aimed at identifying the dominant alternative, often called so­
lution space, (Dell'Era, Magistretti, Cautela, Verganti, & Zurlo, 2020).
The process embedded in the double diamond is structured in 4 phases,
described as sequential, even if they actually require different iterations
and dynamicity (Dell'Era et al., 2020), but scatter knowledge is present
on the dynamic capability needed to enact such approach. Each phase
addresses specific objectives, the discovery phase is where the different
categories of users are identified in order to holistically understand the
user needs and desires (Kuijken, Gemser, & Wijnberg, 2017) that can be
explored through different methodologies based on primary (interviews,
ethnographic observation, etc.) or secondary sources (trends, research
on lifestyles, etc.) (Luotola, Hellström, Gustafsson, & Perminova-
Harikoski, 2017). This practice is all about empathizing with the re­
cipients of the design through observation and ethnography, with the
aim of solving problems from their perspective (Brown, 2009; Holloway,
2009; Ward, Runcie, & Morris, 2009). The define phase requires a
critical attitude in analyzing the collected information in order to
properly frame the problem to be solved. If the discovery phase is based
on divergent thinking to foster creativity, the define phase aims at
reframing the problem and glimpsing possible paths towards the solu­
tion (Boland & Collopy, 2004; Drews, 2009). If getting started is half the
job, identifying, framing, and re-framing the problem to be solved are
crucial in design thinking. Probing questions aim at challenging the
status quo and steering the innovation process towards criticism and
embracing truly innovative directions (Verganti, 2016, 2017). The
following two phases move within the solution space. During the develop
phase, first ideas and then more detailed concepts are designed. Imag­
ination describes designers' propensity to look laterally at reality,
explore unconventional alternatives, and perceive situations from
innovative perspectives (Casakin, 2007). A visual approach enables
understanding abstract and intangible concepts in a better and deeper
way, grasping all the facets hidden in the ambiguity of words alone
(Carr, Halliday, King, Liedtka, & Lockwood, 2010; Ward et al., 2009).
Finally, in the deliver phase, the most valuable concepts are prototyped
in order to test them and therefore understand the effective adherence of
the solution to user needs and desires (Pham et al., 2021). In a design
thinking process, problems are tackled through an experimental
approach. This mentality allows them to select the most promising di­
rections for the innovation process (Brown, 2009; Fraser, 2009; Hollo­
way, 2009). The practice of learning-by-doing relies on the power of
tangibility. Turning an abstract idea into something real allows design
thinkers to test it, to reveal new opportunities therefrom, to share it with
others in a more effective way, and obtain their feedback (Boland &
Collopy, 2004; Lockwood, 2009; Rylander, 2009). The above mention
review of the extant literature and knowledge on creative problem-
solving approach within the design thinking paradigm unshadow how
such process is deemed to be a good approach to cope with user needs,
but less is known on the role it might have in dealing with the devel­
opment of digital technologies. Only few attempts have been made by
scholars to unpack the role of design thinking in the digital technology
world (Pham et al., 2021; Verganti et al., 2020) and both of them looked
ad practices that designers should embrace to manage technologies
without introducing the view over dynamic capabilities. On the other
hand, Liedtka, 2020, paper connects dynamic capability with design
thinking but not to foster digital transformation but to reduce bias
associated to the development of the technological solutions.
Even though researchers appointed how design thinking is rooted on
dynamic capabilities (Liedtka, 2020) and dynamic capabilities are useful
for digital transformation (Warner & Wäger, 2019) the role that design
thinking dynamic capabilities can have in digital transformation is still
missing and requires more knowledge. Thus, the paper aims to shed light
on how design thinking dynamic capabilities foster discovering the op­
portunities digital technologies provide to enact the transformation.
3. Research methodology
In view of our research question on how design thinking dynamic
capabilities can support the transformation of technological challenges
into opportunities for end-users, ultimately fostering digital trans­
formation, the case study methodology is deemed the most appropriate
(Yin, 2011). Indeed, considering the multifaceted aspect of this complex
phenomenon, an exploratory case study can help shed light on the topic.
In particular, we draw on a literal replication of cases of companies
adopting design thinking to manage and develop their innovative pro­
jects based on digital technologies.
3.1. Empirical setting
In this article, we focus on four innovation projects developed by
leading consulting organizations in 2018 adopting design thinking as a
methodology to enhance the value of the opportunities of digital tech­
nologies. More precisely, we analyze four projects undertaken by Design
Group Italia, DOING, IBM, and Triplesense Reply with clients that
operate in completely different industries: insurance, public adminis­
tration, telecommunications, and energy.
To select the cases, we adopted theoretical and convenience sam­
pling (Dubois & Gadde, 2002; Easton, 1995; Siggelkow, 2007). In
particular, concerning the theoretical aspects, these four firms provide
an excellent research setting, as they are pioneer adopters of design
thinking methods aimed at developing digital innovations. Adopting the
definition of design thinking that Brown (2009) proposed, we selected
these companies for promoting innovation starting from the investiga­
tion of user needs. In addition, all faced the digitalization issue theo­
retically discussed in Nambisan (2017) and can help shed light on the
continuous evolution of the scope, features, and value of the offerings
determined by digitalization. Regarding the sampling, the study focuses
on consulting organizations, as the authors have been involved with
these companies in a multiyear research platform and have good con­
nections with their managers.
Table 1 provides a synthetic overview of the four projects along
different dimensions: consulting organization, client, and project
objectives.
S. Magistretti et al.

--- PAGE 4 ---
Industrial Marketing Management 97 (2021) 59–70
62
3.2. Data collection
The study relies on data collected over a year of interactions with
these four consulting organizations. Due to the exploratory nature of the
research, we performed two waves of interviews, the first focused on
understanding the main boundaries of the research, the second aimed at
validating the first intuitions and deeply investigate the evidence gath­
ered (Von Krogh, Spaeth, & Lakhani, 2003). Two exploratory interviews
were organized during the first wave to setup up each case study (see
Appendix 1); at least three additional semi-structured interviews were
undertaken in the second wave to collect insights from different per­
spectives, viewpoints, and stakeholders (see Appendix 2). The interview
guide adopted in the second wave interviews is based on the Double
Diamond framework described in the literature review section, identi­
fying the design thinking practices adopted by the consulting organi­
zation to capitalize on the opportunities of digital technologies. Each
interview lasted between 2 and 3 h. All the interviews were taped and
transcribed. In each consulting organization, the key account and proj­
ect leader were interviewed by both researchers. This gave us access to
those most knowledgeable about the consulting project. Considering
both the first and second wave interviews, the dataset represents almost
40 h of interviews and 400 pages of transcripts (see Table 2). Most of the
data were collected during the interview. Rich secondary sources such as
project deliverables, presentations, and reports were collected to trian­
gulate the information collected through the interviews.
3.3. Data analysis
The data analysis was based on the interview transcripts. For the
Table 1
Overview of the case studies.
Project Name Consulting
Organization
Client Project
Objectives
MyGenerali Design Group
Italia
Design innovation
consultancy with a
50-year track
record of creating
value for local and
global companies.
Their offices are in
Milan and New
York. They work in
several industries
ranging from
healthcare,
consumer goods,
tourism to
technology, with a
diverse group of
clients including
Italian classics,
Silicon Valley start-
ups, non-profits,
and global Fortune
500 companies.
Generali Italia
SpA
Generali Group is
an insurance
company founded
in 1831 in Trieste,
Italy. Born with an
intrinsic European
spirit, the
company, with
more than 70
billion of insurance
premiums
gathered, is one of
the most important
insurance
companies in the
world, present in
60 countries with
76,000 employees
and 55 million
clients.
Health services
based on
artificial
intelligence
aimed at
enhancing the
welfare of
employees.
HiDubai DOING by
Capgemini
DOING is a Digital
Agency part of
Capgemini, with 4
offices, of which 1
in the United Arab
Emirates, a
turnover of 29
million euro, more
than 200
employees and an
international
network formed by
the best
independent
agencies in the
world, one of the
largest Italian
players in the
digital
environment.
DOING combines
data analysis,
service design,
creativity and
content technology
to offer its
customers the best
marketing,
communication,
digital
transformation,
and data solutions.
Dubai SME
Established in
2002, Dubai SME
was created as an
integrated division
of the Department
of Economic
Development
(DED). It was
developed as a
resource for
support,
information, and
outreach for the
growing SME
sector, promoting
innovation and
leadership across
all segments and
guiding
entrepreneurs
through the steps
of starting their
own enterprise.
Directory based
on big data of
local SMEs,
owned by the
Department of
Economic
Development.
MaintenanceApp IBM iX
With a history of
107 years, IBMis an
innovation leader
serving companies
and organizations
throughout the
world. It operates
in 175 countries
with about 380,000
employees. The
turnover for 2017
was 79.1 billion
dollars coming
from cognitive,
Snam
Snam is Europe's
leading gas utility.
It builds and
manages
sustainable and
technologically
advanced
infrastructures,
guaranteeing
energy security for
over 75 years.
Snam operates in
Italy and, through
subsidiaries,
Workspace
aimed at
acquiring and
analyzing big
data supporting
maintenance
activities.
Table 1 (continued)
Project Name Consulting
Organization
Client Project
Objectives
artificial
intelligence, cloud,
security, and
mobile solutions.
IBM iX (Interactive
eXperience) offers
creative solutions
for business
strategy and
experience design
to solve complex
business
challenges.
Austria (TAG and
GCA), France
(Teréga), and the
United Kingdom
(Interconnector
UK). Since 2001,
Snam is a public
company listed on
the Italian Stock
Exchange FTSE
MIB index.
WindTreBusiness Triplesense Reply
A creative and
design consulting
agency that helps
companies manage
change and obtain
the best benefits
from digital
transformation.
They aim at
improving
interactions
between people
and products
through creativity,
with a user-
centered approach
to design and
digital
communication.
They bring together
the services of a big
international group
with the versatility
of dynamic reality.
Wind3
Italian telecom
founded in 2016
after a joint
venture between
Wind and 3, two
main players in the
market. With
revenues of around
6.1 billion euro,
the group is the
first mobile
operator in Italy,
with 30% of the
entire market, and
third in the fixed
telephony market.
The company is
now involved in
the revolution of
5G and digital
solutions, with an
active role among
industries.
Chatbot based
on artificial
intelligence
aimed at
improving lead
identification.
S. Magistretti et al.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Industrial Marketing Management 97 (2021) 59–70
63
analysis of the gathered data, the authors have followed the qualitative
and interpretative approach proposed by Creswell (2009). It developed
in 4 main steps.
Step 1. Our analysis began with the transcription of the raw data
collected during the interviews. Indeed, we transformed the recordings
of the interviews into text format.
Step 2. With the transcripts of the interviews, each researcher
analyzed the cases separately from the others. Each researcher repeat­
edly read through to data to deeply immerse in each case and fully know
the data (Rossman & Rallis, 2011). As a result, each researcher orga­
nized the data into chunks that were then analyze and interpreted
(Rossman & Rallis, 2011). This in-depth analysis provided the corner­
stones for the identification of relevant themes.
Step 3. During this stage of the analysis, researchers rejoined to
share the relevant themes they had initially identified. The researchers
decided not to codify the empirical material. Instead, the researchers
analyzed the data textually, to identify the themes that pertained to the
conceptual elements of design thinking capabilities. The chunks of data
were interpreted as “abstract units of information” (Creswell, 2009,
p.174). This resulted from an iterative and inductive process that wit­
nessed a continuous move between the data and themes until a
comprehensive set of themes was found. The themes defined five design
thinking capabilities that enabled the transformation of digital tech­
nology challenges into opportunities, thus enabling the digital
transformation.
Step 4. In the final iteration, the researchers crystallized the five
themes and cross-checked them by performing a backward classifica­
tion. Indeed, they re-classified the quotesunder the five themes,to check
whether the themes would embody all the diverse perspectives from the
interviewees.
4. Empirical results
The analysis of the four cases allowed us to identify five design
thinking dynamic capabilities that enable the transformation of tech­
nological challenges into opportunities. To capture the aspects of the
design thinking dynamic capabilities adopted to drive digital trans­
formation, this section is organized in four subsections, respectively on
the four cases. The narration of the cases and how the consultants sup­
ported the firm in managing the digital transformation and adoption of
digital technology in a more human and valuable way let the five design
thinking dynamic capabilities to emerge, the fifth section of the
empirical summarize the quotes, the evidence, and the emerging
capability.
4.1. Welion: Design group Italia and Generali Italia SpA
When, in 2017, Generali Italia SpA decided to build a portfolio of
welfare services for employees, it did not have a clear idea in mind. To
support them in the creation of novel and meaningful solutions, they
decided to involve Design Group Italia (DGI). Although the direction
was still undefined, they soon came to the realization that these services
would benefit from a digital integration. This eventually gave birth to
Welion, an organization within Generali that offers a set of welfare
services for families, organizations and employees. In particular, the
collaboration between DGI and Welion brought about the creation of a
set of prevention services that leverage on Artificial Intelligence and
wearables to educate and support people in achieving their wellbeing. It
achieves that through a personalized and automated support system that
accompanies the user.
At the beginning, Generali and Welion presented DGI with a broad
and ill-defined challenge: they wanted to create a service for the health
of employees. Although they wanted the solution to be digital, they were
still undecided on which digital technology to use. Hence, DGI began the
collect the information to define the problem space. Indeed, they started
to map with the Client's objectives, to build the outlines of the problem.
As they defined the requirements for Welion, the true turning point was
achieved when DGI adopted a different interpretative lens. In fact, they
shifted the way they saw the employees of Generali: no longer as clients,
but as final users – i.e., the employees that would benefit from the ser­
vices offered by Welion. This shift in perception, allowed both DGI and
Welion to empathize with the user and understand their problems and
desires.
“At one point, we started to observe several employees of Generali
with new eyes. The idea was to investigate their feelings and ex­
pectations towards the welfare services that could be provided by
Welion. We collected a lot of data in order to empathize with their
daily behaviors: agendas, daily routines, main issues faced in their
work life, and so on."
Lead Service Design
The data collected from the employees of Generali allowed DGI and
Welion to define an employee journey and “archetypes” – i.e., user
profiles resulting from the cumulated knowledge of user needs and their
specific characteristics in terms of approach to technology. These
informed DGI and Welion during a brainstorming session that culmi­
nated with the generation and selection of high-level ideas. Moreover,
they allowed DGI and Welion to the search and evaluate the existing
digital technologies that couldfit the service. In particular, the employee
journey allowed them to discuss the technologies by counterposing
technological functionalities with human needs.
“we searched for the technologies that could solve the problems we
highlighted through our understanding of the users' feelings and
expectations. In our search, we focused on the relationship between
the technology and the problems of the employees. Hence, we didn't
strictly stop at the functionalities of the technologies.”
UX Designer
Instead, the archetypes supported DGI and Welion in understanding
which digital technologies were more aligned with their behaviors and
attitudes, thus defining the likeliness of adoption. In fact, they were
fundamental in reducing the number of potential digital technologies, as
archetypes stirred the selection of the right technologies.
Table 2
Data collection.
Project Name 1st Wave Interviews 2nd Wave Interviews
MyGenerali
Design Group
Italia
Psychologist-Design
Research Director
(04/02/2019; 3 h)
Partner-Industrial Service
Design Director
(04/02/2019; 2 h)
Lead Service Design
(22/02/2019; 2 h)
UX/UI Team Manager
(22/02/2019; 1.5 h)
UX Designer
(22/02/2019; 1.5 h)
HiDubai
DOING by
Capgemini
Head of Service Design
(26/11/2018; 2.5 h)
Strategy and Consulting
Director
(26/11/2018, 2.5 h)
Head of Service Design
(25/02/2019, 2 h)
Design Client Director
(25/02/2019, 2 h)
MaintenanceApp
IBM iX
Customer Engagement &
Design Italy Lead
(04/02/2019, 3 h)
Enterprise Design Thinking
Chapter Lead
(04/02/2019, 2 h)
Managing Consultant
(25/02/2019, 2 h)
IT Solution Architect
(25/02/2019, 1 h)
Enterprise Design Thinking
Chapter Lead
(25/02/2019, 2 h)
WindTreBusiness
Triplesense Reply
Associate Partner
(26/11/2018, 2 h)
Senior Manager
(26/11/2018, 3 h)
Senior Manager
(21/02/2019, 3 h)
Digital Marketing Planner
(21/02/2019, 2 h)
S. Magistretti et al.

--- PAGE 6 ---
Industrial Marketing Management 97 (2021) 59–70
64
“We created and selected archetypes considering how they use the
technology. If your archetype has specific needs, behaviors and at­
titudes, technology has to be developed in a specific way to catch
their attention. Technology cannot manage all problems. Humani­
zation of technology enters here. Users' behaviors really define what
the IT has to develop, in terms of architecture of service and tech­
nology, in order to start with effective creation of the service.”
Lead Service Design
Coherently, it was fundamental to combine all the cumulated
learnings from the user experience, and the knowledge of the techno­
logical features to outline technological opportunities.
“Opportunities provided by digital technologies such as artificial
intelligence and internet of things devices result from the harmoni­
zation with people's life. They don't represent the solution per se. The
combination of the knowledge cumulated during the discovery phase
and the one of technology were fundamental to craft the role of
technology"
UX/UI Team Manager
Finally, the technological challenge was transformed into a solid
solution through the integration of the interpretations of different
stakeholders. Each stakeholder extended the shared knowledge base and
enhanced the solution, by leveraging on their previous experience.
“The project involved many stakeholders. Some external, and some
internal to Generali. The different point of views allowed us to
question the service and, at the end, make it stronger. Each person
brought their cumulated experience to the table, as they joined
previous searches and personal interests. “
UX Designer
4.2. WindTreBusiness Chatbot: Triplesense reply and Wind3
The telecommunications market is one of the most competitive for
numerous reasons: creating tailored offerings is complicated, loyalty in
the market is very low, and new entrants prevail. Moreover, Wind and 3
were two different companies that decided to create a joint venture in
2016 in order to become the biggest Italian telecommunication oper­
ator, with a 30% market share. In 2017, Wind3 engaged Triplesense
Reply to redesign several services addressing the business market (e.g.,
corporations, SMEs, freelancers). One of the most complicated chal­
lenges consisted in improving the lead generation process in the business
market. Since the beginning of the project, Wind3 wanted to design a
website chatbot that would leverage on Natural Language processing to
identify leads. By tackling the technological challenge of designing a
chatbot, Triplesense Reply uncovered the greater opportunity of
designing a conversational tool that could provide tailored offerings not
only to identify leads, but also to engage completely new clients.
As they tackled the problem space, Triplesense Reply engaged the
client through a set of brainstorming sessions. These sessions were done
with the intent of extending the initial knowledge base, and gather
understanding on the Client's way of working, their objectives and re­
quirements – e.g., they understood the information that Wind3 Business
wished to collect through the engagement service. Initially, Triplesense
Reply interacted only with the B2B marketing specialists of Wind3
Business, that focused their expertise on the content of the interactions.
“At the beginning of the project, we collaborated closely with the
marketing specialists from Wind3 Business. We began by gathering
information from their team, as they had greater knowledge about
the content that could be handled by the chatbot. We brainstormed
together, to build a shared knowledge, which ultimately gave us the
possibility to set objectives and clarify also the way to reach them."
Digital Marketing Planner
The learnings that emerged from these brainstorming sessions sha­
ped the requirements that led to the definition of a first draft of the
conversation tree. While creating the conversation tree, Triplesense
Reply understood how important it was to enlarge the knowledge base,
by including the B2C perspective. In fact, although out of scope, they
decided to involve people from Wind3 that closely interacted with
customers to collect insights.
“We eventually decided to change our perspective. We no longer
limited to the B2B people. In fact, we included people working in
B2C, so people who worked constantly with the final users. This
allowed us to collect different points of view about the same service.”
Senior Manager
The integration of the B2C perspective helped Wind3 Business and
Triplesense Reply to observe the initial problem with a different lens, as
they were able to retrieve the most relevant need of the user, Indeed,
they found greater interest in customer care, rather than purchase
recommendations.
“The insights from the final users helped us understand the true
potential behind this service, it convinced Wind3 that the service
could go beyond lead generation, because what clients really wanted
was help.”
Senior Manager
Informed by the new insights, Triplesense Reply had the intuition
that they could explore the service even further, as they spurred spe­
cialists to debate alternative interactions that would encompass both
human and artificial operators.
“We challenged Wind3Business specialists in imagining alternative
interactions between users and artificial/human operators. This
exploration was fundamental in order to properly train the AI algo­
rithm and identify those contexts where chatbot and human opera­
tion can collaborate or substitute each other."
Senior Manager
Eventually, this resulted in the creation of a more “human” machine,
that would go beyond the traditional chatbot, as it combined artificial
and human, to offer an improved problem solving and marketing
features.
“Traditional chatbots are quite effective in solving problems faced by
the user. So, when we developed the conversation tree, we tried to
mix artificial and human operators, alternate problem solving and
marketing features. "
“We shifted from a structured machine to a more "human" machine.
Basically, we moved from a chatbot aimed at selling to a chatbot
aimed at taking care of the customer. Hence, changing the initial
vision behind.”
Digital Marketing Planner
4.3. HiDubai – Doing part of Capgemini and department of economic
development of Dubai
Dubai is among the most dynamic cities in the world in terms of
population evolution, investments in real estate, technology, R&D dis­
covery, economic output, and increasing connectivity. When the
S. Magistretti et al.

--- PAGE 7 ---
Industrial Marketing Management 97 (2021) 59–70
65
Department of Economic Development of Dubai approached DOING
part of Capgemini, they asked them to develop a directory, in the form of
a web-based platform, listing the different SMEs with the aim of
exploiting the value behind the data on SMEs owned by the Economic
Department. With the population of Dubai consisting of 3.32 million
inhabitants of which 2.91 million expats from more than 200 countries,
DOING proposed a user-centered approach to develop a directory that
would be mindful of the different cultural influences.
To cope with this cultural issue and design the best directory, the
company needed to first understand the particularities of the businesses
of the SMEs and then the user needs. Indeed, they started to collect data
on the merchants of the SMEs and the citizens Despite the Department of
Economic Development owned a large set of data on the SMEs, as these
had to be registered in the Department's system to get licensed, DOING
underwent a research phase aimed at understanding the peculiarities
defining the merchants of the SMEs and the citizens. They did that
through ethnographic research, mapping the information on people that
reached the psychological model of personality. This “soft”-information
was recombined with the “hard”-data on SMEs owned by the Depart­
ment to imagine compelling directions for the directory.
“Being a Government Department, we expected the client to have
plenty of information on citizens and merchants. However, there was
only descriptive data on the SMEs! We needed to combine the in­
formation from the dataset with new information, more ‘human’
information."
Design Client Director
This allowed DOING to set the stage and formulate the problem.
More specifically, the interactions with more than 50 individuals, 36
consumers, and 25 SME employees inspired the team from DOING to
create 9 personas and identify the most relevant variables for designing
the service.
“By talking with all the different consumers and merchants, we
identified the most relevant insights that were embodied in nine
different personas. These personas led us to the identification and
selection of the most relevant evaluation criteria for SMEs, they
spanned from evaluatingthe experience, to the revenue model, tothe
people involved”
Design Client Director
As the project went on, and the insights were consolidated, the team
from DOING decided to give greater importance to the cultural differ­
ences in the population of Dubai, thus highlighting the different per­
spectives of Arabs, as opposed to Expats. By interpreting people's needs
from the two perspectives, thanks to the involvement of “like-minded”
people – i.e., people with the same nationality or same cultural in­
teractions – they were able to tailor the service on their different atti­
tudes and needs. This way, became more complete, including an app, a
predictive analytics algorithm and a series of secondary services.
“Stakeholders during the whole process were a lot, especially for
what regards activities that had to be done in Dubai with locals:
companies for interviews or ethnographic researches were called in
order to mitigate the cultural distance and collect from people the
most reliable insights possible in order to create basis for service.”
Design Client Director
After a first testing phase for usability, service and communication,
they started to envision with client a 2.0 solution that questioned the
interaction between humans and artificial more deeply, as it integrated
effectively the predictive analytics to create a network of people and
workers, thus going beyond the simple directory, initially requested.
“The HiDubai project is interesting because initially, the client was
merely looking for a directory, a huge repository that filters the
services offered by the 300K SMEs using tags. Thanks to the human-
centered perspective, we completely changed the approach and
instead of starting from the data available we started from the users
and their needs. We collected and visualized in 9 customer journey
the over 100 customer insights."
Head of Service Design
This was possible also because the Team from DOING decided to
invest time in extending their technological knowledge base, that
allowed them to collaborate withthe technologicalproviders andbuild a
shared understanding of the limitations and possibilities of the
technology.
"Talking about Big Data and predictive analytics and working on
them to create a service are two totally different things. We neededto
learn more about them to understand what we could really do with
them. We had what people wanted, but we needed to understand
what we could actually do."
Design Client Director
4.4. MaintenanceApp – IBM iX and Snam
MaintenanceApp was born as Snam, an Italian Energy company,
contacted IBM iX for knowledge and expertise in both technology and
design thinking. The app aims at improving the data acquisition and
analysis process in the maintenance field. More specifically, Snam
wanted to provide effective and efficient tools to the workforce dedi­
cated to the maintenance of different categories of plants. Moreover, the
aim of the energy company was to imprint a new culture in his team of
engineers.
Since the beginning of the project, IBM iX decided to involve the
Maintenance Engineers, thus the final users of the service. This decision
of involving the final users since the strategic sessions stemmed from the
willingness to enlarge their comprehension on the context in which the
user operated, thus overcoming possible bias in the design of the tech­
nology and the experience. Indeed, they wanted to extend their tech­
nical knowledge with the “soft” knowledge of everyday work.
“The design thinking sessions allowed us to understand more on the
core issues perceived by different stakeholders.”
Enterprise Design Thinking Chapter Lead
In these initial phases, the team that met with the client was
numerous. The aim was to leverage on the different streams of expertise
of IBM to debate on the problem setting, considering all the possible
layers. To design across the different perspectives, IBM iX involved ex­
perts from other business units – e.g., Watson, the internal AI system of
IBM or IBM cloud.
“Align the three souls is for us the added value of Design Thinking.
We never sacrifice concreteness for methodology, and it means to
align each time Business, Functionality and Desire of client: this is
what we want to reflect in our team."
Senior Digital Strategy Consultant
As they understood the high-level requirements for Main­
tenanceApp, they continued to involve the final users. This time, how­
ever, they concentrated on identifying and interpreting the differences
among final users. Thus, IBM iX identified two main stakeholders: on the
one hand, the workforce in charge of collecting data on plant mainte­
nance, on the other hand, the engineering team in charge of interpreting
S. Magistretti et al.

--- PAGE 8 ---
Industrial Marketing Management 97 (2021) 59–70
66
the collected data and defining the necessary interventions. By empa­
thizing with both senior and junior engineers, IBM iX was able to
interpret the current scenario with two lenses. This allowed to identify a
sense of unhappiness and frustration especially in the junior roles: they
spent the majority of their working time adjusting collected data,
merging data from different sources, and understanding possible pat­
terns. In this way, they did not properly exploit their engineering skills,
focusing on data analysis instead.
“The design thinking sessions allowed us to understand and focus on
the core issues perceived by different stakeholders: maintenance
workforce, senior and junior engineers. We created draft user stories
in order to properly look at the same process from different
perspectives”.
Enterprise Design Thinking Chapter Lead
The direct involvement of the engineers during the co-designing of
solutions allowed to zoom in specific functionalities of the solution, that
were consideredmore relevant.Moreover, italso pushed the company to
focus not only on solution but also on the cultural change that this so­
lution entailed.
“The collaboration with the users and definition of user stories
allowed us to emphasize some requisites. Thanks to user stories, we
overcome older methods to get to the requisites, typical of technical
teams. “
Senior Digital Strategy Consultant
Finally, during the last phases the IBM worked on the possible so­
lutions. They were discussed with the client every other week, in a
continuative prototyping and testing phase. The team combined the pre-
existing knowledge on the technology –e.g., the knowledge on Cloud
systems previously developed – together with the new gained knowl­
edge on the context, the needs and desires of the users, to prepare reli­
able solutions for the final user to test.
“They (consultants) were fundamental to combine the concepts in an
operational form thanks to their capabilities in empowering each of
us, with our own capability and knowledge. These shared in common
sessions to identify better problems."
IT Solution Architect
The result, at the end was not only a service and a system that re­
duces the time for analysis and data setting, thanks to the exploitation of
big data technologies, but also a change in the culture.
4.5. The emergence of design thinking dynamic capabilities for digital
transformation
The analysis of the four cases allows us to shed light on different
design thinking dynamic capabilities that might foster digital trans­
formation. In particular, by triangulating the information, we have been
Table 3
Cross-case evidence for the design thinking dynamic capabilities.
Welion
Design Group Italia
WindTreBusiness
Triplesense Reply
HiDubai
DOING part of Capgemini
MaintenanceApp
IBM iX
Design Thinking Dynamic
Capabilities
UX Designer: “Each person
brought their cumulated
experience to the table, as they
joined previous searches and
personal interests.”
Digital Marketing Planner: “At the
beginning of the project, we
collaborated closely with the
marketing specialists from Wind3
Business. […] We brainstormed
together, to build a shared
knowledge, which ultimately gave us
the possibility to set objectives and
clarify also the way to reach them.”
Design Client Director:
“Talking about Big Data and
predictive analytics and working
on them to create a service are
two totally different things. We
needed tolearn more about them
to understand what we could
really do with them.”
Enterprise Design Thinking
Chapter Lead: “The design thinking
sessions allowed us to understand
more on the core issues perceived by
different stakeholders.”
EXTENDING through the close
collaboration and observation
of the stakeholders, the
consultants were able to
enlarge their knowledge base
on the opportunities and
requirements for the
technology
UX Designer:“Wesearched for the
technologies […]. In our search,
we focused on the relationship
between the technology and the
problems of the employees.
Hence, we didn't strictly stop at
the functionalities of the
technologies.”
Senior Manager: “We challenged
Wind3Business specialists in
imagining alternative interactions
between users and artificial/human
operators.”
Head of Service Design:
“Initially, the client was merely
looking for a […]. Thanks to the
human-centered perspective, we
completely changed the
approach and instead of starting
from the data available we
started from the users and their
needs. “
Senior Digital Strategy
Consultant: “Align the three souls is
for us the added value of Design
Thinking. We never sacrifice
concreteness for methodology, and
it means to align each time Business,
Functionality and Desire of client:
this is what we want to reflect in our
team.”
DEBATING the artificial and the
human perspectives, by
challenging the initial
technological challenge and
adopting a critical approach
Lead Service Design: “Users'
behaviors really define what the
IT has to develop, in terms of
architecture of service and
technology, in order to start with
effective creation of the service.”
Senior Manager: “The insights from
the final users helped us understand
the true potential behind this service,
it convinced Wind3 that the service
could go beyond lead generation,
because what clients really wanted
was help.”
Design Client Director: “These
personas led us to the
identification and selection of
the most relevant evaluation
criteria for SMEs”
Senior Digital Strategy
Consultant: “The collaboration
with the users and definition of user
stories allowed us to emphasize
some requisites. Thanks to user
stories, we overcome older methods
to get to the requisites, typical of
technical teams. “
CROPPING the alternative
solutions and information, as a
result of empathizing with the
user. In fact, only the solutions
and features that are relevant to
the final user are retained.
UX Designer: “we started to
observe several employees of
Generali with new eyes. The idea
was to investigate their feelings
and expectations towards the
welfare services that could be
provided by Welion.”
Senior Manager: “We eventually
decided to change our perspective
[…] we included people working in
B2C, so people who worked
constantly with the final users. This
allowed us to collect different points
of view about the same service.”
Design Client Director:
“companies for interviews or
ethnographic researches were
called in order to mitigate the
cultural distance and collect
from people the most reliable
insights possible in order to
create basis for service.”
Enterprise Design Thinking
Chapter Lead: “We created draft
user stories in order to properly look
at the same process from different
perspectives”.
INTERPRETING by empathizing
with the final user, thus
framing the problem under a
different perception lens that
can lead to the identification of
new opportunities.
UX/UI Team Manager:
“Opportunities provided by
digital technologies such as
artificial intelligence and internet
of things devices result from the
harmonization with people's
life.”
Digital Marketing Planner: “So,
when we developed the conversation
tree, we tried to mix artificial and
human operators, alternate problem
solving and marketing features.”
Design Client Director: “We
needed to combine the
information from the dataset
with new information, more
‘human’ information.”
IT Solution Architect: “They
(consultants) were fundamental to
combine the concepts in an
operational form thanks to their
capabilities in empowering each of
us, with our own capability and
knowledge.”
RECOMBINING artificial with
human factors, by associating
and all the clues within a
holistic reframing.
S. Magistretti et al.

--- PAGE 9 ---
Industrial Marketing Management 97 (2021) 59–70
67
able to identify five design thinking dynamic capabilities. Table 3 re­
ports the quotes and the classification according to the four cases and the
related dynamic capability emerging.
5. Discussion
The capabilities emerging from the interviews unveil how design
thinking is deemed to be appropriate to study and effectively interpret
the dynamics of complex systems (Simon, 2019). In facing complexity,
design thinking tackles issues by first considering them in their entirety,
including the broader context they derive from (Brown, 2009; Drews,
2009). In the following we connect the five design thinking dynamic
capabilities with the theory, and we highlight the first insights about
them.
The first dynamic capability emerging from the data is extending the
knowledge base. In particular, it shows how in pursuing a digital
transformation, design thinker should be capable of looking at an
innovation challenge not only by considering the specific issue but also
by looking at how that issue is influenced by and interacts with the
organizational context, market environment, and stakeholder system
(Dunne & Martin, 2006). This capability should be built to exploit
effectively the suggestions and knowledge provided by different intel­
ligence domains (Byosiere & Luethge, 2008), such as the artificial and
human in fostering the adoption of digital technologies as shown by the
Design Group Italia digital system. This view expands the idea that
digital transformation is only the translation of non-digital processes
into digital solutions (Pagani & Pardo, 2017), but that is the critical,
holistic reflection of all the knowledge available to extend the spectrum
of impact and foresee where the technology play a better role for users.
The informants also unpack how to foster digital transformation;
they leveraged debating as a capability. The system's complexity forced
the consultants to cultivate the capability of dynamically and iteratively
debating among clients and consultants in the project, and this media­
tion role is typical of consulting firm (Strike & Rerup, 2016). Still, it is
not clear how it can be applied in digital transformation and the design
thinking perspective. Our insights unveil how designers, by being able to
understand and consider the different perspectives and interests of in­
ternal and external stakeholder (including users) to frame the innova­
tion challenge in a meaningful way (Micheli et al., 2019), are building in
the team the debating capability as a crucial step for letting the digital
solution be grounded on more solid insights. This capability is rooted in
the design thinking principle of reframing (Dorst & Cross, 2001). It is
founded to be particularly valuable in debating and complementing the
views provided by digital technologies, as in the case of the chatbot
embedded in MyWind by Triplesense Reply. This view integrates the
idea that digital transformation requires discovery, abundance, and
partnership (Tronvoll, Sklyar, Sörhammar, & Kowalkowski, 2020) and
needs to dynamically embrace debating to go deeper in the under­
standing of the opportunity embedded in digital technologies.
The capability to empathize with users is at the core of design
thinking (Carlgren et al., 2016) as a dynamic capability and the evidence
pointed out how it is also fundamental to properly exploit the value
embedded in digital technologies. The incredible amount of information
organizations can access in designing innovative solutions calls for sig­
nificant analytical and capability in selecting the powerful insights.
Thus, the cases inform of the need for managers to leverage the cropping
design thinking dynamic capability. Cropping as described above helps
in select and retrieve relevant data in data-driven design, data is at the
center of the process; it is the primary (and sometimes, the only) input,
while in data-informed design, data is a key input among many other
variables to the point that they allow a deeper understanding of the
value provided to users (Liedtka, 2020). As the evidence let emerge the
direct interaction with both senior and junior engineers allowed IBM iX
to discover that the big amount of information collected by the work­
force required a great deal of effort and frequently did not fit with the
expectations of junior engineers. This dynamicity in the cropping of
insights coming from the true nature of the technology as found to be
crucial for mastering fully the digital transformation. In adding to the
common needs' interpretation of design thinking (Brown, 2008) a more
digital oriented perspective typical of the digital era (Obal & Lancioni,
2013).
Criticizing refers to designers' propensity to constantly ask probing
questions to challenge the status quo and steer the innovation process
towards experimenting and embracing truly innovative directions
(Verganti, 2016). This capability is not static but rather dynamic and
supports creative problem solving in different ways, as it helps the actors
move away from obvious solutions towards testing ideas internally and
engaging in dialogical activities that bring contrasting perspectives to
the surface and make them solvable (Verganti, 2017). The more the
available data, the more data interpretation becomes crucial. As shown
from the HiDubai app designed by DOING evolved significantly by
cultivating a culture of constant interpretation of insights. Thus, the
fourth design thinking dynamic capabilities is interpreting and it is
grounded on the ability of designers to foresee future scenario (Dunne &
Raby, 2013) and of strategically size opportunities embedded in digital
technologies (Teece, 2007). So, the result is a dynamic capability that
rooted on design ability to early porotype and envision scenario is able
to converge over solutions.
The last design thinking dynamic capabilities emerging from the case
is the recombining one. The cases show how consultants and team should
be able to engage in the activities of imagining what might be rather
than what is, for example, through abductive reasoning and herme­
neutic pragmatism (Dong,Garbuio, & Lovallo,2016;Verganti, 2017). As
a consequence, the capability to focus on identifying socio-cultural
trends and narratives, creating future scenarios as departure points for
developing digital design solutions (Micheli et al., 2019) is pointed out
to be crucial to foster digital transformation. This clearly emerges from
the 9 personas and associated customer journeys that DOING proposed
to the Government of Dubai to exemplify the intended solutions is just
one example emerging from the cases. In so doing managers leverage the
recognition of original patters and associations inspired by the design
perspective of abduction but also on the transforming perspective of
digital transformation (Warner & Wäger, 2019).
Fig. 1 proposes a conceptualization of the above mentioned five
different design thinking dynamic capabilities that might fosters digital
transformation (see Fig. 1).
In connecting the five emerging design thinking dynamic capabilities
with theories, the above discussion pointed out three main contribu­
tions. First, they enrich the understanding of design thinking as a set of
dynamic capabilities and not as a simple sequence of phases and tools
(Liedtka, 2020; Micheli et al., 2019). Second, they inform how a design
thinking perspective over the capability might reinforce the effective­
ness of a digital transformation (Cankurtaran& Beverland, 2020). Third,
answers to the recent calls of how and why firms should embrace more
and more hybrid approaches to foster innovation (Cooper & Sommer,
2016).
Design thinking is traditionally seen as a design approach transferred
to the management field to cope with ill-defined and wicked problems
(Brown, 2008). From that moment on, several studies tried to unpack its
true nature. Few studies looked at the different approaches that differ­
entiate for the aims and principles underpinning (Dell'Era et al., 2020).
Other studies looked at the practice to move from design to design doing
and unveil the tools (Micheli et al., 2019). Few recent attempts tried to
see the more strategic value of design thinking to create a competitive
advantage (Liedtka, 2020; Pham et al., 2021). Our studies followed this
last trend in showing how the design thinking approach is grounded on a
set of dynamic capabilities influenced by the scope, e.g., digital trans­
formation, enriching the understanding of such approach as a more
strategic one.
Nambisan et al., 2017, showed how the market and the context in­
fluence digital transformation, and the technology is embedded in the
transformation thanks to a better configuration. Despite this, no
S. Magistretti et al.

--- PAGE 10 ---
Industrial Marketing Management 97 (2021) 59–70
68
practical guideline is proposed on leveraging the complex system sur­
rounding embedding contextual factors in the transformation. Warner &
Wäger, 2019, stated that dynamic capabilities could be valuable in the
digital environment to foster digital transformation. Still their research,
despite pointing them out for business model innovation environment,
does not highlight the role of the environment and customers in making
it doable. Thus, our paper, by leveraging the design thinking approach
deeply rooted in empathy, reframing, speculating, and criticizing prin­
ciples, proposes a set of design thinking dynamic capabilities that rein­
force the centrality of dynamic capability in creating competitive
advantage (Teece, 2007) but also in proposing how design thinking
might make dynamic capability more effective in the context of digital
transformation. Indeed, by focusing on user needs, the findings answer
the recent calls of Arbesman, 2016.
Finally, the paper is proposing a combined view of design thinking
(Brown, 2008), a social science approach, with dynamic capabilities
(Teece, 2007), a strategic approach, informs academics on the value that
hybrid models and intertwined views can have in the pursuit of inno­
vation and digital transformation. The spread of hybrid approaches
(Cooper & Sommer, 2016) from software development to new product
development is only one of the potentialfutures of such hybridization. In
following this trend, our paper tries to build on the growing relations
that design, and strategy fields are foreshadowing.
6. Conclusions
This qualitative analysis sheds light on the role of design thinking
dynamic capabilities in capitalizing on digital technologies' opportu­
nities. In particular, our qualitative study identifies new and thus far
unexplored design thinking dynamic capabilities that enable digital
transformation in a business-to-business environment, the consulting
one.
This study offers several contributions. First, by qualitatively
exploring how digital technologies are valorized in digital
transformation projects by leveraging design thinking dynamic capa­
bilities, our empirical results advance current understanding of which
dynamic capabilities are relevant in design thinking, a somewhat
neglected aspect in existing literature (Carlgren et al., 2016; Micheli
et al., 2019). Second, we advance knowledge on digital transformation,
especially on the process, methods, and practices relevant when digital
technologies are introduced in the mark to respond to user needs
(Nambisan, 2017). Third, the analysis of the four cases enriches the
current understanding of dynamic capabilities (Teece, 2012) by showing
how these should be adapted when dealing with digital transformation
and by leveraging a design thinking approach. Indeed, the four projects
highlight that the internal and external capabilities changed dynami­
cally in response to the different phases of the projects. Moreover, it
enhances the understanding of the adoption of design thinking dynamic
capabilities in the business-to-business environment. It unshadows how
consulting firms adopt this set of capabilities to facilitate digital trans­
formation projects and deliver higher value to the end-users.
Finally, the study provides managers with insights into enhancing
the opportunities that digital technologies offer in digital transformation
projects by adopting different design thinking dynamic capabilities. The
capabilities previously reported are valuable for managers facing the
introduction of digital technologies in solutions. Indeed, through the
design thinking dynamic capabilities pointed out above, they can better
craft the final solution by situating the value for users at the center
instead of the technical functionalities. Furthermore, this study opens up
new areas of investigation through combining the design thinking,
digital technologies, and dynamic capabilities research streams, sug­
gesting future studies aimed at understanding the intertwined re­
lationships existing and emerging within them.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the editors and anonymous re­
viewers, who helped significantly in enhancing the study’s
Fig. 1. Design thinking dynamic capabilities to foster digital transformation.
S. Magistretti et al.

--- PAGE 11 ---
Industrial Marketing Management 97 (2021) 59–70
69
contributions. The authors would also thank Piervito Biondo for his
support in the initial activity of this research.
Appendix A. Check-list of the 1st wave interviews
• How do you apply the design thinking approach in consulting
projects?
• What are the principal frameworks and practices you apply in
consulting projects based on design thinking?
• What are the typical deliverables you develop in consulting projects
based on design thinking?
• How do you compose the team (consulting and client side) in
consulting projects based on design thinking?
• How do you apply the design thinking approach in consulting pro­
jects characterized by digital technologies such as artificial intelli­
gence, big data, internet of things, blockchain, etc.?
• Do you differently shape design thinking frameworks and practices
in consulting projects characterized by digital technologies such as
artificial intelligence, big data, internet of things, blockchain, etc.?
How?
• What are the particular design thinking deliverables you develop in
consulting projects characterized by digital technologies such as
artificial intelligence, big data, internet of things, blockchain, etc.?
How?
• Do you differently compose the design thinking team (consulting and
client side) in consulting projects characterized by digital technolo­
gies such as artificial intelligence, big data, internet of things,
blockchain, etc.? How?
Appendix B. Check-list of the 2nd wave interviews
• How did you brief (and debrief) the challenge described by your
client in the consulting project based on artificial intelligence/big
data?
• How did you develop the discover phase in the consulting project
based on artificial intelligence/big data?
• What were the specific challenges you faced during the discover phase
in the consulting project based on artificial intelligence/big data?
• How did you develop the define phase in the consulting project based
on artificial intelligence/big data?
• What were the specific challenges you faced during the define phase
in the consulting project based on artificial intelligence/big data?
• How did you develop the develop phase in the consulting project
based on artificial intelligence/big data?
• What were the specific challenges you faced during the develop phase
in the consulting project based on artificial intelligence/big data?
• How did you develop the deliver phase in the consulting project based
on artificial intelligence/big data?
• What were the specific challenges you faced during the deliver phase
in the consulting project based on artificial intelligence/big data?
References
Adner, R., Puranam, P., & Zhu, F. (2019). What is different about digital strategy? From
quantitative to qualitative change. Strategy Science, 4(4), 253–261.
Arbesman, S. (2016). Overcomplicated: Technology at the limits of comprehension. Penguin.
Beckman, S. L., & Barry, M. (2007). Innovation as a learning process: Embedding design
thinking. California Management Review, 50(1), 25–56.
Boland, R. J., & Collopy, F. (Eds.). (2004). Design matters for management. In Managing as
designing. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Brown, T. (2008). Design thinking. Harvard business review, 86(6), 84.
Brown, T. (2009). Change by design – How design thinking transforms organizations and
inspires innovation. New York: Harper Collins Publishers.
Buchanan, R. (1992). Wicked problems in design thinking. Design Issues, 8(2), 5–21.
Byosiere, P., & Luethge, D. J. (2008). Knowledge domains and knowledge conversion: An
empirical investigation. Journal of Knowledge Management, 12(2), 67–78. https://doi.
org/10.1108/13673270810859523.
Cankurtaran, P., & Beverland, M. B. (2020). Using design thinking to respond to crises:
B2B lessons from the 2020 COVID-19 pandemic. Industrial Marketing Management,
88, 255–260.
Carlgren, L., Rauth, I., & Elmquist, M. (2016). Framing design thinking: The concept in
idea and enactment. Creativity and Innovation Management, 25(1), 38–57.
Carr, S. D., Halliday, A., King, A. C., Liedtka, J., & Lockwood, T. (2010). The influence of
design thinking in business: Some preliminary observations. Design Management
Review, 21, 58–63.
Casakin, H. P. (2007). Factors of metaphors in design problem-solving: Implications for
design creativity. International Journal of Design, 1(2), 21–33.
Çetinkaya, M., Johansson-Sköldberg, U., & Woodilla, J. (2013). Design thinking: Past,
present and possible futures. Creativity and Innovation Management, 22(2), 121–146.
Chen, H., Chiang, R., & Storey, V. (2012). Business intelligence and analytics: From big
data to big impact. MIS Quarterly, 36(4), 1165–1188.
Cooper, R. G. (2019). The drivers of success in new-product development. Industrial
Marketing Management, 76, 36–47.
Cooper, R. G., & Sommer, A. F. (2016). Agile-stage-gate: New idea-to-launch method for
manufactured new products is faster, more responsive. Industrial Marketing
Management, 59, 167–180.
Coyne, R. (2005). Wicked problems revisited. Design Studies, 26(1), 5–17.
Creswell, J. W. (2009). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods
approaches, 3rd ed. In Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods
approaches (3rd ed.). Sage Publications, Inc.
Danneels, E. (2004). Disruptive technology reconsidered: A critique and research agenda.
Journal of Product Innovation Management, 21(4), 246–258.
Danneels, E., & Frattini, F. (2018). Finding applications for technologies beyond the core
business. MIT Sloan Management Review, 59(3), 73–78.
Day, G. (2011). Closing the marketing capabilities gap. Journal of Marketing, 75(4),
183–195.
Dell'Era, C., Magistretti, S., Cautela, C., Verganti, R., & Zurlo, F. (2020). Four kinds of
design thinking: From ideating to making, engaging, and criticizing. Creativity and
Innovation Management, 29(2), 324–344.
Dong, A., Garbuio, M., & Lovallo, D. (2016). Generative sensing: A design perspective on
the microfoundations of sensing capabilities. California Management Review, 58(4),
97–117.
Dorst, K., & Cross, N. (2001). Creativity in the design process: Co-evolution of problem-
solution. Design Studies, 22(5), 425–437.
Drews, C. (2009). Unleashing the full potential of design thinking as a business method.
Design Management Review, 20, 39–44.
Dubois, A., & Gadde, L. E. (2002). Systematic combining: An abductive approach to case
research. Journal of Business Research, 55(7), 553–560.
Dunne, A., & Raby, F. (2013). Speculative everything: Design, fiction, and social dreaming.
MIT press.
Dunne, D., & Martin, R. (2006). Design thinking and how it will change management
education: An interview and discussion. Academy of Management Learning &
Education, 5(4), 512–523.
Easton, G. (1995). Case research as a methodology for industrial networks: A realist
apologia. In IMP conference (11th).
Fraser, H. M. (2009). Designing business: New models for success. Design Management
Review, 20, 56–65.
Ghezzi, A., & Cavallo, A. (2020). Agile business model innovation in digital
entrepreneurship: Lean startup approaches. Journal of Business Research, 110,
519–537.
Gobble, M. M. (2018). Digital strategy and digital transformation. Research-Technology
Management, 61(5), 66–71.
Holloway, M. (2009). How tangible is your strategy? How design thinking can turn your
strategy into reality. Journal of Business Strategy, 30, 50–56.
Iansiti, M., & Lakhani, K. R. (2020). Competing in the age of AI.
Kollmann, T., & Kuckertz, A. (2010). Evaluation uncertainty of venture capitalists'
investment criteria. Journal of Business Research, 63(7), 741–747.
Kuijken, B., Gemser, G., & Wijnberg, N. M. (2017). Effective product-service systems: A
value-based framework. Industrial Marketing Management, 60, 33–41.
Leonardi, P. (2013). When does technology use enable network change in organizations?
A comparative study of feature use and shared affordances. MIS Quarterly, 37(3),
749–775.
Liedtka, J. (2015). Perspective: Linking design thinking with innovation outcomes
through cognitive bias reduction. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 32(6),
925–938.
Liedtka, J. (2020). Putting technology in its place: Design thinking’s social technology at
work. California Management Review, 62(2), 53–83.
Lockwood, T. (2009). Transition: How to become a more design-minded organization.
Design Management Review, 20, 29–37.
Luotola, H., Hellström, M., Gustafsson, M., & Perminova-Harikoski, O. (2017).
Embracing uncertainty in value-based selling by means of design thinking. Industrial
Marketing Management, 65, 59–75.
Magistretti, S., Dell'Era, C., & Verganti, R. (2020). Searching for the right application: A
technology development review and research agenda. Technological Forecasting and
Social Change, 151, 119879.
Micheli, P., Wilner, S. J., Bhatti, S. H., Mura, M., & Beverland, M. B. (2019). Doing design
thinking: Conceptual review, synthesis, and research agenda. Journal of Product
Innovation Management, 36(2), 124–148.
Nambisan, S. (2017). Digital entrepreneurship: Toward a digital technology perspective
of entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 41(6), 1029–1055.
Nambisan, S., Lyytinen, K., Majchrzak, A., & Song, M. (2017). Digital innovation
management: Reinventing innovation management research in a digital world. MIS
Quarterly, 41(1), 223–238.
S. Magistretti et al.

--- PAGE 12 ---
Industrial Marketing Management 97 (2021) 59–70
70
Nowacki, R., & Bachnik, K. (2016). Innovations within knowledge management. Journal
of Business Research, 69(5), 1577–1581.
Obal, M., & Lancioni, R. A. (2013). Maximizing buyer–supplier relationships in the
digital era: Concept and research agenda. Industrial Marketing Management, 42(6),
851–854.
Pagani, M., & Pardo, C. (2017). The impact of digital technology on relationships in a
business network. Industrial Marketing Management, 67, 185–192.
Pham, C. T. A., Magistretti, S., & Dell’Era, C. (2021). The role of design thinking in big
data innovations. Innovation, 1–24.
Ries, E. (2011). The lean startup: How today’s entrepreneurs use continuous innovation to
create radically successful businesses (Currency).
Rossman, G. B., & Rallis, S. F. (2011). Learning in the field: An introduction to qualitative
research. Sage.
Rylander, A. (2009). Design thinking as knowledge work: Epistemological foundations
and practical implications. Design Management Journal, 4, 7–19.
Siggelkow, N. (2007). Persuasion with case studies. Academy of Management Journal, 50
(1), 20–24.
Simon, H. A. (2019). The sciences of the artificial. MIT press.
Strike, V. M., & Rerup, C. (2016). Mediated sensemaking. Academy of Management
Journal, 59(3), 880–905.
Teece, D. J. (2007). Explicating dynamic capabilities: the nature and microfoundations of
(sustainable) enterprise performance. Strategic management journal, 28(13),
1319–1350.
Teece, D. J. (2012). Dynamic capabilities: Routines versus entrepreneurial action.
Journal of Management Studies, 49(8), 1395–1401.
Teece, D. J., Pisano, G., & Shuen, A. (1997). Dynamic capabilities and strategic
management. Strategic Management Journal, 18(7), 509–533.
Trabucchi, D., & Buganza, T. (2019). Data-driven innovation: Switching the perspective
on big data. European Journal of Innovation Management, 22(1), 23–40. https://doi.
org/10.1108/EJIM-01-2018-0017.
Trabucchi, D., Buganza, T., Dell'Era, C., & Pellizzoni, E. (2018). Exploring the inbound
and outbound strategies enabled by user generated big data: Evidence from leading
smartphone applications. Creativity and Innovation Management, 27(1), 42–55.
Tronvoll, B., Sklyar, A., Sörhammar, D., & Kowalkowski, C. (2020). Transformational
shifts through digital servitization. Industrial Marketing Management, 89, 293–305.
Verganti, R. (2011). Radical design and technology epiphanies: A new focus for research
on design management. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 28(3), 384–388.
Verganti, R. (2016). The innovative power of criticism. Harvard Business Review, 94(1),
18.
Verganti, R. (2017). Overcrowded: Designing meaningful products in a world awash with
ideas. MIT Press.
Verganti, R., & Öberg, Å. (2013). Interpreting and envisioning—A hermeneutic
framework to look at radical innovation of meanings. Industrial Marketing
Management, 42(1), 86–95.
Verganti, R., Vendraminelli, L., & Iansiti, M. (2020). Innovation and Design in the age of
artificial intelligence. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 37(3), 212–227.
Von Krogh, G., Spaeth, S., & Lakhani, K. R. (2003). Community, joining, and
specialization in open source software innovation: A case study. Research Policy, 32
(7), 1217–1241.
Ward, A., Runcie, E., & Morris, L. (2009). Embedding innovation: Design thinking for
small enterprises. Journal of Business Strategy, 30(2/3), 78–84.
Warner, K. S., & Wäger, M. (2019). Building dynamic capabilities for digital
transformation: An ongoing process of strategic renewal. Long Range Planning, 52(3),
326–349.
Williams, R., & Edge, D. (1996). The social shaping of technology. Research Policy, 25(6),
865–899.
Yin, R. K. (2011). Applications of case study research. Sage.
Yoo, Y., Boland, R. J., Jr., Lyytinen, K., & Majchrzak, A. (2012). Organizing for
innovation in the digitized world. Organization Science, 23(5), 1398–1408.
S. Magistretti et al.