--- PAGE 1 ---
554 IJISS Vol.16 No.1 January-March 2026
Indian Journal of Information Sources and Services
ISSN: 2231-6094 (P) Vol.16, No.1, 2026, pp.554-567
© The Research Publication, www.trp.org.in
DOI: https://doi.org/10.51983/ijiss-2026.16.1.58
A Theoretical Integration of Enterprise Architecture Frameworks for
Business-It Alignment
Akhil John Mampilly1*
, Dr. Chithirai Pon Selvan2
and Dr. Divya Midhunchakkaravarthy3
1*
Research Scholar, Lincoln University College, Petaling Jaya, Malaysia
2
Director, School of Science and Engineering, Curtin University, Dubai, U.A.E
3
Director, Faculty of Computer Science and Multimedia, Lincoln University College, Petaling Jaya,
Malaysia
E-mail: 1
dr.akhilmampilly@gmail.com, 2
pon.selvan@curtindubai.ac.ae, 3
divya@lincoln.edu.my
ORCID: 1
https://orcid.org/0009-0003-2626-0070, 2
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9295-3340,
3
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8044-1863
(Received 27 November 2025; Revised 29 December 2025, Accepted 14 January 2026; Available online 27 February 2026)
Abstract - In the digital transformation era, organizations
struggle to achieve effective Business-IT Alignment (BITA)
because disruptive technologies, new business models, and
changing customer expectations widen the gap between
strategicgoalsandITcapabilities. EnterpriseArchitecture(EA)
has been recognized as a crucial facilitator in addressing this
challenge by providing formal frameworks that unify business
and IT. Nonetheless, the theoretical underpinnings of EA's
function in augmenting BITA are disjointed, with the majority
of research focusing on technical or managerial dimensions
rather than cohesive theoretical frameworks. This paper
examines and integrates pertinent theoretical frameworks,
including the Strategic Alignment Model, Dynamic Capabilities
Theory, and Sociotechnical Systems Theory, to formulate a
cohesive perspective on how Enterprise Architecture (EA) can
systematically enhance Business IT Alignment (BITA) in
dynamic contexts. The research enhances academic
comprehension by elucidating theoretical connections and
providing pragmatic recommendations for firms to implement
EA practices that promote agility, creativity, and value
generation. Overall, the study demonstrates that EA plays a
crucial role in enabling companies to navigate digital
transformation and remain competitive.
Keywords: Business IT Alignment, Enterprise Architecture,
Digital Transformation, Strategic Alignment Model,
Sociotechnical System Theory, Dynamic Capabilities
I. INTRODUCTION
1.1 Background Information
EA (Enterprise architecture) is a key factor that enables
organizations to be flexible and effectively manage their
technical resources. In the context of sustainable
management, EA should provide a framework connected to
the DT objective with the sustainable business model, which
fosters ecological, social, and economic sustainability. EA
should play a critical role in providing the dynamic
capabilities to enable the business to operate in unfavorable
environments. (Alghamdi,2024).Italsohelpscompaniesand
organizations improve their online performance by
leveraging digital technology at the operational level, known
as high digital ambidexterity. (Pattij et al., 2022;Avison et al.,
2004).The strategic importance of enterprise architecture has
been increasingly recognized, as it promotes organizational
adoption and manages technological complexity. (Pancote et
al., 2025). Enterprise digital transformation should support
innovation to align government subsidies for business
innovation plans. (Kaidalova et al., 2018;Andriushchenko et
al., 2020). This approach incorporates sustainable
management practices through the EA framework, ensuring
innovative contributions through long-term environmental
sustainability, economic resilience, and social responsibility,
which fosters responsible business practices consistent with
overall sustainability goals. (Anthony Jnr, 2021; Arasuraja,
2025).The alignment is crucial for the technological progress
of a robust architecture framework, which helps to maximize
the benefits. EA not only supports strategic management of
technology but also enables businesses to leverage financial
and innovative resources. (Goerzig & Bauernhansl, 2018).
1.2 Overview of Digital Transformation in Today's
Technological Landscape
Digital transformation is the biggest issue in the business
world. Nowadays, digital technology connects through
corporate operations, which affects how companies work and
provides various benefits. It's primarily driven by new
technology and encompasses new business process
structures, cultural changes, and enhanced customer
experiences. These help to build the ground up and change
the internal business demand and markets. (Demlehner &
Laumer, 2020; Slaiby et al., 2025). The business transition is
connected to manufacturing and cyber-physical systems. The
internal IT landscape should be aligned with the various
enterprise architectures. (Hartl, 2019; Busch & Zalewski,
2025). These are all connected to make it easier for the
products tobe iterativeandcustomer-involved,whichis good
for the business. Digitalization of business has also forced
changes at the ecosystem level, followed by adjustments to
audit work and the integration of business and IT functions
(Nhabomba et al., 2025; Vigren & Eriksson, 2025).

--- PAGE 2 ---
Akhil John Mampilly, Dr. Chithirai Pon Selvan and Dr. Divya Midhunchakkaravarthy
IJISS Vol.16 No.1 January-March 2026 555
1.3 Problem Statement
Organizations undergoing digital transformation often
struggle to achieve Business-ITAlignment (BITA), resulting
in IT skills that fail to adequately support strategic business
goals. Rapid technology changes, new company models, and
rising customer expectations exacerbate the misalignment,
resulting in inefficiency and poor value generation.
Enterprise Architecture (EA) provides organized ways to
connect business and IT, although its theoretical function in
improving BITA during digital transformation remains
unclearMost of the study that have been done so far focuses
on technical or management issues and don't look at
integrated theoretical frameworks. This fragmentation limits
both academic insights and real-world results. This
necessitates finding and combining strong theories that
explain how EA may systematically increase BITA in
changing situations.
1.4 Scope of The Research
The goal of this study is to examine and integrate various
theoretical frameworks that demonstrate how Enterprise
Architecture (EA) can enhance Business-IT Alignment
(BITA) within the context of digital transformation. It
examines the strategic, organizational, and technological
aspects of EA to determine how it can help align corporate
goals with IT skills. The research is confined to conceptual
and theoretical examination, utilizing established models and
frameworks to build a cohesive viewpoint. We will
emphasize practical consequences to help firms adopt EA
principles that foster agility, innovation, and value realization
throughout digital transformation projects.
1.5 Significance of the Study
This study is critical because it addresses the ongoing
problem of Business-IT Alignment (BITA) in situations of
digital transformation. By integrating theoretical
frameworks, it enhances scholarly comprehension of how
Enterprise Architecture (EA) facilitates the alignment
between corporate strategy and IT capabilities. The research
addresses deficiencies in the current literature, which
frequently prioritizes technical or managerial dimensions
lacking robust theoretical foundations. In practice, the study
demonstratestofirmshowtoutilizeEAmethodsthatenhance
their flexibility, creativity, and value. Ultimately, it
underscores the importance of EA in enabling businesses to
navigate the digital transition and remain competitive.
1.6 Research Objective
• To determine how IT strategies with Business
objectives help improve the organizational
performance, competitiveness, and decision-making in
the digital area.
• To explore the primary role of EA (enterprise
architecture) in aligning business strategies, which
involves implementing an effective IT system,
managing various operations, minimizing
inefficiencies, and providing support through the
digital transformation area.
• The review assesses the alignment of business and IT
with the strategic alignment model, business alignment
theories, and digital transformation frameworks,
encompassing various types of theoretical models.
• To identify the key challenges organizations face and
how they achieve their business strategies within the
context of digital transformation, and to propose new
solutions based on practical and theoretical insights.
1.7 Research Hypothesis
OB-1 H0: There is no significant relationship between
aligning IT strategies with business goals to improve
organizational performance, decision making, and
competitiveness in the digital age.
OB-1 H1: This significant relationship between aligning
strategies and business objectives aims to improve
organizational performance, competitiveness, and decision-
making in the digital age.
OB-2 H0: EA (Enterprise Architecture) fails to contribute to
aligned business strategies with IT systems, which do not
effectively analyze streamlined operations, reduce
inefficiency, or support digital transformation efforts.
OB-2 H1: EA (Enterprise Architecture) significantly
contributed to business strategies with IT systems, followed
by streamlined operations, reduced inefficiency, and support
through digital transformation efforts.
OB-3 H0: Theoretical models and frameworks are connected
through SAM (Strategic Alignment model), IT business
alignment theories, and digitaltransformationframeworks do
not support the alignment of business and IT.
OB-3 H1: Theoretical models and frameworks are connected
through the SAM (Strategic Alignment model), IT business
alignment theories, and digital transformation frameworks,
which support the alignment of business and IT.
OB-4 H0: There is no significant relationship among the
various key challenges faced in achieving alignment between
IT and business strategies, particularly in the context of
digital transformation, which involves a proposed solution
supported by both theoretical and practical values.
OB-4 H1: There is a significant relationship among the
various key challenges faced in achieving alignment between
IT and business strategies, particularly in the context of
digital transformation, which involves a proposed solution
supported by both theoretical and practical values.
1.8 Research Questions
• What role can Enterprise Architecture play in
improving Business IT Alignment during digital
transformation?

--- PAGE 3 ---
A Theoretical Integration of Enterprise Architecture Frameworks for Business-It Alignment
556 IJISS Vol.16 No.1 January-March 2026
• What theoretical frameworks provide the best
understanding of how EA and BITA relate in dynamic
organizational settings?
• What are the shortcomings of current EA methods in
tackling alignment issues during digital
transformation?
• What role can an integrated theoretical approach play
in guiding IT capabilities to better align with shifting
business strategies?
Key Contribution
This research is covered in the various sections. Section I
describes the introduction of the particular topic, which
consists of Background information, an Overview of digital
transformation in recent years, a problem statement, the
Scope of the research, the significance of the study, the
Research Objective, the Research Hypothesis, and the
Research Questions. SectionIIpresents theLiterature review,
while Section III outlines the concept model for enhancing
business IT Alignment through architectural approaches in
Digital Transformation contexts. This includes explanations
of the strategic alignment model, conceptual framework for a
research model, Digital transformation drivers, Enterprise
architecture, enhanced BITA, and the Theoretical analysis
model. SectionIVdescribes the Methodology, which consists
of sample demographic information, data analysis, and
interpretation among the various objectives. Section V
describes the discussion section, and Section VI explains the
summary of the research key findings.
II. LITERATURE REVIEW
Various types of hypothesis statements should be explained
based on DT and EA, which means the success should be
influenced and demonstrate the impact of EApractices on the
organization's strategy.According to the authors, (Kotusev &
Kurnia, 2021), the EA lacks a theoretical framework. Based
on the various theories, it is essential to analyze the
organization's interaction through EA artifacts, followed by
network theory, boundary object theory, and cognitive fit
theory. Most viewpoints analyze the EA, which is crucial for
understanding the interaction between IT and improving the
IS planning and strategic decision-making process.
According to authors (Kotusev & Kurnia, 2021), the EA
framework has a direct limitation in terms of creativity.
Others, including Tamm et al., discussed the EAas a method
for integrating various technologies related to maintaining
organizational adaptability. This research paper discusses
how technological environments should determine the
balance among EA performance. (Tamm et al., 2022; Glaser
et al., 2025). It is a simple technique for literature analysis of
the adoptability of EA frameworks, which has the
conventional method of stable contexts. Following the
various research scholars, who discussed the EA and
presented innovative ideas from an organizational
perspective. (Sadeghi, 2018). Most digital companies are
unsustainable, yet they understand the new modifications,
including various technologies like AI, IoT, and blockchain.
(Nhabomba et al., 2025).
The role of EA is to serve as the sustainable management
region, adhering to strict environmental guidelines.
According to the European Union, the Sustainable
Development Goals are used to create both types of digital
transformation and ecological compliance. (Chauhan &
Bhatia, 2025; Beese et al., 2023). Conversely, in regions with
less stringent regulations, such as certain Asian countries,
digital transformation efforts tend to overlook sustainability
(Nosova et al., 2021; Odionu et al., 2024). This suggests that
sustainability is becoming an essential consideration in EA;
however, its adoption is largely ineffective due to a region’s
regulatory climate and societal attitudes towards
environmental concerns. According to the authors Zhang et
al.,2024;Goerzig&Bauernhansl,2018) describetheimpacts
of digital adoption on productivity based on economic
development, which consists of the digital media phase.
Economic growth supported the analysis of digitalization
developed in the region, particularly in terms of its impact on
digital industrialization. (Zhang et al., 2024).
III. A CONCEPTUAL MODEL FOR IMPROVING BUSINESS IT
ALIGNMENT THROUGH ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE IN
DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION CONTEXTS
The conceptual model, which focuses on improving Business
IT Alignment (BITA) through Enterprise Architecture (EA)
during digital transformations, draws upon numerous
theoretical frameworks to provide a thorough explanation.
Institutional Theory focuses on external constraints,
including competition, technological disruptions, and
legislation, that influence a business's decision to adopt
Enterprise Architecture for gaining legitimacy and
adaptiveness. (Rehman et al.,2024).The StrategicAlignment
Model (SAM) serves as the primary framework showcasing
the role of EA in integrating business and IT activities to
ensure strategic alignment and functional integration.
Dynamic Capabilities Theory (DCT) explains how EA
increases agility within organizations by enabling the
detection of opportunities, innovative resource allocation,
and the ability to shift resources in fast-changing
environments. (Nie & Liu, 2024; Wang & Zhang, 2025).
Sociotechnical Systems Theory (STS), which seeks to ensure
that technological systems evolve simultaneously with
human systems, emphasizes the importance of coordinating
the human, procedural, and technological components of EA
to sustain effectiveness and efficiency. Finally, the Resource-
Based View (RBV) perceives EA and IT resources as
strategic assets that could provide a sustained competitive
advantage for the firm by fostering innovation, delivering
value, and enhancing the firm’s performance over time.
(Bhattacharya, 2018). This theoretical framework illustrates
that EAserves as a mediator between the pressures of digital
transformation and the alignment results, allowing firms to
progressively and systematically enhance their BITA, agility,
and competitiveness in turbulent environments. (Henderson
& Venkatraman, 1994).

--- PAGE 4 ---
Akhil John Mampilly, Dr. Chithirai Pon Selvan and Dr. Divya Midhunchakkaravarthy
IJISS Vol.16 No.1 January-March 2026 557
3.1 Strategic Alignment Model
Fig. 1 Strategic Alignment Model
Fig. 1 illustrates the synergy between IT and other
departments within a company, as shown by the strategic
alignment model. From the model, we gather that IT and
business strategies must be in “strategic fit” to be aligned.
Also, the convergence of the two domains, IT and business,
entails their infrastructures and processes, where the business
IT infrastructure is functionally aligned with the business
infrastructure. (Ahriz et al., 2018). This is to ensure that IT
resources are used effectively to reach business goals. The
figure illustrates the central role of strategic fit and functional
integration for the success of the entire firm.
3.2 Conceptual Framework for Research Model
Fig. 2 Conceptual Framework for Research Model
The Above (Fig. 2) discusses how enterprise architecture
should be served through a mediator between the digital
transformation driver and enhanced for business in IT
Alignment, which encompasses multiple frameworks. The
Institutional theoryprimarilyfocuses on the external pressure
driving digital initiatives, and the Strategic alignment model
is used to ensure business alignment of IT strategies.
Dynamic capability theory primarily focuses on how
organizations adapt to innovation in response to various
changing conditions. STS mainly describes the human,
social, and technical dimensions, and RBV defines the
effective use of organizational resources and capabilities. To
combine all these frameworks complements each other and
provides offers through a multi-lens perspective, followed by
EA, which should absorb institutional pressure, align
strategic priorities, and ensure sociotechnical balance and
leverage resources.
3.2.1 Digital Transformation Drivers (Institutional Theory)
Transformative technologies, evolving consumer
preferences, market competition, and even regulatory
policies are all factors that prompt enterprises to rethink how
IT supports the implementation of their business strategies.
(Wang & Zhang, 2025). This phenomenon is illuminated by
Institutional Theory, which argues external organizational
constraints tend to shape the practices of organizations,
driving them to adopt Enterprise Architecture to ensure they
remain relevant, flexible, competitive, and sustain
organizational integrity. In this case, digital transformation
drivers are the socio-political and macroeconomic forces that
necessitate higher Business-IT Alignment, or BITA. (Sun et
al., 2025).
Enterprise
(Domains and interactions)
Strategic fit
IT domain
Integration
Strategic fit
Business domain
Functional
Business
infrastructure and
processes
Business
strategy
IT
infrastructure and
processes
IT strategy
Digital Transformation Drivers
(Institutional Theory)
EnterpriseArchitecture
(Mediator)
StrategicAlignment (SAM)
Dynamic Capabilities (DCT)
Sociotechnical Systems (STS)
Resource-Based View (RBV)
Enhanced BITA
Agility & Innovation
Value Realization &
Competitiveness

--- PAGE 5 ---
A Theoretical Integration of Enterprise Architecture Frameworks for Business-It Alignment
558 IJISS Vol.16 No.1 January-March 2026
3.2.2 Enterprise Architecture (Mediator)
Enterprise Architecture (Fig 2) serves as the basic mediator
that connects a business strategy with its supporting IT
functions. Also known as ‘IT Architecture’ or ‘Enterprise
Architecture Planning,’EAemploys a systematic approach to
ensure technological expenditures in a company are in line
with its business objectives, making EA an essential enabler
in the context of digital transformation. EA’s mediating role
is founded on a variety of different theories. The Strategic
Alignment Model (SAM) illustrates how EA transforms
strategic objectives into functional and strategic IT-enabled
processes. Dynamic Capabilities Theory (DCT) focuses on
the business EA's role in responding to change by enhancing
the identification of opportunities, innovative ideas, and the
concept of resource reallocation, known as business
flexibility. Sociotechnical SystemsTheory (STS) emphasizes
the integrative role of EA, where people, processes, and
technology are seamlessly combined to ensure that digital
transformation efforts are both technically sound and socially
acceptable. The Resource-Based View (RBV) of EA IT
focuses on viewing EA and IT capabilities as strategic
resources that, when properly managed, can accrue sustained
value and a competitive advantage. These diverse
perspectives illustrate the various ways in which order can be
maintained with EA in the background.
3.2.3 Enhanced Bita
The right side of the conceptual framework focuses on the
outcomes expected from employing EA in relation to the
motivations for digital transformation. The pivotal objective
is to achieve improved Business IT Alignment, which
indicates that IT systems and capabilities fully support the
business strategy and operational requirements. In addition to
alignment, EA fosters increased organizational agility and
innovation, enabling the business to quickly adapt to
technological advances and market shifts, while also driving
innovation in its offerings. EA also helps firms unlock value
and remain competitive by enabling better resource
allocation, increasing customer satisfaction, and maintaining
strong performance over time. These outcomes illustrate the
advantages EA provides, which is rooted in various theories,
enabling firms to integrate IT with business processes and
succeed in turbulent and complex digitally transformed
environments. The overarching progression shown in the
conceptual framework illustrates the flow from external
factors to strategic outcomes. Institutional factors driving
digital transformation create the need for alignment. EA
serves as the intermediary that assimilates these factors into
the systemic integration of business and IT. This process
employs the Strategic Alignment Model, Dynamic
Capabilities Theory, Sociotechnical Systems Theory, and the
Resource-Based View. Proper application of EA facilitates
improved BITA, enhanced flexibility, innovation, and
sustained value creation. This comprehensive flow illustrates
that the effectiveness of alignment and the success of the
transformation are contingent upon the firm’s utilization of
EAinbalancingexternalrequirementswithinternalgoalsand
resources.
3.2.4 Theoretical Analysis Model
Fig. 3 Theoretical Analysis Model
The model Fig: 3 demonstrates the effect of skillful changes
on performance within an organization. Organizational
change initiatives are categorized into two types: exploitative
transformation and explorative transformation. The former
concentrates on the fine-tuning and optimization of
prevailing processes, while the latter prioritizes innovation
and the exploration of new ideas. Both of these approaches
yield dynamic capabilities such as green innovation, social
responsibility, and effective management. These
competencies serve as intermediaries that enhance the
connection between transformation initiatives and
performance outcomes, evaluated across environmental,
social, and governance dimensions. The arrows reflect the
hypothesized paths, with benchmark analysis focusing on
direct links and mediation path analysis investigating the
indirect impact of dynamic capabilities in connecting
transformation efforts to organizational performance.
IV. METHODOLOGY
This study utilizes a mixed-methods approach, combining
qualitative and quantitative techniques, to examine and
reinforce theoretical frameworks about the role of Enterprise
Architecture (EA) in enhancing Business-IT Alignment
Exploitative
transformation
Governance score
Social score
H2:
Mediation
path analysis
Exploitative
transformation
Digital transformation
Environmental score
ESG performance
Operational
management
Social responsibility
Green innovation
Dynamic capabilities
H1: Benchmark analysis

--- PAGE 6 ---
Akhil John Mampilly, Dr. Chithirai Pon Selvan and Dr. Divya Midhunchakkaravarthy
IJISS Vol.16 No.1 January-March 2026 559
(BITA) within the realm of digital transformation. A
systematic literature review (SLR) of scholarly articles,
books, and practitioner frameworks, such as TOGAF and
Zachman, is performed to identify critical constructs and
develop a conceptual model. The model integrates the
Strategic Alignment Model (SAM), Dynamic Capabilities
Theory (DCT), Sociotechnical Systems Theory (STS),
Resource-Based View (RBV), and Institutional Theory to
illustrate how EA links the factors driving digital
transformation with organizational outcomes, including
agility, innovation, and competitiveness. To explore the
relationships between constructs and assess the strength of
the conceptual framework, Structural Equation Modeling
(SEM) is suggested for empirical validation. (Jasim &
Mustafa, 2022; Wang & Zhang, 2025). The primary
qualitative analysis included a methodological gap based on
future studies to capture the organizational insights. The
quantitative research primarily focused on SEM for
validating the conceptual model. This provides the various
offers to test the relationship between the current
methodologyandspecifiesthedatacollectiondesign(Sample
frame, population, data collection). Also, statistical analyses
such as data cleaning, descriptive statistics, regression,
hypothesis testing, and SEM were performed using SPSS to
ensure the results are trustworthy and dependable. This
methodology combines the synthesis of theories and modern
statistical approaches, providing not only a robust conceptual
framework but also adding empirical rigor, which facilitates
both theoretical and practical contributions in the context of
digital transformation.
4.1 Sample Demographic Information
TABLE I SAMPLE DEMOGRAPHIC INFORMATION
Demographic Information
Gender Male
Female
Age Group Below 25 Years
25-34 Years
35-44 Years
45-54 Years
55 Years and Above
Educational Qualification Certificate
Diploma
Bachelor Degree
Master Degree
Doctoral Degree
Current role with the
Organization
CEO/Top Management
CIO/IT Director
Business Manager/Department
Head
IT manager/System Architect
Others
What is the size of your
Organization
Micro (1-9 employees)
Small (10-50 employees)
Medium (51-250 employees)
Large (251+ employees)
Experiences 1 to 2 Years
3 to 5 Years
6 to 15 Years
Above 15 years
Income Status RM10000
RM 15000 to RM 20000
RM 25000 to RM 30000
Above RM 35000
The demographic characteristics of the responders, as
detailed in TABLE I, encompass a broader spectrum,
including gender, age, education, professional role,
organizational size, work experience, and income level.
There is a reasonable balance of younger and older
respondents, as both male and female participants fall within
the age range of 25 to over 55. With the responders holding
educational qualifications ranging from certificates and
diplomas to bachelor's, master's, and doctoral degrees, there
is a diverse academic background among them. Survey
responders also hold diverse organizational positions, which
include, but are not limited to: CEOs, CIOs, business
managers, and IT managers. This demonstrates that the study
encompasses both strategic and operational perspectives.
Micro, small, medium, and big businesses are represented,
and professional experience ranges from 1-2 years to over 15
years, covering both early-career and highly seasoned
experts. Finally, the variety in income levels indicates that the
sample comprises individuals from diverse economic
backgrounds, which helps us gain a clearer picture of the
study population. This research primarily focused on the
operating organization in Malaysia, using the Malaysian
Ringgit as the currency for this study. Demographic
information from the Malaysian enterprises across different
operational sizes and roles was included in the data
collection. This is the main logic for using it as a local
currency.
4.2 Data Analysis & Interpretation
4.2.1 Objective-1
were found, particularly between organizational performance
(v1), decision-making (v2), and market competitiveness (v3),
implying that aligning IT strategy improves decision-making
processes as well as the organization's ability to compete in
the market. Also, financial performance (v6) and customer
happiness (v7) are both strongly related to alignment, which
means that better alignment leads to better financial results
and a better customer experience. Better resource allocation
(v4) and communication (v5) between IT and business teams
make agility (v8) better, which makes the company more
responsivetochangesinthemarket.Butseveralbigproblems
were found, such as problems (v9) with alignment, people
(v10) not wanting to change, and not having enough trained
IT workers (v11), all of which make the alignment process
harder. Equally important are a coherent strategy for digital
transformation and enhanced cross-departmental
collaboration for streamlining alignment processes.
Alignment is greatly enhanced through the use of agile
techniques. Overall, the analysis underscores the importance
of strategic alignment between IT and business objectives in
relation to organizational performance, identifying
communication, resource allocation, and collaboration as

--- PAGE 7 ---
A Theoretical Integration of Enterprise Architecture Frameworks for Business-It Alignment
560 IJISS Vol.16 No.1 January-March 2026
primary enabling factors, andchange aversion as well as gaps
in requisite skills as hurdles to success.
Fig. 4 SEM Analysis of Optimizing IT Strategy Alignment through
Organizational Behavior and Effective Solutions
The Structural Equation Modeling (SEM) (Fig 4) research
reveals significant relationships between various components
of aligning IT strategy with business goals and their impact
on organizational performance. Strong positive connections
CMIN
TABLE II OUTPUT SUMMARY OF CMIN
Model NPAR CMIN DF P CMIN/DF
Default
model (DM)
21 83.125 24 .000 3.464
Saturated
model (SM)
45 .000 0
Independence
model (IM)
9 128.038 36 .000 3.557
To interpretTABLE II above, the Chi-Square Goodness ofFit
(CMIN)providessome criticalquantitativeindicatorsonhow
well models integrate IT disciplines in strategic alignment
with the business frameworks. The CMIN value for the
Default model is 83.125 with 24 DF (p = 0.000). This model
CMIN value is statistically significant. Also, the CMIN/DF
ratio of 3.464 is within the acceptable range of 2 to 5,
confirming a reasonable fit between model and data. For
comparison, the Saturated model, which is a perfect fit, has a
CMIN value of 0.000, indicating no residuals and thus an
optimal fit to the data. The Independence model, which
suggests no relationship between the variables, has a CMIN
of 128.038 with 36 DF, p=0.000, which is precisely what was
expected, a good fit. The CMIN/DF ratio of 3.557, though
still within the acceptable range, indicates the model is not
performing as well as the Default model. In summary, the
Default model's fit is good, making it the best for exploring
the relationship between IT plans and business objectives.
Conversely, the Independence model significantly
underperforms the Default model.
4.2.2 Objective-2
Enterprise architecture (EA) (Fig 5) stands out in aligning IT
with business objectives and enhances internal
communication, decision-making, and operational
effectiveness. EA helps optimize operational processes,
reducing redundancy and accelerating the realization of IT
solution value, with effectiveness ratings between 1.90 and
2.06. EA promotes IT investment alignment, nurtures
business goal achievement, supports digital transformation,
fosterstheadoptionofemergingtechnologieslikeAIandIoT,
and supports evolving IT infrastructure needs. EA promotes
interdepartmental collaboration, organizational adaptability,
and responsiveness to market changes. This promotes
effective digital transformation and business growth.

--- PAGE 8 ---
Akhil John Mampilly, Dr. Chithirai Pon Selvan and Dr. Divya Midhunchakkaravarthy
IJISS Vol.16 No.1 January-March 2026 561
Fig. 5 SEM Analysis of Role of Enterprise Architecture (EA)
CMIN
TABLE III OUTPUT SUMMARY OF CMIN
Model NPAR CMIN DF P CMIN/DF
DM 38 181.470 82 .000 2.213
SM 120 .000 0
IM 15 241.332 105 .000 2.298
To interpret the above TABLE III represents the CMIN (Chi-
Square Minimum) statistics, which show how well the model
fits in structural equation modeling. The chi-square value for
the Default Model is 181.470, which means it is statistically
significant. It has 82 degrees of freedom (DF) and a p-value
of 0.000. The CMIN/DF ratio of 2.213 shows a moderate fit,
as ratios between 2 and 3 usually mean an adequate fit. The
Saturated Model has a CMIN of 0.000 and 0 degrees of
freedom, indicating a perfect match to the data, as expected.
The Independence Model, on the other hand, has a CMIN of
241.332, 105 degrees of freedom, and a p-value of 0.000,
indicating a good fit. The CMIN/DF ratio for this model is
2.298, which is a little higher than the Default Model but still
in the acceptable range. Overall, the Default Model provides
a decent match, the Saturated Model entirely fits the data, and
the Independence Model provides a less favorable, but still
acceptable fit.
4.2.3 OBJECTIVE-3
Fig. 6 SEM Analysis of Review and assess various theoretical models and frameworks.

--- PAGE 9 ---
A Theoretical Integration of Enterprise Architecture Frameworks for Business-It Alignment
562 IJISS Vol.16 No.1 January-March 2026
The Strategic Alignment Model (SAM) (Fig. 6) has helped
the company bridge the gap between its IT and business
strategies, which is beneficial (V6: 2.24). Over time,
alignment has improved, resulting in increased innovation
and competitive advantage (V10: 1.80), as well as improved
decision-making and resource allocation (V7: 1.62). Digital
transformationframeworks have beensuccessfully utilized to
amalgamate technology with company strategies, hence
enhancing organizational effectiveness (V3: 1.94, V8: 1.62).
The corporation also routinely analyzes and improves its IT-
business alignment strategy based on these theoretical
frameworks (V4: 1.94), which helps it continually improve.
However, there are still obstacles in adapting SAM and other
theoretical models to real-world scenarios. These models fail
to address the organization's structural complexities or the
rapid changes in technology and market conditions, which is
why they are not widely adopted (V13: -2.05), and people are
resistant to embracing them (V12: -0.10, V14: -2.24). The
organization also struggles to adapt these frameworks to its
changing business demands and IT landscape, which makes
it less flexible (V15: -1.96). Even with these problems, it's
evident how SAM helps alignbusinessand IT(V5: 1.96), and
the company still utilizes these frameworks to inform its
strategic decisions.
FMIN
TABLE IV OUTPUT SUMMARY OF FMIN
Model FMIN F0 LO 90 HI 90
DM .600 .434 .336 .548
SM .000 .000 .000 .000
IM .832 .622 .504 .755
The FMIN (TABLE IV) values indicate the extent to which
the theoretical frameworks for using enterprise architecture
to improve business-IT alignment align with the observed
data during the digital transformation. The Default Model,
which has an FMIN value of 0.600, shows that the
frameworks utilized for alignment are a good fit for the
organization's transformation initiatives. The F0 value of
0.434 further supports this by showing the observed fit
statistic. The LO 90 and HI 90 values (0.336 and 0.548,
respectively) illustrate the range in which the actual FMIN
value may fall with 90% confidence, which means there is an
opportunity for improvement. The Saturated Model value of
0.000, on the other hand, is a perfect fit but is only helpful as
a comparison point. The Independence Model, with a higher
FMIN value of 0.832, demonstrates a poor fit, underlining
that theoretical frameworks cannot be effective without
taking into account the interdependencies between business
and IT alignment and enterprise architecture. We must
consider these interdependencies to ensure more successful
alignment and transformation, as the Default and
Independence models differ significantly. In conclusion, the
Default Model fits rather well, but there is still room for
improvement to make sure that business and IT strategies
work better together throughout digital transformation.
4.2.4 OBJECTIVE-4
Fig. 7 SEM Analysis of Identify the Key Challenges

--- PAGE 10 ---
Akhil John Mampilly, Dr. Chithirai Pon Selvan and Dr. Divya Midhunchakkaravarthy
IJISS Vol.16 No.1 January-March 2026 563
Fig. 7 presents a structural equation model featuring several
key variables (V1 to V15) that influence the effective
integration of IT and business during digital transformation.
V1 (-.15) indicates that poor communication between IT and
business leaders significantly hinders their ability to work
together effectively. V2 (-.30) identifies resistance to change
as a significant impediment to successful alignment, but V3
(2.00) demonstrates that technical improvements outpace the
organization's capacity to align IT with changing business
goals.V4(-.17)indicatesthatcompanyleaderslacksufficient
skills and expertise in IT and digital transformation,
exacerbating alignment problems. V5 (-.11) states that when
business goals and IT capabilities don't align, it hinders
digital transformation and reduces efficiency. V6 (1.89)
emphasizes the importance of organizational culture, noting
that a supportive culture facilitates effective teamwork. V7
(2.15) supports this by stating that an innovation-driven
culture is ideal for integrating IT with business strategies. V8
(2.07) emphasizes the importance of senior management
commitment,anecessityforsuccessfuldigitaltransformation
projects. V9 (-.17) views disengagement from IT and from
business teams as a significant factor of misalignment. V10
(1.92) notes that working in silos impedes strategic
alignment. V11 (1.86) suggests that frameworks such as the
Strategic Alignment Model (SAM) support the intertwining
of IT and business objectives. V12 (2.02) states that digital
transformation frameworks like the Capability Maturity
Model (CMM) aligns initiatives particularly well. V13 (2.01)
proposes that a balance of formal frameworks and informal
practical insights (for example, feedback loops) can help
businesses sustain alignment over time. V14 (1.87) suggests
that external IT business consultants or specialists can assist
in identifying the most effective strategies for integrating
business processes with IT. Finally, V15 (2.02) emphasizes
the importance of Enterprise Architecture (EA) in offering
structure and clarity to digital transformation efforts and
ensuring effective alignment of ITand business strategy.This
approach emphasizes the multifaceted issue of the integration
of business strategy with IT and illustrates the interplay of
these IT and organizational factors to enhance performance.
CMIN
TABLE V OUTPUT SUMMARY OF CMIN
Model NPAR CMIN DF P CMIN/DF
DM 34 443.177 86 .000 5.153
SM 120 .000 0
IM 15 570.748 105 .000 5.436
To interpret TABLE V, the CMIN (Chi-Square Minimum)
values for the models show how well they match the data.
The Default Model has a CMIN value of 443.177 with 86
degrees of freedom, giving in a CMIN/DF ratio of 5.153,
which is greater than the standard threshold of 3, suggesting
that the model and data do not fit well together.This indicates
that the model might not properly illustrate how the data is
connected, so it needs to be changed more. The Saturated
Model, which indicates a perfect match, has a CMIN of 0.000
and no degrees of freedom, suggesting that it completely
reproduces the data but is unsuitable for practical study.
Lastly, the Independence Model has a CMIN of 570.748 and
105 degrees of freedom. This means that it also has a
CMIN/DF ratio of 5.436, indicating that it doesn't fit well,
similar to the default model. This model doesn't take into
account any connections between the variables, and the high
CMIN/DF ratio shows that it doesn't fit the data very well.
Overall, both the Default Model and Independence Model
reveal poor fit, and while the Saturated Model verifies a
perfectfit,itisnotpracticalforreal-worldmodeling,pointing
to the need for further development of the models utilized.
4.2.5 Factor Analysis
TABLE VI OPTIMIZING IT STRATEGY ALIGNMENT THROUGH ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR AND EFFECTIVE SOLUTIONS
Alignment of
IT Strategies
Aligning IT initiatives with business goals makes the organization work better. (V1) 2.02
Aligning IT plans with business goals makes it easier for people in the company to make decisions. 1.97
Businesses can get an advantage in the market by coordinating their information technology strategy with
their overall plans. (V3)
1.99
Aligning IT strategies with business goals has resulted in more effective resource allocation and
prioritization.
1.94
IT and business teams work closely together to align their strategies effectively. (V5) 1.92
Organizational
Behavior
Aligning IT strategies with business goals has boosted financial performance. (V6) 0.97
Matching IT strategies with business goals has led to improved customer satisfaction. (V7) 1.99
Aligning IT with the business has made the organization more agile and responsive to market changes. (V8) 1.99
Challenges Our organization faces major obstacles in syncing IT strategies with business goals. (V9) 1.95
Resistance to change is a significant barrier to aligning IT and business strategies. (V10) 0.15
The lack of skilled IT professionals hampers the alignment of IT strategies with business objectives. (V11) 0.2
Solution and
Improvements
Creating a clear roadmap for digital transformation can improve alignment between IT and business
strategies. (V12)
1.97
Increased cross-functional collaboration between IT and business teams is essential for better alignment.
(V13)
1.95
The adoption of agile methodologies will help improve the alignment of IT strategies with business
objectives. (V14)
1.92

--- PAGE 11 ---
A Theoretical Integration of Enterprise Architecture Frameworks for Business-It Alignment
564 IJISS Vol.16 No.1 January-March 2026
The questionnaire demonstrates that aligning IT plans
(TABLE VI) with business objectives improves
organizational performance, decision-making, and
competitiveness. But things like not wanting to change and
nothavingenoughtrainedITworkersmakealignmentharder.
Creating a digital transformation strategy, encouraging
cooperation across departments, and using agile methods are
allthoughttobeimportantstepstowardbetteraligningITand
business strategies.
TheTABLEVII illustrates the role of EnterpriseArchitecture
(EA) in facilitating digital transformation and highlights the
importance of aligning IT plans with company objectives.
According to respondents, EA is essential for making sure
that IT systems and business strategy are in sync (v1, v2).
EnterpriseArchitecture, combined with facilitated alignment,
enhances business strategy execution (V3). It provides a
guarantee that IT expenditure aligns with business priorities
(V4), which in turn improves communication between ITand
business teams (V5). Following the term of efficacy, EA has
been proven to analyze redundancies effectively (V6).
Streamline process as (V7), decision making (V8), and
resource use as (V10). EA facilitates the digital
transformation through the adoption of new technologies
(V12), thereby increasingtheorganization's flexibility (V13).
This helps IT infrastructure grow by meeting the rising needs
(V14) and encourages the department to connect through
transformation projects (V15).
TABLE VII ROLE OF ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE (EA) IN ALIGNING BUSINESS STRATEGIES WITH IT SYSTEMS AND ITS
EFFECTIVENESS IN STREAMLINING OPERATIONS, REDUCING INEFFICIENCIES, AND SUPPORTING DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION
EFFORTS
Role of enterprise
architecture
Our organization relieson EnterpriseArchitecture(EA) to ensurethat IT strategiesalign with
business goals.
1.99
Our organization’s leadership views Enterprise Architecture (EA) as a critical component for
aligning IT systems with business strategies. (v2)
2.04
The alignment of IT strategies with business objectives through EA has led to more effective
execution of business strategies. (v3)
1.97
EA ensures IT investments align directly with business priorities. 2.00
Communication between IT and business teams has improved due to the implementation of
Enterprise Architecture (EA). (v5)
1.93
Effectiveness Enterprise Architecture (EA) has been effective in reducing redundancies and inefficiencies
in our IT infrastructure. (v6)
2.00
Through EA, our organization has been able to streamline operations and improve
coordination between IT and business functions. (v7)
1.90
The implementation of EA has led to faster decision-making and more efficient use of
resources. (v8)
2.08
EA has contributed to reducing the time required to implement new IT solutions or changes
in the organization. (v9)
1.93
Enterprise Architecture (EA) has helped to identify and eliminate unnecessary IT
investments, reducing operational costs. (v10)
2.00
Digital
Transformation and
Organizational
Agility
Enterprise Architecture (EA) has been instrumental in supporting our organization’s digital
transformation efforts. (v11)
2.03
EA hashelpedour organization identify and integrate emerging technologies(e.g., AI, cloud,
IoT) to drive digital transformation. (v12)
2.06
Theuseof EAhasenabledourorganization to remain agileand responsiveto market changes
and customer demands. (v13)
1.99
Through EA, our organization has been able to scale IT infrastructure to meet the increasing
demands of digital transformation. (v14)
2.01
EA has played a key role in improving collaboration across different departments (IT,
business, and leadership) during digital transformation projects. (v15)
2.05
The TABLE VIII compares numerous theoretical models and
frameworks for aligning IT and business strategies within an
organization. Most people are familiar with and understand
the SAM, which is used to analyze IT business
operations.(V1, V5). The firm also employs specialized IT-
business alignment theories to assist strategic decisions (V2),
and digital transformation frameworks have been utilized to
align business and IT objectives (V3) effectively. However,
issues remain, such as the difficulties in adapting theoretical
models to real-world contexts (V11) and the limitations of
existing frameworks in dealing with the intricacies of the
organization's structure. People also don't want to use these
frameworks because they find them too complicated or
struggle to understand them (V13). Even with these
problems, using theoretical frameworks has helped with
making better decisions, allocating resources (V7), and
coming up with new ideas (V10). However, it hasn't fully
taken into consideration how quickly technology evolves or
how company demands change (V14, V15). Though
theoretical models have had some useful applications, the
organization is encountering difficulties in adjusting them to
its ever-changing surroundings.
The TABLE IX highlights some of the main challenges that
arise when creating business plans that integrate with IT
systems. Difficulty in communicating between IT and
business leadership (V1) and aversion to change (V2) are two
major obstacles to alignment in the digital transformation

--- PAGE 12 ---
Akhil John Mampilly, Dr. Chithirai Pon Selvan and Dr. Divya Midhunchakkaravarthy
IJISS Vol.16 No.1 January-March 2026 565
process. A lack of understanding of information technology
and digital transformation among company executives (V4)
and thequickening speed oftechnical change (V3) both make
alignment more difficult. When business goals and IT
capabilities don't align (V5), tasks are completed less
efficiently and take longer. Strong innovation culture (V7),
dedication from senior management (V8), and collaboration
amongst teams (V9) are essential success elements in solving
these problems, which are influenced by organizational
culture. But departments that work in silos (V10) also make
it harder to get everyone on the same page. Theoretical
frameworks, including the Strategic Alignment Model
(SAM) (V11) and digital transformation frameworks like the
Capability Maturity Model (CMM) (V12), offer significant
advice; nevertheless, a more pragmatic approach that
integrates formal models with feedback loops (V13) is seen
as exceptionally beneficial. To recruit outside consultants
(V14) for analyzing the importance of corporate architecture
(V15), which offers a good way to improve alignment.
TABLE VIII EXAMINE AND EVALUATE DIFFERENT THEORETICAL MODELS AND FRAMEWORKS
Theoretical
Models and
Frameworks
The Strategic Alignment Model (SAM) is widely understood and applied in our organization for aligning IT and business
strategies. (V1)
1.91
We have used specific IT-business alignment theories to guide our organization’s strategic decisions. (V2) 1.90
Digital transformation frameworks have been applied effectively to align business and IT Strategies in our organization.
(V3)
1.96
Our organization regularly reviews and updates its IT-business alignment strategies based on theoretical frameworks. (V4) 1.82
There is a clear understanding of how theoretical models like SAM contribute to business and IT alignment across our
organization. (V5)
2.14
Application and
Effectiveness of
Theoretical
Frameworks
The Strategic Alignment Model (SAM) has significantly helped in bridging the gap between business and IT in our
organization. (V6)
2.24
IT-business alignment theories have provided a structured approach to improve decision-making and resource allocation
in our organization. (V7)
1.98
Digital transformation frameworks have guided the effective integration of technology with business strategies in our
organization. (V8)
1.62
The alignment between IT and business in our organization has been significantly improved through the adoption of
theoretical frameworks. (V9)
1.94
The use of theoretical models for business-IT alignment has led to more innovation and competitive advantage in our
organization. (V10)
1.8
Challenges and
Limitations of
Theoretical
Framework
There are challenges in applying theoretical models like SAM and other IT-business alignment theories to real-world
organizational contexts. (V11)
2.09
Theoretical frameworks for digital transformation often do not fully address the complexities and unique challenges of our
organization’s structure. (V12)
2.16
There is resistance to adopting theoretical models for IT-business alignment within our organization due to a lack of
understanding or perceived complexity. (V13)
2.05
Theoretical frameworks for business-IT alignment do not sufficiently account for rapid changes in technology and market
conditions in our organization. (V14)
1.96
Our organization struggles to adapt existing theoretical models to meet our evolving business needs and IT landscape.
(V15)
1.61
TABLE IX IDENTIFY THE KEY CHALLENGES
Business Strategy
Alignment
Lack of clear communication between IT and business leadership is a significant challenge in aligning IT strategies with
business objectives. (V1)
2.00
Resistance to change within the organization hinders the successful alignment of IT and business strategies during digital
transformation efforts. (V2)
1.86
Thepace of technological advancementsoutpaces the organization'sability to align IT with evolving business goals. (V3) 1.89
Inadequate skills or knowledge of IT and digital transformation among business leaders is a major barrier to alignment.
(V4)
1.94
Misalignment of business priorities and IT capabilities leads to inefficiencies and delays in digital transformation
initiatives. (V5)
1.97
Organizational
Culture
Organizational culture plays a significant role in achieving alignment between IT and business strategies. (V6) 2.17
The culture of innovation within our organization supports the alignment of IT strategies with business objectives. (V7) 2.02
Top management's commitment to IT-business alignment through digital transformation initiatives is crucial for success.
(V8)
2.04
There is a lack of collaboration between business and IT teams, which results in poor alignment and execution of digital
transformation strategies. (V9)
2.07
IT and business departments in our organization often operate in silos, making it difficult to align strategies effectively.
(V10)
1.96
Theoretical Insights Theoretical frameworks such as the Strategic Alignment Model (SAM) provide valuable insights for bridging the gap
between IT and business strategies. (V11)
1.92
Digital transformation frameworks,like the Capability Maturity Model (CMM), are effective tools for guiding businesses
in aligning their IT and business strategies. (V12)
1.86
Using a combination of formal models and practical insights (e.g., feedback loops, iterative assessments) can help
businesses continuously align IT and business strategies. (V13)
2.91
Engaging external consultants or industry experts to advise on best practices for aligning IT and business strategies is an
effective solution. (V14)
2.15
The role of enterprise architecture (EA) in aligning IT and business strategies should be more strongly emphasized to
provide structure and clarity for digital transformation initiatives. (V15)
1.87

--- PAGE 13 ---
A Theoretical Integration of Enterprise Architecture Frameworks for Business-It Alignment
566 IJISS Vol.16 No.1 January-March 2026
V. DISCUSSION
EA (Enterprise Architecture) is essential for ensuring that IT
systems are aligned with business goals through digital
transformation. The above diagram analyzes the various IT
components that collaborate with the different business
functions. This enables people to make better decisions,
leading to IT investments that directly support the business
goals. EA continuously helps to improve the business IT
strategies, followed by the dynamic relation that consists of
nodes and arrows. This helps address the various issues
related to communication gaps and resistance to change.
These types of frameworks are supported by theoretical
knowledge, as seen in the strategic alignment model and
capability maturity model, which ensure that business and IT
programs align through technological improvements. Most
organizations are successful in implementing effective IT
administration driven by digital transformation, which also
enhances their competitive edge through the use of EA-
enabled systems.
VI. CONCLUSION
Most of the organizational analysis of the digital
transformation, followed by the digital age, helps achieve
effective business IT-Alignment (BITA). As a developing
technology, new business models and customer expectations
help to increase the gap between the strategic goals and the
IT capabilities. Enterprise Architecture is a crucial
component in addressing various challenges, providing a
formal framework for unique business needs in IT. Following
the current technology, there is a contribution to the
enhancement of BITA, which is frequently analyzed through
technical or administrative dimensions instead of using
integrated theoretical perspectives. This research primarily
integrates key theoretical frameworks, including the strategic
alignment model, dynamic capability theory, and the
sociotechnical system. These theories provide a holistic
approach to Enterprise Architecture, enhancing business
information technology alignment in dynamic contexts. This
research primarily aimed to improve academic understanding
and provide practical ideas for applying the EA technique to
promote agility, creativity, and value creation. It's also an
analysis of the theoretical linkage and provides related
insights for an actionable device. This also highlights the
EA's strategic role in analyzing the business level through
digital transmission of the completion.
REFERENCES
[1] Ahriz, S.,Benmoussa, N.,ElYamami,A.,Mansouri,K.,&Qbadou,
M. (2018). An Elaboration of a Strategic Alignment Model of
University Information Systems based on SAM Model.
Engineering, Technology & Applied Science Research, 8(1). 2471-
2476. https://doi.org/10.48084/etasr.1696
[2] Alghamdi, H. (2024). Assessing the impact of enterprise
architectureon digitaltransformationsuccess:Aglobalperspective.
Sustainability, 16(20), 8865. https://doi.org/10.3390/su16208865
[3] Andriushchenko, K., Buriachenko, A., Rozhko, O., Lavruk, O.,
Skok, P., Hlushchenko, Y., ... & Kondarevych, V. (2020).
Peculiarities of sustainable development of enterprises in the
context of digital transformation. Entrepreneurship and
sustainability issues, 7(3), 2255.
http://doi.org/10.9770/jesi.2020.7.3(53)
[4] Anthony Jnr, B. (2021). Managing digital transformation of smart
citiesthrough enterprisearchitecture–areviewand researchagenda.
Enterprise Information Systems, 15(3), 299-331.
https://doi.org/10.1080/17517575.2020.1812006
[5] Arasuraja, G. (2025). Integrating Digital Transformation in Global
Marketing Strategies: A Data-Driven Approach to Business
Management and Accounting Analytics. Global Perspectives in
Management, 3(3), 12-17.
[6] Avison, D., Jones, J., Powell, P., & Wilson, D. (2004). Using and
validating the strategic alignment model. The Journal of Strategic
Information Systems, 13(3), 223-246.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis.2004.08.002
[7] Beese, J., Haki, K., Schilling, R., Kraus, M., Aier, S., & Winter, R.
(2023). Strategicalignmentof enterprisearchitecturemanagement–
how portfolios of control mechanisms track a decade of enterprise
transformation at Commerzbank. European journal of information
systems, 32(1), 92-105.
https://doi.org/10.1080/0960085X.2022.2085200
[8] Bhattacharya, P. (2018). Aligning enterprise systems capabilities
with business strategy: An extension of the strategic alignment
model (SAM) using enterprise architecture. Procedia computer
science, 138, 655-662. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2018.10.087
[9] Busch, N. R., & Zalewski,A. (2025).Asystematic literature review
of enterprise architecture evaluation methods. ACM Computing
Surveys, 57(5), 1-36. https://doi.org/10.1145/3706582
[10] Chauhan, P., & Bhatia, A. D. (2025). Digital Transformation in
Public Sector ICT: A Case Study-Based Comparative Analysis.
International Academic Journal of Innovative Research, 12(3), 27-
32. https://doi.org/10.71086/IAJIR/V12I3/IAJIR1222
[11] Demlehner, Q., & Laumer, S. (2020). Why context matters:
Explaining the digital transformation of the manufacturing industry
and the role of the industry’s characteristics in it. Pacific Asia
Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 12(3), 3.
https://doi.org/10.17705/1pais.12303
[12] Glaser, P. L., Sallinger, E., & Bork, D. (2025). The extended EA
ModelSet—aFAIRdataset forresearching and reasoning enterprise
architecturemodelingpractices. SoftwareandSystemsModeling,1-
19.
[13] Goerzig, D., & Bauernhansl, T. (2018). Enterprise architectures for
the digital transformation in small and medium-sized enterprises.
Procedia Cirp, 67, 540-545.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2017.12.257
[14] Hartl, E. (2019, August). A Characterization of Culture Change in
the Context of Digital Transformation. In AMCIS. 1-10.
[15] Henderson, J. C., & Venkatraman, N. (1994). Strategic alignment:
a model for organizational transformation via information
technology. 202-220.
https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780195068061.003.0009
[16] Jasim, B. M., & Mustafa, A. A. (2022). The Impact of Green
Transformational Leadership on Developing the Performance of
Green Products: A Field Study. International Academic Journal of
Social Sciences, 9(2), 194–201.
https://doi.org/10.9756/IAJSS/V9I2/IAJSS0928
[17] Kaidalova,J.,Kurt,S.,&Ulf,S.(2018).Howdigitaltransformation
affects enterprise architecture management–a case study.
International Journal of Information Systems and Project
Management, 6(3), 5-18.
[18] Kotusev, S., & Kurnia, S. (2021).Thetheoretical basis of enterprise
architecture: A critical review and taxonomy of relevant theories.
Journal of Information Technology, 36(3), 275-315.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0268396220977873
[19] Nhabomba, A., Alturas, B., & Alexandre, I. M. (2025). Enterprise
Architecture Assessment and User Satisfaction Model Estimate in
Statistical Organizations of African Countries. The Electronic
Journal of Information Systems in Developing Countries, 91(5),
e70028. https://doi.org/10.1002/isd2.70028

--- PAGE 14 ---
Akhil John Mampilly, Dr. Chithirai Pon Selvan and Dr. Divya Midhunchakkaravarthy
IJISS Vol.16 No.1 January-March 2026 567
[20] Nie, Y., & Liu, F. (2024). Visual Inheritance in the Digital Age:
Image Reconstruction of Shanghai Time-Honored Cosmetics
Brands Under the Influence of Internet of Things. J. Internet Serv.
Inf. Secur., 14(4), 224-233.
https://doi.org/10.58346/JISIS.2024.I4.013
[21] Nosova, S., Norkina, A., Makar, S., & Fadeicheva, G. (2021).
Digital transformation as a new paradigm of economic policy.
Procedia Computer Science, 190, 657-665.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2021.06.077
[22] Odionu, C. S., Adepoju, P. A., Ikwuanusi, U. F., Azubuike, C., &
Sule,A. K. (2024). The role of enterprise architecture in enhancing
digital integration and security in higher education. International
Journal of Engineering Research and Development, 20(12), 392-
398.
[23] Pancote, A., Souza, A., & Veiga, C. P. D. (2025). Enterprise
architecture and building blocks: steering digital transformation in
dynamic environments. Kybernetes. https://doi.org/10.1108/K-02-
2024-0444
[24] Pattij, M., van de Wetering, R., & Kusters, R. (2022). Enhanced
digital transformation supporting capabilities through enterprise
architecture management: A fsQCA perspective. Digital Business,
2(2), 100036. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.digbus.2022.100036
[25] Rehman, Z., Tariq, N., Moqurrab, S. A., Yoo, J., & Srivastava, G.
(2024). Machine learning and internet of things applications in
enterprise architectures: Solutions, challenges, and open issues.
Expert Systems, 41(1), e13467. https://doi.org/10.1111/exsy.13467
[26] Sadeghi, K. (2018). Virtualization and encapsulation dynamic e-
business services in a service-oriented architecture. International
Academic Journal of Science and Engineering, 5(1), 163–169.
https://doi.org/10.9756/IAJSE/V5I1/1810015
[27] Slaiby, W., Bejjani, G., & Noun, R. (2025). Business Management
in the Era of Distributed Networks: Enhancing Organizational
Performance and Innovation in Virtual Teams. Journal of Wireless
Mobile Networks, Ubiquitous Computing, and Dependable
Applications, 16(2). 535–545.
https://doi.org/10.58346/JOWUA.2025.I2.032
[28] Sun, Z., Zhao, L., Mehrotra, A., Salam, M. A., & Yaqub, M. Z.
(2025). Digital transformation and corporate green innovation: An
affordance theory perspective. Business Strategy and the
Environment, 34(1), 433-449.
https://doi.org/10.3390/systems13010043
[29] Tamm, T., Seddon, P. B., & Shanks, G. (2022). How enterprise
architecture leads to organisational benefits. International journal
of information management, 67, 102554.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2022.102554
[30] Vigren, O., & Eriksson, K. (2025).Amultilayer network model for
studying business ecosystems: insights from enterprise
architectures in the real estate sector. Journal of European Real
Estate Research, 18(1), 170-191. https://doi.org/10.1108/JERER-
04-2024-0027
[31] Wang, S., & Zhang, H. (2025). Digital transformation and
innovation performance in small-and medium-sized enterprises: A
systems perspective on the interplay of digital adoption, digital
drive, and digital Culture. Systems, 13(1), 43.
https://doi.org/10.3390/systems13010043
[32] Wang, X., Zhang, Z., & Chun, D. (2025). Resource Bricolage,
Digital Transformation, and Business Model Innovation: Based on
the Conditional Process Analysis of Entrepreneurship.
Systems, 13(5), 355. https://doi.org/10.3390/systems13050355
[33] Zhang,Q.,Wu,P.,Li,R.,&Chen,A.(2024). Digital transformation
and economic growth Efficiency improvement in the Digital media
era: Digitalization of industry or Digital industrialization?.
International Review of Economics & Finance, 92, 667-677.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iref.2024.02.010