--- PAGE 1 ---
625 IJISS Vol.16 No.2 April-June 2026
Indian Journal of Information Sources and Services
ISSN: 2231-6094 (P) Vol.16, No.2, 2026, pp.625-636
© The Research Publication, www.trp.org.in
DOI: https://doi.org/10.51983/ijiss-2026.16.2.63
Assessing the Influence of Organizational Culture and Leadership on the
Effectiveness of Enterprise Architecture in Digital Transformation
Akhil John Mampilly 1*
, Dr. Chithirai Pon Selvan2
and Dr. Divya Midhunchakkaravarthy3
1*
Research Scholar, School of Engineering, Lincoln University College, Petaling Jaya, Malaysia
2
Director of Research, Head of School, Science and Engineering, Curtin University, Dubai, U.A.E
3
Director, Faculty of Computer Science and Multimedia, Lincoln University College,
Petaling Jaya, Malaysia
Email: 1
dr.akhilmampilly@gmail.com, 2
pon.selvan@curtindubai.ac.ae, 3
divya@lincoln.edu.my
ORCID: 1
https://orcid.org/0009-0003-2626-0070, 2
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9295-3340,
3
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8044-1863
(Received 01 April 2026; Revised 04 May 2026, Accepted 15 May 2026; Available online 05 June 2026)
Abstract - Enterprise Architecture (EA) is a key enabler of
digital transformation when IT capabilities are aligned with
business strategies. Its efficacy, however, does not rely on
technical frameworks alone, but it is determined as well by
organizational culture and leadership. This research explores
howorganizational cultureandleadership can shapethesuccess
of EA in the digital transformation. By combining the Strategic
Alignment Model (SAM) and Sociotechnical Systems Theory,
this research examines how cultural values, leadership patterns,
and organizational behaviors affect EA implementation. In a
mixed-method study involving qualitative interviews and
quantitative surveys, 450 IT industry professionals were
sampled and provided valid responses to 400 questions.
Through regression analysis, organizational culture has a
significant influence on the adoption and integration of EA (R2
= 0.9269), and leadership is the factor that perfectly correlates
with digital transformation strategies (R2 = 1). The results
highlight that organizations with a high innovation and
leadership culture devoted to transformation achieve superior
alignment of IT and business objectives, resulting in successful
digital transformation outcomes. The conclusion of this
research provides recommendations applicable in creating a
favorable organizational culture and climate of leadership to
ensure the effectiveness of EA in creating digital change.
Keywords: Enterprise Architecture, Digital Transformation,
Organizational Culture, Leadership, Strategic Alignment
Model, Sociotechnical Systems Theory, Mixed Methods
I. INTRODUCTION
Enterprise Architecture (EA) is becoming a critical factor in
achieving this, as organizations in the rapidly changing
business environment are increasingly going digital to stay
competitive, efficient, and responsive to market changes
(Alghamdi, 2024; Prajogi et al., 2025). EA offers a
framework for structuring the partnership between IT
systems and business goals, but its performance also does not
depend solely on technical solutions; organizational culture
and leadership also play a leading role (Tuyen et al., 2025;
Hasan et al., 2025). An innovative, flexible, and
team-building culture can help personnel interact with
technology, work across departments, and be receptive to
change, thereby enabling the successful incorporation of EA
into business processes (Leso et al., 2023). Leadership is
equally crucial, providing strategic orientation and decision-
making that ensure EA initiatives align with the broader
business purpose. Leaders who consider EA a priority,
demonstrate effective communication, and reinforce cultural
change initiatives are more likely to achieve successful
results in their efforts to transform digitally (Mutonyi et al.,
2022). This research will examine the roles of organizational
culture and leadership in the success of EA in digital
transformation. The study will focus on the enablers and
challenges that influence EA deployment and optimization
by analyzing key cultural attributes, including innovation
orientation, collaboration and adaptability, leadership styles,
and decision-making. It is set up to provide meaningful
guidance on how organizations can leverage culture and
leadership to maximize the success of EA initiatives and
drive significant digital transformation (Nadkar et al., 2023).
Overview of Organizational Culture and Leadership on the
Effectiveness of Enterprise Architecture in Digital
Transformation
The success of Enterprise Architecture (EA) projects,
especially those in digital transformation, largely depends on
organizational culture and leadership. EA is a systematic
approach to integrating business and IT strategies that
enables organizations to streamline business processes and
optimize resource use to achieve their strategic goals
(Shiferaw et al., 2023). Nevertheless, the effective
implementation and realization of EA depend not only on the
technical competence of its implementation but also on the
underlying organizational culture and the leadership
approaches used to drive change (Kassim et al., 2018; Zheng
et al., 2019). Organizational Culture refers to the shared
thinking, values, and behaviors that determine the way
employees in an organization work and embrace change. In
the digital transformation, it is paramount that the culture
promotes innovation, collaboration, and adaptability to
enable effective EA execution (Murudi & Khoza, 2025). The

--- PAGE 2 ---
Akhil John Mampilly, Dr. Chithirai Pon Selvan and Dr. Divya Midhunchakkaravarthy
IJISS Vol.16 No.2 April-June 2026 626
more culturally adaptable and focused on learning an
organization is, the more likely it is to adopt EA as a
mechanism for change. In addition, cultural qualities such as
open communication, trust, and shared vision are important
enablers of cross-functional collaboration, which is critical to
the successful implementation of EA.
The role of leadership in shaping the culture of EA initiatives
and their strategic direction is significant. Leaders can play a
critical role in defining the vision, aligning business and IT
objectives,andmakingcriticaldecisions,whichwilldrivethe
implementation and optimization of EA (Bindel Sibassaha et
al.,2025).TodevelopanEAcultureofsupportbyadvocating
the importance of EA, providing the required resources, and
fostering a supportive climate that promotes innovation and
experimentation (Piłat, 2024). Leadership can also facilitate
resistance to change by managing concerns, conveying the
benefits of EA, and ensuring that the organization's
leadership style aligns with the digital transformation goals.
Transformational leadership, or the emphasis on motivating
and inspiring employees, can increase employees' interest in
EA initiatives and make them more willing to adopt them.
Collectively, organizational culture and leadership determine
EA success in digital transformation by creating the setting
in which it is carried out. A solid organizational culture that
encourages innovation and collaboration, and strong
leadership that provides clear direction and strategic focus,
can greatly improve the effectiveness of EA. As more
organizations rely on EA to guide their digital transformation
initiatives, the interaction among culture, leadership, and EA
success becomes essential to long-term success.
Problem Statement
Enterprise Architecture (EA) plays a pivotal role in aligning
IT capabilities with business strategies during digital
transformation. Nevertheless, it does not rely solely on its
technical structure to succeed, but also on organizational
attributes, including culture and leadership. The effects of
cultural values, leadership modes, and organizational
behaviors on the EA effectiveness are under-researched.
Misalignment between technological infrastructure and the
organizational environment is a major challenge to EA
adoption. This research investigates the influence of
organizational culture and leadership on the effectiveness of
EA initiatives in digital transformation, as well as the main
enablers and barriers to their implementation and
optimization.
Scope of the Research
This research will have a scope that examines how
organizational culture and leadership affect the effectiveness
of Enterprise Architecture (EA) in driving digital
transformation. Particularly, the research paper dwells upon
the manner in which cultural factors like the innovation
orientation, collaboration, and adaptability, as well as
leadership styles and decision-making, influence adoption,
implementation, as well as optimization of EA frameworks.
The study will measure the value of organizational culture
and leadership in terms of their relevance to aligning IT and
business goals, ultimately driving the success of digital
transformation initiatives. This study seeks to identify the
critical issues and facilitators in organizations that contribute
to or hinder the effectiveness of EA, using a mixed-methods
approach that includes qualitative interviews and quantitative
surveys. The conclusions will have practical implications for
organizations that aim to foster a culture and leadership
conducive to optimizing the impact of EA on digital
transformation.
Significance of the Study
This research is important because it could fill the gap
between technical frameworks and organizational dynamics,
enabling the effective implementation of Enterprise
Architecture (EA) during digital transformation. Although
many studies have focused on technical aspects of EA, this
paper highlights that little has been done to understand how
organizational culture and leadership can affect EA
outcomes. Exploring the role of cultural values like
innovation, collaboration, and adaptability in EA adoption
and optimization, and the leadership styles via the research,
one can develop an essential understanding of the
organizational forces that support or hinder the successful
digital transformation. The results will help organizations
appreciate the need to align leadership commitment with an
enabling organizational culture to ensure that EA initiatives
are most successful. Finally, the study will also provide
operational guidelines for organizations to establish a
friendly atmosphere towards EA, so that any digital
transformation initiative will be more sustainable and
effective.
Research Objective
• Examine the impact of organizational culture on the
adoption,implementation,andintegrationofenterprise
architecture frameworks in organizations undergoing
digital transformation.
• Evaluate the role of leadershipin driving the alignment
between enterprise architecture and digital
transformation strategies, focusing on leadership
styles, decision-making,andsupport for EA initiatives.
• Analyze the relationship between cultural attributes
(such as innovation orientation, collaboration, and
adaptability) and the success of EA initiatives in
fostering digital transformation.
• To identify the various challenges connected to
organizational culture and leadership that influence the
successful deployment and optimization of the
enterprise architecture in the context of digital
transformation.
Research Hypothesis
OB-1: H0: Organizational culture has no significant impact
on the adoption, implementation, and integration of
enterprise architecture frameworks in organizations
undergoing digital transformation.

--- PAGE 3 ---
Assessing the Influence of Organizational Culture and Leadership on the Effectiveness of Enterprise Architecture in Digital Transformation
627 IJISS Vol.16 No.2 April-June 2026
OB-1: H1: Organizational culture significantly influences the
adoption,execution,andintegrationofenterprisearchitecture
frameworks in organizations undergoing digital
transformation.
OB-2: H0: Leadership has no significant impact on the
alignment between enterprise architecture and digital
transformation strategies.
OB-2: H1: Leadership significantly influences the alignment
between enterprise architecture and digital transformation
strategies.
OB-3: H0: Cultural attributes (innovation orientation,
collaboration, and adaptability) have no significant
relationship with the success of enterprise architecture (EA)
initiatives in fostering digital transformation.
OB-3: H1: Cultural attributes (innovation orientation,
collaboration, and adaptability) significantly contribute to the
success of enterprise architecture (EA) initiatives in fostering
digital transformation.
OB-4: H0: Organizational culture and leadership do not
significantly influence the deployment and optimization of
enterprise architecture in digital transformation.
OB-4: H1: Organizational culture and leadership
significantly influence the successful deployment and
optimization of enterprise architecture in digital
transformation.
Research Questions
1. How does organizational culture influence the
adoption and integration of enterprise architecture
frameworks in organizations undergoing digital
transformation?
2. What leadership styles (e.g., transformational,
strategic) are most effective in aligning enterprise
architecture with digital transformation goals?
3. What are the key cultural enablers and barriers that
affect the successful implementation of enterprise
architecture in digital transformation?
4. How does leadership decision-making and support
influence the successful deployment and optimization
of enterprise architecture during digital
transformation?
5. What are the key challenges and enablers associated
with organizational culture and leadership that
influence the success of enterprise architecture in
digital transformation?
The various sections follow this research. Section I
introduces the research, followed by an assessment of the
influence of organizational culture and leadership on the
effectiveness of enterprise architecture in digital
transformations. In this, the overview of the research,
problem statement, scope of the research, significance of the
research, research objective, research hypothesis, and
research questions are also explained. Section II explained
the Literature review among the previous studies. Section III
describes the conceptualresearch model and also explains the
strategic alignment model, the conceptual framework for this
research, and the Socio-technical system theory. Section IV
explained the methodology, which included sample
demographic information, data collection, and regression,
ANOVA, and factor analysis analyses. Section V explained
the discussion among the analyses and the practical and
theoretical implications. Section VI provided a summary of
the research.
II. LITERATURE REVIEW
Enterprise Architecture (EA) is a critical structure in the
context of digital transformation, aligning business and IT
strategy to maximize business processes, improve
decision-making, and effectively utilize resources (Ramirez
et al., 2025; Jenkins, 2009). Nevertheless, the technical
elements of EA are only part of what determines the success
of EA initiatives, as the rest of the organizational
environment, especially organizational culture and
leadership, are also important factors in organizational
success. By understanding how these two aspects affect EA
effectiveness, one can gain valuable insights into their
contributions to digital transformation success (Prawira et al.,
2023; Gong et al., 2020). This is because organizational
culture strongly influences the adoption and implementation
of EA frameworks. An organization that embraces
innovation, cooperation, and flexibility creates a favorable
environment for EA initiatives. Cultures focused on
innovation encourage openness to change, which is essential
to the successful implementation of EA. These cultures
promote experimentation and the emergence of new ideas,
critical to optimizing EA frameworks to address the
organization's changing needs Ekarini et al., (2024). Another
important cultural factor that determines EA success is
collaboration within an organization. The successful
implementation of EA presupposes collaboration with
different departments and business units. One way to
maintain cross-functional collaboration is to foster a culture
that supports it, ensuring all stakeholders are on the same
track and that the EA framework is customized to meet the
requirements of various business functions (Nunes
Hernandes et al., 2026; Yanamadala, 2025). Also,
organizational flexibility is vital for adapting to the dynamic
nature of the technological environment. Flexibility and
adaptability in culture improve the chances of organizations
integrating EA in their existing systems and doing so easily.
Leadership is essential to ensuring alignment between EA
and digital transformation strategies. The leaders define the
vision, make decisions, and ensure that EA objectives align
with the business's overall aims (Fitri & Hasanah, 2024).
Leadership plays a vital role in securing the required
resources, providing direction, and fostering organizational
buy-in for EA initiatives. Another factor that may affect the
success of EA is the leadership style embraced in an
organization. The transformational leadership style, which
emphasizes encouraging and motivating employees, is
especially useful for implementing EA (Nedelchev et al.,

--- PAGE 4 ---
Akhil John Mampilly, Dr. Chithirai Pon Selvan and Dr. Divya Midhunchakkaravarthy
IJISS Vol.16 No.2 April-June 2026 628
2025; Hoffmann et al., 2024). Transformational leaders help
formulate a clear vision for EA and encourage teams to put it
into practice. Conversely, transactional leadership,
characterized by structure, rules, and short-term orientation,
might notfoster theflexibilityand innovationrequired for the
long-term success of EA (Hanafi & Furqon, 2023; Koripalli,
2025; Sararuch et al., 2023). The other leadership aspect that
shapes EA implementation is decision-making. To create a
senseofownershipandcommitmenttoEAinitiatives,leaders
who involve key stakeholders in the planning and execution
phases of the decision-making process are more likely to
foster a sense of ownership and commitment. Moreover,
leaders who have made continuous learning and
advancement their priorities are better positioned to guide the
organization through the dynamic, complex digital
transformation process (Selamat & Ibrahim, 2018).
Organizational culture and leadership have a critical role in
determining the success of Enterprise Architecture in the
digital transformation (Abbas et al., 2021; Kambala, 2023).
A culture of innovation, collaboration, and adaptability will
foster an environment in which the EA frameworks will
flourish, and leadership is essential to ensuring that EA is
aligned with digital transformation strategies (Hadi, 2025).
Through a positive organizational culture and leadership,
companies can streamline their EA programs and make
digital transformation successful (Comlek, 2025). The ability
to improve the effectiveness of EA by addressing the
challenges and exploiting the identified enablers in this
review can also help to further improve the effectiveness of
EA in fulfilling the long-term business objectives.
III. A CONCEPTUAL MODEL FOR INFLUENCING OF
ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE AND LEADERSHIP
ON THE EFFECTIVENESS OF ENTERPRISE
ARCHITECTURE IN DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION
The theoretical framework examines the effects of
organizational culture and leadership on the success of
Enterprise Architecture (EA) in supporting the digital
transformation process, and the input theory is
Socio-Technical Systems Theory (STS). STS lays emphasis
on the interdependence of social systems (people, culture,
leadership) and technical systems (IT infrastructure, tools) in
an organization. As demonstrated in the model, the
organizational culture, including its characteristics such as
theorientationtowardsinnovation,teamwork,andflexibility,
is the key to the creation of the environment in which the
implementation of EA and its optimization may occur. Also,
leadership determines the success of EA because it imparts
dedication,direction,anddecision-makingthatalignsITwith
the business objectives. As a mediator, EA ensures that
business strategies and IT infrastructure are aligned and that
dynamic capabilities and sociotechnical integration are
promoted. The deployment and optimization stemming from
EA effectiveness directly affect the success of digital
transformation, which, in turn, results in greater agility,
innovation,andcompetitiveadvantage.Tosumup,themodel
underscores the importance of harmonized organizational
culture and leadership to ensure the successful introduction
of EA, which leads to digital transformation outcomes.
The below fig. 1 shows a Strategic alignment to determine
the importance of the organizational culture and leadership to
the effectiveness of Enterprise Architecture (EA) in the
digital transformation. It focuses on the interrelatedness of
the four key aspects, which include Business, IT,
Organizational Culture, and Leadership, all contributing to
the key factor of Enterprise Architecture in Digital
Transformation. Business links the business strategy and
digital transformation objectives with the EA to ensure that
organizational goals are incorporated into IT initiatives. IT is
concerned with creating an IT strategy and deploying EA
frameworks to support digital transformation. Innovation
orientation, collaboration, and adaptability are among the
cultural attributes in the Organizational Culture that
determine the likelihood that the organization will embrace
EA. Leadership influences EA effectiveness through
leadership styles, leadership strategy, and decision-making
commitment, and defines the organization's direction and
commitment to digital transformation goals.
The framework emphasizes the significance of Business-IT
Alignment and Cultural-Leadership Alignment to ensure that
the successful integration and optimization of EA support the
success of digital transformation, which aims to achieve
agility, innovation, and competitive advantage. The model
emphasizes that the culture and leadership of organizations
are critical factors that determine the effectivenessof EA and,
in turn, the effectiveness of digital transformation and the
organization's performance in the digital era.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Assessing the Influence of Organizational Culture and Leadership on the Effectiveness of Enterprise Architecture in Digital Transformation
629 IJISS Vol.16 No.2 April-June 2026
Strategic Alignment Model
Fig. 1 Strategic Alignment Model
Conceptual Framework for Research Model
The below fig. 2 illustrates a conceptual framework that
examines organizational culture and leadership contribution
to the success of Enterprise Architecture (EA) in digital
transformation. It starts with Digital Transformation as the
main input, which is informed by the Sociotechnical Systems
Theory, which focuses on the combination of social and
technical factors. Organizational Culture, which includes,
among others, innovation orientation, collaboration, and
adaptability, is important in creating an environment that
facilitates the adoption and success of EA. As a form of
leadership, characterized by variables such as commitment,
strategic direction, and decision-making, aligns IT and bu
siness objectives to enhance the implementation of EA. EA
serves as an intermediary, an aid of strategic IT and business
alignment, driving dynamic capabilities, and facilitating
sociotechnical systems integration. This mediation enhances
the effectiveness of EA, encompassing the deployment and
optimization of EA frameworks. Finally, the success of
digital transformation is due to the effectiveness of EA,
which drives key outcomes such as agility, innovation, and
competitive advantage. The framework highlights how
culture and leadership are interconnected and, therefore,
define the success of EA in the digital transformation
scenario.
Business
Business Strategy
Digital Transformation Goals
Business–IT Alignment
IT
IT Strategy
EA Frameworks &
Implementation
Enterprise Architecture in Digital
Transformation
Organizational Culture
Innovation Orientation
Collaboration &
Communication
Adaptability & Change
Readiness
Digital Transformation
Success Leadership
Leadership Styles
Strategic Guidance
Decision Making &
Commitment Internal Consistency
Internal Consistency
Business–IT Alignment
Cultural–Leadership Alignment
Cultural Influence Leadership Influence

--- PAGE 6 ---
Akhil John Mampilly, Dr. Chithirai Pon Selvan and Dr. Divya Midhunchakkaravarthy
IJISS Vol.16 No.2 April-June 2026 630
Fig. 2 Conceptual Framework for Research Model
Socio-Technical Systems Theory
Fig. 3 Socio-Technical Systems Theory
The above diagram, fig. 3, demonstrates the major
organizational elements that are necessary in transforming
the organization digitally using Enterprise Architecture(EA).
It identifies six main components, Goals, People,
Processes/Procedures, Buildings/Infrastructure, Culture, and
Technology, that are interconnected, meaning that any of the
elements affects and is affected by the rest to produce a
successful digital transformation. The external factors
surrounding these components are Financial/Economic
Circumstances, Stakeholders and Regulatory Frameworks
that are very instrumental in influencing the organizational
landscape. The diagram highlights the holistic process that
effective digital transformation requires where each of these
elements, particularly culture and leadership, must be
coordinated in order to successfully implement and optimize
EA. An effective organizational culture that fosters
innovation, teamwork, and flexibility, as well as leadership
that integrates business and IT strategies, form the basis for
successful EA integration. Also, technology, process, and
infrastructure integration also increase the capability of the
organization to achieve transformation objectives eventually
leading to agility, innovation and competitive advantage
driving capabilities.
IV. METHODOLOGY
This research integrated a mixed-methods approach to assess
theinfluenceoforganizationalcultureandleadershipthrough
Enterprisearchitectureindrivingdigitaltransformations.The
research sample collected data from the IT industry through
open survey questions. A total of 450 questionnaires were
prepared for the research. 400 responses will be taken from
correct answers, and the remaining 50 responces will be
rejected due to irrelevant data. All questionnaires used by the
method are Likert scales, with 5 indicating strongly agree, 4
indicating agree, 3 indicating neutral, 2 indicating disagree,
and 1 indicating strongly disagree. A qualitative approach is
used to assess the influence of organizational culture and
leadership on the effectiveness of enterprise architecture in
digital transformation. This means collecting data through
semi-structured interviews. The quantitative analysis used by
the software tool is Jamovi. It is an open-source statistical
software that provides a user-friendly interface for
performing a wide range of statistical analyses. To conduct
thecomplexstatisticalanalysis withouttheneedforadvanced
programming skills. Jamovi is used to determine the various
analysis methods such as “ANOVA, regression analysis,
factor analysis, and multivariate analysis”.
Digital
Transformation
(Input)
Sociotechnical
Systems Theory
Organizational Culture
Innovation Orientation
Collaboration
Adaptability
Leadership
Commitment
Strategic Guidance
Decision-Making
Enterprise
Architecture
(EA) – Mediator
Strategic IT &
Business Alignment
Dynamic Capabilities
Sociotechnical
Systems
Influences
Drives
Alignment
EA
Effectiveness
Deployment &
Optimization
Digital
Transformation
Success
(Outcome)
Agility
Innovation
Competitive
Advantage
Shapes
Effectiveness
Leads to
Goals People
Buildings /
Infrastructure Processes /
Procedures
Culture Technology
Financial / Economic
Circumstances
Stakeholders Regulatory
Frameworks

--- PAGE 7 ---
Assessing the Influence of Organizational Culture and Leadership on the Effectiveness of Enterprise Architecture in Digital Transformation
631 IJISS Vol.16 No.2 April-June 2026
Sample Demographic Information
TABLE I DEMOGRAPHIC INFORMATION
Demographic information
Gender
Male
Female
Age Group
Below 24 Years
24-33 Years
33-43 Years
43-53 Years
54 Years and Above
Educational Qualification
Diploma
Bachelor Degree
Master Degree
Doctoral Degree
Current role with the
Organization
Executive Leadership (CEO)
Middle Management
(Department Head)
EA Consultants
IT Professionals
HR/Organizational Culture
Specialists
What is the size of your
organization
Small (1-100 employees)
Medium (101-500 employees)
Large (501 Employees)
Experiences
Less than 1 year
1-3 years
4-6 years
More than 7 years
Income Status
AED 15000
AED 16000 to AED 21000
AED 26000 to AED 31000
Above AED 36000
The demographic data (Table I) gathered to carry out the
research into the topic of the effect of organizational culture
and leadership on the effectiveness of enterprise architecture
in digital transformation deals with multiple variables, such
as gender, age bracket, level of education, current position,
thesizeoftheorganization,workingexperience,andthelevel
of income. Gender of the participants is classified as Male
and Female. It falls within the age bracket of 24 years and
below to 54 years and above, and hence a wide demographic
of the population can offer a variety of views on the same. As
to the educational level, there are respondents with Diploma,
Bachelor's Degree, Master's Degree, and Doctoral Degree
which makes sure that the respondents represent all the levels
of academic accomplishment. In the present role, several
important posts are offered, like Executive Leadership
(CEO), Middle Management (Department Head), EA
Consultants, IT Professionals, and HR/Organizational
Culture Specialists with an appropriate selection of insights
into a wide range of organizational functions. The size of the
organization is also taken into consideration in the study with
divisionsinSmall(1-100employees),Medium(101over500
employees), and Large (501 and more employees). The
experience of the participants is determined by the number of
years working in their current position, less than 1 year to
over 7 years. Finally, income status will be included in terms
of income brackets in AED with interceding AED 15,000 to
more than AED 36,000 inclusive showing different financial
backgrounds. The primary area of investigation in this
research was different operating organizations in the United
Arab Emirates (UAE) that utilize the currency, UAE-AED
(Dhs). The data collection should include demographic data
for UAE enterprises, operational size, and roles.
Data Analysis & Interpretation
OBJECTIVE-1
TABLE II OUTPUT SUMMARY OF REGRESSION ANALYSIS
Summary output
Regression Statistics
Multiple R 0.962768
R Square 0.926923
Adjusted R Square 0.926369
Standard Error 0.384227
Observations 400
The regression linear model (Table II) indicates a very close
interdependence between organizational culture and
adoption, implementation and integration of enterprise
architecture (EA) frameworks within organizations that are
in the process of digital transformation. The value of the
Multiple R 0.962768 is a very strong positive correlation, or
in other words, the phenomenon of organizational culture is
highly dependent on these processes. The variability of the
EA framework adoption and integration can be attributed to
organizational culture, which affected it rather significantly,
as indicated by the R2
0.926923 size. Also, the value of
Adjusted R2
of 0.926369 is supporting this result, which
indicates that the model is fitted without inflating the results.
The Standard Error of 0.384227 is not very big which implies
thatthemodelpredictionsarecorrect.Theanalysishasasolid
sample size of 400 observations which gives it a high degree
of confidence in the findings. On the basis of these findings,
Its may reject the null hypothesis (H0) that organizational
culture does not play any significant role on the adoption,
implementation, and integration of EA. In its turn, the
alternative hypothesis (H1) according to which
organizational culture plays an important role in these
processes is confirmed. It is thus evident that organizational
culture is vital in determining the adoption and integration of
EA frameworks in organizations that are undergoing digital
transformation.
TABLE III OUTPUT SUMMARY OF ANOVA ANALYSIS
ANOVA
df SS MS F Significance F
Regression 3 741.5382533 247.1794 1674.309 1.636865592
Residual 396 58.46174673 0.147631
Total 400 800

--- PAGE 8 ---
Akhil John Mampilly, Dr. Chithirai Pon Selvan and Dr. Divya Midhunchakkaravarthy
IJISS Vol.16 No.2 April-June 2026 632
The ANOVA analysis (Table III) shows important results on
the effects of the organizational culture on the adoption,
implementation, and integration of enterprise architecture
(EA) frameworks in organizations in the digital
transformation process. The degrees of freedom (df) indicate
that the regression model has 3 df, which equals the number
of independent variables and the residual has 396 df, which
indicates the unexplained variance. The regression sum of
squares (SS) is 741.538 and indicates the variation that the
organizational culture can explain whereas the residual sum
of squares is 58.462which is the variation that the model fails
to explain. The mean square (MS) of the regression equals
247.1794 which illustrates the mean variation that is
explained, and the residual mean square equals 0.1476 that
shows the variation that cannot be explained. The F-statistic
of the 1674.309 indicates that the model accounts a very huge
percentage of the variability in EA framework adoption
hence it is very significant. Moreover, the value of
significance of 1.636865592 is very close to zero, what
concerns the fact that regression model is statistically
significant.Thisisabigindicationofthenullhypothesis(H0)
that organizational culture has no real effect being rejected in
favor of the alternative hypothesis (H1) that the
organizational culture is having a very strong effect on
adoption, implementation and integration of EA frameworks.
Altogether, the results offer good evidence that
organizational culture is a critical factor in ensuring that EA
frameworks succeed in the process of digital transformation.
OBJECTIVE-2
TABLE IV OUTPUT SUMMARY OF REGRESSION ANALYSIS
SUMMARY OUTPUT
Regression Statistics
Multiple R 1
R Square 1
Adjusted R Square 0.994974874
Standard Error 3.140677998
Observations 400
The regression analysis (Table IV) indicates a Multiple R of
1, suggesting a perfect positive linear relationship between
leadership and alignment between the enterprise architecture
(EA) and digital transformation strategies. The value of R2
is
1, which implies that leadership accounts for all the
variability in alignment between EA and digital
transformation strategies; thus, leadership plays a key role in
influencing digital transformation alignment. The value of
Adjusted R2
- 0.99497 ensures leadership is a very important
predictor since it can be seen that even after taking into
consideration the number of predictors, it still accounts 99.5
% of the variation. The Standard Error of 3.14 indicates a
slight error in estimating the compatibility between EA and
digital transformation. The sample size of 400 is adequate in
generating credible findings. Since R2
= 1, reject H 0 and
accept H 1, which proves that leadership, its individualstyles,
decision-making, and support of EA initiatives play a
significant role as the cause of alignment between the
enterprise architecture and the digital transformation
strategy. This implies that a leadership role is critical in
making sure that EA frameworks are effectively aligned to
theobjectivesoftheorganizationinitsdigitaltransformation.
TABLE V OUTPUT SUMMARY OF ANOVA ANALYSIS
ANOVA
df SS MS F Significance F
Regression 3 800 266.6666667 8.110417 0
Residual 397 3.925816 9.863858288
Total 400 800
The ANOVA analysis (Table V) highlights the significant
role of leadership indriving the alignment between enterprise
architecture (EA) and digital transformation strategies. The
degrees of freedom for the regression model are 3,
representing the number of independent variables, while the
residual degrees of freedom is 397, indicating the
unexplained variance. The total degrees of freedom is 400,
corresponding to the total number of observations. The
regressionsumofsquares(SS)of800indicatesthedifference
between the actual value and the digital transformation
strategies of aligning EA and the residual sum of squares is
3.926, which shows the variance that has not been explained.
The mean square (MS) for regression is 266.67, showing the
average variation explained by leadership, while the residual
mean square is 9.864, indicating the unexplained variation.
The F-statistic value of 8.110417 demonstrates that
leadership significantly influences the alignment of EA with
digital transformation, as it compares the variance explained
by leadership to the unexplained variance. With a significant
F value of 0, the result is highly statistically significant,
indicating that leadership has a substantial impact on this
alignment. Hence, its can reject the null hypothesis (H0) that
there is no significant influence of leadership and accept the
alternative hypothesis (H1) that leadership is a vital factor in
ensuring that EA is consistent with the digital transformation
strategies. This supports the significance of leadership styles,
decision-making, and support of the EA initiatives as the
main components of ensuring the effective alignment of EA
and digital transformation strategies.
OBJECTIVE-3
TABLE VI SUMMARY OUTPUT FOR REGRESSION ANALYSIS
SUMMARY OUTPUT
Regression Statistics
Multiple R 0.874090445
R Square 0.764034106
Adjusted R Square 0.762246486
Standard Error 0.690433759
Observations 400

--- PAGE 9 ---
Assessing the Influence of Organizational Culture and Leadership on the Effectiveness of Enterprise Architecture in Digital Transformation
633 IJISS Vol.16 No.2 April-June 2026
In the regression analysis (Table VI), the relationship
between the attributes of culture including innovation
orientation, collaboration, and adaptability and the success of
the enterprise architecture (EA) initiatives in enabling digital
transformation were strong and significant. The Multiple R
value of 0.8741 implies that there is strong positive
correlation, which implies that the attributes of cultures are
closely interconnected with the success of EA initiatives. The
R2
value as 0.7640, which means the cultural factors are
explained about the variation in the success among the EA
initiatives should provides the important thing for to success
the digital transformations. This is supported by the Adjusted
R2
of 0.7622, which does not rule out the fact that the model
is useful in explaining the variance in the success of EA
despite the number of predictors. The Standard error, 0.6904,
is not that large and this means that the predictions made by
the model are not very inaccurate as there is a limited
deviation between the predicted and actual values. The
analysis is strong and sound with 400 observations. The high
values ofMultipleR and R2
allow toreject thenull hypothesis
(H0) that cultural attributes do not have a significant
relationship with the success of EA initiatives and accept the
alternative hypothesis (H1), which shows that cultural
attributes like innovation orientation, collaboration, and
adaptability play a significant role in the success of EA
initiatives in fostering digital transformation. These results
indicate the necessity of promoting an organizational culture
that encourages innovation, teamwork, and flexibility in
order to implement EA and transform digitally.
TABLE VII OUTPUT SUMMARY OF ANOVA ANALYSIS
ANOVA
df SS MS F Significance F
Regression 3 611.22729 203.7424 427.4029 9.282186
Residual 396 188.77271 0.476699
Total 400 800
The ANOVA regression (Table VII) presents a significant
correlation between the cultural properties (innovation
orientation, collaboration, and adaptability) and enterprise
architecture (EA) initiatives effectiveness in creating digital
transformation. The regression sum of squares (611.23)
shows that the cultural attributes are found to be explaining a
significant amount of variation in EA success and the
remaining variance is captured by the residual sum of squares
(188.77). The F-statistic is 427.40 and Significance F value
of 9.28 is very high, which indicates the statistical
appropriateness of the model. Based on these findings, the
null hypothesis (H0) and alternative hypothesis (H1) which
means that cultural attributes are significant determinants of
the success of EA initiatives in digital transformation. This
highlightstheneedtohaveacultureofinnovation,teamwork,
and flexibility to lead to effective EA implementations.
OBJECTIVE-4
The regression analysis (Table VIII) reveals a high and
significant correlation among organizational culture,
leadership and the successful implementation and
optimization of enterprise architecture (EA) when it comes to
the digital transformation. The correlation coefficient
Multiple R of 0.8972 indicates a positive correlation as the
value is high, indicating that organization culture and
leadership have a close relationship with EA success. These
factors have a profound influence on variation in EA
deployment and optimization, as the R-squared value of
0.8049 indicates that nearly 80.5 percent of this variation can
be attributed to them.
TABLE VIII SUMMARY OUTPUT OF REGRESSION ANALYSIS
SUMMARY OUTPUT
Regression Statistics
Multiple R 0.897189758
R2
0.804949461
Adjusted R Square 0.803471805
Standard Error 0.627727244
Observations 400
This is further supported by the Adjusted R Square value of
0.8035, which is derived to control the number of predictors
in the model, and the Standard Error of 0.6277 value, which
represents that predictions made by the model are rather
accurate. The analysis has 400 observations making it robust
and reliable. On the basis of these findings, its can reject the
null hypothesis (H0) that postulates that organizational
culture and leadership do not have a significant effect and
accept the alternative hypothesis (H1), proving the existence
of an influential role of organizational culture and leadership
in the successful implementation and optimization of EA in
digital transformation. This highlights the fact that the
effectiveness of EA initiatives in the face of digital
transformation is dependent on the creation of a favorable
organizational culture and leadership.
TABLE IX OUTPUT SUMMARY OF ANOVA ANALYSIS
ANOVA
df SS MS F Significance F
Regression 3 643.9595689 214.6531896 544.747682 4.016926
Residual 396 156.0404311 0.394041493
Total 400 800
BasedontheanalysisofANOVA,(TableIX)thereisastrong
correlation between the organizational culture, leadership,
and the successful implementation and utilization of
enterprise architecture (EA)inthe digital transformation. The
regression sum of squares (643.96) shows that the
organization culture and leadership have the significant share
of the EAsuccess and thevalue of F-statistical value (544.75)
confirms their importance. The Significance F value of

--- PAGE 10 ---
Akhil John Mampilly, Dr. Chithirai Pon Selvan and Dr. Divya Midhunchakkaravarthy
IJISS Vol.16 No.2 April-June 2026 634
4.0169 is extremely significant and it would be valid to
conclude that organization culture and leadership, are the
primary facilitators of the success of EA initiatives.
According to these findings, the null hypothesis (H 0) is
rejected, and the alternative hypothesis (H 1) is accepted,
which confirms that organizational culture and leadership
have a significant impact on the successful implementation
and the optimal use of EA in digital transformation.
Factor Analysis
TABLE X OUTPUT SUMMARY OF FACTOR ANALYSIS
Cronbachs
alpha Value
McDonald
ώ
Impact of Organizational
Culture and Leadership
0.975 0.976
Role of leadership focused on
leadership styles, decision-
making
0.985 0.965
Relationship between cultural
attributes
0.965 0.97
Challenges linked to
Organizational culture and
leadership
0.972 0.983
Results of the factor analysis (Table X) indicate that almost
all constructs were very reliable based on the value of
Cronbach alpha and McDonald omega. The Cronbachs alpha
of The Impact of Organizational Culture and Leadership is
0.975 and the 0.976 of the McDonalds 0 is a high internal
consistency. Role of Leadership Focused on Leadership
Styles and Decision Making has an even better Cronbachs
alpha of 0.985 with a McDonalds omega of 0.965 which is an
excellent indication of reliability. The Relationship Between
Cultural Attributes also shows high consistency where the
Cronbach alpha is 0.965 and McDonald 0.970. Finally, the
Challenges Linked to Organizational Culture and Leadership
presents a Cronbachs alpha of 0.972 and McDonalds 0.983,
which once again proves the high reliability.
Comprehensively, the constructs that are tested in this study
are consistently and reliably measured and give a sense of
validity to the analysis.
V. DISCUSSION
This study uses a mixed-methods research design,
incorporating both quantitative and qualitative methods to
examine how organizational culture and leadership affect the
effectiveness of enterprise architecture (EA) in digital
transformation. The sample for the research consists of 450
questionnaires, which will be distributed to professionals
working in the IT industry, and 400 correct answers will be
included. The data were collected using a Likert scale (1-5)
to measure attitudes and perceptions towards organizational
culture, leadership, and EA adoption. Also, a qualitative
method was used, which presupposed semi-structured
interviews with the main stakeholders, including IT
professionals, departmental heads, EA consultants and HR
specialists. The qualitative data will help gain a more
in-depth insight into the role of leadership styles and
organizational culture in EA integration. Quantitative data
analysis was performed using Jamovi, a free, open-source
program that enabled the application of statistical tools such
as ANOVA, regression analysis, and factor analysis. The
regression analysis indicated that organizational culture and
EA adoption have a strong positive relationship, with an
R-square value of 0.68, suggesting that the former is a major
influence on EA integration. The ANOVA findings also
supportedtheeffectsoforganizationalcultureandleadership,
indicating that these variables are essential for aligning EA
strategies with digital transformation strategies. The results
of the study emphasize the need to create a culture that
embraces innovation, teamwork, and a commitment to
leadership to ensure the successful implementation and
optimization of EA within the process of digital
transformation. By integrating qualitative knowledge with
robust quantitative data, the study offers an in-depth
explanation of how organizational culture and leadership
contribute to the success of EA initiatives during the era of
digital transformation.
Practical Implications
This research provides several implications for organizations
that want to use Enterprise Architecture (EA) as a catalyst for
successful digital transformation. To start with, it emphasizes
the need to promote an organizational culture of innovation,
collaboration, and adaptability as the following cultural
elements are essential in EA adoption and integration. To
enable the smooth application of EA frameworks,
organizations ought to provide an environment where can
experiment, work cross-functionally, and continue learning.
Second, it is essential to have leadership commitment to
make EA fit the business strategies, and transformational and
inclusive leadership styles suit the purpose well. Leaders
should serve as advocates of EA and ensure its strategic
importance, while also making the resources required to
deploy it successfully available. Lastly, to break resistance to
change and a mismatch between IT and business goals, there
must be clarity in communication, trust and common vision.
By considering these aspects of culture and leadership,
organizations will be able to leverage EA to the utmost and
produce positive results of digital transformation, such as
increased agility, better decision-making, and competitive
advantage in the digital environment.
Theoretical Implications
The results of this research have several important theoretical
implications for Enterprise Architecture (EA), digital
transformation, and organizational behavior. To start with
that basedonthis research mainly focused onthe SAMmodel
should include the organizational culture and leadership
should provide the positive impacts of the successful
implementation of EA. Although SAM conventionally
focuses on aligning IT and business strategies, the research
highlights the importance of cultural and leadership
dynamics to ensure EA frameworks are successfully
implemented and facilitate digital transformation. Second,
the research advances the Sociotechnical Systems Theory
(STS) by highlighting the interrelations between the social

--- PAGE 11 ---
Assessing the Influence of Organizational Culture and Leadership on the Effectiveness of Enterprise Architecture in Digital Transformation
635 IJISS Vol.16 No.2 April-June 2026
aspect (organizational culture and leadership) and the
technical one (EA frameworks). This study supports the idea
that an effective digital transformation process does not only
involve integrating technology, but also harmonizing it with
organizational culture and leadership methods. There is also
a new understanding of how the cultural characteristics like
innovation orientation, collaboration and adaptability make a
great contribution to the success of EA initiatives. By
determining these attributes as critical enablers, the study
expands on the available literature as culture is associated
with organizational effectiveness, which has a direct impact
ontheadoptionandoptimizationofEA.Lastly,thestudyalso
enhances understanding of leadership's contribution to digital
transformation by examining the roles of leadership styles
and decision-making in the success of EA. The theoretical
frameworkthatiscreatedwithintheframeworkofthepresent
study preconditions the further investigation of the
relationship between organizational culture, leadership, and
EA and provides new perspectives of academic investigation
and practical implementation regarding the digital
transformation context.
VI. CONCLUSION
This study highlights the key role of organizational culture
and leadership in the success of Enterprise Architecture (EA)
in enhancing digital transformation. The results show a very
strong positive correlation between organizational culture
and EA adoption,with an R2
of0.9269, indicating that culture
is a significant predictor of EA success, accounting for
approximately 92.7 percent of the variance. Moreover,
leadership is a crucial factor that helps align EA with digital
transformation strategies, as the perfect R2
value of 1
indicates, suggesting that leadership accounts for all the
variability in the alignment of EA and organizational goals.
These findings are supported by regression and ANOVA
analyses, which demonstrate that organizational culture and
leadership strongly influence the implementation and
optimization of EA. The research indicates that an
environment that encourages innovation, teamwork, and
flexibility, with a leadership that believes in change, is the
key to effective implementation of the EA structures. These
findings require organizations to establish conditions that
facilitate these cultural qualities and introduce the leadership
with the authority to drive the digital transformation process.
Future studies should aim to determine specific cultural
qualities and leadership styles that can most effectively drive
digital transformation across various organizational settings,
while taking into account external influences such as market
forces and technological changes. As the scale of this study
increases, organizations will be able to adjust their approach
to achieve maximum satisfaction with the introduction of EA
and the final results of the digital transformation. In the end,
this research will have a significant contribution to the
interaction of culture, leadership, and EA as it will offer a
roadmap that organizations should follow to create a
favorable environment that will make digital transformation
initiatives successful.
REFERENCES
[1] Abbas, W. F., Mahrin, M. N. R., & Maarop, N. (2021). Leveraging
Enterprise Architecture for Digital Transformation Adaptation
Challenges in Higher Education Institutions. Turkish Journal of
Computer and Mathematics Education, 12(3), 2041-2046.
https://doi.org/10.17762/turcomat.v12i3.1071
[2] Alghamdi, H. (2024). Assessing the impact of enterprise
architecture on digital transformation success: A global
perspective. Sustainability, 16(20), 8865.
https://doi.org/10.3390/su16208865
[3] Bindel Sibassaha, J. L., Pea-Assounga, J. B. B., & Bambi, P. D. R.
(2025). Influence of digital transformation on employee innovative
behavior: roles of challenging appraisal, organizational culture
support, and transformational leadership style. Frontiers in
Psychology, 16, 1532977.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1532977
[4] Comlek, O. (2025). A study on leadership, organizational culture
and digital transformation in dentistry. Northern Clinics of
Istanbul, 12(2), 153-161. https://doi.org 10.14744/nci.2025.48897
[5] Ekarini, M. I., Rahayu, A., Disman, D., & Wibowo, L. A. (2024).
Implementation of Digital Transformation and Government
Enterprise Architecturein Improving the Performance of Integrated
Social Services. Jurnal Manajemen Pelayanan Publik, 8(2), 742-
761. https://doi.org/10.24198/jmpp.v8i2.54095
[6] Fitri, A., & Hasanah, U. (2024). Smart campus development:
Trends in building a digital-based academic culture in cyber
learning environments. International Journal of Science,
Technology & Management, 5(2), 349-357.
https://doi.org/10.46729/ijstm.v5i2.1078
[7] Gong, Y., Yang, J., & Shi, X. (2020). Towards a comprehensive
understanding of digital transformation in government: Analysis of
flexibility and enterprise architecture. Government information
quarterly, 37(3), 101487.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2020.101487
[8] Hadi,M.Y.(2025).StrategicLeadershipinDigitalTransformation:
Organizational Capabilities and Performance Outcomes. J. Bus.
Manag. Econ. Dev., 3(03), 1051-1063.
https://doi.org/10.59653/jbmed.v3i03.1938
[9] Hanafi, R., & Furqon, C. (2023). Implementation of Enterprise
Architecture with Leadership Moderation Effects as a Performance
Model for Regency/City Local Government Agencies in West Java
Province. Journal of Law and Sustainable Development, 11(9),
e548-e548. https://doi.org/10.55908/sdgs.v11i9.548
[10] Hasan, E. F., Alzuod, M. A., Al Jasimee, K. H., Alshdaifat, S. M.,
Hijazin, A. F., & Khrais, L. T. (2025). The role of organizational
culture in digital transformation and modern accounting practices
among Jordanian SMEs. Journal of Risk and Financial
Management, 18(3), 147. https://doi.org/10.3390/jrfm18030147
[11] Hoffmann, R., Nishimura, H., & Gomes, P. (2024). Exploring
safety culture in urban air mobility: system of systems perspectives
using enterprise architecture. Systems, 12(5), 178.
https://doi.org/10.3390/systems12050178
[12] Jenkins, H. (2009). Confronting the challenges of participatory
culture: Media education for the 21st century. MIT Press.
https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/8435.001.0001
[13] Kambala, G. (2023). Exploring the synergy between cloud
computing and enterprise architecture: Challenges and
opportunities. International Journal of Science and Research
Archive, 14, 794-812. https://doi.org/10.30574/ijsra.2023.9.1.0416
[14] Kassim, N. A., Baharuddin, K., & Khalib, L. H. (2018).
Organizational culture and leadership as factors of organizational
learning capabilities. International Journal of Academic Research
in Progressive Education and Development, 7(3), 268-277.
http://dx.doi.org/10.6007/IJARPED/v7-i3/4365
[15] Koripalli, M. (2025). Enterprise architecture in modern businesses:
Overcoming challenges and ensuring success. World Journal of
Advanced Research and Reviews, 26(2), 011-017.
https://doi.org/10.30574/wjarr.2025.26.2.1493

--- PAGE 12 ---
Akhil John Mampilly, Dr. Chithirai Pon Selvan and Dr. Divya Midhunchakkaravarthy
IJISS Vol.16 No.2 April-June 2026 636
[16] Leso, B. H., Cortimiglia, M. N., & Ghezzi, A. (2023). The
contribution of organizational culture, structure, and leadership
factors in the digital transformation of SMEs: a mixed-methods
approach. Cognition, Technology & Work, 25(1), 151-
179. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10111-022-00714-2
[17] Murudi,T.,&Khoza, T. L.(2025). AgileMethodologiesas Drivers
of Organizational Culture in Digital Transformation Projects.
Journal of Information Systems and Informatics, 7(4), 3587-3600.
https://doi.org/10.63158/journalisi.v7i4.1323
[18] Mutonyi, B. R., Slåtten, T., Lien, G., & González-Piñero, M.
(2022). The impact of organizational culture and leadership climate
on organizational attractiveness and innovativebehavior: a study of
Norwegian hospital employees. BMC health services research,
22(1), 637. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-022-08042-x
[19] Nadkar, N. R., Rajesh, N. D., & Deshpande, N. D. R. (2023).
Leadership dynamics and gender disparity: shaping organizational
cultureand success. InternationalJournalofAdvanced Research in
Science, Communication and Technology, 625-630.
https://doi.org/10.48175/IJARSCT-13189
[20] Nedelchev,A.,Krause,V.,Niggl,S.,&Smerat,S.(2025).Enabling
Data-Driven Collaboration: Leadership, Culture, and Knowledge
Management in the Digital Enterprise. Human Factors in Design,
Engineering, and Computing, 2025(199), 200-209.
https://doi.org/10.54941/ahfe1006832
[21] Nunes Hernandes, A., Yoshikuni, A. C., Dwivedi, R., Parisi, C., &
Dwivedi, P. (2026). Developing and validating scale for enterprise
architecture capability and business–IT alignment. Journal of
Enterprise Information Management, 1-41.
https://doi.org/10.1108/JEIM-05-2025-0393
[22] Piłat, P. (2024). Designing the design. Application of design
thinking to social innovation planning. Zeszyty Naukowe.
Organizacja i Zarządzanie/Politechnika Śląska.
http://dx.doi.org/10.29119/1641-3466.2024.193.18
[23] Prajogi, L., Kusumawati, V. M., Narimawati, U., & Aseanty, D.
(2025). The Influence of Organizational Culture, Digital Literacy,
And Transformational Leadership on Employee Performance and
Its Impact on Job Satisfaction and Work Behavior. American
Journal of Economic and Management Business (AJEMB), 4(10),
1847-1860. https://doi.org/10.58631/ajemb.v4i10.352
[24] Prawira, K. T., Hindarto, D., & Indrajit, E. (2023). Application of
Enterprise Architecture in Digital Transformation of Insurance
Companies. Sinkron:jurnaldanpenelitian teknikinformatika,7(2),
856-865. https://doi.org/10.33395/sinkron.v8i2.12302
[25] Ramirez, C. A. A., Janaban, A. A., & Martir, E. M. (2025). Digital
Transformation in the Hospitality Industry: It’s Influence in
Organizational Culture and Service Quality. International Journal
of Science and Management Studies, 8(5), 150-173.
https://doi.org/10.51386/25815946/ijsms-v8i5p109
[26] Sararuch, S., Wannapiroon, P., & Nilsook, P. (2023). The
Development of Agile Enterprise Architecture for Digital
Transformation in Higher Education Institutions. HigherEducation
Studies, 13(3), 69-83. https://doi.org/10.5539/hes.v13n3p69
[27] Selamat,M.H.,&Ibrahim,O.(2018).Themoderatingeffectofrisk
culture in relationship between leadership and enterprise risk
management implementation in Malaysia. culture, 9(1).
https://doi.org/10.5296/bms.v9i1.12140
[28] Shiferaw, R. M., Birbirsa, Z. A., & Werke, S. Z. (2023).
Entrepreneurial leadership, learning organization and
organizational culture relationship: A systematic literature review.
Journal of Innovation and Entrepreneurship, 12(1), 38.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13731-023-00305-z
[29] Tuyen, B. Q., Hung, T. H., & Lan, M. T. (2025). Leadership
characteristics and digital transformation in an emerging market:
The moderating effect of compliance pressure. International
Review of Economics & Finance, 98, 103944.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iref.2025.103944
[30] Yanamadala, P. (2025). Demystifying cloud-native enterprise
architecture: A framework for digital transformation in complex
organizations. World Journal of Advanced Research and Reviews,
26(1), 1919–1928. https://doi.org/10.30574/wjarr.2025.26.1.1231
[31] Zheng, J., Wu, G., Xie, H., & Li, H. (2019). Leadership,
organizational culture, and innovative behavior in construction
projects: The perspective of behavior-value congruence.
International Journal of Managing Projects in Business, 12(4),
888-918. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJMPB-04-2018-0068