--- PAGE 1 ---
CATCHWORD
Digital Transformation Strategies
Christian Matt • Thomas Hess • Alexander Benlian
Received: 14 May 2015/Accepted: 1 July 2015/Published online: 4 August 2015
Ó Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden 2015
Keywords Digital transformation framework  Cross-
functional strategy  Digital technologies
1 Background and Basic Understanding
In recent years, firms in almost all industries have con-
ducted a number of initiatives to explore new digital
technologies and to exploit their benefits. This frequently
involves transformations of key business operations and
affects products and processes, as well as organizational
structures and management concepts. Companies need to
establish management practices to govern these complex
transformations. An important approach is to formulate a
digital transformation strategy that serves as a central
concept to integrate the entire coordination, prioritization,
and implementation of digital transformations within a
firm.
The exploitation and integration of digital technologies
often affect large parts of companies and even go beyond
their borders, by impacting products, business processes,
sales channels, and supply chains. Potential benefits of
digitization are manifold and include increases in sales or
productivity, innovations in value creation, as well as novel
forms of interaction with customers, among others. As a
result, entire business models can be reshaped or replaced
(Downes and Nunes 2013). Owing to this wide scope and
the far-reaching consequences, digital transformation
strategies seek to coordinate and prioritize the many
independent threads of digital transformation. To account
for their company-spanning characteristics, digital trans-
formation strategies cut across other business strategies and
should be aligned with them (Fig. 1).
While there are various concepts of IT strategies
(Teubner 2013), these mostly define the current and the
future operational activities, the necessary application
systems and infrastructures, and the adequate organiza-
tional and financial framework for providing IT to carry out
business operations within a company. Hence, IT strategies
usually focus on the management of the IT infrastructure
within a firm, with rather limited impact on driving inno-
vations in business development. To some degree, this
restricts the product-centric and customer-centric opportu-
nities that arise from new digital technologies, which often
cross firms’ borders. Further, IT strategies present system-
centric road maps to the future uses of technologies in a
firm, but they do not necessarily account for the transfor-
mation of products, processes, and structural aspects that
go along with the integration of technologies.
Digital transformation strategies take on a different per-
spective and pursue different goals. Coming from a busi-
ness-centric perspective, these strategies focus on the
transformation of products, processes, and organizational
aspects owing to new technologies. Their scope is more
broadly designed and explicitly includes digital activities at
the interface with or fully on the side of customers, such as
Accepted after one revision by Prof. Dr. Sinz.
Dr. C. Matt (&)  Prof. Dr. T. Hess
Institute for Information Systems and New Media,
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Ludwigstr. 28,
80539 Munich, Germany
e-mail: matt@bwl.lmu.de
Prof. Dr. T. Hess
e-mail: thess@bwl.lmu.de
Prof. Dr. A. Benlian
Chair of Information Systems and E-Services, Technische
Universität Darmstadt, Hochschulstraße 1, 64289 Darmstadt,
Germany
e-mail: benlian@ise.tu-darmstadt.de
123
Bus Inf Syst Eng 57(5):339–343 (2015)
DOI 10.1007/s12599-015-0401-5

--- PAGE 2 ---
digital technologies as part of end-user products. This con-
stitutes a clear difference to process automation and opti-
mization, since digital transformation strategies go beyond
the process paradigm, and include changes to and implica-
tions for products, services, and business models as a whole.
Similar to the previous discussion on the alignment
between business strategies and IT strategies (Henderson
and Venkatraman 1993), it is critical to obtain a close fit
between digital transformation strategies, IT strategies, and
all other organizational and functional strategies. Research
has addressed this issue and has sought to consolidate IT
strategies and business strategies into a comprehensive
‘‘digital business strategy’’ (Bharadwaj et al. 2013). Digital
business strategies often discuss the possibilities and the
effects of digital technologies for firms. For instance,
Oestreicher-Singer and Zalmanson (2013) shed light on the
connection of content and community, and prove that com-
munity-based digital business models can create profitable
revenue streams in times of ‘freemium’ business models.
Drnevich and Croson (2013) show how IT can impact on a
firm’s business-level strategies and its capabilities. There-
fore, while digital business strategies often describe desired
future business opportunitiesand strategiesfor firms that are
partly or fully based on digital technologies, they do typi-
cally not include transformational insights on how to reach
these future states. In contrast, a digital transformation
strategy is a blueprint that supports companies in governing
the transformations that arise owing to the integration of
digital technologies, as well as in their operations after a
transformation. Despite first research efforts and the fre-
quent challenges encountered in practice, academia still
lacks specific guidelines for firms on how to formulate,
implement, and evaluate digital transformation strategies.
2 Two Perspectives on Digital Transformation
Strategies
Strategic planning refers to the process of defining a
strategy as well as deciding on the resources that are
allocated to pursue a strategy in order to achieve firms’
goals. While procedural aspects govern the development,
implementation, and evaluation of digital transformation
strategies, owing to their novel character one first needs to
define which content aspects digital transformation strate-
gies should consist of. The following four key dimensions
and the resulting overarching framework are the result of
preliminary works, including literature analysis and mul-
tiple case studies and interviews.
2.1 The Four Dimensions of Digital Transformation
Strategies
Independent of the industry or firm, digital transformation
strategies have certain elements in common. These ele-
ments can be ascribed to four essential dimensions: use of
technologies, changes in value creation, structural chan-
ges, and financial aspects. The use of technologies
addresses a company’s attitude towards new technologies
as well as its ability to exploit these technologies. It
therefore contains the strategic role of IT for a company
and its future technological ambition. A firm needs to
decide whether it wants to become a market leader in terms
of technology usage with the ability to create own tech-
nological standards, or whether it prefers to resort to
already established standards and sees technologies as
means to fulfill business operations. While being a tech-
nological market leader can lead to competitive advantages
and can create the opportunity of other firms becoming
dependent on one’s technological standards, it might be
more risky and requires certain technological competences.
From a business perspective, the use of new technologies
often implies changes in value creation. These concern the
impact of digital transformation strategies on firms’ value
chains, i.e. how far the new digital activities deviate from
the classical – often still analog – core business. Further
deviations offer opportunities to expand and enrich the
current products and services portfolio, but they are often
accompanied by a stronger need for different technological
and product-related competences and higher risks owing to
Corporate strategy
Operational strategy
(Products, markets,
processes)
Functional strategy
(Finance, human resources,
IT, …)
Digital transformation strategy
Fig. 1 Relation between digital
transformation strategy and
other corporate strategies
123
340 C. Matt et al.: Digital Transformation Strategies, Bus Inf Syst Eng 57(5):339–343 (2015)

--- PAGE 3 ---
less experience in the new field. The digitization of prod-
ucts or services can enable or require different forms of
monetization, or even adjustments to firms’ business scope,
if other markets or new customer segments are addressed.
With different technologies in use and different forms of
value creation, structural changes are often needed to
provide an adequate basis for the new operations. Struc-
tural changes refer to variations in a firm’s organizational
setup, especially concerning the placement of the new
digital activities within the corporate structures. For this
assessment it is further important, whether it is mainly
products, processes, or skills that are affected most by these
changes. If the extent of the changes is fairly limited, it
might be more reasonable to integrate the new operations
into existing corporate structures, while for more substan-
tial changes it might be better to create a separate sub-
sidiary within the firm. However, the former three
dimensions can only be transformed after considering fi-
nancial aspects. These include a firm’s urgency to act
owing to a diminishing core business and its ability to
finance a digital transformation endeavor; financial aspects
are both a driver and a bounding force for the transfor-
mation. While lower financial pressure on the core business
may reduce the perceived urgency to act, companies
already under financial pressure might lack external ways
to finance a transformation. Therefore, firms should con-
front the need to conduct digital transformations and
explore their options openly and in good time.
To ensure the successful rollout of a digital transfor-
mation strategy and fully exploit its intended effects, it is
essential to closely align the four different dimensions: use
of technologies, changes in value creation, structural
changes, and financial aspects. The four transformational
dimensions and their dependencies can be integrated into
one joint Digital Transformation Framework (DTF)
(Fig. 2). If all of these four dimensions are taken into
account as part of the framework, this will support firms in
the assessment of their current abilities and the formulation
of a digital transformation strategy.
2.2 Procedural Aspects of Digital Transformation
Strategies
Digital transformation is a continuous complex undertaking
that can substantially shape a company and its operations. It
is therefore important to assign adequate and clear respon-
sibilities for the definition and implementation of a digital
transformation strategy. If a digital transformation strategy
is approached half-heartedly, firms may lose their scope and
may encounter operational difficulties. Companies should
ensure that the person who is operationally responsible for
the digital transformation strategy has sufficient experience
in transformational projects and directly align his or her
incentives with the strategy’s targets and progress. To date,
there is no clear answer to which senior manager should be
in charge of a digital transformation strategy. In addition to
CIOs or even CEOs, potential candidates include dedicated
business transformation managers or the fairly new role of
the Chief Digital Officer (CDO). In any case, given the long
duration of many transformational processes, this should
preferably continue to be one and the same person. Further,
beginning with the initial planning phase, top management
support is essential along the whole transformation process,
since digital transformation strategies affect the entire
company, and their execution may therefore result in
resistance from different areas of the company. To deal with
such resistance, transformation leadership skills are essen-
tial and require the active involvement of the different
stakeholders affected by the transformation.
Besides adequate staffing for both the initial phase and
further implementation, firms need to find procedures for
formulating, implementing, evaluating, and – if necessary –
adapting digital transformation strategies. This can be a
complex endeavor, and experts from inside and outside the
company might be needed as additional support. Further,
since diffusion of digital technologies can change swiftly,
there typically is high uncertainty concerning the digital
transformation strategies’ underlying assumptions. Hence,
digital transformation strategies should be subject to con-
tinuous reassessment, in which both the underlying
assumptions as well as the transformational progress to
date are evaluated. To ensure that early actions can be
taken if expectations are not met, clear procedures on the
reassessment of digital transformation strategies are nee-
ded. This not only concerns the intervals between
reassessments, but also the definition of procedures and
measures to evaluate intermediate progress and thresholds
upon which corrective actions can be taken. Such methods
are important to ensure management credibility and to
avoid decision-making bias, for instance if high sunk costs
impede the willingness to counter steer.
Use of
technologies
Changes in
value
creation
Financial
aspects
Structural
changes
Fig. 2 Digital transformation framework: balancing four transfor-
mational dimensions
123
C. Matt et al.: Digital Transformation Strategies, Bus Inf Syst Eng 57(5):339–343 (2015) 341

--- PAGE 4 ---
3 Further Research Opportunities
While the basic foundations on digital transformation
strategies have been laid, there are various opportunities for
further research, which can be divided into at least three
different topics.
3.1 Elements and Success Patterns of Digital
Transformation Strategies
The digital transformation framework describes the
cornerstones of the transformation along four dimensions.
Future research should seek to further identify and con-
cretize common elements that can be attributed to these
four dimensions. This pertains in particular to the different
attributes companies could adopt for each of these ele-
ments. Empirical insights could help comparing digital
transformation strategies across different industries to
assess commonalities as well as differences, in order to
increase success rates. One key question relates to the
optimal extent of digitization that a firm should achieve,
since greater use of digital technologies may not always be
desirable (Grover and Kohli 2013). Future research should
analyze whether a firm’s size or the extent to which its core
products can be digitized have different influences in this
respect. Likewise, it is of great interest whether successful
patterns for B2C companies differ from those of B2B
companies.
Further, digital transformations are often accompanied
by changing skill sets that are not only necessary for the
transformation itself, but also for regular operations
thereafter. While current staff members may have a dif-
ferent, less tech-savvy mindset and may lack the required
technological capabilities to cope with the upcoming
changes, new highly skilled and focused staff members
might be difficult to find, given the particular location of a
firm. Research could support firms by providing guidance
on the assessment of their existing technological capabili-
ties and on procedures to weigh up their current options, as
well as guidance on the design of training procedures for
current employees and new hires.
3.2 Procedural Aspects and Responsibilities
Owing to limited empirical evidence, ambiguity about
conventions on how to formulate and reassess digital
transformation strategies remains. This is reinforced by the
considerable uncertainty that results from swift techno-
logical changes and makes necessary adjustments to digital
transformation strategies at a later stage more likely. This
calls for concrete recommendations for procedures for the
continuous refinement of digital transformation strategies,
such as how to observe and evaluate technological
developments and how to test their impacts in controlled
environments within the company. Other key questions
include the desired extent of digital transformations and the
granularity as well as the temporal extent of digital trans-
formation strategies, which could vary from swift, one-
time actions to multiple successive projects.
In addition to the definition of procedural aspects, fur-
ther insights are required to solve questions of responsi-
bilities, particularly related to the new CDO role, in the
planning and deployment of digital transformation strate-
gies (Horlacher and Hess 2014). Owing to the cross-func-
tional characteristics and the far-reaching scope of digital
transformation strategies, it might be useful that a dedi-
cated CDO takes on the responsibility (CIO 2013).
Research should analyze the necessity for a dedicated CDO
position in greater detail and should formulate guidelines
for the definition of this new role. For companies
employing both a CIO and a CDO, research should provide
recommendations for the concrete alignment between the
two; such research can build upon prior research on CIO-
CEO alignment (Johnson and Lederer 2010).
3.3 Integrating Digital Transformation Strategies
into Firms
As noted, digital transformation strategies have a cross-
functional character and need to be aligned with other
functional and operational strategies. However, the align-
ment of IT strategies with other strategies has remained a
difficult and controversial endeavor. Given the rather
recent appearance of digital transformation strategies, fur-
ther evidence is needed as to how this alignment can be
conducted in practice – not only related to IT strategies, but
also from an organizational perspective. In this respect, the
interaction of digital transformation strategies with busi-
ness development and business models also needs to be
assessed from a management perspective. Since digital
transformation strategies cut across various other strategies
at the same time, complex coordination efforts might be
needed. Research should provide guidelines for firms to
help structure these processes in order to achieve shared
goal-setting, the alignment of different strategies, and
cooperation between various people and entities through-
out a firm.
References
Bharadwaj A, El Sawy OA, Pavlou PA, Venkatraman N (2013)
Digital business strategy: toward a next generation of insights.
MIS Q 37(2):471–482
CIO (2013) Why the chief digital officer role is on the rise. http://
www.cio.com/article/743421/Why_the_Chief_Digital_Officer_
123
342 C. Matt et al.: Digital Transformation Strategies, Bus Inf Syst Eng 57(5):339–343 (2015)

--- PAGE 5 ---
Role_Is_on_the_Rise?page=1&taxonomyId=3123. Accessed 17
June 2015
Downes L, Nunes PF (2013) Big-bang disruption. Harv Bus Rev
91(3):44–56
Drnevich PL, Croson DC (2013) Information technology and
business-level strategy: toward an integrated theoretical per-
spective. MIS Q 37(2):483–509
Grover V, Kohli R (2013) Revealing your hand: caveats in
implementing digital business strategy. MIS Q 37(2):655–662
Henderson JC, Venkatraman N (1993) Strategic alignment: leverag-
ing information technology for transforming organizations. IBM
Syst J 32(1):4–16
Horlacher A, Hess T (2014) Der chief digital officer. Medien-
Wirtschaft – Zeitschrift für Medienmanagement und Kommu-
nikationsökonomie 11(3):32–35
Johnson AM, Lederer AL (2010) CEO/CIO mutual understanding,
strategic alignment, and the contribution of IS to the organiza-
tion. Inf Manag 47(3):138–149
Oestreicher-Singer G, Zalmanson L (2013) Content or community? A
digital business strategy for content providers in the social age.
MIS Q 37(2):591–616
Teubner RA (2013) Information systems strategy. Bus Inf Syst Eng
5(4):243–257
123
C. Matt et al.: Digital Transformation Strategies, Bus Inf Syst Eng 57(5):339–343 (2015) 343