--- PAGE 1 ---
Modeling the dynamic alignment of business and information
systems via the lens of human-centered architecture evolution
ZHANG Mengmeng
1
, YI Shuanghui
2,*
, CHEN Honghui
1
, LUO Aimin
1
,
LIU Junxian
1
, and ZHANG Xiaoxue
1
1. Science and Technology on Information Systems Engineering Laboratory, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha
410072, China; 2. National Key Laboratory for Complex System Simulation, Military Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100080, China
Abstract: The complexity of business and information systems
(IS) alignment is a growing concern for researchers and practi-
tioners alike. The extant research on alignment architecture fails
to consider the human viewpoint, which makes it difficult to em-
brace emergent complexity. This paper contributes to the extant
literature in the following ways. First, we combine an enterprise
architecture (EA) framework with a human viewpoint to address
alignment issues in the architecture design phase; second, we
describe a dynamic alignment model by developing a human-
centered meta-model that explains first- and second-order
changes and their effects on alignment evolution. This paper
provides better support for the theoretical research and the
practical application of dynamic alignment.
Keywords: business and information systems (IS) alignment,
human viewpoint, enterprise architecture (EA), meta-model, dy-
namic alignment.
DOI: 10.23919/JSEE.2021.000076
1. Introduction
The importance of business and information systems (IS)
alignment has been well known and documented since
the late 1970s [1−5]. Over the past several decades, it has
remained as one of the top-ranked concerns of business
and information technology (IT) executives, contributing
to initiatives such as “maximizing the return value from
IT investments”, “providing direction and flexibility to
react to change”, and “improving company performance”
[6]. Significant progress has been made in understanding
and addressing alignment issues in recent years, mainly in
streams of research on alignment measurement [7−9], en-
terprise evolution and management [10−12], and enter-
prise architecture (EA) research [13−15], as well as these
topics’ relationships with other subjects [16−18]. How-
ever, due to the emergent complexity and nonlinearity
caused by social influence factors [19], dynamic align-
ment is still difficult to achieve. In the organizational
evolution process, individual behaviors and human iner-
tia are difficult to control, which hinders the achievement
of sustainable alignment [20].
The methodology of EA is a beneficial way to achieve
business and IS alignment. The purpose of the discipline
of EA is to effectively align the strategies of enterprises
with their processes and resources (business and IS).
Many association studies have discussed various aspects
of this discipline, such as EA design [13−15], EA evolu-
tion [10−12], and EA measurement [7−9].
Currently, many scholars have emphasized the import-
ance of the human viewpoint in EA research [21−23].
Different from other viewpoints in IS architecture, the hu-
man viewpoint is required to explicitly represent human
factors and to document the unique implications that hu-
mans bring to system design. This viewpoint enables an
understanding of the human role in systems and EAs,
which provides a basis for stakeholder decisions by
providing a structured linkage from the engineering com-
munity to the manpower, personnel, training, and human
factor communities. It provides early coordination of task
analysis efforts by both systems engineering and human
factors teams. Currently, common EA frameworks fail to
capture the human-centered design aspects necessary to
ensure the effectiveness of human operated and main-
tained systems [21−23]. Applying a human viewpoint to
the architecture framework helps to plan the alignment
architecture from the top down and to capture human be-
haviors from the bottom up.
Through the above explanation, to address human
factors in the architecture design phase and to achieve
continuous alignment, it is beneficial to consider the ap-
plication of human viewpoints to the architecture frame-
work. This paper introduces two contributions: first, we
Manuscript received November 28, 2019.
*Corresponding author.
Journal of Systems Engineering and Electronics
Vol. 32, No. 4, August 2021, pp.881 – 888

--- PAGE 2 ---
introduce a novel lens to combine architecture frame-
work with the human viewpoint to capture human beha-
viors in alignment architecture; second, we describe the
dynamic alignment of business and IS by developing a
human-relevant meta-model and alignment evolution
model, which explain the external changes and their in-
fluences on alignment evolution.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows:
Section 2 presents the related work; Section 3 mainly de-
scribes a human-relevant meta-model combining the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) human
viewpoint with the meta-model of the Department of De-
fense Architecture FrameworkF (DoDAF); Section 4 de-
velops an alignment evolution model with the above hu-
man-relevant meta-model and mainly explains the first-
order changes and second-order changes in the evolution
model; and Section 5 discusses further studies, contribu-
tions and limitations of this paper.
2. Related work
To support our research, we separately explain related
works from the extant alignment research, the alignment
research with the EA method, and the human-related re-
search on the architecture framework.
2.1 Extant alignment research
Throughout the research history of business-IS alignment,
two distinct conceptualizations have been situated in dif-
ferent regions of complexity. The first is located in the re-
gion of order [24], where alignment exhibits high de-
grees of stability. A great deal of research has been con-
ducted to establish such an alignment from multiple types
[25,26], levels [6,27], and dimensions [28,29]. Multiple
alignment techniques have been recommended, such as
business process management, EA, and service-oriented
architecture. Although static and dynamic alignments are
differentiated in this region, all of these techniques view
alignment as a balanced [25], cause-effect deterministic
logic [20].
The second conceptualization is situated in the region
of emergent complexity [30]. The alignment in this re-
gion moves away from equilibrium and exhibits features
such as emergence, nonlinearity, self-organization, and
coevolution [24]. This kind of alignment goes beyond tra-
ditional alignment assumptions and challenges prior
methods and models. A coevolutionary theory is deemed
to be a superior way to address this research challenge
[20]. This theory expresses alignment as a coevolution-
ary process that reconciles top-down rational control and
bottom-up emergent adaptation [20]. Beyond the intended
planning of alignment, the coevolutionary process aims to
coordinate business and IS through continuous adapta-
tion and learning [31]. In our previous work, we classi-
fied the extant coevolutionary literature on alignment
from dimensions including focus, framework, level,
method, and phase [32]. As a result, we found that it was
still difficult to describe the dynamic nature of the align-
ment using the extant coevolutionary research.
According to the literature, alignment complexity
mainly results from the social dimension, such as unin-
tended deviations caused by human inertia, human errors,
and lack of communication [20]. Human behaviors are
difficult to ascertain and control within the “dancing
rugged” external environment and amid IT innovations
[33]. Capturing the human viewpoint is a key solution to
enabling the pursuit of continuous alignment.
2.2 Alignment research with the EA method
EA is defined as the “fundamental organization of a sys-
tem, embodied in its components, their relationships to
each other and the environment, and the principles gover-
ning its design and evolution” [34]. Enterprise architects
seek to align enterprise processes and structures with
their supporting IT systems so that enterprises can flour-
ish in their environments [35]. This alignment seems to
be an instinct of EA development, and the evolution pro-
cess from as-is EA to to-be EA can satisfy the dynamic
requirements of the alignment. As Ross argued, EA is a
payback of the alignment achievement [36].
It is widely acknowledged that intimate connections
exist between alignment research and EA research
[37,38]. Many association studies have discussed various
aspects of this discipline, such as EA design [13−15], EA
evolution [10−12], and alignment measurement [7−9]. In
our previous research, we examined alignment research
combined with the EA method using research questions,
research methods, and techniques [39]. A main limitation
that results from the research examining this combina-
tion is the lack of human-relevant alignment manage-
ment research. The discipline of EA is a top-level re-
search method through top-down planning, which makes
it difficult to control bottom-level human behaviors. En-
hancing human-related exploration is important for fu-
ture EA research.
2.3 Human viewpoint in architecture framework
The human viewpoint enables an understanding of the
human role in EA. It provides a basis for stakeholder de-
cisions by providing a structured linkage from the engi-
neering community to the manpower, personnel, training,
and human factor communities. An EA framework
defines a common approach for development, presenta-
tion, and integration of architecture descriptions. The ap-
plication of a framework enables stakeholders to contri-
882 Journal of Systems Engineering and Electronics Vol. 32, No. 4, August 2021

--- PAGE 3 ---
bute more effectively to building interoperable systems
and to managing the associated complexities. Currently,
most EA frameworks fail to capture the human-centered
design aspects necessary to ensure the effectiveness of
human-operated and maintained systems [21−23]. For ex-
ample, the open group architecture framework (TOGAF)
[40] and DoDAF [41] describe the roles and objectives of
performers but seldom explain human structures and hu-
man constraints, which limits them to capturing dynamic
individual behaviors.
NATO provided a human viewpoint to model human
resources and their applications in architecture evolution
[21]. The purpose of the NATO human view (HV) is to
capture human requirements and the way that humans in-
teract with other elements of a system. The models, de-
scriptions, and contents of the NATO HV are displayed
in Table 1 [21−23]. These clarifications provide human-
related requirements for other EA frameworks.
Table 1 NATO HV
Model Description Content
HV-A: concept A conceptual, high-level representation of the human component of the EA framework
Pictorial depictions
Textual descriptions
HV-B: constraints The expression of capabilities and limitations of humans in systems
Manpower projections
Career progression
Establishment inventory
Health hazards
HV-C: functions A list of human-specific activities and tasks
Function set
Execution criteria of tasks
Task-role matrix
HV-D: roles The roles for humans interacting with systems
Responsibility
Authority
Competencies
HV-E: human network Human-to-human communication patterns
Groupings or teams
Type of interactions
Team performance impacts
HV-F: training The instruction, education or training that is required
As-is training resources
To-be training demands
HV-G: metrics A repository for human-related values, priorities and performance criteria
Human performance metrics
Human function to metrics mapping
Target values
HV-H: human dynamics The dynamic aspects of the human system components defined in above models
States and state changes
Triggering events
Performance measures
3. Human-centered DoDAF meta-model
The Department of Defense Architecture Framework 2.0
(DoDAF 2.0) provides an overarching set of architecture
concepts, guidance, best practices, and methods to enable
and facilitate architecture development, which is widely
adopted by governments. The data meta-model (DM2) of
DoDAF 2.0 provides a mechanism to collect, organize,
and store data, which stipulates the architectural data
standard at a top level and thus guides different view-
points. The data collected with the DM2 can then be
rendered into either of the standard models described by
the “Fit for Purpose” presentations. The complete DM2
can be found in [41].
According to the NATO architecture framework, the
human viewpoint lacks specific data elements and appli-
cation approaches, such as alignment achievement with
human considerations. Within DoDAF 2.0, “Fit for Pur-
pose” is “an architectural description that is consistent
with specific project or mission objectives ” [23]. As
Handley pointed out, the flexible data schema provided
by the DM2 and the ability to describe custom views
tailored to address specific purposes can provide the op-
portunity to integrate the NATO HV with DoDAF [23].
The human centered DoDAF meta-model is displayed
in Fig. 1 with its NATO HV contents. The integrity and
validity of the meta-model can be guaranteed by associat-
ing the data in the HV with the concept layer data and the
logic layer data in other views. The mappings between
DM2 entities and HV models are listed in this figure. For
example, the HV-C functions can be related to the DM2
“Activity” entity; the HV-E human network can be re-
lated to the “Organization” entity. These DM2 contents
can be combined with other viewpoints of DoDAF 2.0 to
develop the complete EA description. Notably, although
DM2 can describe the NATO human contents, the corres-
ponding human viewpoint is lacking in DoDAF 2.0,
which can be examined in future research.
ZHANG Mengmeng et al.: Modeling the dynamic alignment of business and information systems via the lens of ... 883

--- PAGE 4 ---
Capability
Activity
Rule
Measure type
Performer Person type Skill
Organization Service
System
Condition
HV-H
HV-B
HV-E
HV-F
HV-B
HV-D
HV-C
HV-A
HV-G
Fig. 1 Human-relevant DoDAF meta-model
The above human-centered meta-model can support
alignment achievement in the following ways: first, from
the perspective of EA planning, this meta-model deter-
mines the relationships of various viewpoints in multiple
layers, which correlates business-related data and IS-re-
lated data; second, from the perspective of alignment
modeling, e.g., strategic alignment model [5], this meta-
model aligns business capability, IS capability, business
structures, and IS structures with the EA description;
third, from the perspective of human behaviors, this meta-
model tracks different kinds of performers’ relationships,
tasks, and roles to capture the human uncertainty in the
organizational evolution. Overall, this meta-model sum-
marizes human-related data and provides a better founda-
tion for business and IS alignment.
4. Human-centereddynamicalignmentmodel
According to dynamic alignment research, the above
meta-model acts as a deep structure of alignment evolu-
tion. For example, Sabherwal described the deep struc-
ture of alignment with a strategic IS management profile
embracing the business strategy, the business structure,
the IS strategy, and the IS structure [25], and Lyytinen
explained the deep structure of IS from the perspectives
of structure, actors, tasks and technology [42]. This pa-
per emphasizes human factors from a human viewpoint.
Therefore, this paper considers the human-related deep
structure via the DoDAF meta-model.
The dynamic alignment model is developed in Fig. 2,
showing the first-order change and the second-order
change from external and internal environments. This
model explains the alignment trajectory in the organiza-
tional evolution process. These two kinds of changes oc-
cur in different complexity regions. During the organiza-
tional evolution, the organizational structure may under-
go first- and second-order changes. The first-order
changes may be slight, while the second-order changes
are often dramatic and revolutionary. First-order adapta-
tion and second-order adaptation can be applied in these
situations.
Capability
Activity
Rule
Measure type
Performer Person type Skill
Organization Service
System
Condition
Capability
Activity
Rule
Measure type
Performer Person type Skill
Organization Service
System
Condition
First-order change First-order adaptation
Second-order change
Second-order adaptation
Dynamic alignment
First-order change
Time
Environmental changes
Human-relevant alignment meta-model
Organization
structure 1 Organization
structure 2
Human-relevant alignment meta-model
Fig. 2 Human-centered dynamic alignment model
4.1 First-order change and adaptation
According to [25] and [42], the first-order change occurs
between periods of incremental adaptation, and the
second-order change brings revolutionary and episodic
upheaval. As Section 1 explains, the first-order change is
situated in the complexity region of order, which can be
adjusted by correction mechanisms, while the second-or-
der change causes nonlinearity, which needs to be pre-
dicted, and corresponding unintended deviations should
be tamed.
According to extant misalignment research [43,44], the
first-order change can cause misalignment among the en-
tities of meta-models. We enumerate the misalignment
symptoms caused by first-order changes in Fig. 3 and
884 Journal of Systems Engineering and Electronics Vol. 32, No. 4, August 2021

--- PAGE 5 ---
Table 2. For example, in regard to external changes, or-
ganizational goals and the responsibilities of business
processes may be unknown (S01), which misaligns busi-
ness and IS capabilities; changing business goals creates
a lack of required information for performers to support
their day-to-day activities (S05); and business structure
and IS structure fall out of harmony with one another be-
cause business/IS actors have not participated in IS/busi-
ness organizations (S10). These misalignment symptoms
caused by first-order changes describe the possible devi-
ations of the meta-model. Human factors, including
goals, responsibilities, activities, skills, and groups, are
mainly considered in Table 2. Overall, this kind of mis-
alignment is easily checked and is often corrected by
means of meetings, introducing or deleting elements of
the model, reorganizing elements or organizations, and so
on [25,45]. A first-order change can be easily sensed and
absorbed and always improves organizational perform-
ance after the misalignment is corrected [43].
Capability
Activity
Rule
Measure type
Performer Person type Skill
Organization Service
System
Condition
S01
S02
S04
S05
S06
S07
S08
S09
S10
S11
S12
S03
S13
S14
Fig. 3 Misalignment caused by first-order changes
Table 2 Misalignment descriptions
Number Misalignment symptom
S01 Organizational goals and responsibilities of business processes are unknown.
S02 Responsibilities of business and IS activities are unknown.
S03 Mappings of systems and services are unclear.
S04 There is a lack of required information to support alignment measurement.
S05 There is a lack of required performer information to support day-to-day activities.
S06 Relationship between systems and activities is lacking, insufficient, or multiple.
S07 Relationship between services and activities is lacking, insufficient, or multiple.
S08 Systems have not been manipulated by performers.
S09 Services have not been manipulated by performers.
S10 Business/IS actors have not participated in IS/business organizations.
S11 Business/IS actors have not received relevant training.
S12 Criteria for satisfying capabilities are unclear.
S13 Conditions of executing activities are unknown.
S14 There is a lack of required capabilities for measurement alignment.
4.2 Second-order change and adaptation
The second-order change is revolutionary and involves
more than one of the elements or relations shown in Fig. 1.
For example, an IS innovation may alter systems, deploy
performers, or even adjust capabilities. In the extant digit-
izing world, an organization’s external and internal com-
plexities may increase with the challenge of “dancing
rugged ” environments [46], pervasive digital technolo-
gies [33], and a multitude of interdependent relationships
[47]. Under these situations, the traditional alignment
shifts away from equilibrium and starts to embrace “emer-
gent complexity” [20]. Instead of requiring a fixed solu-
tion, deviations from the intended plans generated by the
second-order changes need to be “captured” and “tamed”
[24]. This forces governance mechanisms to identify the
root causes of these dynamics and to regulate human be-
haviors by experimenting and learning [20].
This second kind of change can be absorbed and tamed
by governance principles [20]. In our previous research,
we explored 10 governance principles from the extant li-
terature [32]. For example, frequent mutual communica-
tion among actors can reduce human inertia, e.g., nega-
tive emotions due to threat perception, stickiness due to
norm and value re-enactment, which can be caused by
short-term success but would lead to suboptimal condi-
tions in the long term; in addition, knowledge sharing
supports the perception of unpredictable changes and is
effective in organizational transformation [31]; further-
more, facilitating the learning capability in a company
helps to reduce uncertainties, increase companies’ inter-
ZHANG Mengmeng et al.: Modeling the dynamic alignment of business and information systems via the lens of ... 885

--- PAGE 6 ---
nal complexity, and accelerate future change rates [48].
These governance principles help to tame unintended de-
viations caused by second-order changes.
Overall, the whole alignment trajectory is connected by
first-order changes and second-order changes. The human-
centered alignment meta-model acts as a deep structure to
determine alignment states. The above dynamic align-
ment model explains human behaviors and their long-
term effects on alignment.
5. Discussion and conclusion
Human-centered architecture exploration from the align-
ment perspective is a novel research topic. This paper
mainly introduces a human-centered alignment meta-
model and develops a dynamic alignment model with this
meta-model. This paper suggests further research into
other human-related issues. First, the relationships
between the human viewpoint and other EA viewpoints,
e.g., capability viewpoint and system viewpoint, need to
be determined, and the development process also needs to
be built on the basis of alignment achievement. Second,
architecture data from a human viewpoint should be used
to measure alignment maturity. Third, with the help of a
human viewpoint, the alignment process combining top-
down rational design and bottom-up emergent adaptation
needs to be developed.
We contribute to the extant literature in two ways. The-
oretically, we combine the EA framework and the human
viewpoint to address alignment issues in the architecture
design phase. In addition, we describe dynamic align-
ment by developing a human-centered meta-model and
dynamic alignment model, which can explain first- and
second-order changes and their effects on alignment evo-
lution. Practically, the human viewpoint captures the re-
levant dynamics of human factors and associates them
with the components defined in other views. These cha-
racteristics make it easier to analyze the human view-
point in terms of dynamic changes in organizational
transformation and evolution. This paper thus provides
better support for theoretical research and practical ap-
plication.
This paper still presents limitations. First, given the
lack of validation of the human viewpoint, further human-
related description models need to be developed; second,
the theoretical dynamic alignment model is proposed, but
the best way to guide the practical application of this
model still needs to be explored. A sensing capability that
can identify first-order changes and second-order changes
should be considered in the dynamic alignment model.
All of these limitations need to be analyzed in future re-
search.
Overall, with the advent of emerging technologies and
the associated dynamic strategies, complexity is likely to
pose a long-term challenge to the analysis of alignment
[49,50]. The human viewpoint is a key solution to align-
ment complexity. Given the lack of human consideration
of alignment and architecture frameworks, this paper
combines traditional alignment and dynamic alignment to
achieve alignment through human-centered EA design
and evolution to better describe the alignment evolution
process.
References
PARKER M, BENSON R. Information economics. New Jer-
sey: Prentice-Hall, 1988.
[1]
BRANCHEAU J, WETHERBE J. Issues in information sys-
tems management. MIS Quarterly, 1987, 11(1): 23–45.
[2]
DIXON P J, JOHN D A. Technology issues facing corporate
management in the 1990s. MIS Quarterly, 1989, 13(3):
247–255.
[3]
NIEDERMAN F, BRANCHEAU J, WETHERBE J. Infor-
mation systems management issues for the 1990s. MIS
Quarterly, 1991, 15(4): 475–495.
[4]
LUFTMAN J N. Competing in the information age: practical
applications of the strategic alignment model. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1996.
[5]
AVISON D, JONES J, POWELL P, et al. Using and validat-
ing the strategic alignment model. The Journal of Strategic
Information Systems, 2004, 13(3): 223–246.
[6]
LUFTMAN J N. Assessing business-IT alignment maturity.
Communications of the Association for Information Systems,
2000, 4: 14.
[7]
LUFTMAN J, KEMPAIAH R. An update on business-IT
alignment: “a line” has been drawn. MIS Quarterly Execut-
ive, 2007, 6(3): 165–175.
[8]
ESCALONA M J, ARAGON G, LINGER H, et al. Informa-
tion system development. Berlin: Springer, 2014.
[9]
WAGNER T H. Evolvement of business-IT alignment over
time: a situated change perspective. Proc. of the 47th Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences, 2014:
4366–4375.
[10]
OHLSSON J, HAN S, HULTIN M, et al. How to achieve
sustainable business IT alignment-designing a circular organ-
izational structure at SAAB. Proc. of the 49th Hawaii Inter-
national Conference on System Sciences, 2016: 5116–5125.
[11]
BAKER W E, NIEDERMAN F. Integrating the IS functions
after mergers and acquisitions: analyzing business-IT align-
ment. The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 2014,
23(2): 112–127.
[12]
PEREIRA C M, SOUSA P. Enterprise architecture: business
and IT alignment. Proc. of the ACM Symposium on Applied
Computing, 2005: 1344–1345.
[13]
ZARVIC N, WIERINGA R. An integrated enterprise archi-
tecture framework for business-IT alignment. Proc. of the
CAISE*6 Workshop on Business/IT Alignment and Intero-
perability BUSITAL ’06, 2006. DOI: 10.1201/b16417-5.
[14]
HINKELMANN K, GERBER A. A new paradigm for the
continuous alignment of business and IT: combining enter-
prise architecture modelling and enterprise ontology. Com-
puters in Industry, 2016, 79: 77–86.
[15]
LUFTMAN J N. IT Governance: an alignment maturity per- [16]
886 Journal of Systems Engineering and Electronics Vol. 32, No. 4, August 2021

--- PAGE 7 ---
spective. International Journal of IT/Business Alignment and
Governance, 2010. DOI: 10.4018/jitbag.2010040102.
LUFTMAN J N, LYYTINEN K. Enhancing the measure-
ment of information technology business alignment and its
influence on company performance. Journal of Information
Technology, 2017, 32(1): 26–46.
[17]
GEROW J E. Looking toward the future of IT-business stra-
tegic alignment through the past: a meta-analysis. MIS
Quarterly, 2014, 38(4): 1059–1085.
[18]
BAKER J, SINGH H. The roots of misalignment: insights
from a system dynamics perspective. Proc. of JAIS Theory
Development Workshop, 2015: 1–37.
[19]
BENBYA H, MCKELVEY B. Using coevolutionary and
complexity theories to improve IS alignment: a multi-level
approach. Journal of Information Technology, 2006, 21(4):
284–298.
[20]
HANDLEY H, SMILLIE R J. Architecture framework hu-
man view: the NATO approach. Systems Engineering, 2008,
11(2): 156–164.
[21]
HANDLEY H, SMILLIE R J. Human view dynamics—the
NATO approach. Systems Engineering, 2010, 13(1): 72–79.
[22]
HANDLEY H. Incorporating the NATO human view in the
DoDAF 2. 0 meta model. Systems Engineering, 2012, 15(1):
108–117.
[23]
TANRIVERDI H, LIM S Y. How to survive and thrive in
complex, hypercompetitive, and disruptive ecosystems? The
roles of IS-enabled capabilities. Proc. of the 38th Interna-
tional Conference on Information Systems, 2017: 1–21.
[24]
SABHERWAL R, HIRSCHHELM R, GOLES T. The dy-
namics of alignment: insights from a punctuated equilibrium
model. Organization Science, 2001, 12(2): 179–197.
[25]
GEROW J E, THATCHER J B, GROVER V. Six types of IT-
business strategic alignment: an investigation of the con-
structs and their measurement. European Journal of Informa-
tion Systems, 2015, 24(5): 465–491.
[26]
WAGNER H T, WEIZEL T. How to achieve operational
business-IT alignment: insights from a global aerospace firm.
MIS Quarterly Executive, 2012, 11(1): 1–11.
[27]
CHAN Y E, REICH B H. IT alignment: what have we
learned? Journal of Information Technology, 2007, 22(4):
297–315.
[28]
SCHLOSSER F, WAGNER H T, COLTMAN T. Reconsi-
dering the dimensions of business-IT alignment. Proc. of the
45th Hawaii International Conference on System Science,
2012: 5053–5061.
[29]
PAGE S E. Understanding complexity. Chantilly, VA:
Teaching Company, 2009.
[30]
SAWY E, MALHOTRA A, PARK Y, et al. Research com-
mentary—seeking the configurations of digital ecodynamics:
it takes three to tango. Information Systems Research, 2010,
21(4): 835–848.
[31]
ZHANG M M, CHEN H H, LYYTINEN K. Principles of or-
ganizational coevolution of business and IT: a complexity
perspective. Proc. of the 27th European Conference on In-
formation Systems, 2019. https://aisel.aisnet.org/ecis2019_
rip/8.
[32]
YOO Y, BOLAND R J, LYYTINEN K, et al. Organizing for
innovation in the digitized world. Organization Science,
2012, 23(5): 1398–1408.
[33]
IEEE Std 1471−2000. IEEE recommended practice for archi-
tectural description of software intensive systems. New York:
IEEE Computer Society, 2000.
[34]
WEGMANN A, REGEV G, LOISON B. Business and IT
alignment with SEAM. Proc. of the 1st International Work-
shop on Requirements Engineering for Business Need, and
IT Alignment, 2005: 74–84.
[35]
ROSS J W. Creating a strategic IT architecture competency:
learning in stages. MIS Quarterly Executive, 2003, 2(1):
31−43.
[36]
SCHEKKERMAN J. How to survive in the jungle of enter-
prise architecture frameworks—creating or choosing an en-
terprise architecture framework. Victoria, Canada: Trafford,
2004.
[37]
SCHONHERR M. Enterprise architecture frameworks. Ber-
lin: GITO, 2004.
[38]
ZHANG M M, CHEN H H, LUO A M. A systematic review
of business-IT alignment research with enterprise architec-
ture. IEEE Access, 2018, 6: 18933–18944.
[39]
The Open Group. TOGAF "Enterprise Edition" Version 8.1.
New York: Publishing V H, 2003.
[40]
DoD Architecture Framework Working Group. DoD Archi-
tecture Framework Version 2.0. Washington D. C.: Depart-
ment of Defense, 2009.
[41]
LYYTINEN K, NEWMAN M. Explaining information sys-
tems change: a punctuated socio-technical change model.
European Journal of Information Systems, 2008, 17(6):
589–613.
[42]
ORI D. Misalignment symptom analysis based on enterprise
architecture model assessment. IADIS International Journal
on Computer Science & Information Systems, 2014, 9(2):
1–15.
[43]
ORI D. On exposing strategic and structural mismatches
between business and information systems: misalignment
symptom detection based on enterprise architecture model
analysis. Budapest: Corvinus University of Budapest, 2017.
[44]
ZHANG M M, CHEN H H, LI X Y, et al. Evolvement of
business-IT alignment: a conceptual model and intervening
changes from resource allocation. IEEE Access, 2018, 6:
9160–9172.
[45]
TANRIVERDI H, RAI A, VENKATRAMAN N. Research
commentary—reframing the dominant quests of information
systems strategy research for complex adaptive business sys-
tems. Information Systems Research, 2010, 21(4): 822–834.
[46]
ALLEN P M, VARGA L. A co-evolutionary complex sys-
tems perspective on information systems. Journal of Informa-
tion Technology, 2006, 21(4): 229−238.
[47]
KANDJANI H, TAVANA M, BERNUS P, et al. Co-evolu-
tion path model: sustaining enterprises as complex systems
on the edge of chaos. Cybernetics and Systems, 2014, 45(7):
547–567.
[48]
ILMUDEEN A, BAO Y, ALHARBI I M. How does business-
IT strategic alignment dimension impact on organizational
performance measures: conjecture and empirical analysis.
Journal of Enterprise Information Management, 2019, 32(3):
457–476.
[49]
GIDEON J, LAZAR R, ERIK P. Business-IT alignment in
the era of digital transformation: quo vadis? Proc. of the 53rd
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 2020:
5563–5572.
[50]
ZHANG Mengmeng et al.: Modeling the dynamic alignment of business and information systems via the lens of ... 887

--- PAGE 8 ---
Biographies
ZHANG Mengmeng was born in 1990. He re-
ceived his M.S. degree in management science
and technology from the National University of
Defense Technology (NUDT), Changsha, China,
in 2011. He received his Ph.D. degree from the
NUDT, Changsha, China, in 2019. His research
interests are information system architecture
design, analysis and validation.
E-mail: 18670381635@163.com
YI Shuanghui was born in 1978. He received his
M.S. degree in computer science and technology
in 2003. He has been engaged in distributed com-
puting research for nearly 10 years, software test-
ing for more than three years, and information
system architecture design for more than five
years at Beijing Institute of System Engineering.
Currently, he is the deputy director of the Second
Research Department of National Key Laboratory for Complex System
Simulation.
E-mail: 377019128@qq.com
CHEN Honghui was born in 1969. He received
his M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the National
University of Defense Technology (NUDT). He is
a professor and the executive vice director of Sci-
ence and Technology on Information Systems En-
gineering Laboratory in the NUDT. His current
research interests include requirement engineer-
ing, military information system, and enterprise
architecture design and analysis.
E-mail: chh0808@gmail.com
LUO Aimin was born in 1971. She received her
M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the National Uni-
versity of Defense Technology (NUDT). She is a
professor in the NUDT. Her current research in-
terests include requirement engineering, military
information system, and enterprise architecture
design and analysis.
E-mail: amluo@nudt.edu.cn
LIU Junxian was born in 1973. He received his
M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the National Uni-
versity of Defense Technology (NUDT). He is a
professor in the NUDT. His current research in-
terests include requirement engineering, military
information system, and enterprise architecture
design and analysis.
E-mail: 18674864900@163.com
ZHANG Xiaoxue was born in 1986. She re-
ceived her M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the Na-
tional University of Defense Technology (NUDT).
She is an associate professor in the NUDT. Her
current research interests include requirement en-
gineering, military information system, and enter-
prise architecture design and analysis.
E-mail: snow1126@126.com
888 Journal of Systems Engineering and Electronics Vol. 32, No. 4, August 2021