--- PAGE 1 ---
Journal of Systems Engineering and Electronics
Vol. 31, No. 5, October 2020, pp.983–995
A coevolutionary framework of business-IT alignment via
the lens of enterprise architecture
LIN Menglong1
, YI Shuanghui2,*
, ZHANG Mengmeng1,*
, CHEN Tao1
,
CHEN Honghui1
, and ZHANG Xiaoxue1
1. Science and Technology on Information Systems Engineering Laboratory, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha
410072, China; 2. National Key Laboratory for Complex System Simulation, Academy of Military Sciences, Beijing 100000, China
Abstract: Due to the turbulent external business environment, the
complexity of internal relations of the organization and the emer-
gence of subversive IT roles, the business-IT alignment (BITA)
has become increasingly difficult. The unsuccessful realization of
BITA will lead to the waste of organizational resources, the reduc-
tion of return on investment and eventually the loss of competitive
advantage. In recent years, coevolution has received widespread
attention due to its ability to describe the dynamic relationship
between IT and business. Multiple principles such as quickening
learning action loops and adopt suitable organizing principles for
achieving business and IT coevolution (BITC) are obtained. How-
ever, the continuous BITC is still hard to be achieved because of
the lack of complete BITC management. This paper focuses on
the management process of the BITC and how to perform it gradu-
ally. A coevolution framework combines the enterprise architecture
(EA) approach with the coevolution analysis is proposed, which
contains the design of EA, the sensing and governance of the mis-
alignment and the procedure of the EA misalignment prevention.
The steps for the governance and prevention of misalignment are
discussed in particular. Through comparison with the principles,
characteristics and methods of coevolution in the literature, the
proposed framework is evaluated. The results show that the pro-
posed framework is effective for BITC implementation.
Keywords: business-IT alignment (BITA), coevolution, misalign-
ment governance, misalignment prevention, enterprise architec-
ture.
DOI: 10.23919/JSEE.2020.000073
1. Introduction
Business-IT alignment (BITA) is defined as the degree
of how the enterprise’s business strategy and information
technology fit for each other. In recent years, BITA has
always been one of the most concerned issues for the en-
terprises managers, which is a significant approach to in-
crease the return on the IT investment and improve the en-
terprise’s competitive advantages [1–3]. A great number
Manuscript received December 18, 2019.
*Corresponding author.
of researches have been studied from multiple perspec-
tives, such as BITA achievement [4–6], BITA measure-
ment [7–10], BITA maintenance[11,12],and the relation-
shipsbetweenBITA with firmperformances[13,14].How-
ever, despite years of cumulative research, BITA is still
considered as an unachieved objective [15–17].
The most challenging features of BITA are currently
represented as dynamic [18] and complex [19,20]. A com-
pany can reposition itself by its varied corporate strategies
and competitive strategies. For example, the business stra-
tegy of the Li-Ning company in China has moved from an
imitation strategy to a focus strategy and finally to a differ-
entiationstrategyinthelast20years[21].Furthermore,the
increasing connectedness, asymmetric relationships, and
nonlinear dependencies between business elements (e.g.,
structures, processes, actors) and IT elements (e.g., ser-
vices, applications, actors) have made the alignment more
difficult. “Ecosystem” or “complex adaptive system” is
sometimes used to describe this complexity [19,22].
Recently, the business and IT coevolution (BITC) has
been advocated as a source of methods to address BITA
[16,19,20,23,24]. This study employs Lewin’s definition
of coevolution as “the joint outcome of managerial inten-
tionality, institutional effects and environment” [25] that
should face the dynamics and embrace the complexity of
BITA. The literature analyzed BITC from multilevel, bidi-
rectional, nonlinear, and positive feedback perspectives.
Various definitions, features, and principles of BITC were
previously discussed. These researches have provided sig-
nificant implications for the exploration of BITC.
The extant literature proposedseveral recommendations
to achieve BITC, such as modular design [23,24], sharing
domain knowledge [26], and tension [16,23,24].However,
it is hard to manage BITC in an operative way, without a
process to adopt these mechanisms.
The enterprise architecture (EA) method is useful to in-
tegrate the enterprsie’s strategy with its processes and re-

--- PAGE 2 ---
984 Journal of Systems Engineering and Electronics Vol. 31, No. 5, October 2020
sources more effectively through various viewpoints and
models. EA has proven its capabilities to deal with the tra-
ditional BITA issues, but it is rarely used in the BITC field.
In summary, realizing the BITA is vital to improve the
organization’s competitiveness. Due to the dynamic and
complex features of BITA, BITC is becoming popular to
address the BITA issue. Though there exist several BITC
recommendations, they are not systematically categorized
and managed. In addition, the EA is rarely used when
considering the BITC. Meanwhile, a practical framework
of BITC, which helps to describe the structure and pro-
cess of BITC, is lacking in the literature. Therefore, a
process-oriented BITC management framework should be
proposed to describe and manage BITC, and flexibly repo-
sition organizations.
To reach this objective, three basic arguments are con-
sidered in this study, each of which helps to face the
dynamics and embrace the complexity of BITA. First,
BITC should reconcile both “rational designs” and “emer-
gent processes” [16,23,24,27]. Second, BITC should in-
volve short-term and long-term alignments simultaneously
[26,28–30]. And third, the firm is a complex adaptive
system and its internal relationships are hard to perceive
[20,31]. In this study, the EA method and coevolutionary
analysis are combined to meet the above three arguments.
Specifically, EA acts as a rational BITA design approach
and coevolutionary analysis seeks to govern the deviations
and misalignments in each period of EA evolution. A co-
evolutionaryframeworkthatisformed,containsfoursteps:
EA design, sense of the misalignment, governance of the
misalignment, and prevention of the misalignment. The
main contributions of this study are as follows:
(i) The recommendationprinciplesof BITC are summa-
rized and are categorized as short-term governance princi-
ples and long-term prevention principles.
(ii) A coevolutionary framework combining EA design
with coevolutionary sensing, misalignment governance
andpreventionprinciplesis constructed,whichcouldassist
the senior manager to take related governance measures.
(iii) Demonstrate the proposed framework from several
dimensionsincludingthe characteristics of BITC, the prin-
ciples of BITC and the approaches of the BITC.
Theremainderofthispaperisorganizedasfollows.Sec-
tion 2 presents the relevant background of BITC, EA, and
complex adaptive system. Section 3 introduces a coevo-
lutionary framework combining EA design with coevolu-
tionary sensing, misalignment governance and prevention
principles. Section 4 evaluates the framework from differ-
ent coevolutionary dimensions. Section 5 draws conclu-
sions and presents directions for future research.
2. Theoretical foundation
2.1 BITC
BITC is a new quest in the BITA research, aiming to im-
prove a company’s dynamism and agility in reposition-
ing itself continuously [19]. For analyzing the BITC re-
search deeply, we select 12 representative papers, which
are codied and discussed in Table 1. They are discussed
from main focuses, motivations, contents, and approaches.
Several conclusions can be deduced from Table 1. From
the third column of Table 1, three motivations are driv-
ing the multiple focuses on BITC. First, the external com-
petitive environment of a company is becoming “dancing
rugged” [19,22,32]. Tanriverdi [19] pointed out that a firm
represents a “dancing rugged” competing landscape if its
choice variables become dependent with those of other
firms. Thus, the BITA should understand how the IS stra-
tegy co-evolves with the competitive and corporate stra-
tegy. A firm needs to be able to show sufficiently complex
behavior to survive in this environment [32].
Second, the internal relationships in a company are be-
coming polyphyletic and complex [16,20,23,33–35]. The
relationships of the business and IT are multifaceted in-
cluding the strategy level, operational level and the tactical
level [35]. To address the complex relationships in a com-
pany, Fiss [31] proposed a qualitative comparative analy-
sis method to discuss the company outcomes with discrete
configurations. In brief, the relationships are multifaceted
and multilevel, instead of representing simple determinis-
tic logic. The organization is becoming a complex system
on the edge of chaos.
Third, the IT roles have changed from one of the func-
tional head to the strategic partner [36,37]. Since infor-
mation systems (IS) have evolved from the management
support tools to the components of business structures,
Hiekkanen [38] pointed out that the IS planning and stra-
tegy discussion should go beyond the concept of align-
ment. Instead of a functional-level strategy, it is time to
rethink the role of the IT strategy as a fusion between IT
and the business strategy [39]. Therefore, the business and
IT are fused and their boundaries have been blurred.
Facing the above challenges, dynamic BITC emerged
beyond the traditional alignment. Multiple coevolution-
ary problems are discussed with various models and ap-
proaches as shown in column 4 and column 5 in Table 1.
For example, Benbya and McKelvey [23] viewed align-
ment as a continuous process of coevolution, which coor-
dinated the “rational designs” and “emergent processes”.
They proposed a coevolutionary model from the strategy
level, the operational level, and the individual level. Signi-
ficant implications have been harvested with these re-
search.However,the majority of themstudied what the co-
evolution is and how the business and IT coevolved, rather
than provided ordered mechanisms for practical manage-
ment [20]. In this paper, we aim to propose a management
process on how to control and reposition the BITC within
the evolution of a firm.

--- PAGE 3 ---
LIN Menglong et al.: A coevolutionary framework of business-IT alignment via the lens of enterprise architecture 985
Table 1 Some representative papers on BITC
Author Focus Why What How
Agarwaland and
Sambamurthy (2002)
[40]
Organizing IT func-
tions
Increasing IT roles
Partner model
Platform model
Organize IT to foster coevolu-
tion between business and IT
functions
Bendya and McK-
elvey (2006) [23]
A conceptual model
of BITC
Dancing rugged environment
Complex internal relationships
Strategic level
Operational level
Individual level
Top-down rational design and
bottom-up emergent process
Tanriverdi, et al.
(2010) [19]
A new quest of BITC Dancing rugged environment Strategic alignment quest
Improve the organization’s
agility and dynamics in repo-
sitioning itself
El Sawy, et al. (2010)
[22]
The ecosystem of en-
vironment, business,
and IT systems
Dancing rugged environment
Complex internal relationships
Increasingly IT roles
Digital ecodynamics
Environmental turbulence
Business capabilities
IT systems
Configuration theory
Nassim and Robert
(2013) [24]
Verifying coevolu-
tionary principles
Dancing rugged environment
Complex internal relationships
Adaptive tension
Change rate
Modular design
Top-down rational design and
bottom-up emergent process
Vessey and Ward
(2013) [27]
A conceptual model
of BITC
Dancing rugged environment
Complex internal relationships
Adaptive IS management
Enabling IS management
Administrative IS mana-
gement
Top-down rational design and
bottom-up emergent process
Short-term and long-term align-
ment
Sandberg (2014) [41]
A shift to digital busi-
ness strategy
Dancing rugged environment
Increasing IT roles
Digital business strategy
Organizational performance
Improving organizational per-
formance through coevolution
Peppard (2014, 2003)
[16,42]
A conceptual model
of BITC
Dancing rugged environment
Complex internal relationships
“Never go ahead” loop
“More of the same” loop
Glaserian form of grounded
theory development
Weeger and Haase
(2016) [33]
Transformation of
BITA
Complex internal relationships
IT activity system
Business activity system
Activity theory
Amarilli, et al. (2016)
[20]
A conceptual model
of BITC and different
approaches
Dancing rugged environment
Complex internal relationships
Macro scale
Micro scale
Metaphors, functional comp
lexity models, co-evolutionary
models, and dynamic complexi-
ty models
Kahre, et al. (2017)
[36]
A shift to digital busi-
ness strategy
Dancing rugged environment
Increasing IT roles
Organizational conditions
& changes
Environmental conditions
& changes
Changes in the content of
strategy
Provide a structured clarifica-
tion of the current digital busi-
ness strategies knowledge base
2.2 EA
EA is considered as a useful approach to achieve and sus-
tain BITA. According to the ISO/IEC 42010 [43], EA is
defined as “the basic organization of the enterprise embo-
diedin its components,the relationshipsbetweenthem and
the environment, and the principles guiding their design
and development”. EA is a useful method to describe a
complex organization from different viewpoints. Niemann
[44] argued that EA is a structured and aligned plan col-
lection of integrated representations of the business and
IT landscape of the organization’s states in the past, the
current and the future. EA represents the basic organiza-
tion of an enterprise, maybe as a whole, or together with
its suppliers, customers and partners, and also contains the
principles guiding its design and development [45]. Some
organizations proposed EA frameworks to describe EA in
a unified and compatible way. EA frameworkscontain var-
ious viewpoints and models which could help the archi-
tects to abstract the details of the design tasks and pro-
duce several models relating to the architectural descrip-
tions. Multiple kinds of EA frameworks have emerged
in the literature, such as that of Zachman [46], Ministry
of Denfence Architecture Framework (MoDAF) [47], De-
partment of Denfense Architecture Framework (DoDAF)
[48], and Open Group Architecture Framework (TOGAF)
[49].
EA is deemed as a discipline, and the target is to align
the organization’s strategies together with their resources
and processes more effectively [50]. Duffy [51] even ar-
gued that the design of the organization’s business and IT
systemalignmentisthefieldofEA.WinterandSchelp[52]
thought EA merges “pure” business related artifacts expli-
citly, hence providing an opportunity to align business
and IT structures more effectively. Four main topics were

--- PAGE 4 ---
986 Journal of Systems Engineering and Electronics Vol. 31, No. 5, October 2020
found in the literature to address BITA problems with EA
methods,whicharetherelationshipofBITAandEA,BITA
achievement with EA, BITA measurement with EA, and
BITAgovernancewithEA.Theirdescriptionsandresearch
examples are displayed in Table 2. EA has provenits capa-
bilities to deal with the traditional BITA problems.
Table 2 Research topics combining BITA with EA
Topic Description Example
The relationship between BITA and EA What are the correlations of BITA and EA? [13,14,53]
BITA achievement with EA How can we achieve BITA with EA methods? [4,5,50]
BITA measurement with EA How can we measure BITA with EA methods? [7–10]
BITA governance with EA How can we maintain BITA with EA methods? [11,12,54]
However, the questions of BITC are more severe than
the traditional BITA on the basis of the challenges ex-
plained in the last section. Rare papers considered EA in
the region of BITC. We deem that EA still owns signifi-
cant advantages in dealing with BITC problems.
In this paper, we consider EA as a rational top-down
BITC design method. Various contents and relationships
among them in a company are organized and classified
within EA design, which helps to build the BITA. For the
changesin the process of EA evolution,we considera mis-
alignment goverance method.
2.3 Complex adaptive system
The commonality across the complex adaptive systems is
thatalargenumberofinteractingcomponentsoragentsare
contained there [16]. According to the statement of several
authors, a firm can be regarded as a complex adaptive sys-
tem if exhibitinga numberof the followingcharacteristics:
(i) Dynamic–Organization change over time, and dif-
ferent components with different rates.
(ii) Governed by feedback–Due to the tight coupling,
actions will feed back on themselves. Every decision will
have an impact on future decisions.
(iii)Nonlinear–Theresultsarerarelyproportionaltothe
cause. Small changes in one place may cause dispropor-
tionate changes in other places.
(iv) Adaptive–Through learning experience, the actor’s
decision rules and actions often change over time. How-
ever, learning may be detrimental to the overall perfor-
mance of the organization.
(v) Policy resistant–Solutions aimed at the obvious
symptoms often get the opposite function.
(vi) Trade-offs–Solutions that address obvious symp-
toms rather than to find root causes will often lead to the
initial improvement, followed by a long-term performance
degradation.
Multiple researches have studied the aforementioned
theory. Benbya found that if the added complexity is not
properly managed, IS fails [23]. Based on the complexi-
ty theory, especially the self-organizingemergency behav-
iorandstructure,McKelveyputforwarda viewofISalign-
ment [23]. Based on the complexity characteristics of IS,
Nassim constructed a process causal-loop model of the
strategic alignment by using the empirical data [24]. Pep-
pard [16] argued that symptom analysis methods are diffi-
cult to find out the root causes, and may lead to the initial
improvement followed by a long-term performance degra-
dation, which makes the BITA situation worse.
In this paper, we consider that the organizational IS is a
complex adaptive system, and the simple symptoms cor-
rection action is not enough to cure the misalignments.
Thus, the organizational manager should sense the devi-
ations and misalignments at a timely manner, and apply
governanceprinciples to sustain the firm’s competitive ad-
vantages in a dynamic environment. At the same time,
the misalignment prevention principles should be applied
through the long-term EA management process.
3. A coevolutionary framework
In order to describe and manage BITC, a coevolution-
ary framework combining EA with coevolutionary ana-
lysis is proposed in this section. The extant literature al-
ways suggested that the coevolution should not only re-
concile rational designs but also involve emergent pro-
cesses of coherently and consciously interrelating all the
relevant components of the organization [16,23,24,27]. In
other words, the coevolution should combine both bottom-
up adaptation and top-down control. Thus, BITC is al-
ways regarded as multilevel which needs to be aligned
bidirectionally [23,35,36]. Meanwhile, the literature also
argued the coevolution should consider both short-term
alignmentandlong-termalignmentwithrespectivemecha-
nisms [26,28–30]. As a summary, for the sake of coevolv-
ing business and IT more flexible and efficient, the coevo-
lutionary framework should take into account the combi-
nation of bottom-up adaptation and top-down design, the
combination of long-term alignment and short-term align-
ment, and the combinationof exploitationand exploration.
We aim to express the coevolutionary issue more com-
prehensively and practically in this paper. A coevolution-
aryframeworkis displayedsketchilyinFig.1.TheDoDAF

--- PAGE 5 ---
LIN Menglong et al.: A coevolutionary framework of business-IT alignment via the lens of enterprise architecture 987
is used to design and manage EA. Four parts exist in
this figure: EA design, misalignment sensing, misalign-
ment governance, and misalignment prevention. In the
earlystageofdesign,theorganizationachievedbasicBITA
through EA design. However, due to the complexity of the
external environment and the deviations during the imple-
mentation phase, the misalignment may exist between the
business and IT strategies. The enterprise could realize a
short-term alignment by sensing the deviations and taking
goverance principles. In addition, it could also achieve a
long-time alignment through taking prevention principles.
The misalignment governance and prevention part will be
mainly discussed in this paper. We will explain each part
respectively.
Fig. 1 Coevolutionary framework combining EA with coevolutionary analysis
3.1 EA design
EA is an expression of organization’s design decision-
making results. The information contained in the EA in-
cludes the organization’s strategic positioning, business
process and IS capabilities [55]. The design content of the
EA should include the strategic objects, business structure
and processes, and IS components [56,57]. The different
designconcepts,and theirrelationshipsare oftendiscussed
in the literature [58,59]. In order to design EA, several EA
frameworkssuch as Zachman,TOGAF, DoDAF have been
published sequentially.
DoDAF is adopted in this paper. As other frameworks,
it contains an EA meta-model, multiple viewpoints, and
dozens of models. The meta-model of DoDAF (Fig. 1) is
composed of 12 main tuples and the relationships among
them, which normalizes the modeling standard and data
criterion. The meta-model is used to represent, store, and
collect EA contents in different organizations, or differ-
ent life phases. Further, DoDAF includes eight viewpoints,
i.e., capability, operational, services, systems, standard,
data and information, all and project, which are respon-
sible for describing EA from different perspectives. Quan-

--- PAGE 6 ---
988 Journal of Systems Engineering and Electronics Vol. 31, No. 5, October 2020
tity different models exist in each viewpoint, for example,
projectviewpointincludes“projectportfoliorelationships”
model, “project timelines” model, and “projectto capabili-
ty mapping” model. DoDAF describes the internal rela-
tionships in an organization among the eight viewpoints
and their models.
The meta-model based architecture development me-
thod is a data-centric approach, which guides the EA de-
sign by building a standardized meta-model, as shown in
Fig. 2. The meta-model is the specification for organiz-
ing and managing the architecture data, and it is also the
foundation for supporting a variety of architecture model-
ing methods and flexibly representing the architecture as
required.
Fig. 2 Meta-model based architecture development process
Similar to the architecture development model (ADM)
of TOGAF, DoDAF explains the design process of EA
with six steps. Meanwhile, scholars also proposed design
processes through different development sequences of ar-
chitecture viewpoints and models. For example, Dam [60]
studied how to design DoDAF with 16 specific steps; Zei-
gler and Mittal [61] discussed the DoDAF development
process with a discrete event system specification; IBM
rhapsody defined the development sequence of DoDAF
models with an embedded DoDAF package [62].
Therefore, the BITA is suitably built in the EA design
phase with a unified EA meta-model, the interdependent
relationships among viewpoints and models, and a specific
design process. Therefore, we deem the EA design as a
rational top-down BITA design process.
3.2 Misalignment sensing
Organizations have made BITA achievements; they are

--- PAGE 7 ---
LIN Menglong et al.: A coevolutionary framework of business-IT alignment via the lens of enterprise architecture 989
suffering from the misalignments at the same time [63].
Sensing the deviations from the intended strategies is the
first step to tame the misalignments. When the complexi-
ty of the organizational structure and the external environ-
ment is at a lower level, we can sense the misalignment
through detecting the misalignment symptoms. However,
with increasing complexity of the organization, misalign-
ment may occur without exhibiting any of these potential
symptoms. When we realize that misalignments exit be-
tween the business strategy and the IT strategy, it is often
too late to take governanceprocess. Therefore, it is critical
to sense the deviations in a timely manner.
As shown in Fig. 3, two kinds of deviations exist in the
framework of the organizational architecture. The devia-
tion between the business strategy intended and the busi-
ness strategy realized is the first kind of deviation [64].
The intended business strategy comes from the business
executives at the EA design phase, which reflects the per-
spective of the senior managers. Similarly, the intended IT
strategy comes from the IT executives at the EA design
phase. The business strategy and the IT strategy intended
are basically aligned after the cogitative EA design phase.
Due to variousunexpectedsituations, i.e., environmentdy-
namism, employee support for the business strategy, the
realized business strategy could exhibit a deviation com-
pared to the intended business strategy.
Fig. 3 Deviations in organizational architecture
Similarly, the realized IT strategy could also exhibit a
deviation compared to the intended IT strategy, which is
the second kind of deviation [64]. Due to the aforemen-
tioned two kinds of deviations, there may be a misalign-
ment between the realized business strategy and the re-
alized IT strategy. We could sense misalignment through
assessing the degree to which the business mission, objec-
tives and plans are supported by the information technolo-
gy mission, objectives, and plans.
3.3 Misalignment governance
The research on misalignment governance is scarce in the
literature. Once the deviations or the misalignments are
recognized by the organization, several governing princi-
ples should be taken to prevent the further drift of the or-
ganizational strategy and sustain the performance of the
firm in the dynamic competitive environment.
The root causes of the misalignment are multitudinous
andhardto trace. Forexample,dueto theabsence ofthe IT
executives in the IT strategy design process, the business
executives may not understand the emerging information
technologies. Drastic changes in the external competitive
environment could also make the realized IT strategy lag
behind the organizational business development and fur-
ther make the firm lose its competitive advantage.
There are several verified governance principles which
could be taken to correct the aforementioned misalign-
ments as shown in Table 3. Firstly, companies need to de-
tect and sense deviations of the intended plans (P1), and
then conduct root-cause analyses (P2) to investigate the
reasons behind the scene. To adjust these deviations and to
avoidfurthermisalignment,companiesneedtoaddmecha-
nisms and learn from environmental reactions (P3). These
mechanisms are adjusting actions companies adopt, such
as the dynamic resource allocation. Adapting with the re-
actions, these deviations need to be “tamed” instead of
“solved”. Besides, P4 suggests that the coevolution needs
tobe ambidextrousandconsidersexplorationandexploita-
tion as part of IT strategies. We can achieve value creation
through exploring and developing IT strategies.
With the importance of innovative technologies steadily
increasing, enterprises should not regard the strategies of
the IT/IS as subordinate or the business strategy anymore,
but at equal status. According to Bharadwaj [39], it is time
to rethink the role of the IT strategy, from a function-
levelstrategytothestrategyreflectingtheintegrationofthe
business strategyand the IT strategy.Being consistent with
researchofdigitalbusinessstrategy,P5considersdigitalIT
capabilitiesas intrinsic elementsof business strategic plan-
ning.Additionally,organizationsneed to adopt suitable or-
ganizing principles (P6), either centralized, decentralized,
or federal, to manage business processes. Multilevel com-
munication is vital to develop a shared understanding, so
P7 suggeststhat organizationalmembersshouldcommuni-
cate with each other and form a collaborating relationship.

--- PAGE 8 ---
990 Journal of Systems Engineering and Electronics Vol. 31, No. 5, October 2020
Table 3 Misalignment governance and prevention principles
Principle Name Description Supporting literature
P1
Detect and sense deviations from
intended plans.
Firms need to sense and respond to external
or internal changes in a timely manner.
Sandberg, 2014 [41]; Weeger and Haase,
2016 [33]; Tanriverdi and Lim, 2017 [65].
P2 Conduct root-cause analyses.
Root causes should be identified on the basis
of multiple symptoms.
Benbya and McKelvey, 2006 [66]; Weeger
and Haase, 2016 [33]; Tanriverdi and Lim,
2017 [65].
P3
Add mechanisms and learn from
environmental reaction.
Mechanisms should be added to analyze its
reactions to dynamic actions.
Benbya and McKelvey, 2006 [23]; Tan-
riverdi et al., 2010 [19]; Tanriverdi and Lim,
2017 [65].
P4
Consider both exploration and ex-
ploitation as part of IT strategies.
Exploration concerns to discover new oppor-
tunities, and exploitation increases the pro-
ductivity of existing capabilities.
Peppard and Karin, 2003 [42]; Zhang et al.,
2011 [21]; Vessey and Ward, 2013 [27].
P5
Consider digital IT capabilities as
inherent elements of planning busi-
ness strategies.
IT strategies are no longer subordinate to
business strategies but shape them.
Agarwal and Sambamurthy, 2002 [40];
Sandberg, 2014 [41]; Tanriverdi, et al., 2010
[19].
P6
Adopt suitable organizing princi-
ples.
An organization should balance the internal
coordination and external partnering.
Agarwal and Sambamurthy, 2002 [40];
Amarilli et al., 2016 [20].
P7
Communicate frequently among
agents.
Agents should communicate with each other
and form a collaborating relationship.
Plazaola et al., 2006 [7]; Peppard and Camp-
bell, 2014 [16]; Baker, 2019 [64].
P8
Own concrete, precise, and detailed
intentions.
The intended strategy must be specific and
explicit.
Baker, 2019 [64]; Benbya and McKelvey,
2006 [23];
P9 Adopt modular design.
Modularity is the ability to easily reconfi-
gure components by minimizing interdepen-
dencies among modules.
Benbya and McKelvey, 2006 [23]; Ben-
bya and McKelvey, 2006 [66]; Nassim and
Robert, 2010 [24].
P10
Design IS with sufficient up-front
complexity.
A system needs to generate the same degree
ofinternal complexity as the external com-
plexity it faces in its environment.
Benbya and McKelvey, 2006 [23]; Tan-
riverdi and Lim, 2017 [65].
P11 Share domain knowledge.
Agents build consensus as to the shared reali-
ty of the organization.
Plazaola et al., 2006 [7]; Peppard and Camp-
bell, 2014 [16].
P12 Quickened learning action loops.
Speeding up the learning action loops can in-
crease an organization’s competitive advan-
tage.
Benbya and McKelvey, 2006 [23]; Tan-
riverdi and Lim, 2017 [65].
P13
Foster coevolution to improve IS
alignment.
The alignment is a dynamic processinvolv-
ing continuous adjustments between busi-
ness and IS.
Benbya and McKelvey, 2006 [23]; Tan-
riverdi and Lim, 2017 [65].
P14
Predict possible emergent situations
in advance.
Possible emergent situations should be exa-
mined to speed up future change rates.
Vessey and Ward, 2013 [27]; Amarilli et al.,
2016 [20].
3.4 EA management/misalignment prevention
This part aims to consider appropriate principles, guide-
lines and commonsense rules whose purposeis to prevent,
rather than treat, the misalignment [9,10]. It belongs to the
field of EA management.
In order to cultivate the coevolutionand achieve sustain-
able alignment, various principles have been discussed in
the literature. As Table 3 shows, for a strategy to be imple-
mented exactly as expected, the organization should have
concrete, precise, and detailed intentions (P8). Existence
of a clear and intentional IT strategy has a positive impact
on the organization’s ability to communicate this strategy
to its employees. Simon [67] argued that complex systems
are hierarchicalbut consist of “almost decomposable”sub-
units, and modulardesign is consideredto be a mechanism
to increase system flexibility and comprehensibility, while
allowing to shorten the system development time. There-
fore, modular design has been considered as a conducive
principle to manage the IT/IS complexity (P9).
As Ashby’s “law of requisite variety” puts [68], in or-
der to survive, a system needs to generate the same degree
of internal complexity as the external complexity it faces
in its environment. Only complexity can destroy complex-
ity. In order to cope with the complex market conditions,
the designed IS should possess sufficient upfrontcomplex-
ity (P10). Benbya and McKelvey [23] argued that in or-
der to develop shared domain knowledge and the abil-
ity to coordinate alignment-related actions, a collaborative
partnership should be established between business and
IS managers at all levels (P11). In the absence of multi-
departmental and all-level communication, leaders may
find it is difficult to reach a common understanding with
their managers and other employees, and clearly commu-

--- PAGE 9 ---
LIN Menglong et al.: A coevolutionary framework of business-IT alignment via the lens of enterprise architecture 991
nicate their strategic plans.
Because of the emergence of new knowledge and the
processes of learningand innovation,the rate of adaptation
cannot exceed the rate of available changes, and El Sawy
[32]calledthis processas “quickenedactioncycles”(P12).
The faster the action loopis established, the easier it is to
gain a competitive advantage. In order to obtain the sus-
tained market condition, firms should foster coevolutionto
improve IS alignment (P13). Furthermore, with the intel-
ligence capability, companies need to predict emergent si-
tuations in advance (P14), in order to increase companies’
internal complexity and to accelerate future change rate.
All of these principles should be used in the phase of
long-term EA management and short-term coevolutionary
analysis, which helps to cultivate a sustainable BITA envi-
ronment.
With the above four parts, the BITC can be bet-
ter described and managed. EA acts as a normative
BITA achievement framework, and coevolutionary analy-
sis treats each unbalanced EA state in the long run. The
whole method aims to explore a practical coevolutionary
framework. Though it is rather simple now, we argue that
it is fascinating in the coevolutionary research. In the next
section,thecoevolutionaryframeworkwillbevalidatedac-
cording to the features and methods from several signifi-
cant studies.
4. Utility evaluation of the coevolution
framework
To demonstrate the utility of our proposed framework, we
follow Hevneret al. [69], who proposed five evaluationap-
proaches, one of which is adopted in this paper. We use
the descriptive approach of framework evaluation by em-
ploying the informed argument method using information
from the knowledge base of our research domain to build
convincingargumentsfor the framework’sutility. Our pro-
posed framework provides a process-oriented approach to
manage the BITC. This method cannot be directly com-
pared with existing methods because of its different fo-
cus on coevolution. According to the existing knowledge
base, we evaluate the proposed framework from three di-
mensions respectively: characteristics of BITC, principles
of BITC, and approachesof BITC. We select one represen-
tative literature for each dimension and determine whether
our framework is accordant with the results of the litera-
ture.
4.1 Utility evaluation from characteristics of BITC
The properties of the coevolution were always discussed
by scholars, such as [16], [25] and [27]. Lewin et al.
[25] identified properties of coevolutionary models of
strategic management and organizational adaptation re-
search, which are multi-levelness effects, multi-directional
causalities, non-linearity, and positive feedback. These
properties lay the foundation for the following research on
coevolution.We aim to judge whetherourproposedframe-
work meets the above four properties.
(i) Multi-levelness effects
The multi-levelness effects refer to the coevolutionary
effects occur at multiple levels within the enterprises. In
our framework, the misalignments may occur in one EA
viewpoint,or between two differentEA viewpoints.Multi-
levelness effects have been caused due to the emergenceof
misalignments.
(ii) Multi-directional causalities
In a system with complex relationship, the change of
one variable is caused by the change of other variables.
In our framework, complex relationships exist among the
multiple entities in the EA. Changes for one entity or rela-
tionship may cause misalignments, and need other entities
or relationships to be aligned with.
(iii) Non-linearity
The non-linearity means that we cannot deal with the
effects of coevolutionary through simple linear logical re-
lationships between independent and dependent variables.
Like human bodies, we cannot say one disease is deter-
minedly caused by the fixed symptoms. The symptoms for
one disease may be volatile or can cause other diseases be-
cause of the complex relationships in human bodies. The
organization is a complex system and a black box [20] as
the humanbody [9,10].It is hard to discoverall of the mis-
alignment symptoms and the absolutely right cause-effect
relationships in one organization. In our framework, we
aim to seek for the root causes of the misalignment, dis-
cover their cause-effect relationships, and provide govern-
ingmechanisms,whichhelpstocontrolthecompanyinthe
mist.
(iv) Positive feedback
The positive feedback refers to actions and interactions
between enterprises and their environments are recursive
and lead to interdependencies and circular causality. Ac-
cording to the framework we propose, the external envi-
ronment could cause misalignments for EA, and the EA
could also shape the external competitive environment af-
ter correcting the misalignments and executing manage-
ments. The loop forms continuous positive feedbacks.
4.2 Utility evaluation from the principles of BITC
Part of the scholars conducted their studies on how we
can cultivate and manage coevolution in an organization
[23,24,27]. Multiple principles were introduced in these

--- PAGE 10 ---
992 Journal of Systems Engineering and Electronics Vol. 31, No. 5, October 2020
studies. With the argument that the coevolution occurs in
both bottom-up adaptation and top-down control, Vessey
and Ward [27] proposed the adaptive IS management, ad-
ministrative IS management and enabling IS management
in his sustainable IS alignment framework, and introduced
principles for each management. We tend to determine
whether our proposed framework meets these principles.
(i) Adaptive IS management principle
Adaptive IS management focuses on emergence and
self-organization, learning, and innovation [27]. Three
principles are introduced for this management. The first is
matching coevolutionary change rates. In our framework,
suitable governance mechanisms are proposed according
to the cause and effect relationships among symptoms.
The realignment process can match the external changes.
The second is optimizing self-organization, which states
that autonomous agents in a complex system organize
themselves in such a way that they may best address
the complexity in their environment [27]. The conti-
nuous misalignment sensing and governance help to
achieve the self-organization in our framework. The third
principle synchronizes exploitation and exploration. Ex-
ploitation describes the activities that use or extend the
enterprise’s existing resources. On the other hand, explo-
ration describes the activities that lead to a new order
[27]. In our framework, we realign the business and IT
withexploitingexistingresourcesandcapabilities; alsoex-
plore new capabilities and skills with the long-term learn-
ing, which helps to acquire new symptoms and governing
mechanisms.
(ii) Administrative IS management principle
This principle represents managementin the formal hie-
rarchy that is responsible for planning and coordinating
formally-sanctioned IS activities [27]. It is a rational de-
sign process. The EA design process satisfies this principle
in this paper.
(iii) Enabling IS management principle
This principle governs the links between the bottom-up
adaptive management process and the top-down manage-
ment process. The EA evolution correlates the rational EA
design and emergent coevolutionary analysis in this paper,
which reflects the applicability of this principle.
4.3 Utility evaluation from the approaches of BITC
Several researches explored different approaches to
achieve the coevolution, such as perspectives of question-
ing alignment and situated change [37], co-learning and
collaboration [16], activity theory [33], conceptualization
and degree of formalization [20]. Amarilli proposed two
conceptual distinctions and four kinds of approaches in
BITC [20]: (i) metaphors, which refer to use analogical
reasoning to raise awareness or to influence the way of
thinking; (ii) functional complexity models, which mean
the relationships in a complex system can be expressed
through mathematical models and formulated in the form
of payoff functions; (iii) coevolutionary models, which
study the evolution of a complex system based on the in-
teraction of the constituting elements; (iv) complexity dy-
namics models, which capture the dynamics of a complex
system through mathematical descriptions, usually in the
form of non-linear equations.
Amarilli argued that the application of complexity dy-
namics models is rather difficult, which requires reduc-
tionism techniques to identify the limited number of re-
levant variables and rules that may explain the behaviour
of the system. Based on this, he pointed out that the
mixed strategies of alignment combining different meth-
ods can also help. For instance, a company may adopt a
metaphor approach to improve social alignment and gen-
erate the conditions for implementing other alignment ac-
tions, apply coevolutionary models to pursue alignment
on day-to-day basis, and monitor key properties through
a functional complexity model [20]. This argument ac-
cords with our framework, which involves the first three
kinds of approaches. With regard to the perspective of the
metaphor, our framework looks the complex organization
as human bodies, and the misalignments in organizations
as the diseases in human bodies. This metaphor makes the
complexity in organizations more easily to understand.
With regard to the perspective of the functional complex-
ity model, our framework adopts a misalignment analysis
methodto seek for a short-termgovernance.With regardto
the perspective of the coevolution model, our framework
considers applying multiple rules in day-to-day organiza-
tional activities, which helps to seek a long-term manage-
ment. With the advantages of the above three approaches,
the BITC can be achieved in a process-oriented way.
5. Conclusions, limitations and future work
Following the research of BITC, this paper helps prac-
titioners and researchers make sense of the coevolution
achieve it, and manage it. Three basic arguments are
mainly considered in this paper. First, the coevolution
should reconcile both bottom-up “emergent processes”
and top-down “rational designs”. Second, the coevolution
should involve both short-term alignment and long-term
alignment. Third, the organization is a complex adaptive
system and its internal relationships are hard to perceive.
On the basis of them, a coevolutionaryframeworkcombin-
ing EA with the coevolutionary analysis is proposed. The

--- PAGE 11 ---
LIN Menglong et al.: A coevolutionary framework of business-IT alignment via the lens of enterprise architecture 993
framework is composed of four main parts: EA design,
sensingofmisalignment,governanceofmisalignment,and
EA misalignment prevention.
This work contributes in several ways. We conclude the
three main motivations for the research on BITC. With re-
gard to the proposed framework, we primarily discuss the
cause and effect relationships among symptoms in mis-
alignment correction. In addition, we evaluate the appli-
cability and utility of the framework through three ways:
characteristics of coevolution, principles of coevolution,
and approaches of coevolution.
The proposed framework and its evaluation methods
have their limitations. On one hand, either EA or BITA
is a discipline and owns extensive research. This paper
mainly discusses their combination for addressing the co-
evolutionary problem of business and IT, but not explains
the research on EA in detail, neither the BITA research
with EA methods. On the other hand, the cause and effect
relationships among the multiple symptoms are used to re-
align the business and IT. However, the internal relation-
shipsin acomplexsystemarenon-linear,whichmeans,the
outcome would not correspond to the constant input vari-
ables. Therefore, the cause and effect relationships among
symptomshelp to controlthe misalignment,while may not
lead to an absolutely right correction scheme. Other com-
plementary methods need to be considered here. Further-
more, this work only selects one utility evaluation method
(informed argument) from Hevner et al. [69]. Other meth-
ods such as case study are also very useful. The adoption
of multiple evaluation methods synchronouslymay help to
verify the framework more thoroughly.
The above limitations provide a starting point for future
work.EA is always acknowledgedas a beneficial approach
to deal with BITA problems. The complete EA compo-
nentsandrelationshipsneedtobefurtherexplained.Mean-
while, the extant research on EA management from as-is
EA to to-be EA needs to be totally analyzed.
A suitable case study should be introduced for the pro-
posed framework. The case study ought to include the
EA design process and the EA evolution process. Due to
the combination of long-term management and short-term
governance,the case studyshouldinvolvea long-termtime
frame and be punctuated by multiple short-term phases.
Finally, to control the coevolution directly, we plan to
explore the complex dynamic models of BITC in an orga-
nization. The positive and negative influence relationships
among different organizational contents will be explored.
The complex dynamic models are more easily to satisfy
the non-linearity and positive feedback features of coevo-
lution.
References
[1] CHANYE, REICHBH.ITalignment: what have welearned?
Journal of Information Technology, 2007, 22(4): 297–315.
[2] KAPPELMAN L A, MCLEON E, LUFTMAN J N, et al. Key
issues of IT organizations and their leadership: the 2013 SIM
IT trends study. MIS Quarterly Executive, 2013, 12(4): 227–
240.
[3] GEROW J E, GROVER V, THATCHER J, et al. Looking to-
ward the future of IT-business strategic alignment through the
past: a meta-analysis. MIS Quarterly, 2014, 38(4): 1059–
1085.
[4] WEGMANN A, REGEV G, LOISON B. Business and IT
alignment with SEAM. Proc. of the 1st International Work-
shop on Requirements Engineering for Business Need, and IT
Alignment, 2005: 74–84.
[5] ZARVIC N, WIERINGA R. An integrated enterprise architec-
ture framework for business-IT alignment.Proc. of theDesign-
ing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks: Integrating Business
Processes with IT Infrastructure, 2014: 63–75.
[6] IACOBM E, MEERTENS L O, JONKERSH, et al. From en-
terprise architecture to business models and back. Software &
Systems Modeling, 2014, 13(3): 1059–1083.
[7] PLAZAOLA L, MOLINA E S, VARGAS N, et al. A meta-
model for strategic business and IT alignment assessment.
Proc. of the 4th Annual Conference on Systems Engineering
Research, 2006, 187: 1–10.
[8] PLAZAOLA L, FLORES J, SILVA E, et al. An approach to
associate strategic business-IT alignment assessment to enter-
prise architecture. Proc. of the 5th Conference on Systems En-
gineering, 2007, 121: 1–10.
[9] CARVALHO G L, SOUSA P. Using a medical sciences per-
spective toharness business and information systems misalign-
ment. Proc. of the 16th European Conference on Information
System, 2008: 2496–2507.
[10] CARVALHO G, SOUSA P. Business and information systems
misalignment model: an holistic model leveraged on misalign-
ment and medical sciences approaches. Proc. of the 3rd Inter-
national Workshop on Business/IT Alignment and Inter Oper-
ability, 2008: 104–119.
[11] CHEN H M. Towards service engineering: service orientation
and business-IT alignment. Proc. of the 41st Hawaii Interna-
tional Conference on System Sciences, 2008: 1–10.
[12] FISCHER R, AIER S, WINTER R. A federated approach
to enterprise architecture model maintenance. Enterprise Mo-
delling and Information Systems Architectures, 2015, 2(2):
14–22.
[13] BRADLEY R V, PRATT R M, BYRD T, et al. Enterprise
architecture, IT effectiveness and the mediating role of IT
alignment inUShospitals. Information Systems Journal, 2012,
22(2): 97–127.
[14] ALAEDDINI M, SALEKFARD S. Investigating the role of an
enterprise architecture project in the business-IT alignment in
Iran. Information Systems Frontiers, 2013, 15(1): 67–88.
[15] PRESTON D, KARAHANNA E. Antecedents of IS strategic
alignment: a nomological network. Information Systems Re-
search, 2009, 20(2): 159–179.
[16] PEPPARD J, CAMPBELL B. The co-evolution of busi-
ness/information systems strategic alignment: an exploratory
study. http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.
1.1.599.3089&rep=rep1&type=pdf.
[17] GEROW J E, THATCHER J B, GROVER V. Six types of IT-
business strategic alignment: an investigation of the constructs
and their measurement. European Journal of Information Sys-
tems, 2015, 24(5): 465–491.

--- PAGE 12 ---
994 Journal of Systems Engineering and Electronics Vol. 31, No. 5, October 2020
[18] ULLAH A, RICHARD L. Asystematic review of business and
information technology alignment. ACM Trans. on Manage-
ment Information Systems, 2013, 4(1): 4.
[19] TANRIVERDI H, RAI A, VENKATRAMAN N. Research
commentary-reframing the dominant quests of information
systems strategy research for complex adaptive business sys-
tems. Information Systems Research, 2010, 21(4): 822–834.
[20] AMARILLI F, VAN VLIET M, VAN DEN H B. Business IT
alignment through the lens of complexity science. Proc. of the
International Conference of Information System, 2016: 1–10.
[21] ZHANG N, YV Y, DONG X Y. A coevolutionary journey of
strategic knowledge management alignment: a Chinese case.
Proc. of the International Conference on Information System,
2011: 1–19.
[22] EL SAWY O A, MALHOTRA A, PARK Y, et al. Research
commentary-seeking the configurations of digital ecodyna-
mics: it takes three to tango. Information Systems Research,
2010, 21(4): 835–848.
[23] BENBYA H, MCKELVEY B. Using coevolutionary and com-
plexity theories to improve IS alignment: a multi-level ap-
proach. Journal of Information technology, 2006, 21(4): 284–
298.
[24] NASSIM B, ROBERT F. IS alignment improved withcoevolu-
tionary principles: an open source approach. Proc. of the 43rd
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 2010:
1–10.
[25] LEWIN A Y, LONG C P, CAROLL T N. The coevolution of
new organizational forms. Organization Science, 1999, 10(5):
535–550.
[26] REICH B H, BENBASAT I. Factors that influence the so-
cial dimension of alignment between business and information
technology objectives. MIS Quarterly, 2000, 24(1): 81–113.
[27] VESSEY I, WARD K. The dynamics of sustainable IS align-
ment: the case for IS adaptivity. Journal of the Association for
Information Systems, 2013, 14(6): 283–311.
[28] VOLBERDA H W, LEWIN A Y. Co-evolutionary dynamics
within and between firms: from evolution to co-evolution.
Journal of Management Studies, 2003, 40(8): 2111–2136.
[29] HUGOSON M A, PESSI K. Operational and structural busi-
ness IT alignment. Proc. of the International Conference on
Business Information Systems, 2011: 196–207.
[30] BALHARETH H, LIU K, MANWANI S. Aligning business
and IT from multi-level learning perspectives. Proc. of the17th
UK International Conference on Information Systems, 2012,
36: 1–11.
[31] FISS P C. Building better causal theories: a fuzzy set approach
to typologies in organization research. Academy of Manage-
ment Journal, 2011, 54(2): 393–420.
[32] KANDJANI H, TAVANA M, BERNUS P, et al. Co-evolution
path model (CePM): sustaining enterprises as complex sys-
tems on the edge of chaos. Cybernetics and Systems, 2014,
45(7): 547–567.
[33] WEEGER A, HAASE U. How contradictions facilitate evo-
lutionary transformation: an exploration into the dynamics
of business-IT alignment from the perspective of activity the-
ory. Proc. of the European Conference on Information System,
2016, 173: 1–16.
[34] WALENTOWITZ K, BEIMBORN D, SCHROIFF A, et al.
The social network structure of alignment: a literature review.
Proc. of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System
Sciences, 2011: 1–10.
[35] GUTIERREZ A, LYCETT M. IS alignment factors: dynamic
relationships at strategic, tactical and operational level. Proc.
of the UK Academy for Information Systems Conference,
2011: 11605–11616.
[36] KAHRE C, HOFFMANN D, AHLEMANN F. Beyond
business-IT alignment-digital business strategies as a paradig-
matic shift: a review and research agenda. Proc. of the 50th
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 2017.
DOI: 10.24251/HICSS.2017.574.
[37] LEONARD J. What are we aligning? Implications of a dy-
namic approach to alignment. Proc. of the Australasian Con-
ference on Information System, 2008: 560–568.
[38] HIEKKANEN K, HELENIUS M, KORHONEN J J, et al.
Aligning alignment with strategic context: a literature review.
Proc. of the Digital Enterprise Design and Management, 2013:
81–98.
[39] BHARADWAJ A, EL SAWY O A, PAVLOU P A, et al. Digi-
tal business strategy: toward a next generation of insights. MIS
Quarterly, 2013, 37(2): 471–482.
[40] AGARWAL R, SAMBAMURTHY V. Principles and models
for organizing theIT function. MIS Quarterly Executive, 2002,
1(1): 1–16.
[41] SANDBERG J. Digital capability: investigating coevolution
of IT and business strategies. Umea, Sweden: Umea Univer-
sity, 2014.
[42] PEPPARD J, KARIN B. Beyond alignment: a coevolutionary
view of the information systems strategy process. Proc. of the
International Conference of Information System, 2003: 743–
750.
[43] International Standardization Organization/International Elec-
trotechnical Committee. Systems and software engineer-
ing–recommended practice for architectural description of
software-intensive systems: ISO/IEC 42010: 2007. Geneva:
ISO, 2007.
[44] NIEMANN K D. From enterprise architecture to IT gover-
nance (Vol. 1). Wiesbaden, Germany: Springer Fachmedien,
2006.
[45] MACRO V. Using ArchiMate and TOGAF to understand the
enterprise architecture and ITIL relationship. Proc. of the Lec-
ture Notes in Business Information, 2013, 148: 134–145.
[46] KAPPELMAN L A. The SIM guide to enterprise architecture.
New York, United States: CRC Press, 2009: 106–110.
[47] BILL B. Ministry of defence architectural framework
(MODAF). Proc. of the IEE Seminar on UML Systems En-
gineering, 2005: 43–82.
[48] DoD Architecture Framework Working Group. DoD Architec-
ture Framework Version 2.0. Washington DC: Department of
Defense, 2009.
[49] HAREN V. TOGAF version 9.1. Amsterdam, Netherlands:
Van Haren Publishing, 2011.
[50] WEGMANN A. The systemic enterprise architecture
methodology (SEAM). Business and IT Alignment for Com-
petitiveness: LAMS-REPORT-2002-009, 2002.
[51] DUFFY J. IT/business alignment: delivering result.
http://www.cio.com/analyst/123101 idc.html.
[52] WINTER R, SCHELP J. Enterprise architecture governance:
theneedfor abusiness-to-IT approach. Proc. oftheACM Sym-
posium on Applied Computing, 2008: 548–552.
[53] PARCHAMI P. Enterprise architecture & alignment. Gothen-
burg, Sweden: University of Gothenburg, 2011.
[54] JENSEN C T, CHARTERS I, AMSDEN J, et al. Leveraging
SOA, BPM and EA for strategic business and IT alignment.
South Miami, United States: IBM Corporation, 2008.
[55] AIER S, KURPJUWEIT S, SAAT J, et al. Enterprise architec-
ture design as an engineering discipline. AIS Trans. on Enter-
prise Systems, 2009, 1(1): 36–43.
[56] IEEE. IEEE recommended practice for architectural descrip-

--- PAGE 13 ---
LIN Menglong et al.: A coevolutionary framework of business-IT alignment via the lens of enterprise architecture 995
tion of software intensive systems: IEEE Std 14712000. New
York: IEEE Computer Society, 2000.
[57] WINTER R, FISCHER R. Essential layers, artifacts, and de-
pendencies of enterprise architecture. Journal of Enterprise Ar-
chitecture, 2007, 3(2): 7–18.
[58] AIER S, KURPJUWEIT S, SCHMITZ O, et al. An engineer-
ing approach to enterprise architecture design and its applica-
tion at a financial service provider. Proc. of the Conference on
Modeling Operational Information System, 2008: 115–130.
[59] IYER B, GOTTLIEB R. The four-domain architecture: an ap-
proach to support enterprise architecture design. IBM Systems
Journal, 2004, 43(3): 587–597.
[60] DAM S H. DoD architecture framework: a guide to applying
system engineering to develop integrated, executable architec-
tures. Washington DC: Create Space Independent Publishing
Platform, 2015.
[61] ZEIGLER B P, MITTAL S. Enhancing DoDAF with a DEVS-
based system lifecycle development process. Proc. of the IEEE
International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics,
2005, 4: 3244–3251.
[62] ROTT J, WEIXLER J. Integrating hierarchical task analysis
into model-based system design using Airbus XHTA and IBM
rational rhapsody. Proc. of Industrial Engineering and Engi-
neering Management, 2018: 1856–1860.
[63] ORI D. Misalignment symptom analysis based on enterprise
architecture model assessment. IADIS International Journal on
Computer Science & Information Systems, 2014, 9(2): 146–
158.
[64] BAKER J. The roots of misalignment: insights from a sys-
tems dynamics perspective. The Journal of Strategic Informa-
tion System, 2019, 28(4): 1–19.
[65] TANRIVERDI H, LIM S Y. How to survive and thrive in com-
plex, hypercompetitive and disruptive ecosystems? The roles
of IS-enabled capabilities. Proc. of the International Confer-
ence on Information Systems, 2017: 1–21.
[66] BENBYA H, MCKELVEY B. Toward a complexity theory of
information systems development. Information Technology &
People, 2006, 19(1): 12–34.
[67] SIMON H A. The sciences of the artificial. Massachusetts:
MIT Press, 1962.
[68] RAADT J D. Ashby’s law of requisite variety: an empirical
study. Cybernetics and Systems, 1987, 18(6), 517–536.
[69] HEVNER A R, MARCH S T, PARK J, et al. Design science
in information systems research. MIS Quarterly, 2004, 28(1):
75–105.
Biographies
LIN Menglong was born in 1993. He received
his M.S. degree in control science and technology
from National University of Defense Technology
(NUDT), Changsha, China, in 2018. He is pursu-
ing his Ph.D. degree in the College of Systems En-
gineering at NUDT. His research interests are in-
formation system architecture design, analysis and
validation.
E-mail: mllin123@163.com
YI Shuanghui was born in 1978. He received his
M.S. degree in computer science and technology
from National University of Defense Technology
(NUDT), Changsha, China, in 2003. He is the
deputy director of the Second Research Department
of the National Key Laboratory for Complex Sys-
tem Simulation. His research interests include dis-
tributed computing, information system architecture
design, and software testing.
E-mail: flyysh@126.com
ZHANG Mengmeng was born in 1990. He re-
ceived his M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from National
University of Defense Technology (NUDT). He is
a lecturer in NUDT now. His current research inter-
ests include information system architecture design,
analysis and validation.
E-mail: 186703816365@163.com
CHEN Tao was born in 1983. He received his M.S.
and Ph.D. degrees from National University of De-
fense Technology (NUDT). He is an associate pro-
fessor in NUDT now. His current research interests
include requirement engineering, military informa-
tion system, enterprise architecture design and ana-
lysis.
E-mail: kd chentao@163.com
CHEN Honghui was born in 1969. He received his
M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from National University
of Defense Technology (NUDT). He is a professor
and the executive vice director of Science and Tech-
nology on Information Systems Engineering Labo-
ratory in NUDT now. His current research interests
include requirement engineering, military informa-
tion system, enterprise architecture design and ana-
lysis.
E-mail: chh0808@gmail.com
ZHANG Xiaoxue was born in 1986. She received
her M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from National Univer-
sity of Defense Technology (NUDT). She is a lec-
turer in NUDT now. Her current research interests
include requirement engineering, military informa-
tion system, enterprise architecture design and ana-
lysis.
E-mail: snow1126@126.com