--- PAGE 1 ---
Citation: Michelotto, F.; Joia, L.A.
Organizational Digital Transformation
Readiness: An Exploratory
Investigation. J. Theor. Appl. Electron.
Commer. Res. 2024, 19, 3283–3304.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
jtaer19040159
Academic Editor: Luis Felipe
Luna-Reyes
Received: 17 July 2024
Revised: 2 October 2024
Accepted: 4 October 2024
Published: 26 November 2024
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
Review
Organizational Digital Transformation Readiness:
An Exploratory Investigation
Flavia Michelotto * and Luiz Antonio Joia
Brazilian School of Public and Business Administration at Getulio Vargas Foundation (FGV EBAPE),
Rio de Janeiro 22231-010, Brazil; luiz.joia@fgv.br
* Correspondence: flavia.michelotto@fgv.br
Abstract: The widespread adoption of digital technologies across various aspects of society has led to
the emergence of two highly context-dependent constructs that explain how businesses are getting
ready for transformative digital processes: digital readiness and digital transformation (DT). However,
assessing the extent to which an organization is ready to succeed in a DT initiative still requires
further investigation. This research addresses this gap by working towards a practical definition
and model of organizational digital transformation readiness (ODTR). The authors investigate how
an organization’s readiness for digital transformation should be conceptualized, assessed, and
improved through a systematic literature review. This literature review covered the years 2004
to 2021, as well as articles published until May 2022. The search was conducted in the Web of
Science database, as well as in the most important publishers’ databases, resulting in 264 papers
on “e-readiness”, 72 articles on “digital transformation”, and 8 articles on “digital transformation
readiness”. Based on this, some dimensions emerged as the most prominent for understanding how
companies prepare for transformative digital processes, namely technological resources, business
processes, management capability, human capability, and corporate culture, which highlights the
multidisciplinary nature of ODTR. Furthermore, the literature review showed the similarity between
e-readiness and digital readiness, allowing the assessment of an organization’s maturity for digital
transformation. The review synthesized the scientific literature on the readiness of organizations
for digital transformation, allowing the proposition of an integrative framework to evaluate ODTR.
Moreover, it allows the development of insights and recommendations for practices related to
successful digital transformation initiatives. As this literature review has limitations related to its
scope and search criteria, future studies can provide a broader investigation into how organizations
respond to the challenge of DT and their respective readiness to do so in practice.
Keywords: digital transformation; digital transformation readiness; organizational digital transformation
readiness; digital readiness; systematic literature review
1. Introduction
Information and communication technology (ICT) is a fundamental structural part
of modern society [ 1], playing a significant role in promoting socio-economic develop-
ment [2,3]. In fact, in recent decades, significant advancements in ICT have made available
several functionalities that have allowed firms to adapt their business infrastructure to an
entirely new digital era [4]. Due to that, a new concept has recently emerged in academia
and among practitioners, namely digital transformation (DT) [5]. DT is a social construction,
implying a cultural transformation, since it represents a process of social interaction and
collective learning by which people embrace and disseminate digital technologies [6]. The
notion of DT has become ubiquitous and is often understood as a change in how a company
employs digital technologies to develop new business models that help generate more
value [7]. Indeed, the digital revolution has transformed the nature of many organizations
by radically changing processes and business models in almost all industries [8]. In this
J. Theor. Appl. Electron. Commer. Res. 2024, 19, 3283–3304. https://doi.org/10.3390/jtaer19040159 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/jtaer

--- PAGE 2 ---
J. Theor. Appl. Electron. Commer. Res. 2024, 19 3284
way, companies have made an effort to respond to the challenges of competition and
globalization brought about by the rapid and profound changes resulting from digital
technologies [9], being at risk of not being able to survive in the market if they do not do
so [10]. Thus, DT has been an imperative for organizations to remain competitive in the
current digital world [11].
However, to date, there is not a unique and commonly accepted definition for the
construct of “digital transformation”, which is often viewed simplistically as an ongoing
process of adopting emerging technologies for significant change [ 12]. In addition, al-
though DT has emerged as a phenomenon in the Information Systems (IS) area in recent
years [11], there are as yet few articles that jointly address the constructs needed to define
organizational digital transformation readiness. However, understanding the steps and
background needed to successfully implement DT in organizations is crucial in an increas-
ingly ICT-dependent world. Thus, for DT initiatives to be successful in companies, they
must be adequately ready for it [13].
The term “readiness” refers to “the state of being ready or prepared for something” [14],
describing a forward-looking state for something that is coming or has almost arrived [15].
E-readiness specifically represents the transformation of society to deal with complex issues
related to the digital world [16]. In fact, since its inception, the concept of e-readiness has
encompassed a wide range of definitions and different measurement methods, involving
various approaches and results [17–20]. In fact, successful organizational DT initiatives
require companies to be ready to implement or develop different capabilities, according to
the business context in which they operate [9,21,22].
Moreover, so far, some questions regarding DT in organizations have lacked further
development, remaining understudied [ 7,11,23–26], including the following: How do
DT initiatives take place in organizations? What organizational requirements (resources,
capabilities, and processes) are needed, and what is the sequence of actions to promote
successful DT in organizations? In line with this, the object of this study is to investigate the
following question: What do companies need to succeed in DT initiatives, that is to say, how
to assess the DT readiness of organizations? Thus, to contribute to the extant literature on
the subject, this article aims to review the topic of DT readiness and propose a framework
for successful implementation of DT initiatives in organizations. From this perspective, a
range of definitions, concepts, and connections referring to what is understood by DT, with
a focus on organizations, will be analyzed.
2. The Foundations of Digital Transformation
According to its most basic meaning, transformation refers to “a complete change in
somebody/something” [27]. In this sense, the DT construct would encompass a complete
change by means of digital devices, technologies, and/or contexts. In the early 1950s, in
one of the first publications that mentioned DT, the expression was approached in a very
basic way, far from the complexity that has been assigned to it recently. Davis [28] p. 90
proposed that “a great deal of progress has been made in converting analog data into a
useful digital form for data processing. The way in which this analog to DT is accomplished
is not biased by tradition or legal reasons”. As society evolved, with the fast-growing use
of digital technologies not only in machines or industries but in the most trivial aspects
of daily life, the construct gained multifaceted approaches in the scientific literature, with
several definitions that emerged in association with its use as a buzzword and are affecting
its credibility and causing turmoil in both academic and practitioner fields [29].
The literature on DT is quite diverse, involving several knowledge areas, which has led
the construct to not have a consolidated definition yet [25]. The initial studies on DT were
related to the strategic role that ICT used to play to support business strategies [30]. As DT
has different meanings for different audiences, this concept has not been equably applied in
the Information Systems (IS) literature, being so associated with different perspectives [15].
Probably one of the most comprehensive works on the concept of DT was carried out by
Vial [11] p. 118, who defined DT as “a process that aims to improve an entity by triggering

--- PAGE 3 ---
J. Theor. Appl. Electron. Commer. Res. 2024, 19 3285
significant changes in its properties through combinations of information, computing, com-
munication, and connectivity technologies”. After that, research on DT began to associate it
with ICT-enabled transformation [5], namely DT started being perceived as an evolution of
IT-enabled transformation, as it represented how digital technologies disruptively impacted
individuals, organizations and society [11]. Another conceptualization commonly related
to DT relates to innovation and disruption, understanding DT as a broader process of
change that represents a combined effect that both drives and is driven by innovations and
digital disruptions [31].
Although DT is a global phenomenon, each country can offer a more or less favorable
context for such initiatives to be successful [32]. In addition, it is not only nations but also
companies that face the challenges related to DT, which is dependent on three dimensions:
technological, organizational, and social [ 6]. As noticed in previous studies [ 11,33], DT
was primarily related to organizations, and there are significant contrasts throughout
definitions concerning the sorts of advancements of technologies encompassed and the
nature of the existing transformation [11]. In fact, DT is strongly related to organizations,
addressing and emphasizing the impact of ICT on organizational structure, work routines,
information flows, and managerial capabilities [11,23,34]. However, DT is a process adopted
by companies to achieve superior performance and sustainable competitive advantage,
through the convergence of multiple digital technologies capable of transforming various
organizational dimensions, such as business models, customer experiences, and operations,
thus configuring a significant change in ways of working [35]. DT is therefore associated
with a profound transformation in organizations provided by digital technologies, aiming
to radically improve their performance [8,36,37].
Moreover, Verhoef et al. [38] point out three external factors as the main drivers of DT:
(1) the growing number of emerging technologies, (2) the drastic change in competition,
and (3) the change in consumer behavior as a response to the digital revolution. However,
despite the growing awareness of the importance of DT in reshaping organizational models
and activities, many companies still struggle to assimilate and implement it accordingly [23].
Becoming digital is a ubiquitous challenge that has been faced by companies in the last
few decades [39]. However, this transformation process is not sustained by technology
alone [40]. Orlikowski [41] found empirical evidence that organizational transformation
was enabled by ICT, but not caused by it. Thus, researchers and organizations gradually
have perceived that DT is not only a technological shift [ 39]; it simultaneously impacts
people and networks [35]. Previous studies have identified that successful DT initiatives
are associated not only with the use of ICT but also with some other non-technology-
related dimensions, such as culture and leadership [40]. Furthermore, both academics and
practitioners have recognized the importance of human resources in this endeavor [29], and
the lack of digital skills has been commonly pointed out as a hurdle to the success of DT [42].
Thus, the main critical success factor for DT initiatives is the focus on their transformational
dimension rather than on digital issues [43]. This requires an alignment of ICT and people,
so that the available digital potential is associated with skilled professionals, allowing DT
to reach the best of its transformative power.
Although DT can be seen, from a business perspective, as a change in how com-
panies use digital technologies to develop new business models, there has not been a
multidisciplinary discussion on the subject. Insights about digital business strategy are still
underdeveloped, as companies are still dealing with multiple digital shifts within tradi-
tional domains [4]. While it is difficult for researchers to develop theories, practitioners also
face difficulties in developing and implementing DT strategies in their organizations [29].
In addition, there are different levels of DT in companies from different countries, although
all have gone or will go through the same process [29]. Thus, it is plausible to realize that
a more comprehensive understanding of the concept of DT, considering the context of
organizations, is still in progress. Moreover, to understand how DT unfolds in organiza-
tions, it is necessary to assess their organizational readiness, namely their digital readiness,
e-readiness, or, in a nutshell, their DT readiness, as addressed in the next section. Then,

--- PAGE 4 ---
J. Theor. Appl. Electron. Commer. Res. 2024, 19 3286
in Section 4, the method used to conduct this research is explained, and, subsequently, in
Section 5, we set forth the results obtained from the systematic literature review carried
out with the aim of proposing and discussing, in Section 6, a framework for organizational
digital transformation readiness, as well as the corresponding propositions derived from it.
Then, in Section 6, we put forth the conclusions of this work, its theoretical and managerial
implications, as well as the limitations of the research and the next steps to be conducted. Fi-
nally, in Appendix A, the PRISMA flow diagram used to carry out the systematic literature
review on the topic under investigation is presented.
3. Conceptualizing e-Readiness and Digital Readiness
3.1. e-Readiness
The origin of the e-readiness construct is strongly related to the public dimension,
addressing, for example, countries as units of analysis [ 42,44,45]. In fact, it stems from
an attempt to provide a unified framework for assessing the scope of the digital divide
between developed and developing countries [18]. In 1998, the Computer Systems Policy
Project (CSPP), a public policy group, gathered information from technology companies
in the United States and developed an e-readiness assessment tool known as the “Readi-
ness Guide for Living in the Networked World”—the first time the term was applied [46].
However, the main problem with e-readiness is the lack of a common standard of assess-
ment associated with a unified set of measures [47]. Jutla et al. [48] took the first steps in
conceptualizing e-readiness from the competitive perspective of e-business. In addition,
from an e-commerce perspective, Bui et al. [ 44] developed a framework to assess and
monitor the e-readiness index of a country comprising eight factors—digital infrastructure,
macroeconomics, investment capacity, education of citizens, competitiveness, access to
skilled labor, culture, and cost of living—and 52 related indicators.
In the following years, several scholars attempted to critically assess the level of e-
readiness in developing countries, such as Ramayah et al. [ 49], Ifinedo [ 50], Dada [ 45],
Mutula and van Brakel [46], Alghamdi et al. [17], Al-Eryani and Rashed [51], and Chipem-
bele and Bwalya [52], to name just a few. Dada [45] points out that several governmental
and private institutions have formulated e-readiness rankings via different methodologies
and divergent definitions of the construct. Thus, the results are not consistent with each
other. Berthon et al. [53] offer a unique perspective on that, presenting a model in which
76% of a country’s e-readiness variation is explained by the propensity to corruption and
cultural values. Lou and Goulding [54] also acknowledge the difference in methodologies
and the divergent definitions of what is considered “global e-readiness”. In addition,
they point out that the private sector initially conducted most e-readiness initiatives, as
governments used to be late adopters of ICT strategies in general. Thus, very recent studies
remain proposing and evaluating e-readiness measurement tools; as an example, a new
review was conducted by Pal et al. [55], focusing on the agricultural sector.
3.2. Digital Readiness
Readiness is related to the condition of being fully prepared or willing to do some-
thing [14]. Thus, the concept of readiness can be described as the extent to which an
organization is prepared to change its current state to a new desired state [56]. However,
digital readiness construct has no universal definition [10,57], being an emerging construct
derived from the concept of change readiness. One of the main contributions of research
on digital readiness is the proposition of criteria for assessing organizational readiness
for DT [58]. Digital readiness, thus, assesses the readiness of an organization before a DT
endeavor is undertaken [59].
Although there are some differences, readiness is often used as a synonym for matu-
rity [57]. Indeed, maturity models have been used to assess readiness, making it possible to
identify an organization’s position in relation to a specific variable. In fact, they provide
frameworks for assessing business performance, enabling comparison and improvement
of an organization’s level of capability in a given dimension [59,60]. Digital readiness is

--- PAGE 5 ---
J. Theor. Appl. Electron. Commer. Res. 2024, 19 3287
also a relevant competitive resource in an innovation economy as it affects the success
of national R&D transfer to the entrepreneurial sector [61]. Companies looking forward
to implementing DT initiatives must answer key questions about how to get started and
which barriers can hamper the success of the DT endeavor [ 62,63]. These questions are
directly related to the readiness of the company to be digitally transformed, focusing on its
internal capabilities and barriers [64].
Moreover, De Carolis et al. [ 65] argue that previous models for measuring digital
readiness are incomplete, as they do not consider the complexities of modern businesses.
As such, they proposed a maturity model for digital readiness that measures the ability of
companies to effectively manage their processes to achieve desired outcomes. However, the
model proposed by De Carolis et al. [65] addresses the manufacturing sector. In the present
study, the perspective is more closely related to the organizational business environment,
which considers the human aspect as part of the fundamental characteristics for DT readi-
ness in organizations. Some studies also analyze the relationship between digital readiness
and technology acceptance in an individual approach, using the technology acceptance
model (TAM) as a parameter [66,67]. However, in this study, the goal is to understand DT
organizational readiness as a whole, taking into consideration human aspects [59].
In sum, in terms of conceptualization, the extant scientific literature does not indicate
significant differences between e-readiness and digital readiness. Often both constructs
are used to define a situation where a certain level of readiness is required to achieve a
change from something analog to something electronic or digital. Indeed, the first studies
on e-readiness considered the external environment, usually a country or nation, as the
main antecedent for electronic adoption [18]. Over the years, there have been more articles
published on e-readiness than on digital readiness—as it will be later demonstrated in
this work—as digital readiness is a more recent issue related to the adoption of digital
technologies by individuals, organizations, industries, and countries [10]. However, both
constructs still lack a unified definition [10,45]. Based on that, in the extant literature, there
is not enough empirical evidence to date on how to design and evaluate a successful DT in
organizations from a business perspective. Therefore, there is a research gap on the exact
understanding of organizational readiness for DT [37], which underpins the relevance of
this work.
After addressing in the previous subsections, the concepts of e-readiness and digital
readiness, as well as their entanglements, similarities, and differences, as proposed in the
scientific literature, we present below the methodological procedure adopted to conduct
this research and answer the abovementioned research questions.
4. Method
This study consisted of a systematic literature review to investigate the constructs
that comprise organizational digital transformation readiness. To do that, we adopted the
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis Protocol (PRISMA)
to select articles and undertook thematic analysis to analyze the data collected [68–70].
The PRISMA flow diagram follows a four-step sequence, namely identification, screen-
ing, eligibility, and inclusion, as detailed below [71].
Identification: In this phase, the research questions are identified, and relevant studies
are sought. The search process should be systematic and comprehensive, with clear
inclusion and exclusion criteria.
Screening: In this phase, the studies identified in the first phase are screened based on
their relevance to the research question and the inclusion and exclusion criteria. This phase
typically involves screening the titles and abstracts of the studies, followed by a full-text
review of studies that meet the inclusion criteria.
Eligibility: In this phase, the eligibility of the studies that have passed the screening
phase is assessed. This assessment includes evaluating the quality of the studies and their
relevance to the research question.

--- PAGE 6 ---
J. Theor. Appl. Electron. Commer. Res. 2024, 19 3288
Inclusion: In this phase, studies that meet the eligibility criteria are included in the
systematic review. Data from these studies are extracted and analyzed, and the findings
are synthesized and reported.
Below, the operationalization of the systematic literature review conducted is presented.
After having defined the research questions in the introduction section of the article,
the review began with a selection of articles to identify the works published in related
journals, including references that better matched the structure and discussion of the
principal theme [72]. The data collection was carried out between April 2021 and May
2022. The review was conducted in chronological order, and the delimitation of the period
comprised mainly the years 2004 to 2021, considering that the subject is still recent and
practically unexpressed before this period. Articles published in 2022 were not included
in the count shown in the graphs, in order to have equal comparison measures, i.e., using
only complete years. Nevertheless, the articles published till May 2022 were reviewed
for the overall analysis and for theoretical purposes. The search aimed to cover articles
published in journals associated with the theme in the Web of Science database (although
the SCOPUS database was also used in this review, it did not bring up any articles that had
not already been obtained from the Web of Science database; therefore, it was decided to
cite only the Web of Science database), as well as in the most important IS journals. The
journals investigated were primarily in English, most of which with a double-blind review
process. Books, technical reports, and other sources were excluded.
The first step addressed the search of the following constructs in the Web of Science
database, using quotation marks to find the exact match of “digital transformation”, “e-
readiness”, “digital readiness”, and “digital transformation readiness”. The search included
the presence of the constructs in the title, abstract, and keywords to analyze and compare
the number of papers published per year and in the sum of these years. Although there
was a search for the total number of articles of the “digital transformation” construct, as
the number of articles is much broader, the subsequent analyses were focused on the three
other constructs: “e-readiness”, “digital readiness”, and “digital transformation readiness”.
“Digital transformation” was used for the theoretical part, considering the relevance of the
journals and the number of citations of the articles.
The second step comprised the analysis of the three aforementioned constructs/themes
according to the areas of interest in which they were published (categories), allowing the
identification of the main categories per theme. This categorization helped to prioritize the
themes that are more related to IS, ICT, and other organizational themes.
The third step comprised the search for each of the constructs/themes in the related
publishers of the most important journals between 2004 and 2022 in their specific databases,
namely Elsevier Science Direct, Taylor & Francis, Springer, and Emerald. This stage aimed
to evaluate the number of publications per theme and to find specific articles more closely
related to DT readiness.
The last step included a deeper analysis of the main articles found, including the most
cited and relevant ones, identifying those with a scope more closely related to organizations.
The relevant themes related to DT readiness within the articles were then used to build a
concept matrix to compare the findings in the literature. Further, a maturity model to assess
the organizational DT readiness was proposed. Finally, a framework was developed to
assess the organizational readiness for DT by investigating the logical order and connections
of categorized themes selected in the reviewed articles. Thus, the DT initiative begins with
the definition and evaluation of the organizational requirements necessary for this initiative
to be successful [63].
In the appendix, the final flow diagram derived from the use of the PRISMA approach
to conduct the systematic literature review is presented, as proposed by Page et al. [73].
5. Results
The search in the Web of Science and abovementioned publishers’ databases brought
up works published from 2004 to 2021, considering both articles and conference papers.

--- PAGE 7 ---
J. Theor. Appl. Electron. Commer. Res. 2024, 19 3289
Thus, 5007 articles related to “digital transformation”, 278 articles related to “e-readiness”,
91 articles related to “digital readiness”, and 7 articles related to “digital innovation readi-
ness” were detected, when analyzing the title, abstract, and keywords of the surveyed
works, as shown in Figure 1.
J. Theor. Appl. Electron. Commer. Res. 2024, 19, FOR PEER REVIEW 7 
 
 
the logical order and connections of categorized themes selected in the reviewed articles. 
Thus, the DT initiative begins with the de ﬁnition and evaluation of the organizational 
requirements necessary for this initiative to be successful [63]. 
In the appendix, the ﬁnal ﬂow diagram derived from the use of the PRISMA 
approach to conduct the systematic literature review is presented, as proposed by Page et 
al. [73]. 
5. Results 
The search in the Web of Science and abovementioned publishers’ databases brought 
up works published from 2004 to 2021, consid ering both articles and conference papers. 
Thus, 5007 articles related to “digital transformation”, 278 articles related to “e-readiness”, 
91 articles related to “digital readiness”, and 7 articles related to “digital innovation 
readiness” were detected, when analyzing the title, abstract, and keywords of the 
surveyed works, as shown in Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1. Number of articles by theme, 2004–2021. Source: Web of Science. 
To focus on the “readiness” concept, the theme “digital transformation” was 
excluded from further analysis due to its br oader scope, as it is inserted in various 
diﬀerent academic categories. Figure 2 represents the search conducted, detailing the 
number of articles published on topics related to readiness, in chronological order and 
separated by year of publication. E-readiness is by far the most researched topic, totaling 
278 articles in the period, covering mainly the governmental and institutional approach 
to readiness, and mainly addressing the metrics of stages and digital advances in 
countries. Although the concept “digital re adiness” did not have the same numerical 
representation as “e-readiness”, it had the highest number of publications in a single year, 
2021, reaching 36 articles, which highlights its recent growth and importance. For all 
themes, most articles were published from 2017 onwards. 
Table 1 details the number of articles on each topic by Web of Science category in the 
period 2004–2021. The top twenty categories ar e listed in that table. It is relevant to 
mention that themes may be counted in more than one category, i.e., the theme “e-
readiness” may be considered in both the Bu siness and Management categories so that 
the total sum of the categories may result in a much larger number than the original count 
of the articles. For e-readiness, the main categories are in the ﬁelds of Computer Science, 
Information Science, Business, Education, and Management; for digital readiness, the 
main categories are in the ﬁelds of Education, Management, Business, Computer Science, 
and Economics; and for DT readiness, the few articles found are divided into the ﬁelds of 
Business, Computer Science, and Economics.  
In this study, the focus is on articles rela ted to organizational issues, thus covering 
the areas of Information Systems, Business, and Management. 
Figure 1. Number of articles by theme, 2004–2021. Source: Web of Science.
To focus on the “readiness” concept, the theme “digital transformation” was excluded
from further analysis due to its broader scope, as it is inserted in various different academic
categories. Figure 2 represents the search conducted, detailing the number of articles
published on topics related to readiness, in chronological order and separated by year
of publication. E-readiness is by far the most researched topic, totaling 278 articles in
the period, covering mainly the governmental and institutional approach to readiness,
and mainly addressing the metrics of stages and digital advances in countries. Although
the concept “digital readiness” did not have the same numerical representation as “e-
readiness”, it had the highest number of publications in a single year, 2021, reaching
36 articles, which highlights its recent growth and importance. For all themes, most articles
were published from 2017 onwards.
J. Theor. Appl. Electron. Commer. Res. 2024, 19, FOR PEER REVIEW 8 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Number of articles by theme by year of publication. Source: Web of Science. 
Table 1. Number of articles in the main categories per theme. Source: Web of Science. 
E-Readiness   Digital Readiness   Digital Transformation 
Readiness   
Computer Science Information 
Systems 54 Education Educational Research 24 Business 2 
Information Science Library 
Science 47 Management 19 Computer Science Theory 
Methods 2 
Business 40 Business 11 Economics 2 
Education Educational Research 39 Computer Science Interdisciplinary 
Applications 8 Automation Control Systems 1 
Management 38 Economics 8 Computer Science 
Interdisciplinary Applications 1 
Computer Science Theory 
Methods 35 Engineering Manufacturing 8 Information Science Library 
Science 1 
Computer Science 
Interdisciplinary Applications 30 Computer Science Theory Methods 7 Management 1 
Engineering Electrical Electronic 23 Environmental Sciences 7   
Computer Science Artificial 
Intelligence 18 Green Sustainable Science 
Technology 6   
Computer Science Software 
Engineering 13 Engineering Industrial 5   
Economics 12 Environmental Studies 5   
Telecommunications 12 Information Science Library Science 5   
Multidisciplinary Sciences 11 Computer Science Information 
Systems 4   
Engineering Industrial 10 Automation Control Systems 3   
Operations Research 
Management Science 10 Computer Science Artificial 
Intelligence 3   
Public Administration 9 Computer Science Software 
Engineering 3   
Engineering Multidisciplinary 8 Energy Fuels 3   
Political Science 7 Engineering Electrical Electronic 3   
Communication 6 Health Care Sciences Services 3   
Figure 2. Number of articles by theme by year of publication. Source: Web of Science.
Table 1 details the number of articles on each topic by Web of Science category in the
period 2004–2021. The top twenty categories are listed in that table. It is relevant to mention
that themes may be counted in more than one category, i.e., the theme “e-readiness” may

--- PAGE 8 ---
J. Theor. Appl. Electron. Commer. Res. 2024, 19 3290
be considered in both the Business and Management categories so that the total sum of the
categories may result in a much larger number than the original count of the articles. For
e-readiness, the main categories are in the fields of Computer Science, Information Science,
Business, Education, and Management; for digital readiness, the main categories are in the
fields of Education, Management, Business, Computer Science, and Economics; and for DT
readiness, the few articles found are divided into the fields of Business, Computer Science,
and Economics.
Table 1. Number of articles in the main categories per theme. Source: Web of Science.
E-Readiness Digital Readiness Digital Transformation
Readiness
Computer Science
Information Systems 54 Education Educational Research 24 Business 2
Information Science Library
Science 47 Management 19 Computer Science Theory
Methods 2
Business 40 Business 11 Economics 2
Education Educational
Research 39 Computer Science
Interdisciplinary Applications 8 Automation Control
Systems 1
Management 38 Economics 8
Computer Science
Interdisciplinary
Applications
1
Computer Science Theory
Methods 35 Engineering Manufacturing 8 Information Science Library
Science 1
Computer Science
Interdisciplinary
Applications
30 Computer Science Theory
Methods 7 Management 1
Engineering Electrical
Electronic 23 Environmental Sciences 7
Computer Science Artificial
Intelligence 18 Green Sustainable Science
Technology 6
Computer Science Software
Engineering 13 Engineering Industrial 5
Economics 12 Environmental Studies 5
Telecommunications 12 Information Science Library
Science 5
Multidisciplinary Sciences 11 Computer Science Information
Systems 4
Engineering Industrial 10 Automation Control Systems 3
Operations Research
Management Science 10 Computer Science Artificial
Intelligence 3
Public Administration 9 Computer Science Software
Engineering 3
Engineering
Multidisciplinary 8 Energy Fuels 3
Political Science 7 Engineering Electrical
Electronic 3
Communication 6 Health Care Sciences Services 3
Social Sciences
Interdisciplinary 6 Operations Research
Management Science 3
Computer Science
Hardware Architecture 6 Business Finance 2
In this study, the focus is on articles related to organizational issues, thus covering the
areas of Information Systems, Business, and Management.
As presented in Table 2, a complementary online search conducted on the main
publishers’ databases from 2004 to 2022 nominated the journals with higher numbers of
articles, resulting in 264 papers on “e-readiness”, 72 articles on “digital transformation”,
and 8 articles on “digital transformation readiness”. The table is ranked from the highest to

--- PAGE 9 ---
J. Theor. Appl. Electron. Commer. Res. 2024, 19 3291
the lowest number of articles found, ordered first by the “e-readiness” results, then by the
subsequent two themes. Some of the main journals in the Information Systems and ICT
subjects were marked in gray. The Information Systems Journal (ISJ), Information Systems
Research (ISR), and Management Information Systems Quarterly (MISQ) do not present
any articles related to any of the three abovementioned themes.
Table 2. Number of articles per theme by related journal.
E-Readiness Digital
Readiness
Digital
Transformation
Readiness
The Electronic Journal of Information Systems in Developing
Countries 48
Government Information Quarterly 28 3
Information Technology for Development 25 1
International Journal of Information Management 13 3
Journal of Global Information Technology Management 12
Telecommunications Policy 11 4
The Information Society 11 1
International Journal of Electronic Commerce 10
Telematics and Informatics 9
IFAC-PapersOnLine 8 4 1
Procedia Computer Science 6 8 1
Industrial Marketing Management 6 3
Electronic Commerce Research and Applications 6 2
International Journal of Network Management 6
Journal of Information Technology & Politics 6
Information & Management 5
International Information & Library Review 5
International Journal of Public Administration 5
Journal of Internet Commerce 5
Technology in Society 4 2
European Journal of Information Systems (EJIS) 4 1
Cogent Business & Management 4
Journal of Business Research 3 9
Journal of Information Technology (JIT) 3
Electronic Markets 3
Journal of Organizational Computing and Electronic Commerce 3
Journal of Promotion Management 3
Journal of Urban Technology 3
Technovation 2 2
International Journal of Project Management 2

--- PAGE 10 ---
J. Theor. Appl. Electron. Commer. Res. 2024, 19 3292
Table 2. Cont.
E-Readiness Digital
Readiness
Digital
Transformation
Readiness
Journal of Strategic Information Systems (JSIS) 1 1
Journal of the AIS (JAIS) 1
Information Systems Management 1
Journal of Marketing Management 1
Technology Analysis & Strategic Management 1
Procedia Manufacturing 10
Technological Forecasting and Social Change 6
Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology 3
Journal of Manufacturing Systems 2 1
Computers & Industrial Engineering 2
Computers in Industry 2
Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management 2
Journal of Management Information Systems (JMIS) 1
Future Generation Computer Systems 1
Sustainable Production and Consumption 1
The Journal of Academic Librarianship 1
Journal of Eastern European and Central Asian Research 1
Information Systems Journal (ISJ)
Information Systems Research (ISR)
Management Information Systems Quarterly (MISQ)
Total 264 72 7
After exploring the databases, a selection of the articles was made, prioritizing the
ones addressing the “digital transformation readiness” (DTR) and “digital readiness” (DR)
themes. The articles chosen were those most related to organizational/business aspects
and with the highest number of citations.
Then, following the process described by Braun and Clark [74] and Braun et al. [75],
an inductive thematic approach was used to identify, in each selected article, the common
categories related to successful digital transformation initiatives. This process involved
six steps: familiarization, generation, category search, category review, category definition
and naming, and reporting. At the end of this process, twelve categories associated with
successful digital transformation initiatives were identified, which were brought together
in a matrix of concepts.
Table 3 presents the matrix of concepts, with the articles and the categories re-
lated to ODTR, which will be used to develop a framework on this subject. The table
depicts the articles in chronological order and according to the number of related cat-
egories found in each article, from highest to lowest. In addition, the oldest article
on the subject is from 2017, thus confirming the novelty of the theme. Therefore, the
following categories were found, namely Technology, Change/Innovation/Disruption,
Assessment/Maturity/Performance, Processes/Deployment/Implementation, Organiza-
tion/Company/SME, Management/Strategy, Resources/Capabilities, Competitiveness,
Business/Business Model, Culture/Environment, Human (Aspects), and Sustainability.

--- PAGE 11 ---
J. Theor. Appl. Electron. Commer. Res. 2024, 19 3293
Table 3. Concept matrix for “Digital Readiness” (DR) and “Digital Transformation Readiness” (DTR).
Technology
Change, Innovation, Disruption
Assessment, Maturity,
Performance
Processes, Deployment,
Implementation
Organization, Company, SME
Management, Strategy
Resources, Capabilities
Competitiveness
Business, Business Model
Culture, Environment
Human (Aspects)
Sustainability
De Carolis et al. (2017) [65] DR x x x x x x x x x x x x
Alharbi (2019) [76] DTR x x x x x x x x x
Lam & Law (2019) [43] DR x x x x x x x x x x x
Limani et al. (2019) [32] DTR x x x x x x x x x
Machado et al. (2019) [77] DR x x x x x x x x x x x
Pirola et al. (2019) [59] DR x x x x x x x x x x
Pramanik et al. (2019) [78] DTR x x x x x x x x x x x
Bican & Brem (2020) [79] DR x x x x x x x x x x
Caiado et al. (2021) [80] DR x x x x x x x x x x x
Genest & Gamache (2020) [81] DR x x x x x x x x x x x x
Gfrerer et al. (2021) [13] DR x x x x x x x x x x x
Stoianova et al. (2020) [64] DTR x x x x x x x x x x x
Švarc et al. (2021) [82] DTR x x x x x x x x x x x
Deja et al. (2021) [83] DTR x x x x x x x x x
Hoa & Tuyen (2021) [84] DTR x x x x x x x x x x x x
Criado-Perez et al. (2022) [85] DTR x x x x x x x x x x x

--- PAGE 12 ---
J. Theor. Appl. Electron. Commer. Res. 2024, 19 3294
6. Organizational Digital Transformation Readiness (ODTR)
The literature review lists the main characteristics of the categories that make up orga-
nizational digital transformation readiness. Through an extensive search of terms related to
e-readiness, digital readiness, and DT readiness, it was possible to verify that research on
the latter subject is still scarce. Even in the organizational area, several articles are related to
aspects of Industry 4.0 and manufacturing processes, leaving aside other business aspects.
Thus, given the importance of the transformational processes that companies have been
facing, with regard to the growing adoption of digital technologies, studies related to the
subject under analysis are essential. However, before defining the architecture of the ODTR
framework, it is essential to identify the key organizational processes for companies to
achieve DT, as these business-related processes must portray the company’s strategy [62].
Before designing the ODTR framework, it was necessary to define the maturity levels
that would enable the company’s readiness to change. The conceptualization of “maturity”
is related to an organized set of levels to assess management practices in different capabili-
ties or process areas in a qualitative or a semi-quantitative way [86,87]. Maturity models
can be applied in different specific scopes, enabling a general understanding of what has
to be done to develop a maturity assessment [86]. The levels proposed in this study were
inspired by the CMMI framework (Capability Maturity Model Integration), which has
its roots in the software engineering area—having been generalized to incorporate other
areas—as well as the DREAMY maturity model [ 65,86]. The decision to use the CMMI
framework was based on the clear, flexible, and well-designed model, which provides
a structure that helps organizations appraising their maturity, describing discrete levels
of process improvement within each process area [87]. In this work, the CMMI maturity
model was used [65] with some adjustments made to fit organizational digital readiness
assumptions in order to consider socioeconomic differences, as many businesses in devel-
oping countries would start at Level 0, rather than Level 1, as some models propose, as
detailed later.
Figure 3 describes the maturity levels for ODTR, according to the CMMI model [87]
and considering adaptions provided by De Carolis et al. [65], as mentioned above. At Level
0 (incomplete), the process is unpredictable, poorly controlled, or without any control; the
management level is reactive and with inconsistent performance. Level 1 (initial) embraces
an initial approach to meeting the objectives of the practice area, beginning to address
performance issues. Level 2 (managed) includes the practices from Level 1, establishing
a complete set of practices that fully address the intent of the practice area, requiring no
specific assets and identifying and monitoring the progress. Level 3 (defined) incorporates
Level 2 practices, adding organizational standards to address specific characteristics, using
and contributing to organizational assets, and focusing on achieving performances. Level 4
(integrated and interoperable) incorporates Level 3 practices, with integration and inter-
operability of applications, as well as information exchange, being thoroughly planned
and implemented considering enabling technologies, and uses quantitative techniques to
understand performance and achieve quality; finally, Level 5 (digital-oriented) builds on
Level 4 practices with a fully digital-oriented process, based on robust technological infras-
tructure and a high potential organizational growth, providing fast and secure information
exchange, in collaboration with the company functions and decision making.

--- PAGE 13 ---
J. Theor. Appl. Electron. Commer. Res. 2024, 19 3295
J. Theor. Appl. Electron. Commer. Res. 2024, 19, FOR PEER REVIEW 13 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Maturity levels for organizational digital transformation readiness. Adapted from CMMI 
Team [87] p. 13 and De Carolis et al. [65] p. 17. 
Differently from the DREAMY ( digital readiness assessment maturity model) 
approach, presented by De Carolis et al. [65], as well as other models in the literature that 
prioritize relevant stages for manufacturing processes [13,77], this study focus es on the 
organizational approach, also considering human aspects as essential to enable ODTR. 
Thus, the aforementioned categories are grouped via categorical content analysis [88], 
seeking to develop a parsimonious framework related to organizational digital 
transformation readiness, the key dimensions of which are detailed in Table 4. 
Table 4. Dimensions and criteria associated with ODTR. 
Dimensions Criteria  
Technological 
Resources 
− Technology availability (infrastructure to support digital 
processes) 
− Use of BI, data-driven, digital tools for management 
− Innovative TR 
Business Processes  
− Processes to support digital businesses 
− Evaluation processes to guarantee digital evolution of 
businesses 
Management 
Capability  
− Management and Leadership Skills on digital environment 
− Develop and implement digital environment and businesses 
as core strategy 
− Innovation driven mindset  
− Ability to evaluate performance indicators to provide 
sustainable businesses 
Human Capability  
− Human digital skills development 
− Ability to work with digital resources 
− Understand and disseminate digital culture 
Corporate Culture  
− Culture of digital environment 
− Competitive awareness  
− Sustainable digital business culture  
− Corporate institutional communication to disseminate 
digital culture 
Those dimensions encompass the indispensable resources and capabilities related to 
organizational digital readiness, representing the success factors for DT endeavors. Each 
dimension and criterium must be evaluated according to the previous maturity levels  
Figure 3. Maturity levels for organizational digital transformation readiness. Adapted from CMMI
Team [87] p. 13 and De Carolis et al. [65] p. 17.
Differently from the DREAMY (digital readiness assessment maturity model) ap-
proach, presented by De Carolis et al. [ 65], as well as other models in the literature that
prioritize relevant stages for manufacturing processes [ 13,77], this study focuses on the
organizational approach, also considering human aspects as essential to enable ODTR.
Thus, the aforementioned categories are grouped via categorical content analysis [88], seek-
ing to develop a parsimonious framework related to organizational digital transformation
readiness, the key dimensions of which are detailed in Table 4.
Table 4. Dimensions and criteria associated with ODTR.
Dimensions Criteria
Technological Resources
- Technology availability (infrastructure to support digital
processes)
- Use of BI, data-driven, digital tools for management
- Innovative TR
Business Processes
- Processes to support digital businesses
- Evaluation processes to guarantee digital evolution of
businesses
Management Capability
- Management and Leadership Skills on digital environment
- Develop and implement digital environment and businesses
as core strategy
- Innovation driven mindset
- Ability to evaluate performance indicators to provide
sustainable businesses
Human Capability
- Human digital skills development
- Ability to work with digital resources
- Understand and disseminate digital culture
Corporate Culture
- Culture of digital environment
- Competitive awareness
- Sustainable digital business culture
- Corporate institutional communication to disseminate
digital culture
Those dimensions encompass the indispensable resources and capabilities related to
organizational digital readiness, representing the success factors for DT endeavors. Each
dimension and criterium must be evaluated according to the previous maturity levels

--- PAGE 14 ---
J. Theor. Appl. Electron. Commer. Res. 2024, 19 3296
proposed to achieve digital readiness. The dimensions and the subsequent criteria are
as follows:
Technological resources comprise available technology (infrastructure to support digi-
tal processes), use of business intelligence (BI), and other data-oriented digital management
tools, as well as innovative IT solutions such as cloud computing, big data, the internet of
things (IoT), virtual/augmented reality, robotics, artificial intelligence (AI), and machine
learning (deep) [ 64,65,78,84]. They include, via categorical analysis [ 89], the categories
Technology and Resources/Capability.
Business processes encompass all the processes needed to support digital businesses.
DT requires a change in organizational processes and/or the development of new business
models [9]. The processes are carried out via digital platforms and consist of well-designed
and -described formal procedures that may be divided into several sub-processes. In
addition, processes must be constantly evaluated to guarantee the digital evolution of
the business [64,78,79]. They include, via categorical analysis [89], the categories Assess-
ment/Maturity/Performance and Processes/Deployment/Implementation.
Management capability encompasses management and leadership skills in the digital
environment. This includes the development and implementation of a digital environment
and definition of a digital business model as a core strategy. Managers must also have
an innovation-driven mindset, capable of perceiving digital changes in a competitive en-
vironment. This dimension also refers to the managerial ability to evaluate performance
indicators to provide a sustainable digital business [ 13,64,84]. It includes, via categor-
ical analysis [ 89], the categories Organization/Company/SME, Management/Strategy,
Competitiveness, and Business/Business Model.
Human capability is related to the development of digital skills of personnel directly
or indirectly related to tasks that demand digital knowledge. These skills are usually
verified in hiring processes or can be developed through specific training programs. Not
only employees but also third parties must have the ability to work with digital resources.
Another aspect of human capability is the understanding and dissemination of the organi-
zation’s digital culture [13,59,78,84]. It includes, via categorical analysis [89], the category
Human (Aspects).
Corporate culture encompasses the development and perpetuation of a digital en-
vironment throughout all corporate levels by means of institutional communication and
actions. As organizations understand the need to perform in a digital competitive scenario,
they seek to promote a sustainable digital culture, namely an innovative culture. Stoianova
et al. [64] merged corporate culture and human resources into one dimension. However,
corporate culture is a broader concept, integrating human resources, processes, manage-
ment, physical organizational aspects, and technology [13,64,84]. It includes, via categorical
analysis [89], the categories Change/Innovation/Disruption, Culture/Environment, and
Sustainability.
The ODTR Framework
From the theoretical background presented and the analysis of the key constructs and
organizational dimensions related to digital readiness, the organizational digital transfor-
mation readiness (ODTR) framework is proposed, as detailed in Figure 4.
The framework proposes a logical and structured approach to assess an organization’s
readiness to undertake a successful digital transformation initiative, addressing three levels
of analysis, namely the macro-, meso-, and micro-levels. The framework begins at the
macro-level, covering the market and the context in which the company operates, called
the competitive environment. The meso-level—the focus of the study—is the organization
itself, which is analyzed through its key dimensions related to DT readiness, namely
technological resources, business processes, capacity management, human capacity, and
corporate culture, previously detailed. These key dimensions, which represent the micro-
level of analysis, do not follow a pre-defined hierarchy or order, interacting with each other
and being guided by top management.

--- PAGE 15 ---
J. Theor. Appl. Electron. Commer. Res. 2024, 19 3297
As mentioned earlier, each abovementioned organizational dimension needs to reach
the required maturity to lead to the achievement of the required digital readiness for a
successful digital transformation. At the organizational level, once the levels of maturity of
the five key dimensions have been reached, it is up to top management to propose, develop,
and implement a digital strategy that translates into a digital transformation (Schallmo
et al. [57]; Bican and Brem [83]; Correani et al. [90]).
J. Theor. Appl. Electron. Commer. Res. 2024, 19, FOR PEER REVIEW 16 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Organizational digital transformation readiness (ODTR) framework. 
When assessing the DT readiness of companies in di ﬀerent socioeconomic realities, 
through the ODTR framework, three propositions can be formulated: 
P1. Successful DT initiatives in organizations depend directly on their digital readiness, 
measured through their level of maturity in the ensuing dimensions: technological 
resources, business processes, management  capacity, human capacity, and corporate 
culture [58,59,64,65,78,92]. 
That proposition, to be further tested, can be divided into ﬁve sub-propositions, namely: 
P1a. The level of maturity of technological resources in ﬂuences successful DT 
initiatives in organizations.  
P1b. The level of maturity of business processes in ﬂuences successful DT initiatives 
in organizations.  
P1c. The level of maturity of management capacity in ﬂuences successful DT 
initiatives in organizations.  
P1d. The level of maturity of human capacity in ﬂuences successful DT initiatives in 
organizations.  
P1e. The level of maturity of corporate culture inﬂuences successful DT initiatives in 
organizations. 
P2. The level of readiness of ﬁrms for DT has a direct impact on the conceptualization, 
design, and implementation of their digital strategies [78,79,92]. 
P3. The level of maturity for DT of a business directly impacts its level of competitiveness 
in the market in which it operates [64,78,79]. 
7. Conclusions 
This study proposed an integrative framework for assessing the ODTR based on a 
review and analysis of the extant scienti ﬁc literature on this subject. Having done that, 
this paper revealed an overlap between the deﬁnitions of e-readiness and digital readiness 
constructs. Indeed, the extant scientiﬁc literature does not demonstrate so far a signiﬁcant 
distinction between e-readiness and digital readiness, as both are supposed to indicate the 
level of maturity required from a country, institution, organization, or person to be 
digitally transformed successfully. This work also unveiled the lack of a uni ﬁed and 
monosemic deﬁnition for the “digital transformation readiness” construct, especially in 
Figure 4. Organizational digital transformation readiness (ODTR) framework.
According to Rauser [ 91], digital strategy refers to the strategy a company would
apply to all of its digital initiatives. This includes the entire process: collecting all re-
quired information, planning, identifying risks and opportunities, maintaining your digital
strategy, and creating sub-strategies such as your digital-marketing strategy. In the same
vein, Schallmo et al. [57] argue that a digital strategy summarizes digital transformation
processes, objectives, guidelines, and controlling structures and acts as interface to the
coordination of the numerous digitalization activities. In addition, the digital strategy
contains a company’s digital vision and expresses the business strategy’s objectives and
priorities through digital plans. Moreover, for Schallmo et al. [57], within the digital strat-
egy, digital technologies and methods are applied to products, services, processes, and
business models. In order to develop a digital strategy, the company and its environment
have to be analyzed as a basis for several future scenarios. Therefore, the digital strategy of
a company should comprise its vision, mission, values, strategic objectives, as well as the
corresponding key success factors and indicators.
Thus, the digital strategy (according to Schallmmo et al. (2018) [57], the terms digital
strategy, digitalization strategy, digital business strategy, digitization strategy, and digital
transformation strategy are used often interchangeably) will interact with all processes
and digital resources previously listed, and its design will be determined by the level
of digital innovation intended by the organization in its competitive environment. It
is important to emphasize that, over the process, the DT readiness indicators must be
monitored and controlled, until all levels for a complete DT are reached. Therefore, DT will
take place when the necessary readiness is achieved. Once the transformation occurs, it
consequently impacts the organization (as indicated by the arrow from the DT box towards
the organization box). In addition, once the organization is transformed, it also impacts
the competitive environment in which it is inserted (as indicated by the arrow from the DT

--- PAGE 16 ---
J. Theor. Appl. Electron. Commer. Res. 2024, 19 3298
box to the competitive environment box). In this way, the framework portrays a cyclical
feedback process where all levels of analysis can interact with each other, given the constant
technological changes that occur in society today.
When assessing the DT readiness of companies in different socioeconomic realities,
through the ODTR framework, three propositions can be formulated:
P1. Successful DT initiatives in organizations depend directly on their digital readiness,
measured through their level of maturity in the ensuing dimensions: technological re-
sources, business processes, management capacity, human capacity, and corporate cul-
ture [58,59,64,65,78,92].
That proposition, to be further tested, can be divided into five sub-propositions, namely:
P1a. The level of maturity of technological resources influences successful DT initiatives in
organizations.
P1b. The level of maturity of business processes influences successful DT initiatives in
organizations.
P1c. The level of maturity of management capacity influences successful DT initiatives in
organizations.
P1d. The level of maturity of human capacity influences successful DT initiatives in
organizations.
P1e. The level of maturity of corporate culture influences successful DT initiatives in
organizations.
P2. The level of readiness of firms for DT has a direct impact on the conceptualization,
design, and implementation of their digital strategies [78,79,92].
P3. The level of maturity for DT of a business directly impacts its level of competitiveness
in the market in which it operates [64,78,79].
7. Conclusions
This study proposed an integrative framework for assessing the ODTR based on a
review and analysis of the extant scientific literature on this subject. Having done that,
this paper revealed an overlap between the definitions of e-readiness and digital readiness
constructs. Indeed, the extant scientific literature does not demonstrate so far a significant
distinction between e-readiness and digital readiness, as both are supposed to indicate
the level of maturity required from a country, institution, organization, or person to be
digitally transformed successfully. This work also unveiled the lack of a unified and
monosemic definition for the “digital transformation readiness” construct, especially in
the organizational realm. In the universe of articles retrieved from the Web of Science and
publishers’ databases, e-readiness represents about 74% of the works, digital readiness
represents 24%, and digital transform readiness represents only 2% of the articles, most of
them published after 2017.
Indeed, ODTR is a relatively new construct in the academic realm, reporting the idea
of measuring the level of readiness of an organization for ICT implementation and use,
combined with other organizational issues, to enable a successful DT. In fact, studies on
organizational readiness for DT are also quite scarce, representing a research opportunity.
In short, there is an academic gap associated with the investigation of the level of maturity
required for the various dimensions of an organization for the success of DT initiatives
carried out in it, as corroborated by the literature review. This academic gap ranges from the
assessment of the existing context for organizational DT initiatives to their implementation
and final assessment.
It is also noteworthy that there are several relevant concepts involved with organiza-
tional readiness for DT, as already mentioned, which is corroborated by evidence found in
related systematic literature reviews as well as explicitly stated by Latifah et al. [69] and
Silva et al. [93]. These concepts are related not only to ICT but also to several other organi-
zational dimensions, such as resources, processes, organizational culture and environment,
competitiveness, management, human competencies, business models, and sustainability,

--- PAGE 17 ---
J. Theor. Appl. Electron. Commer. Res. 2024, 19 3299
among others, thus confirming the multidisciplinarity (and also the interdisciplinarity) of
the theme.
7.1. Theoretical Contributions
As a first theoretical contribution, this study provided a comprehensive and in-depth
understanding of the concepts and methodological aspects that cover the topic of ODTR.
Indeed, the literature review conducted identified the main constructs related to digi-
tal transformation organizational readiness—namely, technological resources, business
processes, management capability, human capability, and corporate culture.
Furthermore, the article unveiled the logical configuration of the critical factors asso-
ciated with successful DT initiatives in organizations, which allowed the formulation of
an exploratory framework on this topic. This proposed framework articulates the main
dimensions and criteria necessary to measure and evaluate the organizational readiness
for DT, in line with the ideas of [ 94,95]. It also provides a straightforward visualization
of the essential steps required in an organization to develop a digital strategy associated
with its DT, in accordance with [96]. Moreover, the theoretical framework also includes a
competitive environment perspective, proposing that the DT process is cyclical: once the
transformation is accomplished in the organization, it impacts the competitive environment
in which the organization operates in return, which is also supported by Fabac [97].
Another theoretical contribution of this work is the development of a maturity model
to assess organizational digital readiness, as also suggested by Gökalp and Martinez [98]
and Kao et al. [ 99]. This maturity model allows for conceptual adjustments that suit
organizational assumptions and various socioeconomic scenarios.
7.2. Practical Contributions
In addition to the theoretical contributions mentioned, this work also makes some
practical contributions. The first of these concerns the main dimensions that an organization
must pay attention to in order to achieve successful digital transformation initiatives. In
fact, adequate technological capabilities spanning emerging technologies (such as the IoT,
Blockchain, generative AI, etc.) as well as established technologies (such as databases,
intranets/extranets, IOS, etc.) are necessary for successful DT efforts. Furthermore, man-
agers must also be aware of the need for new business processes that duly correspond
with the technologies available for DT initiatives. Furthermore, the management team
must be trained to deal with the peculiarities of digital transformation initiatives, especially
regarding leadership issues. In line with this, capacity building efforts must be undertaken
by organizations so that their personnel are well equipped to deal with DT projects. Finally,
it is essential that organizations have a corporate culture that welcomes innovation and
tolerates possible failures arising from the implementation of DT projects.
Another practical contribution of this work is the possibility for organizations to assess
ex ante their readiness for a successful implementation of DT via the ODTR framework.
Thus, managers can anticipate which features should be improved in companies so that
possible DT initiatives are successful.
7.3. Limitations and Further Steps
While this review is not exhaustive, the proposed framework is intended to provide a
broader understanding of the steps an organization must take to succeed in a DT initiative
in a fast-changing digital-dependent world. However, some limitations must be considered.
The search was limited to the Web of Science and main publishers in IS and Management
databases. Although this allowed a broad search, some publications may not have been
considered. In addition, some limitations were established regarding the scope and search
criteria adopted.
Future steps of this research may include further elaboration and validation of the
proposed model, with a broader investigation on how organizations have responded to the
challenge of DT and their readiness in practice to do so, in line with what was developed

--- PAGE 18 ---
J. Theor. Appl. Electron. Commer. Res. 2024, 19 3300
by Soto-Acosta [ 100]. Moreover, comparative studies might also incorporate specific
contextual aspects associated with distinct business industries in different socioeconomic
contexts, such as ODTR in developing countries, as also proposed by Raghavan et al. [101].
In addition, further investigations can strengthen the understanding of how (and by
whom) some relevant decisions about DT initiatives are made in organizations, addressing
the role and importance of leadership and employees’ digital readiness for successful
digital transformation initiatives, as also suggested by Larjovuori et al. and Höyng and
Lau [102,103]. Finally, future research could expand the current debate on new business
models enabled by DT, namely how companies can change their basis of competition
associated with innovative products and services through digital transformation.
Overall, with the accelerated pace of digital technologies and the profound changes
that the world has faced lately, expanding the theoretical scope associated with the impact
of emerging ICT on organizations is essential to monitor and evaluate the latest initiatives
on DT, as well as to predict future changes. This work, therefore, intends to move in this
direction, by proposing a new way of conceptualizing and evaluating the processes behind
the DT initiatives that organizations are currently experiencing.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, F.M.; methodology, F.M.; software, F.M.; validation,
L.A.J.; formal analysis, F.M.; investigation, F.M.; resources, F.M.; data curation, F.M. and L.A.J.;
writing—original draft preparation, F.M.; writing—review and editing, F.M. and L.A.J.; visualization,
F.M. and L.A.J.; supervision, L.A.J.; project administration, F.M. and L.A.J.; funding acquisition, L.A.J.
All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by the NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECH-
NOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT (CNPq), grant number PQ 304290/2021-1 and GETULIO VARGAS
FOUNDATION, grant number EBAPE PROPESQUISA 00505100300359.
Data Availability Statement: The dataset used during the current study is available from the
corresponding author on reasonable request.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Appendix A
J. Theor. Appl. Electron. Commer. Res. 2024, 19, FOR PEER REVIEW 19 
 
 
Appendix A 
 
Figure A1. PRISMA ﬂow diagram for the systematic literature review. Source: Page et al. (2021) [73]. 
References 
1. Dobrota, M.; Jeremic, V.; Markovic, A. A New Perspective on the ICT Development Index. Available online: 
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/epdf/10.1177/0266666912446497 (accessed on 3 July 2023). 
2. Brynjolfsson, E.; McAfee, A. Race Against the Machine: How the Digital Revolution  Is Accelerating Innovation, Driving Productivity, 
and Irreversibly Transforming Employment and the Economy ; Digital Frontier Press. Lexington, Massachusetts: 2011; ISBN 978-0-
9847251-1-3. 
3. Milenkovic, M.J.; Brajovic, B.; Milenkovic, D.; Vukmirovic, D.; Jeremic, V. Beyond the Equal-Weight Framework of the 
Networked Readiness Index: A Multilevel I-Distance Methodology. Inf. Dev. 2016, 32 , 1120–1136. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0266666915593136. 
4. Bharadwaj, A.; El Sawy, O.A.; Pavlou, P.A.; Venkatraman, N. Digital Business Strategy: Toward a Next Generation of Insights. 
MIS Q. 2013, 37, 471–482. 
5. Wessel, L.; Baiyere, A.; Ologeanu-Taddei, R.; Cha, J.; Blegind-Jensen, T. Unpacking the Diﬀerence between Digital 
Transformation and IT-Enabled Organizational Transformation. J. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 2021, 22 , 102–129. 
https://doi.org/10.17705/1jais.00655. 
6. Švarc, J.; Lažnjak, J.; Dabić, M. The Role of National Intellectual Capital in the Digital Transformation of EU Countries. Another 
Digital Divide? J. Intellect. Cap. 2020, 22, 768–791. https://doi.org/10.1108/JIC-02-2020-0024. 
7. Lanzolla, G.; Lorenz, A.; Miron-Spektor, E.; Schilling, M.; Solinas, G.; Tucci, C.L. Digital Transformation: What Is New If 
Anything? Emerging Patterns and Management Research. AMD 2020, 6, 341–350. https://doi.org/10.5465/amd.2020.0144. 
8. Demirkan, H.; Spohrer, J.C.; Welser, J.J. Digital Innovation and Strategic Transformation. IT Prof. 2016, 18 , 14–18. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/MITP.2016.115. 
9. Reis, J.; Amorim, M.; Melão, N.; Matos, P. Digital Transformation: A Literature Review and Guidelines for Future Research. In 
Trends and Advances in Information Systems and Technologies ; Rocha, Á., Adeli, H., Reis, L.P., Costanzo, S., Eds.; Advances in 
Intelligent Systems and Computing; Springer International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2018; Volume 745, pp. 411–421. 
ISBN 978-3-319-77702-3. 
10. Nasution, R.A.; Rusnandi, L.S.L.; Qodariah, E.; Arnita, D.; Windasari, N.A. The Evaluation of Digital Readiness Concept: 
Existing Models and Future Directions. ajtm 2018, 11, 94–117. https://doi.org/10.12695/ajtm.2018.11.2.3. 
11. Vial, G. Understanding Digital Transformation: A Review and a Research Agenda. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 2019, 28 , 118–144. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis.2019.01.003. 
12. Teichert, R. Digital Transformation Maturity: A Systematic Review of Literature. Acta Univ. Agric. Silvic. Mendel. Brun. 2019, 67, 
1673–1687. https://doi.org/10.11118/actaun201967061673. 
Figure A1. PRISMA flow diagram for the systematic literature review. Source: Page et al. (2021) [73].

--- PAGE 19 ---
J. Theor. Appl. Electron. Commer. Res. 2024, 19 3301
References
1. Dobrota, M.; Jeremic, V .; Markovic, A. A New Perspective on the ICT Development Index. Available online: https://journals.
sagepub.com/doi/epdf/10.1177/0266666912446497 (accessed on 3 July 2023).
2. Brynjolfsson, E.; McAfee, A. Race Against the Machine: How the Digital Revolution Is Accelerating Innovation, Driving
Productivity, and Irreversibly Transforming Employment and the Economy. Digital Frontier Press: Lexington, MA, USA, 2011;
ISBN 978-0-9847251-1-3.
3. Milenkovic, M.J.; Brajovic, B.; Milenkovic, D.; Vukmirovic, D.; Jeremic, V . Beyond the Equal-Weight Framework of the Networked
Readiness Index: A Multilevel I-Distance Methodology. Inf. Dev. 2016, 32, 1120–1136. [CrossRef]
4. Bharadwaj, A.; El Sawy, O.A.; Pavlou, P .A.; Venkatraman, N. Digital Business Strategy: Toward a Next Generation of Insights.
MIS Q. 2013, 37, 471–482. [CrossRef]
5. Wessel, L.; Baiyere, A.; Ologeanu-Taddei, R.; Cha, J.; Blegind-Jensen, T. Unpacking the Difference between Digital Transformation
and IT-Enabled Organizational Transformation. J. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 2021, 22, 102–129. [CrossRef]
6. Lorenz, F.; Buchwald, A. Chief Digital Officers’ Social Construction of and Coping with Digital Transformation. InAcademy of
Management Proceedings; Academy of Management: Briarcliff Manor, NY, USA, 2023; Volume 2023, p. 11220. [CrossRef]
7. Lanzolla, G.; Lorenz, A.; Miron-Spektor, E.; Schilling, M.; Solinas, G.; Tucci, C.L. Digital Transformation: What Is New If Anything?
Emerging Patterns and Management Research. AMD 2020, 6, 341–350. [CrossRef]
8. Demirkan, H.; Spohrer, J.C.; Welser, J.J. Digital Innovation and Strategic Transformation. IT Prof. 2016, 18, 14–18. [CrossRef]
9. Reis, J.; Amorim, M.; Mel ão, N.; Matos, P . Digital Transformation: A Literature Review and Guidelines for Future Research.
In T rends and Advances in Information Systems and T echnologies; Rocha, Á., Adeli, H., Reis, L.P ., Costanzo, S., Eds.; Advances in
Intelligent Systems and Computing; Springer International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2018; Volume 745, pp. 411–421,
ISBN 978-3-319-77702-3.
10. Nasution, R.A.; Rusnandi, L.S.L.; Qodariah, E.; Arnita, D.; Windasari, N.A. The Evaluation of Digital Readiness Concept: Existing
Models and Future Directions. ajtm 2018, 11, 94–117. [CrossRef]
11. Vial, G. Understanding Digital Transformation: A Review and a Research Agenda. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 2019, 28, 118–144.
[CrossRef]
12. Teichert, R. Digital Transformation Maturity: A Systematic Review of Literature. Acta Univ. Agric. Silvic. Mendel. Brun. 2019, 67,
1673–1687. [CrossRef]
13. Gfrerer, A.; Hutter, K.; Füller, J.; Ströhle, T. Ready or Not: Managers’ and Employees’ Different Perceptions of Digital Readiness.
Calif. Manag. Rev. 2021, 63, 23–48. [CrossRef]
14. Readiness Noun-Definition, Pictures, Pronunciation and Usage Notes|Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary at OxfordLearn-
ersDictionaries.Com. Available online: https://www.oxfordlearnersdictionaries.com/definition/english/readiness (accessed on
4 July 2023).
15. Voß, F.L.V .; Pawlowski, J.M. Digital Readiness Frameworks. In Proceedings of the Knowledge Management in Organizations;
Uden, L., Ting, I.-H., Corchado, J.M., Eds.; Springer International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2019; pp. 503–514.
16. Alaaraj, H.; Ibrahim, F.W. An overview and classification of e-readiness assessment models. Int. J. Sci. Res. Publ. 2014, 4, 1–5.
17. Alghamdi, I.A.; Goodwin, R.; Rampersad, G. A Suggested E-Government Framework for Assessing Organizational E-Readiness
in Developing Countries. In Proceedings of the Informatics Engineering and Information Science ; Abd Manaf, A., Zeki, A., Zamani, M.,
Chuprat, S., El-Qawasmeh, E., Eds.; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2011; pp. 479–498.
18. Choucri, N.; Maugis, V .; Madnick, S.; Siegel, M.; Gillet, S.; O’Donnel, S.; Best, M.; Zhu, H.; Haghseta, F.Global e-Readiness-for What?
Center for eBusiness at MIT: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2003.
19. Molla, A.; Cooper, V .; Corbitt, B.; Deng, H.; Peszynski, K.; Pittayachawan, S.; Teoh, S. E-Readiness to g-Readiness: Developing
a Green Information Technology Readiness Framework. In Proceedings of the 19 th Australasian Conference on Information
Systems, Christchurch, New Zealand, 3–5 December 2008; p. 35. Available online: https://aisel.aisnet.org/acis2008/35 (accessed
on 21 September 2024).
20. Sheoran, S.; Vij, S. A Review of E-Government Assessment Frameworks: E-Readiness, Adoption, Citizen Engagement and Quality.
JeDEM 2022, 14, 197–213. [CrossRef]
21. Heubeck, T. Managerial Capabilities as Facilitators of Digital Transformation? Dynamic Managerial Capabilities as Antecedents
to Digital Business Model Transformation and Firm Performance. Digit. Bus. 2023, 3, 100053. [CrossRef]
22. Mihu, C.; Pitic, A.G.; Bayraktar, D. Drivers of Digital Transformation and Their Impact on Organizational Management.Stud.
Bus. Econ. 2023, 18, 149–170. [CrossRef]
23. Stief, S.E.; Eidhoff, A.T.; Voeth, M. Transform to Succeed: An Empirical Analysis of Digital Transformation in Firms.Int. J. Econ.
Manag. Eng. 2016, 10, 1833–1842.
24. Jedynak, M.; Czakon, W.; Ku´ zniarska, A.; Mania, K. Digital Transformation of Organizations: What Do We Know and Where to
Go Next? J. Organ. Change Manag. 2021, 34, 629–652. [CrossRef]
25. Konopik, J.; Jahn, C.; Schuster, T.; Hoßbach, N.; Pflaum, A. Mastering the Digital Transformation through Organizational
Capabilities: A Conceptual Framework. Digit. Bus. 2022, 2, 100019. [CrossRef]
26. Imran, F.; Shahzad, K.; Butt, A.; Kantola, J. Digital Transformation of Industrial Organizations: Toward an Integrated Framework.
J. Change Manag. 2021, 21, 451–479. [CrossRef]

--- PAGE 20 ---
J. Theor. Appl. Electron. Commer. Res. 2024, 19 3302
27. Transformation Noun-Definition, Pictures, Pronunciation and Usage Notes|Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary at
OxfordLearnersDictionaries.Com. Available online: https://www.oxfordlearnersdictionaries.com/us/definition/english/
transformation?q=transformation (accessed on 15 July 2024).
28. Davis, R. Unit Control Systems Engineering. In Proceedings of the February 11–12, 1954, Western Computer Conference: T rends in
Computers: Automatic Control and Data Processing on-AIEE-IRE ’53 (Western) ; ACM Press: Los Angeles, CA, USA, 1954; p. 89.
29. Gong, C.; Ribiere, V . Developing a Unified Definition of Digital Transformation. T echnovation2021, 102, 102217. [CrossRef]
30. Kochan, T.A.; Useem, M. T ransforming Organizations; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 1992; ISBN 978-0-19-506504-6.
31. Skog, D.A.; Wimelius, H.; Sandberg, J. Digital Disruption. Bus. Inf. Syst. Eng. 2018, 60, 431–437. [CrossRef]
32. Limani, Y.; Hajrizi, E.; Stapleton, L.; Retkoceri, M. Digital Transformation Readiness in Higher Education Institutions (HEI): The
Case of Kosovo. IF AC-Pap.2019, 52, 52–57. [CrossRef]
33. Mergel, I.; Edelmann, N.; Haug, N. Defining Digital Transformation: Results from Expert Interviews. Gov. Inf. Q. 2019, 36, 101385.
[CrossRef]
34. Li, F. The Digital Transformation of Business Models in the Creative Industries: A Holistic Framework and Emerging Trends.
T echnovation2020, 92–93, 102012. [CrossRef]
35. Ismail, M.H.; Khater, M.; Zaki, M. Digital Business Transformation and Strategy: What Do We Know So Far? Camb. Serv. Alliance
2017, 10, 1–35.
36. Bekkhus, R. Do KPIs Used by CIOs Decelerate Digital Business Transformation? The Case of ITIL. DIGIT 2016 Proc . 2016.
Available online: https://aisel.aisnet.org/digit2016/16 (accessed on 16 July 2024).
37. Matt, C.; Hess, T.; Benlian, A. Digital Transformation Strategies. Bus. Inf. Syst. Eng. 2015, 57, 339–343. [CrossRef]
38. Verhoef, P .C.; Broekhuizen, T.; Bart, Y.; Bhattacharya, A.; Qi Dong, J.; Fabian, N.; Haenlein, M. Digital Transformation: A
Multidisciplinary Reflection and Research Agenda. J. Bus. Res. 2021, 122, 889–901. [CrossRef]
39. Henriette, E.; Feki, M.; Boughzala, I. The Shape of Digital Transformation: A Systematic Literature Review. In Proceedings of
the MCIS 2015 Proceedings, Samos, Greece, 2–5 October 2015; p. 10. Available online: https://aisel.aisnet.org/mcis2015/10
(accessed on 21 September 2024).
40. Nadkarni, S.; Prügl, R. Digital Transformation: A Review, Synthesis and Opportunities for Future Research. Manag. Rev. Q. 2021,
71, 233–341. [CrossRef]
41. Orlikowski, W.J. Improvising Organizational Transformation Over Time: A Situated Change Perspective.Inf. Syst. Res. 1996, 7,
63–92. [CrossRef]
42. Agrawal, P .; Narain, R.; Ullah, I. Analysis of Barriers in Implementation of Digital Transformation of Supply Chain Using
Interpretive Structural Modelling Approach. J. Model. Manag. 2019, 15, 297–317. [CrossRef]
43. Lam, C.; Law, R. Readiness of Upscale and Luxury-Branded Hotels for Digital Transformation. Int. J. Hosp. Manag. 2019, 79,
60–69. [CrossRef]
44. Bui, T.X.; Sankaran, S.; Sebastian, I.M. A Framework for Measuring National E-Readiness. Int. J. Electron. Bus. 2003, 1, 3–22.
[CrossRef]
45. Dada, D. E-Readiness for Developing Countries: Moving the Focus from the Environment to the Users. Electron. J. Inf. Syst. Dev.
Ctries. 2006, 27, 1–14. [CrossRef]
46. Mutula, S.M.; van Brakel, P . An Evaluation of E-Readiness Assessment Tools with Respect to Information Access: Towards an
Integrated Information Rich Tool. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 2006, 26, 212–223. [CrossRef]
47. Bakry, S.H. Toward the Development of a Standard E-Readiness Assessment Policy. Int. J. Netw. Manag. 2003, 13, 129–137.
[CrossRef]
48. Jutla, D.; Bodorik, P .; Dhaliwal, J. Government Support for the E-Readiness of Small and Medium Sized Enterprises. In
Proceedings of the 35th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, Big Island, HI, USA, 10 January 2002; p. 11.
49. Ramayah, T.; Yan, L.; Sulaiman, M. SME E-Readiness in Malaysia: Implications for Planning and Implementation. Sasin J. Manag.
2005, 11, 103–120.
50. Ifinedo, P . Measuring Africa’s e-Readiness in the Global Networked Economy: A Nine-Country Data Analysis.Int. J. Educ. Dev.
Using ICT 2005, 1, 53–71.
51. Al-eryani, A.; Rashed, A. The Impact of the Culture on the e-Readiness for E-Government in Developing Countries (Yemen).
In Proceedings of the 13th International Arab Conference on Information Technology ACIT 2012, Lebanon, Lebanon, 10–13
December 2012.
52. Chipembele, M.; Bwalya, K.J. Assessing E-Readiness of the Copperbelt University, Zambia: Case Study. Int. J. Inf. Learn. T echnol.
2016, 33, 315–332. [CrossRef]
53. Berthon, P .; Pitt, L.; Cyr, D.; Campbell, C. E-readiness and Trust: Macro and Micro Dualities for E-commerce in a Global
Environment. Int. Mark. Rev. 2008, 25, 700–714. [CrossRef]
54. Lou, E.C.W.; Goulding, J.S. The Pervasiveness of E-readiness in the Global Built Environment Arena. J. Syst. Inf. T echnol. 2010, 12,
180–195. [CrossRef]
55. Pal, A.; Singh, D.; Dhaliwal, R.K. Identification and Relevance of E-Readiness Assessment Tools for ICT Use in Agriculture. Curr.
J. Appl. Sci. T echnol. 2020, 39, 93–102. [CrossRef]
56. Kaplan, R.S.; Norton, D.P . Measuring the Strategic Readiness of Intangible Assets. Harv. Bus. Rev. 2004, 82, 52–63. [PubMed]

--- PAGE 21 ---
J. Theor. Appl. Electron. Commer. Res. 2024, 19 3303
57. Schallmo, D.; Williams, C.A.; Lohse, J. Clarifying digital strategy–Detailed literature review of existing Approaches. In ISPIM
Conference Proceedings; The International Society for Professional Innovation Management (ISPIM): Manchester, UK, 2018; pp. 1–21.
58. Giang, N.; Pham, H.; Tu, N.; Tan, P . Exploring the Readiness for Digital Transformation in a Higher Education Institution towards
Industrial Revolution 4.0. Int. J. Eng. Pedagog. (Ijep) 2021, 11, 4. [CrossRef]
59. Pirola, F.; Cimini, C.; Pinto, R. Digital Readiness Assessment of Italian SMEs: A Case-Study Research. JMTM 2019, 31, 1045–1083.
[CrossRef]
60. Becker, J.; Knackstedt, R.; Pöppelbuß, J. Developing Maturity Models for IT Management. Bus. Inf. Syst. Eng. 2009, 1, 213–222.
[CrossRef]
61. Moeini Gharagozloo, M.M.; Askarzadeh, F.; Moeini Gharagozloo, A. More Power for International Entrepreneurs: The Effect of
Digital Readiness of Economies on Channeling National R&D Resources to Entrepreneurship. J. Int. Entrep. 2022, 20, 474–502.
[CrossRef]
62. Jones, M.D.; Hutcheson, S.; Camba, J.D. Past, Present, and Future Barriers to Digital Transformation in Manufacturing: A Review.
J. Manuf. Syst. 2021, 60, 936–948. [CrossRef]
63. Margiono, A. Digital Transformation: Setting the Pace. JBS 2021, 42, 315–322. [CrossRef]
64. Stoianova, O.; Lezina, T.; Ivanova, V . Corporate Culture: Impact on Companies’ Readiness for Digital Transformation. InDigital
Economy. Emerging T echnologies and Business Innovation; Bach Tobji, M.A., Jallouli, R., Samet, A., Touzani, M., Strat, V .A., Pocatilu, P .,
Eds.; Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing; Springer International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2020; Volume 395,
pp. 13–26, ISBN 978-3-030-64641-7.
65. De Carolis, A.; Macchi, M.; Negri, E.; Terzi, S. A Maturity Model for Assessing the Digital Readiness of Manufacturing Companies.
In Advances in Production Management Systems. The Path to Intelligent, Collaborative and Sustainable Manufacturing ; Lödding, H.,
Riedel, R., Thoben, K.-D., Von Cieminski, G., Kiritsis, D., Eds.; IFIP Advances in Information and Communication Technology;
Springer International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2017; Volume 513, pp. 13–20, ISBN 978-3-319-66922-9.
66. Ashari Nasution, R.; Arnita, D.; Fatimah Azzahra, D. Digital Readiness and Acceptance of Mobile Advertising. Australas. Mark. J.
2021, 29, 95–103. [CrossRef]
67. Venkatesh, V .; Morris, M.G.; Davis, G.B.; Davis, F.D. User Acceptance of Information Technology: Toward a Unified View.MIS Q.
2003, 27, 425–478. [CrossRef]
68. Moher, D.; Liberati, A.; Tetzlaff, J.; Altman, D.G. Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses: The
PRISMA Statement. Int. J. Surg. 2010, 8, 336–341. [CrossRef]
69. Latifah, R.; Budiyanto, C.W.; Saputro, H. Digital transformation readiness in education: A review. Int. J. Inf. Educ. T echnol. 2022,
12, 809–815. [CrossRef]
70. Reis, J.; Melão, N. Digital Transformation: A Meta-Review and Guidelines for Future Research. Heliyon 2023, 9, e12834. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
71. Galletta, S.; Mazzù, S.; Naciti, V .; Paltrinieri, A. A PRISMA Systematic Review of Greenwashing in the Banking Industry: A Call
for Action. Res. Int. Bus. Financ. 2024, 69, 102262. [CrossRef]
72. Arya, S.; Kaji, A.H.; Boermeester, M.A. PRISMA Reporting Guidelines for Meta-Analyses and Systematic Reviews. JAMA Surg.
2021, 156, 789–790. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
73. Page, M.J.; McKenzie, J.E.; Bossuyt, P .M.; Boutron, I.; Hoffmann, T.C.; Mulrow, C.D.; Shamseer, L.; Tetzlaff, J.M.; Akl, E.A.;
Brennan, S.E.; et al. The PRISMA 2020 Statement: An Updated Guideline for Reporting Systematic Reviews. BMJ 2021, 372, n71.
[CrossRef]
74. Braun, V .; Clarke, V . Using Thematic Analysis in Psychology. Qual. Res. Psychol. 2006, 3, 77–101. [CrossRef]
75. Braun, V .; Clarke, V .; Hayfield, N.; Davey, L.; Jenkinson, E. Doing Reflexive Thematic Analysis. In Supporting Research in
Counselling and Psychotherapy: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods Research ; Bager-Charleson, S., McBeath, A., Eds.;
Springer International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2022; pp. 19–38, ISBN 978-3-031-13942-0.
76. Alharbi, A.S. Challenges in digital transformation in Saudi Arabia obstacles in paradigm shift in Saudi Arabia. In Proceedings of
the 2019 6th International Conference on Computing for Sustainable Global Development (INDIACom), New Delhi, India, 13–15
March 2019; pp. 1287–1291.
77. Machado, C.G.; Winroth, M.; Carlsson, D.; Almström, P .; Centerholt, V .; Hallin, M. Industry 4.0 Readiness in Manufacturing
Companies: Challenges and Enablers towards Increased Digitalization. Procedia CIRP 2019, 81, 1113–1118. [CrossRef]
78. Pramanik, H.S.; Kirtania, M.; Pani, A.K. Essence of Digital Transformation—Manifestations at Large Financial Institutions from
North America. Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 2019, 95, 323–343. [CrossRef]
79. Bican, P .M.; Brem, A. Digital Business Model, Digital Transformation, Digital Entrepreneurship: Is There A Sustainable “Digital”?
Sustainability 2020, 12, 5239. [CrossRef]
80. Caiado, R.G.G.; Scavarda, L.F.; Gavião, L.O.; Ivson, P .; de Mattos Nascimento, D.L.; Garza-Reyes, J.A. A fuzzy rule-based industry
4.0 maturity model for operations and supply chain management. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 2021, 231, 107883. [CrossRef]
81. Genest, M.C.; Gamache, S. Prerequisites for the implementation of industry 4.0 in manufacturing SMEs. Procedia Manuf. 2020, 51,
1215–1220. [CrossRef]
82. Švarc, J.; Lažnjak, J.; Dabi´ c, M. The role of national intellectual capital in the digital transformation of EU countries. Another
digital divide? J. Intellect. Cap. 2021, 22, 768–791. [CrossRef]

--- PAGE 22 ---
J. Theor. Appl. Electron. Commer. Res. 2024, 19 3304
83. Deja, M.; Rak, D.; Bell, B. Digital transformation readiness: Perspectives on academia and library outcomes in information literacy.
J. Acad. Librariansh. 2021, 47, 102403. [CrossRef]
84. Hoa, N.T.X.; Tuyen, N.T. A Model for Assessing the Digital Transformation Readiness for Vietnamese SMEs.J. East. Eur. Cent.
Asian Res. (JEECAR) 2021, 8, 541–555. [CrossRef]
85. Criado-Perez, C.; Shinkle, G.A.; Höllerer, M.A.; Sharma, A.; Collins, C.; Gardner, N.; Haeusler, M.H.; Pan, S. Digital Transformation
in the Australian AEC Industry: Prevailing Issues and Prospective Leadership Thinking. J. Constr. Eng. Manag. 2022, 148,
05021012. [CrossRef]
86. Macchi, M.; Fumagalli, L. A Maintenance Maturity Assessment Method for the Manufacturing Industry. J. Qual. Maint. Eng. 2013,
19, 295–315. [CrossRef]
87. CMMI Product Team. Capability Maturity Model® Integration (CMMI), Version 1.1—Continuous Representation; Carnegie Mellon
Software Engineering Institute: Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 2002. [CrossRef]
88. Roumell, E.A. Qualitative content analysis in adult education policy research: Developing a coding framework and conducting
categorical analysis. In Research Handbook on Adult Education Policy ; Edward Elgar Publishing: Cheltenham, UK, 2024; pp. 41–53.
89. Arden, S.V .; Pentimonti, J.M.; Cooray, R.; Jackson, S. A categorical content analysis of highly cited literature related to trends and
issues in special education. J. Learn. Disabil. 2018, 51, 589–599. [CrossRef]
90. Correani, A.; De Massis, A.; Frattini, F.; Petruzzelli, A.M.; Natalicchio, A. Implementing a Digital Strategy: Learning from the
Experience of Three Digital Transformation Projects. Calif. Manag. Rev. 2020, 62, 37–56. [CrossRef]
91. Rauser, A. Digital Strategy: A Guide to Digital Business T ransformation ; CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform: Scotts Valley,
CA, USA, 2016; ISBN 978-1-5193-3124-3.
92. Isaev, E.; Korovkina, N.; Tabakova, M. Evaluation of the Readiness of a Company’s IT Department for Digital Business Transfor-
mation. Bus. Inform. 2018, 2018, 55–64. [CrossRef]
93. Silva, R.P .; Saraiva, C.; Mamede, H.S. Assessment of Organizational Readiness for Digital Transformation in SMEs. Procedia
Comput. Sci. 2022, 204, 362–369. [CrossRef]
94. Kretschmer, T.; Khashabi, P . Digital Transformation and Organization Design: An Integrated Approach.Calif. Manag. Rev. 2020,
62, 86–104. [CrossRef]
95. Shehadeh, M.; Almohtaseb, A.; Aldehayyat, J.; Abu-AlSondos, I.A. Digital Transformation and Competitive Advantage in the
Service Sector: A Moderated-Mediation Model. Sustainability 2023, 15, 2077. [CrossRef]
96. Vaska, S.; Massaro, M.; Bagarotto, E.M.; Dal Mas, F. The Digital Transformation of Business Model Innovation: A Structured
Literature Review. Front. Psychol. 2021, 11, 539363. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
97. Fabac, R. Digital Balanced Scorecard System as a Supporting Strategy for Digital Transformation. Sustainability 2022, 14, 9690.
[CrossRef]
98. Gökalp, E.; Martinez, V . Digital Transformation Maturity Assessment: Development of the Digital Transformation Capability
Maturity Model. Int. J. Prod. Res. 2022, 60, 6282–6302. [CrossRef]
99. Kao, L.-J.; Chiu, C.-C.; Lin, H.-T.; Hung, Y.-W.; Lu, C.-C. Unveiling the Dimensions of Digital Transformation: A Comprehensive
Taxonomy and Assessment Model for Business. J. Bus. Res. 2024, 176, 114595. [CrossRef]
100. Soto-Acosta, P . COVID-19 Pandemic: Shifting Digital Transformation to a High-Speed Gear.Inf. Syst. Manag. 2020, 37, 260–266.
[CrossRef]
101. Raghavan, A.; Demircioglu, M.A.; Orazgaliyev, S. COVID-19 and the New Normal of Organizations and Employees: An Overview.
Sustainability 2021, 13, 11942. [CrossRef]
102. Larjovuori, R.-L.; Bordi, L.; Heikkilä-Tammi, K. Leadership in the Digital Business Transformation. In Proceedings of the
Proceedings of the 22nd International Academic Mindtrek Conference, New York, NY, USA, 10 October 2018; ACM: Tampere,
Finland; pp. 212–221.
103. Höyng, M.; Lau, A. Being Ready for Digital Transformation: How to Enhance Employees’ Intentional Digital Readiness. Comput.
Hum. Behav. Rep. 2023, 11, 100314. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.