--- PAGE 1 ---
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 12, No. 6, 2021
341 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org
Law Architecture for Regulatory-Compliant Public
Enterprise Model: A Focus on Healthcare Reform in
Egypt
Alsayed Abdelwahed Mohamed1
, A.Abdo3
Faculty of Computers and Artificial Intelligence
Helwan University, Egypt1, 3
Faculty of Computing, Arab Open University in Egypt3
Nashwa El-bendary2
Arab Academy for Science, Technology, and Maritime
Transport, College of Computing & Information
Technology, Aswan - Egypt
Abstract—Public business operations are governed by a set of
legal sources, which regulate their implementation under
administrative laws that are increasingly influencing software
system design and development. Enterprise Architecture (EA) is
a critical approach for driving business and Information Systems
(IS) transformation in the public sector. On the other hand, EA
frameworks lack representation schemas that support law
models. Understanding of the law Architecture in the
government domain is required for EA work and is thus the first
architecture activity that must be completed. As EA approaches
for Law compliance reviews are performed by legal experts,
there is a gap between law experts and technical system
architects. To cover these gaps, this paper proposes a novel
framework for analyzing the administrative laws, extracting the
legal policies and legal rules, identify their relationships with
other EA domains, and identifying the law compliance
requirements. Moreover, the integration of our proposed law
architecture framework with existing EA frameworks to reach a
law-compliant public enterprise model is identified. Finally, the
applicability of the proposed framework is shown and validated
through a case study. Moreover, subject matter experts of the
legal domain also evaluated the extracted legal policies and rules
during the implementation of our proposed framework.
Keywords—Law architecture; regulatory compliance;
requirements engineering; enterprise architecture; law ontology;
TOGAF
I. INTRODUCTION
Administrative laws are the law acts that regulate the
operations of government agencies. The branch of law governs
administrative agencies' development and operation.
Administrative law, commonly known as (regulatory law),
includes the rules and regulations that an administrative body
promulgates and enforces. Administrative laws are compulsory
for the institutional domain and are a benchmark for officials
and architects in government and government digital
transformation initiatives. Enterprise architecture (EA) is the
method of aligning an authority’s business with information
technology, including the convergence of business procedures,
Information Systems (IS), technology, and people[1]. EA has
been in progress and deployment for the past years[2].
However, most authorities continue to have issues with EA
practices; EA practice is not a simple task. Despite a large
number of current EA frameworks, public authorities have
been unable to translate EA solutions to meet their needs [3].
In the study [1], the Gartner Group stated that a big
percentage of EA implementations fail in the world because
they start with modeling rather than defining business
requirements first where the business requirements must meet
the needs of IS. The business needs of the public agencies
should comply with laws. Regulatory or law compliance
management is a general concept that encompasses all
practices and procedures used to ensure that a public authority
adheres to all legal rules mandated by local or international
laws. These laws are typically outlined in a natural language
text that is difficult to comprehend for non-legal professionals.
Existing laws pose a different set of problems. New digital
transformation solutions may not be properly tested until they
are put into operation and laws are developed to fix previous
issues caused because of business and social shifts. To
overcome the law compliance problem, several research
studies have been conducted. Some researchers propose a law
ontology approaches as a solution for law compliance. Some
other researchers proposed regulatory compliance frameworks
with the business process [4]. Moreover, other studies were
conducted to regulatory compliance for requirements
engineering [5] [6] [7] Enterprise architecture frameworks are
used to guide the creation of enterprise models in terms of
three domains namely business architecture, IS architecture,
and technology architecture. Thus, extending the enterprise
model to represent the policies identified by law can be
obtained by defining the law architecture (our proposed
framework) and integrating it with other enterprise architecture
domains, as illustrated below in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1. Public Enterprise Model View after Integrating the Proposed
Framework with EA Frameworks.

--- PAGE 2 ---
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 12, No. 6, 2021
342 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org
Knowledge of the law Architecture in the government
domain is a prerequisite for architecture work. The law
Architecture is also often necessary as a means of defining the
governance layer and regulatory compliance requirements of
following EA activities for all enterprise model domains.
Many emerging approaches to e-Government architecture,
on the other hand, do not take legal sources into account. There
is no formal structure for e-Government enterprise model
enforcement with legal sources in these approaches.
Compliance with regulatory issues and e-Government business
models is a critical problem for governments. Thus, this study
proposes a novel framework to address the following
questions:
 How to manage compliance with laws across all
enterprise model domains; business, IS, and
Technology?
 How to design Government IS that complies with
administrative laws?
 How to transfer laws policies into a machine-readable
format?
In the next section, we present a state-of-the-art review of
the related works. a detailed description for the proposed law
architecture framework components and method including the
integration with EA frameworks will be presented in Section
III. Section IV presents the applicability of the proposed
framework to real-life cases; the case study of the Egyptian
Universal Health Insurance program is demonstrated. Finally,
in Section V, a brief analysis of the obtained conclusions and
future work are discussed.
II. STATE OF THE ART
Law compliance or regulatory compliance is a concept of
acting in accordance with established laws, regulations, etc. In
order to judge that a public authority is following the given
legal rules or not, compliance auditing is conducted.
TABLE I. COMPARISON OF SURVEYED STATE-OF-THE-ART OF REGULATORY COMPLIANCE
Study
Extraction of
legal rules
Ontology
represent-
ation
Integration with
enterprise model
Meta-model
Requirements
engineering for
SW
Legal modeling
Business process compliance
Jörg Becker,2015
[1]
√ √ √
Christina
Stratigaki ,2016
[2]
√ √ √
Noel Peter,2017
[3]
√
Selja Seppala
,2017 [4]
√ √ √
Hashmi
Mustafa,2018 [5]
√ √
Cesare Bartolini
,2019 [6]
√ √ √ √ √
Raimundas M. ,
2020 [7]
√ √
Tobias Seyffarth,
2021 [8]
√ √
Law Ontology
Mirna El
Ghosh,2017 [9]
√ √
Monica
Palmirani,2018
[10]
√ √ √
Galina
Kurcheeva,2019
[11]
√ √ √
Valentina Leone,
2020 [12]
√ √
Requirements Engineering
Ftemeh
Zarrabi,2015 [13]
√ √ √
Ana Zalazar,2017
[14]
√
Sushant
Agarwal,2018
[15]
√ √ √
Mahmood
Alsaadi,2019 [16]
√ √
Michael
Felderer,2020 [17]
√
The proposed framework √ √ √ √ √ √

--- PAGE 3 ---
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 12, No. 6, 2021
343 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org
A compliance review is an important activity of compliance
auditing which depends on the extraction of regulatory
compliance requirement from administrative laws. There have
been an increasing number of research challenges to automate
regulatory requirements extraction from legal acts.
Administrative laws, which drive the development of
regulatory compliance solutions, are generally available as
natural language text documents (semi-structured format), and
understanding them is performed by legal domain expertise.
Testing a given business model for enforcement is,
unsurprisingly, a manual process performed by accredited
domain experts. Moreover, effective regulatory compliance
requires good knowledge of the enterprise model of public
authority by the legal auditors and a good knowledge of the
compliance framework by the enterprise architects. This makes
the close collaboration of legal auditors with enterprise
architects a necessity. The challenge of automated compliance
checking can be seen as extending an enterprise model to
include concepts defined by the regulatory compliance
framework and enabling the needed automation in checking an
enterprise model against the policies defined in a regulatory
compliance framework.
This is because most legal acts are written in natural
language, which a conventional computer system cannot
understand. A legal ontology is a theory that describes the
concepts that exist in the legal acts and how they are
connected. Many kinds of research have been undertaken to
develop ontological representations for legal documents to
achieve law compliance [8] [9] [10] [11]. on other hand, a big
number of studies exist for achieving law compliance through
linking laws policies with Business Process Models (BPM)
[12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19]. Moreover, Regulatory
compliance is a well-studied area in software requirements
engineering, including research on how to model, check,
analyze, extract, and validate compliance of software different
requirements engineering techniques for achieving software
compliance as discussed in [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] the below
Table I outlines the comparison between different approaches
for achieving regulatory compliance. Based on the comparison
Table I, we argue that this literature survey could not found any
contribution that addresses the topic of how to integrate law
compliance solutions with the enterprise model.
III. PROPOSED FRAMEWORK
The proposed Law Architecture Framework (LAF)
provides the baseline for mapping various legal policies related
to regulatory requirements to business process, stakeholders,
capabilities, IS, data concepts, and technology architecture.
Regulatory compliance planning and subsequent deployment
projects require mapping and tracking the evolution of the
following artifacts of law architecture:
 Legal policies tied to business capabilities.
 Legal rules tied to business processes.
 Legal policies and rules tied to data concepts.
 Legal policies and rules tied to Information systems.
 Legal policies and rules tied to Technology.
The law architecture framework is a goal-oriented, law-
driven framework aimed to define compliance requirements
through which a particular public enterprise and its related
information systems can comply with a given administrative
law. We define the law architecture as a holistic representation,
multidimensional views of legal policies and their derived legal
rules, and identifying their relationships with the business,
data, information systems, and technology domains, in addition
to identifying the requirements of compliance with these rules
and policies. Law architecture requires a complete framework
to guide its development and practice. We argue that the effort
required to accomplish the law architecture activities should be
performed by a team that has both bits of knowledge of
technology and law domains, a team with the following key
roles:
 Law Architect is an information and communications
technology professional that is responsible for
analyzing administrative laws and extracting from them
the regulatory compliance requirements of business, IS,
and technology architectures. The law architect must be
reasonably knowledgeable of the administrative laws
and public sector domains to be familiar with public
sector services and the operational environment.
 Legal Counsel: According to the BIZBOK Guide [25]"
A Legal Counsel is a person who is legally qualified
and licensed to represent an organization in a legal
matter, such as lawsuits, policy formations, contract
negotiation, and patent activities". A legal counsel
regularly works in legal departments of the public
authorities and is considered the subject matter expert
during the law architecture cycle. The legal council is
responsible for the analysis, and validation of extracted
policies and rules. The objectives of the law
architecture framework can be summarized as follows:
 To align laws and regulations with business and IT
Systems.
 To identify and model legal policies and rules and
linking them with the enterprise model domains
namely; business architecture, information systems, and
technology architecture.
 To identify the relationship between legal rules and
other architecture domains.
 To identify the regulatory compliance criteria with the
legal rules.
 To manage any suggested law amendments and assess
their impact on the enterprise model.
 To develop the appropriate viewpoints, models, and
matrixes that enable the demonstration of how the legal
policies are addressed in the business, IS, and
technology architectures.
As shown in Fig. 2, the law architecture framework
consists of the following components:

--- PAGE 4 ---
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 12, No. 6, 2021
344 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org
Fig. 2. Components of the Proposed Law Architecture Framework.
 Law-Architecture-Development-Method (LADM):
describes a set of guidelines and activities for
developing a law Architecture.
 Law Architecture Meta-model: defines a formal
structure of core concepts and their relationships to
ensure consistency within the law architecture.
 Asset Repository: outlines different taxonomies and
guidelines to categorize and store the inputs and outputs
of law-architecture effort such as laws catalogs.
 EA framework integration: describes the ability to
integrate the law architecture framework with other
enterprise architecture frameworks.
 Law Ontology: defines an ontological and semantic
representation of the law architecture Meta-model for
getting a machine-understandable model that is enabled
easily for automation and model analysis.
 Regulatory Compliance Management: defines different
approaches for checking a public enterprise model
against the legal policies and rules defined within the
LADM.
The details of some selected components of the proposed
framework are detailed as follow:
A. Law-Architecture-Development-Method (LADM)
The LADM is the product of the continuous efforts of law
architects and legal counsels. It describes a method for
modeling and managing the compliance requirements of laws
that govern the public enterprise and forms the core of the Law
architecture framework. It describes the steps, guidelines, and
tools to analyze, extract, and model the legal policies and rules
from administrative laws. Moreover, it guides the definition of
the correlation between extracted legal policies and rules with
other public enterprise model domains, to align the public
authority and its IT systems with the law.
Fig. 3 depicts the phases of the proposed LADM which
consists of the following:
 Law Architecture Initiation.
 Phase (A): legal Policy Mapping.
 Phase (B): Legal Rule Mapping.
 Phase (C): Definition of legal Policies/ Business
architecture correlation.
 Phase (D): Definition of legal Policies / IS architecture
correlation.
 Phase (E): Definition of Legal Policies / Technology
architecture correlation.
 Management of Suggested Law amendments.
The level of detail addressed in Law Architecture will
depend on the scope and objectives of the overall law-
architecture effort. The key steps in details of the LADM
include the following:
1) Law architecture initiation: The Objectives of this
phase include initiating the law Architecture Capability
planned by the public authority, defining the law Architecture
Principles, and Identifying the set of administrative laws that
applies to the business performed by a public organization
which is related to the IT systems' Scope. The LADM is a
generic approach that can be used by a broad range of public
bodies and, if necessary, in combination with a wide range of
EA frameworks. The recommended steps within the initiation
phase are as follows:
a) Determine the Scope of the Public Agency Impacted:
Identify the public entity core units that would be most
affected or gain the most benefit from the law architecture
work.
b) Define and Establish the Law Architecture Team:
The required team members that will develop the law
architecture should be identified.
c) Define Law Architecture Principles: A principle is an
agreed-upon fact that can guide one’s analysis and reasoning.
Core principles that apply to law architecture, in general, are:
Fig. 3. Law-Architecture-Development-Method (LADM) Phases.

--- PAGE 5 ---
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 12, No. 6, 2021
345 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org
 Legal policies are accessible and shared.
 Common Vocabulary and legal policy Definitions.
 Law architecture’s scope is defined by a set of laws
applied to the public authority.
 The law architecture process is iterative.
 Law architecture artifacts are reusable especially those
extracted from domain-specific laws.
d) Develop Law Catalogs: Catalogs form the raw legal
documents for the development of models and views and
represent a key artifact for driving the law architecture
activities. The following catalogs should be developed:
 Project-Related Acts Catalog.
 Domain-Related Acts Catalog.
 Legal Policy catalog.
 Suggested Amendments Catalog.
 Ontology Representation.
 Suggested Amendments Catalog.
 Regulatory Compliance Requirements.
 Approved Amendments Catalog.
 Suggested Amendments Catalog.
 Compliance Requirements Catalog.
2) Phase (A) Perform legal policy mapping: The
objectives of this phase are analyzing architecture scope
impacted acts and extract the legal policies representations,
Reviewing extracted policies with different legal experts and
ensuring their correctness and consistency, and finally
updating the legal policy catalog. Administrative laws define
the legal limits for public authority by enforcing requirements
that specify which actions are legal and which must be
prohibited during the conduct of daily operations. A legal
policy is a statement or set of statements that describe the
course of events and how a specific action should be carried
out. A policy is defined to achieves a business goal. A legal
policy has a subject, who is the stakeholder(s) who is/are
responsible for carrying out the policy's actions. A legal policy
requires a business capability to be executed, a business
capability is defined as a set of resources and activities that
integrate to deliver a value to an internal or external
stakeholder (target). Legal Policy mapping is the core of law
architecture and an excellent starting point. Describe the
policies and legal rules associated with the law articles, the
main idea in the law architecture is that legal policies define
decisions on whether a state of the business activity is allowed
or not. The extraction of legal policies and rules is a
hardworking and time-consuming activity and is
recommended to be carried out by legal architects (or business
analysts) with the help of legal counsels. To extract the legal
policies the architects must look for important information by
scanning the legal articles and try to answer the following
questions:
 Why was the article written? The answer to this
question identifies the objectives that the policy intends
to achieve.
 What rules/actions intended by the policy? And what
are the required capabilities required to achieve these
rules?
 Who responsible for executing these rules/actions and
who will be affected by them?
 When are these rules/actions allowed to be performed?
 Where these rules/actions are applicable? By answering
when and where questions the event and scope of the
legal policy can be identified.
A legal Policy can be classified as follow:
a) Business Function: Identified by article(s) that
defines a course of business activities that should be
performed in a predefined manner to achieve some business
outcomes.
b) Organization Unit: Mapped by an article(s) that
define an organizational structure and responsibilities.
c) Technical Function: Mapped by an article(s) that
directly describe an IT resource or system.
Legal Policy Mapping Approaches include the following:
a)Top-Down Approach: The top-down approach to policy
mapping is performed by scanning and analyzing the
administrative law starting from the first article until the last
article. For each article try to answer the five whys’ questions
listed above to extract the Legal policies essential to regulate
the operation and services provided by the public enterprise.
b) Goal-Oriented Approach: the legal councils identify
the main objectives of each administrative law, and for each
goal, the team scans the law and extracts the related policies.
3) Phase (B) Perform legal rules mapping: The objectives
of this phase are analyzing legal policies and laws then extract
the intended legal rule, reviewing and validating extracted
legal rules with different legal experts and ensuring their
correctness and consistency, and finally, update the legal rule
catalog. To perform legal rule mapping properly the following
concepts should be considered:
 A legal rule is derived from one or many legal policies,
in other words, many legal rules can be sequentially
implemented to achieve a certain legal policy. A legal
rule is also has a business goal and has a scope. A legal
rule requires input data to process and has an input
event that triggers the execution of the legal rule.
 A legal rule contains an action that is implemented in a
business process usually in a form of a business
decision.
 A constraint is an assertion that, by one of its properties
or a relationship to another concept, such as as a role in

--- PAGE 6 ---
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 12, No. 6, 2021
346 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org
an activity, restricts or reduces the potential
representation for a concept. For example, the statement
“a beneficiary who under-poverty-line” constrains the
set of all possible beneficiaries to the possibly smaller
set of only those beneficiaries who are under the
poverty line.
 A stakeholder is an entity afforded rights and/or
obligations by the law.
 A right refers to one or more actions that deliver a
defined stakeholder a certain value or benefit. If a
stakeholder is not obligated to perform an action or to
receive an action value, called an anti-obligation.
 An obligation refers to one or more actions that are
required to be undertaken by a certain stakeholder.
 An anti-right refers to one or more actions that are not
permitted to be performed by a certain stakeholder.
 A rule’s action is either a right, obligation or anti-right
per our above definitions.
4) Phase (C) Identify the correlation between extracted
policies and business architecture: Legal policies represent
the governance layer that organizes the business functions,
therefore linking legal policies with their related capabilities,
processes, organization units, and stakeholder will simplify
the alignment of these business objects with laws and will
result in a law-compliant Information system when these
business artifacts mapped to IS. In other words, will help the
administrative entity to deliver the right service to the right
citizen at the right time. Moreover, will enhance the efficiency
and transparency of the public institutions. The correlation
between legal policies and business architecture can be
illustrated through the analysis of the legal policies catalog
and developing the following matrixes:
 Legal policy Mapping to Business Capabilities
describes.
 Legal Rule Mapping to Business Process.
 Legal policy Mapping to Organization Structure.
 Legal Rule Mapping to Stakeholder.
5) Phase (D) Identify the correlation between extracted
policies and Information Systems(IS) architecture:
Information systems designed to support business processes in
public authorities must conform to the relevant legal acts and
regulations. The correlations between business architecture
and legal policies should be transferred into technical system
requirements and IS should be designed to comply with these
requirements. IS architecture is consists of data architecture
and application architecture. After identifying the business
regulatory compliance requirements through phase (C), the
following steps should be performed in this phase to design, a
law-compliant IS in a later detailed IS architecture definition
cycle using any EA frameworks. Typical dimensions of the
correlations between extracted legal policies and IS
architecture include the following:
a) Define Data Concepts:
 Extract data concepts from the legal rules.
 Extract the data modalities from the constrains.
 Classify the data concepts (internal or external).
b) Define Role/Application Function Matrix:
 Each participant stakeholder with the legal rules should
be mapped to an application role.
 Each action assigned to a legal rule should be mapped
to an application function.
c) Define Application Interaction Matrix:
 Stakeholders and data concepts defined in the legal rule
catalog should be classified into internal or external (of
the scope of the public authority).
 Each external concept defines a possible integration
requirement with external systems.
6) Phase (E) Identify the correlation between extracted
policies and technology architecture: Technology
Architecture consists of software and hardware assets that are
used to implement and realize information system solutions,
legal policies, and rules that have a direct impact on
technology architecture. The correlation between legal
policies and technology architecture can be identified as
follow:
a) Availability of the Systems: Based on the scope and
type of services identified by legal policies the availability of
the systems can be identified for example the availability of
health services should be 24/7, the technology services should
grantee the operation of the systems 24 Hours in 7 days each
week. The availability of some other public services mandated
by law could be only within the official working hours or for a
certain time like examination systems or submission of tax
declaration requests.
b) Data Archiving and Retention Plans: Data retention
refers to the storage of transaction data for a certain time. The
primary objective in government data retention is traffic
analysis and judicial arbitration. Each country has its data
retention policies and plans that are defined in its
administrative laws.
c) Network and Communications: Based application
interaction matrix defined in phase D, the requirement of
communication lines between the public authority and eternal
entities should be identified, the detailed specifications of
these lines can be identified later in the detailed technology
architecture cycle of EA practice. The scope of the legal
policy also can identify the locations where the required IS
should be accessed, thus also implies communication lines
requirements.
d) Security Requirements: The access rights for data
assets can be defined based on the Roles/ application function
matrix developed in Phase C.

--- PAGE 7 ---
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 12, No. 6, 2021
347 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org
7) Phase (F) Collect and communicate the suggested law
amendments: The object of proposing new law amendments is
to improve the effectiveness, efficiency, and fairness of the
administrative processes. Architecture practice implemented
in Law, business, data, IS and technology phases may propose
new procedures designed to afford more time for this function.
It is hoped that delays and costs will be reduced and that new
prestige will be provided for those who make the decisions.
Suggested Law amendments should be handled as follow:
a) Build the Suggested amendments Catalog.
b) Update the Catalog with any suggested law
amendments during architecture phases (Law, Business, data,
IS, and Technology).
c) Prioritize Law amendments and assess their impact.
d) Communicate the amendments to the relevant
Stakeholders.
B. Law Architecture Meta-Model
In the previous section, a method to create and manage the
law architecture artifacts within the government enterprise was
defined. At each step, a discussion of architectural work and
artifacts was presented such as the legal policy map and legal
rule map. The content Meta-model provided here defines a
formal structure for the core concepts of the law architecture
and their relationships to ensure consistency within the law
architecture and to guide the implementation of the law
architecture within a public enterprise. Fig. 4 depicts the
proposed law architecture Meta-model.
C. Integrating Law Architecture with EA Frameworks
In the context of digital transformation in the public sector,
the integration between law architecture and EA frameworks is
a natural architectural alignment of two related disciplines.
Law architecture represents the mapping of legal policies and
rules related to IT architecture while EA provides a guiding
framework for business and IT architecture alignment.
According to the Federation of Enterprise Architecture
Professional Organizations, EA “represents the holistic
planning, analysis, design, and implementation for the
development and execution of strategy by applying principles
and practices to guide organizations through the integration
and interoperation of all other architecture domains”[26]. Most
EA approaches do agree on the foundational domains, which
include:
 Business Architecture.
 Information Systems (Application- Data) Architecture.
 Technical Architecture.
For each architectural domain, there is an associated set of
Law related concerns, each set can be described by law
architecture models that define the legal rules governing that
domain. Integrating Law architecture with EA offers the
following benefits:
 Brings a robust, Law-centric focus to the practice of EA
in the public sector.
 Integrates all aspects of law compliance through all
layers of the IT solution.
 Facilitates the adoption and implementation of new law
amendments in public enterprises.
Fig. 4. Law Architecture Meta-Model.

--- PAGE 8 ---
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 12, No. 6, 2021
348 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org
TOGAF [27] is an architecture framework. TOGAF that is
widely used by many EA practitioners within the public sector
was selected here to demonstrate the capability of our proposed
framework to integrate with EA frameworks. At the core of the
TOGAF framework is the architecture development method
(ADM) that “provides the methods and tools for assisting in
the acceptance, production, use, and maintenance of enterprise
architecture. It is based on an iterative process model supported
by best practices and a re-usable set of existing architecture
assets” [20]. The proposed law Architecture Framework (LAF)
here, has a Law-architecture-development-method (LADM)
that provides the methods for assisting in the production and
maintenance of law architecture. The ADM of the TOGAF can
be adapted to integrate with the LADM of our proposed LAF.
Fig. 5 depicts the ADM in a larger form and Fig. 6
illustrates how TOGAF'ADM can be integrated with LADM.
The Suggested ADM Adaptation to be integrated with the
proposed LADM can be listed as follow:
1) After the architecture vision (Phase A) of the ADM:
Then the LADM should be initiated and completed according
to the detailed description listed above.
2) After the end of the LADM: Then the TOGAF Business
architecture phase should be performed.
3) The result from LADM Phase (A): Should be added as
an input to the TOGAF Business architecture phase.
4) One of the objectives of the TOGAF business
architecture phase is to develop the target business
architecture, the target business architecture may have any
suggested business process engineering that is based on some
law amendments suggestions, these amendments should be
linked with LADM’ Phase (F), Collect and Communicate the
suggested Law amendments .
5) After the completion of the TOGAF business
architecture phase, the information systems architecture phase
should be initiated by adding the result from the LADM phase
(D) to the inputs of that phase of the ADM.
6) One of the objectives of the TOGAF IS architecture
phase is to develop the target IS architecture, the target IS
architecture may have any suggested IS improvements is
based on some law amendments suggestions, these
amendments should be linked with LADM Phase (F).
7) After the completion of the TOGAF IS architecture
phase, the technology architecture phase should be initiated by
adding the result from LADM’ Phase (E) to the inputs of the
phase.
8) Any suggested technology improvements that require
some law amendments suggestions, should be linked with
LADM’ Phase (F)
9) The TOGAF ADM phases will be completed then as
defined in TOGAF Standard.
Fig. 5. ADM Process of the TOGAF Framework.
Fig. 6. Adapting the TOGAF' ADM to Integrate with LADM.

--- PAGE 9 ---
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 12, No. 6, 2021
349 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org
IV. HEALTHCARE REFORM IN EGYPT THROUGH THE LENS
OF THE LAW ARCHITECTURE: A CASE STUDY
A. Universal Health Insurance (UHI) Law at a Glance
The Egyptian Parliament endorsed a fresh law on universal
health coverage that was formally promulgated on January 11,
2018, by the President. The Universal Health Insurance Law
(2/2018) is regarded as an unprecedented effort to control the
healthcare industry in Egypt, expanding the extensive
protection of healthcare to every industry of culture. Healthcare
was dealt with on a case-by-case ground before this law. The
27 governorates of Egypt will be split into six regional fields
when applying the fresh law, and the law will then be
implemented gradually over the next 15 years. Existing laws
and regulations in the health insurance sector will stay in effect
during the transformation era. Subscription to the new health
insurance scheme will be compulsory for all Egyptians living
in the Arab Republic of Egypt and free for Egyptians employed
or remaining onboard with their relatives. Fees are laid by
revenue and extra financing sources to include tariffs on the
tobacco industry and other extra regions. The state has
dedicated to offering the strategy to about 25 percent of the
population who are unable to afford it free of cost.
B. Defining the UHI Law Architecture based on the LADM
The Ministry of Health has formed a technical committee
including representatives from the Ministry of
Communications and Information Technology (MCIT), the
Ministry of Finance, and a consortium of experienced
international and local experts. The mandate of this committee
was to explore how to realize the objectives of the UHI law,
study each use case defined in the law, and define the technical
specification of the required systems. As the corresponding
author of this manuscript was one of the enterprise architecture
team assigned by MCIT to achieve the technical design and
architecture of the required systems. The architecture team
depended on analyzing the UHI law as the prime source of
information in identifying the high-level system requirements.
By following the steps and guidelines of the LADM proposed
above and illustrated in Fig. 2, the team analyzed the UHI
available laws and identified the law architecture of the UHI
program before performing a detailed enterprise architecture
activity, the extracted law architecture models resulted from
this exercise cand be illustrated as follow:
1) Law architecture initiation: During this phase, the law
architecture work will follow the principles identified in
section (III), and Table II represents the Project-Specific Acts
Catalog that stores the core administrative laws related to the
UHI project.
2) Phase (A) Perform legal policy mapping: The UHI law
was analyzed, and 10 legal policies and 23 related legal rules
were extracted as shown in Table III. To understand the main
elements in the legal policy and their relationships to each
other the legal policy model was suggested. For example,
article (41) identified three important legal policies as shown
in Fig. 7.
TABLE II. UHI PROJECT-SPECIFIC ACTS CATALOG
# Act No. Subject
Issuing
Date
Issuing
Authority
1
No.2 of
2018
The universal health insurance
system law
Jan. 2008
The
Parliament
2
Bylaw-
No.909
of 2018
The executive regulations of the
universal health insurance system
law promulgated by law No. 2 of
2018
May.2008 The Prime
Minister
3
No.707
of 2018
Setting criteria for targeting those
below the poverty line in applying
the provisions of the Universal
Health Insurance Law
April
2018
The Prime
Minister
4
No.2257
of 2020
Devolution of some medical
assets in the governorates of Port
Said and Luxor to the Public
Health Care Authority in
preparation for their inclusion in
the Universal health insurance
system
Nov.
2020
The Prime
Minister
5
No.2273
of 2020
Determinants of patients with
chronic diseases and tumors and
controls for their exemption from
Universal health insurance
premiums
Nov.
2020
The Prime
Minister
Fig. 7. Model of Premium Collection Management Policy.
3) Phase (B) Perform legal rule mapping: The legal
policy catalog listed below in Table III was analyzed versus
the UHI law to extract and model the related legal rules, Fig. 8
represents a sample legal rule model that represents “Premium
Collection for Social Insured Beneficiaries”. Each extracted
legal rule was modeled to provide a visualized artifact that can
be easily understood by different business and IT
stakeholders.
PRODUCT
Article(41)
Article
PRINCIPLE
Primmum Collection
Management
LegalPolicy
drives
has
requires
Collection Management
Capability
has
WORKPACKAGE
BusinessFunction
Type
GOAL
Achieving the financial
sustainability
Goal
REQUIREMENT
Premium Collection for
under-poverty line
beneficiaries
Legal Rule REQUIREMENT
Premium Collection for
Non-social insured
beneficiaries
Legal Rule
implies
Implies
implies
REQUIREMENT
Premium Collection for
social insured
beneficiaries
Legal Rule

--- PAGE 10 ---
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 12, No. 6, 2021
350 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org
TABLE III. LEGAL POLICY CATALOG OF THE UHI PROJECT
Policy
ID
Policy Name Type
Ref.
Article
Req. capability Goal Legal Rules
LP_01
Premium
Collection
Management
Business
Function
41
Collection
Management
Collection of Financial
resources required to
achieve financial
sustainability
 Premium Collection for social insured beneficiaries
 Premium Collection for under-poverty line beneficiaries
 Premium Collection for Non-social insured beneficiaries
LP_02
Premium
calculation
Business
Function
41
Collection
Management
Collection of Financial
resources required to
achieve financial
sustainability
 Premium calculation for public employees
 Premium calculation for private-sector employees
 Premium calculation for Self Employed
 Premium calculation for pensioner
 premium calculation for pension entitled
 premium calculation for beneficiaries under the poverty line
LP_03
Board of
Directors
structure of
UHI
authority
organization
structure
5
Program
Management
Defining the structure
and responsibility of
the authority
management
 UHI authority board of directors
 Duration of the board
LP_05
Disability
injuries
policy
Business
Function
13
Beneficiary
management
Defining the process of
issuing a disability
certificate
 disability certificate issuing responsibility
 disability certificate notification responsibility
LP_06
Co-payment
policy
Business
Function
table
(3)
 Health Service
Management
 Collection
Management
Define the
beneficiaries’
contributions for
health services
 co-payment value for home visits
 co-payment value for medicine
 co-payment value for scans
 co-payment value for medical tests
 co-payment value for inpatient services
LP_07
Military
recruits
handling
policy
53
Beneficiary
management
Managing the services
for the military people
 Military recruits handling procedures
LP_08
UHI website
and Database
Technical
Function
57 -
bylaw
IT Management
Building a website and
DB for UHI Authority
 building a website and defining access rights
LP_09
National
Social
Insurance
Authority
responsibility
Technical
Function
57 -
bylaw
IT Management
Feeding the authority's
database with the
necessary data for all
those subject to the
registered social
insurance laws and
their families.
 feeding the authority's database with social insured people
and their families
LP_10
work injuries
policy
Business
Function
12
Beneficiary
Management
Regulate the work
injury treatment
process
 work injury notification procedures work injury treatment
TABLE IV. LEGAL POLICY / CAPABILITIES MATRIX
Policy Name Business capability
Premium Collection Management Collection Management
Premium calculation Collection Management
Board of Directors structure of UHI authority Program Management
Disability injuries policy Beneficiary management
Co-payment policy Service Management
Military recruits handling policy Beneficiary Management
UHI website and Database IT Management
National Social Insurance Authority
responsibility
IT Management
1) Phase (C) identify the correlation between legal
policies business architecture:
a) Develop legal Policy/Capabilities Matrix: Table IV.
depicts legal policy/capabilities matrix.
b) Legal Rule/Business Process Matrix: Table V depicts
legal rule/business process matrix.
TABLE V. LEGAL RULE / BUSINESS PROCESS MATRIX
Legal Rule Business Process
Premium Collection for social insured
beneficiaries
Manage accounts receivable
Funds
disability certificate issuing responsibility Authorize Medical Service
co-payment value for home visits Manage Rate setting
Military recruits handling procedures Manage Treatment plan
Feeding the authority's database with social
insured people and their families
Manage Integration with
external entities
work injury notification procedures Manage Treatment plan

--- PAGE 11 ---
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 12, No. 6, 2021
351 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org
Fig. 8. Legal Rule Mode: Premium Collection for Social Insured
Beneficiaries.
c) Stakeholder Mapping: By analyzing the legal policy
and rules catalogs several system use cases can be identified in
terms of obligations and rights as illustrated in the below
Fig. 9.
Fig. 9. A Legal Use Case Diagram of the UHI Project.
2) Phase (D) Legal Policy/Information systems
Correlation:
a) Data Concepts Extracted from the Law: By
analyzing the legal policy and rules catalogs the data concept
catalog that is related to the IS was created, the most important
data concept related to our extracted above policies is the
beneficiary, and by analyzing the legal rule's actions and
constraints we deducted that the beneficiary data should be
segmented based on the following features shown in Fig. 10.
b) Application Interaction Matrix: By classifying the
data concepts as internal or external to the UHI authority, the
external data concepts define an integration requirement.
Moreover, analyzing the actions related to the legal rules can
also identify integration requirements. Following these
procedures, the following integration requirements were
identified as below in Fig. 11 and Table VI:
Fig. 10. Beneficiary Segmentation Features.
Fig. 11. Application Interaction Diagram.
REQUIREMENT
PremiumCollection for
social insured
beneficiaries
Legal Rule
ACTOR
NationalSocial
InsuranceAuthority
Performedby
WORKPACKAGE
Subject
Type
has
CONSTRAINT
Beneficiary is
pensioner orsubject
totheSocial
InsuranceLaw
EVENT
Monthlyschedule
PROCESS
MonthlyPremium
transfer
Triggeredby
operatedon
Restrictedby
ACTOR
benficiary
WORKPACKAGE
target
Type
WORKPACKAGE
obligation
Modality
Appliedon
OBJECTIVE
*Calculatepremium
*Transferpremiumamounts
toUHIAuthority
Action
fires
WORKPACKAGE
internal
Modality
Modifiedby
filteredby
PHYSICAL DATA
COMPONENT
DatasetofSocial
insuredbeneficiaries
InputData
PHYSICAL DATA
COMPONENT
Moneysettlements
transferredtoUHI
output Data
input
output
WORKPACKAGE
internal
Modality
WORKPACKAGE
external
Modality
WORKPACKAGE
external
Modality
Modifiedby
Modifiedby
Modifiedby

--- PAGE 12 ---
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 12, No. 6, 2021
352 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org
TABLE VI. APPLICATION INTERACTION MATRIX
#
Target System
(External Systems)
Integration Reasons
1
Social Insurance
Authority
• Update UHI DB with Social Insured
• Transfer Premiums for Social Insured
2
Ministry of
Education • Update UHI DB with Students
3 Ministry of Health
• Updated UHI DB with Dishabilles people
4 Tax Authority • Transfer of money deducted from taxes under
the UHI Law
5
Ministry of Interior
• Validate Beneficiary National ID
• Update the Beneficiary Family
• Updated the beneficiary address
• Transfer amounts deducted from traffic license
• Update with worker abroad people
6 Ministry of Defense • Update with military services registered
7
Agricultural
Associations
• Update UHI system with farmers and their
families
8
Ministry of Social
Solidarity
• Update UHI System with under-poverty-line
people and their families
3) Phase (E) Legal Policy / Technology architecture
correlation: The following technology requirements were
extracted based on the legal policy catalog and the regulatory
compliance requirements catalog was updated as following
Table VII:
TABLE VII. SAMPLE OF REGULATORY REQUIRMENTS CATALOG
# Requirement Type Rational
Architecture
Domain
1
The system and
servers should operate
at 24/7 uptime.
availability
The system
provides
healthcare
services
Technology
2
all changes to a
financial database
must be recorded in a
trace file with before
and after values
Audit
Tracing
Enable financial
transactions
tracing
Technology
3
All communications
between the UHI
system and Social
Insurance System
Communic-
ation
Respond to
system
integration
requirements
Technology
4
Keep a record of all
transactions for 5
years
Data
Retention
Mandated by law Technology
V. DISCUSSION
As presented above, in the introduced case study, the UHI
law was the prime source of information that the technical
committee depended on for extracting the high-level
specifications of the digital transformation solution required for
the UHI program. EA frameworks lack a detailed methodology
for analyzing and modeling laws, thus our proposed law
architecture framework suits these types of problems where the
core business processes and services are highly regulated by
laws. The law architecture framework offers the ability to
visualize what decoupling and divesting laws and how it
impacts various aspects of the public ecosystem. This was
illustrated through the use case as the legal policies and rules
were extracted from the UHI law, in addition to the
relationship between these rules and business capabilities,
processes, IS, data concepts, and technical specifications based
on the proposed LADM that represents the heart of the
proposed law architecture framework. The application of the
proposed framework supported the UHI program in extracting
the regulatory compliance requirements from the law and
supported the design of regulatory-compliant system.
Law architecture does not stand alone in a public
enterprise. Several complementary or ancillary frameworks or
disciplines may exist within a public enterprise. Each of these
frameworks may have its focus. The success and maturity of
law architecture are influenced by its ability to integrate and
align with each of these disciplines and frameworks. Another
limitation in our proposed framework is the LADM proposed
for extracting the legal rules and policies and their correlations
with other artifacts in the public enterprise model is a manual
task. This is because ambiguity exists in the laws that require
the investigation and validation of legal experts.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In recent years, there have been various contributions to
deal with law compliance problem, None of the previously
surveyed work in the state of the art section takes an (i) generic
approach to law compliance management, (ii) seeks to
integrate with EA frameworks, (iii) allows declarative
modeling of policies and rules while separating these two
concepts and, (iv) introduces a new concept and formal
definition for the law architecture and, (v) supports for
traceability by a set of links to establish between legal policies
and enterprise models. Our claim through this work is that our
proposed framework allows for achieving these goals and
overcomes these limitations:
 Domain-independence: a solution to the problem of IS
requirements engineering to comply with all applicable
administrative laws.
 Domain-variability: a solution that takes into account
the variability of possible legal policies and rules
applied in different public sector services.
 Flexible-integration: a solution that takes into
consideration the integration with other EA frameworks
to achieve a law-compliant public enterprise model.
 Machine-readable: a solution that can be easily
translated into an ontology model.
 Knowledge-gap: a solution that covers the knowledge
gap between the technical architects and the legal
experts.
Finally, the applicability of our proposed framework is
shown and validated through a case study. Subject matter
experts of the legal domain also evaluated the extracted legal
policies and rules during the implementation of the case study.

--- PAGE 13 ---
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 12, No. 6, 2021
353 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org
VII.FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we did not cover all components of the
proposed law architecture framework, future work will include
a detailed description of other framework components such as
compliance management and ontology representation of the
framework metamodel. Moreover, the capability of our
framework to integrate with other EA frameworks will be
investigated.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The activities described in our case study were supervised
by Dr. Khaled El-Attar, Vice Minister - The Egyptian Ministry
of Communications and Information Technology, as part of the
Universal Health Insurance program implementation. We also
dedicate this work to the deceased Prof. Hawaf Abdel-Hakim
for his kindness, help, and assistance.
REFERENCES
[1] N. A. A. Bakar, S. Harihodin, and N. Kama, “Assessment of Enterprise
Architecture Implementation Capability and Priority in Public Sector
Agency,” in Procedia Computer Science, 2016, vol. 100, pp. 198–206,
doi: 10.1016/j.procs.2016.09.141.
[2] G. L. Richardson, B. M. Jackson, and G. W. Dickson, “A principles-
based enterprise architecture: Lessons from Texaco and Star Enterprise,”
MIS Quarterly: Management Information Systems, vol. 14, no. 4, pp.
385–402, 1990, doi: 10.2307/249787.
[3] B. van der Raadt, M. Bonnet, S. Schouten, and H. van Vliet, “The
relation between EA effectiveness and stakeholder satisfaction,” Journal
of Systems and Software, vol. 83, no. 10, pp. 1954–1969, Oct. 2010, doi:
10.1016/j.jss.2010.05.076.
[4] A. Elgammal and O. Turetken, “Lifecycle Business Process Compliance
Management: A Semantically-Enabled Framework,” in 2015
International Conference on Cloud Computing, ICCC 2015, Jul. 2015,
pp. 1–8, doi: 10.1109/CLOUDCOMP.2015.7149646.
[5] M. Ochodek and S. Kopczyńska, “Perceived importance of agile
requirements engineering practices – A survey,” Journal of Systems and
Software, vol. 143, pp. 29–43, Sep. 2018, doi:
10.1016/j.jss.2018.05.012.
[6] S. D. Ringmann, H. Langweg, and M. Waldvogel, “Requirements for
legally compliant software based on the GDPR,” in Lecture Notes in
Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial
Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), 2018, vol. 11230
LNCS, pp. 258–276, doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-02671-4_15.
[7] A. M. Mustapha, O. T. Arogundade, A. Abayomi-Alli, O. J. Adeniran,
K. Adesemowo, and C. Y. Alonge, “A Systematic Method for
Extracting and Analyzing Cloud-Based Compliance Requirements,” in
2020 International Conference in Mathematics, Computer Engineering
and Computer Science, ICMCECS 2020, Mar. 2020, pp. 1–7, doi:
10.1109/ICMCECS47690.2020.240839.
[8] M. el Ghosh, H. Naja, H. Abdulrab, and M. Khalil, “Ontology learning
process as a bottom-up strategy for building domain-specific ontology
from legal texts,” in ICAART 2017 - Proceedings of the 9th
International Conference on Agents and Artificial Intelligence, Feb.
2017, vol. 2, pp. 473–480, doi: 10.5220/0006188004730480.
[9] G. Kurcheeva, M. Rakhvalova, D. Rakhvalova, and M. Bakaev, “Mining
and indexing of legal natural language texts with domain and task
ontology,” in Communications in Computer and Information Science,
Nov. 2019, vol. 947, pp. 123–137, doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-13283-5_10.
[10] M. Palmirani, M. Martoni, A. Rossi, C. Bartolini, and L. Robaldo,
“PrOnto: Privacy ontology for legal reasoning,” in Lecture Notes in
Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial
Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), Sep. 2018, vol. 11032
LNCS, pp. 139–152, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-98349-3_11.
[11] V. Leone, L. di Caro, and S. Villata, “Taking stock of legal ontologies: a
feature-based comparative analysis,” Artificial Intelligence and Law,
vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 207–235, Jun. 2020, doi: 10.1007/s10506-019-09252-
1.
[12] J. Becker, J. vom Brocke, M. Heddier, and S. Seidel, “In Search of
Information Systems (Grand) Challenges: A Community of Inquirers
Perspective,” Business and Information Systems Engineering, vol. 57,
no. 6, pp. 377–390, Dec. 2015, doi: 10.1007/s12599-015-0394-0.
[13] C. Stratigaki, M. Nikolaidou, P. Loucopoulos, and D. Anagnostopoulos,
“Business process elicitation from regulatory compliance documents:
An E-government case study,” in Proceedings - CBI 2016: 18th IEEE
Conference on Business Informatics, Dec. 2016, vol. 2, pp. 8–13, doi:
10.1109/CBI.2016.43.
[14] N. Peter Mrope, G. Simiyu Namusonge, and M. Amuhaya Iravo, “Does
Compliance with Rules Ensure Better Performance? An Assessment of
The Effect of Compliance with Procurement Legal and Regulatory
Framework on Performance of Public Procurement in Tanzania,”
European Journal of Logistics, Purchasing and Supply Chain
Management, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 40–50, 2017.
[15] S. Seppälä, M. Ceci, H. Huang, L. O’Brien, and T. Butler, “SmaRT
Visualisation of Legal Rules for Compliance,” undefined, pp. 73–85,
2017.
[16] M. Hashmi and G. Governatori, “Norms modeling constructs of business
process compliance management frameworks: a conceptual evaluation,”
Artificial Intelligence and Law, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 251–305, Sep. 2018,
doi: 10.1007/s10506-017-9215-8.
[17] C. Bartolini, A. Calabró, and E. Marchetti, “Enhancing business process
modelling with data protection compliance: An ontology-based
proposal,” in ICISSP 2019 - Proceedings of the 5th International
Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy, 2019, pp.
421–428, doi: 10.5220/0007392304210428.
[18] R. Matulevičius, J. Tom, K. Kala, and E. Sing, “A Method for Managing
GDPR Compliance in Business Processes,” in Lecture Notes in Business
Information Processing, Jun. 2020, vol. 386 LNBIP, pp. 100–112, doi:
10.1007/978-3-030-58135-0_9.
[19] T. Seyffarth and S. Kuehnel, “Maintaining business process compliance
despite changes: a decision support approach based on process
adaptations,” 2021, doi: 10.1080/12460125.2020.1861920.
[20] A. S. Zalazar, L. Ballejos, and S. Rodriguez, “Analyzing requirements
engineering for cloud computing,” in Requirements Engineering for
Service and Cloud Computing, Springer International Publishing, 2017,
pp. 45–64.
[21] S. Agarwal, S. Steyskal, F. Antunovic, and S. Kirrane, “Legislative
compliance assessment: Framework, model and GDPR instantiation,” in
Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes
in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), Jun.
2018, vol. 11079 LNCS, pp. 131–149, doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-02547-
2_8.
[22] M. Alsaadi, A. Lisitsa, and M. Qasaimeh, “Minimizing the ambiguities
in medical devices regulations based on software requirement
engineering techniques,” in ACM International Conference Proceeding
Series, Dec. 2019, pp. 1–5, doi: 10.1145/3368691.3368709.
[23] F. Jorshari and R. H. Tawil, “A High-Level Scheme for an Ontology-
Based Compliance Framework in Software Development,” 2015 IEEE
17th International Conference on High Performance Computing and
Communications, 2015 IEEE 7th International Symposium on
Cyberspace Safety and Security, and 2015 IEEE 12th International
Conference on Embedded Software and Systems, pp. 1479–1487, 2015.
[24] M. Usman, M. Felderer, M. Unterkalmsteiner, E. Klotins, D. Mendez,
and E. Alégroth, “Compliance Requirements in Large-Scale Software
Development: An Industrial Case Study,” in Lecture Notes in Computer
Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and
Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), 2020, vol. 12562 LNCS, pp. 385–401,
doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-64148-1_24.
[25] Business Architecture Guild, A Guide to the Business Architecture Body
of Knowledge (BIZBOK Guide)., Version 6.5. 2018.
[26] “The Federation of Enterprise Architecture Professional Organizations
(FEAPO).” https://feapo.org/ (accessed May 24, 2021).
[27] OMG: The Open Group, The Open Group Architecture Framework
(TOGAF), Version 9.2. 2018.