--- PAGE 1 ---
Citation: Mohammadi, S.; Heidari,
A.; Navkhsi, J. Proposing a
Framework for the Digital
Transformation Maturity of
Electronic Sports Businesses in
Developing Countries. Sustainability
2023, 15, 12354. https://doi.org/
10.3390/su151612354
Academic Editor: Yang (Jack) Lu
Received: 9 July 2023
Revised: 9 August 2023
Accepted: 9 August 2023
Published: 14 August 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
sustainability
Article
Proposing a Framework for the Digital Transformation Maturity
of Electronic Sports Businesses in Developing Countries
Sardar Mohammadi 1,* , Arman Heidari 1 and Jamil Navkhsi 2
1 Department of Sport Management, University of Kurdistan, Sanandaj 6617715175, Iran;
heidari1113@gmail.com
2 Physical Education and Sports Science, Science and Research Branch, Islamic Azad University,
Tehran 1477893855, Iran; jamil.navkhasi@gmail.com
* Correspondence: sardar.mohammadi@uok.ac.ir
Abstract: Digital transformation has become the top priority for 80% of sports companies worldwide,
but statistics show that between 70 and 95% of all digital transformation projects fail due to the
significant and varied challenges that sports businesses face during the digital transformation process.
This is because strategy, not digital technology, drives digital transformation, and without a mature
digital transformation model, success is unlikely. Moreover, the digital transformation model of
developing and developed countries is not the same, and it cannot be adopted as a blueprint.
Therefore, the aim of this research was to propose a framework for the digital transformation maturity
of electronic sports businesses in developing countries. Semi-structured interviews were conducted
with a sample of 15 stakeholders of electronic sports businesses in Iran. Thematic analysis was
used to analyze the interviews, and three main perspectives were identified: (1) enablers, (2) digital
resilience and capabilities, and (3) digital transformation maturity stages. The enablers were formed
by six sub-themes, including governance and leadership, strategy, culture, and skills, innovation,
technology, and data. Digital resilience and capabilities were formed by four sub-themes, i.e.,
business model and ecosystem, digital customer experience, digital employee experience, and digital
processes. Additionally, it was found that the digital transformation maturity stages were based on
four stages: digital beginners, digital followers, digital conservatives, and digital leaders. The findings
indicate that moving towards digital transformation and achieving digital resilience in electronic
sports businesses will be impossible without synergy between enablers and digital resilience and
capabilities. This framework can be useful for electronic sports businesses to evaluate their current
digital status and effectively guide them towards a desirable digital status. Furthermore, electronic
sports businesses can prioritize their efforts and resources for digital transformation by focusing on
targeted capabilities and enablers and ensure the more effective and efficient allocation of resources
towards digital transformation.
Keywords: digital transformation; digital maturity; electronic sports businesses; digital resilience;
thematic analysis
1. Introduction
Digital transformation has become a vital aspect in many fields of life, including
electronic sports businesses, because it is the basis of supporting flexible and adaptive
changes in operational processes and information systems [1]; leads to improved efficiency
and productivity [2]; makes it easy to enter new markets [3]; recognizes the emergence
of threats and opportunities caused by the dynamism and rapid change of the business
environment [2]; leads to automated processes, reduces costs, and improves decision
making [4]; causes innovation [4]; follows strategic change [5]; improves the customer
experience [6]; and ultimately improves the value proposition for the customer and creates
new revenue channels [7].
Sustainability 2023, 15, 12354. https://doi.org/10.3390/su151612354 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability

--- PAGE 2 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 12354 2 of 18
Therefore, many industries have taken steps in this direction in order to gain the
benefits of these developments. Meanwhile, the sports industry has been one of the greatest
users of these new technologies due to the ever-growing need for using digital solutions [8],
so that digital transformation has become the main priority of 80% of sports companies
around the world [9]. For example, GoPro initially offered a camera that was suitable for
filming action sports; then, this company reached millions of people around the world
by using its brand and taking advantage of social media and providing user-friendly
software [10]. Such digital innovations are not limited to social media; Roger Goodell,
the National Football League (NFL), also introduced the NFL’s roadmap to enhance the
in-stadium experience using digital technologies [11]. Stadium operators are beginning
to digitize their stadiums by offering smartphone applications that allow spectators, the
media, and other stakeholders such as sponsors to communicate with each other and
create value. For example, the San Francisco 49ers app provides an opportunity for fans
to order food and drinks, communicate with other fans, access real-time statistics, and
see traffic patterns inside and outside the stadium [12]. This means that sports businesses
are increasingly trying to create new ideas and have come to the conclusion that new
technologies will help them develop products and services [8].
Nevertheless, the researchers show that the adoption of digital transformations has not
always been accompanied by success. Many companies, especially sports businesses, have
avoidedenteringthisfield[13], ortheirdigitaltransformationprocesshassloweddown[14]
due to the chaotic conditions resulting from fundamental changes in the organizations, the
nature of uncertainty, the lack of transparency in terms of the consequences, the high costs
of investment [13,15], employees’ resistance to change [14], a lack of digital skills among
employees [14], doubts about the safety and effective management of data [16], cyber
security, changes in the way customers interact, and compliance with regulations [14,16,17].
As an explanation, I should say that Kane et al. (2017, 2015) have a different opinion; they
believe that strategy, not technology, drives digital transformation, and they have suggested
that businesses should focus on developing a clear digital strategy that is aligned with
their overall business strategy and must create the organizational capabilities needed to
effectively implement this strategy [18,19]. In addition, Brown and Brown (2019) believe
that the lack of knowledge about the various dimensions of this phenomenon and the
factors related to it and also the lack of guidelines to direct the organizations are the main
reasons for this failure. They suggest maturity models as a guideline [20] because digital
maturity is a systematic method for the digital transformation of the businesses [18] and
shows the achievements that the organizations have reached by making digital attempts
so far, including the way the organization adapts to this environment and being ready to
compete in this digital environment [6].
However, there is no clear and specific framework that describes the concepts and
general guidelines of digital transformation maturity [21,22]. Between 70% and 95% of all
digital transformation projects fail due to the large and varied challenges that organizations
face during digital transformation processes [23]. Most models provide an incomplete
picture of digital maturity, and most of the existing models of digital maturity are dedicated
only to the field of production [24]. On the other hand, in developing countries, there are
challenges such as digital skills, a lack of digital skills [25], legal complexity, insufficient
funding [26], obstacles to successful implementation [27], and a lack of context-dependent
policy etc., which prevent the successful implementation of digital transformation maturity
in businesses [28]. Therefore, it is necessary to develop a framework that is capable of
guiding businesses towards digital transformation in a desired way. Such a framework
seems to be much more valuable in electronic sports businesses because in electronic sports
businesses, digital transformation requires specific capabilities and enablers just like other
businesses, but unlike them, digital transformation maturity models in electronic sports
businesses have not been customized with the specific goals and needs of these businesses.
On the other hand, they do not have a clear picture and a deep understanding of the
maturity of digital transformation because basically most of the researchers have an indus-

--- PAGE 3 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 12354 3 of 18
trial background. In addition, in the field of sports management, theoretical contributions
regarding the potentials and consequences of digitalization are still limited [29].
Therefore, it is necessary to design a framework for the maturity of digital transfor-
mation in electronic sports businesses in developing countries, and in this regard, this
study has three objectives: (1) to identify the capabilities of digital transformation maturity
in electronic sports businesses, (2) to identify the achievements of the maturity of digital
transformation in electronic sports businesses, and (3) to identify the maturity levels of
digital transformation in electronic sports businesses. Achieving these goals can help
electronic sports businesses manage digital transformations and also provide systematic
insight into the requirements of the success of digital transformation in electronic sports
businesses. The results can also guide the mentioned businesses to adopt a coherent and
integrated digital strategy. Additionally, this study contributes to the existing literature on
the maturity of digital transformation in electronic sports businesses.
2. Literature Review
2.1. Digital Transformation
In the research literature, digitization, digitalization, and digital transformation are
concepts that are sometimes used interchangeably even though these concepts do not have
a single definition [30,31]. Digitalization is the process of converting analog information
into digital encoded information [32], which occurred with the widespread emergence of
computers [29]. Digitalization is a phenomenon that describes the use of digital technolo-
gies, for example, when companies use computers to facilitate work processes and do not
adopt them only for traditional uses [33]. Therefore, digitization is related to the use of
digital technologies in organizational settings and increasing the workforce [29]. On the
other hand, digital transformation is a radical process of change that is carried out using the
pre-introduced innovations [34,35]. Also, digital transformation is the process of imposing
changes in the use of digital technologies or the development of new digital business
models and a dramatic change in the functioning of an organization or a country centered
on transformative technologies [19,36,37]. In addition, it means the integration of digital
technologies in all different segments of a business, which changes the working procedures
and provides value for the customers [38]. Therefore, in this study, digital transformation
in electronic sports businesses refers to a cultural, organizational, and operational change
that involves the intelligent integration of digital technologies, processes, and competencies
at all levels, resulting in a convergence of these elements towards a strategic direction. The
findings of a case study indicate that the number of published studies focusing on digital
transformation in sports marketing has increased steadily since 2016 and reached its peak
in 2020. Most of these studies have been published in sports communication journals, such
as the International Journal of Sports Communication and Communication and Sport. The
majority of studies have utilized a quantitative or qualitative approach, and more than half
of them have been conducted in the United States. These studies have primarily focused
on sports media, electronic sports, fantasy sports, and other digital innovations, such as
smartphone applications [29]. There is no research that examined the digital transformation
with an emphasis on electronic sports businesses. However, in the few studies conducted
by Yang and his colleagues, by analyzing the digital transformation in Chinese traditional
companies of sporting goods in tandem with the COVID-19 pandemic crisis and examining
the role of digital transformation in coping with this problem, they found that the relevant
businesses can increase their knowledge management capabilities and flexibility, allowing
a higher level of performance [39].
2.2. Digital Maturity
Organizations are trying to successfully implement digital transformation in order
to achieve sustainable success in their operations. This requires evaluating the organi-
zation’s current digital maturity levels based on several dimensions and employing the
best approach for this evaluation and creating a launching pad to implement digital trans-

--- PAGE 4 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 12354 4 of 18
formation and use the digital maturity models [40]. Digital maturity is closely related
to digital transformation and is defined by Gökalp and Martinez as a state in which the
digital technology of a unit has changed its activities, skills interaction, and business
frameworks [41]. Hägg and Sandhu [42] call it a situation where a transformation has oc-
curred in an organization that has succeeded in solving problems related to digital business
prospects [42]. Schumacher and his colleagues define maturity as a complete provision
or an ideal, which indicates the developing stages of a system [43]. Teichert uses the term
digital transformation maturity to specify that the relationship between digital transforma-
tion and digital maturity includes technological and managerial components [24]. Cargiov
and his colleagues have defined the maturity of digital transformation as the degree of an
organization’s readiness and capacity to change the strategy, business model, technology,
products and services, internal and external processes, organizational structure, and com-
pany culture using digital technologies [6]. Based on these definitions, digital maturity
can be summarized as a critical indicator that shows the adaptive performance of digital
transformation [40].
In the field of sports, the digital maturity model can be used to evaluate the digital
readiness of sports organizations such as clubs, leagues, and federations. This model can
help them understand their strengths and weaknesses in terms of digital capabilities and
create a road map for digital transformation [44]. However, there are few empirical studies
that have focused on the maturity of digital transformation in sports and the sports industry
and have identified the enablers and achievements of digital transformation in this context.
In one of the few studies conducted in this field, Kitocompent and his colleagues showed in
research entitled “Proposed framework of digital maturity dimension for sports media in
Thailand: review and comparative analysis” that there are eight characteristics that are used
in the most common maturity models: culture, technology, organization, customer, strategy,
operations, innovation, and data analysis [45]. Wijnen also believes that strategy, culture,
data, technology, processes, and people are important pillars around which the maturity of
digital transformation in sports revolves [44]. In addition, Wylie and Palmer state that the
maturity of digital transformation in sports leads to increased digital capabilities, creating
a digital advantage, increasing agility, innovation, and greater participation, creating
personalized products and services to improve sports experiences [46].
2.3. Electronic Businesses
E-business can be defined as the use of the Internet for networking and enabling
business processes, e-commerce, organizational communication, and collaboration within
a company and with its customers, suppliers, and other stakeholders. E-businesses use the
Internet, intranets, extranets, and other networks to support their business processes [47].
Electronic sports businesses are online retailers that specialize in sports-related goods
and services. These retailers offer a wide range of products (including sports clothing,
sports equipment, tickets to sports events) and sports services (including sports content
production)[48]. Therearealsobusinessesthatprovidesports-relatedproductsandservices
on the Internet or produce sports-related information and content [48]. Therefore, electronic
sports businesses refer to online businesses that specialize in selling products and services
related to digital sports and use digital technologies to reach a wider audience, improve
customer experience, and simplify operations.
In general, though the existing literature has increased our understanding of the
specific aspects of digital transformation in sports businesses, we lack a comprehensive
pictureofthenatureandconceptsofdigitaltransformationanddigitalmaturityinelectronic
sports businesses. Perhaps the reason is that the studies conducted on sports management
are mainly focused on the relationship between digital transformation and electronic sports,
and the comprehensive understanding of digital transformation in sports requires a broader
approach [49]. Therefore, in the present study, an attempt has been made to provide a
framework for the maturity of digital transformation with an emphasis on electronic
sports businesses.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 12354 5 of 18
3. Methodology
3.1. Research Methodology
In this study, the method of content analysis was used to identify, analyze, and report
the patterns present in qualitative data. Content analysis encompasses a broad spectrum of
methods and techniques, and suitable analytical methods can be employed based on the
research goals and questions [50]. Nevertheless, the most commonly accepted method for
conducting content analysis involves six stages, all of which were carried out in this study:
(1) Familiarization with the data, (2) Developing initial codes, (3) Searching for themes,
(4) Reviewing themes, (5) Naming themes, and (6) Producing the report [51].
3.2. Sampling and Participants
The participants in this study were stakeholders of electronic sports businesses op-
erating in Iran, which is considered a developing country. The reason why this research
focuses on developing countries and Iran is that García-Fernández and colleagues believe
that digital transformation in developing countries is not comparable to that of developed
countries in many aspects, including technology infrastructure, digital culture, and so
on [52]. Therefore, a uniform digitalization pattern cannot be applied to them [53].
According to stakeholder theory, anyone who is in any way affected by an organization
or its performance is considered a stakeholder [54]. However, in this study, stakeholders
included employees, managers, producers, and suppliers of electronic sports businesses.
In this study, criteria such as expertise (having relevant knowledge and expertise in the
field of study), work experience (having at least 5 years of work experience in the field of
study), diversity (having diverse and broad backgrounds and experiences), availability,
and willingness to collaborate were considered for selecting experts. The sampling method
used was purposive sampling, and its strategy was snowball sampling. The reason why
participants from different spectrums (employees, managers, producers, and suppliers)
were selected for the interviews was to explore a range of perspectives on the research topic.
After conducting 12 interviews, we reached data saturation, and to ensure data saturation,
we conducted three more interviews.
Of this number, 7.66% were men and 3.33% were women. Their average age was
41.3 years, and their work experience was 7.11 years. They had an equal distribution of
bachelor’s, master’s, and doctoral degrees. The businesses in which these individuals
were active are as follows: a video-based fitness and bodybuilding movement educational
database, ahomeworkoutapplication, afootballnews, statistics, anddatareferencewebsite,
a specialized online sales platform for sports equipment, the science of a bodybuilding
educational system, social network for sports with the ability to compare sports clubs, a
comprehensive sports directory for Iran, an online store for sports clothing and equipment,
a sports social network and information platform, an online platform for introducing and
booking sports facilities, a platform for providing diet and exercise plans, a sports industry
platform, and a specialized store for yoga and meditation equipment.
3.3. Data Collection
The data were collected between August 2021 and January 2022. Participants were
asked to participate in semi-structured interviews, the purpose of which was to identify the
drivers of digital transformation, its achievements, and stages. Skype was used to collect
the data because the time and location flexibility provided by the Internet is beneficial for
qualitative research, allowing researchers to access diverse and geographically dispersed
populations that may not be easily accessible [55].
3.4. Validity and Reliability
In this study, the following measures were taken to evaluate the validity and reliability
of the results (Table 1).

--- PAGE 6 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 12354 6 of 18
Table 1. Validity and reliability of the results.
Result Method Strategy Validity/Reliability
Confirm
Research process confirmation by
eight experts
Credibility (reliability) Validity
Confirm
Using two coders for coding multiple
interview samples
Credibility (reliability) Validity
Confirm
Opinions of three experts who did not
participate in the study
Transferability Validity
Confirm
Recording and documenting
all interviews
Conformability (verifiability) Validity
Confirm
Sharing information with five
participants in the study
Process audit study Reliability
Reliability between two
coders is 88%
Analyzing three interviews by the
researcher and a co-worker and
identifying similar and dissimilar codes
Inter-coder agreement Reliability
3.5. Data Analysis
Data analysis began from the first day of data collection and was carried out using
transcription, note-taking, coding, theoretical comparison, charting, and integration. All
interviews were conducted in the local language (Persian) and transcribed as soon as they
were completed. The primary author transcribed all recorded data in Microsoft Word
2010. The transcripts were then checked and sent via email for review by the participants.
This was done to ensure that the transcripts accurately reflected the participants’ opinions.
Each transcript was kept in its original form and was never translated into English because
translatingasignificant portionofthedata intoanotherlanguagecarriesthe riskoflosingits
true meaning [56]. However, themes or codes generated from the analysis were translated
into English because they were shorter (in phrases or a few words) and were easier to
translate with less chance of losing their meaning.
To facilitate the data analysis process, note-taking was carried out after each interview,
during transcription, and throughout coding. These operations involved reflections on
the environment, participants’ expressions of emotions and responses, interview quality,
lessons learned, and strategies for future interviews. Note-taking during transcription
focused on key words, patterned questions, and gaps that needed to be filled. Note-taking
during coding focused on the relationship between key ideas and themes that emerged
during the analysis. Finally, the information was prepared for analysis using the reflexive
thematic analysis method proposed by Braun and Clarke in 2006, which has since become
one of the most common methods of conducting content analysis [57].
4. Findings
Our findings generally indicate that moving towards digital transformation and
achieving digital maturity in electronic sports businesses depend on six key capabilities.
By equipping relevant businesses with these capabilities, it will be possible to move to-
wards digital transformation and achieve the four outcomes of digital transformation. In
addition, the maturity of digital transformation in electronic sports businesses is divided
into four levels. Now, we will discuss the enablers, achievements, and stages of digital
transformation in electronic sports businesses in more detail.
4.1. Enablers of Digital Maturity in Electronic Sports Businesses
Every electronic sports business needs key enablers and capabilities to move to-
wards digital transformation. Digital enablers refer to “governance and leadership”, “dig-
ital strategy”, “culture and skills”, “innovation”, “technology”, and “data”, and achiev-

--- PAGE 7 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 12354 7 of 18
ing digital transformation and digital maturity will be impossible without each of these
enablers (Table 2).
Table 2. Enablers of Digital Maturity.
Themes Subthemes Concepts
Enablers of
Digital Maturity
Digital Governance
and Leadership
Internal promotion of digital governance literacy
Efforts to increase digital governance literacy
Definition, approval, and management of digital transformation projects
Design of a digital governance system
Moving towards a digital-focused redesign of structures
Support for managers in digital transformation
The impact of managers on digital transformation
Attracting digital transformation managers from outside
Development of digital transformation managers at various levels
Digital Strategy
A strategic approach to digital transformation
Development of strategic pillars (vision and goals of the organization in the
field of digitalization)
Expansion and coverage of strategic pillars
Alignment between digital transformation strategies and functional and
competitive strategies
Digital Culture and Skills
Evaluation of digital culture
Evaluation of digital skills
Cultivation of digital culture
Development of digital skills and training
Digital Innovation
A strategic approach to digital innovation
Building a digital innovation governance system
Systematic research and development
Enhancement of business innovation literacy
Presence in innovation trends
Technology
Moving towards information technology governance
Thinking about information technology auditing
Thinking about information technology architecture
Entering the field of information technology management
Using transformative technologies in products and services
Having short-term and long-term development plans for the technology field
Data
Evaluation of data maturity
Data literacy
Use of data analysis platforms
4.1.1. Digital Governance and Leadership
Digital governance is a system for guiding digital transformation in electronic sports
businesses that establishes policies, structures, processes, and mechanisms to ensure the
acquisition of digital value and benefit. According to interviewee number 8, who is an
employee of an electronic sports business with 15 years of work experience, “digital
governance pursues two main objectives: first, coordination for prioritizing, synchronizing,
and aligning digital initiatives across the organization; second, sharing efficient resources to
achieve digital transformation goals”. Additionally, “digital leaders” are leaders who define
and frame digital age issues well, offer technology-based solutions for them, and coordinate
the elements of their organization to move towards digital transformation. In this regard,
interviewee number 4 stated, “Digital leaders know that the digital transformation story is
not just a technology story, but they consider strategy, culture, innovation, and employee
skills as circles alongside technology that are essential to guide the organization on the path
to digital transformation. Perhaps the most important role of digital leaders is to attract
enthusiastic employee participation in the path of digital transformation”.

--- PAGE 8 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 12354 8 of 18
4.1.2. Digital Strategy
Digital strategy is important in electronic sports businesses because today, the role of
technology in business has gone beyond a specific area such as information technology
and encompasses the entire business. To take advantage of this, a business needs a more
comprehensive strategy than an information technology strategy. In recent years, to address
this problem, the convergence of information technology strategy and business strategy has
been discussed in the form of “digital strategy”. In this regard, interviewees 7 and 11 stated
a similar position, i.e., “Digital strategy seeks to create capabilities within a business
using transformative technologies so that an organization can respond to changing market
conditions. Therefore, electronic sports businesses need to have a strategic outlook on
digital transformation and at the same time formulate their vision and goals in the field
of digitalization”.
4.1.3. Digital Culture and Skills
Regarding the importance of “digital culture and skills”, it can be said that to success-
fully implement digital transformation in electronic sports businesses, digital culture must
be nurtured. When we talk about digital culture, it does not mean an entity independent of
the organizational culture. Digital culture is a set of systematic values and methods that
each individual strengthens individually and empowers businesses to progress in a world
that is advancing towards a digital economy. Therefore, digital culture is the same culture
that organizations of this era must cultivate to embark on a digital journey. According to
interviewee number 9, “Electronic sports businesses, according to my experience over the
past 17 years, must have a technology-accepting culture for sustainable digital transforma-
tion”. On the other hand, interviewee number 3 believes that “although culture may be
an effective factor, we should not forget that without digital skills and talents, we cannot
hope for digital transformation in business. Businesses should not necessarily focus on
professional experts in technology such as data analysis and artificial intelligence; in fact,
they should aim to attract, develop, and retain individuals with a set of cognitive, social,
emotional, and technical skills”.
4.1.4. Digital Innovation
“Digital innovation” refers to innovation in products, processes, or business models
using digital technologies. “Digital innovation” refers to using digital technologies to solve
problems and challenges in electronic sports businesses. In this regard, interviewee number
3 stated, “Businesses have no choice but to innovate to take advantage of opportunities
and overcome the implicit threats of transformative technologies”. At the same time,
interviewee number 5 stated, “Research, development, and innovation are an ongoing
and dynamic process, not a one-time event, which requires both short-term and long-term
results. Therefore, innovation must become a key capability in the organization”.
4.1.5. Technology
“Technologies” are divided into two common and transformative types. Common
technologies play a maintenance role in electronic sports businesses and have become
essential for survival. In contrast, transformative technologies aim to create fundamental
changes in electronic sports businesses. Common technologies are used only to perform
routine and daily operations in organizations, and they cannot be expected to create trans-
formation in business or industry. The Internet, email, AR/VR ID, GPS, and smartphones
are examples of such technologies. Although daily business operations become difficult
without common technologies, their use does not create a competitive advantage for elec-
tronic sports businesses and does not generate digital dividends. However, transformative
technologies provide the possibility of fundamental changes for businesses. In this regard,
interviewee number 12 stated: “Digital leaders equip themselves with innovative digital
technologies more than their competitors and put themselves on the path of transforma-
tion through them. These technologies are a combination of information, communication,

--- PAGE 9 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 12354 9 of 18
operations, and media technologies that facilitate the organization role through innovation
in the business model, improving core processes of the organization and enhancing cus-
tomer experience, leading to digital transformation in business. Data analytics, artificial
intelligence, blockchain, the Internet of Things, cloud computing, 3D printing, virtual and
augmented reality, robotics, physical, and social media are among the most important
digital technologies that play a key role in the digital transformation of businesses, and
electronic sports businesses are certainly not an exception”.
4.1.6. Data
Another empowering element of digital transformation maturity is “data”, which help
electronic sports businesses move away from guesswork and towards inspiring predictions
and continuous testing of hypotheses. Today, data provide the necessary insight for
decision-making, and the era of decision making based solely on intuition and emotions is
over. In this regard, interviewee number 4 stated: “Today’s businesses have become data-
driven businesses. They need data analysis and information to gain a better understanding
of customers, competitors, target markets, and even products and services to be offered.
These analyses help managers define new business lines”. Also, interviewee number
15 stated: “Digital electronic sports businesses managers must make all their decisions
data-driven, from formulating business strategies to determining employee salaries and
rewards, to succeed in the digital age”.
4.2. Achievements of Digital Transformation Maturity
The findings indicate that by equipping electronic sports businesses with the aforemen-
tioned capabilities and tools, they can move towards digital transformation and achieve
four digital transformation achievements: “business model and ecosystem”, “digital cus-
tomer experience”, “digital employee experience”, and “digital processes” (Table 3).
Table 3. Achievements of Digital Transformation.
Themes Subthemes Concepts
Achievements of
Digital Transformation
Business model
and ecosystem
Reviewing the ways and methods of creating value in the digital age
Adaptation of actions to the capabilities and opportunities of the digital age
Sustainability of the digital business model
A digital ecosystem approach
Developing a digital ecosystem
Digital customer
experience
Evaluation of digital customer experience
Design and analysis of customer journey maps
Program and process for enhancing the digital customer experience before,
during, and after purchase
Upgrading the management and knowledge of digital customer experience
Co-creation of digital product and service development with customers
Digital employee
experience
A strategic approach to digital employee experience management
Evaluation of the work environment and digital employee experience
Development of a digital work system
Design and analysis of employee journey maps
Upgrading digital employee experience before, during, and after employment
Digital processes
Documenting digital processes
Modeling and architecture of digital processes
Ensuring the maturity of digital processes
Using digital technologies and innovation in business processes
Redesigning digital business processes
4.2.1. Business Model and Ecosystem
“Business models” are business models that create value for electronic sports busi-
nesses with a focus on digital technologies. The transformation that digital technologies

--- PAGE 10 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 12354 10 of 18
create in business models can be partial or fundamental. Sometimes, a review of the busi-
ness model is carried out by creating innovation, limitations, and non-structural changes
in the current model. These changes do not bring a completely new business model for
electronic sports businesses, but rather focus on innovation and improvement in the current
model’s performance. On the other hand, the transformation of the business model through
digital technologies can go beyond limited innovations in the current model and lead to
the creation of new products and services or fundamental changes in sales approaches or
revenue generation methods. This fundamental re-creation sometimes not only affects the
business itself but also affects related industries and creates new structures in the industry
or new behaviors in customers.
Furthermore, theconceptofthe“businessecosystem”isanewconceptthatemphasizes
the cooperation and synergy among various players in the business space, where the
business space is considered an ecosystem, and a network of actors plays a role in creating
value for the customer. Interviewee number 14 stated in this regard, “The participation
of each of the main and ancillary players with each other in the ecosystem of the product
or service offered in related businesses creates a dependency that ultimately brings more
value to the customer”.
4.2.2. Customer Digital Experience
Digital technologies are impacting the “customer experience” more than ever before.
Although “customer experience” is not a new concept in the field of electronic sports
businesses, due to the amazing impact that digital technologies have had on customer
experience in various industries, it has received more attention than ever before, and a new
concept called “customer digital experience” has been introduced. Interviewee number
13 believes: “Digital technologies are able to significantly improve the customer experience
by creating an attractive, interactive and completely different environment and meeting
their expectations in the best possible way”. Interviewee number 10 also stated: “To
create an attractive digital experience, coherence must be created between the physical and
technological experience of customers to create the highest value for them”.
4.2.3. Employee Digital Experience
Enteringtheeraof“employeeexperience”isamajorrevolutioninthefieldofelectronic
sports businesses. In this era, organizations no longer treat individuals as the “assets and
resources of the organization”, but rather as “humans”. The result of this new approach
is a greater effort to understand employees and provide solutions tailored to their needs.
In fact, when employees have a positive experience in the business, they have a high
level of attachment, are well integrated with the organization, participate, are sensitive to
what they do, and have higher productivity. In this regard, participant number 6 stated:
“The employee experience includes all factors that affect the perception and feelings of
employees about their work environment and job, and electronic sports businesses must
always have a strategic approach to managing the digital experience of employees and
design and analyze employee travel plans”.
4.2.4. Digital Processes
Advances in information technology and the emergence of digital technologies have
provided better conditions for improving “organizational processes”. Digital technologies
canhelpimprovetheworkprocessesinelectronicsportsbusinesses. Basedonthisapproach,
processes are eliminated, simplified, and automated. Businesses have been trying for years
to automate manual tasks, but today, with the use of technologies, these tasks can be easily
done, and many good and low-cost solutions have been provided through technologies.
4.3. Levels of Digital Maturity
Findings show that after evaluation and auditing, electronic sports businesses are
placed in one of the levels of digital maturity according to their score. “Digital beginners”

--- PAGE 11 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 12354 11 of 18
are at the lowest level, followed by “digital enthusiasts”, “digital conservatives”, and at
the highest level of maturity, “digital leaders”. Participant number 3 states, “Beginners
are at the starting point of their digital journey. Many of them are trying to ensure success
before taking action, which is why they have adopted the ‘let’s see what happens’ strategy”.
Interviewee number 5 also believes that “some beginners think that technological oppor-
tunities are suitable for other industries, not theirs. Others lack the necessary leadership
to create change. As a result, beginners only have basic technological capabilities and are
placed lower than their competitors in many financial performance criteria”. On the other
hand, enthusiasts do not wait (interviewee number 12). They buy every new digital tool.
They follow technological trends and fashions and are proud of this feature, but do not
change the nature of their affairs (interviewee number 9). However, due to the lack of
strong digital governance and leadership, many of their expenses are wasted. Or they
find that they need to review everything they have done so far in order to integrate and
upgrade their capabilities (interviewee number 3). Interviewee number 10 believes that
“none of these enthusiasts have a mechanism for coordinating activities or creating synergy
between their investments. Creating a wide range of non-adaptive processes and systems
may seem like progress, but in reality, it will limit the exploitation of larger opportunities.
This inflexibility prevents the creation of a coordinated approach to customer interaction
and a unified approach to operations”. Furthermore, conservatives are at the opposite
end of enthusiasts in terms of capability. Interviewee number 9 believes that “although
conservatives have useful digital leadership capabilities, excessive caution prevents these
businesses from creating powerful technological capabilities. These businesses focus on the
fact that each technological investment should be carefully selected and fully coordinated
with each other. Leaders in these businesses avoid making mistakes because they know it
will waste scarce resources like time, effort, and money”. Finally, unlike most businesses,
digital leaders excel in both empowering and achieving superior results. This is while some
businesses may only appear strong in technological capabilities and be weak in leadership
capabilities, and vice versa (Figure 1).
Sustainability 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 20
processes and systems may seem like progress, but in reality, it will limit the exploitation
of larger opportunities. This inﬂexibility prevents the creation of a coordinated approach
to customer interaction and a uniﬁed approach to operations”. Furthermore,
conservatives are at the opposite end of enthusiasts in terms of capability. Interviewee
number9 believesthat“althoughconservativeshaveusefuldigitalleadershipcapabilities,
excessive caution prevents these businesses from creating powerful technological
capabilities. These businesses focus on the fact that each technological investment should
be carefully selected and fully coordinated with each other. Leaders in these businesses
avoid making mistakes because they know it will waste scarce resources like time, eﬀort,
and money”. Finally, unlike most businesses, digital leaders excel in both empowering
and achieving superior results. This is while some businesses may only appear strong in
technological capabilities and be weak in leadership capabilities, and vice versa (Figure
1).
Enablers of Digital
Maturity
Digital
Governance and
Leadership
Digital Strategy
Digital Culture
and Skills
Digital Innovation
Technology
Data
Achievements of
Digital
Transformation
Business model
and ecosystem
Digital customer
experience
Digital employee
experience
Digital processes
Theme
Sub-theme
Link to Sub-themes
Relationship between Themes
digital leaders
digital conservatives
digital enthusiasts
Digital beginners
Figure 1. Conceptual Map of Digital Maturity in Developing Countries’ Electronic Sports
Businesses.
5. Discussion
In simple terms, in any change or transformation, we need a benchmark model to
compare and measure our progress. Digital transformation is no exception, and using a
benchmarkmodel iscrucial forachievingthe best results. Moreover,a crucial element that
diﬀerent businesses should consider before embarking on the digital transformation
journey is determining an appropriate model for assessing digital maturity in their
Figure 1. Conceptual Map of Digital Maturity in Developing Countries’ Electronic Sports Businesses.

--- PAGE 12 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 12354 12 of 18
5. Discussion
In simple terms, in any change or transformation, we need a benchmark model to
compare and measure our progress. Digital transformation is no exception, and using a
benchmark model is crucial for achieving the best results. Moreover, a crucial element that
differentbusinessesshouldconsiderbeforeembarkingonthedigitaltransformationjourney
is determining an appropriate model for assessing digital maturity in their industry. This is
because in different time intervals, the basis for measuring progress and desired indicators
must be determined to obtain a proper comparison and analysis of progress, strengths, and
weaknesses. In this study, based on interviews with stakeholders in developing countries’
electronic sports businesses, a framework has been developed for digital maturity in
these businesses.
This framework emphasizes digital enablers and digital achievements in the path of
digital transformation of electronic sports businesses in developing countries. Digital gov-
ernance and leadership are among the digital enablers, as they ensure that electronic sports
businesses have a clear strategy, structure, and accountability for their digital initiatives.
Without effective governance and leadership, digital transformation efforts may lack direc-
tion, compatibility, and harmony with business objectives, resulting in wasted resources
and missed opportunities. Digital governance includes creating policies, procedures, and
standards for managing digital assets, data, and processes. It also involves defining roles,
responsibilities, and decision-making processes for digital initiatives. Effective digital gov-
ernance ensures that businesses can manage risks, comply with regulations, and optimize
their digital investment value. On the other hand, digital leadership includes creating
a vision, culture, and mindset that enhance innovation, collaboration, and agility in the
digital age. Digital leaders must be able to inspire and motivate their teams to embrace
change, experiment with new ideas, and continuously learn and improve. They also need
to be able to communicate the value of digital transformation to stakeholders and align it
with business strategy.
Strategy is another enabler of digital transformation maturity in electronic sports
businesses, which has been highlighted in past research, unlike governance and leader-
ship [44,45]. This is because strategy provides a roadmap for how digital technologies
and processes can be used to achieve business objectives. A well-defined digital strat-
egy ensures alignment between digital initiatives and the overall business strategy, and
resources are effectively allocated to achieve maximum impact. A digital strategy also
helps electronic sports businesses identify opportunities for innovation and growth and
stay ahead of competitors in a digital landscape, while enabling businesses to prioritize
investment in technologies and digital processes based on their potential to deliver value
and improve customer experiences. Furthermore, a digital strategy provides a framework
for measuring the success of digital transformation initiatives and continuous improvement
and optimization over time, helping electronic sports businesses stay agile and respond to
changing market conditions and customer needs.
Another enabler identified for digital maturity in electronic sports businesses is culture
and skills, which have been previously mentioned in studies [44,45]. The reason culture
and skills were recognized as an enabler for digital transformation maturity in electronic
sports businesses is that both are vital factors that determine the success or failure of digital
initiatives. A culture that is open to change, innovation, and experimentation is essential for
accepting new technologies and processes and fostering a mindset of continuous improve-
ment. In addition, having the appropriate skills and expertise for effective implementation
of digital initiatives is crucial. This includes technical skills such as data analysis, artificial
intelligence, and cybersecurity, as well as soft skills such as communication, collaboration,
and adaptability. Without a culture that supports digital transformation and the necessary
skills to implement it effectively, businesses may struggle to fully leverage the potential of
digital technologies and processes. They may face resistance to change, encounter obstacles
in implementation, or fail to achieve desired results. Therefore, businesses must invest in
developing a culture that encompasses digital transformation and creating the necessary

--- PAGE 13 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 12354 13 of 18
skills and capabilities for effective implementation. This requires a commitment to continu-
ous learning and development, as well as a willingness to experiment and take risks in the
pursuit of innovation and growth.
The fourth enabler identified through the combination of themes in the study [45] is
innovation, which plays a role in the maturity of digital transformation in electronic sports
businesses as it fosters growth, competition, and customer satisfaction. Digital technologies
are constantly evolving, and businesses that fail to innovate are at risk of falling behind
their competitors and losing market share. Innovation can also help businesses identify
new opportunities, create new products and services, improve processes, and enhance
customer experiences. By embracing innovation, businesses can stay ahead of the curve and
remain relevant in a rapidly changing marketplace. Furthermore, innovation can reinforce
a culture of continuous experimentation and improvement, which is essential for successful
digital transformation. It encourages employees to think creatively and remain open to new
ideas, technologies, and approaches. Finally, innovation helps electronic sports businesses
overcome challenges and obstacles that may arise during the digital transformation process,
enabling them to find solutions for complex problems, adapt to changing conditions, and
take advantage of new opportunities.
In this study, technology was also identified as an enabler of digital maturity in elec-
tronic sports businesses, previously mentioned in studies. The reason technology explains
digital transformation maturity is that it is the foundation upon which digital transfor-
mation is built. Digital technologies enable businesses to automate processes, collect and
analyze data, engage with customers, and create new products and services. Technology
also guides innovation by providing new tools and platforms for experimentation and
development. For example, cloud computing, artificial intelligence, and blockchain are
all technologies that drive innovation in various industries. Additionally, technology is
essential for businesses to remain competitive in a rapidly evolving market. Finally, by
using technology, electronic sports businesses can improve efficiency, reduce costs, and
enhance customer experiences.
The latest enabler identified through the combination of themes in this study is the
sub-theme of data, which has also been emphasized in the studies by Kittkumpanat et al.
(2023) and Wijnen (2020) [44,45]. Data provide valuable insights that can be used to improve
decision making, optimize processes, and enhance customer experiences. As the volume
of data generated by businesses increases, the use of data analysis tools and techniques to
extract meaningful insights from these data has become essential. Through data analysis,
electronic sports businesses can identify patterns, trends, and correlations that can help
them understand customer behavior, market trends, and business performance. This
information can then be used for informed decision making about product development,
marketing strategies, and resource allocation. Data are also important for improving
operational efficiency. By collecting and analyzing data about processes and workflows,
electronic sports businesses can identify inefficiencies and areas for improvement, leading
to cost savings, improved productivity, and better resource utilization. Finally, data are vital
for enhancing customer experiences. By collecting and analyzing customer data, businesses
can gain insights into their preferences, needs, and behaviors. This information can then
be used to personalize products and services, improve customer service, and create more
engaging marketing campaigns.
By equipping organizations with these capabilities, it is possible to move towards
digital maturity. “Business model and ecosystem”, “digital customer experience”, “dig-
ital employee experience”, and “digital processes” are the four achievements of digital
transformation that, when combined, will create a digital-savvy organization. The reason
why the business model ecosystem contributes to the digital maturity of electronic sports
businesses is that this model provides a framework for how businesses operate and interact
with other businesses and stakeholders in the digital economy. On the other hand, it
defines the value proposition, revenue streams, and cost structure of the business, showing
how the business creates value for customers, shareholders, and other stakeholders. A

--- PAGE 14 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 12354 14 of 18
well-designed business model can help businesses identify new opportunities, optimize
operations, and achieve sustainable growth. Additionally, the ecosystem can provide access
to new technologies and resources that can accelerate digital transformation. For example,
partnering with technology providers or startups can help electronic sports businesses
gain access to technologies and expertise that can assist in innovation and staying ahead
of competitors.
One of the sub-themes of achieving digital maturity is the digital customer experience,
which has been mentioned in the study by Kittkumpanat et al. (2023) [45] as one of
the indicators of digital transformation maturity. The reason why the digital customer
experience explains digital maturity is that customer experience directly affects satisfaction,
loyalty, and retention. In today’s digital age, customers expect holistic and personalized
experiences at all touchpoints, including websites, mobile applications, social media, and
other digital channels. As a result, electronic sports businesses that prioritize the customer
experience can gain a competitive advantage by providing exceptional experiences that
meet or exceed customer expectations, leading to increased customer loyalty, positive word-
of-mouth referrals, and higher revenue growth. In addition, the digital customer experience
can also provide valuable insights into customer behavior and preferences that businesses
can use to inform their digital transformation strategies. By collecting and analyzing
customer data, businesses can identify pain points, opportunities for improvement, and
new areas for innovation.
Furthermore, it has been found that in addition to the digital customer experience,
electronic sports businesses must also focus on the digital employee experience to achieve
digital maturity. A positive digital experience for employees can lead to increased pro-
ductivity and efficiency. When employees have access to the right tools and technology,
they can work more efficiently and complete tasks more quickly. When employees gain the
necessary experience, they can provide better services and support to customers, and they
are more likely to offer innovative ideas that can contribute to business growth.
Finally, it has been determined that digital processes are the foundation of digital
maturity in electronic sports businesses, as previously mentioned in the study by Wijnen
(2020) [44]. They enable electronic sports businesses to streamline their operations, increase
efficiency, and improve customer experiences. Digital processes also allow businesses to
collect and analyze data more effectively, which can help them make informed decisions
and identify areas for improvement. By implementing digital processes, electronic sports
businesses can automate repetitive tasks, reduce errors, and free up employees to focus on
higher-value activities, which can lead to increased productivity, faster response times, and
improved customer satisfaction. Digital processes also enable electronic sports businesses
to leverage emerging technologies such as artificial intelligence, machine learning, and
the Internet of Things. These technologies can help businesses gain insights into customer
behavior, optimize operations, and create new products and services.
6. Conclusions
This section includes the authors’ concluding comments, theoretical contributions,
implications for practice, limitations of the study, and recommendations for future research.
6.1. Theoretical Contribution and Implications
This study provides a framework for digital transformation in developing countries’
electronic sports businesses. As far as we know, this is the first qualitative study examining
digital transformation in electronic sports businesses in developing countries. The results
showed that digital transformation and digital maturity in electronic sports businesses in
developing countries, with a focus on Iran, are a function of 10 sub-themes, and balanced
developmentintheseareascanensureelectronicsportsbusinesses’digitaltransformationto
a great extent. “Governance and leadership”, “strategy”, “culture and skills”, “innovation”,
“technology”, and “data” were identified as enabling factors and needs for digital maturity,
and “business model and ecosystem”, “customer digital experience”, “employee digital

--- PAGE 15 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 12354 15 of 18
experience”, and “digital processes” were identified as achievements and needs for digital
maturity. Although there are some differences between enabling factors and achievements,
itisessentialtoemphasizethatmovingtowardsdigitaltransformationandachievingdigital
maturity in electronic sports businesses is impossible without synergy between them.
From a theoretical perspective, this study highlights the importance of maturity
models in the digital transformation process, and evaluations based on this framework can
act as a catalyst and identify the turning points in the digital transformation journey of
electronic sports businesses in developing countries. Overall, this framework increases our
understanding of digital transformation and digital maturity in electronic sports businesses
and provides valuable insights for researchers and experts in this field.
6.2. Practical Implications
From a practical perspective, this study provides useful concepts for electronic sports
businesses in developing countries that are seeking successful digital transformation. For
this purpose, a framework for digital transformation maturity with 10 sub-themes has
been proposed. These sub-themes refer to various enabling factors and vital success
factors in the digital transformation process, and the unique structure of the proposed
framework enables the clear and explicit evaluation of digital maturity levels for electronic
sports businesses. Additionally, electronic sports businesses can prioritize their efforts
and resources towards successful digital transformation by focusing on targeted enabling
factors and capabilities and ensure a more effective and efficient transition to digitalization.
Finally, this framework helps electronic sports businesses in developing countries evaluate
their progress in digital transformation over time and measure the effectiveness of their
digital transformation initiatives.
6.3. Limitations
Despite the benefits of the digital transformation maturity framework for electronic
sports businesses in developing countries, there are limitations that must be considered.
The first limitation is that this framework is relatively new, and there is limited empirical
research on its effectiveness in the electronic sports businesses. The second limitation is
that this framework may not be applicable to all electronic sports businesses, as different
businesses may have different goals, resources, and levels of digital maturity. Finally, this
framework may not take into account the rapidly evolving nature of electronic sports
businesses and the continuous emergence of new technologies and business models.
6.4. Recommendations for Future Research
To address these limitations, there are various areas for future research that can be
explored. Firstly, empirical research can be conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of the
digital transformation maturity framework in the electronic sports businesses. Secondly,
future research can examine the applicability of the maturity framework for different types
of electronic sports businesses. For example, this framework may be necessary for small
and medium-sized businesses or start-ups that have limited resources. This research can
also investigate the factors that impact the level of digital maturity in electronic sports
businesses and how to address them. Lastly, future research can investigate the impact
of emerging technologies and business models on the digital transformation maturity
framework for electronic sports businesses. For instance, the emergence of blockchain
technology and non-fungible tokens (NFTs) in the electronic sports businesses may require
a different approach to digital transformation. This research can also examine the challenges
that electronic sports businesses may face in adopting these new technologies and how to
overcome them.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, J.N.; Methodology, S.M.; Software, A.H.; Formal analysis,
S.M.; Resources, A.H.; Data curation, A.H.; Writing—original draft, J.N.; Funding acquisition, J.N. All
authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

--- PAGE 16 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 12354 16 of 18
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the study.
Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available on request from the
corresponding author. The data are not publicly available due to the privacy concerns of interviewees.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1. Parviainen, P.; Tihinen, M.; Kääriäinen, J.; Teppola, S. Tackling the Digitalization Challenge: How to Benefit from Digitalization in
Practice. Int. J. Inf. Syst. Proj. Manag. 2017, 5, 63–77.
2. Toanca, L. Empirical Research Regarding the Importance of Digital Transformation for Romanian SMEs. Manag. Econ. Rev. 2016,
1, 92–108.
3. Pereira, C.S.; Durão, N.; Moreira, F.; Veloso, B. The Importance of Digital Transformation in International Business. Sustainability
2022, 14, 834. [CrossRef]
4. Rupeika-Apoga, R.; Petrovska, K.; Bule, L. The Effect of Digital Orientation and Digital Capability on Digital Transformation of
SMEs during the COVID-19 Pandemic. J. Theor. Appl. Electron. Commer. Res. 2022, 17, 669–685. [CrossRef]
5. Ji, X.; Li, W. Digital Transformation: A Review and Research Framework. Front. Business Econ. Manag. 2022, 5, 21–27.
6. Carrijo, P.; Alturas, B.; Pedrosa, I. Análise de Modelos de Maturidade de Transformação Digital. In Proceedings of the 2021 16th
Iberian Conference on Information Systems and Technologies (CISTI), Chaves, Portugal, 23–26 June 2021. [CrossRef]
7. Romanova, A.N.; Shvalev, N.S. Digital Transformation of Professional Sports Organizations’ Business Model: The Case of the US
National Football League. St. Petersburg State Univ. 2023, 1, 84–104.
8. Ratten, V. Digital Transformation in Sport and Social Media. In Sport Startups: New Advances in Entrepreneurship; Emerald
Publishing Limited: Bingley, UK, 2020; pp. 89–104. ISBN 1789730821.
9. Vandenhouweele, J. Digital Transformation in Sports. MySueño Sport & Health Marketing. 2020. Available online: https:
//mysueno.com/digital-transformation-in-sports/ (accessed on 15 August 2022).
10. Brodie, R.J.; Benson-Rea, M.; Medlin, C.J. Branding as a Dynamic Capability: Strategic Advantage from Integrating Meanings
with Identification. Mark. Theory 2017, 17, 183–199. [CrossRef]
11. Boorstin, J. NBA and NFL Commissioners Tell How They’re Turning to Technology to Draw in Fans. 2019. Available online:
https://www.cnbc.com/ (accessed on 15 August 2022).
12. Horbel, C.; Buck, C.; Diel, S.; Reith, R.; Walter, Y. Stadium Visitors’ Smartphone Usage and Digital Resource Integration. Sport Bus.
Manag. An Int. J. 2021, 11, 10–27. [CrossRef]
13. Osterrieder, P.; Budde, L.; Friedli, T. The Smart Factory as a Key Construct of Industry 4.0: A Systematic Literature Review. Int. J.
Prod. Econ. 2020, 221, 107476. [CrossRef]
14. Teker, S.; Teker, D.; Orendil, E. Digital Transformation in Businesses: The Process and Its Outcomes. Press. Procedia 2022, 15,
142–144. [CrossRef]
15. Bannikov, V.; Lobunets, T.; Buriak, I.; Maslyhan, O.; Shevchuk, L. On the Question of the Role of Project Management in the
Digital Transformation of Small and Medium-Sized Businesses: Essence and Innovative Potential. Amaz. Investig. 2022, 11,
334–343.
16. Jewapatarakul, D.; Ueasangkomsate, P. Digital Transformation: The Challenges for Manufacturing and Service Sectors. In
Proceedings of the 2022 Joint International Conference on Digital Arts, Media and Technology with ECTI Northern Section
Conference on Electrical, Electronics, Computer and Telecommunications Engineering (ECTI DAMT & NCON), Chiang Rai,
Thailand, 26–28 January 2022.
17. Yu, P. Opportunities and Challenges of Digital Transformation of China’s Cultural Tourism Industry in the Post-Epidemic Era.
BCP Bus. Manag. 2023, 44, 449–456. [CrossRef]
18. Kane, G.C.; Palmer, D.; Phillips, A.N. Achieving Digital Maturity. MIT Sloan Manag. Rev. 2017. Available online: http:
//sloanreview.mit.edu/digital2017 (accessed on 15 August 2022).
19. Kane, G.C.; Palmer, D.; Phillips, A.N.; Kiron, D.; Buckley, N. Strategy, Not Technology, Drives Digital Transformation. MIT Sloan
Manag. Rev. 2015. Available online: https://sloanreview.mit.edu/projects/strategy-drives-digital-transformation/ (accessed on
15 August 2022).
20. Brown, N.; Brown, I. From Digital Business Strategy to Digital Transformation-How: A Systematic Literature Review. Proc. S. Afr.
Inst. Comput. Sci. Inf. Technol. 2019, 2019, 1–8.
21. Egodawele, M.; Sedera, D.; Bui, V. A Systematic Review of Digital Transformation Literature (2013–2021) and the Development of
an Overarching Apriori Model to Guide Future Research. arXiv 2022, arXiv:2212.03867.
22. Korachi, Z.; Bounabat, B. Integrated Methodological Framework for Digital Transformation Strategy Building (IMFDS). Int. J.
Adv. Comput. Sci. Appl. 2019, 10, 242–250. [CrossRef]
23. Merten, S.; Schmidt, S.L.; Winand, M. Organisational Capabilities for Successful Digital Transformation: A Global Analysis of
National Football Associations in the Digital Age. J. Strateg. Manag. 2022. [CrossRef]

--- PAGE 17 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 12354 17 of 18
24. Teichert, R. Digital Transformation Maturity: A Systematic Review of Literature. Acta Univ. Agric. Et Silvic. Mendel. Brun. 2019,
67, 1673–1687. [CrossRef]
25. Gorokhova, T. The Transformation of Business Processes in Conditions of Provides for Special Tax Conditions, Which Will Be
Determined by the Tax Code of Ukraine. The Relevant Bill Is Currently Being Drafted by the Ver Khovna Rada to Fulfill the Tasks
Set out in Presi. Econ. J. Lesya Ukr. Volyn Natl. Univ. 2021, 3, 14–21. [CrossRef]
26. Safonov, Y.; Borshch, V.; Shulzhenko, I.; Zahrebelna, I.; Bolshakova, I. Digital Transformation in Developing Economies under the
COVID-19 Pandemic. IEEE Eng. Manag. Rev. 2022, 50, 46–57. [CrossRef]
27. Syed, R.; Bandara, W. Controlling Corruption in Developing Country Public Sector: A Process Ecosystems Perspective. In
Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Information Systems (ICIS) 2019; Association for Information Systems:
Atlanta, GA, USA, 2019; pp. 1–9.
28. Hicks, J. Environmental Challenges of Digital Transformation in Developing Countries; Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office:
London, UK, 2021.
29. Ströbel, T.; Stieler, M.; Stegmann, P. Guest Editorial. Digital Transformation in Sport: The Disruptive Potential of Digitalization
for Sport Management Research. Sport. Bus. Manag. Int. J. 2021, 11, 1–9. [CrossRef]
30. Mertens, P.; Wiener, M. Riding the Digitalization Wave: Toward a Sustainable Nomenclature in Wirtschaftsinformatik: A
Comment on Riedl et al. (2017). Bus. Inf. Syst. Eng. 2018, 60, 367–372. [CrossRef]
31. Riedl, R.; Benlian, A.; Hess, T.; Stelzer, D.; Sikora, H. On the Relationship Between Information Management and Digitalization.
Bus. Inf. Syst. Eng. 2017, 59, 475–482. [CrossRef]
32. Tilson, D.; Lyytinen, K.; Sørensen, C. Research Commentary—Digital Infrastructures: The Missing IS Research Agenda. Inf. Syst.
Res. 2010, 21, 748–759. [CrossRef]
33. Legner, C.; Eymann, T.; Hess, T.; Matt, C.; Böhmann, T.; Drews, P.; Mädche, A.; Urbach, N.; Ahlemann, F. Digitalization:
Opportunity and Challenge for the Business and Information Systems Engineering Community. Bus. Inf. Syst. Eng. 2017, 59,
301–308. [CrossRef]
34. Hinings, B.; Gegenhuber, T.; Greenwood, R. Digital Innovation and Transformation: An Institutional Perspective. Inf. Organ.
2018, 28, 52–61. [CrossRef]
35. Skog, D.A.; Wimelius, H.; Sandberg, J. Digital Disruption. Bus. Inf. Syst. Eng. 2018, 60, 431–437. [CrossRef]
36. Fitzgerald, M.; Kruschwitz, N.; Bonnet, D.; Welch, M. Embracing Digital Technology: A New Strategic Imperative. MIT Sloan
Manag. Rev. 2014, 55, 1.
37. Verhoef, P.C.; Broekhuizen, T.; Bart, Y.; Bhattacharya, A.; Dong, J.Q.; Fabian, N.; Haenlein, M. Digital Transformation: A
Multidisciplinary Reflection and Research Agenda. J. Bus. Res. 2021, 122, 889–901. [CrossRef]
38. Zhai, H.; Yang, M.; Chan, K.C. Does Digital Transformation Enhance a Firm’s Performance? Evidence from China. Technol. Soc.
2022, 68, 101841. [CrossRef]
39. Yang, J.; Zhang, X.; Pei, Y. Digital Transformation of the Business Models of Chinese Sporting Goods Enterprises in the Post-
COVID-19 Era: A Knowledge-Management Perspective. J. Knowl. Manag. 2023. [CrossRef]
40. Aras, A.; Büyüközkan, G. Digital Transformation Journey Guidance: A Holistic Digital Maturity Model Based on a Systematic
Literature Review. Systems 2023, 11, 213. [CrossRef]
41. Gökalp, E.; Martinez, V. Digital Transformation Capability Maturity Model Enabling the Assessment of Industrial Manufacturers.
Comput. Ind. 2021, 132, 103522. [CrossRef]
42. Hägg, J.; Sandhu, S. Do or Die: How Large Organizations Can Reach a Higher Level of Digital Maturity. Master’s Thesis, Luleå
University of Technology, Luleå, Sweden, 2017.
43. Schumacher, A.; Erol, S.; Sihn, W. A Maturity Model for Assessing Industry 4.0 Readiness and Maturity of Manufacturing
Enterprises. Procedia CIRP 2016, 52, 161–166. [CrossRef]
44. Wijnen, M.V. What’s Your Sports Organisation’s Digital Maturity Level? 2020. Available online: https://www.linkedin.com/
pulse/whats-your-sports-organisations-digital-maturity-level-van-wijnen (accessed on 15 August 2022).
45. Kittkumpanat, M.; Chankuna, D.; Sriboon, N. A Suggested Framework of Digital Maturity Dimension for Sport Media in
Thailand: Review and Comparative Analysis. Acad. J. Bus. Rev. 2023, 15, 1–12.
46. Wylie, J.; Palmer, K. Connecting Digital and Technology with Australia’s Competitive Sport Obsession to Achieve World-
Leading Physical Activity and High Performance Objectives. Australian Sports Commission. 2016. Available online: https:
//www.sportaus.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0010/665857/34871_Connecting_Digital_with_Sport_Final_V3.pdf (accessed
on 15 August 2022).
47. Combe, C. Introduction to E-Business; Routledge: London, UK, 2012; ISBN 1136392890.
48. Tomanek, M.; Cieslinski, W.; Polasik, M. Digital Business Models in Sport; Taylor & Francis: Oxfordshire, UK, 2022.
49. Vial, G. Understanding Digital Transformation: A Review and a Research Agenda. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 2019, 28, 118–144.
[CrossRef]
50. Squires, V. Thematic Analysis. In Varieties of Qualitative Research Methods: Selected Contextual Perspectives; Springer:
Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2023; pp. 463–468.
51. Scharp, K.M.; Sanders, M.L. What is a Theme? Teaching Thematic Analysis in Qualitative Communication Research Methods.
Commun. Teach. 2019, 33, 117–121. [CrossRef]

--- PAGE 18 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 12354 18 of 18
52. García-fernández, J.; Valcarce-torrente, M.; Mohammadi, S.; Gálvez-ruiz, P. The Digital Transformation of the Fitness Sector: A Global
Perspective; Emerald Publ. Ltd.: Bingley, UK, 2022. [CrossRef]
53. Siani, M.G.; Mohammadi, S.; Veisi, K. Digital Transformation in Iranian Fitness Centres. In The Digital Transformation of the Fitness
Sector: A Global Perspective; Emerald Publ. Ltd.: Bingley, UK, 2022; pp. 159–164. ISBN 1801178615.
54. Freeman, R.E. Strategic Management: A Stakeholder Approach; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 2010; ISBN 0521151740.
55. Stewart, K.; Williams, M. Researching Online Populations: The Use of Online Focus Groups for Social Research. Qual. Res. 2005,
5, 395–416. [CrossRef]
56. Smith, H.J.; Chen, J.; Liu, X. Language and Rigour in Qualitative Research: Problems and Principles in Analyzing Data Collected
in Mandarin. BMC Med. Res. Methodol. 2008, 8, 1–8. [CrossRef]
57. Byrne, D. A Worked Example of Braun and Clarke’s Approach to Reflexive Thematic Analysis. Qual. Quant. 2022, 56, 1391–1412.
[CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.