--- PAGE 1 ---
Computer Science and Information Systems 22(3):815–837 https://doi.org/10.2298/CSIS240729017M
PI2M-ITGov – Panel of Indicators for Monitoring and
Maintaining the Information Technology Governance:
Method and Artefacts
Altino J. Mentzingen Moraes⋆
and Álvaro Rocha
Advance, ISEG, University of Lisbon
Rua Miguel Lupi, nº 20 (Gab. 101)
1249-078 Lisbon, Portugal
altino.moraes{@gmail.com, @gestao.gov.br}
amrrocha@gmail.com
Abstract. In today’s highly competitive corporate world, effective management of
Information Technology (IT) resources and the consequent need for structured man-
agement and governance are essential. Therefore, prior planning of goals, definition
of effective actions, and monitoring of results (through Indicators) is the way to
apply effective control. This article presents the method named as PI2M-ITGov -
Panel of Indicators for Monitoring and Maintaining Information Technology Gov-
ernance, which covers 12 identified IT Areas and consists of 12 key monitoring
indicators (KMIs) and their 36 sub-KMIs (3 sub-KMIs for each 12 identified IT
Areas). This method is the result of many years of IT Governance Models imple-
mentation expertise of the Authors besides theories presented by both in several
Technical Congresses participations. The artefacts created are available at the pro-
vided links. The simulation (through a case study) demonstrated a high level of
acceptance of the tools as a practical IT Governance alternative.
Keywords:ITManagement;ITGovernance;AreasofManagementofIT;ITStrate-
gic Alignment; MM - Maturity Models; KMI - Key Monitoring Indicators; Case
Study; DSR - Design Science Research.
1. Introduction
Organizations can be classified into two distinct domains: 1) Those that utilize informa-
tion technology (IT) resources for their operations; and 2) Those that serve as providers
of IT resources. Figure 1 visually illustrates this division, emphasizing the differentiation
between these two domains.
In both cases, even the organizations belonging to the second category (IT resources
providers) have an internal administrative area that functions similarly to companies in
the first category (IT resources users). This internal administrative area also needs to ef-
fectively manage its performance and actions to ensure the success of the overall business.
Consequently, both domains – without exception – make significant investments in
IT, which are expected to yield tangible results for the business. Whether operating in the
industrial, commercial, or financial sectors, organizations aim to maintain a competitive
position in the globalized business environment.
⋆ Corresponding author

--- PAGE 2 ---
816 Altino J. Mentzingen Moraes et al.
Fig.1. Enterprise domains
To ensure effective monitoring of IT initiatives and their alignment with the organiza-
tion’s strategic planning, a set of guidelines known as IT governance is implemented.
Peter Weill [41] is one of the prominent authors in the field of IT governance, empha-
sizing the importance of IT being perceived as a sustainable area that generates results
(revenues), rather than merely incurring costs (expenses). According to Weill, IT should
strongly focus on ‘aligning its initiatives with the business’.
In the words of Rockart [32]:
In sum, the load of IT on organizations is heavier than ever before and the man-
agement of it is more complex.
In light of this reality, as highlighted by one of the authors [24] in this research, signif-
icant challenges need to be addressed to effectively implement IT governance and strive
for high-quality indices. The doctoral thesis presents Figure 2, referred to as the ‘puzzle’
of the governance process, illustrating these challenges. Overcoming these challenges is
essential to successfully implement IT governance and achieve desirable quality metrics.
Consequently, it becomes evident that monitoring IT governance activities requires
an initial and meticulous planning phase (structuring), followed by effective management
(administration), and rigorous governance (control) processes.
To accomplish this objective, a practical approach is to apply the plan, do, check, act
(PDCA) cycle, initially formulated by the American statistician William Edwards Dem-
ing. The PDCA cycle is advocated by the author Ruks Rundle [33] and is depicted in
Figure 3, adapted here to provide a more operational interpretation.
The problem at hand revolves around how management can effectively apply gov-
ernance processes, particularly those recommended by IT governance techniques. It is
crucial to adopt a proactive approach to administration control, rather than a reactive
one, in order to anticipate and prevent misalignments between the actions of the IT de-

--- PAGE 3 ---
PI2M-ITGov – Panel of Indicators for Monitoring and Maintaining 817
Fig.2. Process of governance ‘puzzle’ [24]
Fig.3. Plan, do, check, act (PDCA) cycle: adapted by authors from Rundle [33]

--- PAGE 4 ---
818 Altino J. Mentzingen Moraes et al.
partment and the initial planning. Failure to address these misalignments can result in
non-compliance with the organization’s expected outcomes.
To address this challenge, the panel of indicators for monitoring and maintaining in-
formation technology governance (PI2M-ITGov) method, developed through research
and presented in this article, aims to fulfill the management’s need in this field. It pro-
vides a panel of indicators that can measure the degree of alignment between the actions
implemented by the IT department and the organization’s strategic planning. This enables
decision-makers to identify and rectify any distortions, thereby guiding the organization
back to the correct course of action.
It is important to inform that this article is the result of a deep revision of one first and
initial proposal presented by Moraes & Rocha [25] in a European IT Congress held in the
City of Aveiro/Portugal (CISTI’23) – which revision besides other aspects – involved, as
the main purpose, the build of artefacts.
Those artefacts were created (such as a spreadsheet, a guideline, forms and other
tools), in order to make, this first and initial proposal became from theory to practice
in a real operational environment. Their links are provided and mentioned in the context
of this paper.
Additionally, it is also important to note that the PI2M-ITGov method ensures the
maintenance of confidentiality and privacy of personal data. The method does not handle
information that possesses sensitive content or characteristics, thereby safeguarding the
privacy of individuals involved.
2. Applied Methodology
This research project is guided by the design science research (DSR) methodology and its
principles.
In a broader sense, scientific research involves the practical application of objective
procedures by researchers to develop experiments and generate new knowledge that inte-
grates with existing knowledge, as explained by Fontelles [11].
Within the framework of DSR, the development of artefacts plays a crucial role in pro-
ducing scientific knowledge from an epistemological perspective, as described in Simon’s
work ‘The Sciences of the Artificial’ [35].
According to Peffers et al. [27], any designed entity intended to achieve a goal can
be considered an artifact. However, the creation of a well-designed artifact and its inves-
tigation in a specific context are key elements in knowledge production within scientific
research, as emphasized by Dresch, Lacerda & Antunes Jr. [8].
This paper adheres to the process flow of DSR as recommended by Wieringa [42],
with graphical adaptations made by the authors, as depicted in Figure 4.
The DSR methodology consists of several cycles, including the design cycle (steps 1,
2, and 3) for conceiving and constructing the solution, and the engineering cycle (steps 3
and 4) for adapting the solution to real-world applicability.
In DSR, one of the objectives of research is to contribute to the knowledge base of the
research area. Therefore, it is crucial for researchers to engage with existing knowledge
bases to ensure their work provides an original contribution to scientific knowledge, rather
than solely focusing on technological advancements [15].

--- PAGE 5 ---
PI2M-ITGov – Panel of Indicators for Monitoring and Maintaining 819
Fig.4. The design science research flow: adapted by authors from Wieringa [42]
Following the guidelines of step 1 (problem investigation) in DSR, this research aimed
todetermineiftherewasasufficientdegreeofrelevancetojustifyitsdevelopment.Thein-
vestigationsoughttoidentifywhetherotherstudieshadaddressedtheproblemthatneeded
to be resolved and considered important. The results of this investigation are presented in
the subsequent section titled ‘problem investigation’.
Within the context of DSR, artefacts can be classified into four types: models (abstrac-
tions and representations), methods (algorithms and practices), instantiations (implemen-
tations and prototypes), and constructs (vocabularies and symbols).
This research focused on creating artefacts in alignment with the principles of DSR.
To ensure their effectiveness in practical application, the research underwent three itera-
tions of the engineering cycle (steps 3 and 4). These iterations aimed to refine the artefacts
and adapt them to the realities of corporations.
This clarifies the rationale behind the versioning of the artefacts, which are made
available in the provided link in Section 3 (‘Solution Validation’). The version indicated
as V.01c signifies the third revision of the artifact.
3. Problem Investigation
As mentioned in Section 1, this research aims to address the need for a tool within IT
governance that can manage a dashboard to guide the alignment of IT initiatives with
corporate strategic planning.

--- PAGE 6 ---
820 Altino J. Mentzingen Moraes et al.
Following the guidelines of the DSR methodology, the research commenced with step
1, ‘problem investigation’. This step aimed to determine whether conducting this research
and allocating effort to this task would contribute to advancing scientific knowledge.
To assess the existing literature related to the research objectives, a bibliographic
searchwasconducted.Ninedatabasesweresearched,namelyACM,IEEE,MIT,Research
Gate, Scholar Google, SciELO, Science Direct, Scopus, and Web of Science (WoS). The
search keywords used were ‘IT Governance NOT Social NOT Health NOT Education
AND Performance Indicator AND Spreadsheet AND Guideline’. The exclusion criteria
of‘NOTSocialNOTHealthNOTEducation’wereappliedtofilteroutarticlesnotdirectly
linked to the business domain, such as banking/financial, industry, and services.
Of course, the papers those were focused on these 3 areas (Social, Health and Educa-
tion) and in their business tools, what means no in its final targets as to support Social,
Health or Education problems in its main themes, were also considered because, in this
interpretation, these can be sort as integrating the areas of banking/financial, industry, and
services as well.
Additionally, the search was limited to the last decade (2012–2022) to ensure rele-
vance and up-to-date information.
The initial search in the ACM database yielded only seven occurrences, which did not
align with the research focus. Subsequent searches in IEEE, MIT, Research Gate, Scholar
Google, and SciELO databases resulted in zero occurrences, while Science Direct yielded
only two occurrences. In response to these limited results, two additional databases, Sco-
pus and Web of Science, were searched, but no relevant articles were found.
Detailed information regarding the search results can be found in the ‘1. Problem
Investigation/Investigação do Problema’ folder accessible via the following link https:
//drive.google.com/drive/folders/1sFa5845Wcxr7KXQlH9hePXxN
0WdRKchV?usp=sharing.
Based on the analysis of these search results, which demonstrated the lack of lit-
erature on this specific topic, it became evident that the research should proceed. It was
determined that there was a significant gap that could be filled by concluding this research
in the planned format. The intention is to generate practical material that can effectively
assist IT managers in their work and activities.
4. Solution Design
Following the principles of the DSR methodology, this research project progressed to
step 2, ‘solution design’. The objective of this step was to conceptualize and construct the
architecture required to address the identified research question.
4.1. The 12 IT Monitoring Areas
As a way of delimiting the scope of this study – among the various existing possibilities
– the Theory of Number 12 as described by Tesla 1
[39] which highlights the significance
of this ‘magic number’ in various elements of the universe, served as the inspiration for
the establishment of a quantitative framework for IT work processes.
1 Nikola Tesla was a Serbian-Croatian scientist who was known for his important discoveries in the field of
electricity. His work was fundamental in improving the transmission of electrical energy.

--- PAGE 7 ---
PI2M-ITGov – Panel of Indicators for Monitoring and Maintaining 821
Since Tesla was one of the most recognized scientists by the Scientific Community in
studies related to electricity, and was even a direct competitor of Thomas Edison in his
discoveries, the line of work applied by this research – in the composition of the quantity
of IT work processes to be studied – followed his “magic number” equal to 12 (instead of
being applied other value within another focus of reasoning), also because, Tesla related
his “magic number” to many elements of the universe and not only to elements involved
with the theme of the electricity.
Following this line of reasoning, IT work processes were organized into 12 IT man-
agement areas, which became the focal point for the creation of indicators.
To determine the 12 IT management areas, in addition to delimiting the scope of this
study within 12 areas according to Tesla’s Theory (as the initial idea already mentioned
above), the empirical experience of the Authors (who have each worked in the IT field for
almost 5 decades) was considered, as well as a criterion based on the identification of IT
work processes that had published and recognized maturity level assessment models was
applied.
These 12 areas, which had corresponding maturity level assessment models, were
subsequently renamed as IT monitoring areas. For each of these areas, 12 key monitoring
indicators (KMIs) were created, with 3 sub-KMIs for each one, resulting in a total of 36
sub-KMIs for the proposed solution (which will be the focus of the following ”4.2. The
Scope of the 36 Sub-KMIs - Key Monitoring Sub Indicators”).
To ensure precision in the analysis, three key monitoring sub-indicators (sub-KMIs)
were developed for each of the 12 IT monitoring areas, leading to a total of 36 sub-KMIs
within the proposed solution. The data collected to determine the percentages for these 36
sub-KMIs were derived from aligning the results with the highest maturity levels (ranging
from 3 to 5) identified in the considered maturity level assessment models.
Theresearchprocessinvolvedtheapplicationoftechnicalandprofessionalknowledge
by one of the authors, combined with the principle of empiricism, as described by Locke
[22]. This approach allowed for an analysis of the data to determine whether the maturity
level assessment models under investigation could be aligned with an IT management
area, which in this case is referred to as IT monitoring areas.
Even when the framework which the maturity level assessment models was based
could have more than just one IT area focus it was considered, to make possible the
application of the idea behind this proposed study and its resulted model, its main focus
(e.g.: CobiT® mentioned in the sequence of this paper).
Despite the availability of 26 maturity level assessment models, the aim was to main-
tain the framework within the limit of 12 IT monitoring areas. Detailed descriptions of
these models can be found in the ‘2. Solution Design/Projeto da Solução’ folder in the
provided link https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1sFa5845Wcx
r7KXQlH9hePXxN0WdRKchV?usp=sharing.
These findings led to the determination of the 12 IT monitoring areas considered by
the PI2M-ITGov. It is important to note that the references listed at the end of this work
provide the foundational understanding for readers. However, additional literature was
also researched to support the continuation of this study.
Two significant maturity models identified were ITIL®
(Information Technology In-
frastructure Library) by Axelos [3] and ITSCMM©
(Information Technology Service Ca-
pability Maturity Model) by Clerc & Niessink [6]. Both of these models pointed towards

--- PAGE 8 ---
822 Altino J. Mentzingen Moraes et al.
a set of assessments that could be categorized under a services management area, which
was subsequently renamed as the services monitoring area.
Furthermore, the CMMI©
(Capability Maturity Model Integration) of the SEI®
[34],
the Software Engineering Institute, as referenced by [1], and with strong alignment with
the Technical Standard 15.504 ISO/IEC [18], along with the MR MPS br©
(Reference
Model for Improvement of the Brazilian Software Process [Modelo de Referência para
Melhoria do Processo de Software Brasileiro]) by SOFTEX [36], were also investigated.
After conducting the research, these models were classified as relevant to the development
management area, which was then renamed as the development monitoring area.
The research also investigated the CobiT® (Control Objectives for Information and
Related Technology Maturity Model) from ISACA [17], referenced by Gartner [12], and
found that it specifically addresses the management of IT work processes. Similarly, the
TOGAF©(The Open Group Architecture Framework) from the OPEN GROUP was iden-
tified as relevant to the same area. Both models were categorized under a business man-
agement area, which will be renamed as the business monitoring area.
The exploration of the B-ITa©(Business–IT Alignment Maturity Model) by Tapia,
Daneva, Eck & Wieringa [38], EAG©(Enterprise Architecture Governance) by CIOIn-
dex [5], and ITGAP©(IT Governance Assessment Process) by Peterson [28] highlighted
the need for a governance management area specifically linked to IT. This area will be
renamed as the governance monitoring area in the context of this research.
The research also encompassed maturity models such as MMGP©(Project Manage-
ment Maturity Model) by Prado [30], OPM3©(Organizational Project Management Ma-
turityModel)fromPMI®[29],PMMM©(ProjectManagementMaturityModel)byKerzner
[19], and P3M3©(Portfolio, Program, and Project Management Maturity Model) by Ax-
elos [4]. These models were associated with project management, leading to the identifi-
cation of a projects management area, which will be renamed as the projects monitoring
area.
The investigation revealed a maturity model called OKA©(Organizational Knowl-
edge Assessment) presented by Fonseca [10], which mentioned the use of a software
application called SysOKA©(OKA – Organizational Knowledge Assessment System).
This model was classified as relevant to the knowledge management area, which will be
renamed as the knowledge monitoring area for the purpose of this work.
The maturity models SIMM©(Service Integration Maturity Model) by [2] and
SOAMM©(SOA©Maturity Model) by Sonic [37] were evaluated and identified as rele-
vant to the integration management area, which will be renamed as the integration moni-
toring area.
During the assessment of maturity models, the research identified the requirements
management area, which will be renamed as the requirements monitoring area, through
the exploration of the RMM©(Requirements Management Maturity Model) by Heumann
[14].
Further analysis of maturity models included the BPMM©
(Business Process Maturity Model) from OMG [26] and the BPMMM©(Business Pro-
cess Management Maturity Model) referenced by Tapio Hüffner [16]. These models were
associated with the processes management area, which will be renamed as the processes
monitoring area.

--- PAGE 9 ---
PI2M-ITGov – Panel of Indicators for Monitoring and Maintaining 823
Additionally, the EFQM©[9], the European Foundation for Quality Management and
the Six-Sigma©Maturity Model described by Prasad[31], were evaluated and found to
be relevant to the quality management area. This area will be renamed as the quality
monitoring area to align with the research terminology.
Theresearchcontinuedwiththeexplorationoftwomorematuritymodels:theBSIMM©
(Building Security in Maturity Model) from Synopsys [?] and the ISM3©(Information
Security Management Maturity Model) from the ISM3 Consortium [7]. Both models
were classified under the security management area, which will be renamed as the se-
curity monitoring area.
Furthermore, three additional maturity models were researched. The first model,
MMAST©(Automated Software Testing Maturity Model) by Mitchel Krause [20], the
second model, TMMi©(Test Maturity Model Integration) referenced in the TMMi – Test
Maturity Model Integration Foundation [40] link, and the third model, TOM©(Test Orga-
nization Maturity Model) by Systeme Evolutif Ltd. [23], were found to be relevant to the
tests management area. This area will be renamed as the tests monitoring area.
As a result of these research activities, Figure 5 was created, presenting the identified
maturity models that guided the definition of the 12 IT monitoring areas considered by the
PI2M-ITGov. Additionally, these 12 IT monitoring areas were categorized into 3 IT mon-
itoring groups for ease of interpretation and application of their activities: the planning
monitoring group, the execution monitoring group, and the control monitoring group.
Fig.5. The 12 monitoring areas considered by the PI2M-ITGov
After conducting the research and evaluating the requirements, it was determined that
the KMIs applicable to each of the 12 IT monitoring areas would be established in order to
achieve the highest maturity levels (ranging from 3 to 5) of the maturity level assessment
models considered.
4.2. The Scope of the 36 Sub-KMIs - Key Monitoring Sub Indicators
The GQ(I)M framework, developed by Goethert & Hayes [13], is widely recognized in
the literature as a valuable approach for constructing indicators. This framework follows a

--- PAGE 10 ---
824 Altino J. Mentzingen Moraes et al.
structured process consisting of four components: goal, question, indicator, and measure-
ment. Figure 6 exemplifies the workflow of this framework, illustrating its step-by-step
approach to indicator construction.
Fig.6. GQ(I)M – Goal, question, indicator, and measurement [13]
During the synthesis process following the research, it was observed that three re-
quirements were common and essential for attributing the highest maturity levels (rang-
ing from 3 to 5) of the maturity level assessment models considered. These requirements
were related to achieving satisfactory performance of activities, complying with schedule
and budget, and meeting quality requirements.
These three evaluation criteria also aligned with the proposal put forward by one of the
authors [3, p. 180–189] of this research in their doctoral thesis. They suggested reducing
the Likert [21] scale, which typically has five levels of evaluation, to just three levels
(referred to as the AJMM table) for greater precision in assessment. The three levels of
evaluation in the AJMM table were defined as: 1st = Ok, 2nd = Ok with Restriction, and
3rd = Not Ok.
In accordance with the previously mentioned indicator construction technique and the
planned approach, the assembly of the three sub-KMIs for each of the 12 IT monitoring
areaswascarriedoutasfollows:onesub-KMIfortheassessmentofworkresults,onesub-
KMI for the assessment of delivery commitment, and one sub-KMI for the assessment of
customer satisfaction.
The following section presents the content of the three sub-KMIs, which are replicated
for each of the 12 identified IT monitoring areas. The placeholder ‘???’ will be replaced
by the monitoring area code ranging from 1 to 12:
It is apparent that sub-indicator 1, WR, has the least demanding requirements among
the three sub-indicators. Sub-indicator 2, DC, has moderate requirements, as it establishes
thatthevolumeofsub-indicator1,WR,hasfulfilleditsrestriction.Ontheotherhand,sub-

--- PAGE 11 ---
PI2M-ITGov – Panel of Indicators for Monitoring and Maintaining 825
KMI ?? – 1. WR (work result) = Percentage of work concluded.
KMI ?? – 2. DC (delivery commitment) = Percentage of work concluded and delivered on
schedule planned and within the estimated cost.
KMI ?? – 3. CS (customer satisfaction) = Percentage of work concluded and delivered on
schedule planned and within the estimated cost,
which in addition, received the definitive
acceptance (and not provisional).
indicator 3, CS, is the most demanding, as it requires the cumulative fulfillment of both
the volumes of sub-indicator 1, WR, and sub-indicator 2, DC.
5. Solution Validation
Following the principles of DSR, the next step, step 3, involves ‘solution validation’. This
step focuses on planning the implementation of the solution designed in step 2.
To calculate the sub-KMI, which represents the resulting data as a percentage for the
KMI %, the following equation can be utilized.
X
inspected numbers − m

maximum goal − minimum goal
2

= ×
100%
m
where:
P
= Summationm = Average
The ‘
P
inspected numbers’ data implies that it may be necessary to aggregate indi-
vidual values for the same area/sector or across multiple areas/sectors if the time unit of
the maximum goal and minimum goal differs from the volume being inspected for these
data.
The maximum goal can be a smaller value than the total of an existing value in prac-
tical reality, which will be considered as the expected achievement for the KMI, or it can
even be a larger value than the existing total in the real world.
Conversely, the minimum goal can be a greater value than the total of an existing value
in practical reality, which will be considered as the accepted achievement for the KMI, or
it can even be a smaller value than the existing total in the real world.
It is important to note that both the maximum goal and the minimum goal should be
provided as quantitative numerical values rather than percentages. This approach is more
feasible and simpler for obtaining this data.
If there are changes in the maximum goal and/or the minimum goal for certain KMIs,
these changes should be considered simultaneously within the same time period. This
ensures an equal assessment and allows for comparisons across different scenarios.
The balance for all KMIs is determined by the arithmetic average of the maximum
goal and the minimum goal, also known as the maximum–minimum average. This aver-
age is compared with the ‘inspected numbers’ data, which enables evaluation of the KMI

--- PAGE 12 ---
826 Altino J. Mentzingen Moraes et al.
against this criterion for the entire PI2M-ITGov framework. Based on this comparison,
there are two interpretations: A KMI greater than 0 indicates a positive percentage cal-
culated above the maximum–minimum Average, while a KMI smaller than 0 indicates a
negative percentage calculated below the maximum–minimum average.
The interpretation of the KMI calculated as 0% would be that the data ‘inspected num-
bers’ remained exactly at the maximum–minimum average, and therefore, there was no
positive or negative result. As a sample of a hypothetical example, we can say that for a
maximum goal established as 8 and a minimum goal established as 4, which would result
in a maximum–minimum average equal to 6: 1) if the data ‘inspected numbers’ were 6
the KMI would be 0%; 2) if the data ‘inspected numbers’ were 3 the KMI would be –50%
which demonstrates a negative result, falling halfway below the maximum–minimum av-
erage; 3) if the data ‘inspected numbers’ were 9 the KMI would be 50% which demon-
strates a positive result, exceeding the maximum–minimum average by half.
According to this logic, in the casedescribed in the previous paragraph, the percentage
of 100% of the KMI would only be calculated when the value of the data ‘inspected
numbers’ was equal to 12, which is the sum of the maximum goal and the minimum goal.
Under this same logic, positive percentages greater than 100% can be calculated when the
value of the data ‘Inspected Numbers’ is greater than 12.
When the value of the data ‘inspected numbers’ is equal to 0, the KMI percentage
will be negative and equal to –100%. It is not common or normal for the data ‘inspected
numbers’ to have a negative value. However, in certain cases where it is necessary to
account for previous poor results or ‘debit’ them in the current evaluation, this scenario
could be plausible. In such cases, the KMI will be negative and lower than just 100%.
In some companies that operate in different industries or sectors, the evaluation and
score of a specific IT Monitoring Area among the 12 treated areas may be considered
more important than the values calculated for the other areas. This prioritization can vary
depending on the nature of the business and the specific needs and goals of the company.
For instance, a company in the communication sector (such as a newspaper or mag-
azine) may place greater emphasis on the sub-KMIs focused on knowledge management
(IT monitoring area code = KMI 6). Conversely, a company in the financial sector (such
as banks or loan institutions) may prioritize the sub-KMIs focused on security manage-
ment (IT monitoring area code = KMI 11). Similarly, a company in the manufacturing
sector (such as a factory or assembly plant) may attach more significance to the sub-KMIs
focused on project management (IT monitoring area code = KMI 3).
To account for the varying significance of different KMIs in distinct scenarios, sig-
nificance weights can be assigned to highlight the importance of one KMI over another
during the comparison process. Therefore, the final formula used by PI2M-ITGov for cal-
culating the KMI percentage will be modified to include the application of significance
weights (represented as the letter ‘W’ in the equation):
X
inspected numbers − m

maximum goal − minimum goal
2

= ×
100%
m
× W2
or: W3
]

--- PAGE 13 ---
PI2M-ITGov – Panel of Indicators for Monitoring and Maintaining 827
It is important to note that the KMI (final) and its sub-indicators are calculated with
one decimal place. This precision is necessary because in decision-making processes, the
decimal place can hold significant information that differentiates similar values.
A small spreadsheet has been created to simulate this formula and can be accessed in
the folder ‘3. Solution Validation/Validação da Solução’ in the link https://drive.
google.com/drive/folders/1sFa5845Wcxr7KXQlH9hePXxN0WdRKchV
?usp=sharing.
This spreadsheet allows for the exercise of the hypothetical example mentioned ear-
lier, with a maximum goal of 8, a minimum goal of 4, and data ‘inspected numbers’ of 6,
3, and 9, resulting in KMI percentages of 0%, –50%, and 50%, respectively.
6. Solution Implementation
Step 4 of the DSR, referred to as ‘solution implementation’, requires exercising the so-
lution theory and implementing the constructed models (from the prior step 3). This in-
volves applying and evaluating the created artefacts (spreadsheet and guidelines) in a real
operational environment.
To facilitate the assessment of IT governance in a given situation using the PI2M-
ITGov assessment, two artefacts have been developed and are available for use in the
folder ‘4. Solution Implementation/Implementação da Solução’ in the link https://
drive.google.com/drive/folders/1sFa5845Wcxr7KXQlH9hePXxN0W
dRKchV?usp=sharing.
These artefacts include the MS®
Excel spreadsheet entitled ‘PI2M-ITGov - Spread-
sheet {V.01c}’ Edition= +Scenario= ’ and the accompanying guide-
lines ‘PI2M-ITGov - Guidelines {V.01c}’. The guidelines provide instructions on how to
complete the spreadsheet and interpret its results.
In the same link, you will also find the form for each KMI, which consists of two
frames. The first frame is used to record the goals established during the evaluation plan-
ning phase in collaboration with the strategic management department. The second frame
is used to record the actual data captured in the field during the execution phase of the
PI2M-ITGov evaluation.
To facilitate identification, it is suggested to copy the fields ‘Edition’ and ‘Scenario’
from the spreadsheet’s header to the file name, which will help in organizing and identi-
fying the content of the spreadsheet in the directory or archive folder.
The layout of the cells in the MS®-Excel spreadsheet follows the predefined order
of the 12 IT monitoring areas, divided into the three IT monitoring groups: planning
monitoring group, execution monitoring group, and control monitoring group.
The current version of these artefacts, at the time of publication of this article, is
V.01c, representing the third revision (letter ‘c’) of the first version (number ‘01’). Further
updates and improvements may be made available in the same link following subsequent
revisions.
The previous revisions (letters ‘a’ and ‘b’) were identified during the execution of the
fifth and final stage of the DSR, which will be presented in the next topic. This stage
involved a case study conducted over three rounds until reaching the current version in
the third and final round.

--- PAGE 14 ---
828 Altino J. Mentzingen Moraes et al.
Appendix A of this article presents the four main tabs of the MS® Excel spreadsheet.
The first tab displays the data entry cells, while the other three tabs contain graphs for
interpreting the results. The ‘INSTRUCTIONS’ tabs, which provide guidance on data
entry and analysis of status icons, are not displayed.
It is important to note that the instructions provided in the ‘PI2M-ITGov - Guidelines
V.01c’ document are based on the results obtained from simulating the implementation of
this method in a real corporate environment, as described in Section 7, ‘Implementation
Assessment’.
Appendix B of this paper showcases the Chronogram (created in MS® Project) used
to coordinate the execution of step 4 of the DSR. This chronogram is available in the same
link under the folder ‘4. Solution Implementation/Implementação da Solução’. Although
it is already filled, it can be copied and reused, as it provides average duration data for the
tasks that can be replicated.
7. Implementation Assessment
In the final step of the DSR, step 5, known as ‘implementation assessment’, the results
obtained from the previous step 4 were interpreted and examined to determine the utility
and applicability of the proposed solution from step 3.
To assess the effectiveness of the solution, a simulation was conducted in a Brazilian
Government Agency, consisting of three rounds. The outcomes of this simulation were
utilized in the development of the guidelines, as mentioned earlier, which can be accessed
through the provided link.
Theresultsobtainedfromthesimulationarepresentedinthespreadsheettitled‘PIM2-
GovTI - Spreadsheet V.01c Edition=2021 2nd.Quarter+Scenario=Organizational Restruc-
turing’availableinthefolder‘5.ImplementationAssessment/AvaliaçãodaImplementação’
in the link https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1sFa5845Wcxr7
KXQlH9hePXxN0WdRKchV?usp=sharing.
Additionally, in the same link, a form for each KMI (KMI Form) with two frames is
available where the first frame captures the goals defined during the evaluation planning
phase in collaboration with the Strategic Management Department, as part of the applica-
tion of the PI2M-ITGov method. The second frame records the actual data collected in the
field from the business areas during the execution phase of the PI2M-ITGov evaluation.
The 3rd. and final round of this simulation, was to evaluate the 2nd. Quarter of the
assessment year and, in this quarter, this assessment was performed at a time when the
Company was undergoing Organizational Restructuring.
There are comments, in the above Spreadsheet, where this scenario was described
and where is possible to be understood that even with this issue the Method could be
implemented and retrieve extra-results those were applied to support decision about this
Organizational Restructuring in progress.
Following the Chronogram (created in MS® Project) used to coordinate the execution
of step 4 of the DSR (which is available in the same link under the folder ‘4. Solution
Implementation/Implementação da Solução’ and presented in the Appendix B) this sim-
ulation handles the numbers exposed in the Figure 7 when was applied the KMI Form.
Many interpretations, which led the need of immediate corrective actions, could be
found analyzing the results in the spreadsheet titled ‘PIM2-GovTI - Spreadsheet V.01c

--- PAGE 15 ---
PI2M-ITGov – Panel of Indicators for Monitoring and Maintaining 829
Fig.7. Numbers retrieved from Final Simulation
Edition=20212nd.Quarter+Scenario=OrganizationalRestructuring’availableinthefolder
‘5. Implementation Assessment/Avaliação da Implementação’ in the link https://dr
ive.google.com/drive/folders/1sFa5845Wcxr7KXQlH9hePXxN0WdR
KchV?usp=sharing.
Those corrective actions were discussed with the Board of Directors of the Brazilian
Government Agency, where this simulation and assessment were applied, during the 4th.
Phase = Evaluation of the Chronogram (created in MS® Project which is available in the
same link under the folder ‘4. Solution Implementation/Implementação da Solução’ and
presented in the Appendix B)
One of the interpretations about the KMI 1 - Processes is that this Processes had a
high level of Production with 100% in the Sub-KMI 1. WR (work result) but with many
difficulties to get the values for the Sub-KMI 2. DC (delivery commitment) and 3. CS
(customer satisfaction), what of course, impacted indeed the analysis that could be made
by the Strategic Area.
Other of them is according to KMI 6 - Knowledge which the evaluation shown that
this Processes had no procedures implemented in this theme, what can be interpreted that
the Organization in assessment is losing the monitoring of its successful actions to register
these and reuse as practical and useful feedback.
Also, could be found that the KMI 11 - Security, even this Process having a very high
importance for a effective IT Governance, was impossible to be defined and the explana-
tion for that was: “All 3 Subindicators of this KMI will be evaluated only in the next Time
Period as this Security Area is in the process of reviewing the Internal Processes.” (as is
in the comments in the Spreadsheet).
Regarding the KMI 3 - Projects must be highlighted that its 3 Sub-KMIs, what means
1. WR (work result), the Sub-KMI 2. DC (delivery commitment) and 3. CS (customer
satisfaction), had these 3 ones done under the expectations and can be considered as a
successful Process all concluded.

--- PAGE 16 ---
830 Altino J. Mentzingen Moraes et al.
These above interpretations were consistent with the evaluation obtained in the KMI 4
- Governance where the Sub-KMI 3. CS (customer satisfaction) had a negative value even
with the follow explanation which can justify this grade but drive to reinterpret this result:
“The Division Manager justified the very low value of the 3. SC above due to the large
number of his Customers on vacation or on leave that still could not assess the Degree of
Satisfaction of the reports delivered.” (as is in the comments in the Spreadsheet).
Theguidelinesprovidedinthelinkserveasapracticalresourceforunderstandinghow
the simulation was conducted, in addition to being a tool for applying the PI2M-ITGov
method.
As mentioned in the initial summary of this research work, the PI2M-ITGov method
can be utilized to (1) assess the performance status of an IT area. Furthermore, it can
also be used to (2) compare the results of suppliers as a means of supporting decision-
making, particularly in the context of proof of concept (POC) evaluations for contracting
or renewing commercial agreements.
The MS® Excel spreadsheet discussed earlier primarily focuses on objective (1) men-
tioned above. However, to address objective (2) and provide an immediate assessment of
a POC, the PI2M-ITGov KMIs can be applied in the manner depicted in Figure 8 (for
evaluating service provider enterprises in the field of systems development, specifically
as a software factory [FSW]) and Figure 9 (for evaluating service provider enterprises in
the field of project management, particularly as a project management office [PMO]).
Fig.8. Example of proof of concept (POC) to build a comparative framework in system
development
Fig.9. Example of POC - Proof of Concept to build a Comparative Framework in Project
Management

--- PAGE 17 ---
PI2M-ITGov – Panel of Indicators for Monitoring and Maintaining 831
In both examples, the assessment of sub-indicator 2. DC should focus solely on the
deadline criterion, excluding the cost criterion. In a POC evaluation, cost evaluation is not
typically a common factor.
Furthermore, in both examples, regarding sub-indicator 3. CS, the term ‘customer’
represents the evaluation committee responsible for applying the final acceptance criteria
for the POC presented by the assessed supplier.
For these examples, the maximum goal and minimum goal for the KMIs should be
the same. Since the POC has a short duration and aims to achieve a specific outcome,
the maximum goal and minimum goal reflect the singular target value that the evaluated
supplier must meet.
8. Future Work
This article limited its approach in retrieve data and analyzes results from how the IT
Governance, in a specific Organization, are being conducted – with the target – to gain
able time to realign deliveries and expectation, based in the status obtained with a precise
monitoring, before a massive control and auditing are not yet necessary in fact.
Nevertheless,wecanexpandthisapproachtocomparetheresultobtainedbyaspecific
Organization with another to sort its ranking, what means, transforming PI2M-ITGov
Method into a real MM - Maturity Model itself acting in distinct Organizations.
As a first step, we can think (as an initial idea) of creating a ranking with Gold, Silver
and Bronze levels, what will drive us to need to define the maximum and minimum range
grade for each Level according to each 36 sub-KMIs results.
In the sequence of this new approach implementation, it is necessary to establish cri-
teria (such as: Capital Amount, Employes Number, Type of Business Finance; Industry;
Services, Capillarization (Local; National; Intl), and other points) for sorting the Organi-
zations in Small, Medium and Big sizes, so it will be possible compare different scenarios
and apply an ”Adjustment Weight” in order to equalize the grades obtained and attributes
the correct Gold, Silver and Bronze level.
If this idea will be put in practice, of course, a new article will be built and explaining
how it was done in details and how to use the new approach of PI2M-ITGov Method as
a MM - Maturity Model between different Organizations to obtain a unique Pannel of
Statistics.”
9. Conclusion
This research adhered to the principles of a scientific method by following the steps of
DSR, including the application of a case study consisting of three simulation rounds to
validate the constructs and artefacts created (guidelines and spreadsheet).
Based on the evaluation, it can be concluded that the PI2M-ITGov, which is a panel of
indicators for monitoring and maintaining IT governance, effectively serves as a practical
tool for executing the necessary procedures in IT management.
While the PI2M-ITGov was constructed in a structured manner, its continued use
and feedback from users will likely lead to new versions with added functionalities and
improvements.

--- PAGE 18 ---
832 Altino J. Mentzingen Moraes et al.
The author welcomes and appreciates users who provide feedback and share their
experiences in using the PI2M-ITGov. This feedback will contribute to enhancing the
quality of the method.
It is recommended to periodically check the provided link for any new updates or
revisions that can be downloaded.
Furthermore, the author encourages future contacts and assures that any inquiries will
be handled with care and attention. The author is dedicated to guiding interested indi-
viduals in implementing the PI2M-ITGov in their organizations and providing necessary
support to ensure the success of this initiative.
Acknowledgments. Partial financial support was received from ITMA - Information and Technol-
ogy Management Association for sponsoring the proofreading revision costs.
References
1. Ahern, D.M., Clouse, A., Turner, R.: CMMI Distilled – A Practical Introduction to Integrated
Process Improvement. 2nd ed. Pearson Education Inc., Boston, Massachusetts, USA (2002)
2. Arsanjani, A., Holley, K.: The Service Integration Maturity Model: Achieving Flexibility
in the Transformation to SOA©, Services Computing, IEEE International Conference on,
p.515, IEEE International Conference on Services Computing (SCC’06), ISBN: 0-7695-2670-
5. Chicago, Illinois, USA, Sep 18–22 (2006)
3. Axelos: ITIL® Foundation: ITIL 4 Edition. Axelos Ltd. (2022), https://www.axelos.c
om/best-practice-solutions/itil
4. Axelos: P3M3 – Portfolio, Programme and Project Management Maturity Model. Axelos Ltd.
(2022), https://www.axelos.com/best-practice-solutions/p3m3
5. CIOIndex: EAG© – Enterprise Architecture Governance. CIOIndex – Global Community For
Chief Information Officers (2022), https://cio-wiki.org/wiki/Enterprise_Ar
chitecture_Governance
6. Clerc, V., Niessink, F.: IT Service CMM, A Pocket Guide. Van Haren Publishing, Holland
(2005)
7. Consortium, I.: Information Security Management Maturity Model., chap. ISM3 Consortium
- Creative Commons Attribution. ISM3 Consortium - Creative Commons Attribution, ISBN:
978-54-611-9825-2. San Francisco, California, USA (2007)
8. Dresch, A., Lacerda, D.P., Antunes Jr., J.A.V.: Design Science Research: Research Method for
Advancing Science and Technology (Método de Pesquisa para Avanço da Ciência e Tecnolo-
gia). Bookman, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil (2015)
9. EFQM©: The Fundamental Concepts of Excellence. European Foundation for Quality Man-
agement (2022), https://www.onecaribbean.org/wp-content/uploads/Fun
damental-Concepts-of-EFQM.pdf
10. Fonseca, A.F.: Organizational Knowledge Assessment Methodology. World Bank Institute,
Washington, DC, USA (2006)
11. Fontelles, M.J., Simões, M.G., Farias, S.H., Simões, R.G.: Scientific Research Methodology –
Guidelines for Elaboration of a Research Protocol. Cercomp, Brazil (2009)
12. Gartner, G.: CobiT® – Control Objectives for Information and Related Technology. Gartner
Group (2022), https://www.gartner.com/en/information-technology/gl
ossary/cobit-control-objectives-for-information-and-related-t
echnology
13. Goethert, W., Hayes, W.: Experiences in implementing measurement programs. Technical note,
Software Engineering Measurement and Analysis Initiative, SEI® – Software Engineering In-
stitute (2001), CMU/SEI-2001-TN-026, NOV

--- PAGE 19 ---
PI2M-ITGov – Panel of Indicators for Monitoring and Maintaining 833
14. Heumann, J.: The Five Levels of Requirements Management Maturity – Rational Software
(2022), https://pt.slideshare.net/ibmrational/the-five-levels-o
f-requirements-management-maturity
15. Hevner, A.: A Three Cycle View of Design Science Research. Scandinavian Journal of Infor-
mation Systems 19(2), 4 (2007)
16. Hüffner, T.: The BPM® Maturity Model – Towards A Framework for Assessing the Business
Process Management Maturity of Organizations. GRIN Verlag, Munich, Germany (2007)
17. ISACA: CobiT® – Control Objectives for Information and Related Technology. Information
Systems Audit and Control Association (2022), https://www.isaca.org/resource
s/cobit
18. ISO/IEC: 15.504 – Process assessment – Part 5: An Exemplar Software Life Cycle Process
Assessment Model. International Organization for Standardization (2022), https://www.
iso.org/standard/60555.html
19. Kerzner, H.: Using the Project Management Maturity Model: Strategic Planning for Project
Management, 2nd ed. John Wiley & Sons Inc, New York, NY, USA (2004)
20. Krause, H.M.: A maturity model for automated software testing. Medical Device & Diagnostic
Industry Magazine (1994), mDDI Article Index
21. Likert, R.: A technique for the measurement of attitudes. Archives of Psychology 140, 1–55
(1932)
22. Locke, J.: The Works of John Locke: An Essay Concerning Human Understanding. Halcyon
Classics – Kindle Edition, Jun-23 (2009)
23. Ltd., S.E.: Test Organization Maturity Questionnaire V2.0. Systeme Evolutif Ltd, Gloucester
House, 57/59 – Gloucester Place, London, England (2000)
24. Moraes, A.J.M.: M2A3-GovTI Proposal – Maturity Model for Analysis of the Alignment
of Activities Related to Governance of Technology of Information in Accordance with the
Outcome Expectations Planned by the Organization (Proposta do M2A3-GovTI – Modelo
de Maturidade para Análise do Alinhamento das Atividades relacionadas à Governança da
Tecnologia da Informação em conformidade com as expectativas de resultado planejadas pela
Organização). Doctoral thesis, Stricto-Sensu Postgraduate Program in Production Engineering
Doctorate. UNIP – Paulist University, São Paulo, SP, Brazil (2010)
25. Moraes, A.J.M., Rocha, M.R.: IT Management: Proposal of the PI2M-ITGov - Panel of Indi-
cators for Monitoring and Maintaining IT Governance: Research and Model (2023), https:
//ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10211818
26. OMG: BPMM® – Business Process Maturity Model. Object Management Group (2022), ht
tp://www.omg.org/spec/BPMM/1.0/PDF
27. Peffers, K., Tuunanen, T., Rothenberger, M.A., Chatterjee, S.: A design science research
methodology for information systems research. Journal of Management Information Systems
24(3), 45–77 (2007)
28. Peterson, R.: Crafting Information Technology Governance. Taylor & Francis Online (2022),
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1201/1078/44705.21.4.20
040901/84183.2
29. PMI®: OPM3® – Organizational Project Management Maturity Model. Project Management
Institute (2022), https://www.gartner.com/en/information-technology/
glossary/cobit-control-objectives-for-information-and-related
-technology
30. Prado, D.: MMGP – A Brazilian Model of Project Management Maturity (Um Modelo
Brasileiro de Maturidade em Gerenciamento de Projetos). Ponto GP (2005), http://po
ntogp.wordpress.com/2006/05/06/mmgp
31. Prasad, R.: Maturity Model Describes Stages of Six-Sigma® Evolution. iSixSigma (2010),
https://www.isixsigma.com/basics/maturity-model-describes-sta
ges-six-sigma-evolution/

--- PAGE 20 ---
834 Altino J. Mentzingen Moraes et al.
32. Rockart, J.F., Earl, M.J., Ross, J.W.: Eight imperatives for the new it organization. Sloan Man-
agement Review 38(1), 43–55 (Fall 1996)
33. Rundle, R.: Deming Cycle PDCA – Plan Do Check Act Journal in Daily Life Toyota Way.
Independently Published (2019)
34. SEI®: CMMI® – Capability Maturity Model Integration. Software Engineering Institute
(2022), https://resources.sei.cmu.edu/asset_files/TechnicalRep
ort/2010_005_001_15287.pdf
35. Simon, H.A.: The Sciences of the Artificial. 3rd ed. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts,
MA, USA (1996)
36. SOFTEX: MR MPS br®: Reference Model for Brazilian Software Process Improvement
(Modelo de Referência para Melhoria do Processo de Software Brasileiro). Softex (2022),
http://www.softex.br/mpsbr/_guias/default.asp/
37. Sonic: The New SOA® Maturity Model. Sonic Software Corporation, AmberPoint Inc., Bear-
ingPoint Inc., Systinet Corporation. All rights reserved (2005)
38. Tapi, R.S., Daneva, M., Eck, P., Wieringa, R.J.: B-ITa – Business-IT Alignment Maturity
Model. University of Twente (2022), https://research.utwente.nl/en/pub
lications/towards-a-business-it-alignment-maturity-model-for-c
ollaborative
39. Tesla, N.: Map of Multiplication. Unicentro, Paraná, PR, Brazil (2021), https://www3.u
nicentro.br/petfisica/2017/05/18/o-mapa-da-multiplicacao-de-t
esla/
40. TMMi: Test Maturity Model Integration. TMMi Foundation (2023), https://www.tmmi
.org/tmmi-documents/
41. Weill, P.: The relationship between investment in information technology and firm perfor-
mance: A study of the valve manufacturing sector. Information Systems Research 3(4), 307–
333 (Dec 1992)
42. Wieringa, R.J.: Design Science Methodology for Information Systems and Software Engineer-
ing. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Germany (2014)

--- PAGE 21 ---
PI2M-ITGov – Panel of Indicators for Monitoring and Maintaining 835
Appendix A: MS® Excel Spreadsheet of PI2M-ITGov

--- PAGE 22 ---
836 Altino J. Mentzingen Moraes et al.
Appendix B: MS® Project ‘Assessment of the PI2M-ITGov’
Altino Moraes holds the title of Ph.D. in Production Engineering (with emphasis in In-
formation Systems), M.Sc. in Information Management, and BCs in Information Tech-
nology. He also developed Post Doctoral Research with an IT Governance focus. Addi-
tionally, he has two lato-sensu courses: one MBA in Project Financial Management and
one Specialization in System Analysis. He is certified in five Technical Certifications ap-
plied to the IT Area (CobiT, ITIL, PMI, ISTQB, and ABPMP). He is a Researcher at the
ADVANCE (the ISEG Centre for Advanced Research in Management at the University of

--- PAGE 23 ---
PI2M-ITGov – Panel of Indicators for Monitoring and Maintaining 837
Lisbon). He is a member of Scientific Committees in congresses sponsored by IIIS - In-
ternational Institute of Informatics and Systemics, ITMA - Information and Technology
Management Association and AISTI - Iberian Association of Information Systems and
Technologies. He often participates in Conferences related to the IT Area and publishes
in its Proceedings. Besides, he has been participating in books (as coeditor/coauthors) dis-
tributed by IGI Global. He is also a Brazilian Government Employee currently allocated
to MGI - Ministério da Gestão e Inovação (Management and Innovation Ministry).
Álvaro Rocha holds the title of Honorary Professor, and holds a D.Sc. in Information
Science, Ph.D. in Information Systems and Technologies, M.Sc. in Information Manage-
ment, and BCs in Computer Science. He is a Professor of Information Systems at the
University of Lisbon - ISEG, researcher at the ADVANCE (the ISEG Centre for Ad-
vanced Research in Management), and a collaborator researcher at both LIACC (Labo-
ratory of Artificial Intelligence and Computer Science) and CINTESIS (Center for Re-
search in Health Technologies and Information Systems). His main research interests
are maturity models, information systems quality, online service quality, requirements
engineering, intelligent information systems, e-Government, e-Health, and information
technology in education. He is also Vice-Chair of the IEEE Portugal Section Systems,
Man, and Cybernetics Society Chapter, and Founder and Editor-in-Chief of two Scopus
and SCIMago journals: JISEM - Journal of Information Systems Engineering & Man-
agement; and RISTI - Revista Ibérica de Sistemas e Tecnologias de Informação / Iberian
Journal of Information Systems and Technologies. Moreover, he has served as Vice-Chair
of Experts for the European Commission’s Horizon 2020 Program, and as an Expert at
the COST - intergovernmental framework for European Cooperation in Science and Tech-
nology, at the European Commission’s Horizon Europe Program, at the Government of
Italy’s Ministry of Universities and Research, at the Government of Latvia’s Ministry of
Finance, at the Government of Mexico’s National Council of Science and Technology, at
the Government of Polish’s National Science Centre, and at the Government of Cyprus’s
Research and Innovation Foundation.World’s Top 0.05% Scientist, according to Schol-
arGPS. World’s Top 1% Scientist, according to Stanford University and Elsevier. World’s
Top 1% Scientist, according to ResearchGate. ISEM’s Book Series Scientific Manager
at Springer Nature: https://www.springer.com/series/17396. Chair of ITMA - Informa-
tion and Technology Management Association: http://itmas.org. Founder and Vice-Chair
of IEEE SMC Portugal Chapter. Invited Full Professor at University of Calabria, Italy.
Honorary Professor at Amity University, India. Professor of Information Systems, ISEG,
University of Lisbon, Portugal.
Received: July 29, 2024; Accepted: January 12, 2025.

--- PAGE 24 ---
