--- PAGE 1 ---
 1 Nadhamuni S, et al. BMJ Global Health 2021;6:e005242. doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2021-005242
Driving digital transformation of
comprehensive primary health services
at scale in India: an enterprise
architecture framework
Sunita Nadhamuni,1
Oommen John ‍ ‍ ,2
Mallari Kulkarni,1
Eshan Nanda,1
Sethuraman Venkatraman,3
Devesh Varma,4
Satchit Balsari ‍ ‍ ,5,6
Nachiket Gudi,7
Shantidev Samantaray,1
Haritha Reddy,8
Vikas Sheel9
Practice
To cite: Nadhamuni S, John O,
Kulkarni M, et al. Driving
digital transformation of
comprehensive primary health
services at scale in India:
an enterprise architecture
framework. BMJ Global Health
2021;6:e005242. doi:10.1136/
bmjgh-2021-005242
Handling editor Seye Abimbola
► ► Additional supplemental
material is published online only.
To view, please visit the journal
online (http://​dx.​doi.​org/​10.​
1136/​bmjgh-​2021-​005242).
Received 3 February 2021
Revised 2 April 2021
Accepted 5 April 2021
For numbered affiliations see
end of article.
Correspondence to
Sunita Nadhamuni;
​sunita.​nadhamuni@​dell.​com
© Author(s) (or their
employer(s)) 2021. Re-­ use
permitted under CC BY-­ NC. No
commercial re-­ use. See rights
and permissions. Published by
BMJ.
ABSTRACT
InitscommitmenttowardsSustainableDevelopmentGoals,
Indiaenvisagescomprehensiveprimaryhealthservicesasa
keypillarinachievinguniversalhealthcoverage.Embedded
insiloedverticalprogrammes,theirlackofinteroperability
andstandardisationlimitssustainabilityandhencetheir
benefitshavenotbeenrealisedyet.Weproposeanenterprise
architectureframeworkthatovercomesthesechallenges
andoutlinearobustfuturisticdigitalhealthinfrastructurefor
deliveryofefficientandeffectivecomprehensiveprimary
healthcare.Coreprinciplesofanenterpriseplatform
architecturecoveringfourplatformleverstofacilitateseamless
servicedelivery,monitorprogrammaticperformanceand
facilitateresearchinthecontextofprimaryhealthcareare
listed.Afederatedarchitecturesupportsthecustomneeds
ofstatesandhealthprogrammesthroughstandardisation
anddecentralisationtechniques.Interoperabilitydesign
principlesenableintegrationbetweendisparateinformation
technologysystemstoensurecontinuumofcareacrossreferral
pathways.Aresponsivedataarchitecturemeetshighvolume
andqualityrequirementsofdataaccessibilityincompliance
withregulatoryrequirements.Securityandprivacybydesign
underscoretheimportanceofbuildingtrustthroughrole-­ based
access,stronguserauthenticationmechanisms,robustdata
managementpracticesandconsent.Theproposedframework
willempowerprogrammemanagerswithareadyreference
toolkitfordesigning,implementingandevaluatingprimary
careplatformsforlarge-­ scaledeployment.Inthecontextof
healthandwellnesscentres,buildingaresponsive,resilientand
reliableenterprisearchitecturewouldbeafundamentalpath
towardsstrengtheninghealthsystemsleveragingdigitalhealth
interventions.Anenterprisearchitectureforprimarycareisthe
foundationalbuildingblockforanefficientnationaldigitalhealth
ecosystem.Ascitizenstakeownershipoftheirhealth,futuristic
digitalinfrastructureattheprimarycarelevelwilldeterminethe
health-­ seekingbehaviourandutilisationtrajectoryofthenation.
INTRODUCTION
Primary healthcare (PHC) entails the provi-
sion of holistic person-­ centred services
comprising health promotion, disease
prevention, health maintenance and the
diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic
illnesses, to help maintain physical, mental
and social well-­ being.1
Evidence from low
Summary box
► ► Portability of health information is critical for ensur-
ing continuum of care and improving health out-
comes at the primary care setting.
► ► Digital health tools to strengthen primary healthcare
services are widely implemented across vertical
healthcare delivery programmes in many low and
middle-­ income country settings including India.
► ► Stand-­ alone mHealth applications have been
deployed across vertical programmes for non-­
communicable diseases, tuberculosis and maternal
and child health, under the National Health Mission
in India.
► ► The wider benefits of digitisation of the primary
healthcare services have not been fully realised due
to lack of interoperability, standardisation and scal-
ability of these applications.
► ► Efficiency, quality and coverage can be significantly
enhanced when digital health infrastructure is im-
plemented incorporating the core principles of an
enterprise platform architecture covering four plat-
form levers to facilitate seamless service delivery,
monitor programmatic performance and facilitate
research in the context of primary healthcare.
► ► An enterprise architecture framework that address-
es these key requirements and envisages a futuristic
platform approach for a robust digital health infra-
structure that would serve as a backbone for deliv-
ery of efficient and effective comprehensive primary
healthcare.
► ► A federated architecture as proposed taking into
consideration the local contexts that vary across
the different states will enable scalability through
standardisation best practices and decentralisation
techniques in the context of comprehensive primary
care through the health and wellness centres there-
by contributing to the essential building blocks of the
national digital health infrastructure.
BMJ Global Health: first published as 10.1136/bmjgh-2021-005242 on 26 July 2021. Downloaded from https://gh.bmj.com on 7 July 2026 by guest.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

--- PAGE 2 ---
2 Nadhamuni S, et al. BMJ Global Health 2021;6:e005242. doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2021-005242
BMJ Global Health
and middle-­ income countries (LMIC) demonstrates that
strengthening PHC results in improved health outcomes,
and helps achieve universal healthcare.2 3
The universal delivery of primary care is hampered
by human and material resource constraints that can be
substantially mitigated by strategic application of techno-
logical solutions. LMICs like India have been challenged
with low investment,4
insufficient human resources with
only 20.6 doctors per 10000 population, of which 70%
are employed in the private sector.5
This is exacerbated
by low digital literacy and infrastructural issues.6 7
Globally, we have seen the development of meaningful
electronic data platforms that can support a range of
services including universally accessible personal health
records for patients, consolidated diagnostic reports and
decisionsupporttoolsforproviders,qualityimprovement
data for administrators and critical epidemiological data
to public health practitioners.8
However, fragmentation
of the solution space, lack of scalability, limited config-
urability and weak security and privacy frameworks limit
the potential of technology in advancing comprehensive
PHC in India.9 10
India’s flagship health scheme, Ayushman Bharat,
seeks to deliver comprehensive PHC through a package
of 12 distinct primary health services offered at 150000
health and wellness centres (HWC) across India.11
These
services are delivered via a range of vertical programmes
each with varying levels of information technology (IT)
development.12
The national IT solutions for reproduc-
tive and child health (RCH), non-­ communicable diseases
(NCD) and tuberculosis (TB) replicate the silos of their
parent programmes. This fragmentation places a heavy
burden on health workers by duplicating data collection
and reporting. It precludes the patient or provider from
having access to a comprehensive picture of the patient’s
health.13
A plethora of technology pilots across health systems
in India have exacerbated the fragmentation and have
proved to be highly unsustainable.9 14
App developers
spend significant resources on duplicating foundational
components like facility and user registries, authentica-
tion protocols and collecting consent which are neither
standardised nor easily available. The lack of reliable
internet connectivity necessitates all software solutions
to support offline functioning which exponentially
increases their technical complexity. The sheer volume
of patients and providers warrants high-­ performance,
scalable systems fit for concurrent use by tens of thou-
sands of users.
Health system structures and workflows along with
clinical protocols are also constantly evolving and are
continually modified to suit the unique administrative
context and needs of local governments. Most digital
health solutions are not engineered to adapt rapidly to
dynamic changes. Rigid, non-­ standardised, proprietary
architectures also preclude the decentralised configu-
ration required to support the heterogeneity of health
systems across Indian states.15
Traditional security and privacy-­ preserving measures
are rendered ineffective by advances in data science
and machine learning.16 17
The designing, building and
maintenance of secure privacy-­ preserving databases for
millions of users is expensive and beyond the scope of
small technology companies that may have very inno-
vative solutions to offer for individual or population
health.18
In summary, the ad hoc, non-­ standardised and
fragmented nature of health technology solutions is
duplicative and wasteful, and unsustainable due to heavy
costs associated with maintaining the agility, capacity and
security required at scale.19
In this paper, we describe how India’s evolving digital
health ecosystem, including the National Digital Health
Mission (NDHM) and public health platforms (that
many of us are directly involved in designing and imple-
menting), seeks to address the challenges of fragmenta-
tion, scalability, configurability and privacy.
Enterprise architecture: a platform thinking approach
The inefficiencies and risks posited by the current frag-
mentedhealthITlandscapecanbeaddressedbyadopting
a systemic platform approach. Platforms, as described
below, provide a stabilising framework responsible for
maintaining governance mechanisms which include
standards, interfaces and rules to support a dynamic
ecosystem of autonomous complementors (third-­ party
actors, like vendors) and consumers (eg, providers,
patients or payers).20 21
Disparate vertical programmes
can then all plug into the platform, provided they adopt
standards, use of common nomenclature and shared
single sources of truth (SSOT) registries.22
A modular
design allows individual components of the system to be
upgraded or exchanged without cascading effects on the
entire system.
Platform ecosystems are not new to India; the universal
ID programme, Aadhaar, and related fintech advances
including the universal payment interface and the
consentmanagerframeworkthatallowsforasynchronous
authentication of payments, execute millions of transac-
tions daily.23
Similar federated plug-­ and-­ play architecture
undergirds the framework prescribed by India’s NDHM
to ensure authenticated universal information access
across various care settings enabling transition of care.21
We describe below how components of a nascent digital
platform ecosystem in India specifically for primary
health will help address the challenges we discussed.
From fragmentation to integration: developing standards and
interoperability
A platform approach allows a wide range of actors to
participate in curating, applying and exchanging data
provided they can identify each other and communicate
via a shared language. Electronic Health Records (EHR)
standards of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare that
covers health data and metadata interchange stand-
ards like Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine
(SNOMED), International Classification of Diseases 10th
BMJ Global Health: first published as 10.1136/bmjgh-2021-005242 on 26 July 2021. Downloaded from https://gh.bmj.com on 7 July 2026 by guest.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

--- PAGE 3 ---
Nadhamuni S, et al. BMJ Global Health 2021;6:e005242. doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2021-005242 3
BMJ Global Health
Revision (ICD-10)/ICD-11, Logical Observation Iden-
tifiers Names and Codes (LOINC) and Health Level
7 (HL7)/Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources
(FHIR) must be adopted.24
Intervention and care proto-
cols may also be exposed as FHIR bundles in line with
Computable Care Guidelines standards.25
Linking health
data transactions across systems requires common iden-
tifiers for both patients and providers, the generation
of which is likely to be particularly challenging in India
given lack of updated databases of registered providers,
and uncertainty around identity systems in the context
of India’s evolving privacy and data protection policies.26
Health ID
Individuals across the socioeconomic spectrum seek
primary care across the public and private sectors, and
often across state borders given the seasonal and annual
migration patterns in India. Low health-­ seeking behav-
iour and socioeconomic deprivation however disrupt
reliable and timely access to care. Without a common
identifier, it is hard to compile a comprehensive medical
history, facilitate referrals and even more hard to identify
those that fall through the cracks entirely. It is also ineffi-
cient, requiring health workers to re-­ enrol beneficiaries
in different health programme apps at the same facility.
The NDHM recently launched the Health ID to
address these problems.21
The Health ID, linked to
Aadhaar or mobile number, can be created by individ-
uals themselves and provides the basis of integrating all
their digital health records allowing seamless, consented
sharing of health data between providers, laboratories
and pharmacies. The health IT systems we have helped
develop, Affordable Medicines and Reliable Implants for
Treatment (AMRIT),27
Technology Enabled Community
Health Operations (TeCHO+)28
and the national NCD
(Digital LifeCare)29
system have their own unique identi-
fiers which are being linked to NDHM Health IDs.
Registries
Most IT systems have registries for facilities and providers
embeddedwithin,andthesegroworganically,userbyuser,
facility by facility, as the system adoption increases.30 31
Instead, there must be independent registries which are
an SSOT, accessible and usable by all primary health
programmes for interoperability. The registries should
have open interfaces for ease of access by all ecosystem
apps, be scalable for heavy loads and have clear processes
for maintenance.32
The national identification number
(NIN) for health facilities, an initiative of the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare, serves as the official basis of
identification for all public health facilities today.33
TeCHO+ hasa separate facility management module
that uses the NIN to uniquely identify all the health facil-
ities in its area of operation. Using this helped in better
mapping of the RCH data collected at the state level
with the national RCH monitoring system. AMRIT has
leveraged state-­ based facility and health human resource
registries which helps to uniquely identify the workforce
and triangulate resources during referrals. Also, AMRIT
has integrated with India’s TB platform to manage drug
adherence and identification of comorbidities among
patients. NDHM architecture includes registries for all
healthcare providers, facilities and the first set of building
blocks by NDHM include two registries, DigiDoctor for
all registered doctors and the Health Facility Registry for
all health facilities in the country.21
Integration between information technology systems
Integration has been attempted within well-­ defined
programmatic frameworks. AMRIT, a platform for
primary health interventions in resource-­ poor districts,
currently serving 7+ million people (with an archived
record base of 70+ million data points), has enabled
vertical integration between front-­ line health workers
and peripheral health facilities like HWCs, community
outreach programmes through mobile medical vans and
at first referral units which creates a longitudinal view
of health information, handles escalations and creates
referral pathways to help establish care continuum.27
Digital LifeCare, the platform built for the Govern-
ment of India NCD programme targeting 500 million
people, integrates apps across village, subhealth centre
and primary and secondary-­ level facilities by adopting a
cloud EHR tagged with a unique health identifier, role-­
based updation rights, e-­ referrals, centralised patient
status and common registries.34
TeCHO+ serves over 60
million people across multiple health verticals in the
primary care settings and enables longitudinal tracking
of patient information using a unique ID between village
health facilities, PHCs and across secondary healthcare
facilities.28
Lateral integration across these systems will be
enabled by the adoption of the common Health ID and
health registries offered by NDHM. Figure 1 describes
the platform approach to establish a continuum of care.
Distributed data and processing architecture as a pathway to
scale
Pilots do not scale in India due to the daunting hard-
ware and computing capacity required when expanding
projects to serve tens of millions of persons served by
each state health ministry. Power and internet connec-
tivity challenges necessitate data collection, consent
management, information exchange and updates to
work seamlessly even while offline. The volume of health
data transactions generated in a population of 1.3 billion
people raises significant challenges of data consistency,
24×7 availability and scalability.
Intermittent power and connectivity
The TeCHO+’s distributed processing architecture
allows a field health worker offline using a store-­ and-­
forward approach to mitigate the challenges of network
fluctuations. A strong sync mechanism at the server uses
advanced logic to manage the longitudinal record integ-
rity to merge data about the same beneficiary coming
from multiple offline devices in the field. Like TeCHO+,
BMJ Global Health: first published as 10.1136/bmjgh-2021-005242 on 26 July 2021. Downloaded from https://gh.bmj.com on 7 July 2026 by guest.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

--- PAGE 4 ---
4 Nadhamuni S, et al. BMJ Global Health 2021;6:e005242. doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2021-005242
BMJ Global Health
AMRIT uses a store-­ and-­ forward mechanism in its facility
systems, mobile medical units or front-­ line worker
systems, even enabling low-­ bandwidth teleconsultations.
Clinical information collected via health helplines is used
by the beneficiaries to get in touch with a doctor. These
systems create a single longitudinal view of all benefi-
ciary data resulting in a better health profile of people,
community and district.
Distributed data architecture
Health IT platforms include a transactional system, with
applications to conduct routine care operations and an
analytics system, where the collected data are analysed to
generate reports and dashboards. In the Digital LifeCare
system, initially the data architecture for these two was
unifiedanditworkedupto10millionbeneficiaries.Asthe
volume increased to 15 million, the application perfor-
mance began to degrade. This problem was addressed by
adopting a distributed data architecture approach so that
the analytics module did not impact transaction perfor-
mance for users. The functional separation of data collec-
tion, storage, integration, processing and visualisation is
shown in the PHC example in figure 2. We will examine
modules 2 and 4 which are key elements of a distributed
data architecture.
Transaction datastore layer
The choice of database for transactional storage is
based on the type and volume of data, storage duration,
frequency of access, consistency and availability. PHC
data consist of structured data (numerical values like
height, weight, blood pressure, etc) which are stored in
relational databases and unstructured data (X-­ ray images
and free text) stored in object storage. Storage duration
for archiving health records is based on policy which
service providers need to comply with. For effective cost
optimisation, frequently accessed health data can be
stored in high-­ performance, but more expensive (hot)
storage and other data can be stored in cheaper, slower
performance (cold) storage.35
For large-­ scale transac-
tional data storage systems like public health systems,
consistency is critical as all users must have access to the
exact same data at any given point in time. Systems must
be always running and highly available; to achieve this,
they are deployed with duplicate copies of data on addi-
tional servers in different data centres.
Distributed processing layer
Large-­ scale data warehouse systems require processing
and storage to be distributed so they can provide dynamic
updates to health administrators. Typically, in a distrib-
uted datastore, the data are partitioned by location,
year or beneficiaries. If a health administrator wishes to
compare screening data over 5years, it requires data to
be fetched from five different partitions. Partition design
for smooth functioning even during network outage is
very important for analytics systems.36
This separation of
data layer and distributed processing is implemented in
Digital LifeCare and is currently handling 100 million
beneficiaries and can scale up to 500 million benefi-
ciaries.
Plug-and-play model to allow configurability
A federated enterprise architecture allows a vast network
of loosely coupled, semiautonomous entities to exchange
information in a standardised secure manner.37
It fosters
Figure 1 Platform thinking to establish care continuum. NCD, non-­ communicable disease.
BMJ Global Health: first published as 10.1136/bmjgh-2021-005242 on 26 July 2021. Downloaded from https://gh.bmj.com on 7 July 2026 by guest.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Nadhamuni S, et al. BMJ Global Health 2021;6:e005242. doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2021-005242 5
BMJ Global Health
innovation by allowing easy development of apps on the
platform and allows for modular expansion by its adher-
ence to standards. A variety of patient apps can be devel-
oped that allow the individual to have a comprehensive
view of her health record and track her visits, her wellness
metrics and care regimen.
Dynamic configurability in TeCHO+ has ensured that
the system is always primed for changes in policy or
evidence-­ based protocol updates. Well-­ defined intercon-
nections and dynamic configurability between systems
enable a ‘plug and play’ approach for innovation, rapid
development and ease of customisation. For example,
AMRIT can easily plug in various point-­ of-­ care devices to
help collect clinical data points at various health settings
(static or mobile). Using these, front-­ line worker systems
can connect to health facilities and make quick decisions
using decision support systems, saving time in the urgent
referral for the high-­ risk pregnant woman needing to see
a specialist right away. In Digital LifeCare, a clinical deci-
sion support system for hypertension and diabetes has
been plugged into the platform through standardised
interfaces for use in one state while other states continue
to use existing government protocols.
Open-source stack
An open-­ source platform leads to stronger community
participationforecosysteminnovationsandsustainability.
In all three platforms, the confidence in the platforms
Figure 2 Distributed data architecture. IT, information technology; NCD, non-­ communicable disease; TB, tuberculosis.
BMJ Global Health: first published as 10.1136/bmjgh-2021-005242 on 26 July 2021. Downloaded from https://gh.bmj.com on 7 July 2026 by guest.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

--- PAGE 6 ---
6 Nadhamuni S, et al. BMJ Global Health 2021;6:e005242. doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2021-005242
BMJ Global Health
and willingness to adopt them were significantly higher
as they were built on open-­ source technologies and were
themselves public good open-­ source systems.
Authenticated, secure data exchange with privacy by design
According to the National Resource Centre for EHR
Standards, the government (as a health provider) is only
a custodian of health data while ownership lies with the
individual.24
Digital LifeCare has a four-­ pronged security
strategy as shown in figure 3.
Consent
Policy mandates that consent of an individual must be
taken at the point of data collection and for sharing data
with other systems. The consent must be free, specific,
clearly given and revocable. The challenges with consent
are twofold. First, consent is not necessarily informed
or free from coercion given the inverted power asym-
metries in many healthcare interactions, and second, the
recording of consent is particularly constrained in low-­
resource settings where individuals may not have mobile
phones, connectivity is poor or data are entered retro-
spectively from paper.
AcorebuildingblockofNDHMistheconsentmanager
which is designed to comply with government policies
and frameworks including electronic consent framework
(Technology Specifications v1.1) with its subsequent revi-
sion(s) published by Ministry of Electronics and Infor-
mation Technology.38
Leveraging this, primary health
platforms must additionally extend the consent frame-
work to an offline first architecture using mechanisms
like video, or a one-­ time password to capture consent
electronically.38
Sample flow control is explained in
figure 4.
Encryption and secure data exchange
The architecture of a large-­ scale health system must
have robust security features designed into the system.
Digital keys used in cryptographic functions must be
safeguarded and periodically rotated. In Digital Life-
Care, data are securely encrypted whether it is at rest
or in transit within the system, using the best available
encryption key strength.39
Secure transmission standards
like HTTPS, TLS 1.2 and TLS 1.3 are adopted, along with
digital signatures for ensuring authenticity of identity.
Authentication and authorisation
As digital ecosystems mature, it is imperative that access
to data is role based in concordance with institutional
policy and pertinent laws. As the COVID-19 pandemic
has shown, it is still not a common practice or expec-
tation that identities be masked from health data sets.
To enable role-­ based access, Digital LifeCare platform
authenticates user credentials through identity manage-
ment and authentication services. Security features like
strong password management, automatic logging off,
CAPTCHA, access privileges and interface data valida-
tions are part of the platform.
Audit trail
To ensure accountability and transparency, all transac-
tionsshouldhaveaclearaudittrailthatrecordsuseriden-
tity, identifies the data sets accessed, with timestamps and
transaction description.40
Audit trails should be available
Figure 3 Security and privacy layer.
BMJ Global Health: first published as 10.1136/bmjgh-2021-005242 on 26 July 2021. Downloaded from https://gh.bmj.com on 7 July 2026 by guest.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

--- PAGE 7 ---
Nadhamuni S, et al. BMJ Global Health 2021;6:e005242. doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2021-005242 7
BMJ Global Health
Figure 4 Control flow.
BMJ Global Health: first published as 10.1136/bmjgh-2021-005242 on 26 July 2021. Downloaded from https://gh.bmj.com on 7 July 2026 by guest.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

--- PAGE 8 ---
8 Nadhamuni S, et al. BMJ Global Health 2021;6:e005242. doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2021-005242
BMJ Global Health
to authenticated users on demand or on a periodic basis
for compliance monitoring as mandated by policy.
In comparison with other enterprise architecture
frameworks,41
the framework being proposed here is for
the unique context of LMICs like India. The framework
needs to be able to scale up for health programmes that
serve more than a billion people. It needs to be scalable
and configurable to support last mile service delivery
with close to a million field health workers and 150000
subhealth centres from states with diverse administrative
needs. Health systems in LMICs operate under severe
resource constraints so the framework must be cloud
based which requires lower investment and technology
capability to manage. Finally, the poor connectivity in
remote rural areas requires an architecture where data
collection, consent management and secure data sharing
need to work seamlessly in an offline mode.
CONCLUSION
We submit that a federated enterprise or platform
approach for comprehensive PHC mandates standard-
isation and security while offering interoperability and
customisability. It can scale exponentially by leveraging
third-­ party solutions that can enhance engagement, user
experience and efficiency, while relying on consent and
privacy frameworks maintained by the platform.
This complementary approach allows for the vast
heterogeneity in health system needs and capabilities
acrossstatesinIndia,adaptstothedynamicandchanging
nature of both medical practice and public health policy
and is responsive to local workflows and end user needs
whicharecriticaltostrengtheningprimaryhealthsystems
to advance the well-­ being of populations.
Author affiliations
1
Digital LifeCare, Dell Technologies, Bengaluru, Karnataka, India
2
The George Institute for Global Health, University of New South Wales, New Delhi,
Delhi, India
3
Argusoft, Gandhinagar, Gujarat, India
4
Piramal Swasthya Management and Research Institute, Hyderabad,Telangana,
India
5
Emergency Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA
6
Harvard University T H Chan School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
7
The George Institute for Global Health, New Delhi, Delhi, India
8
BeeHyv Software Solutions, Hyderabad,Telangana, India
9
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, New Delhi, India
Twitter Oommen John @oommen_john and Satchit Balsari @satchit_balsari
Contributors SN, OJ, MK, EN and SS conceptualised the paper. MK, EN, SV, DV
and SS analysed the frameworks. SN, OJ, MK, EN, SV, DV, SS, HR and NG drafted
and revised the paper. SB and VS provided critical feedback and revised the paper.
All authors read and approved the final version of the manuscript.
Funding The authors have not declared a specific grant for this research from any
funding agency in the public, commercial or not-­ for-­ profit sectors.
Competing interests None declared.
Patient consent for publication Not required.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Data availability statement There are no data in this work.
Supplemental material This content has been supplied by the author(s). It has
not been vetted by BMJ Publishing Group Limited (BMJ) and may not have been
peer-­ reviewed.Any opinions or recommendations discussed are solely those
of the author(s) and are not endorsed by BMJ. BMJ disclaims all liability and
responsibility arising from any reliance placed on the content.Where the content
includes any translated material, BMJ does not warrant the accuracy and reliability
of the translations (including but not limited to local regulations, clinical guidelines,
terminology, drug names and drug dosages), and is not responsible for any error
and/or omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.
Open access This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-­ NC 4.0) license, which
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-­ commercially,
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is
properly cited, appropriate credit is given, any changes made indicated, and the
use is non-­commercial. See: http://​creativecommons.​org/​licenses/​by-​nc/​4.​0/.
ORCID iDs
Oommen John http://​orcid.​org/​0000-​0002-​9008-​1726
Satchit Balsari http://​orcid.​org/​0000-​0002-​5492-​1900
REFERENCES
1 Ghebreyesus TA. Strengthening our resolve for primary health care.
Bull World Health Organ 2020;98:726.
2 Hsieh VC-­ R, Wu JC-­ li, Wu T-­ N, et al. Universal coverage for
primary health care is a wise investment: evidence from 102
low- and middle-­ income countries. Asia Pac J Public Health
2015;27:NP877–86.
3 Ministry of Health and Family Welfare GoI. National health policy,
2017. Available: https://www.​nhp.​gov.​in//​NHPfiles/​national_​health_​
policy_​2017.​pdf
4 Kamath S, Kamath R. Does India really not have enough money to
spend on healthcare? Postgrad Med J 2017;93:567–67.
5 Karan A, Negandhi H, Nair R, et al. Size, composition and
distribution of human resource for health in India: new estimates
using national sample survey and registry data. BMJ Open
2019;9:e025979.
6 Nedungadi PP, Menon R, Gutjahr G, et al. Towards an inclusive
digital literacy framework for digital India. Education+ Training
2018;60:516–28.
7 Garg S, Basu S, Rustagi R, et al. Primary health care facility
preparedness for outpatient service provision during the COVID-19
pandemic in India: cross-­ sectional study. JMIR Public Health Surveill
2020;6:e19927.
8 Cohen AB, Dorsey ER, Mathews SC, et al. A digital health industry
cohort across the health continuum. NPJ Digit Med 2020;3:1–10.
9 Bassi A, John O, Praveen D, et al. Current status and future
directions of mHealth interventions for health system strengthening
in India: systematic review. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2018;6:e11440.
10 Mohan P, Sethi H, Reddy KR, et al. Designing primary healthcare
systems for future in India. J Family Med Prim Care 2019;8:1817.
11 NHSRC. Ayushman Bharat comprehensive primary health care
through health and wellness centers operational. Delhi: Guidelines,
2018.
12 Choudhury NR. Framework for development of information
technology infrastructure for health (ITIH) care in India–a critical
study. . Qualitative and Quantitative Methods in Libraries,
2017: 5. 787–96.
13 Winkelman WJ, Leonard KJ. Overcoming structural constraints to
patient utilization of electronic medical records: a critical review
and proposal for an evaluation framework. J Am Med Inform Assoc
2004;11:151–61.
14 Bhatia A, Matthan R, Khanna T, et al. Regulatory Sandboxes: a cure
for mHealth Pilotitis? J Med Internet Res 2020;22:e21276.
15 Gavin Tong RT. How open is your system architecture? Canada:
Healthcare Information Management and Communications, 2017.
16 Vagadia B. Data integrity, control and Tokenization. digital disruption.
Springer, 2020: 107–76.
17 Wambugu SVC. mHealth for health information systems in low- and
middle-­ income countries – challenges and opportunities in data
quality, privacy and security 2016.
18 Randall SM, Ferrante AM, Boyd JH, et al. Privacy-­preserving
record linkage on large real world datasets. J Biomed Inform
2014;50:205–12.
19 Businesswire. Insights into the Digital Healthcare Market in India
(2019 to 2024) - CAGR of 27.41% Expected - ​ ResearchAndMarkets.​
com, 2020. Available: https://www.​businesswire.​com/​news/​
BMJ Global Health: first published as 10.1136/bmjgh-2021-005242 on 26 July 2021. Downloaded from https://gh.bmj.com on 7 July 2026 by guest.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

--- PAGE 9 ---
Nadhamuni S, et al. BMJ Global Health 2021;6:e005242. doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2021-005242 9
BMJ Global Health
home/​20200221005363/​en/​Insights-​into-​the-​Digital-​Healthcare-​
Market-​in-​India-​2019-​to-​2024-​CAGR-​of-​27.​41-​Expected-​
ResearchAndMarkets.​com
20 Hein A, Schreieck M, Riasanow T, et al. Digital platform ecosystems.
Electronic Markets 2020;30:87–98.
21 Ministry of Health and Family Welfare GoI. National digital health
mission (NDHM), 2020. Available: https://www.​nhp.​gov.​in/​national-​
digital-​health-​mission-(​ndhm)_​pg
22 Vahidy F, Jones SL, Tano ME, et al. Rapid response to drive
COVID-19 research in a learning health care system: rationale
and design of the Houston Methodist COVID-19 surveillance and
outcomes registry (curator). JMIR Med Inform 2021;9:e26773.
23 INDIA NPCO. Unified payment interface API and technology
specifications, 2015. Available: https://www.​mygov.​in/​digidhan/​
pages/​pdf/​sbi/​NPCI%​20Unified%​20Payment%​20Interface.​pdf
24 National Resource Centre for EHR Standards. EHR standards for
India. Available: https://www.​nrces.​in/​standards/​ehr-​standards-​for-​
india#​securuty_​technical_​standards
25 Benson T, Grieve G. Principles of health interoperability: SNOMED
CT, HL7 and FHIR. Springer, 2016.
26 Greenleaf G. Promises and illusions of data protection in Indian law.
International Data Privacy Law 2011;1:47–69.
27 RCP. Ltd. Accessible medical record via integrated technologies
(AMRIT) (2018-19). Available: https://​csrbox.​org/​India_​CSR_​Project_​
Piramal-​Enterprises-​Limited-​Accessible-​Medical-​Record-​via-​
Integrated-​Technologies-(​AMRIT)-​Telangana-_​15082
28 Saha S, Kotwani P, Pandya A, et al. Addressing comprehensive
primary healthcare in Gujarat through mHealth intervention: early
implementation experience with TeCHO+ programme. J Family Med
Prim Care 2020;9:340.
29 Dell Technologies. FY20 dell technologies progress made real
report, 2020. Available: https://​corporate.​delltechnologies.​com/​
en-​in/​social-​impact/​reporting/​fy20-​progress-​made-​real-​report.​
htm#​overlay=/​content/​dam/​delltechnologies/​assets/​corporate/​pdf/​
progress-​made-​real-​reports/​delltechnologies-​fy20-​progress-​made-​
real-​report.​pdf
30 Faujdar DS, Sahay S, Singh T, et al. Public health information
systems for primary health care in India: a situational analysis study.
J Family Med Prim Care 2019;8:3640.
31 Faujdar DS, Sahay S, Singh T, et al. Field testing of a digital health
information system for primary health care: a quasi-­ experimental
study from India. Int J Med Inform 2020;141:104235.
32 Vukovic M, Laredo J, Muthusamy V, et al. Riding and thriving on the
API hype cycle. Commun ACM 2016;59:35–7.
33 Ministry of Health and Family Welfare GoI. National identification
number to health facility of India (NIN-­ TO-­ HFI). Delhi: NHP India,
2016. https://​nin.​nhp.​gov.​in/​about_​nin2hfi.​php#:~:​text=​NIN%​
20will%​20be%​20random%​20but,​be%​20attached%​20to%​20NIN%​
20initially
34 Ministry of Health and Family Welfare GoI. CPHC NCD Solution.
Available: https://​main.​mohfw.​gov.​in/​sites/​default/​files/​CPHC%​
20NCD%​20Solutions%​20-%​20PHC%​20Medical%​20Officer%​
20User%​20Manual_​0.​pdf
35 Rouse M. Hot data. Available: https://​ searchstorage.​ techtarget.​ com/​
definition/​hot-​data
36 Nazrul SS. CAP theorem and distributed database management
systems, 2018. Available: https://​ towardsdatascience.​ com/​
cap-​theorem-​and-​distributed-​database-​management-​systems-​
5c2be977950e
37 Sheth AP, Larson JA. Federated database systems for managing
distributed, heterogeneous, and autonomous databases. ACM
Comput Surv 1990;22:183–236.
38 (MeitY) MoEaIT. Electronic Consent Framework - Technology
Specifications (Ver 1.1). Available: http://​dla.​gov.​in/​sites/​default/​files/​
pdf/​MeitY-​Consent-​Tech-​Framework%​20v1.​1.​pdf
39 DC NC. Data privacy and security, 2015. Available: https://www.​ nhp.​
gov.​in/​data-​privacy-​and-​security_​mtl
40 Walsh T, Miaoulis W. Privacy and security audits of electronic health
information. J Ahima 2014;85:54–9.
41 Mukherjee M, Cresswell K, Sheikh A. Identifying strategies to
overcome roadblocks to utilising near real-­ time healthcare and
administrative data to create a Scotland-­ wide learning health
system. Health Informatics J 2021;27:1460458220977579.
BMJ Global Health: first published as 10.1136/bmjgh-2021-005242 on 26 July 2021. Downloaded from https://gh.bmj.com on 7 July 2026 by guest.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.