--- PAGE 1 ---
Establishing organisational
resilience through developing
a strategic framework
for digital transformation
Lihle Nkomo and David Kalisz
Department of Entrepreneurship and Digital Transformation,
Paris School of Business, Paris, France
Abstract
Purpose– Thepurposeofthispaperistopresentastrategicmanagementframeworkforasuccessfuldigital
transformation(DT)roll-outaimedat enablingorganisationalresilience.Thestudyaimsto identifythecritical
areas of consideration for management to strategically approach DT in order to build resilience.
Design/methodology/approach – The research study is based on the 3Ps framework: (1) people (culture,
capabilities,engagementandwell-being),(2)processes(systems)and(3)plant(technologicalinfrastructureand
tools). The research methodology is a qualitative study comprising semi-structured in-depth interviews,
conducted with industry experts in different sectors undergoing major digital disruptions such as financial
services, mining, oil and gas, energy and retail.
Findings – The research findings show that the successful roll-out of an organisation’s DT is largely driven
by the people elements incorporating organisational culture, workforce skills and training and employee well-
being. It also highlights that it is critical for organisations to invest in technological infrastructure, once the
people elements have been addressed, as they are the drivers of technology implementation.
Research limitations/implications – A bigger and broader sample size can validate the elements and
structure of the DT framework in South Africa.
Practicalimplications– Thestudy’sdiscussionunlocksunderstandingabout:(1)whatarethekeyenablers
for successful DT; (2) what hinders organisations from realising the value of digital investments and (3) a
strategic framework for the digital roll-out.
Social implications – Technology is impacting employees at both a personal and professional levels.
Ensuring that DT rollouts are strategical implemented lowers the impact on technostress and strengthens
resilience.
Originality/value – The value and practical implication of this study is that the developed strategic
frameworkcan be usedby managements to enablethe smoothadoption of DT towardbuildingorganisational
resilience in developing countries such as South Africa with low digital maturity.
Keywords Digital transformation, Digital strategy, People, Technology, Strategic framework,
Organisational resilience
Paper type Research paper
1. Introduction
The use of digital technologies to transform organisational operations has impacted various
industriesacrosstheglobesuchaseducation,retail,automotive,healthcare,energy,financial
services and manufacturing (Albukhitan, 2020; Chanias & Hess, 2016). Their ever-evolving
technological systems require organisations to devise digital strategies that will ensure they
Strategic
management
framework
403
©LihleNkomoandDavidKalisz.PublishedinDigitalTransformationandSociety.PublishedbyEmerald
PublishingLimited.ThisarticleispublishedundertheCreativeCommonsAttribution(CCBY4.0)licence.
Anyone may reproduce, distribute, translate and create derivative works of this article (for both
commercial and non-commercial purposes), subject to full attribution to the original publication and
authors.Thefulltermsofthislicencemaybeseenathttp://creativecommons.org/licences/by/4.0/legalcode
This paper forms part of a special section “Social Informatics and Designing for Social Good”, guest
edited by Alicia Julia Wilson Takaoka, Madelyn Rose Sanfilippo and Xiaohua (Awa) Zhu.
The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on Emerald Insight at:
https://www.emerald.com/insight/2755-0761.htm
Received 12 November 2022
Revised 22 May 2023
Accepted 15 June 2023
Digital Transformation and
Society
Vol. 2 No. 4, 2023
pp. 403-426
Emerald Publishing Limited
e-ISSN: 2755-077X
p-ISSN: 2755-0761
DOI 10.1108/DTS-11-2022-0059
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/dts/article-pdf/2/4/403/289647/dts-11-2022-0059.pdf by guest on 07 July 2026

--- PAGE 2 ---
maintain their competitive advantage within the various industries, by continuously
improvingtheirvaluecreation.Digitaltransformation(DT)isanongoingprocessofutilising
digital technologies in daily organisational activities, it utilises agility as the driver for the
strategic change of (1) business models, (2) stakeholder collaboration and (3) the business’
own culture (Walsh, Kefi, & Baskerville, 2010; Warner & W€ ager, 2019). Organisations
implement DT by utilising technology to advance core business strategy and operations
(Mergel et al., 2019). Therefore, organisational management needs to be able to evolve
effectively with digital innovation and ensure that digital investments yield the expected
return on investment, while boosting resilience against disruptions. To gain a competitive
advantage, organisational leadership should exploit the opportunities and avoid the threats
associatedwithdigitaltechnologies,astheydevelopbusinessmodelsthatprioritisecustomer
needs and experiences (Afandi, 2017; Warner & W€ ager, 2019).
1.1 Digital disruptions
Vial (2019) states that DT has been experienced as an industry disruptor driven by three
elements: (1) technology, (2) competition and (3) consumer behaviour, as shown in Figure 1.
Globally, it is evident that companies which prioritise continuous digital improvement of
business strategies and operating models thrive as they take advantage of emerging digital
capabilities that enable a competitive advantage such as Amazon, Google, Facebook, Netflix
and Apple (Miguel & Casado, 2016). Their capability to adapt and accept technological
advancement locates them in a unique position where they can better understand the
customer and cater to their needs, thereby increasing their market share in different
industries. These companies use platforms that enable them to provide targeted advertising,
co-create products with customers and incorporate customer feedback appropriately.
Therefore, technology can be utilised to develop new businesses and increase the stability of
product delivery and services (Schiavi & Behr, 2018). Andal-Ancion, Cartwright, and Yip
(2003) discuss the fact that, although itcan be challenging for traditional companies to adopt
DT strategies, it is vitally important to enable these organisations to retain their customers
andremainprofitable,asshowninTable1.TheimplementationofDThasshownbenefitsfor
organisations in line with operational efficiencies, streamlined operations, reduced costs and
increased quality; thus, this study aims to develop a strategic framework to roll-out DT
successfully.
Digital
Consumer
Behaviour
Digital
Competition
Digital Technology
Availability of Big data has promoted
targeted consumer advertising in the retail
sector such as Takealot.
Consumer behaviour
has increased the
need of ecommerce
and home delivery
services as consumers
shop from the
comfort of their
homes.
The financial
services sector has
had to quickly evolve
in order to compete
with digital banking
platforms such as
Samsung pay.
Source(s):Adapted from Vial (2019)
Figure 1.
Enablers of digital
disruptions
DTS
2,4
404
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/dts/article-pdf/2/4/403/289647/dts-11-2022-0059.pdf by guest on 07 July 2026

--- PAGE 3 ---
1.2 Disruptions due to the pandemic
The significance of adapting and pivoting in the digital economy for most organisations was
magnified during the crisis brought about by the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
pandemic. The pandemic caused an economic shock in most industries as social distancing
became the newnorm, forcing companies to review theirbusiness and operatingmodels. For
most businesses this meantinvesting more intodigital platformsfor customer andemployee
reach, automating production systems and diversifying their markets to match the evolving
demand for products and services. Fletcher & Griffiths (2020) states that during the
pandemic, several organisations realised that (1) they had no digital platforms for video
conferencing, (2) they were dependent on on-site platforms which were not remotely
accessible, and (3) they comprise a fixed workforce and organisational structures and
processes.Theseorganisations’digitalmaturitywasverylow,andthusitwaschallengingto
adapt to the new business environment. Advancing technology such as machine learning,
blockchain, geospatial location intelligence, predictive analysis, robotics and drone
technology have been enablers of organisational resilience. The impact resulting from the
pandemic affected workforces, technology, operations and business models as shown in
Figure 2.
Technological investments impacted by the pandemic: Technology investments conducted
by organisations had to be re-prioritised to those that were key to business survival during
and post-pandemic. The rise of the use of cloud deployment to avoid physically located
servers, the adoption of safe communication platforms to enable stakeholder engagements
and the use of analytics to reach consumers better was observed across various industries
including retail, financial services and manufacturing. Organisations whose digital maturity
was very low pre-pandemic due to few or no technological investments had to improve their
Major disruptors Traditional business Customer benefits
Retail Amazon, Alibaba,
Takealot
Retailers: Toys“R”Us,
Clothing & Electronics
Easy access to e-commerce
Automotive Uber, Taxify Metered taxis Safe, reliable and
standardised rates
Hospitality Booking.com, AirBnB Hotel bookings and
management
Fast, competitive and
centralised
Media and
Entertainment
Netflix, Showmax, You
Tube, Facebook Watch
Filming industry and
mainstream television
Flexibility to watch on
multiple devices and to be
mobile
Source(s): Andal-Ancion et al. (2003) and Verhoef et al. (2021)
• Interaction platforms for employees such as Microsoft Teams, Zoom,
Google Meet, Amazon Chime
• Customer interactionsthrough websites, social media
Technology
• Virtual control of production lines
• Automation of systems
• Decentralised production plants
Operations
• Physical consultations and service offerings to digital based systems
thereby reaching and stretching geographical boundaries Business models
• Remote working and management
• Decentralised work places
• Virtual teams
Workforce
Source(s): Figure by the authors
Table 1.
Disruptions within
industries
Figure 2.
Areas impacted by the
pandemic
Strategic
management
framework
405
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/dts/article-pdf/2/4/403/289647/dts-11-2022-0059.pdf by guest on 07 July 2026

--- PAGE 4 ---
digital maturity in order to maintain business continuity in the face of a disruptive
environment (Fletcher & Griffiths, 2020).Therefore, the pandemic has been a main driver for
organisations to increase their digital capabilities and applications.
Rapid automation of operations due to the pandemic: Organisational operations were
alsohighlyimpactedasproductioncentreswereclosed.Thisforcedmanufacturing,mining
andenergycompaniestoautomatetheirsystemsrapidlytocontinueproductionduringand
post-pandemic. Belhadi et al. (2020) analyses the time to recover within the operations field
post a disruption through organisational resilience. A good resilience strategy will ensure
thattherecoverytimeisminimalandtheimpactonperformanceisquicklyovercome.Since
most organisations resilience models were not robust, the pandemic led to a lot of
production coming to a standstill, which had a huge negative impact on business
continuity. The pandemic forced a lot of businesses to rethink and revamp their operations
by utilising modern technology to improve production during and post-pandemic. As a
result, organisations have been able to extract more information from their operations,
identifying opportunities to increase production and improve quality and safety through
Internet of Things (IoT) solutions.
Redesigning of business models post-pandemic: For most organisations, the impact of the
pandemic meant that they had to re-evaluate their business models to ensure organisational
resilienceandmanagebusinessrisksresultingfromtherapidlyalteredbusinessenvironment.
Fletcher&Griffiths(2020)statesthatpost-pandemic,themostagileorganisationswouldhave
adapted from lessons learnt from this experience. These businesses will continue to evolve in
innovative ways after the pandemic. Organisations that did not build resilience during this
pandemic will be disrupted during the next period of disruptive risk, which could range from
poor weather, disruptive consumer behaviour or a drastic rise in competition. Thus, they
should ensure that they are evolving to a higher digital maturity level.
The impact of the pandemic on the workforce: The workforce was highly impacted by the
pandemic as employees could not work in centralised office spaces due to the health risks,
thereby forcing organisations to allow employees to work remotely from their homes. This
was challenging for organisations in South Africa that had to establish new policies and
procedures to promote productive work-from-home environments. These new ways of
working also caused challenges for management in leading and monitoring their virtual
teams. Although the trend of virtual teams was already emerging due to globalisation and
new technology, the pandemic accelerated this process.
1.3 Research details
This study aims to develop a strategic framework which management can use to implement
DTwithinestablishedorganisations,asanapproachtobuildingorganisationalresilienceina
disruptive environment. The digital economy has changed consumer expectations and
engagement behaviours, as consumers now expect a tailored and enjoyable user experience.
The qualitative study focuses on the 3P’s approach to analyse the DT: (1) plant, (2) processes
and (3) people. This research contribution is to develop a framework that can be utilised by
established organisations to ensure the efficient and effective adoption of DT. The research
question is: how can organisations enable organisational resilience through the use of DT as
a tool?
2. Literature review
Organisations that have shown digital resilience are classified as innovators and early
adopters during the rapidly changing work environment due to the pandemic, which has
significantly disrupted the ways of working.
DTS
2,4
406
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/dts/article-pdf/2/4/403/289647/dts-11-2022-0059.pdf by guest on 07 July 2026

--- PAGE 5 ---
2.1 Organisational resilience through DT
Organisational resilience through DT has become extremely significant to the survival of
businesspost-pandemic,asthepandemichasimpactedbusinessmodels,valuenetworksand
thetechnologyrequiredtothriveinthedigitaleconomy.Globally,itisevidentthatcompanies
whichprioritisecontinuousdigitalimprovementofbusinessstrategiesandoperatingmodels
thrive, as they take advantage of emerging digital capabilities that give a competitive
advantage such as Amazon, Google, Facebook, Netflix and Apple (Miguel & Casado, 2016).
Their capability to adapt and accept technological advancement places them in a unique
position where they can understand the customer better and cater for the customer’s needs,
thereby increasing their market share in different industries. These companies use digital
platforms that enable them to provide targeted advertising, co-create products with
customers and incorporate timely customer feedback. Therefore, technology can be utilised
to develop new streams of revenue and increase stability of product delivery and services
(Schiavi & Behr, 2018). Andal-Ancion et al. (2003) discuss the fact that, although it can be
challenging for traditional companies to adapt DT strategies, it is a vital task to enable these
organisations to retain their customers.
The ability of an organisation to evolve rapidly and adapt to changing business
environments is termed “organisational resilience”. It describes the phenomenon by which a
business remains competitive when exposed to disruptive risk.Mcmanus, Seville,Brunsdon,
and Vargo (2007) describe resilience as a function of an organisation’s: (1) situational
awareness for an understanding of the entire operating environment, (2) control of the main
vulnerabilities in the areas of concern during a significant disruption and (3) adaptive
capacity based on the culture and dynamics of an organisation that enables decision making
in a Volatile, Uncertain, Complex and Ambiguous (VUCA) environment. The attributional
resilience model developed by a community of interest group, focuses on the attributes that
arepossessedbyhighlyresilientorganisations.Thesearecrucialastheyconsideragilityasa
key attribute, which agrees with our study as it models organisational agility as a key DT
success factor. The resilience triangle model analyses the process capability, resources and
infrastructure and management, people and knowledge capabilities. The herringbone
resilience model considers the organisation’s capabilities, activities and characteristics
collectively, as drivers of business continuity in a disruptive environment. All these models
possess important aspects that will be considered as part of this research into strengthening
an organisation’s resilience, with a focus on the organisation’s capabilities, and its approach
to dealing with technostress to ensure employee well-being and improved performance. The
combined use of these resilience models is a good foundation for understanding and
extending how to build organisational resilience in the digital economy in the face of
uncertainty. The rapid growth of the use of digital technologies has been a tool utilised by
organisations to be resilient against business risks posed by rapidly evolving customer
demands, competition and the company’s dynamics such as culture, ways of working and
processes.
Gibson and Tarrant (2010) discuss the principles of modelling resilience, as a good risk
management approach, since it is multidimensional and exists over a range of conditions.
Figure 3 shows three models for organisational resilience: (1) the attributional resilience
model, (2) the herringbone resilience model and (3) the resilience triangle model. Tengblad &
Oudhuis (2018) argue that organisational resilience extends beyond being a capability to a
philosophyofensuringcompaniescannavigateadverse,complexanduncertainsituationsin
a responsible and pro-active way. It defines a resilient organisation as one that uses its
financial, technical and social resources to develop long-term capabilities, in an efficient and
reliable manner, to manage risks and exploit opportunities. Resilient companies are
strategicallyplacingthemselvestoexploitopeningswhenothercompanieslosedirectionand
stop being competitive due their inability to generate sufficient survival resources.
Strategic
management
framework
407
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/dts/article-pdf/2/4/403/289647/dts-11-2022-0059.pdf by guest on 07 July 2026

--- PAGE 6 ---
Technology has disrupted a number of products such as telegraph, cassettes and film
cameras. Less adaptable organisations have closed down due to unfavourable market and
businessconditions.Therefore,itisimportantfororganisationstoensurethattheirresources
are well taken care of, and that they continuously develop innovative ways to meet their
customer demands.
2.2 The 3 Ps framework
To develop a comprehensively, mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive approach to
utilising DT as a tool for organisational resilience in the face of disruptive risk to ensure
business continuity, various factors must be established within the 3Ps framework (people,
process and plant). The 3Ps framework is critical in the analysis of DT adoption as the three
elements should be considered as the basis of developing a comprehensive DT strategy.
Therefore, this study will investigate how each of these areas can be tailored to promote
organisational resilience through DT.
Plant: To ensure organisational resilience, companies need to leverage the available
innovativetechnologytoimprovebusinessperformanceandcompetitiveness.Technological
infrastructure or tools are one of the main drivers of digital innovation. New technology
involving Social, Mobile, Analytics, Cloud and Internet of Things (SMACIT) has led to
innovativeproductdevelopment,improvedcustomerexperience,streamlinedoperationsand
improved business models. Hinings, Gegenhuber, and Greenwood (2018) state that “Digital
innovation is about the creation of novel products and services; bydigital transformation we
mean the combined effects of several digital innovations bringing about novel actors,
structures, practices, values, and beliefs that change, threaten, replace or complement
existing rules of the game within organisations and fields”. The Technology Enactment
Framework (TEF) is used to analyse the structures and institutional arrangements on the
roll-out of technological strategies. Technology is considered both objectively (technological
hardware and software) and enactment (structural setups), as demonstrated by the
sociotechno system described by Esteves and Joseph (2008). The diamond framework by
Leavittdescribesorganisationsasconsistingoffourelements:(1)actors:thepeoplewithinthe
organisation, (2) structure, (3) tasks: processes and (4) technology. The diamond framework
argues that these four elements need to be in balance for transformation to occur, although it
does not provide further detail on the role depth of the elements to create value in the
organisation as it does not indicate readiness toward transformation. This framework
demonstrates that organisations consist of both social and technical elements, and that both
are equally significant and need to work together for value creating transformation to occur.
Thus, in thiswork itisimportant to consider both the socialandtechnical elements toenable
resilience through DT.
Processes: Organisational processes have been highly impacted by the quickly evolving
digital technologies, as they are expected to allow for quick alterations to cater for rapidly
Figure 3.
Resilience models:
attributional,
herringbone and
triangle
DTS
2,4
408
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/dts/article-pdf/2/4/403/289647/dts-11-2022-0059.pdf by guest on 07 July 2026

--- PAGE 7 ---
changing customer requirements. Therefore, agility has been a key enabler in digitally
developing organisations (Guinan, Parise, & Langowitz, 2019). The evolving technology has
fostered processes motivated by agile methodologies as opposed to waterfall approaches.
The agile manifesto focuses on: “(1) individuals and interactions over processes and tools
(2)workingsoftwareoverdetaileddocumentation(3)collaborationsovercontractnegotiation
(4) change of management over following a plan”. Beltran and Ramesh (2018), Schwarz,
Kalika, Keffi, and Schwarz (2010), and Warner and W€ ager (2019) state that the dynamic
capabilities to implement DT are based on the ability of the organisation to adapt to the
evolving technology. The applicability of agile systems across different industries outside of
the IT space has been a growing concern, but the tools have shown great benefits in catering
fortherapidlyevolvingdigitalenvironments.Therefore,itiscriticaltorevieworganisational
processes and ensure that they promote agility as part of utilising DT as a tool to
organisational resilience. To promote agile processes, organisations are adapting a design
thinking framework which promotes system design based on user inputs, as part of the
customer centric design methodology to product development.
People: In developing a successful DT approach, it is important to consider people-related
issues such as culture, stakeholder engagement, learning and development. These areas are
crucial to ensuring that the organisation’s workforce is equipped to accept and drive the
digital direction. McClelland’s “theory of needs” details that the needs of an individual are
acquired and shaped over time through life experiences. This theory is based on three needs
for motivation: (1) achievement (2) power and (3) affiliation. McClelland states that these
needs are not based on an individual’s environment, culture or social status but rather
motivatedbyrecognitionintheirworkplace(Royle&Hall,2012).Theneedforachievementis
driven by an urge to succeed among competitors, whereas the need for power is driven by
having influence to control or lead others. Individuals whose need for motivation is through
affiliation, have a desire for interpersonal and social relationships, which is fuelled by
working in groups and sticking to the norm to avoid rejection. Contrary to McClelland’s,
Sirota’s motivation theory is based on three motivating factors: fairness, achievement and
togetherness (Sirota & Klein, 2013). The management should incorporate these needs for
motivation in the organisation’s digital strategy to promote the adoption of DT.
2.3 New business models, value creation and limitations
The implementation of DT techniques leads to revamped business models that are designed
to result in new value creation for the organisation and its stakeholders. Developing an
organisation’s business model requires an appreciation of the key elements contributing to
disruptive business models. Fost (2021) discuss four areas which influence disruptive
business: key trends, market influence, industry influence and macroeconomic trends. These
support the areas to be evaluated in the PESTEL model when conducting an external
organisational analysis during the development of DT strategy. Therefore, it is vital for
organisations to understand their operating environments and the factors that could impact
their digital strategy and business models. Figure 4 explains the digital business models.
Transforming the business is implemented through revamping the business model to
ensure that it focuses on improved customer experience, redesigning the brand and
uncovering new opportunities (Cuofano, 2020). Based on the literature review on
organisational resilience and DT, the research gap is a strategic framework that integrates
thedifferentelementsofDTtoenableasuccessfulroll-outintheSouthAfricanenvironment.
2.4 Adoption of digital technologies in South Africa
ItisquiteevidentintheSouthAfricancontextwherethesedisruptionshavehadasignificant
impact, that organisations that are not participating in the digital economy will not benefit
Strategic
management
framework
409
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/dts/article-pdf/2/4/403/289647/dts-11-2022-0059.pdf by guest on 07 July 2026

--- PAGE 8 ---
from the unique value add, such as improved customer experience, efficient operating and
business models. These organisations will be disrupted as consumers are opting for more
convenient products and service offerings. Technological advances have resulted in the
disruption of traditional ways of business globally. They demand that businesses reinvent
themselves with the aim of deriving more customer value. A study conducted by the
consulting firm, Deloitte Africa, maps out the Digital Disruption Index by engaging senior
leadersacrosstheAfricancontinent,withafocusonSouthAfricanorganisations.Itindicates
that38%oforganisationsareintheearlystageofdevelopment,52%aredigitallydeveloping
and 10% are digitally maturing, as shown in Table 2, (Deloitte Digital, 2020). Therefore, the
digital maturity is low thus a huge research gap to ensuring organisations improve their
digital maturity and enable organisational resilience.
Astudy ofthe South Africanfinancial services adoptionof DT, analyses itsadoption as a
developing country (Modiba, Kekwaletswe, & Komati, 2020). South Africa’s challenges to
establishing DT have been caused by a steady economic growth, technology, infrastructure,
cultural diversity and political issues. Therefore, industries in this country require tailor-
made solutions to suit their economic and political climate. South Africa’s position on digital
adoption has led to further challenges in responding to the pandemic and implementing the
required changes for business continuity. Modiba, Kekwaletswe, and Komati (2020)
• Monetises through subscriptions on payment per transaction. Requires a balance
between service providers and customers to enable profitability.
On demand
Uber, Lyft
• Requires very large user base. Mostly consists of hidden revenue generation. Google
ads, Facebook, Twitter, Quora.
Ad supported
Google, Facebook
• Creates a platform that enables a service provider and user, offers great user
experience. Usually eliminates third party. Future could lead to self driving cars,
electric scooters and bike sharing.
Peer to peer
Uber, Bolt
• Using the web as a place to sell and purchase products, thus removing geographical
boundaries for transactions
E-commerce/
Marketplace
Amazon, Alibaba
• Growth and branding strategy, free service to majority of users and paying customers
are premium users. To ensure that: a strong customer base, a strategic conversion
approach to transform free users into paid ones and a robust technological
infrastructure that can deal with a large base of free users
Freenium model
Spotify, Dropbox
• Challenging, but allows for sustainable business models, usually sustained by original
content to keep users renewing their plan. The customer acquistion cost should be
less than the lifetime value of the customer. Enabled by: a loyal customer base,
continuousrevenue and a guaranteed sales pipeline
Subscription based
Netflix, Showmax
• An open source model makes software free to access, and it generally gives the
ability to a community of programmers to contribute to it. It can be later monetised
through premium services or subscriptions
Open source model
Github
Source(s): Cuofano (2020)
Organisation maturity assessment (%) Leaders equipped to lead DT (%)
Early stage 38 36
Digitally developing 52 53
Digitally maturing 10 80
Source(s): Deloitte Digital (2020)
Figure 4.
Digital business
models
Table 2.
Assessment of digital
leadership maturity in
Africa
DTS
2,4
410
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/dts/article-pdf/2/4/403/289647/dts-11-2022-0059.pdf by guest on 07 July 2026

--- PAGE 9 ---
investigate how the financial services sector operates in order to be competitive in the digital
economy by leveraging new technologies. The study pays particular attention to South
Africa, which is categorised as a developing country, considering the fact that a large
population of the country are in under-developed areas, where there is limited access to
technology. Modiba et al. (2020) utilise the Technology Organisational Environmental
framework to analyse the case of South African financial services. The results show that
under the organisational context: (1) there is a culture of micro-managing working hours, as
opposed to being output based; (2) scattered in-house capability building, not leveraging
companies that specialise in particular skillsets offered by big companies such as Amazon
and Microsoft. The technology context focused on (1) increased fault tolerance to ensure that
system failures result in minimum impact to customers and (2) complex legacy systems
resulting in high costs in managing demands. The environment speaks to customers who do
not have the infrastructure to access innovative products due to being in under-developed
areas (Modiba et al., 2020).
The (Price Waterhouse Coopers, 2018) report discusses how South Africa is falling
behind without DT. Despite DT being on the radar for a lot of C-suites, few organisations’
digital investments result in a competitive advantage in the market. A global study
showed that only 10% of manufacturing companies are digital champions, who view DT
as an approach to push innovation, beyond automation and networking. In this report, it
states that none of the manufacturing companies surveyed in South Africa are digital
champions as most fall into the digital novice category. The research shows that digital
champions are deriving more than 50% of their revenue from digital investments.
Two-thirdsofcompaniesdonothaveacleardigitalvisionandstrategytosupportDTand
the required culture (Price Waterhouse Coopers, 2018). Chief Information Officer (CIO)
Africa analysed the state of DT in South Africa and the challenges presented by legacy
systems (CIO Africa, 2019). Legacy systems present challenges to (1) innovation (2)
creativity and (3) new cloud deployments to spark progress. Technological advances are
seen to change by industry, and mostly by individual organisations such as banks, which
are changing faster due to an increased threat from digital banks. Insurance
organisations are investing resources to catch up with the digital economy. The
introduction of Amazon and Microsoft data-centres in South Africa will result in
increased migration to cloud deployment, which will, in turn, increase the uptake of
Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence (AI), to derive value from data and enable
improved decision making. One of the top concerns in the technology sector, is cyber
security which is crucial to protect the organisation and its customers data. Big
organisations are collaborating with innovative start-ups, to build digital capability (CIO
Africa, 2019). The increase in digital adoption will strengthen organisational resilience as
they will be better equipped to deal with VUCA environments.
3. Research methodology
The literature review has demonstrated that there are research gaps with regard to
developing a holistic framework in the South African context for management to utilise to
establish organisational resilience using DT. Thus, this research aims to address these gaps
by understanding the main elements of successful DT post-pandemic. To develop a
comprehensive, mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive approach for utilising DT as
atoolfororganisational resiliencetoensurebusinesscontinuityinthefaceofdisruptiverisk,
variousfactors mustbeestablished withinthe 3Psframework. The 3Psframework is critical
in the analysis of DT adoption, as the three elements are the basis of developing a
comprehensive DT strategy. Therefore, this study will investigate how each of these areas
can be tailored to promote organisational resilience through DT.
Strategic
management
framework
411
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/dts/article-pdf/2/4/403/289647/dts-11-2022-0059.pdf by guest on 07 July 2026

--- PAGE 10 ---
3.1 Research design
A qualitative approach is utilised to understand the DT elements that impacted digital maturity
within the workplace in the South African context during the pandemic. The research approach
will be to utilise interviews in order to have a deeper understanding of how organisations have
beenimpacted,andhowtheyhavereactedinthefaceofthepandemic.Theinterviewinvestigates
the digital investments that organisations had prior to the pandemic and how they enabled
businesscontinuity,whatfurtherinvestmentswereinjectedasaresultofthepandemic,andhow
businesseshavebeenpermanentlyimpactedleadingtoashiftindigitalmaturity.Toconductthe
qualitative research, grounded theory is used to build the theoretical framework based on the
collecteddata.Theresearchproblemisthatthereislackofmanagementframeworkstoenablethe
adoption of DT in a developing economy. This research’s main contribution is to develop an
empirical framework for the smooth adoption of DT in South Africa.
3.2 Interview sample environment
Professionals were interviewed to obtain a detailed analysis on how the use of technology
implemented during the pandemic has impacted organisations, and the workforce, with a
particular focusonthedigitalenvironment andmaturity intheseperiods. Thedataanalytics
utilises MAXQDA software for the coding process. Ten interviewees in digital management
werechosentorepresentdifferentindustriesnamely:mining,financialservices,energy,retail
and oil and gas, as shown in Table 3. The interviews were carried out through face-to-face
discussion, and video calls through platforms such as Microsoft Teams and Zoom. The
themes identified will then be used to arrive at an approach for utilising DT as a tool to build
resilienceinthefaceofdisruptiverisk.Thereisanequaldistributioninthesampleacrossthe
differentindustriesinterviewed.Themajorityoftheintervieweesweremalebetweentheages
of[18,35],eachwithaneducationallevelofabachelor’sdegree,atleast,as showninFigure5.
Thisisduetothetechnological spacebeingyoung,andmaledominatedin SouthAfrica.The
interview questions are indicated in Table A1.
4. Results
The main codes resulting from the interviews on DT use and its impact on an individual’s
technostress were categorised and shown in Figure 6.
4.1 People element
The analysis shows that the people element is impacted the most by DT when analysing the
discussions across the different industries. Interviewee 5M states that “People will not
Respondents Age Gender Education Industry
1M Between 18 and 35 Male Bachelors Energy
1F Between 18 and 35 Female Bachelors Energy
2M Between 36 and 50 Male Doctorate Financial services
3M Between 18 and 35 Male Masters Financial services
4M Between 36 and 50 Male Masters Mining
5M Between 18 and 35 Male Doctorate Mining
6M Between 18 and 35 Male Masters Oil and gas
7M Between 18 and 35 Male Masters Oil and gas
8M Between 18 and 35 Male Bachelors Retail
2F Between 18 and 35 Female Bachelors Retail
Source(s): Developed by the authors
Table 3.
Detailed demographics
analysis
DTS
2,4
412
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/dts/article-pdf/2/4/403/289647/dts-11-2022-0059.pdf by guest on 07 July 2026

--- PAGE 11 ---
appreciate the value of understanding data and the insights brought about by digital”. Unless
explained to them, this lack of understanding can hinder projects’ successful DT roll-outs. 5M
alsoelaboratesthat“Peopleonlyprioritisedatathatspeakstotheirbottomline,i.e.thebankwill
40
40
20
Education
Bachelor Masters Doctorate
20%
20%
20%
20%
20%
Industry
Energy Mining
Financial services Retail
Oil and gas
80
20
Gender
Male Female
80
20
Age
[18,35] [36,50]
Source(s): Figure by the authors
Figure 5.
Interviewee
demographics in %
Figure 6.
Codes analysis
Strategic
management
framework
413
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/dts/article-pdf/2/4/403/289647/dts-11-2022-0059.pdf by guest on 07 July 2026

--- PAGE 12 ---
be most likely to have the correct customers’ bankbalance”. Furthermore, that people who are
industrydomainexpertswouldbenefitfromunderstandingdigitalknowledge:“becauseofthe
directionthattheworldistaking,itwillbeadvantageousfortheoperationsthosepeoplehaveto
performforthem to havean understandingofdigital, datascience,and what itcanoffer them,
whatvaluecantheyextractfromit”.6Mstatesthatduringthepandemic,“Thetechnologypart,
for ways of working, was impacted, because people did not have data for connectivity which
now had to be issued”. Since they had no infrastructure or connectivity to work-from-home,
thesefactorscontributedtotechnostress,asemployeeswerenotcomfortableworkingthrough
technological digital platforms because they were used to being office-based. Due to the
pandemic,thepeopleelementbecamemorecrucialduetoremoteworking.Thiswasaccelerated
by the COVID-19 pandemic, during which people had to maintain social distance and set up
theirwork officesintheir homes.This caused a lot of dynamicsacrossthedifferent sectorsfor
theemployeesandledtoalotoftechnostressareas,suchastechno-invasionasthelinebetween
personal and professional space overlapped. This transformation also impacted
communication between internal stakeholders (employees and management) and external
stakeholders (customers and executive board). This is supported by the interviewee in the
financial services sector who stated that: “Definitely. Working remotely has made people to
think that they can always have access to a person through channels like the email system.”
“Because workingremotelyhas ledtoone not separatingtheworkandpersonal.” “AndI don’t
think we have quite figured it out, adapting to remote working”.
4.1.1 Organisational culture. In addition to the people element, organisational culture is
also an important factor in ensuring a conducive environment which promotes productivity
and the willingness of employees to upskill and be innovative towards digital business
models as supported by the interviewees: “I think culture is a big one and for people to
understand from the get-go, when you’re doing a digital transformation project”. 2F also
agrees,statingthatintheretaile-commercespace:“Culturallyspeaking,wedoaccommodate,
making sure that people feel that they are part of the business, that they are at one with the
businessandtheirvaluesaresharedwiththebusiness”.Theintervieweesalsoacknowledged
thatthecultureisimpactedbytrustissuesbetweenmanagementandemployees,statingthat:
“There are trust issues when it relates to job security and there is no trust in the business
about the consideration of people’s well-being”. Thus, leadership has to be aware of the way
people feel and put forward measures to avoid technostress issues: “The leadership team
learnt a lot from that type of experience, knowing that it’s necessary to have more
transparency within the business, making sure that the business objectives are
communicated better, so that people understand what the business is trying to achieve”.
4.1.2 Digital skills: upskilling and reskilling in the workplace. Ensuring that employees are
upskilled and reskilled to stay abreast of technological developments is crucial to enable
organisations to be at the forefront of technological developments. In the mining sector, DT
includes a lot of automation of processes. in fact, respondent 4M from the mining sector,
commentedonthetechno-insecuritythatisduetomoretechnologicaladvancedprocessesbeing
introduced in this space: “I’m saying upfront, you must think about the upskilling that will be
required,orwhereelseyouwillwanttousethosepeople”.“Thinkaboutthatupfront,grantedthat
youmightnotalwayshaveaneedtohavethosepeople”.Therewasalsoacknowledgementthat
insomecasesthetechnologyisnotsocompletelyadvancedtoallowittooperateonitsown:“And
thatiswhywecan’tcompletelygetridofpeople,untilthetimewhenthesemachinesdon’tneedto
be manned”. Until there comes a time when the technological advances can allow complete
automation, which means that these plants would require fewer people to operate them. Stating
that it might not be possible to keep all the employees, thus there should be a comprehensive
upfrontplantominimisejoblosses,astheseleadtoincreasedtechnostress.4Mstatedthat,about
thejoblosses:Soyeah,it’scertainlynotpossible,butitneedstobethoughtaboutitupfrontsothat
it can be minimised and, other ways can be thought about, better to say where we can best use
DTS
2,4
414
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/dts/article-pdf/2/4/403/289647/dts-11-2022-0059.pdf by guest on 07 July 2026

--- PAGE 13 ---
thesepeople.“Andwhatisoutthere,easilyaccessibleinthemedia,isthatthistechnologyishere
toreplacepeople”.Intermsofskillsthereisabattlebetweendigitalskillsagainstindustrydomain
knowledge.Specifically,intheminingsectortheystatethat:“Ideally,youwanttostrikeabalance,
almost have 60 % domain knowledge and 40 % you know, on the advanced analytics side of
things”. “I think domain is still important, but people with domain without the advanced
analytics, again, they are a problem as well”. “There is an ease if you don’t have domain
knowledge,youwillstrugglewithalotofthingsandyouwillaskalotofpeoplequestionsnow”.“I
think domain is still important, but people with domain without the advanced analytics, again,
they are a problem as well”. Thus, it is important for organisations to ensure that they are
equipped with the correct skills set, which are comprehensive of both industry domain
knowledgeanddigitalanalyticalskillselaboratedby4M:“Now,youlookatthefinanceandretail
space they are way advanced in comparison to mining, and that is why if you’re looking for
someonewho’slikealmostadatascientistwhowillworkintheminingspace,evenifyoucanget
someone from the banking side, you will still struggle because they don’t have domain
knowledge, and on the other hand, if your people are traditional engineers, and they are almost
crawlingatthespeedofatortoise”.Upskillinginthee-commerceretailsectorisanongoingeffort
and2Fstatedthat:“Therearecoursesthatareofferedtoupskillyou,forinstance,ifyouwantto
gointooperationstherearecoursesthathavebeencurated,inordertohelpyougettothatpoint”.
Thus, Figure 7 shows the resulting qualitative codes for the people element.
4.2 Technology element
The implementation of value adding technology was one of the major elements identified as
beingcrucialtotheroll-outofaDTinitiative.The qualitativeanalysisshowsthatitiscrucial
that the organisation conducts an analysis into which technologies would drive the most
value,bothintheshortandlongterm.Acrossthedifferentsectors,varioustechnologieshave
been implemented such as machine learning, cloud computing, data analytics, blockchain
and FinTech technologies. Although the implementation of these technologies is at infancy
stages, some benefits have been realised in terms of understanding the plants’ operational
efficiencies and the consumer behaviour. In the financial services sector, cloud adoption has
People
Technostress
Job security
Remote
working
Communication
leadership
customer
Teams
Skill
Domain
Training
Digital Training
Culture
Partnerships
KPI
Source(s): Based on this study’s output
Figure 7.
People qualitative
codes and categories
Strategic
management
framework
415
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/dts/article-pdf/2/4/403/289647/dts-11-2022-0059.pdf by guest on 07 July 2026

--- PAGE 14 ---
had a major impact, in terms of improving agility and cost reduction, as pointed out by 2M:
“So pre-pandemic, we actually used Amazon Web Services (AWS), for most of our services
but now we’re using Google Cloud for all services”. “But we had to accelerate our cloud
migration.Thatwentverywell,Ithink,we’vemanagedtomovealmost50%ofourworkloads
fromonpremtothecloud”.“Andintermsofagility,andspeed,forinnovationspeed,withthe
move to cloud, somehow we have managed to shorten our go to market cycles”. “While
movingourworkloadstocloud,anotherimportantthingthatwehavebeendoing,andweare
continuingtodoisobservability,whichisbasicallybeingabletohaveaviewofalltheevents
orinteractionsthathappenedwithinourbusinessservices”.“Andourmovetocloudhasalso
helped a great deal with cost reduction”. “So, because we no longer own very expensive
infrastructure for the most part, and we’re leveraging, cloud capabilities”.
4.2.1 Technological infrastructure and adoption. The adoption of technologies such as
blockchain has been slow, although different sectors are starting to investigate the potential
thatcouldbederivedfromblockchaintechnologies. 4MpointedoutthatintheSouthAfrican
market the use of blockchain has not been completely rolled out, but there is room to utilise
the technology to model commodities and enable real time trading between stakeholders:
“Mostmining housesarenotleveraging blockchainastheyshould,butIdothinkblockchain
is being demystified and very soon it will make inroads into this space”. “And I think that’s
where the whole blockchain technology can come in, because you can start treating this
commodity in real time, because you’re able to control the demand supply and link it to the
exchange rates”. The energy space also agrees on the slow adoption of blockchain stating
thattheywouldwanttomakesuccessofthefoundationaltechnologycurrentlybeingutilised
beforeimplementingmoresophisticatedtechnologies:“Ireallyfeelthatwestillwanttomake
whatwehaveworkbeforewegettoblockchain,wewanttofocusonsomethingsimple,before
we get to advanced analytics”.
4.2.2Technologicallimitationsandmaturity.Fortechnologyimplementation,someofthe
limitations pointed out in the mining sector are that the technology might not be fully
accessible in regions that do not have highly mature DT: “I mean, we are working with
global companies in terms of tech, and in as much as we have got data centres across the
globe,butsome of thecapabilitiesthatyoumightwanttoleverage on thecloud,theymight
not yet be in the country, and hence you might have to go to another region to leverage
those”. The energy sector also states that they are not currently using advanced
technologies for their operations or to devise new business models: 1M states that: “I don’t
think we can say the organisation as an enterprise is one of the companies that are now
adopting technology”. Which is supported by 1F: “And I can say that we are looking at the
technologies that are coming up, that could potentially be disruptors in the energy space”.
Thus,althoughtherearepocketsof excellenceintermsoftechnologyadoptionintheSouth
African market, with industries such as: financial services and retail e-commerce being
more digitally mature, when compared to heavy engineering-oriented organisations such
as: oil and gas and the energy space, which are not. The more mature sectors have seen the
adoption of sophisticated tech such as cloud adoption, big data analytics driving Machine
Learning and AI, whereas the less mature sector are still working on mastering collecting
data through IoT technologies to create operational transparency through dashboarding
tools such as Power Business Intelligence (BI). Thus, Figure 8 shows the resulting
qualitative codes for the technology element.
4.3 Process element
Intermsofprocesses,itisimportantthattheorganisationupdatestheirprocessestobeinline
with more streamlined and agile approaches to management for the changing corporate
environment and consumer expectations.
DTS
2,4
416
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/dts/article-pdf/2/4/403/289647/dts-11-2022-0059.pdf by guest on 07 July 2026

--- PAGE 15 ---
4.3.1 Digital governance. The main process factor resulting from the qualitative analysis is
governance, which is crucial to compliance management and ensuring that there is structure
in the way data is managed. In the retail e-commerce space, there is a specific focus on data
governance and dedicated resources to manage this process, as stated by 2F: “So, as we
understand, most ofthese governance andregulations would fallin thedata space. So,we do
have people that are responsible for privacy data governance”. For the financialservices, 2M
stated that: “For the most part, we already had a very robust data governance”. “Our data
governance, whichisrelativelymature,Ithinkitmadecomplying,toGDPRandPOPIactfor
the regulatory environment, more manageable”. In the mining sector 4M stated that: “In
terms of governance, I think we almost can’t do without governance”. “Well, you certainly
need governance to help with such things. You definitely need governance to deal with the
biasness,whetherit’scultural,gender,colour,age”.Intheretailsector2Fstatesthat:“Well,in
terms of like policy and legal, we have a lot of training that happens, naturally, for people to
understand what’s the best Code of Conduct rules and regulations within the company
governance”.Theenergysectorstatesthatthereisalotofgovernanceandsomeofthiscomes
with 3rd party products as stated by 1M: “We use, the state-of-the-art technology in the
market and we just adopt that governance”.
4.3.2Designthinking.Alsocriticaltoproductdevelopmentiscustomercentricity,whichis
managed by the process of design thinking that considers the end-user design requirements
during the product development process. This ensures that the consumers or end-users get
brought in from the start, and are comfortable with using the product. In the oil and gas
sector: “It was mentioned and understood that there will be a need for agility, there will be a
needfordesignthinkingandforsprint’s”.Supportedbytheretaile-commercesectorwhereit
is considered for customer inclusivity: “In terms of design thinking, we are looking at
customer consideration when developing solutions”. In the mining sector, 4M states that:
“Design thinking, it’s much needed, and the industry is embracing it, but they can still
improve”. “And if you were to apply design thinking, you will harness from the employees
Technology
Infrastucture
Blockchain
Fintech
Cloud
Analytics
AI
Value
Revenue
Efficiency
Customer
satisfaction
Source(s): Figure based on this study’s output
Figure 8.
Technology qualitative
codes and categories
Strategic
management
framework
417
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/dts/article-pdf/2/4/403/289647/dts-11-2022-0059.pdf by guest on 07 July 2026

--- PAGE 16 ---
thathave domainknowledge, andthe employeesthathave littledomainknowledge, butalot
of analytical expertise”. “Design thinking helps you to bridge that divide, without design
thinking you will struggle to bridge that divide, and have that innovation and product that
will work for a company”. In the energy space, 1M states that: “So no, in terms of design
thinking, I don’t think much of our products are centred around our customer, because the
core businesses produce is electricity”.
4.3.3 Agile framework. Aligned to design thinking is the use of agile frameworks during
product development. The use of agile methodologies pushes for organisations to
continuously reiterate with their clients to refine the user requirements. This approach has
proven to be challenging in some sectors which are still operating through traditional
methodologies, where project requirements are completely defined priorto starting aproject.
These sectors have had to find hybrid approaches to take advantage of the benefits of agile
approaches, while still operating within the traditional waterfall approach. The benefits of
using agile approaches are quick iterations and the ability to continuously tailor the
deliverables to the customer requirements. In the financial services sector, 3M acknowledges
that:“Astherearebigorganisations,thechancesarethateveninoursectorifwebecomevery
good at being agile, then the organisations that want to emulate, will try to emulate us in a
competitive manner, rather than in a comparative manner”. Also stating that the
organisational culture needs to support agile processes: The process factors governance,
design thinking and agility have gained implementation familiarity across the different
sectors,butorganisationsstillhaveopportunitiestotakefurtheradvantageoftheseelements
to ensure streamlined processes and increased customer satisfaction on product
development. Thus, Figure 9 shows the resulting qualitative codes for the process element.
4.4 Strategy and organisation element
The re-evaluation of business models to derive new ways to getting revenue is important to
ensure that organisations are competitive and sustainable in future digital economy.
4.4.1 Digital business models. Digital business models will allow organisations to partner
and operate across different sectors, while delivering value to their consumer base. One area
that is applying this approach is the financial services sector that is using their base
consumer to expand into marketplace businesses. In the retail space, respondent 2F states
Processes
Data management
Governance
Customer
centricity
Design thinking
Agility
Source(s): Based on this study’s output
Figure 9.
Process element
qualitative categories
and codes
DTS
2,4
418
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/dts/article-pdf/2/4/403/289647/dts-11-2022-0059.pdf by guest on 07 July 2026

--- PAGE 17 ---
that due to the pandemic: “There were a lot of changes that we made in terms of our actual
product, we also made changes to suit the needs of customers at this point in time, for
instance, we introduced the likes of contactless pickup, contactless delivery, so that people
don’t have to have as much interaction and as many touch points with other people”.
4.4.2 Digital strategy. In the energy sector, they acknowledge that the development of a
digital strategy is still at its early stages, and the implementation of this strategy has not yet
begun:“Idon’tthinkthemainaspectoftheorganisation’sbusinessmodelatthepresenttime
is on a strategy to adopt technology, although we all know the pathways, but I think what is
happening at the moment is not strategic, per se”. This research shows that the successful
implementation of a DT initiative goes beyond the technological investment. A comment
from the financial services sector on the successful roll-out of DT initiatives was: “So,
basically, it has six legs to it: (1) culture, (2) technology, (3) infrastructure, (4) people, (5)
processesand(6)metrics.”“Asmuchasyouarefocusingonthetechnology,youneedtofocus
onthe culture, andfocuson thepeople. Because ifyoudo notdothat, youare going tohave a
technologythatpeopledonotrelateto.So,knowledgeandtechnologyarenotfreegoods,they
don’tjustflow,theorganisationneedstobedeliberateonhowtoimplement”.Thus,Figure10
shows the resulting qualitative codes for the strategy and organisation element.
4.5 Overall strategic roll-out
When it comes to the implementation of tech, organisations need to be strategic about this
roll-out, and start by deriving value from fundamental tools that will allow for decision
making, like dashboarding, as stated that: “Transparency is your first step, before doing
moresophisticatedtech,throughvisualisation.Itcouldevenstartderivingvalueifitsdriving
decision making within the organisation”. When asked about the successful implementation
of DT, the respondent from oil and gas, 6M, stated that: “Success will be when we have
become clearer about which areas need which kind of technologies, and deploying those
Strategy and
organisation
Business models
Revenue
Partnerships
Pandemic
Customer satisfaction
Source(s): Figure based on this study’s output
Figure 10.
Strategy and
organisation
qualitative categories
and codes
Strategic
management
framework
419
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/dts/article-pdf/2/4/403/289647/dts-11-2022-0059.pdf by guest on 07 July 2026

--- PAGE 18 ---
technologies where we need them to achieve those gains, either from an operational
perspective, or from a customer interaction perspective”.
5. Formulating the DT strategic framework
Thequalitative study wasexploratoryresearch thatindicated thatinthe differentindustries
being investigated (1) energy, (2) financial services, (3) mining, (4) oil and gas and (5) retail e-
commerce, there are common themes that are crucial to the successful roll-out of DT
initiatives.
ThedatacodesinTable4,indicatedthatpeopleandtechnologyarebigdriversforDTand
thesehavebeenacceleratedbythepandemic.Intermsofvalue,thebiggestdrivershavebeen
the global pandemic, forcing organisations to be more digitally mature. The qualitative
analysis shows that the impact of DT on technostress has been significant, due to the
increased use and dependence on digital technologies during the pandemic. Thus,
organisations need to roll-out digital transformational projects strategically, considering
the impact of these projects on the people element and avoiding techno-overload resulting
fromtheconsistentuseofdigitalcommunicationplatformsandincreaseduseofsocialmedia.
To achieve this understanding of the people element, an extensive quantitative study has to
be conducted to understand the technostress elements that impact employee well-being.
TheframeworkinFigure11describesthepracticalstepsthatmanagementcanundertake
toward a DT journey in different industries. As demonstrated by the framework,
organisations should begin their journey by conducting an industry-specific digital
maturity assessment to inform the digital strategy. The maturity assessment will
highlight the gaps between the current maturity score and the target score. In the
implementation stage, the 3Ps should be analysed holistically to ensure the success of the
implementationroll-out.Theframework showsmoreelementsthantechnologyarecriticalto
Codes Categories Themes
Job security Technostress People
Remote working
Leadership Communication
Customer
Teams
Domain training Skill
Digital training
Partnerships Culture
Key Performance Indicators (KPIs)
FinTech Technological infrastructure Technology
Blockchain
Machine learning
Analytics
Cloud
Revenue Value
Efficiency
Customer satisfaction
Governance Streamlined data management Processes
Design thinking Customer centred product development
Agility
Revenue Business models Strategy and organisation
Partnerships
Pandemic Customer satisfaction
Source(s): Developed by the authors
Table 4.
Codes and themes
DTS
2,4
420
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/dts/article-pdf/2/4/403/289647/dts-11-2022-0059.pdf by guest on 07 July 2026

--- PAGE 19 ---
Conduct value analysis
based on:
- Revenue
- Productivity
- Quality
- Sustainalibility
Key Performance
Indicators linked with
overall Digital strategy
Track improvements on
the Maturity tool
4. Monitoring and
improvement
Plant
- Technological tools
- Tech adoption
People
- Organisational culture
- Continous learning
- Engagement
- Technostress
Processes
- Agility
- Design thinking
- Digital governance
3. Implementation
- Based on the
technological roadmap
from the maturity
assessment, develop
and integrate digital
strategy
- The digital strategy
should prioritise areas
that were identified to
drive the most value
from the assessment
- Discuss and integrate
the digital strategy into
the corporate strategy
- Derive detailed digital
initiatives and assign
initiative owners
- Conduct change
management to align the
organisation on the
digital transformational
activities
-Evaluate organisations'
business model
2. Digital strategy
and organisation
- Establish
organisational end-to-
end assessment areas
- Analyse the current
Digital Maturity of the
organisation through
interviews with different
stakeholders
- Determine target for
the maturity score for
the organisation
- Compare the score
with local and
international roadmaps
- Map out a
technological roadmap
to enable the
organisation to move
from current maturity
score to desired
competitive score
1. Digital Maturity
Assessment
Plant
• Technological tools:
Establish the technological
tools required to drive the
Digital strategy and improve the
maturity score on the prioritised
organisational areas
• Tech adoption: Invest in
technological adoption
initiatives to ensure that the
technologyintroduced is
integrated into the current
systems and the workforce
receives sufficient training
People
• Organisational culture: as
part of the change
management process, ensure
the culture promotes an agile
and flexible working culture as
digital processes and
technology is continously
evolving
• Continous learning: Establish
processes that ensure that
employees are continously
upgrading to be a fit in the
organisation's future skills need
• Engagement: Create digital
engagement platforms to
enable both employee and
customer feedback
• Technostress: Review
technostressc creators and
ensure that provision is created
to manage it
Processes
•Agility: Ensure processes
allow for iterative project
implementation, continously
engage and get feedback from
clients on the projects
deliverables, Requirements
gathering process is going with
a focus on the project phase
•Design thinking: Make the
client integral to the design
process by empathising with
the clients needs and
environment
•Digital governance: Establish
processes for governing digital
and data systems to ensure
successful structured digital
success with accountable
people
Identify
technostressors
- Conduct internal analysis on
factors that create stress
- Investigate wellbeing impact
techno elements such as
techno-overload, insecurity,
invasion
- Identify common themes for
stressors, such lack of training
Evaluate
situational factors
- Develop interventions to
reduce employee stress, such
as structured training for new
technologies being introduced
into the organisation
- Create trackable programs
targeted to ensure improved
employee well being
Monitor employee
strain levels
- Track and monitor
employee wellbeing,
prioritising periods in which
the organisation is
undergoing major digital
transformation initiatives
Source(s): Figure based on this study’s research output
Figure 11.
Digital transformation
framework
Strategic
management
framework
421
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/dts/article-pdf/2/4/403/289647/dts-11-2022-0059.pdf by guest on 07 July 2026

--- PAGE 20 ---
DT roll-out. Thus, organisational leadership should manage all of these elements. As
discussed in the literature by Ragu-Nathan et al. (2008), organisations should monitor work
environmental stressors and derive situational factors by reducing technostress
experienced by employees, thus promoting job satisfaction and satisfaction with life
scale.Toexploretheresearch’slimitationsandfurtherwork:throughhighlightingareasthat
will contribute to expanding the research areas and strengthening the DT framework and
employee well-being during DT. The limitations of the research are that the investigation
was conducted in the South African environment. The study can be broadened from local
working professionals to compare against other countries with differing maturity curves.
Future study recommendations are that similar research can be included for a more
significant sample:
(1) Including more industries, such as health care and manufacturing
(2) InvestigateSmallMediumandMicro-Enterprises(SMMEs)versusbigorganisational
analysis to investigate the barriers to DT based on organisational size and
complexities
(3) Conductadeepdiveintoeachfocusareatodeveloporganisationalinitiativesfromthe
DT framework, detailing the project management elements such as timelines,
resources and cost
(4) Include a bigger sample size, to get a bigger representation of the environment
6. Conclusion
Organisations have an opportunity to improve their value offering to their customers by
utilising DT to improve ways of doing business. This qualitative study engages digital
industry experts to investigate the DT elements that contribute to a successful
transformation roll-out. In addition to choosing the adequate technological infrastructure,
organisations should focus on the people elements including culture, communication,
technostress or well-being, as being critical transformation factors. Thus, DT is more than
just about technology. This research’s contribution is the developed digital transformational
framework to guide organisations on their journey. It highlights other critical elements
beyond the technological infrastructure, such as people, process and governance. The
researchshowsthatorganisationsundergoingDTtostrengthentheirresilienceshouldfocus
on ensuring employee well-being.
References
Afandi, W. (2017). The role of strategic leadership in digital transformation process. International
Journal of Recent Research and Applied Studies, 33(2), 2015–2018.
Albukhitan, S. (2020). Developing digital transformation strategy for manufacturing. Procedia
Computer Science, 170, 664–671. doi: 10.1016/j.procs.2020.03.173.
Andal-Ancion, A., Cartwright, P. A., & Yip, G. S. (2003). The digital transformation of traditional
businesses. MIT Sloan Management Review, 44(4), 34–41.
Belhadi, A., Kamble, S., Jabbour, C. J. C., Gunasekaran, A., Ndubisi, N. O., & Venkatesh, M. (2020).
Manufacturing and service supply chain resilience to the COVID-19 outbreak: Lessons learned from
the automobile and airline industries. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 163, 120447. doi:
10.1016/j.techfore.2020.120447.
Beltran, G., & Ramesh, B. (2018). Dynamic capabilities in small service firms. Engaged Management
ReView, 1(3). doi: 10.28953/2375-8643.1018.
DTS
2,4
422
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/dts/article-pdf/2/4/403/289647/dts-11-2022-0059.pdf by guest on 07 July 2026

--- PAGE 21 ---
Chanias, S., & Hess, T. (2016). Understanding digital transformation strategy formation: Insights from
Europe’s automotive industry. In Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, PACIS 2016
- Proceedings, January.
CIO Africa (2019). Just what is the state of digital transformation in South Africa? — CIO, available
from: https://www.cio.com/article/3431617/just-whatis-the-state-of-digital-transformation-in-
sout h-africa.html
Cuofano, G. (2020). Digital business models map: The most popular digital business model types -
FourWeekMBA. FourWeekMBA, available from: https://fourweekmba.com/digital-business-
models/
Deloitte Digital (2020). Digital disruption Index – South Africa being digital: Aligning strategy,
workforce and technology (Issue August).
Esteves, J., & Joseph, R. C. (2008). A comprehensive framework for the assessment of eGovernment projects.
Government Information Quarterly, 25(1), 118–132. doi: 10.1016/j.giq.2007.04.009.
Fletcher, G., & Griffiths, M. (2020). Digital transformation during a lockdown. International Journal of
Information Management, 55, 102185. doi:10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2020.102185.
Fost, M. (2021). Disruptive business model development. Fostec and Company. available from: https://
www.fostec.com/en/competences/strategy/disruptive-business-model-development/
Gibson, C., & Tarrant, M. (2010). A conceptual models approach to organisational resilience. The
Australian Journal of Emergency Management, 25(2), 1–12.
Guinan, P. J., Parise, S., & Langowitz, N. (2019). Creating an innovative digital project team: Levers to
enable digital transformation. Business Horizons, 62(6), 717–727. doi: 10.1016/j.bushor.2019.
07.005.
Hinings, B., Gegenhuber, T., & Greenwood, R. (2018). Digital innovation and transformation:
An institutional perspective. Information and Organization, 28(1), 52–61. doi: 10.1016/j.
infoandorg.2018.02.004.
Mcmanus, S., Seville, E., Brunsdon, D., & Vargo, J. (2007). Resilience management: A framework for
assessing and improving the resilience of organisations. Resilient Organisations Research
Report, 1, 79, available from: http://ir.canterbury.ac.nz/handle/10092/2808
Mergel, I., Edelmann, N., & Haug, N. (2019). Defining digital transformation: Results from expert
interviews. Government Information Quarterly, 36(4), 101385. doi:10.1016/j.giq.2019.06.002.
Miguel, J. C., & Casado, M. A. (2016). Gafanomy (Google, Amazon, Facebook and Apple): The big four
and the becosystem. In Dynamics of big internet industry groups and future trends (pp. 127–148).
Springer.
Modiba, M. M., Kekwaletswe, R. M., & Komati, M. D. (2020). It capability framework for digital
transformation in South African financial service providers. International Journal of Computer
Organization Trends, 10, 2. doi: 10.14445/22492593/ijcot-v10i2p305.
PricewaterhouseCoopers (2018). Digital champion – how industry leaders build operations ecosystems
to deliver end-to-end customer solutions 4.0. in web (issue may), available from: https://www.
pwc.com/gx/en/industries/industry4-0.html
Ragu-Nathan, T.S., Tarafdar, M., & Ragu-Nathan, B.S. (2008). The consequences of technostress for
end users in organizations: Conceptual development and validation. Information Systems
Research, 19(4), 417–433. doi:10.1287/isre.1070.0165.
Royle, M. T., & Hall, A. T. (2012). Theory of needs, feeling individually. International Journal of
Management and Marketing Research, 5, 1.
Schiavi, G. S., & Behr, A. (2018). Emerging technologies and new business models: A review on
disruptive business models. Innovation & Management Review, 15, 4. doi: 10.1108/inmr-03-
2018-0013.
Schwarz, A., Kalika, M., Keffi, H., & Schwarz, C. (2010). A dynamic capabilities approach to
understanding the impact of it-enabled businesses processes and it-business alignment on the
Strategic
management
framework
423
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/dts/article-pdf/2/4/403/289647/dts-11-2022-0059.pdf by guest on 07 July 2026

--- PAGE 22 ---
strategic and operational performance of the firm. Communications of the Association for
Information Systems, 26, 1. doi: 10.17705/1cais.02604.
Sirota, D., & Klein, D. (2013). The enthusiastic employee: How companies profit by giving workers what
they want (2nd ed.). New Jersey: Pearson FT Press.
Tengblad, S., & Oudhuis, M. (2018). The resilience framework. Work, Organization, and Employment,
10, 978–981.
Verhoef, P. C., Broekhuizen, T., Bart, Y., Bhattacharya, A., Qi Dong, J., Fabian, N., & Haenlein, M.
(2021). Digital transformation: A multidisciplinary reflection and research agenda. Journal of
Business Research, 122(July 2018), 889–901. doi: 10.1016/j.jbusres.2019.09.022.
Vial, G. (2019). Understanding digital transformation: A review and a research agenda. Journal of
Strategic Information Systems, 28(2), 118–144. doi: 10.1016/j.jsis.2019.01.003.
Walsh, I., Kefi, H., & Baskerville, R. (2010). Managing culture creep: Toward a strategic model of user
it culture. Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 19(4), 257–280. doi: 10.1016/j.jsis.2010.
09.002.
Warner, K. S. R., & W€ ager, M. (2019). Building dynamic capabilities for digital transformation:
An ongoing process of strategic renewal. Long Range Planning, 52(3), 326–349. doi:10.1016/j.lrp.
2018.12.001.
Further reading
Bellis, M. A (2020). The history of steam-powered cars. ThoughtCo, available from: https://www.
thoughtco.com/history-of-steam-powered-cars-4066248
Blaschke, M., Cigaina, M., Riss, U., & Shoshan, I. (2017). Designing business models for the digital
economy. In Shaping the Digital Enterprise: Trends and Use Cases in Digital Innovation and
Transformation. Issue Springer International Publishing Switzerland. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-
40967-2.
Bulawa, P. (2014). Adapting grounded theory in qualitative research: Reflections from personal
experience. International Research in Education, 2(1), 145. doi: 10.5296/ire.v2i1.4921.
Bygstad, B., Aanby, H.P., & Iden, J. (2017). Leading digital transformation: The Scandinavian way.
Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing, 294(July), 1–14. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-64695-
4_1.
Co, M. (2019). Digital reinvention can spur South Africa’s economy, available from: https://www.
mckinsey.com/
Deshpande, A. (2019). 6 keys to digital transformation for small businesses - frevvo blog, available
from: https://www.frevvo.com/blog/6-keys-digital-transformation/
Doodleblue (2020). The impact of digital transformation on small to medium-sized enterprises.
Doodleblue Digital Strategy Consulting, available from: https://www.doodleblue.com/blogs/
impact-of-digital-transformation-on-smes
Duch-Brown, N., & Rossetti, F. (2020). Digital platforms across the European regional energy markets.
Energy Policy, 144(June). doi: 10.1016/j.enpol.2020.111612.
Forbes (2020). How small businesses should approach digital transformation. Forbes Agency Council,
available from: https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbesagencycouncil/2020/03/13/how-small-
businesses-shouldapproach-digital-transformation/?sh5687edef67 495 [accessed 23 11 2020].
Freeman, E. R., & Phillips, R. A. (2002). Stakeholder theory: A libertarian Defense. Business Ethics
Quarterly, 12(3), 331–349. doi: 10.2307/3858020.
Galindo-Mart ın, M.  A., Casta~ no-Mart ınez, M. S., & M endez-Picazo, M. T. (2019). Digital transformation,
digital dividends and entrepreneurship: A quantitative analysis. Journal of Business Research,
101(June), 522–527. doi: 10.1016/j.jbusres.2018.12.014.
DTS
2,4
424
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/dts/article-pdf/2/4/403/289647/dts-11-2022-0059.pdf by guest on 07 July 2026

--- PAGE 23 ---
Ismail, S. (2016). Detailed review of Rogers’ diffusion of innovations theory and educational
technology-related studies based on Rogers’ theory and educational technology-related studies
based on rogers. The Turkish Online Journal of Educational Technology – TOJET, 5(2), 13–23.
Jouany, V., & Martic, K. (2020). Change management Models to Take a look at. Smarp, available from:
https://blog.smarp.com/5-change-management-models-to-take-a-look-at
Jyothi, V., & Rao, K. (2011). Effective implementation of agile practices. International Journal of
Advanced Computer Science and Application, 2(3), 41–48.
Kane, B. G. C., Palmer, D., Phillips, A. N., Kiron, D., & Buckley, N. (2017). Digital maturity. In MIT
Sloan Management Review (Issue Summer.).
Lee, Y., Kozar, K. A., & Larsen, K. R. T. (2003). The technology acceptance model: Past, present, and
future. Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 12. doi: 10.17705/
1cais.01250.
Li, L., Su, F., Zhang, W., & Mao, J. Y. (2018). Digital transformation by sme entrepreneurs: A capability
perspective. Information Systems Journal, 28(6), 1129–1157. doi: 10.1111/isj.12153.
Martin, G., & VanBoskirk, S. (2016). The digital maturity model 4.0, benchmarks: Digital business
transformation playbook. Forrester.
Matt, C., Hess, T., & Benlian, A. (2015). Digital transformation strategies. Business and Information
Systems Engineering, 57(5), 339–343. doi: 10.1007/s12599-015-0401-5.
Remane, G., Hanelt, A., Wiesboeck, F., & Kolbe, L. (2017). Digital maturity in traditional industries –
an exploratory analysis. Association for Information Systems, 39, 2.
Saarikko, T., Westergren, U. H., & Blomquist, T. (2020). Digital transformation: Five recommendations
for the digitally conscious firm. Business Horizons, 63, 6. doi: 10.1016/j.bushor.2020.07.005.
Scott, S. D., Plotnikoff, R. C., Karunamuni, N., Bize, R., & Rodgers, W. (2008). Factors influencing the
adoption of an innovation: An examination of the uptake of the canadian heart health kit (hhk).
Implementation Science, 3, 1. doi: 10.1186/1748-5908-3-41.
Sebastian, I. M., Moloney, K. G., Ross, J. W., Fonstad, N. O., Beath, C., & Mocker, M. (2017). How big
old companies navigate digital transformation. MIS Quarterly Executive, 16(3), 197–213.
Sousa, M. J. & Rocha,  A. (2019). Digital learning: Developing skills for digital transformation of
organizations. Future Generation Computer Systems, 91, 327–334. doi: 10.1016/j.future.2018.
08.048.
Utterback, J. M., & Acee, H. J. (2005). Disruptive technologies: An expanded view. International Journal
of Innovation Management, 9(01), 1–17.
Verhoef, P. C., Broekhuizen, T., Bart, Y., Bhattacharya, A., Dong, J. Q., & Fabian, N. H. M. (2018).
Digital transformation: A multidisciplinary reflection and research agenda. Journal of Business
Research, 122, 889–901. doi: 10.1016/j.jbusres.2019.09.022.
Supplementary material
The supplementary material for this article can be found online.
About the authors
Dr.LihleNkomoisadigitaltransformationspecialistwithaDoctorate ofBusinessAdministration from
ParisSchoolofBusinessinFrance,whereshemajoredinthesuccessfulimplementationofDTinitiatives
across various industries. She holds a Masters of Science in Engineering majoring in control systems,
from the University of the Witwatesrand, where she also obtained a Bachelor of Science in Electrical
Engineering.SheisaDTprofessional,whereherrolefocusesonimplementingtechnologysolutionsthat
breachthegapbetween digitalstrategyandoperations. Shehasledteamsthatconduct digitalmaturity
assessments across different organisations to understand their current and targeted states and further
Strategic
management
framework
425
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/dts/article-pdf/2/4/403/289647/dts-11-2022-0059.pdf by guest on 07 July 2026

--- PAGE 24 ---
benchmark these organisations against both local and global digital trends. Dr. Lihle is also a certified
Project Management Professional (PMP) for Industry 4.0 initiatives. Lihle Nkomo is the corresponding
author and can be contacted at: nkomolihle@gmail.com
David Kalisz, Ph.D. Doctor of economics in the discipline of management sciences. He holds Ph.D.
degree from Department of Management Theory (Warsaw School of Economics, Poland). He also holds
two master titles in economics (both summa cum laude), and also completed post-graduate studies in
Aviation Management at the Institute of Aviation and Air Defense (National Defense University,
Poland). Author of numerous publications in the field of new media, digital marketing, competition
strategy and value innovation. Author of the book “Competitive strategies: TV market in Poland”.
Winner of the National Broadcasting Council Award and Warsaw University and the for the best
doctoral dissertation in electronic media in 2014. He specialises in the area of innovation, strategy and
managementintheneweconomy.Scientificallyinspiredbytheinfluenceofthelatesttechnologiesonthe
functioning of enterprises, which is presented in his latest series of lectures – Industry 4.0 & IoT. He is
the creator of the first in Poland programme of the Blue Ocean Strategy and the Blue Ocean Shift. He
gives lectures in Polish, English and French. He teaches in Poland and abroad, also at MBA and DBA
studies in cooperation with foreign universities (including USA, India, France).
For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website:
www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htm
Or contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.com
DTS
2,4
426
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/dts/article-pdf/2/4/403/289647/dts-11-2022-0059.pdf by guest on 07 July 2026