--- PAGE 1 ---
Business Cloudification
An Enterprise Architecture Perspective
Ovidiu Noran and Peter Bernus
IIIS Centre for Enterprise ARchitecture Research and Management, Griffith University, Brisbane, Australia
Keywords: Enterprise Architecture, System Properties, Cloud Computing, Cloudification.
Abstract: Cloud computing is emerging as a promising enabler of some aspects of the ‘agile’ and ‘lean’ features that
businesses need to display in today’s hyper-competitive and disruptive global economic ecosystem.
However, it is increasingly obvious that there are essential prerequisites and caveats to cloudification that
businesses need to be aware of in order to avoid pitfalls. This paper aims to present a novel, Enterprise
Architecture-based approach towards analysing the cloudification endeavour, adopting a holistic paradigm
that takes into account the mutual influences of the entities and artefacts involved, in the context of their life
cycles. As shown in the paper, this approach enables a richer insight into the ‘readiness’ of a business
considering embarking on a cloudification endeavour and therefore empowers management to evaluate
consequences of- and take cognisant decisions on the cloudification extent, type, provider etc. based on
prompt information of appropriate quality and detail. The paper also presents a brief practical example of
this approach and illustrates, using the Enterprise Architecture viewpoint, the necessity of well-defined
business architecture, policies and principles dictating solution selection and design and transition program
as sine qua non preconditions towards successful cloudification.
1 INTRODUCTION
In today’s competitive and disruptive global
economic ecosystem, businesses need more than
ever to display agility, i.e. the capacity to quickly
adapt to changes in their environment. This implies
the capacity to promptly reconfigure and redesign
themselves ‘on the fly’ to various extents.
Importantly, an essential enabler of agility is the
need to be ‘lean’, i.e. avoid excessive investment in
areas that are likely to change and can be
outsourced.
Cloud computing, as an Internet-based paradigm
model enabling on-demand access to configurable
computing resources that can be promptly and easily
enabled from the client side, holds the promise to
answer some aspects of the two requirements
described above. This is because typically cloud
computing and storage solutions provide services
such as Infrastructure (IaaS), Platform (PaaS),
Software (SaaS) (see Fig. 1), while making use of
shared resources in order to achieve coherence and
economies of scale.
For example, in the case of IaaS, cloud
computing allows companies focus on their core
businesses instead of spending resources on building
and maintaining their own computer infrastructure.
Cloud computing also promises to allow enterprises
deploy and operate applications faster, reduce
maintenance, improve manageability, thus directly
supporting the said lean and agile requirements
(Hirzalla, 2010; Sawas and Watfa, 2015).
Figure 1: Typical Cloud Architecture – based on NIST
Cloud Computing Reference Architecture (Liu et al,
2011).
Figure 1 presents a typical cloud architecture. While
following the accepted NIST terminology (Liu et al.,
2011), it does however consider the architecture
from a functional point of view (i.e., leaving it open
on how service, service management and other
Noran, O. and Bernus, P.
Business Cloudification - An Enterprise Architecture Perspective.
DOI: 10.5220/0006248603530360
In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Enterprise Information Systems (ICEIS 2017) - Volume 3, pages 353-360
ISBN: 978-989-758-249-3
Copyright © 2017 by SCITEPRESS – Science and Technology Publications, Lda. All rights reserved
353

--- PAGE 2 ---
related functions are distributed among
organisations). In addition, in Fig. 1 Information
Services are singled out separately, given the various
new forms of services that are based on various
other information sources and repositories other than
databases, such as streaming data, unstructured
media sources, etc.
Cloud computing may be deployed in various
ways, such as private, public, community or hybrid
(a combination thereof). Choosing the type of
deployment must consider factors such as security,
privacy, compliance, availability and reliability
(Goyal, 2014; Jansen and Grance, 2011).
This is especially true considering that cloud
computing technology has not yet fully matured and
as such it cannot always satisfy the above-mentioned
criteria to the level required (Badger et al., 2014a;
Zhang et al., 2010; Wang et al, 2008, Brian et al.,
2008; Grossman, 2009). The recent years have seen
the lowering of cost of services, computing and
storage, and improvements in scalability and
availability and network capacity. This situation, in
the context of the emergence, increase in acceptance
and subsequent adoption of models such as
Information Technology (IT), virtualisation and
service orientation by businesses have encouraged
the perception that cloudification is an achievable
target for most businesses. Gartner (2016) states that
currently cloud vendors (and users) are still rushing
to the market to gain a position in the growth
market, with various service delivery models (IaaS,
PaaS, SaaS, etc.) present at all levels of the hype
cycle. It is however emphasized that only those
businesses who filter out the hype and perform a
realistic assessment and matching of the cloud
capabilities “to the right scenarios, with the right
management and governance” benefit from “[…]
increased agility, elasticity, scalability, innovation,
and in some cases, cost savings” [ibid.]. This
supports the above-stated authors’ stance (detailed in
Section 2) that there are important aspects that need
to be observed in order to make the ‘cloudification
journey’ a successful one. Identifying the aspects
that need to be addressed and selecting the
appropriate methods and models to prepare for
cloudification can be a daunting task given the daily
economic pressures and the ‘system-of-systems’
complexity of today’s enterprises. This paper
advocates the use of Enterprise Architecture (EA) as
a holistic, life-cycle oriented approach towards
assessing, creating or improving of what can be
called ‘cloudification readiness’ of businesses.
2 CLOUDIFICATION
CHALLENGES
As more businesses attempt the move to the cloud,
an increasing number of problems are surfacing.
This has much to do with the expected inherent
complexity of- and turbulence created by any major
change in doing business; however, in this case there
are also present specific problems originating in the
very nature of cloud computing and importantly, in
the fact that the business, as well as the cloud
computing business model and technology
themselves are ‘moving targets’ that evolve during
and after the ‘cloudification’ project(s).
A first major hurdle that businesses face is the
extent of cloudification. Thus, organizations must
apply due diligence when selecting and moving
functionality to the cloud, as cost and productivity
advantages also bring potential drawbacks in risk
and liability (Cayirci et al., 2016). For example,
although government organizations may be
discouraged to outsource services to a public cloud
due to the sensitivity of the data handled, with
appropriate risk mitigation a partial deployment in
the cloud should still be possible (Jansen and
Grance, 2011). However, a proper analysis
determining which services and what proportion
thereof to be outsourced requires that a common
understanding of the AS-IS (present) state of the
business is achieved by all stakeholders and in all
aspects necessary for the change.
A second important challenge increasing the
complexity of the cloudification endeavour is
service recursion, where services may call upon
other services, such as e.g. in an ‘intercloud’
architecture (Morrow et al., 2009). For example, an
E-commerce site needs banking, fraud detection, etc.
which are nowadays (also, or often only) offered as
external services (Aulkemeier et al., 2016). This
situation raises several important questions such as:
Who is responsible for reliability if a service fails
due to other services it depends on? Can a service be
guaranteed if is integrated with / depends on others?
If so, who is the responsible / guarantor entity?
Therefore, it is important that the degree of recursion
is properly understood and therefore, adequate
queries are raised by the acquisition panel of the to-
be-cloudified business to the cloud computing
solution provider.
A main driver for cloudification is the promise of
lowered costs; therefore, realising if appropriate
savings are indeed achieved in the long run is an
important issue (considering also that business needs
will change). Thus, the total cost of ownership
ICEIS 2017 - 19th International Conference on Enterprise Information Systems
354

--- PAGE 3 ---
(including initial migration and deployment to the
cloud, operation, continual development and
decommissioning / migration) can escalate if the
cloud pricing model is not understood and
strategically assured by the user. The use of cloud
pricing frameworks (e.g. as proposed by Laatikainen
(2013)) is useful in this regard so as to understand
the options; however, this should not be the only
factor and as previously stated, first of all it should
be decided why cloudification is necessary or
desirable, what is to be cloudified, and to what
extent. In addition, cloud solution vendors are
increasingly asking for long term contracts and to
bundle applications in order to offer discounts;
hence, an essential cloud solution incentive is in
danger of not being materialised.
A heterogeneous cloudification solution (using
several providers) could be cheaper and a better fit
for purpose as various providers offer different
coverage of specific services and thus best prices
may be negotiated for each application type. This
option would require more varied in-house
competencies compared to relying on a single cloud
service provider; however, the latter option has
drawbacks such as potential lock-in, or high exit cost
should a migration be necessary.
Zardari et al. (2012) argue that analysing Service
Level Agreements (SLA) of cloud providers and
matching them against the user requirements can
reveal potential violations of important principles, or
conflicts and risks; while the SLA approach is
useful, in the authors’ opinion the above discussion
has revealed that a much broader spectrum of
cloudification challenges is in fact present. Due to
their intertwined character, these challenges have to
be addressed in a more holistic manner, based on the
entire set of applicable quality of service
requirements (also called ‘architecturally significant’
or ‘non-functional’ requirements (Chen et al.,
2013)). The ‘applicable’ qualifier used above raises
the question as to which non-functional systemic
requirements, or ‘ilities’ (de Weck, 2011), are
affected by the various cloudification solutions, how
(to the better or the worse) and to what extent. The
following sub-section attempts to identify the most
relevant ‘ilities’ in question.
3 CLOUDIFICATION AND
SYSTEMS ‘ILITIES’
As de Weck (ibid.) explains, “[…] the ilities are
desired properties of systems, […] (usually but not
always ending in 'ility'), that often manifest
themselves after a system has been put to its initial
use. These properties […] typically concern wider
system impacts with respect to time and stakeholders
[…]”. He also provides a ranking of the ilities based
on journal articles’ coverage and Google hits, and
identifies and further describes four classic
engineering ilities, i.e. safety, quality, usability and
reliability. Willis and Dam (2011) provide a more
complete list that includes what they call ‘the
forgotten ilities’.
In this paper, the authors will attempt to select
the most relevant ilities from the point of view of
cloudification and analyse how they are affected by
various cloud service delivery models, and if
possible, analyse the extent of impact.
It is important to state some overall observations
beforehand. For example, some ilities appear to
subsume others, or at least overlaps are present. E.g.,
quality is a very general ility that appears to be one
of the most cited; in addition, quality can be
evaluated from several points of view (see Table 1.),
thus illustrating another general ility aspect.
The discussion of ilities in the context of cloud
computing presents two main aspects: i) cloud
computing (in its various forms) promises to solve a
number of business problems, by allowing the
achievement of some systemic properties that
otherwise may be out of reach, however, ii) adopting
a cloud solution changes many existing systemic
properties of the IT ecosystem, and therefore in a
cloudification project (or more often than not a
programme) it is not possible to simply concentrate
on the desired additional benefits. This makes the
cloudification attempt more complex than might
initially have been assumed.
As mentioned, the ilities are not a set of mutually
independent systemic properties; in addition, some
important ilities are in fact aggregations of others
(see Table 1). Therefore, to reach an optimum (or at
least an acceptable trade-off) one must employ
multi-criteria decision making- and cost analysis
techniques known from systems engineering to
explore the ilities ‘trade space’ Boehm et al (2014).
In general, the typical problems that cloud
computing promises to solve are as follows:
concerns about the total cost of ownership of
information technology services, the scalability /
elasticity of the IT solution, the rigidity of
investment timing, and agility (e.g., quick time to
market).
However, security, privacy, trust, compliance
with legislations, and a number of other strategically
important architectural properties could substantially
Business Cloudification - An Enterprise Architecture Perspective
355

--- PAGE 4 ---
Table 1: Categories of ilities (Source: Boehm, 2014).
Individual ilities
 Quality of Service: Performance, Accuracy,
Usability, Scalability, Versatility
 Resource Utilization: Cost, Duration, Personnel,
Scarce Quantities (size, weight, energy, …)
 Protection: Safety, Security, Privacy
 Robustness: Reliability, Availability,
Maintainability
 Flexibility: Modifiability, Tailorability /
Extendability, Adaptability
 Composability: Interoperability/Portability,
Openness/Standards Compliance, Service-
Orientation
Composite ilities
 Comprehensiveness/Suitability: all of the above
 Dependability: Quality of Service, Protection,
Robustness
 Resilience: Protection, Robustness, Flexibility
 Affordability: Quality of Service, Resource
Utilization
deteriorate or even be lost when adopting a cloud
solution. Therefore, both governments and vendors
are working very hard to guarantee that these
limiting factors are removed from the pathway to
adopt cloud solutions in order to reap its benefits.
For example NIST (Badger et al, 2014a) define
security, interoperability and portability to be the top
priority ilities for government.
Governments have been playing a pro-active role
in laying the ground rules for the cloud computing
market, and this has had a substantial benefit for all
involved stakeholders e.g. by funding the research
and standardisation work to establish a cohesive
terminology and nomenclature (Liu et al., 2011)..
Furthermore, some governments played a
substantial role in organising the consensus
definition of capability deficits that need research
and development e.g., (Badger et al, 2014a) and
defining accreditation of cloud products (IaaS, PaaS
and SaaS) to create a cloud market and a service
delivery and quality control framework, in regard to
both organisational and technical aspects – called
FedRamp in the USA (Federal Risk and
Authorization Management Program) and IRAP in
Australia (Information Security Registered
Assessors Program) and the Australasian
Information Security Evaluation Program (AISEP).
Several other countries have similar arrangements.
The above-mentioned efforts include reference
models for Service Level Agreements (Aljoumah et
al., 2015) and the definition of service metrics (de
Vaulx, Simmon and Bohn, 2015) that can be used to
decide required capability and capacity and to
monitor the actual service performance.
Large enterprises and governments are in a
substantially different situation relative to small and
medium sized businesses who could never afford to
own and internally run a complete professional-
quality IT service. Therefore the potential gain for
the latter is to achieve ilities that were previously out
of reach, as opposed to the large players mentioned
who could take those for granted and now must be
careful to be able to keep them.
Thus, it appears that two main current problems
in achieving a successful cloudification are (1)
cloudification cannot be just done off the shelf - the
business needs to transform to some extent (while
still operating as it cannot afford to stop) so as to
minimize turbulence and best take advantage of the
service structure offered by the cloud and (2) even if
(1) is accomplished, how can the end user avoid the
bad side effects of moving to the cloud? The current
lack of emphasis on the interactions between the
various entities inhabiting the layers created by (1)
and the interaction among the life cycle phases of
these entities carries the risk of creating sub-standard
‘solutions’ that suffer from multiple systemic
aspects in unanticipated ways.
A systematic treatment of moving to the cloud
can be regarded as a specialised application of an
Enterprise Architecture (EA) effort. It must be noted
from the beginning that clearly, the limited view of
EA as a ‘business – IT alignment’ exercise that is
sometimes adopted e.g., COBIT (Isaca, 2012),
TOGAF (Open Group, 2011) will not be sufficient,
because the change will fundamentally affect the
way business is done, will change the human
organisation (including roles and responsibilities)
and also alter legal, financial and contractual
relationships (and the IT sub-system itself as well,
where the IT architecture view of EA is applicable).
In other words, such transformation requires a
holistic approach that considers mission fulfilment
(manufacturing, mining, banking, health care,
transportation, logistics, etc. technology, processes
and human (TPH) organisation) as well as
management and control (command and control)
TPH, the redesign of business relationships, carrying
out ensuing organisational changes, human
competency development, and the introduction of
new governance constructs, to only name a few.
The authors therefore propose the use of a
framework that provides this broader view of
enterprise architecture (ISO 15704) thus enabling a
perspective that sees the embodiment of the
enterprise as an evolving socio-technical system of
systems. As a result of this framework adoption, the
ICEIS 2017 - 19th International Conference on Enterprise Information Systems
356

--- PAGE 5 ---
standard vocabulary of EA (as present in ISO
15704) and Systems Engineering (as espoused by
ISO 15288 will be used throughout the discussion in
Section 4 that demonstrates through an example an
approach that considers ‘moving to the cloud’ to be
an EA endeavour.
4 THE EA PERSPECTIVE ON
CLOUDIFICATION
The goal of adopting Enterprise Architecture
practice in an enterprise is to ensure that strategy,
human organisation, utilised technology and
processes are all in alignment (Doucet at al., 2009).
Alignment, however, is not a one-off transformation
project, but rather part of the enterprise’s evolution
This article assumes that the reader is familiar
with the basic terminology of ISO 15704 / GERAM
nevertheless a brief overview of the most important
concepts is given below and illustrated in Fig. 2.
The scope of the architecture is equivalent to the
scope of the NIST Cloud Computing Reference
Architecture (which is in ISO15704 terms an
architectural level reference model of the IT system
of the enterprise, also called a ‘Reference
Architecture of type I’).
Given the open nature of enterprises, when
looking at the entities of interest in describing the
enterprise, one cannot limit to organisational
boundaries; rather, rather include other relevant
entities, such as suppliers and customers, as well as
supporting entities that provide services to sustain
the enterprise’s operations and/or other entities that
may be called upon to help any transformational
tasks.
This extended scope is justified as cloudification
requires so-called ‘generative interactions’ among
participating entities. (A generative interaction is
defined as the operations of one entity performing or
contributing to one or several life cycle phases of
another (e.g. entity A develops or changes the
business concept of entity B.).
Figure 3 shows a life cycle diagram representing the
life cycles of all typically involved entities. The
model includes existing infrastructure as well as new
cloud entities and a transformation programme
(coordinating multiple projects). Interestingly, the
decomposition of the system into a system of
systems is not a uniform disaggregation: those
systems whose subsystems will be expected to
change in a similar fashion are not further
decomposed, which controls the number of entities
in the model (to the extent possible of course).
The model can also be thought of as a first-cut
structural decomposition of the enterprise into
functionally-independent entities. This is necessary
because cloudification typically implies that part of
the IT Stack would be ‘carved out’ and moved. It
therefore makes sense to first fence off parts of the
IT stack that are candidates for cloudification
(whether into a private, public or hybrid cloud).
Essentially this is tantamount to re-organising the IT
stack in a service-oriented way (Rabelo, Noran and
Bernus, 2015).
Various techniques are known to achieve the
desired maximum functional independence among
service entities (these are not discussed in detail in
this article as they are out of scope); the necessary
methods are available in the literature on Service
Orientation (Keith, Demirkan and Goul, 2013)
axiomatic design (Suh, 2001) and enterprise
architecture complexity management (Kandjani,
Bernus and Wen, 2014).
Figure 2: Enterprise entities interact with each other in the context of their life cycles.
Business Cloudification - An Enterprise Architecture Perspective
357

--- PAGE 6 ---
Figure 3. Life cycle relationships among service entities and cloud service consumers.
Using such a decomposition allows to separately
consider several systemic properties and make
independent decisions, namely:
o) As part of a preliminary stage for
cloudification we assume that Government and
Industry bodies have defined policies, principles and
laws regarding cloud services, including the roles
and responsibilities of cloud service brokers and
auditors (arrows marked 0 in Fig.3), and that these
have been implemented and rolled out by respective
organisations (arrow 0’ in Fig. 3).
i) Decide the desired improvements that each
service layer must undergo (for example, creating
dynamically established ‘many-to-many’ (M:N)
infrastructure-platform and application-platform
relationships, in order to allow load sharing and
elasticity, to achieve increased responsiveness and
availability of IT support to the business), as layer
by layer the business benefit may vary. Systems
engineering methods and tools exist to support the
cost optimisation of investment (Boehm et al.,
2014), taking into account through-life support, total
cost of ownership, as well as performing risk
mitigation and probabilistic optimisation based on
the analysis of possible future scenarios (arrow 1 in
Fig. 3).
ii) Decide the desired business, technological and
organisational benefits of creating a cloud and
balance it with the known limitations to cloud
service security and trust, interoperability and
portability (and also other important ilities discussed
in Section 2.2). Note that these limitations are
different between SaaS, PaaS and IaaS, as well as
depend on the choice of Private-, Public- and Hybrid
cloud. There are various systems engineering
methods that help holistic decision making in this
regard. For example, system thinking diagrams
(Meadows, 2008) may reveal the cause and effect
relationships among multiple change factors and are
helpful in assisting management to avoid unexpected
effects of the cloudification effort. Boehm et al.
(2014, p28.) discuss known cross-relationships
among ilities in the cloud. (arrow 1 in Fig.3)
iii) Based on the above two decisions, determine
the current, future and transition boundaries between
services provided from inside the organisation and
those from the outside. Some decisions may be
conditional based on technology analysis / forecasts;
however, management may decide to build
preparedness for being able to make certain future
cloudification decisions, even though current
technology may not be deemed mature or
appropriate (arrow 1 in Fig.3).
iv) Determine a ‘rolling’ strategic roadmap with
clearly defined benefits after each stage of the
transition (rolling meaning that the roadmap is
periodically reviewed in light of new information or
developments in business, technology or
organisation). (arrow 2 in Fig.3)
v) Define the design activities performed by the
cloudification project (including the external service
provider’s possible participation in the project -
arrows 4’…4’’’ in Fig. 3)
vi) Describe the rollout of changes in the
business (including contracting, see arrow 5’ in Fig.
3) and the deployment of the SaaS service by the
service provider (arrow 5’’ in Fig. 3)
vii) Define the respective service provisions in
operation (arrows 6’ and 6’’ in Fig. 3).
Note that the SaaS entity has two parts: the actual
service and the management of that service. The
latter is supported by an Auditing Service to monitor
performance and adherence to quality criteria
against standards and SLAs (arrow 7 in Fig. 3).
viii) Select the SaaS service – which may be
performed by Corporate Management or by the
Government /
Industry
Regulator
Broker
0’
2
3
4’
Corporate
management
1’
5’
SaaS
4’’
External Service
Provider
4’’’
SBUs
5’’
6’
6’’
Cloudifica on
Project
1’’
Auditor
0’
7
7
0
0
ICEIS 2017 - 19th International Conference on Enterprise Information Systems
358

--- PAGE 7 ---
cloudification project (N.B. arrow 4’’’ shows the
case where a cloud broker entity is engaged by the
project).
Note that in Fig. 1 the cloud carrier (such as
telecommunication service providers) was omitted,
but when intending to commit to using a cloud
service, the availability, bandwidth and trust aspects
need to be checked and brokering and auditing
services need to be engaged, in the same way as they
would be used in conjunction with the cloud service
and its provider.
It must be stressed that some entities represented
in Fig. 3 are ‘representative’ rather than individual;
e.g., ‘SaaS’ stands for multiple applications (bundles
or suites), on the condition that organisationally
speaking each bundle undergoes similar transition.
The similarity is based on the governance
relationship between a transition programme,
transition projects, and such bundles. This greatly
simplifies the management of transition projects,
because they all share the same architecture
principles and mostly similar strategic objectives.
5 CONCLUSIONS AND
FURTHER WORK
This paper has presented an Enterprise Architecture-
based approach towards the cloudification effort,
involving the adoption of a holistic paradigm that
models the mutual influences (generative
interactions) of the entities and artefacts involved in
the project, in the context of their life cycles. The
authors have argued and demonstrated that this
approach enables a richer insight into the current and
planning of ‘cloudification readiness’ of a business.
Using the EA-based approach, the findings are that
firstly, cloudification requires the business to
prepare ‘on-the-fly’ and the cloud services to be
customised to achieve a useful match. Thus, moving
to the cloud requires increasing and improving
architecture competencies. Policies and principles
dictating the design / select solution and the
transition program must be put in place beforehand.
Secondly, cloudification is not a ‘done-and-dusted’,
one-off exercise; the solution has to be maintained
as the business structure and its environment
(including the cloud it now resides in) constantly
evolve. There is a need for an increase in human
resources prominently featuring architecture
competencies. Thirdly, successful cloudification
requires (a) a good understanding of the enterprises’
needs driving the value that can be derived from
cloud computing, (b) an architected design of the
solution to be able to efficiently utilize cloud
services (Dodani, 2009) and (c) the ability to grow
the cloud capabilities and value delivered in time.
The scope of this paper was limited to presenting
cloudification on the example of the adoption of
software as a service (such as expense management
services). Further work should extend the present
model by developing a reference model of a typical
SaaS adoption roadmap, as well as expanding it into
a more complex scenario demonstrating a
combination of IaaS, PaaS, Information as a Service
and SaaS in a hybrid cloud.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to acknowledge the research
grant (Strategic Advancement of Methodologies and
Models for Enterprise Architecture) provided by
Architecture Services Pty Ltd (ASPL Australia) in
supporting this work.
REFERENCES
Aljoumah, E., Al-Mousawi, F., Ahmad, I., Al-Shammri
M., and Al-Jady Z., (2015) SLA in Cloud Computing
Architectures: A Comprehensive Study. Int J of Grid
Distrib. Computing. 8(5):7-32.
Aulkemeier, F., Paramartha, M. A., Iacob, M-E., van
Hillegersberg, J. (2016) A pluggable service platform
architecture for e-commerce, J. Inf Syst E-Bus
Manage 14:469–489.
Badger, L., Bohn, R., Chu, S., de Vaulx, F., Hogan, M.,
Iorga, M., Kauffman, V., Liu, F., Mao, J., Messina, J.,
Mills, K., Simmon, E., Sokol, A., Tong, J., Whiteside
F., Leaf, D. (2014b) US Govt. Cloud Computing
Technology Roadmap Volume II: Useful Information
for Cloud Adopters. NIST SP 500-293.
Badger, L., Bernstein, D., Bohn, R., de Vaulx, F., Hogan,
M., Iorga, M., Mao, J. Messina, J., Mills, K., Simmon,
E., Sokol, A., Tong, J., Whiteside, F., Leaf. D.
(2014a). US Government Cloud Computing
Technology Roadmap Volume I: High-Priority
Requirements to Further USG Agency Cloud
Computing Adoption. NIST SP 500-293.
Boehm, B. (2014). Ilities Tradespace and Affordability
Analysis. GSAW/INCOSE LA/SPIN (talk).
Boehm, B. et al (2014). -ilities Tradespace and
Affordability Project – Phase 3. Technical Report
SERC-2014-TR-039-3. Hoboken, NJ: Stevens
Institute of Technology, Systems Engineering
Research Center.
Brian, H., Brunschwiler, T., Dill, H., Christ, H., Falsafi,
B., Fischer, M. and Zollinger, M.―Cloud computing,
Communications of the ACM, 51(7), 9-11, 2008.
Business Cloudification - An Enterprise Architecture Perspective
359

--- PAGE 8 ---
Cayirci et al. (2016). A risk assessment model for
selecting Cloud Service Providers. J. Cloud
Computing, 2016.
Chen, L., Ali Babar, M., Nuseibeh, B. (2013).
"Characterizing Architecturally Significant
Requirements". IEEE Software. 30 (2): 38–45.
Cloud Service Providers. Journal of Cloud Computing:
Advances, Systems and Applications 5:14.
de Vaulx, F., Simmon, E., and Bohn, R. (Eds) (2015).
Cloud Computing Service Metrics Description.
Gaithersbourg, WA: NIST.
De Weck, O. L. (2011) Life-Cycle Properties of
Engineering Systems: The Ilities. In de Weck, O. L.,
Roos, D. and Magee, C. L. (Eds.) Engineering
Systems, pp. 65-96.
Dodani, M. (2009) Cloud Architecture. Journal of Object
Technology, 8 (7), pp 35-44 http://www.jot.fm/
issues/issue_2009_11/column3/
Doucet, G., Gøtze, J., Saha, P., Bernard, S. (Eds) (2009).
Coherency Management – Architecting the Enterprise
for Alignment, Agility and Assurance. Hershey, PA,
USA: Idea Group Inc.
Goyal, Sumit (2014) Public vs Private vs Hybrid vs
Community - Cloud Computing: A Critical Review
I.J. Comp. Network and Info. Security, 2014, 3, 20-29.
Grossman, R.L. ―The case for cloud computing, IT
professional, 11(2), 23-27, 2009.
Hirzalla, M. (2010) Realizing Business Agility
Requirements through SOA and Cloud Computing.
18th
IEEE International Requirements Engineering
Conference pp. 379 - 380.
I.J. Comp Network and Info Security, 2014, 3, 20-29.
Isaca (2012). Cobit 5. Rolling Meadows, IL: Information
Systems Audit and Control Association.
ISO 15704 (2000; Amd 1: 2005) Requirements for
enterprise-reference architectures and methodologies.
Geneva: ISO.
ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288 (2015). : Systems and software
engineering–System life cycle processes. Geneva:
ISO.
Jansen, W., Grance, T. (2011) Guidelines on security and
privacy in public cloud computing, ‖ NIST special
publication 800-144.
Johnston, S. (2009) Overview of cloud computing,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=60
80417.
Kandjani, H. and Bernus,P., Wen, L. (2014) Enterprises as
Complex Systems: Extended Axiomatic Design
Theory and its Application in Enterprise Architecture
Practice. In Pallab Saha (Ed) A Systemic Perspective
to Managing Complexity with Enterprise Architecture.
Hershey, Pennsylvania: IGI Global. pp72-98.
Keith, M., Demirkan, H., Goul, M. (2013). Service-
Oriented Methodology for Systems Development.
Journal of Management Information Systems.
30(1):227-260.
Laatikainen, G., Ojala, A., and Mazhelis, O. (2013). Cloud
Services Pricing Models. In G. Herzwurm and T.
Margaria (Eds.), Software Business. From Physical
Products toSoftware Services and Solutions (pp. 117-
129). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Liu, F., Tong, J., Mao, J., Bohn, R. B., Messina, J. V.,
Badger, M. L., Leaf, D. M. (2011). NIST Cloud
Computing Reference Architecture. NIST SP 500-292.
Gaithersburg, MD: NIST IT Laboratory.
Meadows, D. (2008). Thinking in Systems: A Primer.
White River Junction, VT: Chelsea Green Publishing.
Morrow, M., Bernstein, D., Diamond, S., Sankar,K.,
Ludvigson, E. (2009) "Blueprint for the Intercloud -
Protocols and Formats for Cloud Computing
Interoperability", International Conference on Internet
and Web Applications and Services, pp. 328-336.
Open Group (2011). TOGAF 9.1.Burlington, MA: The
Open Group.
Rabelo, J. R., Noran, O., Bernus, P. (2015). Towards the
Next Generation Service Oriented Enterprise
Architecture. In Proc. IEEE 19th Int. Enterprise
Distributed Object Computing Workshop. pp91-100.
Sawas, M. S. and Watfa, M. K. 2015, The impact of cloud
computing on information systems agility,
Australasian J of Info. Systems, vol. 19, pp. 97-112.
Suh, N.P. (2001). Axiomatic Design: Advances and
Applications. New York: Oxford University Press.
Wang, L., Tao, J., Kunze, M., Castellanos, A.C, Kramer,
D. and Karl, W. (2008) Scientific cloud computing:
Early definition and experience, ‖ In: Proceedings of
10th IEEE International Conference on High
Performance Computing and Communications, (pp.
825-830), September 2008.
Willis, J. D. and Dam, S. (2011) The Forgotten Ilities,
www.dtic.mil/ndia/2011system/13166_WillisWed.pdf.
Zardari, S., Faniyi, F. and Bahsoon, R., (2012) Using
obstacles for systematically modeling, analysing, and
mitigating risks in cloud adoption. Aligning Enterprise
System and Software Architectures, IGI Global, pages
275-296.
Zhang, Q., Cheng, L., Boutaba, R. (2010) Cloud
computing: state-of-the-art and research challenges.‖nt
J of Internet Services and Applications, 1(1), 7-18.
ICEIS 2017 - 19th International Conference on Enterprise Information Systems
360