--- PAGE 1 ---
JAES
ISTRAŽIVANJA I PROJEKTOVANJA ZA PRIVREDU
www.engineeringscience.rs JOURNAL OF APPLIED ENGINEERING SCIENCE
Indexed by
APPROACHES TO DEVELOPING A STRATEGIC
PROGRAM FOR HIGH-TECH ENTERPRISE IN THE
CONTEXT OF DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION
Sergey V. Novikov
Moscow Aviation Institute
(National Research University),
Moscow,
Russian Federation
Online aceess of full paper is available at: www.engineeringscience.rs/browse-issues
Cite article:
Andrey A. Sazonov
Moscow Aviation Institute
(National Research University),
Moscow,
Russian Federation
Key words: technological concept "Industry 4.0", digital transformation of high-tech enterprise,
development of business processes, digital production modeling
doi:10.5937/jaes0-31875
V. Novikov S., A. Sazonov A. (2022) APPROACHES TO DEVELOPING A
STRATEGIC PROGRAM FOR HIGH-TECH ENTERPRISE IN THE CONTEXT OF
DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION, Journal of Applied Engineering Science, 20(1), 41 - 52,
DOI:10.5937/ jaes0-31875

--- PAGE 2 ---
Istraživanja i projektovanja za privredu
Journal of Applied Engineering Science
Original Scientific Paper
doi:10.5937/jaes0-31875 Paper number: 20(2022)1, 902, 41-52
APPROACHES TO DEVELOPING A STRATEGIC
PROGRAM FOR HIGH-TECH ENTERPRISE IN
THE CONTEXT OF DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION
Sergey V. Novikov*, Andrey A. Sazonov
Moscow Aviation Institute (National Research University), Moscow, Russian Federation
The article is devoted to the consideration of approaches to the development of a strategic program for the develop-
ment of high-tech enterprise in the context of digital transformation in order to increase the level of digital maturity of
the enterprise. The digital maturity levels of the operating model are considered, followed by an example of a possible
distribution of the spectrum of technologies according to these digital maturity levels. The article discusses issues
related to the mechanism for implementing digital transformation at industrial enterprises in modern conditions. The
article considers the categorical apparatus affecting the management of digital changes: digital transformation, as
applied to industry. In addition, the authors highlight the main problem points to which the management of enter-
prises should pay attention when implementing digital transformation and draw conclusions regarding changes in
approaches to organizing the system of interaction within the company. Analytical and expert assessments of project
development forecasts using modern digital technologies are used as research methods. The study is based on a
comprehensive analysis and subsequent assessment of the main results of the implementation of the processes of
technological transformation of projects in industry, followed by the definition of its key areas and directions. In project
management in the era of digital transformation, the most applicable approach is one that combines tight control of
results on the horizon of strategic planning and inspiring flexibility in organizing work over short distances.
Key words: technological concept "Industry 4.0", digital transformation of high-tech enterprise, development of
business processes, digital production modeling
*sv@mai.ru 41
INTRODUCTION
The concept of "Industry 4.0" and digitalization has re-
ceived a fairly wide range of distribution in the world and
in Russia. A holistic understanding of the technologies
that make up this concept has already developed, ways
of their effective application have been identified, and the
concept is already considered as a tool necessary for
transforming a certain set of elements from the composi-
tion of various business models [1].
Since the beginning of the industrialization of society, the
paradigms of industrial development have changed un-
der the condition of technological breakthroughs, which
later became known as industrial revolutions (IR). Three
IRs have passed in succession:
• high mechanization of production processes;
• transition to the use of electricity in production;
• digitalization of the processes of manufacturing enterprises.
Industry 4.0 involves the transformation of key aspects of
manufacturing. Consulting company BCG identifies nine
key technologies that are aimed at forming the fourth IR:
autonomous robotization, simulation modeling, horizon-
tal and vertical integration of systems, augmented reality,
IoT, cloud technologies, additive manufacturing, cyber-
security and large. The introduction of Industry 4.0 tech-
nologies will allow factories to reduce production costs
by 10–30%, logistics costs by 10–30% and quality man-
agement costs by 10–20% [2]. Industry 4.0 technologies
are designed to reduce time-to-market, improve custom-
er engagement, economies of scale and more efficient
use of resources. The development of modern innova-
tive technologies contributes to the transformation of en-
tire industries and individual types of business. Leading
experts and experts in digitalization have developed a
“high-level” transformation roadmap for high-tech enter-
prises, which includes a series of sequential steps. This
map can also be successfully used by small and medi-
um-sized enterprises that have chosen for themselves
a priority strategy of incremental improvements [3]. The
first step is to determine the current position and state of
the enterprise, its strategic position from the point of view
of internal and external perspectives. The second step
allows the desired target state to be determined, taking
into account the promising technology research taken
into account. Step three is the direct implementation of
the transition process through the development of spe-
cial prototypes and design of the business model. The
fourth step is the development of a detailed plan that in-
cludes an analysis of the scaling processes and organi-
zation of change management to organize the transition
of the entire enterprise to the target state. However, the
digitalization process requires significant investments, so
enterprises that have chosen this path of development
need to correctly prioritize tactical and long-term goals,
draw up a roadmap and assess the future economic ef-
fect of the introduction of these technologies. This article
aims to conduct research on practice-oriented approach-

--- PAGE 3 ---
42
Sergey V. Novikov, et al. - Approaches to developing a strategic program
for high-tech enterprise in the context of digital transformation
es to the formation of a competent and effective digital
transformation program. The results of the study were
the development of models for the digital maturity of an
enterprise and a detailed structural description of two
main practical approaches to developing a program for
organizing digital transformation [4].
THEORETICAL BASIS
Digital transformation is the complex integration of pro-
cess innovation into the structure of an enterprise. Pro-
cess innovation refers to the introduction of advanced or
significantly modernized methods of organizing produc-
tion or delivery, i.e. this type of innovation implies qual-
itative changes not only in equipment and technology,
but also in the software used at the enterprise. The par-
ticular difficulty of introducing process innovations is as-
sociated, as a rule, with their systemic nature: changes
that have occurred in one part of the production system
of an enterprise will unconditionally affect other subsys-
tems and processes [5]. The integration of any complex
technological innovations can lead to situations where
unforeseen technological problems may appear, need to
master fundamentally new skills, growth of requirements
and level of qualifications of the working staff and the like-
lihood that there will be significant changes in the work-
ing production processes throughout production line. It is
necessary to take into account the additional difficulties
associated with the integration of advanced technologies
and the lack of an unambiguous understanding of all the
nuances associated with their implementation, i.e. the
scope of future changes is unclear. The difficulties dis-
cussed above make technological innovations, especial-
ly when viewed in the context of digital transformation, a
very difficult task that requires timely and high-quality op-
timization of processes and actions that may go beyond
the initially defined scope of work associated with their
implementation [6]. The authors of the article carried out
a detailed analysis of the activities of large high-tech en-
terprises, on the basis of which the following provisions
were systematized that are faced by enterprises actively
introducing digital factories, for convenience they were
divided, dividing them into three broad categories:
• Enterprise staff. Employees of the enterprise often
experience a lack of time required for a common un-
derstanding and vision of the whole unified concept
of creating a digital factory and the mechanisms for
its implementation. As a rule, employees different-
ly perceived and shifted the volume of changes that
occurred and the need to develop their own produc-
tion skills. Additional difficulties arise in terms of the
existing attachment to the previous generation of
production technologies and the emerging threat to
the already established competencies, i.e. factors of
a negative attitude to future changes appear [7].
• Manufacturing technologies. Rather high indicator
of uncertainty and complexity in the development
of digital technologies undoubtedly complicates the
process of assessing potential production and eco-
nomic effects, therefore, an ambiguous business
rationale for the need for their implementation is
created [8]. Indeed, the concept of a digital facto-
ry is inherent in the systemic nature of implemen-
tation, which creates a certain uncertainty about a
number of specific changes that may be required in
other related technologies, production, technological
and organizational processes, as well as the skills
of working employees. The overestimated cost of
implementing the digital factory concept, especially
in the early years, only exacerbates the uncertainty,
since the benefits from the investment will be possi-
ble only for an indefinite period of time [5].
• Processes. High-tech enterprises are experiencing
some difficulty in changing traditional procedures
and different groups of processes in the implementa-
tion of digital transformation. In factories often there
is a lack a systematic methodological approach to
the integration of modern innovative design models,
which allow obtaining more adaptive and flexible
results, as well as significantly optimizing the time
required to enter the market. Typically, production
processes are implemented almost identically over
a long period of time and become an integral part of
everyday practice. This highly structured culture is
nearly impossible to change [9]. Modern innovative
models aimed at business transformation are neces-
sary in these contexts to ensure the transformation
process and to create conditions for attracting spe-
cialists with high competencies to support it.
Economic transformations associated with the
implementation of projects for the development and
implementation of Industry 4.0 technologies
Akey driver of Industry 4.0 technologies is the increased
integration of “cyber-physical systems” or CPS, into
manufacturing processes. Possible economic transfor-
mations associated with the implementation of projects
for the development and implementation of Industry 4.0
technologies include the following possible changes in
the field of production:
1. Increasing labor productivity by reducing the number
of personnel, the emergence of new technologies
that can increase the efficiency of services provided
and products;
2. Emergence of new types of industrial technologies
and new industrial production, caused by:
• development of mobile Internet and cloud technologies;
• development of 3D printing;
• emergence of new materials, genetic and biotech-
nologies, which will give a new impetus to the devel-
opment of medicine, agriculture, pharmaceuticals,
plastics and polymers and biofuels;
3. Widespread use of innovative solutions, a new
level of automation and robotization of production
processes, an increase in the computing power of
computers and the use of the capabilities of large
Istraživanja i projektovanja za privredu ISSN 1451-4117
Journal of Applied Engineering Science Vol. 20, No. 1, 2022

--- PAGE 4 ---
43
Sergey V. Novikov, et al. - Approaches to developing a strategic program
for high-tech enterprise in the context of digital transformation
amounts of data, artificial intelligence and machine
learning, which make it possible to automate oper-
ations that were previously perceived as impossible
for machines to perform;
4. Development of remote access and control over pro-
duction equipment with the development of IoT, i.e. the
ability to control physical objects using the Internet;
5. Emergence of new sources of energy and energy tech-
nologies, increasing the energy efficiency of production;
6. Blurring the boundaries between industries and ac-
tivities. At the same time, changes are also forecast-
ed in the sphere of consumption, including:
• development of the sharing economy;
• increasing interest in ecological products;
• growing importance for consumers of ethical aspects of
consumption and problems of personal data protection;
• development of new specific products, services and
business models due to an aging population and an
increase in life expectancy.
The rise of workplace automation in many of its forms
can dramatically increase productivity and increase em-
ployee productivity.Automation technology can help take
the burden of repetitive administrative work and keep
employees focused on solving more complex problems,
while reducing the risk of human error by allowing them
to focus on value-added tasks [10]. Examples of already
well-established and almost invisible automation tools
that did not exist 25 years ago are programming and
modeling software used by architects, engineers and
designers, robotic medical instruments used by doctors
and surgeons and search engine technologies that allow
researchers to find more relevant information. Theoreti-
cally, these technologies remove tasks from workers, but
in practice their overall effect is to significantly enhance
and increase their abilities [11]. With the introduction of
Industry 4.0 technologies, the picture will change, name-
ly, the role of machines and the algorithm in solving spe-
cific problems will at least double. The increase in the
share of machines in solving production problems will
be especially noticeable in such functions as "reasoning
and decision making", "administration" and "finding and
obtaining the necessary information". Most of the tasks
of organizing and processing information, searching and
transferring information will be performed using automa-
tion technologies [12].
For the successful implementation of all components of
the digital transformation program, the management of
enterprises must act as "technological agents" of change
and clearly understand and evaluate the digital strategy
of the enterprise. It must necessarily cover the entire en-
terprise as a whole and take into account the rejection
of the disparate work of divisions with the subsequent
integration of key staff, resources, technologies and pro-
cesses [13]. Within the framework of three subject areas
discussed above (enterprise staff, production technolo-
gies and processes), the authors managed to success-
fully carry out systematization based on the allocation of
maturity levels when organizing the process of transition
to a digital factory, as well as to classify the key activity
indicators that underlie the organization of the entire dig-
ital space [14]. The model was modified in accordance
with the results of research and opinion of experts. The
final model is shown in the Table 1.
RESEARCH PART
We will conduct a study of an approach to the formation
of a program aimed at carrying out digital transformation
of an enterprise based on replicating existing tools. Du-
plication of tools assumes that the enterprise has avail-
able various pilot innovative technologies that demon-
strate positive results and are characterized by a certain
degree of versatility, i.e. these technologies can be suc-
cessfully applied in most similar enterprise processes
[15]. The practical application of this approach is largely
based on a well-designed maturity model in which the
levels were originally designed. An example of preparing
an enterprise maturity model in terms of its use of certain
technologies that can be used in replication processes is
shown in the Table 2.
The composition of technologies at each individual matu-
rity level should be selected separately for each specific
enterprise or function [16].The development of a program
of initiatives to organize digital transformation based on
the use of technology replication tools can include the
following stages in its structural composition [17]:
Stage 0 "Creation of special register of digital tools and
filling with data of the maturity assessment model".
Tasks:
• to analyze digital tools that are already used at the
enterprise and offered by specialists as the best
world practices and also select only relevant tools
from those offered by suppliers on the market;
• to describe potential effects expected from the instruments;
• to describe necessary technical conditions for the in-
tegration of these tools;
• to distribute tools at main levels of maturity model in
such a way that the effect of their use is maximized.
Results:
• to obtain register for all digital instruments;
• to develop full-fledged digital maturity model for spe-
cific enterprise.
Stage 1. Diagnostics of current level of maturity in-
dicators of the enterprise in the structural context of
production / lines.
Tasks:
• to determine current list of instruments and degree
to which they correspond to each maturity level;
• to determine criteria for effectiveness of integration
of instruments;
• to conduct inventory of all implemented digital tools;
Istraživanja i projektovanja za privredu ISSN 1451-4117
Journal of Applied Engineering Science Vol. 20, No. 1, 2022

--- PAGE 5 ---
Sergey V. Novikov, et al. - Approaches to developing a strategic program
for high-tech enterprise in the context of digital transformation
44
Maturity level Ongoing processes Technologies used Staff
1 2 3 4
Level №5 «Adaptability»
Systems required to provide
a set of corrective actions
for all types of installed pro-
duction equipment, operat-
ing independently or within
the framework of existing
corporate system in order
to maximize efficiency, have
been successfully integrated
Development of processes
for the organization of au-
tonomous decision-making
process by systems
Interaction with external
data marts of buyers and
suppliers
Development of practices
aimed at continuous im-
provement and innovation
Development of processes
for the organization of con-
tinuous forecasting and
planning of future produc-
tion development
Application of artificial
intelligence systems
Inclusion in the structure of
the enterprise of specialists re-
sponsible for the development
of the direction of predictive
analytics and adaptability
Level №4 «Predictiveness»
Predictive systems have
been introduced, which
are necessary for compe-
tent and effective fore-
casting of future state, for
example, SAP Analytics
Cloud or Logi Predict
Development of processes
for the analysis of past
and current data and the
use of information ob-
tained from the analysis in
order to carry out various
optimization measures is
underway
Integration in real time of
special systems necessary
for the analysis of cur-
rent activities, which can
independently and auto-
matically carry out various
analytics and generate
warnings and various
kinds of recommendations
Organization of work of
cross-functional sessions,
including also sessions on
data exchange in order to
optimize work on the most
important problems and
opportunities for carrying
out optimization technolo-
gies based on new data
Introduction of special pro-
cedures necessary for orga-
nizing the process of regular
optimization of initiatives
Use of digital twin technology
to organize the testing, optimi-
zation and prototyping process
Attracting additional spe-
cialists (data analysts) to
work
Level №3 «Transparency»
Highlighting the most
significant process indica-
tors for visualizing them on
special dashboards with
the ability to track their
changes in real time
Streamlining processes in
data flow management
Improving data accuracy and
analyticity, reducing the amount
of unnecessary information
Organization of training for
employees to work with special
data systems and new devices
Development of special pro-
cesses that allow for the ac-
tive exchange of knowledge
and various data between all
participants in the process
Implementation of innova-
tions in the field of mining
systems for data processing
and analysis
Developing employees'
digital skills
Creation of a unique
cross-functional network
for efficient data exchange
Implementation of special
systems that facilitate data
exchange, for example, inte-
gration of BI systems into the
structure of an enterprise that
allows visualizing data sources
Culture development in
terms of knowledge man-
agement
Level №2 «System connection»
Data from the operational
process enter the system
automatically, i.e. without
any specialist participation.
Integration of related sys-
tems has been completed
in full. Control action takes
place remotely
Streamlining a number of
processes in the field of
digital factory integration
(systematic and detailed
description)
Detailed study of all key
areas for the inclusion of
existing systems and tech-
nologies at the enterprise
with future components
included in the digital plant
Development of a culture
of inclusiveness, active
involvement of the com-
pany's employees in the
process of developing a
target vision
Development of processes
aimed at attracting partic-
ipants and stakeholders
external to the enterprise in
order to ensure the "con-
nection" of all systems
Development of a single
independent information
space and data streams,
connection of various
systems
Separation of roles and re-
sponsibilities. The beginning
of the process of attracting
specialists / experts in the
field of business, IT and
high-tech production
Table 1: Content structure of digital maturity levels of the operating model
Istraživanja i projektovanja za privredu ISSN 1451-4117
Journal of Applied Engineering Science Vol. 20, No. 1, 2022

--- PAGE 6 ---
45
Sergey V. Novikov, et al. - Approaches to developing a strategic program
for high-tech enterprise in the context of digital transformation
Maturity level Ongoing processes Technologies used Staff
1 2 3 4
Level №1 «Computerization»
Development of automa-
tion processes for any IT
system. Entering into the
database is done manually
Complete elimination of
paper forms and media
Integration of basic systems
in order to organize a com-
petent process for managing
production and the enterprise
Employees must take
refresher courses in order to
acquire skills in working with
systems that are in their
area of staff responsibility
Organization of the process
of executing processes only
through system interfaces. Data
transfer in automatic mode
Putting into operation of
the enterprise systems for
automatic transmission of
various data
Level №0 «Basic infrastructure»
Use of technologies that
do not give significant
business effects in them-
selves, but have a high
degree of importance
when introducing more
advanced technologies
No matter how significant the
impact on the processes is
Creation of a special
infrastructure allowing the
implementation of the fol-
lowing technologies at the
enterprise: industrial WiFi,
as well as local networks
Employees do not need ad-
ditional digital competencies
to work
Technological maturity level
Digital technologies applied in pro-
duction
Using digital technologies in mainte-
nance and repairs
1 2 3
Level №1 «Computerization»
Using a group of software and hardware
solutions to automate the control process
of all technological equipment installed
at the enterprise (automated process
control system)
Automated control system for mainte-
nance and repair
Implementation of multi-component man-
ufacturing execution systems
Reliability management system will al-
low reducing the costs of manufacturing
and maintenance of products, as well as
increasing the degree of product reliabil-
ity with a minimum increase in costs for
the necessary activities
Level №2 «Connectivity»
Internet of Things (IoT) with certified
crypto protection
Remote assistant specialist based on
augmented reality technologies
Industry robotization
Photogrammetry and laser scanning Automation of the process of manual
switching of equipment
Level №3 «Transparency»
Centralized remote control of all production
processes in the enterprise without exception
Remote monitoring of equipment health
indicators
Creation of a remote workplace using
tablet computers
Engineering data management system
(EDMS)
ASKUE (automated system for commer-
cial metering of electricity)
Technical vision
Digital dashboards for visual manage-
ment of performance indicators
Remote monitoring of equipment status
and supplier
Level №4 «Predictiveness»
Model advisors Predictive surveillance and maintenance system
Kinetic models Trust management center
Virtual analyzers
Level №5 «Adaptability»
Global systems for dynamic optimization
of technological processes
Automatic predictive generation of
special work orders for repair work
based on data obtained from predictive
diagnostics
Automation of the process of entering
spare equipment
Table 2: Example of conditional distribution of enterprise technologies according to main levels of digital maturity
Istraživanja i projektovanja za privredu ISSN 1451-4117
Journal of Applied Engineering Science Vol. 20, No. 1, 2022

--- PAGE 7 ---
Sergey V. Novikov, et al. - Approaches to developing a strategic program
for high-tech enterprise in the context of digital transformation
46
• to compare implemented digital tools with maturity
levels of enterprise;
• to assess the degree of success / completeness of
the implementation of digital tools according to the
criteria prepared in advance and agreed with the
managers of the enterprise;
• to assess the current level of maturity of all objects of
enterprise according to a single template.
Results:
• current level of digital maturity of the enterprise has
been determined;
• degree of success of integration of existing digital
initiatives at the enterprise was determined;
• “heat map” was drawn up of the success of imple-
mentation of existing digital tools according to the
main criteria.
Stage 2. Development of a map of the transition to the
target technological level of maturity of the enterprise
in the context of the operation of production lines.
Tasks:
• to determine target level of maturity of all production facilities;
• to start forming target portfolio of instruments in or-
der to organize the transition to the target level by
using the structure of register of instruments;
• to determine necessary set of prerequisites neces-
sary for integration of tools selected by specialists;
• to create roadmap for implementation of digital tools.
Results:
• full-fledged roadmap for consistent implementation of
digital tools over the course of 3 - 5 years is formed;
• image of the predicted results after the implementa-
tion of the roadmap is expressed in the target level
of maturity.
It should be noted that the objects for digital transforma-
tion are various groups of processes at individual instal-
lations or industrial sites of an enterprise, since they can
be simultaneously at different levels of maturity and, as
a result, strive to different levels of maturity [18]. As a re-
sult, after completing all the stages discussed above, an
effectivedigital transformation programshouldbeformed
[19], which is focused on replicating various digital tools,
which at the preliminary stage have already proven their
effectiveness in the framework of pilot projects or directly
developed at the enterprise [20].
We consider the process approach and the possibility
of its application to form a digital transformation pro-
gram. This approach assumes that an in-depth analysis
of all existing business processes in the enterprise will
be carried out in order to identify areas for optimization
[21]. The digital transformation process involves the use
of advanced innovative technologies as a basic optimi-
zation tool. A key feature of using this approach when
drawing up a roadmap for digitalization is the need for
a detailed analysis of all processes without exception,
including even individual manual operations. Detailed
specifications of the levels and methods of their practical
application are given in the Table 3.
Digital transformation presupposes full-scale integration
of modern information systems, which means that the
key object of analysis when developing a roadmap for
digital transformation of an enterprise is Level 5. Com-
petent compilation of a profile portfolio of initiatives for
the implementation of digital transformation based on the
application of the process approach should include the
following stages [22]:
Stage№0.Conductingdetaileddiagnosticsofallprocess-
es within the boundaries of the digital transformation.
Tasks:
Level in the process model Application
1 2
Level №1. Defines a group of investigated processes
Levels 1 - 3 allow determining the existing boundaries
of the enterprise's business, determining its functional
composition, process model, as well as the degree of
interrelation of processes, with the possibility of select-
ing the most key ones from among them
Level №2. Develops various business scenarios that
can be used as input in Level 3 in structural process-
es. As a result, a chain of sequentially interconnected
processes is formed
Level №3. Decomposition of processes to the level of
detailed presentation of business processes
Level №4. Contains models that allow describing steps
in a sequential manner. In this case, a step is a specif-
ic action that a group of users performs, for example,
creating documents, generating application, etc. Detailed detailing of processes to Levels 4 - 5 is often
used to develop a specific technical task for integrating
systems, writing standard operating procedures and
user manuals when working in a particular system
Level №5. Explains business processes in detail down
to the transaction level. A transaction in this case is a
simple operation, for example, opening an electronic
form or entering any data into a specific electronic field,
etc.
Table 3: Representation of process control levels
Istraživanja i projektovanja za privredu ISSN 1451-4117
Journal of Applied Engineering Science Vol. 20, No. 1, 2022

--- PAGE 8 ---
Sergey V. Novikov, et al. - Approaches to developing a strategic program
for high-tech enterprise in the context of digital transformation
47
• toconductinterviewswiththemanagementoftheenterprise;
• to analyze end-to-end business processes;
• to assess the timing with the subsequent analysis of the
structure of labor costs for certain types of processes;
• to calculate indicators of the cost of processes and
total labor costs;
• to conduct an analysis of IT components and IT ar-
chitecture, information flows, including the study of
plans for IT development;
• to conduct external and internal benchmarking.
Results:
• detailed description of all business processes was received;
• indicators of the process execution are given;
• potentially problematic processes in the structure of
the enterprise were identified;
• architecture of information systems in detail from
the point of view of diagnosed processes, amount
of manual work carried out by users in systems, etc.
was analyzed.
Stage №1. Development of hypotheses.
Tasks:
• to assess the current indicators of the cost of processes;
• to analyze the indicators of operational efficiency of
current business processes at the enterprise (AS-IS);
• to perform benchmarking of business processes op-
erating at the enterprise;
• to determine the most priority directions and hypotheses
for optimization with the aim of their further development.
Results:
• analysis of the current model for the implementation
of business processes was carried out for compli-
ance with the best international practices and com-
panies of the reference group;
• preliminary report was drawn up on the comparative
analysis of the indicators of the number of staff of
the enterprise and the effectiveness of the functions
they perform in comparison with similar enterprises
operating in the industry of the Russian Federation
and in the world;
• detailed description of the models of the considered
groups of business processes was obtained with ref-
erence to information systems, performed in strict
accordance with the selected methodology for mod-
eling business processes;
• results of physical measurements, interview protocols,
benchmarking of normative indicators, KPIs of pro-
cesses and other data were obtained, which confirm
the hypotheses put forward in the field of optimization;
• description of various hypotheses was obtained for
the organization of further elaboration and testing
them at the Stage 2.
Stage №2. Elaboration of hypotheses and develop-
ment of future initiatives.
Tasks:
• development of special targeted top-level business
processes (TO-BE);
• definition of high-level functional provisions and re-
quirements for IT systems.
Results:
• high-level detailed description of business processes
with the addition of special information systems (TO-BE);
• list of top-level functional requirements for the main pro-
posed changes in the field of automation was formed;
• management of the enterprise is presented with a
list of various initiatives for optimization in the envi-
ronment of business processes, taking into account
their correct arrangement in terms of timelines and
predicted results from the conducted high-level as-
sessment of the desired effect of the implementation
of the proposed initiatives on the enterprise;
• high-levelassessmentofbusinesscaseswascarriedout.
Stage №3. Formation of portfolio of projects in the
field of initiatives.
Tasks:
• development of detailed target business processes (TO-BE);
• definition of functional requirements, as well as a
number of non-functional requirements for the con-
sidered IT systems;
• development of a detailed business case;
• development of projects in the field of optimization;
• development of a specialized program aimed at im-
proving performance indicators.
Results:
• description of the model of business processes was
obtained with the reference to information systems,
on the basis of full compliance with the selected meth-
odology for modeling business processes (TO-BE);
• sets of various recommendations with a detailed de-
scription of changes are grouped into projects, in-
cluding setting tasks for automation with subsequent
assessment of effects, for example, standards and
KPI processes (TO-BE);
• approval was made, quantitative indicators of busi-
ness cases were calculated for each individual project;
• formed a program aimed at improving operational ef-
ficiency, including a plan for its direct implementation;
• formed a communications program for integrating
the program into the structure of the enterprise.
Theresultofthesequentialimplementationofthesestag-
es is a full-fledged program for the digital transformation
of the enterprise, aimed at increasing the efficiency indi-
cators and digitalization of the most complex, labor-in-
tensive and problematic processes at the enterprise [23].
RESULTS
The introduction of Industry 4.0 technologies should pro-
Istraživanja i projektovanja za privredu ISSN 1451-4117
Journal of Applied Engineering Science Vol. 20, No. 1, 2022

--- PAGE 9 ---
Sergey V. Novikov, et al. - Approaches to developing a strategic program
for high-tech enterprise in the context of digital transformation
48
Advantages Disadvantages
Replication of instruments at the disposal of the enterprise
Fast start of the program for digital transformation of
production and technological assets
There is a possibility of missing out on benefits due to
insufficient immersion
Intensive use and development of existing digital tools
at the enterprise
High level of quality requirements for existing tools and
a team of specialists for their implementation
Full transparency and understandability of predicted
results due to the use of a lower degree of uncertainty
Perhaps not a solution to a number of problems, be-
cause this approach cannot solve them effectively
Process approach to implementing a digital transformation program for an enterprise
Detailed study of a huge list of a wide variety of processes
High indicators of labor intensity of the stages, espe-
cially the stage of the diagnostic examination
Focusing only on real-life problems in the enterprise
There are high requirements for the qualification level
of methodologists who conduct research and use vari-
ous methods.
Potentially high effect in the case of finding processes
that require significant labor intensity and which can
then be successfully automated
Diagnostic stage requires significant attention from the
employees of the enterprise
Possibility of conducting an audit with the subsequent
updating of the process model Start of digital transformation is postponed until the
diagnosis is complete Presence of side effects that can be expressed in the
detection of various types of organizational problems
Table 4: Comparative analysis of various approaches to developing a digital transformation program
vide: reduction in repair costs, reduction in the time for
collecting and analyzing data, reduction in the number of
defects, reduction in emergency stops and the number
of repairs and increase in the useful life of equipment
and components. However, any change must be justified
and have specific goals. Otherwise, the risk of introduc-
ing ineffective improvements, which are accompanied by
the emergence of additional costs, increases significant-
ly. Since modern production is based on technologies,
a short list of key technologies has been formed that
ensure the implementation of the Industry 4.0 concept
in practice, and directions for their use are given. The
driver of the transformation of production is the desire
to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the enter-
prise, which is demonstrated by the relation “application
of technology - effect in production - impact on financial
results”. The approaches considered in the article differ
significantly from each other. The process of replicating
the tools at the disposal of the enterprise considers al-
ready existing, planned or proposed digital tools as a
“starting point”; it is a top-down approach. The process
of developing digital technologies is implemented for the
competent solution of specific problems, which means
that positive effects will be obtained in any case. Never-
theless, when using this approach to digital transforma-
tion, specific problems can be overlooked, the solution of
which through the use of advanced digital tools can have
a positive effect, but it is absent for them, which means
that it must be developed from scratch.
The process approach to the development of a digital
transformation program for an enterprise assumes a
consistent progressive movement "from the bottom up",
i.e. the whole existing set of problems that need to be
solved should be considered as a "starting point". This
approach can be called more fundamental than the rep-
lication process, because to identify existing problems,
it is required to do a huge amount of work related to the
diagnosis of all processes in the enterprise down to the
level of individual operations carried out in manual mode.
This circumstance is a significant disadvantage of using
this approach, since the beginning of the stratum of dig-
ital transformation processes is significantly postponed,
which can be started only after the procedure for sum-
ming up the results of the diagnostic examination (Table
4). It should be noted that the approaches are not mu-
tually exclusive. First, when applying the first approach,
before starting the development and replication process,
in any case, it is imperative that a complete diagnostic
examination procedure be carried out, followed by filling
the register of digital instruments with information, but it
can also be a separate procedure. Secondly, both con-
sidered approaches can be successfully used simulta-
neously; in parallel with the process of introducing digital
tools "from top to bottom", the study of existing problems
of the processes and the search for effective solutions
"from the bottom up" can be conducted, but only on con-
dition that these approaches have a high degree of syn-
chronization with each other.
Russian enterprises that already have direct experience
in implementing digital technologies are creating special
centers of excellence in those functional blocks where
the pilot project has already been implemented. Often
these are operational business units or unique IT unit
that tests advanced technologies. The set of various ser-
Istraživanja i projektovanja za privredu ISSN 1451-4117
Journal of Applied Engineering Science Vol. 20, No. 1, 2022

--- PAGE 10 ---
Sergey V. Novikov, et al. - Approaches to developing a strategic program
for high-tech enterprise in the context of digital transformation
49
vices provided by a specialized competence center may
differ, it depends on which model was chosen. To date,
there are several models of competence centers that
have already developed in Russian enterprises.
Methodological unit. Dedicated center of excellence, ex-
isting as a methodology unit, ensures the development
of universal standards and methodologies, oversees the
architecture and manages data. The development of
technological solutions and their subsequent implemen-
tation remains in special business functions, in which it is
planned to use them in the future.
General corporate center. It is a unique centralized
production unit, whose task is to provide a full cycle of
work related to the development of a methodological ap-
proach and technologies for the implementation of se-
lected solutions. Business functions only shape strategy
development initiatives and project requests.
Thus, the article considered a model of the levels of digi-
tal maturity of an enterprise, approaches to developing a
digital transformation program and, in particular, mecha-
nisms of their use. The information presented in this ar-
ticle can be the basis for the development and adoption
of management decisions in practice when implementing
the concept of digital transformation.
DISCUSSION
According to the data obtained after the study by the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Develop-
ment, there are two key factors that affect the speed of
implementation of advanced digital technologies in Rus-
sia. The first factor is certain internal capabilities of the
enterprise, which include staff management, availability
of resources necessary for production, their correct dis-
tribution, etc. The second factor that stimulates digital
transformation processes includes not only indicators of
the current level of competition in the industry, availabil-
Process: inflexible or slow
Infrastructure: outdated infrastructure and lack of
integration of new and existing technologies
Financial: no budget for digitalization projects
Administrative and managerial: no person in the
company responsible for digitalization / no leadership
Staff shortage of specialists with necessary
qualifications
Communication: lack of close ties between IT
department and business unit
Regulatory barrier
3,5
2,5
3,1
3,1
3,1
3
3,3
7,2
4,4
5,8
6
5,9
5,7
6
Now In 5 years
Figure 1: Key barriers to digital transformation
ity of advanced technologies and capital, but also takes
into account trends in the development of legislation. Ex-
perts have found that there is a direct relation between
the development of human capital in an enterprise and
the degree of effectiveness of the implementation of in-
novative digital technologies. Therefore, the successful
implementation of digital initiatives requires the presence
of strong leadership skills, as well as the use of modern
management practices [24].
The analytical company Digital Leader, together with the
companies PricewaterhouseCoopers, International Data
Corporation and JSC CROC incorporated conducted a
study to determine the technologies that can have the
greatest impact on the labor market and business by 2030.
The main obstacles to the full-fledged digital transforma-
tion of Russian enterprises are shown in the Figure 1.
The main barriers to the implementation of digital transfor-
mation at the moment, according to leading specialists and
experts, are infrastructure, financial and process. For the
foreseeable future (approximately 3-5 years), inflexible or
excessively slow processes will continue to actively hinder
the development of digital transformation processes. Lack
of investment and regulatory hurdles are predicted to slow
down the transition to innovation [1].
The effective combination of advanced technologies and
business processes within the enterprises requires em-
ployees to have basic IT skills, programs that allow them to
maintain and develop these skills, as well as to fully match
the nature of work with the competencies that employees
of the enterprise have. The leaders of many large Russian
enterprises note that the key indicator of readiness for the
full implementation of large-scale digital transformation
programs is a targeted increase in the digital literacy of
working employees. This is especially important for those
employees who do not work in IT, but in business units.
The scale of future changes that will occur in the business
of Russian enterprises due to the impact of innovative
Istraživanja i projektovanja za privredu ISSN 1451-4117
Journal of Applied Engineering Science Vol. 20, No. 1, 2022

--- PAGE 11 ---
Sergey V. Novikov, et al. - Approaches to developing a strategic program
for high-tech enterprise in the context of digital transformation
50
technologies on them is shown in the Figure 2.
According to the results of the study, artificial intelligence
and machine learning technologies, IoT and Process Ro-
botization will fundamentally change activities in Russian
enterprises over the next 10 years, according to a number
of experts. Under the influence of new technologies, the
functions / departments of Russian enterprises will also be
transformed [3]:
• IT;
• marketing;
• user / customer support;
• accounting / finance.
The process of transition from the traditional technological
approach to the new cost-oriented approach is necessary
to improve the quality indicators of the enterprise. Tradi-
tionally, within the technological approach, most enterpris-
es are guided by the following approach with an emphasis
on innovative technologies [8]:
• selection of advanced breakthrough technologies;
• search, study and subsequent piloting of technologies;
• identification of potential business value.
The value-based approach is aimed at implementing the
concept of digital transformation based on the use of the
methodology "from a business problem" and includes:
• setting business objectives;
• search, study and analysis of various alternative ways
of creating value;
• selection of innovative technologies.
Experts and representatives of the business community
believe that the most competent and at the same time
effective approach to the implementation of the concept
of digital transformation is the use of the methodology
"from business tasks" by the enterprise management.
This means that an enterprise actively begins to intro-
duce innovative technologies, based on the principle of
whatresulttheenterprise management seekstoachieve,
what sources of value creation exist, and only then it pro-
ceeds to the process of choosing a specific technology
for their subsequent implementation [25]. The results of
numerous studies show that fundamental approaches to
the selection of digitalization projects can be borrowed
from the leaders of the Russian market, who are already
following the path of implementing various programs
Blockchain 3D printing Robotics 5G Internet Unmanned vehicles
Virtual and augmented reality Cybersecurity technologies
Process Robotization IoT Artificial intelligence and machine learning
Figure 2: Scale of business change by innovative technologies
aimed at transformation. The focus is on outcome and
cost, not technology. When choosing projects, market
leaders act in conditions of limited resources, and there-
fore prioritize processes, and highlight only those areas
that will significantly increase the value of the business.
The path to successful implementation of transformation,
of course, depends on a balanced, strategically sound
and thoughtful approach aimed at implementing digital
initiatives, which are primarily focused on increasing
business value [26].
CONCLUSIONS
Based on the analysis of the institutional aspects of the
digital transformation of industry and factors affecting the
formation of an institutional environment conducive to
the large-scale introduction of technical and technologi-
cal means of global megatrends and the development of
digital ecosystems, it can be concluded that the following
trends exist: world community accepts the challenges of
thefourthIRandthesearchforstrategicsolutionsthrough
the creation of regulatory program documents that would
regulate the development of digital transformation of the
industry. The United States has adopted the Advanced
Manufacturing Partnership program, with an investment
fund of over $ 500 million. It is aimed at ensuring the
country's competitive advantages through the develop-
ment of the manufacturing industry. The program envis-
ages cooperation of scientific societies, industrial enter-
prises and government, organization of joint investment,
development of innovations and their commercialization,
unification of government, education, science and indus-
try in the network "National Network for Manufacturing In-
novation". Among the participants are leading American
universities, experimental research institutes and United
States industrial holdings. The fund is $ 8.5 billion and is
aimed at the development of chemical, biological, energy,
robotic industrial sectors, energy conservation and train-
ing of specialists with appropriate qualifications.
The modern scientific and technological development pol-
icy of the Republic of Korea was formalized in the docu-
ment "Long-term forecast for the development of science
and technology until 2025" ("Long-term Vision for Science
and Technology Development toward 2025"), which was
adopted in 2013. In 2015, the third strategy for the de-
velopment of science and technology “Manufacturing
Innovation 3.0 Strategy” became the next stage in the
Istraživanja i projektovanja za privredu ISSN 1451-4117
Journal of Applied Engineering Science Vol. 20, No. 1, 2022

--- PAGE 12 ---
Sergey V. Novikov, et al. - Approaches to developing a strategic program
for high-tech enterprise in the context of digital transformation
51
implementation of the “creative economy”. Science and
Technology Basic Plan has been approved by the gov-
ernment. The strategic direction was the development
of completely new industrial sectors for the economy of
the Republic of Korea: big data, 5G telecommunications,
artificial intelligence, IoT, self-driving cars, virtual reality,
intelligent robots, energy conservation, etc. Key ministries
in charge of strategic directions for the development of the
creative economy, became: Ministry of Science, Telecom-
municationsandForecasting(MinistryofScience,ICTand
Future Planning) and the Ministry of Trade, Industry and
Energy (Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy), which in
2015 mastered more than 60% of government spending
on R&D (31.9% and 30.4%, respectively). The investment
fund for financing government programs is United States
$ 7.5 billion. In new industrial sectors, it is planned to cre-
ate more than 550 000 additional jobs by 2025.
In Japan, in 2014, a strategy for the development of in-
formation and communication technologies "SmartJa-
panStrategy" was developed. Within its framework, in
2015, the Fifth Basic Plan for Scientific and Technologi-
cal Development ("Fifth Science and Technology Plan")
was adopted, which sets the tasks for the formation of
a superintelligent society (SuperSmartSociety 5.0) and
plans to accelerate technological growth by introducing
cyber-physical systems into industrial production and
the industrial IoT. State Council of the People's Republic
of China (2015), as part of the national digital develop-
ment strategy "Internet Plus" (Internet Plus), published
the "Made in China 2025" program, which is based on
the integration of information and communication tech-
nologies and industrialization, as well as the application
of in the artificial intelligence industry. Goal: transforma-
tion and modernization of key industries and meeting the
basic needs for the development of new generations of
information technology (smart manufacturing, production
of additives, new materials and biomedicine).
In France, in 2013, the French industrial development
plan "NewIndustrialFrance" was adopted, providing in-
stitutional support to 34 industrial projects, including
"Fabric of the Future", "Robotics", "Supercomputers",
etc. This document is coordinated with the strategic plan
of scientific and technical research, diffusion of innova-
tions, European technology transfer and brings together
the interests of private business, the scientific communi-
ty and the state. United Kingdom adopted the Strategic
Industrial Development Plan until 2050 (United Kingdom
Digital Strategy 2017), the first section of which sets stra-
tegic goals for the development of the digital economy
and digital transformation of industry within the frame-
work of the Industry 4.0 concept. At the same time, the
Industry 4.0 concept was taken as a basis for the forma-
tion of national programs for the digital transformation of
industry in many industrially developed European coun-
tries, such as:Austria, Belgium, Hungary, Denmark, Italy,
Spain, Lithuania, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Slova-
kia, Czech Republic, Sweden, etc.
REFERENCES
1. Burenina, I. V., Gayfullina, M. M., Sayfullina, S. F.
(2018). The social and economic transformations
connected with implementation of projects of devel-
opment and deployment of Industry 4.0 Technolo-
gies. The Eurasian Scientific Journal, vol. 5, no. 10.
2. Rojko, A. (2017). Industry 4.0 concept: background
and overview. International Journal of Interactive
Mobile Technologies, vol. 11, no. 5, 77–90.
3. Avdeeva, I. L., Polyanin,A. V., Golovina, T.A. (2019).
Industrial Economic Systems’ Digitalization: Prob-
lems and Consequences of Modern Technologies.
Bulletin of the Saratov University. New episode. Se-
ries Economics. Management. Law, vol. 19, no. 3,
238–245.
4. Wiktorsson, M., Noh, S. D., Bellgran, M., Hanson, L.
(2018). Smart Factories: South Korean and Swedish
examples on manufacturing settings. Procedia Man-
ufacturing, vol. 25, 471–478.
5. Shendrikova, O. O., Elfimova, I. F. (2019). The study
of processes related to digitalization of industrial enter-
prises. Organizer of Production, vol. 27, no. 1, 16-24.
6. Schuh, G., Anderl, R., Gausemeier, J., Ten Hompel,
M., Wahlster, W. (2017). Industrie 4.0 Maturity Index:
Die digitale Transformation von Unternehmenge-
stalten. Herbert Utz Verlag, München.
7. Shahrubudin, N., Chuan, L. T., Ramlan, R. (2019).
An overview of critical success factors for imple-
menting 3d printing technology in manufacturing
firms. Journal of Applied Engineering Science, vol.
17, no. 3, 379-385.
8. Dovbiy, I. P., Ionova, N. V., Dovbiy, N. S. (2019).
Fourth industrial revolution (aspects of investment
and financial and personnel support). Bulletin of the
South Ural State University. Series Economics and
Management, vol. 13, no. 1, 120–131.
9. Hofmann, E., Rüsch, M. (2017). Industry 4.0 and the
current status as well as future prospects on logis-
tics. Computers in Industry, vol. 89, 23–34.
10. Sergeeva, O. Yu. (2018). “Industry 4.0” as a mecha-
nism for formation of “Smart production”. Nanotech-
nologies in Construction, vol. 10, no. 2, 100–113.
11. Novikov, S. V., Sazonov, A. A. (2020). Digital trans-
formation of machine-building complex enterprises.
Journal of Physics: Conference Series, vol. 1515,
no. 3, 032021.
12. Saldivar, A. A. F., Li, Y., Chen, W. N., Zhan, Z. H.,
Zhang, J., Chen, L. Y. (2015). Industry 4.0 with cy-
ber-physical integration: A design and manufacture
perspective. Proceedings of 21st International Con-
ference onAutomation and Computing (ICAC) 2017,
p. 260-265.
Istraživanja i projektovanja za privredu ISSN 1451-4117
Journal of Applied Engineering Science Vol. 20, No. 1, 2022

--- PAGE 13 ---
Sergey V. Novikov, et al. - Approaches to developing a strategic program
for high-tech enterprise in the context of digital transformation
52
Paper submitted: 16.04.2021. Paper submitted: 16.04.2021.
Paper accepted: 28.05.2021. Paper accepted: 28.05.2021.
This is an open access article distributed under the This is an open access article distributed under the
CC BY 4.0 terms and conditions. CC BY 4.0 terms and conditions.
13. Rakyta, M., Fusko, M., Hercko, J., Zavodska, L.,
Zavodska, N. (2016). Proactive approach to smart
maintenance and logistics as a auxiliary and service
processes in a company. Journal of Applied Engi-
neering Science, vol. 14, no. 4, 433-442.
14. Zhou, K., Liu, T., Zhou, L. (2015). Industry 4.0: To-
wards future industrial opportunities and challenges.
12th International Conference on Fuzzy Systems
and Knowledge Discovery 2015, p. 2147–2152.
15. Lima, R. M. (2010). Integrating production planning
and control business processes. Information Resourc-
es Management: Concepts, Methodologies, Tools and
Applications. IGI Global, Hershey, p. 391-412.
16. Kretzschmar, N., Chekurov, S., Salmi, M., Tuomi, J.
(2018). Evaluating the Readiness Level of Additively
Manufactured Digital Spare Parts: An Industrial Per-
spective. AppliedSciences, vol. 8, no. 10, 1837.
17. Agostini, L., Filippini, R. (2019). Organizational and
managerial challenges in the path toward Industry
4.0. European Journal of Innovation Management,
vol. 22, no. 3, 406-421.
18. Jovanović, M., Lalić, M., Mas, A., Mesquida, A. L.
(2015). The agile approach in industrial and software
engineering project management. Journal ofApplied
Engineering Science, vol. 13, no. 4, 213-216.
19. Yin, R. K. (2018). Case Study Research and Appli-
cations: Design and Methods, Sixth edition. SAGE
Publications, Los Angeles.
20. Jesus, C. de, Lima, R. M. (2020). Literature Search
of Key Factors for the Development of Generic and
Specific Maturity Models for Industry 4.0. Applied-
Sciences, vol. 10, no. 17, 5825.
21. Mičieta, B., Herčko, J., Botka, M., Zrnić, N. (2016).
Concept of intelligent logistic for automotive industry.
Journal of Applied Engineering Science, vol. 14, no.
2, 233–238.
22. Pfeiffer, S. (2017). The vision of «Industrie 4.0» in
the making – a case of future told, tamed, and trad-
ed. NanoEthics, vol. 11, no. 1, 107–121.
23. Samostroenko, G. M., Sulima, E. P. (2017). “Digital”
Inheritance as a Factor of Development of Entrepre-
neurship in the Sphere of Protecting Personal Data.
Central Russian Journal of Social Sciences, vol. 12,
no. 1, 252–258.
24. Bauernhansl, T. (2014). Die VierteIndustrielle Rev-
olution – Der Weg in einwertschaffendesProduk-
tionsparadigma. In Industrie 4.0 in Produktion, Au-
tomatisierung und Logistik, T. Bauernhansl, M. ten
Hompel, und B. Vogel-Heuser, Hrsg. Springer Fach-
medien Wiesbaden, Wiesbaden.
25. Dmitriev, O. N., Novikov, S. V. (2019). Verification of
Feasibility Studies at High-Technology. Russian En-
gineering Research, vol. 39, no. 9, 780-781.
26. Kosareva, I. N., Samarina, V. P. (2019). The man-
agement features of the enterprises in the conditions
of digitalization. The Eurasian Scientific Journal, vol.
3, no. 11.
Istraživanja i projektovanja za privredu ISSN 1451-4117
Journal of Applied Engineering Science Vol. 20, No. 1, 2022