--- PAGE 1 ---
HAL Id: hal-05540661
https://ifip.hal.science/hal-05540661v1
Submitted on 6 Mar 2026
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive
for the deposit and dissemination of scientific re-
search documents, whether they arepublished or not.
Thedocumentsmaycomefromteachingandresearch
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or pri-
vate research centers.
L’archiveouvertepluridisciplinaireHAL,estdes-
tinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents scien-
tifiquesdeniveaurecherche, publiésounon, émanant
des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche
français ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou
privés.
Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 - Attribution - International License
A Business Technology Alignment Strategy for Digital
Collaborative Networks
A. Luís Osório, Ricardo J. Rabelo, Carlos Gonçalves
To cite this version:
A. Luís Osório, Ricardo J. Rabelo, Carlos Gonçalves. A Business Technology Alignment Strategy for Digi-
tal Collaborative Networks. 24th Working Conference on Virtual Enterprises (PRO-VE), Sep 2023, Valencia,
Spain. pp.380-397, ⟨10.1007/978-3-031-42622-3_27⟩. ⟨hal-05540661⟩

--- PAGE 2 ---
This document is the original author manuscript of a paper submitted to an IFIP
conference proceedings or other IFIP publication by Springer Nature. As such, there
may be some differences in the official published version of the paper. Such
differences, if any, are usually due to reformatting during preparation for publication or
minor corrections made by the author(s) during final proofreading of the publication
manuscript.

--- PAGE 3 ---
A Business Technology Alignment Strategy
for Digital Collaborative Networks
A. Luís Osório1(B), Ricardo J. Rabelo2, and Carlos Gonçalves1,3
1 ISEL - Instituto Superior de Engenharia de Lisboa, Instituto Politécnico de Lisboa, and
POLITEC&ID, Lisboa, Portugal
{aosorio,cgoncalves}@deetc.isel.ipl.pt
2 UFSC – Federal University of Santa Catarina, Florianópolis, Brazil
ricardo.rabelo@ufsc.br
3 NOVA LINCS, Costa da Caparica, Portugal
Abstract. The fast pace toward a digital-centered society requires new, more
holistic strategies to model and lifecycle-manage sociotechnical systems and ser-
vices under agnostic ecosystem provisioning. Despite the enormous multidisci-
plinaryresearchtomodelanorganization’sinformationtechnologylandscapes.In
this paper, we work further on previous consolidated research toward leveraging a
digitalandservice-orientedtechnologytransformationtounderpincompanies’IT
sovereignty. Our research challenges multi-layered systems’ responsibility mod-
eling from the business domain to underly digital technologies formulations in
intra-organization and Collaborative Networks. A core contribution of the paper
is positioning the concept of Business System of Systems and the Business Ser-
vice element as an IT-alignment strategy to map business modeling to informatics
systems more integrally.
Keywords: Enterprise Architecture · Collaborative Networks · Distributed
System of Systems · Agnostic Technologies and Services
1 Introduction
Regardingtherapidevolutionofinformationtechnology(IT),existingapproachesmake
it difficult to replace products or services with competing ones (replaceability) given the
lack of complete standards and the constant changes in business and hence in systems’
architecture and scalability [48].
Since initial efforts in the 90’s using the hub-and-spoke pattern – mostly represented
by Enterprise Application Integration (EAI) tools – organizations have increasingly
moved their IT assets to the cloud. Although the point-to-point integration pattern is
still very much used by most companies, modern integration approaches have shifted
to loosely-coupled models, such as messaging and bus patterns, using e.g., integration-
Platform-as-a-Service (iPaaS) cloud-based tools, endowing more flexible and scalable
integrations of heterogeneous and distributed systems [12].
© IFIP International Federation for Information Processing 2023
Published by Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
L. M. Camarinha-Matos et al. (Eds.): PRO-VE 2023, IFIP AICT 688, pp. 380–397, 2023.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-42622-3_27

--- PAGE 4 ---
A Business Technology Alignment Strategy 381
However,bigcloudproviderssuchasAmazon,Google,andAzurehavenotsupported
such flexibility and scalability. Although the many advantages got with this shift, the
companies’ digital transformation strategies end up depending too much on the cloud
provider’stechnologicalandcommercialstrategy,asmanysystemsareintegratedwithin
thecloud,usinginternalproprietarytechnologiesandcomponents,whichcreateahugely
difficult to replace systems due to the consequent lock-in [28].
This new cloud centrality introduces novel challenges to fit organizations’ business
needs, strategy, and objectives regarding business-IT alignment, being one of the most
critical obstacles to successful digital transformation [39]. Agnostic IT strategies in
multi-vendors business environments impact companies’ competitiveness [38].
Onestrategyadoptedformanyyearstoaddressthisisusingopenstandards.However,
despitemassiveinvestmentsinthisandopen-sourcesoftware,manybarriersstillexistto
overcome[17].Actually,giventhecomplexityofformalizingmodelsbalancingbusiness
and technology, the integrated digital as an integrated service delivery [50] still lacks
a collaborative “platformization” as loose coupling and seamless integration between
the various IT components and the management of their life cycles [20, 29, 34]. For
example, suppose we pick an Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system. In that case,
no formal border exists to delimit its responsibilities regarding functional scope (from
the business perspective) and the IT entities that should execute it.
The concept of service and Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) architectural style
emerged in the 90’s [46] as a sounding attempt for a better structuration of distributed
computational responsibilities in network-centric computing infrastructures [8]. Mean-
while, the fast-rising of the Internet and cloud computing has established a new pace for
digital transformation, demanding a renewed business-IT strategy [12, 46].
The need for a strategy business-technology connection formulated in the dawn of
80’s [25] is still a main challenge in the dawn of 20’s [42].
Important initiatives in this direction, such as the COBIT framework, have been
proposed. However, they lack a more unified and integral strategy that can cope with
newbusiness-ITintegrationrequirementsintermsofhowtoalignbusinessmodelingand
objectives to technology realizations and required quality expectations within this ever-
increasingdigital,cloud,andecosystems-based,service-orientedmulti-vendoroffering,
and collaborative environments [26, 46].
This paper represents a first attempt towards this direction, presenting a more for-
mal business framework that expresses business intents, the expected quality, and other
aspects of the organization’s interest.
The remaining paper is structured as follows. Section 2 summarizes some relevant
worksrelatedtothispaper’sgoal.InSect.3weintroducetheconceptofBusinessSystem
and Business System of Systems. Section 4 extends the proposed approach considering
both business and informatics systems in the context of Collaborative Networks (CN).
Section 5 presents conclusions and discusses further research.
2 Related Research
Business-IT alignment is not a new issue, it traces back to the 90’s [21], and it has been
more recently extended to networked enterprises [10].

--- PAGE 5 ---
382 A. L. Osório et al.
While formal models addressing the business IT alignment are lacking, there is a
growingconsensusfortheneedforadeeperunderstandingoftheroleoftechnology[19].
However, current integration approaches are challenged by the difficulties in adapting to
new digital processes and technology toward integrated vendor-agnostic IT landscapes,
as tried to be faced by the EMPAIA consortium, including legacy IT [28].
The theoretical model in [23] considers twelve hypotheses, where H1 represents IT
alignment and digitalization success, while H2..H12 maps to organizational structure,
organizational culture, agility, leadership skills, digital metrics, stakeholder relation-
ships, external domain alignment, and human resources management. The suggested
theoretical model organizes essential aspects of the organization and business but lacks
a more concrete strategy for a better alignment toward the promised success. In this
line, and as later described, our research contribution proposes the concept of a business
system from the business perspective, and the informatics system from the engineering
viewpoint with an associated clear mapping strategy.
The IT4IT initiative “… developed from the professional experience of its creators”
[18] represents an alternative approach for a business view of IT to gain added control
over the increasing vendor dependency of a distributed complex technology landscape.
This new standard, 2015, “… describes a reference architecture that can be used to
manage the business of Information Technology (IT) and the associated end-to-end
lifecycle management of Digital Products”. IT4IT defines a digital product as a “…
service, physical item, or digital item that provides an agreed and specific outcome
for a consumer, and that incorporates and requires software to realize that outcome”
[35]. The definition raises, however, the question of what a physical item is. From the
digital technology perspective, every managed element needs an accessible/connectable
computing entity, the mentioned “software to realize”.
From the Enterprise Architecture community, this new standard is not well mapped
to well-known enterprise reference architectures, as strategic technology decisions are
taken at the business level without considering that a coordinated business-IT strategy is
essential for achieving business goals. Other relevant standards addressing the modeling
of IT-related aspects of an organization (e.g., ITIL, COBIT, TOGAF, and ARIS) are
industry-supported initiatives, in some cases tough to map towards a unified abstract
reference model [18].
IT4IT shares common architectural elements with other enterprise architecture
frameworks but focuses only on IT without providing methodological guidelines to
map business to IT [18]. The next section proposes associating meta-data with busi-
ness conceptual modeling elements aligned to model-driven developments guided by
business process management (BPM) principles [11].
The scientific research in [43] proposes four IT architectural stages to align the
business to IT: i) the application silo architecture, considering individual applications
architecture; ii) standardized technology architecture, considering enterprise with IT
architectureadoptingstandardsandcentralizedcoordination;iii)rationalizeddataarchi-
tecture, which comprises standardization of data and processes; and iv) modular archi-
tecture, comprising an enterprise with global standards and loosely coupled applica-
tions, data, and technology components, preserving unicity with diversity. However, the

--- PAGE 6 ---
A Business Technology Alignment Strategy 383
authors recognize that this systematization is a complex endeavor from the management
perspective.
Our understanding of the need for alternative approaches, e.g., why TOGAF lacks
to cope with a balanced and coordinated modeling of both business and technology
view, can be understood by creating a new IT4IT standard. Nevertheless, establishing
a coordinated model for business and IT at both enterprise and collaborative network
levels is still an open research question.
IT evolved fast over the last decades and lacked sound and formal models to help
establish a reliable and vendor-agnostic technology landscape [22]. One example is
cloud computing, a more and more consolidated model and strategy that has arisen
with the trend to adopt the OPEX business model, moving the IT infrastructure and
business application resources from on-premises to public cloud providers (also known
as hyper-scalers and, in most cases offering third-party cloud services) [2].
Nevertheless, the IT shift from on-premises infrastructures to a public cloud, guided
bycostreductionandscalabilityneeds,hasdemonstratedlimitationsregardingintegrated
and sustainable life cycle management of IT resources. Beyond that, organizations want
“… to see shorter innovation cycles, less complexity, and access to expertise that is
unavailable or cannot be built up within the company” [10]. This report also points out
therisksassociatedwithhyper-scaleconcentration,whichjeopardizesintegratedservice
delivery (ISD) in, for example, collaboration networks [50].
The risks of unbalanced dependency on the public cloud providers make us reflect
on the trade-off advantages of repositioning the center again on the organization. For
example, the DYNAMO European Commission Terrestrial Ecosystems Research Initia-
tive [34], has been reflecting on multi-vendor environments where supporting microser-
vices for telecommunications infrastructures in smart cities and public mobility are
deployed in given (proprietary) clouds. The proposal of adopting a monitoring system
like Prometheus [13] incorporates heterogeneous implementation technologies, e.g.,
NET, but scaling in a multi-vendor environment is challenging.
In[49],theauthorssuggestthecalled‘ITplatformization’todecreasesociotechnical
tensions and to offer better support to map business models against required technolo-
gies. Nevertheless, no integration strategy is presented to more accurately cope with the
complexity and dynamics of collaborative relationships.
Another rising question is how each vendor’s responsibility relates to service offer-
ings’failureconsideringthecomplexinterdependenciesamongtechnologyelementsthat
underly (in this exemplified case) both smart-city and public transport cases. According
to [1], microservices (system’s service elements) “… urge a system-centric perspective
to better reason about the system evolution and its quality attributes”. For example,
scalability is relatively simple for a stateless service. However, if the service holds state,
scalability needs to cope with some distributed coordination strategy to guarantee the
consistency of the configured replicas that offer an equivalent one of a single execution
instance.
Revisingscientificandtechnicalliteratureconsideringvariousresearchcommunities
and practitioner discussions, we suggest identifying the need for reaching an enhanced
consensus on business-IT mediation languages and modeling to establish a holistic

--- PAGE 7 ---
384 A. L. Osório et al.
“digital stack” [24]. Towards this direction, we position the Business System of Sys-
tems (BSoS) as a business-level framework that leads or maps to a technology-centered
Informatics System of Systems (ISoS) framework [38].
3 The Business System of Systems (BSoS) Related to ISoS
The proposed Business System of Systems (BSoS) framework grounds on previous
research,questioninghowcomputingandcyber-physicaltechnologyelementswouldbe
structured in a multi-vendor/multi-supplier organization’s IT landscape.
3.1 Model’s Rationale
Thereisagrowingconsensusfortheneedtoformalizetheenterpriseitselfandtheenter-
prise as a node of a CN towards managed, platform-agnostic, digital business ecosystem
[41]. By managed, we mean a coordinated strategy based on meta-data models referenc-
ingbusinessprocesses,data,andorganizationmodelsformanagingthelifecycleofbusi-
ness expectations, namely mechanisms to evaluate goal’s fulfillment in both enterprise
and CN contexts.
Fulfillingbusinessgoalsconsidersthequalityofservicesbasedonperformanceindi-
cators and sustainable costs, which requires integrated views and becomes even more
complex when managing legacy monolithic application silos. With the more recent
service-oriented approaches, technology barriers can be faded to establish a unified
ecosystem. Towards reducing this complexity, we structure our model into two perspec-
tives:i)theBusiness&Management;andii)theTechnology&Engineeringecosystems,
following a similar approach to [29].
The problem of mapping user interfaces and experience (UI/UX) interfaces based
on models and meta-models into low-level web technology business logic with existing
model-drivenproductsisdiscussedin[5].ThedifficultyinaligningbusinesswithIThas
led business units to manage their technology resources using poor practices, known as
shadowIT [7],e.g.,usingspreadsheetstosupportsystems-ITintegration,wherebusiness
and IT responsibilities are blurred. In this context, our BSoS-ISoS model aims to con-
tribute to overcoming the issues pointed out in [29]: i) uncoordinated decision processes
are an obstacle to self-managed teams; ii) the lack of clear governance is an obstacle to
on-time decisions; iii) the lack of precise alignment between functions and end-to-end
leave responsibilities unclear; iv) a common urgency to adopt fashioning technologies
(as artificial intelligence) without framing them into the business perspective; v) the
adoption of new technologies without any vision in terms of global systems architec-
ture, creating different data silos; and vi) the lack of an integrated strategy conducts to
a waste of efforts to answer digital expectations.
Following a well-succeeded experience of adopting the ISoS framework [38] in the
PT2020 SITL-IoT project [14], we propose a similar approach to the business domain.
The central idea is to establish both business (meta-models and models) and technology
(meta-models, models, executive entities, and service elements) to manage better and
integrate them within an agnostic strategy. For this, we extended the sociotechnical
system (STS) analytical framework based on structure and people (on the social &

--- PAGE 8 ---
A Business Technology Alignment Strategy 385
business system side), and on the technology and tasks (on the technical system side),
connected by what in [49] is identified as interacting variable classes (Fig. 1).
Fig. 1. Revisiting Interacting variable classes within a sociotechnical work system [49]
The proposed framework considers conceptual modeling elements managed as con-
ceptual sociotechnical work systems of systems to establish the business landscape. The
framework accommodates, side by side, the social & business system and the technical
system. Since the information system needs to map to the new proposed conceptual
modeling elements, its concepts should balance (distribute) both sides.
One main motivation for the business system (BSystem) as a composite of business
service elements is, on the one hand, to establish clear (business) responsibility borders.
On the other hand, to establish a mapping strategy for the technology counterpart. The
ISoS IT modeling concepts formally establish technology (operational) responsibilities.
TheproposedBusinessSystemofSystems(BSoS)isinspiredbytheinformationsys-
tems community, particularly the business technology alignment question. The concept
of business IT alignment is formulated in [30]. However, from the systems engineering
perspective, the definition is too vague, evidencing the need for a more formal app-
roach for both business and IT parts regarding the responsibility of offering sustainable,
reliable, and resilient systems/services operations support [39].
3.2 Basic Methodology
Our research challenges the Enterprise Architecture (EA) community pushed by Open-
Group with strategic standardization contributions in the virtual border, separating
Business & Management from Technology & Engineering.
To sustain our discussion, we selected the TOGAF EA methodology and frame-
work (The Open Group Architecture Framework) and the related ArchiMate enterprise
architecture modeling language as relevant examples of standards.
While slightly shifted to the technology side, conceptual modeling is a central dis-
course of both practitioners and science & technology researchers. Our research entails
the more recent IT4IT standard that “… addresses a critical gap in the Digital Transfor-
mation toolkit: the need for a unifying architectural model that describes and connects

--- PAGE 9 ---
386 A. L. Osório et al.
the capabilities, value streams, functions, and operational data needed to manage a
Digital Product Portfolio at scale”. This is additional evidence of the need for novel
approaches for organizations in the digital world.
While arguing for the need first to consolidate a strategy for the intra-organization
business and IT formal modeling, a comprehensive digital transformation and related
business integration should also embrace the company’s partnerships and suppliers so
the CNs it is involved in. Therefore, one of the goals of this research is to extend our
proposed approach to CN. For this case, we extend the enterprise collaboration network
(ECoNet) framework [38] with the business system and services concepts.
3.3 The Proposed Model
The ISoS framework establishes that an IT of an organization is structured based on the
ISystem responsibility boundaries. The informatics system concept relies on the system
concept. According to the SOA concept [47], a system “…is a set of interacting parts,
generallytoolargetobebuiltbyasingleperson,createdforsomeparticularpurpose…”.
We add that dating back to Bertalanfy’s general system theory, “The whole is more than
the sum of its parts” [15]. Furthermore, SOA refers to the architectural style adopted
by ISoS since operating (executable) entities are the Service elements published in the
ISystem0, whose role is to implement a service directory for the informatics systems
of an organization. One advantage of adopting the system concept is the possibility of
unifying the responsibility border, delimiting a suite of technology artifacts as interde-
pendent parts, so hiding complex computational logic and resources as an alternative to
monolithic software practices.
Oneusualsystemmodelingstrategyistodefineasystemasacompositeofelements,
nomattertheirinternalcomplexity,usedprogrammingparadigmandtechnology,granu-
larity,orfunctionalroleorlevelwithintheglobalarchitecture.Eachpartcanbeasystem
or a terminal element, usually called an undecomposable component or part. However,
given the number of elements, the approach represents a very complex computing envi-
ronment to model. To deal with this complexity, the ISoS adopted a simplified model of
an informatics system (ISystem) by establishing a composition of Cooperation Enabled
Services (CES) as a strategic grouping to organize Service elements in the computing
domain, establishing the atomic or the terminal element of an informatics system. The
Service element incorporates computational logic and required resources (e.g., config-
uration files) but does not necessarily follow the microservice approach since a Service
can be a large entity.
Following a similar strategy, we propose adopting the system concept, but now
applied to structuring business goals. Here there is a problem since our idea of the busi-
ness system differs from some other definitions. More concretely, our approach does not
share the vision of a type of business system grouping specific business characteristics
[5]. Instead, our interest considers the variety of business systems that can delimit busi-
ness responsibilities regarding enterprise business goals and the mechanisms to achieve
them via IT.
The definition of a business system as “… a sociotechnical whole covering the com-
pany purpose, goals, organization, processes, people and technology” seems a good

--- PAGE 10 ---
A Business Technology Alignment Strategy 387
working base, but it needs to be more clarified. Since we adopt the concept of infor-
matics system as the technology abstraction and want a similar strategy to the business
perspective, we need to restrict the business system to socio-organizational whole and
goals, including people.
We define a Business System (BSystem) as a socio-organizational whole covering
organization’sgoals,structure,andprocesses.Thedefinitionreferstothebalancedinfor-
mation system, as depicted in Fig. 1. While there is no global consensus about an infor-
mation system, the sociotechnical terminology is recurrent. It has been linked to issues
relatedtobettermatchingtechnologywithjobsatisfactionorpersonaldevelopment[44].
Since the end of 80’s there have been questions about how strategic frameworks
of composite information systems are suitable for strategic advantage (business value)
[32]. In this line, Fig. 2 adapts the questioning of the need for a process to link strategic
applications to both organizational and information system contexts and approaches
elements to better found our Business System and the composite Business System of
Systems (BSoS) framework concepts.
Fig. 2. Linking Strategic Applications to Information Technology, adapted from [32]
It is worth noting that we are looking for a formal entity that can be worked aligned
withbusiness,sociological,andmanagementexpertiseandcaptureconceptualmodeling
entities that can be “automatically” incorporated into informatics systems design and
implementation.
An organization that instantiates an ISystem0 realizes what is designated by the
Informatics System of Systems (ISoS) since it abstracts one or more ISystems, making
the computing-related technology artifacts part of the Service elements (Fig. 3).
The ISoS model suggests that well-established Service borders delimit the software
engineeringresponsibility.Aservicecanwrapalegacysystem,encapsulatingitas-it-isor
adoptingastrategytoevolveforamorefine-grainedapproachclosertothemicroservice
idea, hence organizing technical artifacts under the SOA model.
We formalize business expectations based on the system concept for documenting
andgeneratingbusinesslogicforthetechnologypart(mappingstotheISystemconcept),
modeledasbusinesssystems(BSystem).Tosimplifytheapproachandmakethemapping
to ISoS concepts easier, a BSystem is a composition of cooperation-enabled business
services (CEBS). Like CES is a strategy to establish Service elements groups, the CEBS
concept is a group of business services (BService).

--- PAGE 11 ---
388 A. L. Osório et al.
Fig. 3. The Service’s primary structuring responsibility
The BSoS business-level conceptual modeling strategy extends the Business Ser-
vice [38]. Our proposed BSoS model further considers the meta-business system, the
BSystem0, asamodelregistryandcoordinationresponsibilityofmaintainingtheconsis-
tency among BSoS and ISoS models and implementations. The idea is to establish two
coordinated co-responsibilities. The business responsibility (grant for business objec-
tives) is to consider organizational, people, processes, and conceptual data models, set-
ting what is expected by organization’s and business partner’s (CN level) stakeholders.
The technology co-responsibility considers the complex technology decisions involved
in a reliable execution of distributed Service elements. They are executed on a given
node’s IT infrastructure (cloud-based or not), establishing a federated pool of shared
(underRBAC-role-basedaccesscontrolconstraints)servicescalledVBEServicesFed-
eration[40].PreviousresearchproposedanEnterpriseCollaborationNetwork(ECoNet)
[37] as a computing responsibility for managing interactions with partners in Virtual
organization Breeding Environment (VBE) [3] to serve as a preparedness-supporting
platform for companies’ collaboration (Fig. 4).
The proposed unified model establishes some rupture with current approaches, not
hardly linked to model implementation. Still, we understand that legacy models and
existing information systems (enterprise applications) can be wrapped with minimal
changes to be incorporated into the proposed governed IT system of systems. As far as
IsoS is concerned, the research project PT2020 SITL-IoT with the FORDESI company
developed a validation of the ISoS with a reference implementation of an ISystem0 [14].
Service elements incorporated legacy systems by wrapping their legacy code, allowing
the enterprise systems to adopt the proposed service orientation. The wrapper concept
suggests that a strategy to adapt a legacy system to the BSoS-ISoS frameworks differs
from the most common connector or adaptor concept. We assume the wrapper is not
definitive and only exists until the system fully complies with the BSoS or ISoS frame-
work.Thispreliminaryvalidationmadeusadoptasimilarstrategytoformalizebusiness
goals organized as BSystem/CEBS/BService constructors.
InthecontextoftheBSoSframework,theBServiceisthecentralelement.ABService
aims to model requirements at a conceptual level. While the relationship between a
BService and a Service needs further research and validation, we believe the business
(applications) architecture experts have a guideline with BSoS to structure business

--- PAGE 12 ---
A Business Technology Alignment Strategy 389
Fig. 4. Unified BSoS and ISoS as prepared Collaborative Network nodes
requirements in collaboration with technology experts for decisions on how to map
BSystems to ISystems, as addressed in [6] and [9].
Figure 5 shows the conceptual mapping where BService delimits abstract specifica-
tions of data models, process models, and organizational structure with worker’s roles,
e.g., RBAC for making effective security policies and QoS parameters (of business and
technology systems/services).
Fig. 5. The BService primary structuring responsibility
The BSystem, CEBS, and BService associatethe required metadata withidentifying
the modeler/developer team, version, and dates (creation, update), among other aspects
of the modeling elements. The BSystem0, following the ISoS model, is a meta-business
systemworkingasaregistryofthedifferentBSystem/CEBS/BServicepathstoBService
terminal elements.
In the case of a BService with one or more process definitions, the mapping gener-
ates a Service responsible for the execution of process instances. The execution relies
on embedding a business process execution engine and, for each process, solving the
technology bindings involved in the calling of ISoS Service elements. Technological
bindings are associated with activities that require embedded computing logic (a proxy

--- PAGE 13 ---
390 A. L. Osório et al.
to call other Service elements of the same ISystem, or other ISystem accessible through
the ISystem0).
ThepositionoftheBSoS,whilemotivatedbytheneedforaunifiedapproachtobusi-
ness applications/information systems development, raises challenging research ques-
tions. An important one is mapping well-established concepts based on standards, e.g.,
the OpenGroup TOGAF reference architecture, the related Archimate modeling lan-
guage, and the TOGAF’s Architecture Development Methodology (ADM). A simple
example the difficulties is the TOGAF definition of ‘application’. The application def-
inition “… deployed and operational IT system that supports business functions and
services; for example, a payroll” [45] raises the need for a consensus. Some questions
are:WhatisanITsystem?WhatisdeployinganITsystem?Whatarebusinessfunctions?
How are they operationalized? What is a business service?
By positioning the BSoS concepts, we aim to answer the lack of rigorous definitions
for concepts understood by experts both from business and technology domains.
4 The Collaborative Network in a BSoS Context
Anessentialmotivationforproposingaholisticsystemof“thinking”thesingleenterprise
is the need to improve how to manage the digital at the CN level. The current trend to
moveenterpriseinformationsystems(orinformaticssystemsasacompositeofservices,
in our proposed terminology) to the cloud has the drawback of shifting the IT center to
an external independent cloud provider whose main goal is to support the storing and
execution of enterprise applications, but without any awareness of enterprises’ business
and IT strategies.
This trend restricts the freedom of the enterprise to lead an integration strategy with
the participation of multiple vendors. Costs sustainability requires independence from
a single product/services provider/supplier [36]. However, the “fragmentation” trend of
service-oriented architectural strategy towards ‘everything as a service’ (XaaS) requires
novelmanagedmodelsforIT,what[4]discussesassoftware-definedbusiness,following
a similar concept adopted for IT infrastructures, e.g., software-defined infrastructure or
software-defined storage systems [31].
Moreover, integrating SaaS parts needs coordination with other components (other
informaticssystems/services).Theintegrationstrategyofcurrentbusinessproductscon-
siders offering adapters and APIs (e.g., “You can create an integration profile for the
following SaaS applications”, found in a well-positioned SaaS provider’s website for
integrating about thirty-five products1). Such proprietary integration profiles raise ques-
tions about how to integrate with other competing products or even new ones with
valuable advantages, but for which there is the need to develop an integration profile.
The enterprise integration problem in the cloud context is not new, as demonstrated
by a 2009’s research from a well-known IT technology supplier that states that “The
risingadoptionofsoftware-as-a-service(SaaS)applicationsbyenterpriseorganizations
has been driven by deep dissatisfaction with on-premises applications, which require
organizations to purchase and deploy infrastructure, overstock on licenses, and pay
1 ServiceNow, as of May 2023 (link).

--- PAGE 14 ---
A Business Technology Alignment Strategy 391
for expensive resources for customizations, upgrades, and ongoing maintenance.” [16].
However, after about fifteen years, despite the value brought by cloud computing, the
organization’s IT integration problem remains [44].
The research [21] discusses the concept of integration Platform as a Service (iPaaS)
as a reliable and scalable integration management strategy as a successor of the classic
enterprise application integration (EAI) and enterprise service bus (ESB) approaches.
However, they used to be proprietary.
To contribute to the integration problem, we adopt the BSoS and ISoS, which estab-
lishes an enterprise-led integration strategy, as discussed above. Despite theoretical
potential technology dependencies, our approach strongly relies on open standards and
values legacy systems by wrapping them into the open standard BSoS-ISoS IT-managed
strategy. The operations outsourcing of BSoS and ISoS meta-informatics systems by a
third party under a platform-as-service (PaaS) model remains a possibility. This app-
roach allows companies (including SMEs) to adopt OPEX and keep the decision power
and IT sovereignty in their business-IT alignment strategy.
The proposed paradigm shift considers the changes in the integration strategy from
specific isolated products to an enterprise system of systems by adopting the proposed
sociotechnical tandem system of systems BSoS-ISoS.
In what CN is concerned, we propose a similar approach, adopting the collaborative
enterprise network (ECoNet) framework [37]. With ECoNet, a specialized enterprise-
collaborative network manager (ECoM) ISystem embeds the computational responsi-
bility for managing interaction exchanges among enterprise organizations. The ECoM
ISystem is the enterprise application specialized in managing collaboration contexts
(CoC) for data and coordination exchanges in specific contexts, e.g., adopting standard
dataexchangesbasedonbusinessprocessesreferencemodels,astheUniversalBusiness
Language (UBL), as proposed in [27]. The ECoM further implements the virtual col-
laboration contexts (VCC) as groups of enterprises that join shared secure collaboration
spaces accessed through a simple programmatic interface [33].
In our research, we go a bit further, proposing the conceptual modeling of the ECoM
informatics system through what we designate as a business enterprise collaboration
management(BECoM)asanexampleofaBSystem.TheBECoMsystemaimstoabstract
the implemented CoC and VCC, establishing the conceptual models that will serve as
open standards to be used by other business systems (business level) and informatics
systems (technology level) to make collaboration cases documented and operational.
Figure6depictsCNnodes,node.A,…,node.Nlogicallyandoperationallyconnected,
establishing an Econet collaborative network.
TheECoNetapproachmakestheCoCandVCCconceptsimplementedbytheECoM
ISystem, which services (implemented interfaces, APIs) can be shared by the other
ISystems of the enterprise. It means an ISystem can programmatically create or join a
virtual collaboration context (VCC) to share data with other members of the same VCC.
The data exchange or sharing is managed by collaboration context (CoC) services that
implement specific data interchange protocols, e.g., EDI/EDIFACT standards.
Following the proposed BSoS and ISoS dual enterprise responsibility IT levels, the
idea is to establish business CoC (BCoC) and business VCC (BVCC) as conceptual
modeling elements of the corresponding technology implementation CoC and VCC.

--- PAGE 15 ---
392 A. L. Osório et al.
Fig. 6. The ECoNet CN framework extended to the business BSoS context.
The approach makes it possible to define business processes to manage the virtual col-
laboration contexts, e.g., accessing creation, joining, leave, and configuration changes
services of EcoM Isystem.
As a small example of the proposed strategy, consider Enterprise A agrees on a
novel business (NB) with Enterprises B and C to offer product customization, delivery,
and support. Enterprise B is responsible for product delivery, while Enterprise C offers
customization and support services. The enterprises agree to develop an NB_Bsystem
collaboratively, modeling each responsibility set’s concepts. Enterprise A defines a
product customization process. The process starts and mediates interactions with the
product management ISystem when a new product customization event arrives. The
NB_BSystem at A incorporates this and other business processes and conceptual data
models, later used to generate one or more informatics systems that operationalize
the execution of the defined processes. In collaboration with Enterprise A, Enterprise
C designs the product customization process in response to a customer’s need. The
NB_BSystematCbeginsfromacustomer’sevent.NB_BSystemfurthermodelstheuser
interface and programmatic interactions with Enterprise A to access product definition,
including modeling available configuration options. Customers generate customized
products through the user interface.
Enterprise A adds to NB_BSystem a delivery process in coordination with Enter-
prise C, but operationalized by Enterprise B. At Enterprise A, the process begins when
a customized product is ready for delivery, an event originated in the manufacturing
execution system (an ISystem). One important aspect of the proposed model is that the
consistency of the BSystem or BSystems with the manufacturing execution ISystem
is kept consistent. Current practices tend to manage changes in the operating systems
without updating the models that originate them.
ConsidernowtheNB_BSystematEnterpriseBholdingtheproductdeliveryprocess,
whichbeginswhenaproductdeliveryeventisreceivedfromEnterpsiseA.Thecustomer
ofacustomizedproductcanfollowuponproductstatusesacrossproductionanddelivery.
It means that both Enperprises A and C collaborate with B to keep customers updated.
NB_BSystem at Enterprise B is supposed to generate or update a delivery ISystem
responsible for operationalizing delivering steps. The NB_BSystem at each Enterprise

--- PAGE 16 ---
A Business Technology Alignment Strategy 393
further establishes a BCoC to model message and coordination exchanges and a BVCC
(later mapped to a Virtual Collaboration Context (VCC) created by Enterprise A) to
be joined by Enterprises B and C, hence establishing a secure Collaborative Network
modeling the novel business virtual enterprise.
The initial design of the ECoNet infrastructure concept relied on a central service
at the domain econet-cno.org [37], where members needed to register. However, with
the ISoS framework and the ISystem0 well-known endpoint address (e.g., isos.node-
a.com:2058),anyotherenterprise’sinformaticssystemcanprogrammaticallyaccessthe
ISystem0’s I0 interface available at this endpoint. Through the I0 interface, it is possible
to access ECoM ISystem services and, for instance, access the join operation to apply
for some VCC created by the called node. The current version of the ISystem0 reference
implementation adopts a simple RESTful web service for realizing the I0 interface. The
interactions through ISystem0’s I0 interface consider that restriction policies condition
access to the public entry point (e.g., address isos.node-a.com:2058).
The realization of the ECoNet concept is the responsibility of ECoM running as
an ISystem in the enterprise ISoS IT infrastructure. The ECoM informatics system can
be seen as implementing the ECoNet’s API. Since specifications are open, enterprises
do not depend on any central entity. They must provide and maintain a conforming
implementationwiththeECoMreferencemodel.ECoMistechnologyagnostic,making
it easier to find competing products. ECoNet/ECoM providers contribute in this way to
reduce technology dependencies.
5 Conclusions and Further Research
This paper has presented an approach to leverage a company’s IT independence and
sovereigntystrategy,giventheincreasingriskscreatedbythetrendofmovingITsystems
and infrastructures to hyper-scaler cloud providers.
It does that by proposing a more consistent business and IT alignment, positioning
the business system of systems (BSoS) framework aligned with the ISoS as a business
modeling concept towards agnostic integrated IT architectures and strategy for both
single companies and collaborative networks.
Following a previous validation with a company in adopting the ISoS with an ini-
tial ISystem0 reference implementation for the technology layer, a similar approach is
adopted for the business layer, proposing a BSystem0 responsible for playing a reg-
istry role for business systems (BSystems). The scheme establishes a rigorous mapping
between business conceptual modeling and the association with operating technology
artifacts, contributing to improve business-IT alignment.
This research has questioned some IT current ‘mantras’ somehow determined by
the own cloud providers as well as some limitations observed in Enterprise Architec-
ture models in what IT sovereignty is concerned with this increasingly digital, fully
connected, and cloud- & ecosystems-based business environments. On the other hand,
we believe the BSoS can incorporate the TOGAF Architecture Development Method
(ADM) [26] and its proven methods to help define conceptual models that satisfy the
business needs of an organization.
Dealing with all the issues involved in the envisaged paradigm shiftis very complex,
embracing some challenging aspects. Therefore, this paper should be taken as a first

--- PAGE 17 ---
394 A. L. Osório et al.
attempt towards a more integral vision of the Business-IT alignment strategy that can
lead companies to be more independent from systems vendors and, at the same time,
remain competitive and sustainable in their digital transformation pathway.
Further research of this work includes the definition of how data models, business
processes, user interfaces, and organization models as parts of a business service map
to one or more service elements. Another aspect is the ModelingUI interface of the
BSystem0. Like the administration interface of the ISystem0, an ISoS management tool
isexpectedtoevolvetoincorporategovernancefeatures,includingcross-BSystemmodel
management features. Finally, a reference implementation is needed to consolidate and
validate the proposed BSoS concepts.
Acknowledgments. This work is supported in part by the ANSR/SINCRO project and
BP/HORUS(GIATSI/ISEL/IPLresearchgroup)aswellasbyCAPESBrazilianAgencyforHigher
Education, project PrInt “Automation 4.0”.
References
1. Abdelfattah, A.S., Cerny, T.: Roadmap to reasoning in microservice systems: a rapid review.
Appl. Sci. 13(3), 1838 (2023). https://doi.org/10.3390/app13031838
2. ACM. Market Study Cloud services. Technical report ACM/INT/440323, Netherlands
Authority for Consumers and Markets (2021). https://www.acm.nl/system/files/documents/
market-study-def-public.pdf
3. Afsarmanesh,H.,Camarinha-Matos,L.M.,Msanjila,S.S.:Virtualorganizationbreedingenvi-
ronments: key results from ECOLEAD. IFAC Proc. 40(19), 199–206 (2007). https://doi.org/
10.3182/20071002-mx-4-3906.00033
4. Alt, R., et al.: Software-defined business. Bus. Inf. Syst. Eng. 62(6), 609–621 (2020). https://
doi.org/10.1007/s12599-020-00669-6
5. Bexiga, M., Garbatov, S., Seco, J.C.: Closing the gap between designers and developers in
a low code ecosystem. In: Proceedings of the 23rd ACM/IEEE International Conference on
Model Driven Engineering Languages and Systems: Companion Proceedings. ACM (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1145/3417990.3420195
6. Bezerra,R.O.,Cancian,M.H.,Rabelo,R.J.:EnhancingnetworkcollaborationinSOAservices
composition via standard business processes catalogues. In: Camarinha-Matos, L.M., Afsar-
manesh, H., Fornasiero, R. (eds.) PRO-VE 2017. IAICT, vol. 506, pp. 421–431. Springer,
Cham (2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-65151-4_38
7. Bianchi, I.S., Vaquina, A., Pereira, R., Sousa, R.D., Dávila, G.A.: A benefit dependency
network for shadow information technology adoption based on practitioners’ viewpoints.
Informatics 9(4), 95 (2022). https://doi.org/10.3390/informatics9040095
8. Camarinha-Matos, L.M., Afsarmanesh, H., Oliveira, A.I., Ferrada, F.: Collaborative business
services provision. In: Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Enterprise Infor-
mation Systems, vol. 2: ICEIS, pp. 380–390. INSTICC, SciTePress (2013). https://doi.org/
10.5220/0004535803800390. ISBN 978-989-8565-60-0
9. Souza, A.P., Rabelo, R.J.: A dynamic services discovery model for better leveraging BPM
and SOA integration. Int. J. Inf. Syst. Serv. Sect. 7(1), 1–21 (2015). https://doi.org/10.4018/
ijisss.2015010101
10. Ditsche, J., Rohrhirsch, D., Grunow, S., Fritze, R.: The digital dilemma - Why
companies struggle to master digital transformation. Technical report, Roland Berger
(2022). https://content.rolandberger.com/hubfs/07_presse/Roland_Berger_Focus_Digital_D
ilemma_N3XT_2022.pdf

--- PAGE 18 ---
A Business Technology Alignment Strategy 395
11. Dumas, M., La Rosa, M., Mendling, J., Reijers, H.A.: Fundamentals of Business Process
Management. Springer, Heidelberg (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-56509-4
12. Frantz, R.Z., Corchuelo, R., Basto-Fernandes, V., Rosa-Sequeira, F., Roos-Frantz, F., Arjona,
J.L.:Acloud-basedintegrationplatformforenterpriseapplicationintegration:amodel-driven
engineering approach. Softw. Pract. Exper. 51(4), 824–847 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1002/
spe.2916
13. Gascueña,J.M.,Fernández-Caballero,A.:PrometheusandINGENIASagentmethodologies:
a complementary approach. In: Luck, M., Gomez-Sanz, J.J. (eds.) AOSE 2008. LNCS, vol.
5386, pp. 131–144. Springer, Heidelberg (2009). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-01338-
6_10
14. Gonçalves, C., Osório, A.L., Camarinha-Matos, L.M., Dias, T., Tavares, J.: A collaborative
cyber-physical microservices platform – the SITL-IoT case. In: Camarinha-Matos, L.M.,
Boucher, X., Afsarmanesh, H. (eds.) PRO-VE 2021. IAICT, vol. 629, pp. 411–420. Springer,
Cham (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-85969-5_38
15. Guberman, S., Altos, L.: Reflections on Ludwig von Bertalanfy’s “General System Theory:
Foundations, Development, Applications” (2002)
16. Hai, H., Sakoda, S.: SaaS and integration best practices. Fujitsu Sci. Tech. J. 45, 257–264
(2009)
17. Hanseth, O.: From systems and tools to networks and infrastructures-from design to cultiva-
tion. In Industrial Informatics Design, Use and Innovation, pp. 122–156. IGI Global (2010).
https://doi.org/10.4018/978-1-61520-692-6.ch011
18. Hartmann,A.,Auth,G.:PositioningIT4ITinthefaceofclassicenterprisearchitectureframe-
works.In:Reussner,R.H.,Koziolek,A.,Heinrich,R.(eds.)INFORMATIK2020,pp.183–195
(2021). https://doi.org/10.18420/inf2020_17
19. Hiekkanen, K., Helenius, M., Korhonen, J.J., Patricio, E.: Aligning alignment with strategic
context: a literature review. In: Benghozi, P.J., Krob, D., Rowe, F. (eds.) Digital Enterprise
Design and Management 2013. Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing, vol. 205,
pp. 81–98. Springer, Heidelberg (2013). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-37317-6_8
20. Hydle,K.,Hanseth,O.,Aanestad,M.,Aas,T.H.:Digitaltransformationthroughcollaborative
platformization: a study of incumbent-entrepreneur relations. In: Proceedings of the Annual
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences (2021). https://doi.org/10.24251/hicss.2021.707
21. Hyrynsalmi, S.M.: The state-of-the-art of the integration platforms as a service research.
In: Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Software-intensive Business: Towards
Sustainable Software Business. ACM (2022). https://doi.org/10.1145/3524614.3528634
22. Jansen, C., et al.: The vendor-agnostic EMPAIA platform for integrating AI applications into
digital pathology infrastructures. Futur. Gener. Comput. Syst. 140, 209–224 (2023). https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2022.10.025
23. Jonathan, G.M.: IT alignment: a management paradigm for digital transformation in public
organisations.In:JointProceedingsoftheBIR2022WorkshopsandDoctoralConsortiumco-
Locatedwith21stInternationalConferenceonPerspectivesinBusinessInformaticsResearch
(BIR 2022), number 3223 in CEUR Workshop Proceedings, pp. 189–208. CEUR (2022).
https://ceur-ws.org/Vol-3223/paper18.pdf
24. Juttmann, J., Hovinga, F.: Driving digital process excellence, KPMG (2022)
25. Kantrow, A.M.: Strategy-technology connection. Use in decision making. Harvard Bus. Rev.
(United States) 58(4) (1980)
26. Kornyshova, E., Barrios, J.: Process-oriented knowledge representation of the requirement
management phase of TOGAF-ADM: an empirical evaluation. Procedia Comput. Sci. 192,
2239–2248 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2021.08.237

--- PAGE 19 ---
396 A. L. Osório et al.
27. Al Kukhun, D., Sèdes, F.: Interoperability in Pervasive enterprise information systems - a
double-faced coin between security and accessability. In: Proceedings of the Ninth Interna-
tional Conference on Enterprise Information Systems. SciTePress - Science and Technology
Publications (2007). https://doi.org/10.5220/0002396502370242
28. Lambropoulos, G., Mitropoulos, S., Douligeris, C.: A review on cloud computing services,
concerns, and security risk awareness in the context of digital transformation. In: 2021 6th
South-East Europe Design Automation, Computer Engineering, Computer Networks and
Social Media Conference (SEEDA-CECNSM). IEEE (2021). https://doi.org/10.1109/seeda-
cecnsm53056.2021.9566267
29. Lemrabet, Y., Liu, H., Benkeltoum, N., Bigand, M., Bourey, J.-P.: Business-IT alignment
and organization agility enabled by BPM and SOA approaches interplay. In: Proceedings
13th International Conference on Enterprise Information Systems. SciTePress - Science and
Technology Publications (2011). https://doi.org/10.5220/0003494802410246
30. Luftman, J.: Assessing business-IT alignment maturity. Commun. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 4 (2000).
https://doi.org/10.17705/1cais.00414
31. Macedo, R., Paulo, J., Pereira, J.: A survey and classification of software-defined storage
systems. ACM Comput. Surv. 53(3), 1–38 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1145/3385896
32. Madnick, S.E., Wang, Y.R.: A framework of composite information systems for strategic
advantage. In: Proceedings of the Twenty-First Annual Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences. Decision Support and Knowledge Based Systems Track, volume III. IEEE
Computer Society Press (1988). https://doi.org/10.1109/hicss.1988.11886
33. Méndez, J.D., Rabelo, R.J., Baldo, F., Cancian, M.H.: A plug and play integration model for
virtual enterprises. In: Camarinha-Matos, L.M., Afsarmanesh, H., Rezgui, Y. (eds.) PRO-VE
2018. IAICT, vol. 534, pp. 312–324. Springer, Cham (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
319-99127-6_27
34. Moeyersons, J., Kerkhove, S., Wauters, T., De Turck, F., Volckaert, B.: Towards cloud-based
unobtrusive monitoring in remote multi-vendor environments. Softw. Pract. Exper. 52(2),
427–442 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1002/spe.3029
35. OpenGroup. The Open Group IT4IT Standard, Version 3.0 (2022)
36. Osório, A.L., et al.: open multi-technology service oriented architectur for “its” business
models: the ITSIBus Etoll services. In: Camarinha-Matos, L.M., Afsarmanesh, H., Ortiz, A.
(eds.) PRO-VE 2005. ITIFIP, vol. 186, pp. 439–446. Springer, Boston, MA (2005). https://
doi.org/10.1007/0-387-29360-4_46
37. Osório, L.A., Camarinha-Matos, L.M., Afsarmanesh, H.: ECoNet platform for collaborative
logistics and transport. In: Camarinha-Matos, L., Bénaben, F., Picard, W. (eds.) Risks and
Resilience of Collaborative Networks. PRO-VE 2015. IFIP Advances in Information and
Communication Technology, vol. 463, pp. 265–276. Springer, Cham (2015). https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-319-24141-8_24
38. Osório, A.L., Belloum, A., Afsarmanesh, H., Camarinha-Matos, L.M.: Agnostic informatics
system of systems: the open ISoS services framework. In: Camarinha-Matos, L.M., Afsar-
manesh, H., Fornasiero, R. (eds.) PRO-VE 2017. IAICT, vol. 506, pp. 407–420. Springer,
Cham (2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-65151-4_37
39. Osório, A.L., Camarinha-Matos, L.M., Afsarmanesh, H., Belloum, A.: On reliable collabora-
tive mobility services. In: Camarinha-Matos, L., Afsarmanesh, H., Rezgui, Y. (eds.) Collab-
orative Networks of Cognitive Systems. PRO-VE 2018. IFIP Advances in Information and
Communication Technology, vol. 534, pp. 297–311. Springer, Cham (2018). https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-319-99127-6_26
40. Rabelo, R.J., Gusmeroli, S., Arana, C., Nagellen, T.: The Ecolead ICT infrastructure for
collaborative networked organizations. In: Network-Centric Collaboration and Supporting
Frameworks. PRO-VE 2006. IFIP International Federation for Information Processing, vol.
224, pp. 451–460. Springer, Boston (2006). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-38269-2_47

--- PAGE 20 ---
A Business Technology Alignment Strategy 397
41. Razavi, A.R., Krause, P.J., Strommen-Bakhtiar, A.: From business ecosystems towards dig-
ital business ecosystems. In: 4th IEEE International Conference on Digital Ecosystems and
Technologies. IEEE (2010). https://doi.org/10.1109/dest.2010.5610633
42. Ross, J., Weill, P.: Six IT decisions your IT people shouldn’t make. Harvard Bus. Rev. 80,
84–91 (2002)
43. Ross, J.W.: Creating a strategic IT architecture competency: learning in stages. MIS Quart.
Executive 2(1), 5 (2008)
44. Sawyer, S., Hossein Jarrahi, M.: Sociotechnical approaches to the study of information
systems. In: Computing Handbook, 3rd ed. (2014)
45. TOGAF2022. The Open Group Architecture Framework, 10th Edition
46. Waldo,J.:TheJINIarchitecturefornetwork-centriccomputing.Commun.ACM42(7),76–82
(1999). https://doi.org/10.1145/306549.306582
47. Waldo, J.: On system design. In: Proceedings of the 21st annual ACM SIGPLAN Confer-
ence on Object-Oriented Programming Systems, Languages, and Applications. ACM (2006).
https://doi.org/10.1145/1167473.1167513
48. Westerlund, M.: Digitalization, internationalization and scaling of online SMEs. Technol.
Innov. Manage. Rev. 10, 48–57 (2020). https://doi.org/10.22215/timreview/1346. https://tim
review.ca/article/1346. ISSN 1927–0321
49. Winter, S., Berente, N., Howison, J., Butler, B.: Beyond the organizational ’container’: con-
ceptualizing21stcenturysociotechnicalwork.Inf.Organ.24(4),250–269(2014).https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.infoandorg.2014.10.003
50. Wouters, S., Janssen, M., Lember, V., Crompvoets, J.: Strategies to advance the dream of
integrated digital public service delivery in inter-organizational collaboration networks. Gov.
Inf. Quart. 40(1), 101779 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2022.101779