--- PAGE 1 ---
Computer Standards & Interfaces 76 (2021) 103514
Available online 9 January 2021
0920-5489/© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Strategic IT alignment Projects. Towards Good Governance
Francisco Maciá Pérez, José Vicente Berna Martinez*
, Iren Lorenzo Fonseca
Computer Science and Technology Department, University of Alicante
A B S T R A C T
The senior management of organisations frequently perceive IT Projects as merely technological in nature. They fail to realise that in reality, the mission of IT is to
provide technology-based support to business processes that can be key to the organisation. This lack of understanding means that these IT projects are not aligned
with the business objectives and that investments in resources and personnel are not adequately prioritised. This can lead to an opportunity loss: a mere com­
puterising of the business is sought, and processes that could turn out to be transformative, generating added value, driving a true digital transformation of the
business are overlooked. This article proposes a model for implementing and operating a portfolio of strategic IT projects. Based on Good Governance principles,
these latter projects move strategic decision-making up to an organisation’s senior management, succeeding in gradually implicating these managers into the IT
strategy. But above all, the model succeeds in achieving the targeted strategic alignment of IT projects with the organisation’s business objectives and interests. The
model has already been implemented in fourteen medium and large size public universities. The follow-up through interviews of the nine longest-standing expe­
riences—some are nearly a decade old—revealed that the portfolio implementation strategy had helped to markedly improve the following elements: the institutions’
state of maturity of Good Governance; senior management’s involvement in IT projects; and the identification of the most interesting IT projects for the business. To
conclude, based on our experience, we can affirm that the strategic IT alignment projects is an effective IT Governance tool and, by extension, an example of Good
Governance practice.
1. Introduction
Strategic alignment is one of the least tangible and most complex
governance mechanisms that organisations must embrace [1]. It en­
sures, however, that an organisation’s IT services are aligned with the
business objectives and processes [2]. To achieve this, the process must
implicate the organisation’s various levels of structures, procedures and
activities. Here, communication, cooperation and leadership are essen­
tial factors of success; they even come before project management [3].
It is ever more critical to understand that senior management must
also govern IT, and that IT governance does not mean the governance or
management of IT projects [4]. Unfortunately, in many organisations,
governancestructures have still notsufficientlyevolved andare yetto be
convinced that IT projects should not only be managed, but also
governed.
The ISO/IEC 38500 standard [5] includes principles and activities
for building an IT governance framework. This framework supports
different designs and implementations according to the interests, ob­
jectives, and structure of each organisation [6]. Whatever the final
design, the standard clearly identifies the principles that a management
team must follow to achieve good governance: establish responsibilities,
make acquisitions, strategy, performance, conformance with rules and
respect for human factors [7].
The boundaries between government, governance and IT manage­
ment are indeed blurred—especially because some standards and man­
agement frameworks have been incorporating governance mechanisms
[8,9]. It is also true, however, that today, most senior managers tend to
draw back and widely delegate strategic decisions linked to the devel­
opment and purchasing of the IT services that support their organisa­
tional business processes. It is hard to make senior management
understand that this delegating may entail an abandonment of functions
that directly breaches the expected application of the Good Governance
principle of responsibility [10,11].
This situation causes organisations to simultaneously face two major
challenges when seeking to push IT strategic decisions to the uppermost
management levels: (a) implicating senior managers to the extent that
they become leaders of the strategies and, once achieved, (b) developing
a structure, protocols, processes and activities that facilitate their
governance and management sustainably over time [12].
Experiences over the last two decades [10] reveal that it is very
difficult to tackle the whole scale of the problem, and that experiences
with a more limited scope have been much more effective. In our case,
we focused on achieving strategic and responsible management of IT
projects. An IT project brings together an action or a series of actions, in
any business area, with a fixed start and end that effectively responds to
one or more of the organisation’s strategic objectives, relying heavily on
* Coressponding Authors.
E-mail address: jvberna@ua.es (J.V. Berna Martinez).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Computer Standards & Interfaces
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/csi
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csi.2021.103514
Received 18 May 2020; Received in revised form 23 October 2020; Accepted 5 January 2021

--- PAGE 2 ---
Computer Standards & Interfaces 76 (2021) 103514
2
IT to achieve it. In this sense, the project portfolio is one of the most
effective processes to execute the organisation’s IT strategy. The reason
the impact and visibility that IT projects currently enjoy [11].
Based on this concept of IT project and project portfolio [12], we
propose in the present article a strategic project portfolio model as an
effective tool to address the problem of IT governance [11]. Worthy of
note, the objective is not to delve into the basic governance and man­
agement aspects of a classic project portfolio—which, by extension, are
assumed to be valid and compatible with the proposal presented here.
Rather, we seek to explore the aspects that contribute to making a
portfolio strategic, that is, determine which people elaborate the port­
folio as well as which criteria rule its content thus leading to decisions
regarding the communication flows between the organisation’s different
levels and structures.
In addition to government and governance processes, another major
objective of the strategic project portfolio is to determine how the
portfolio’s projects should be selected and prioritised; moreover, given
the discipline’s strategic character, it should be conducted by the or­
ganisation’s most senior management levels [13]. This requirement,
together with the principle of responsibility established by the Good
Governance standard mean that the strategic project portfolio is an ideal
opportunity to push senior management into getting more actively
involved into an organisation’s necessary decision-making regarding IT
projects.
In accordance with ISO/IEC 38500 [5], its principles and activities,
the portfolio governance model proposed here is based on the fact that
IT government of the portfolio takes place before, during, and after the
governance and management by senior IT managers and the IT
Department. Accordingly, the model must: set the conditions for
creating the portfolio; determine the criteria for selecting and priori­
tising projects; consider periodic controls of decision validity based on
the project management’s execution and its follow-up; and finally
evaluate the results based on the value and impact obtained, the effec­
tive use and the real costs of the IT projects.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: first (section 2), the
state of the art is reviewed, focusing especially on the evolution of IT
management, governance and governance models. Next (section 3), we
provide an overview of the proposed model. Before fully developing the
model, we analyse its different components, allowing to achieve a spe­
cific solution adapted to each organisation (section 4). Thereafter (sec­
tion 5), we present the model’s specifications, expressed through a series
of processes. The following section (section 6) describes project gover­
nance in more detail as it represents a key element of the solution,
together with project prioritisation. All aspects of the model were tested
and validated (section 7) in different public universities, creating links
between public corporate governance, IT governance, IT management
and IT operation and key stakeholders: students, faculty and university
administration and service staff. The universities involved managed to
reach and strengthen a high level of Good Governance maturity and, as
shown in the analysis of this research and the results obtained over
almost a decade, the model is easily transferable to a wide range of or­
ganisations as a Good Governance practice. The authors of this work
have been responsible—in accordance with their respective positions: IT
Vice-manager, Scientific Director and Researcher—for designing and
implementing the proposed model at the University of Alicante, where it
has been operating since 2013. A special analysis is therefore dedicated
to this latter case study. To finish (section 8), we expose the main con­
clusions and future developments.
2. Background and State of the Art
It is important to understand that this work does not focus on how a
portfolio’s projects are managed and operated based on managing
standards and norms [14]. The present study addresses how IT projects
are governed by top management, following the principles of the ISO /
IEC 38500 standard. That is why the main search strings relating to the
subject’s background centre around keywords linked to "prioritisation,
governance and governance of projects", or to "evolution and standards
of IT governance."
The latest versions of COBIT [9] already incorporate a reference
framework for company IT governance and management. Therefore, we
used thisgoodpractice guide as a startingpoint inour present analysis of
the state of the art, always remembering, however, that these practices
have been primarily designed for those responsible for IT governance
and management and not for an organisation’s senior management.
COBIT establishes the need for a hierarchical alignment, proposing a
governance structure and establishing the levels and relationships
among its members. This process has evolved over time [9]. We analyse
in the following sections the different models resulting from this evo­
lution. Their ordered series constitutes, in turn, a maturity model that
could be very useful to assess at which stage each organisation finds
itself in.
One of the earliest models of interest is the one shown in [15], which
provides an insight into IT as a service provider that can be easily out­
sourced or replaced. This model is based on a traditional vision of IT
supply and demand and presents a notable lack of strategic alignment.
In [16] an evolution of the previous model is proposed in which IT
becomes an asset that creates value for the organisation. The traditional
dual domain continues to be maintained but differentiating the stra­
tegic, management and operation dimensions in each of them. Although
these dimensions represent a big step forward, we must remember that
the communication taking place between them is as important as the
communication between domains.
To fill the gaps identified in the previous models, a communication
flow between the main dimensions is proposed in [15] and [16]. In this
flow, a distinction is already made between governance, management
and IT operations processes, and a management flow as well as a control
flow (which goes in the opposite direction) are established. As a result,
the concept of separate business and IT domains starts to disappear, and
the domains of decision and the goals and control cascade become clear.
Nevertheless, the way these flows should be implemented (a series of
good practices) is not defined, for example, how prioritisation should be
performed.
Works [13] and [17] present a framework that links corporate
governance with IT governance. According to this perspective, IT re­
sources should be governed in the same way as physical assets, human
resources, intellectual property, relationships (marketing, commercial,
advertising, etc.) and financial resources. In this model, all assets must
be governed with the same instruments used to govern assets: defining
strategic plans and controlling desirable IT behaviour through measur­
able progress indicators.
As shown in this review of the different models adopted by organi­
sations to achieve strategic IT alignment, IT resources should be
considered as an organisation’s physical assets. Moreover, these IT as­
sets are gaining importance and are creating more value for organisa­
tions than traditional assets [18].
The reality is that not all organisations have reached the same
maturity levels [10]. The later they are in the model, the further away
they are also from the structures, processes and principles necessary to
achieve Good Governance, and, precisely, the greater the resistance to
change. That is why the main IT governance framework, ISO/IEC 38500
does focuses less on improving procedures and more on improving the
behaviour of all stakeholders and processes involved [5].
Our study is based on the fact that a strategic portfolio of projects, as
opposed to a conventional project portfolio, in addition to providing a
framework for IT project governance that is compatible with its struc­
tures, governance and management, helps the organisation to achieve
the Good Governance principles [11] dictated by the ISO/IEC 38500
standard [5] by elevating strategic decision-making to the most senior
management levels.
Our case studies so far have focused on applying this model to IT
governance in the public sector, more specifically to a dozen medium
F. Maciá Pérez et al.

--- PAGE 3 ---
Computer Standards & Interfaces 76 (2021) 103514
3
and large public universities. In this regard, literature exists on the
subject, confirming the general interest in providing solutions for this
sector. Some proposals are more generic such as [19] and [20], others
are more focused on public government and governance [21] and others
still focus more on IT governance and IT management aspects regarding
risks and IT security [22].
The model proposed in this research is consistent with the best
practice guides proposed by the main reference frameworks such as ITIL
or COBIT. These frameworks are not designed to set up projects related
to the implantation of the framework itself, but rather to guide organi­
sations on how to identify internal deficiencies, define which de­
ficiencies should be given priority and how to implement improvements.
They leave the setting up as a separate task that each organisation must
address based on its own characteristics [23,24]. For example, COBIT
proposes governance and management structures, ITIL outlines gover­
nance in its ITIL Service Strategy, ITIL again delves deeper into man­
agement processes in its Service Design, Transition and Operation lifecycle
using structures based on layers. Both frameworks may guide you
through Continual Improvement. COBIT provides an Integral Dashboard
aligned with business objectives and a guide on Evaluating Results.
From a methodological viewpoint, to avoid ambiguous definitions as
much as possible and to seek a framework that is as formal as possible
[25,26], we chose to base the proposal on the Business Process Model
(BPM), described using the Universal Modelling Language (UML), more
specifically using the Eriksson-Penker notation [27] for the BPMN no­
tation[28].
The analysis of existing literature and maturity models on IT
governance and project management revealed the need to advance in
certain aspects of IT government and governance. It also pointed,
however, to the importance of respecting existing structures and man­
agement processes and always facilitating their evolution; indeed, many
are based on frameworks and standards such as COBIT [9], ITIL [29] or
ISO / IEC 20000 [30]. The proposed solutions should focus to a much
greater extent on improving the behaviour of the actors and process
involved, respecting the principles and activities of Good Governance
proposed by the ISO/IEC 38500 standard [5].
3. IT Strategic Portfolio Model. Overview
Before contemplating a solution, we must first consider the poten­
tially huge inertia affecting the organisations in which the model will be
implemented. This inertia not only accentuates typical resistance to
change, but in many cases, it makes change itself impossible, due to
inherited structures and an insufficient state of maturity that would
allow to assimilate Good Governance concepts. For this reason, we must
look for a model that focuses on the evolution and growth of people,
rather than on replacing or re-engineering processes. Thus, the proposed
solution seeks to maintain the structures and processes that are already
implemented as much as possible, proposing changes when necessary
and, aboveall, creating new processes and structures around the existing
ones that complement them.
The main objective of the strategic IT projectportfolio is notto improve
project management, or even to improve a possible portfolio of IT pro­
jects. Its objective is to align this management with the organisation’s
strategy, elevating decision-making to the most senior management
levels. That is why, as shown in the diagram presented in Fig. 1, the
proposed Model (the ITPP Strategic Model or SITPP) incorporates into
the traditional project portfolio model (Conventional ITPP Model), the
government (Strategic IT alignment Projects) and governance (Gover­
nance of IT Projects) processes into the existing management processes
(IT Project Management). It also centres on connecting them all and
proposing the necessary artefacts (University Strategy, Prioritised IT
Project List) to achieve the desired alignment with the business strategy.
The model is conceived in such a way that it largely respects the orga­
nisation’s established processes while it also facilitates the incorporating
of new processes drawn from reference frameworks such as COBIT and
ITIL or, naturally, the modifications of existing ones.
More specifically, the IT Projects Strategic Alignment process aims to
draw up a prioritised list of IT projects that the organisation is interested
in developing. A large group of actors participates in the prioritising, but
this prioritisation is led by the organisation’s most senior governance
bodies. The enterprise’s organisational aspects and resources are
considered, though the bulk of the decisions is based on corporate
strategy. We will go into more detail later about this prioritisation.
Thanks to this new governance process, the software development
process no longer feeds merely off a more or less arbitrary list of IT
project requests but the strategically prioritised list of IT project re­
quests. This is key to achieving the desired objective without having to
intervene in the current IT Project Management process. A new activity
is simply added if it does not exist already: the project’s pre-analysis. This
activity runs, in an agile way, a first technical assessment of the project.
In this way, the governing team will dispose of more accurate infor­
mation on a project’s required deadlines, technical feasibility, costs,
structures and its material and human resources. The strategic criteria
helping to obtain the prioritised list are also applied in this activity;
benefits, risks, key dates, needs, alignment with the strategic plan are
analysed, feasibility is studied and the development or implementation
costs (in terms of time, people and other factors) are estimated. This
Fig. 1. Model of a strategic IT project portfolio (SITPP) integrated and aligned with the organisation’s operating and IT project management. The strategic portfolio
of projects is related to the traditional project portfolio, as well as IT government, governance, and management activities.
F. Maciá Pérez et al.

--- PAGE 4 ---
Computer Standards & Interfaces 76 (2021) 103514
4
information will be crucial for managers to prioritise the projects in a
strategic, but also realistic way.
The second major process that is part of the proposed solution is the
IT Project Governance Process. This process plays a key role in regulating
how the organisation’s Governing team or senior management will
interact with the process of managing IT projects. This process consists
of a systematic communication mechanism between all value chain
actors and processes involved in the IT project. The activities defined
here will determine who will intervene in a process phase, how they will
do so, and how they will relate to the rest of the actors. In addition, the
process will be based on the business rules proper to each organisation.
These rules could be dynamic or, in the most stringent cases, totally
static. Basing the process on business rules will greatly facilitate the
adaptation of this simple yet critical process to each organisation.
The IT Project Governance process will also have to solve problems
arising from project monitoring needs, ensuring that contingency plans
or schedule deviations continue to be aligned with the strategy. It will
have to determine how potential regulatory or political changes, both
internal and external, affect a project, justify the state of development,
as well as determine which actors can make decisions at each stage and
what their scope may be. Therefore, it is necessary to consider how
required projects regarding different issues (of a normative, political,
strategic nature, etc.) outside the call are incorporated. In summary, the
Governance process will be responsible for maintaining the portfolio’s
strategic alignment once it is launched.
The methodology allowing to adapt the proposed model to each
organisation is composed of two major stages. The organisational level
can naturally be an institution as a whole, but it can also consist of an
independent unit such as a faculty or organisational unit, provided its
degree of autonomy is sufficient to conduct its own IT governance. The
first stage (Section 4), in turn, is divided into three major steps: identi­
fying the major phases of each call for proposals in the strategic IT
project portfolio (section 4.1); identifying the agents involved as well as
the essential roles and structures required for a good performance
(section 4.2); and identifying a project’s possible different states at any
time (section 4.3). Based on the study carried out in the first stage, the
solution is expressed during the second stage (section 5) in the form of a
series of processes, sub-processes and activities, paying special attention
to the governance process that is addressed in more detail in Section 6.
4. Stage 1. Identification of Main Components
4.1. SITPP phases
The first portfolio phase is the setup phase. This phase will only occur
once and, although it is obviously essential to its successful establish­
ment, it will also have a big impact on its future viability. Despite its
importance, this phase is beyond the scope (and length) of this article,
although an extensive explanation can be found in [11] together with
examples of successful experiences.
Once the project portfolio is set up, its implementation will be
structured through successive calls. The most common practice is to
establish an annual call.However, each organisation is free to set its own
periodicity. It can be as valid to have two or more calls within a year
than to have biannual or triannual calls. The yearly basis is closely
linked to making it coincide with the organisation’s accounting year to
better fit all the portfolio processes into the rest of the organisation’s
management processes. Experience will help determine the optimal
timing in each case.
Whatever the final periodicity, each project portfolio call will be part
of one of five phases: Phase PH1 or Preparation Phase, Phase PH2 or
Study Phase, Phase PH3 or Planning Phase, Phase PH4 or Execution
Phase, and Phase PH5 or CompletionPhase. These phases are sequential,
so we will always start with phase PH1 and end with the PH5 phase.
Below we take a closer look at each proposed phase.
• Preparation Phase (PH1). In this phase, each new edition of the
project portfolio is planned and culminates with the publication of
the call to participate in the project portfolio of that edition. During
this period, the calendar must be prepared, the regulations must be
updated, the prioritisation criteria must be set, the budget must be
fixed, and the President’s letter must be drafted: as the head of the
organisation, the President will initiate the new call. In the second
year of the portfolio’s implementation, a report on the state of the
current year’s project portfolio must be included in this phase to
know which projects have to be requested again or automatically
extended, and the criteria to apply in each case.
Although this phase is very short in terms of duration, it is none­
theless critical regarding the rest of the process insofar as it will lay the
foundations that will guide the entire call. To fulfil the intended Good
Governance principles, all the documentation generated in this phase
and all the decisions taken will be made public with the call’s
publication.
• Study Phase (PH2). The study phase begins once the call has been
published. IT project requests are collected, their technical and
strategic feasibility are reviewed, and their necessary funding and
resources are assigned. This phase ends with a preliminary proposal
that is prioritised, applying executive criteria and restrictions that
were established and approved during the preparation phase.
This phase covers most of the IT Projects Strategic Alignment Process
proposed in the general solution in Fig. 1 but does not end with the final
prioritised list of projects. It is limited to achieving a first proposal of a
more executive nature. This list will become strategic in the next phase.
• Planning Phase (PH3). Given the complexity of most IT projects, the
purely executive application of regulations does not ensure outcomes
in line with the interests of the organisation’s senior management.
For this reason, in order to comply with the principle of re­
sponsibility, it is the organisation’s Governing board (or the equiv­
alent collegiate body) that will finally agree on a prioritised list of IT
projects, determining the planning and above all a timeline to
execute each IT project throughout the current call. In doing so, the
Governing board will always consider the preliminary prioritisation
proposal obtained in phase PH2 and all the regulations approved in
phase PH1, acting in accordance with the criteria and knowledge of
the organisation’s interests and strategy. Moreover, it is these senior
managers who must also indicate which projects are clearly viable,
which projects can hardly be carried out given current resources and
interests, and which projects are unlikely to be carried out.
The duration of phase PH3 is very short and could well be considered
as a sub-phase included in the PH2. PH3 is, however, highly strategic,
and it is important to clearly understand this stage as pivotal amid the
preparation and alignment processes and the beginning of the execution
of IT projects.
• Execution Phase (PH4). Like phase PH2, phase PH4 covers most of the
second proposed solution (see Fig. 1). This phase will be temporarily
and functionally related to the IT Project Management Process and,
more still, to the IT Project Governance Process. The IT Project
Management Process now disposes of an entry point with the list of
IT projects prioritised by the Governing team. Nevertheless, this
latter list, the strategic conditions and regulations may all vary as the
project portfolio call unfolds. In addition to responding technically
and organisationally to these changes, the senior management must
be made aware and take relevant decisions. The processes suggested
in this phase aim at following up project governance by regulating
the Governing Team’s intervention via the IT project management
F. Maciá Pérez et al.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Computer Standards & Interfaces 76 (2021) 103514
5
process and by ensuring that strategic and political decisions remain
aligned with technical, technological and organisational decisions.
• Completion Phase (PH5). In the completion phase, it is necessary to
ensure that all IT portfolio projects reach some form of completion.
This completion does not have to bedefinitive. A project may even be
extended. In this phase, each project will be individually assessed,
and the project portfolio’s overall implementation will also be
evaluated. The evaluation of the portfolioitself must becarried out at
a sufficiently distant date to appreciate the project’s benefits. It can
be based on surveys conducted with requesters and promoters as well
as on result analyses. All the information generated at this comple­
tion stage will be crucial both for purposes of transparency and to
assist the Governing team in their decision-making.
4.2. Roles and Structures
The next step in building a solution based on this model is to identify
and classify all the roles involved in the process. To do this, we first list
the different agents having participated in the different experiences in
which work has been accomplished. Since these experiences have so far
focused on public universities, the specific names of the positions are
proper to these institutions. Of interest here, however, is what their
attributions consist of, and the latter must be easily extrapolated to any
other type of organisation. The classification described below was
established based on these actors and the sum of the tasks they per­
formed. We must remember that at this point, the objective is to identify
the roles, not the people or the positions.
Different agents take part in preparing the IT Project Portfolio. They
are described below. Table 1 schematically illustrates the range of roles
identified.
• Requester: The person who requests the project, justifies its neces­
sity and its benefits, elaborates the project’s report and defines its
milestones. It is recommended that the Requester know perfectly the
domain of implementation of the IT project, so the person must be a
coordinator, or head of unit or service, although not necessarily be
functionally dependent on the Promoter.
• Promoter. This is the person who proposes the project and is tasked
with defending the need for it or reasons to implement it before the
Governing Team. It must necessarily be a Vice-Chancellor (in the
case of universities, each Vice-Chancellor is the top person respon­
sible for a given management domain, similar to a general manager),
the Manager or some other member of the Governing Team, as he or
she must have the biggest decision-making capacity.
• Project Manager (PM). This person is assigned by the Project Pro­
moter tosubsequently manageand execute the project. Heor she will
be responsible for fulfilling the proposed objectives. It is recom­
mended that the project manager be perfectly knowledgeable of the
domain in which the IT project will be implemented. This person
must therefore be a coordinator, or a head of unit or service, but does
not necessarily have to be functionally dependent on the Promoter.
• IT Project Portfolio Office (PPO). This person will be responsible,
among many other tasks, to: advise Portfolio users in the course of its
different phases, especially when drafting a proposal for an IT Project
in strategic terms; to inform the Vice-Chancellor on which IT Project
proposals are properly developed and gather sufficient information
to be considered as candidates; to elaborate the evaluation report of
the IT Project proposals and transmit them to the Vice-Chancellor of
IT projects; and to prepare reports to monitor the execution of IT
Projects and to report them back to the Vice-Chancellor of IT Pro­
jects. Given the role played in this model by the PPO, more details
will be given later.
• Governing board (GB). Initially, the Governing Team (whether the
Governing board or otherwise) will be responsible for establishing
the funding allocated to the Project Portfolio over the following year,
as well as the criteria to follow when establishing the priorities. Once
Table 1
Roles identified in the strategic IT project portfolio.
Abbrev. Agent Composition Summary of functions
Requester Requester Director of
administration, service,
unit, centre, etc.
Prepares the project’s
report (in most cases,
the same figure as the
Project Manager).
Note: Departments can
submit their
applications through
their centre.
Promoter Promoter Members of the
Governing board
Proposes and defends
the projects of their
domain before the GB.
Must reject projects that
are little strategic so as
not to create false
expectations
Allocate funding and
resources (if necessary).
Designate the Project
Manager
PM Project
Manager
Director of
administration, service,
unit, centre (or whoever
delegates), etc.
Monitors compliance
with project execution
times and objectives.
In the event of incidents
or unforeseen events,
coordinates any
additional necessary
actions to achieve
proper compliance.
It may temporarily
suspend a project on the
basis of operational
aspects and always in
accordance with the
Promoter.
PPO Project
Portfolio
Office
IT Vice-manager (or
equivalent) (and his or
her team)
Coordinates and
manages the project
portfolio.
GB Governing
board
Chairman and members
of the management team
Define the strategic
pillars and prioritise the
portfolio of projects
according to these
pillars.
CIO Top IT
Manager
Top Strategic Head of IT
and his or her Board of
Governors Directors
Coordinates the
alignment of the project
portfolio with the
university’s strategy and
is the link between the
GB and the PPO.
Oversees the operation
of the project portfolio
and reaches agreements
with the Promoter in
case of unforeseen
events, acceptance of
new projects or priority
changes.
May temporarily
suspend a project for
strategic reasons in
agreement with the
Promoter.
ITS IT Service Director of the ITS and
its staff
Technical management
of the project.
May stop a project due
to a lack of resources, or
relaunch a suspended
project when available
again
Other Other units
or services
... Provide services or
perform additional tasks
to correctly execute the
project
F. Maciá Pérez et al.

--- PAGE 6 ---
Computer Standards & Interfaces 76 (2021) 103514
6
the proposals have been received, it will analyse the requests,
determine their priority based on the established criteria, draw up
the final project portfolio, which helps to define the following year’s
IT budget and inform the rest of the university community.
• Chief Information Officer (CIO). This person is responsible, among
other tasks, for promoting the implementation and proper exploita­
tion of the IT Project Portfolio; overseeing the running of the IT
Project Portfolio Office; advising promoters and helping to coordi­
nate IT-transversal projects involving several vice-chancellors or
services; of giving the go-ahead to the IT Projects list and the eval­
uation proposal and transmitting it to the Governance Team so that it
be given priority; finally, the CIO is responsible for tracking the
execution of the IT projects included in the portfolio and informing
the Governing team of their successful outcome.
• Technical Support (ITS). The IT Service will designate one or more
persons who could give (technical) advice to the Promoter and the
Project Manager during the proposal’s elaboration.
Plainly, this list of actors may vary a little, or widely, according to
each organisation. It is also clear that other actors are involved and that
they will at some point perform additional tasks to correctly execute the
different projects. However, the range of tasks, whether performed by
one actor or another, must be fairly uniform, regardless even of the
organisation in question. To achieve this uniformity and a more gener­
alised proposal, the identified tasks are described as a series of roles.
This means the responsibilities and activities related to a project port­
folio can be treated independently from the persons or organisational
structures that will bear those responsibilities or who must perform
determined tasks.
In our experience, the Project Portfolio Office (PPO) plays a major
role in the success of the strategic project portfolio, acting as a catalyst.
For this reason, in addition to playing an essential role in the proposed
model, it is also recommended to create a specifically dedicated struc­
ture. At the very minimum, this structure should be made up of a
physical office and a Director of that office. The role, the physical office
or the Director or group of workers who perform the role are referred to
indistinctly in the rest of the document using the acronym PPO. Table 2
shows the main tasks to be performed by the PPO.
Although we avoid approaching here the issue of portfolio man­
agement, there is a management side that includes strategic components
such as the tasks above.
We could also discuss the structure of the PPO for use cases. The PPO
may consist of a single a person, as in our case, or of several people.
4.3. States of an IT project
In this section we identify all the possible states of each portfolio IT
project, and we build a general states diagram and their transitions.
By starting with the definition of a states diagram, we obtain a simple
yet excellent tool to build the desired solution. On the one hand, iden­
tifying the states is fairly independent from the agents, roles, resources,
schedules and, above all, the processes involved in the project portfolio.
On the other, once the states and the associated transition diagram have
been identified, we will dispose of very precise information allowing us
to infer the optimal range of processes that will ensure the transition
from one state to another until reaching a state of completion.
In this way, the story that we are building not only ends with the
portfolio model that we are looking for, but it also explains the method
used to reach this solution. Given the great disparity of cases found in
each organisation, disposing of the method ensures that our proposed
portfolio model is general and will even apply to situations that were
unforeseen in this work.
The states diagram starts from the second phase (PH2) because the
first phase (PH1) is one of preparation, especially documentation and
planning and there are no projects yet. A general diagram is presented
later, in Fig. 6, showing all the identified states. But before reaching this
diagram, we will gradually build it up, following the different phases of
the entire process.
As explained above and as can be seen in Fig. 2, we begin with phase
PH2 or the study phase. We start with the Requester’s project request, so
that a project’s first state (S01) corresponds to a recently presented
project; it is pending the project portfolio office’s evaluation regarding
its basic viability and conformity with regulation requirements.
Once validated, the project moves to a second state (S02) where it
remains pending the approval of a developer. The promoter must be the
top political person in charge (just below the President) with compe­
tences in the domain of the expected solution, service or support. In our
case, these responsibilities fall, as we saw in the previous sections, on the
Board of Governors. If the developer approves the project, he or she will
have to assign both the necessary financing and a project manager.
This milestone brings the process to the next state (S03) in which the
project willbe pending the rankingproposal by the Vice-Chancellorwith
IT competencies (or the most senior political person in charge of infor­
mation technology at the university), who will prepare a preliminary
ranking proposal.
This latter action takes the project to a new state (S04) in which it
will be pending ranking by the Government Team, made up of the
promoters and the Chancellor him or herself. We must remember that all
the states analysed so far have always evolved during the PH2 phase or
the project presentation and study phase.
With the final ranking carried out by the Governing Team, each
project will move to one of the following states: S05 (ranked and
accepted), S06 (ranked and pending availability) and S07 (ranked and
unscheduled). All these states occur within the PH3 phase or planning
phase.
The ideal situation would be that all projects would be in an S05 state
(ranked and accepted), but the reality is that the number of projects
requested will be above the developing capacity, due to lack of staff,
time, budget or any other type of resource. Therefore, we need the op­
tion of also prioritising non-accepted projects, but without any guar­
antee that they will be implemented (S06 - ranked and pending
availability). It is possible that, as the project portfolio call unfolds these
projects may be addressed due to a variety of factors. However, there
may also be so many projects to prioritise that we clearly know in
advance that it is unlikely they be carried out, or at least with great
difficulty. To prevent false expectations, the third ranking (S07- ranked
and unplanned) is proposed. While it may seem a better solution to
remove such projects from the portfolio, for political reasons and for the
sake of transparency, it is not apparently justified. That is, if the project
meets all the conditions published in the call, following what criterion
should it be removed? Although it may generate controversy, in the
medium and long term this exercise of transparency, accountability and
performance will eventually build trust and may even reveal that it
would be highly strategic to invest more resources or financing in IT.
Although from a formal point of view, it could be understood that the
PH2 and PH3 phases are similar in nature, given the relevance of
obtaining a published list of prioritised projects for the next project
Table 2
Main tasks performed by the Project Portfolio Office (PPO).
Summary of functions
Assess each project’s risk.
Identify multiannual projects and attempt to get the requester to break them down.
Study which projects can be outsourced.
Decide which projects are launched at any given time, which running projects should
be stopped and vice versa.
Define the strategic pillars and prioritise the portfolio of projects according to these
pillars.
Manage conflicts, keeping the CIO informed.
Request for projects outside the call, inform the CIO.
Assess project completion.
Identify similar or related projects and facilitate synergies between them.
Identify and resolve dependencies between projects.
F. Maciá Pérez et al.

--- PAGE 7 ---
Computer Standards & Interfaces 76 (2021) 103514
7
portfolio call, we wished precisely to emphasize it by applying this small
distinction. This prioritised list is essential to achieve the necessary
decoupling between Project Portfolio processes and IT Project Man­
agement processes, ensuring that the IT Service (or the staff of the Ser­
vices and Units involved in the project generally) will enjoy sufficient
autonomy to manage their service as they deem best in each case.
On the other hand, the general philosophy of the Project Portfolio is,
and should always be, to maintain as fixed as possible both the priori­
tisation of projects decided and published, and the projects that had
been accepted and incorporated according to the conventional terms
established by the regulations. Despite this, the option of exceptionally
making changes in these regulations should be left open. These changes
can only be proposed and approved by the Government Team and will
affect projects exclusively in states S05, S06 and S07 of this phase. The
latter will almost certainly provoke a cascading effect, though always
affecting these three states. For example, if a project initially ranked in
state S06 (pending) can or must be launched, it will almost certainly
affect at least some of the projects planned in S05, which will probably
have to move, now, to S06.
During its study phase (states S01, S02, and S04), a process could
move to an FSB completion state because it is rejected. This rejection can
be due to a variety of factors and involve different actors (Fig. 3).
According to the above (see Fig. 3), a recently requested project
(S01) that does not comply with the regulations or that presents some
type of deficiency, may be directly rejected by the Project Portfolio
Office (PPO). Likewise, once the project is approved (state S02), the
Promoter may reject it if he or she considers that it is not strategic
enough or its alignment with the University’s strategy has not been
sufficiently justified. Finally, during the process of prioritising all pro­
jects (state S04), the Government Team itself may decide to reject a
project if it considers that it is not strategic enough. In all cases, the
projects will pass to the final FSB state.
The dynamics radically change from the moment the final prioritised
list of IT projects for the current call is published (Fig. 4). From then on,
Fig. 2. A diagram of the possible initial states of each IT project included in the strategic IT project portfolio.
Fig. 3. States diagram detailing the possible cancellation of an IT project included within the IT project portfolio during its study phase.
F. Maciá Pérez et al.

--- PAGE 8 ---
Computer Standards & Interfaces 76 (2021) 103514
8
it will be the project development unit, team, or service (for example,
the IT Service) that will be responsible for executing the projects, ac­
cording to the order and timetable published during the previous phases.
They will now be generally responsible for the project’s evolution
throughout the value chain until its completion. Accordingly, the port­
folio will enter phase PH4 or Execution Phase, and each launched
project will pass on to state S08 (under development by the ITS).
During its execution (state S08), a project may be temporarily sus­
pended one or several times. This is when it is important to regulate the
scope of the IT Service’s decision-making, the nature of the relationship
with the Government Team and the Government Team’s intervention.
The overall objective is to solve possible incidents and get the project
back into S08 state as quickly as possible.
The suspension states, in principletemporary, are asfollow: S10 state
of suspension by the Vice-chancellor with IT powers, always in
agreement with the Promoter and always regarding strategic aspects;
S09 state of suspension by the IT Service due to technical problems,
generally due to an unexpected lack of resources; and S11 state of sus­
pension by the Project Manager in agreement with the Promoter and due
to operational aspects.
When a project (in state S08) ends, it will go to the FSA state or
finalised state (see Fig. 5). Once this state of completion is reached, the
chain of value-generating processes will have been developed satisfac­
torily. However, in addition to the states of suspension, which will
derive from this value chain, some situations also arise that cause states
which are less desirable in this case of finalisation, but that are equally
essential. Accordingly, all projects in phase 4 of execution but not in S08
at the end of the current project portfolio call will also have to move to a
state of completion. In this case, that state would be the FSC state of
definitive suspension of the project by the management team.
Fig. 4. A diagram of the possible initial states of each IT project included in the strategic IT project portfolio during the execution phase.
Fig. 5. States diagram detailing the final completion or possible cancellation of an IT project included in the strategic IT project portfolio once that project has
already been definitively planned.
F. Maciá Pérez et al.

--- PAGE 9 ---
Computer Standards & Interfaces 76 (2021) 103514
9
This implicit guide of good practices recommends opting for this
solution for these types of projects. In practice, however, many situa­
tions will arise that will make us think of changing criteria and, under
certain conditions, deciding that certain projects be prolonged in the
very state they are in, only in the next call. We must insist that, although
this may be an acceptable solution, it should be included in advance in
the approved regulations. We should also be aware that this prevents the
project from competing with the rest of the projects (new or old) and its
strategic value must be updated, which will surely change from one call
to another.
Finally, Fig. 5 shows a last case in which feedback occurs in state S8.
This feedback corresponds to the possibility that a project, that is under
development and that does not present any relevant incident preventing
it from being normally completed and relatively soon, may be auto­
matically extended over the next call for proposals at the end of the
project portfolio execution period. According to the above, this project
will go directly to state S08 in the new call. This means that a project
that has unfoldedwithout problems, but that hasrun a littleshort oftime
to complete itself, may continue to run over the next call.
Table 3 summarises all the states that have been identified. Each
state is listed with its manager and the portfolio phase it is part of.
Fig. 6 shows a diagram offering a global view of all the states that
have been identified, along with their corresponding steps.
5. Stage 2. Defining the Model Processes
Once we dispose of the main elements to build the proposed solution
(phases, agents, roles, states), we may go on to define the main processes
on which it will be based and which, as can be seen in Fig. 7, derive
almost directly from the project’s states. Once again, we must remember
that, if the states analysis produces a different result from the one pro­
posed here, the solution’s essential processes can be extracted almost
automatically by simply applying this same method.
Thus, taking into account all these identified factors, we will define a
series of transformative processes (P1 to P5) for the PH2 and PH3 study
and planning phases tasked with moving each project from its applica­
tion state to its planning state (states S05, S06 and S07). As mentioned
already in the section above, phases PH2 and PH3 can be described as a
single phase; however, given the importance of project prioritisation by
the governance team presented throughout the process, we also high­
light here the P5 process which is precisely dedicated to creating and
publishing the decision. P5 is the process that contributes the most to the
institution’s application of the Good Governance principles of trans­
parency and accountability. Thus, the P1 to P4 processes are more
closely linked to participation and, to a lesser extent, to transparency
and accountability.
As can be seen in Fig. 7, a P6 process has been incorporated into the
proposed solution in order to maintain the possibility of making one-off
changes to the final prioritisation list once we have moved on to the PH4
implementation phase. These changes must be exceptional (for example,
due to a change in legislation, due to legal imperative, etc.) and should
be well reflected in the project portfolio regulations. Indeed, although it
is almost essential to contemplate this possibility in practice, the very
fact it exists may cause mistrust among the community.
For the execution phase PH4, a single, large process was defined
(P7). This process is not transformative in nature, unlike those analysed
so far. It is a management process that models the interactions between
the management team, the software development service and the rest of
the services and units involved in the project, in order to ensure the
follow-up of project development Governance. Because these in­
teractions are complex, we will delve a little deeper into this P7 process
in section E), dedicated to Portfolio Governance.
Finally, processes P8 and P9, in the phase 5 of completion, will
address two important tasks: finalising the projects and reporting the
results of the call. It is precisely this latter activity that leads the solution
to contribute to another fundamental principle of Good Governance:
Table 3
States of a project in the project portfolio.
Phase Cod. Name Man. Description
Study Phase S01
(S01)
Pending
validation by
PPO
PPO The PPO will validate
and assess the project
according to the
established evaluation
criteria (S02).
It will identify whether
the project can be
outsourced and
whether it needs
additional funding.
May reject the project
due to lack of
information to carry
out the evaluation
(FSA).
S02
(S02)
Pending
Promoter’s
approval
Promoter The Promoter will give
the go-ahead if he or
she considers that the
project is sufficiently
strategic, will allocate
the budget and
resources (not IT) if
necessary and
designate the PM (S03).
The Promoter may
reject the project
because it is not
sufficiently strategic, or
resources are
insufficient (FSB).
S03 Pending
ranking
proposal by CIO
CIO The CIO will propose a
plan for all validated
projects according to
the PPO evaluation and
alignment with each
project strategy
proposed to the GB
(S04).
S04 Pending
ranking by GB
GB The GB will provide a
planning for all projects
prioritised according to
their strategic interest
and existing resources.
As a result, each project
may be ranked into
three different
categories: Accepted
(S05), Accepted,
Pending Resources
(S06), Rejected because
it is not strategic
enough for existing
resources (FSB).
Planning
Phase
S05 Ranked and
Accepted
PPO Together with the ITS,
draws up each project’s
execution timetable
according to its
priority, existing
resources and the
services and units
involved.
Coordinates the ITS
together with other
services and units
necessary for the
project’s
implementation.
Will inform the PMs so
they take charge of the
implementation (S08).
S06 Ranked and
Pending
Availability
PPO Will re-prioritise the
project if resources
become available
(S05).
(continued on next page)
F. Maciá Pérez et al.

--- PAGE 10 ---
Computer Standards & Interfaces 76 (2021) 103514
10
Table 3 (continued)
Phase Cod. Name Man. Description
After trying to readjust
the project, it is finally
not strategic, and the
GB can decide to
suspend it definitively
(FSC).
S07 Ranked
unscheduled
PPO Will re-prioritise the
project if resources
become available
(S05).
After trying to readjust
the project, it is finally
not strategic, and the
GB can decide to
suspend it definitively
(FSC).
Execution
Phase
S08 Under
development by
the ITS
ITS The ITS will allocate
the necessary resources
to develop the project
according to the
established timetable
and liaise (through the
PM and the PPO) with
the required units and
services.
The ITS may
temporarily suspend a
project in accordance
with the PPO due to a
lack of resources due to
some unforeseen event
(re-prioritisation of
other projects, changes
in budgets or allocated
resources, etc.) (S09).
The CIO may
temporarily suspend a
project in accordance
with the Promoter, if
the project’s strategic
conditions (S10)
change.
The PM may
temporarily suspend a
project in accordance
with the Promoter, if
the operating
conditions (S11)
change.
S08 Under
development by
ITS (next call)
ITS If the CP deadline ends
and does not give time
to complete the project,
the project will
automatically move to
the same S08 state of
the next CP call.
S09 Suspended by
ITS
ITS The ITS may reactivate
a suspended project
according to the PPO
when resources are
available again, after
re-planning (S08).
After trying to readjust
the project, it is finally
not strategic, and the
GB can decide to
suspend it definitively
(FSC).
S10 Suspended by
CIO
CIO The CIO may propose to
resume a previously
suspended project
(S09).
After trying to readjust
the project, it is finally
not strategic, and the
GB can decide to
Table 3 (continued)
Phase Cod. Name Man. Description
suspend it definitively
(FSC).
S11 Suspended by
PM
PM The PM may propose to
resume a previously
suspended project
(S09).
After trying to readjust
the project, it is finally
not strategic, and the
GB can decide to
suspend it definitively
(FSC).
Completion
Phase
FSA Completed PPO The project has fulfilled
the objectives indicated
in the report.
FSB Rejected The project is not
accepted in the
planning phase and will
not be included in the
CP. There are three
different cases of
rejection:
By the GB GB Project rejected by the
GB based on the
prioritisation defined
according to the
university strategy and
existing resources.
By the
Promoter
Promoter Project rejected by the
Promoter.
by the PPO PPO Project rejected by the
PPO.
FSC Permanently
suspended by
GB
PPO After trying to readjust
the project, it is finally
not strategic or its
development deadline
within the call period
for the current project
portfolio has expired.
The GB decides to
suspend it definitively
for thisproject portfolio
call and studies
whether and how to
pass on to the next
project portfolio call.
Coming from
S05, S 6, S07
Must be requested
again from scratch in
the new project
portfolio call (will be
duplicated to facilitate
a direct passage to the
request phase of the
next PP call).
Coming from
S09
Passes directly to state
S09 of the next call
(similarly to state S08).
Coming from
S10
According to an
interview with the
Promoter, passes to
state S10 of the new
project portfolio call or
must be presented
again from scratch if
the wish is to continue.
Coming from
S11
According to an
interview with the
Director, passes to
states S11 of the new
project portfolio call is
or must be presented
again from scratch if
the wish is to continue.
F. Maciá Pérez et al.

--- PAGE 11 ---
Computer Standards & Interfaces 76 (2021) 103514
11
that of accountability. The P8 process is the natural completion of pro­
cesses that have developed in their entirety. The P9 process will allow
current projects (state S08), that are not affected by any incident pre­
venting them from progressing and are sufficiently near completion to
automatically continue in the next portfolio call moving on to the
execution state (S08) of the new call.
Additionally, although as explained above the portfolio’s
implementation goes beyond the scope of this work for lack of space,
given its relevance and to be thorough, a portfolio preparation process
was incorporated (process P0). This latter process provides the decrees,
regulations, criteria, schedules, documents, and forms that rule the rest
of the processes.
We are now ready to specify the generic solution (Fig. 3) that we
proposed in the introduction to this section. This solution proposal is
Fig. 6. A states diagram in which each IT project included in the strategic IT project portfolio can be found.
Fig. 7. Processes that make up the portfolio of strategic IT processes inferred from the possible states of an IT project in a strategic IT project portfolio.
Fig. 8. Process diagram of the strategic IT project portfolio for the government, governance, and management of IT projects.
F. Maciá Pérez et al.

--- PAGE 12 ---
Computer Standards & Interfaces 76 (2021) 103514
12
summarised in the process diagram shown in Fig. 8.
A complete process form was drawn up for each of the ten identified
processes (see Table 4). Each form details the following: its name; its
inputs/outputs; the requester; the highest authority, the person in
charge and the agent. It also defines its mission, controls and resources;
each process is related to the phases and states affected by it. The process
mission is explained and finally briefly described. These process forms
could not be incorporated into this work for lack of space, but they can
be consulted online [31].
As summarised in Table 4, the processes may be of a different nature.
According to the above, the P0 process is related to the portfolio’s
implementation. This process is beyond the scope of this article, but it is
very important to contemplate it within the entire process structure to
understand how it influences the rest through the many necessary re­
sources and controls it provides to launch them. Processes P1 to P5,
along with P8, are mainly related to the Strategic Alignment Process,
elevating decision making to the organisation’s top management. Pro­
cesses P6, P7 and P9 focus on regulating the Governance of IT Projects
or, in other words, on managing senior management intervention
throughout the development of IT Projects. The P7 process is key to this
and is more complex than might appear at first glance. It is thus
described in the next section (section 5) in greater detail.
6. Governance of IT Projects
Fig. 9 shows a diagram focused on the processes linked to Gover­
nance and its relationship with the management processes of IT Projects
and Strategic Alignment. In this diagram you can see that governance
weighs the most in process P7. This process is complex and provides the
keys to establish the communication flows and protocols between all
stakeholders, mainly between senior management and the different
project managers.
The first process directly related to Project Governance is the P6
process. Its mission is to keep the prioritisation of SITPP dynamically
updated with respect to changes. Although this process should be
executed on an exceptional basis, it is important to contemplate because
of the inevitable changes of all sorts that occur during a project’s
execution: changes in external regulations that condition the university
or even create obligations for the university; changes in internal regu­
lations affecting both current projects and projects on standby; changes
in university strategy (change of Management Team, changes to the
Strategic Plan, etc.); and changes in the resources available (financial,
human, technical, etc.).
Because the P7 process, i.e. IT Project Governance is the most com­
plex, we will approach it by analysing its main subprocesses. According
to this, the P7.1 subprocess monitors the project’s normal state of
execution (S08) making sure for example that the reports are updated,
the resources are sufficient, the regulations or the strategic objectives do
not change, that all the actors involved are properly informed, and that
no significant incidents will potentially stop or delay the project’s
execution. The person responsible for this subprocess is the PPO.
If any change or incident in the university strategy affecting a project
is detected, we would go to subprocess P7.2 in which the CIO, in
agreement with the Project Promoter, will request that it be temporarily
suspended, going from state S08 to state S10. The CIO is responsible for
this subprocess.
Furthermore, if any change or incident of an operational nature is
detected (for example, when changes occur in the availability of the
groups, units, offices, etc. involved in a project) during the P7.1 sub­
process, we pass on to subprocess P7.3 in which the Project Manager, in
agreement with the Promoter and through the PPO, temporarily sus­
pends it (S11). The person responsible for this subprocess is its project
manager.
Likewise, if during the P7.1 subprocess, the ITS itself detects any
technical incident (for example, a loss of personnel without the possi­
bility of replacement, delay in the delivery of equipment or software)
that affects project execution, it is possible (applying subprocess P7.4) to
temporarily stop it (S09) and inform the PPO.
The CIO, through subprocess P7.5, is responsible for monitoring all
the projects suspended in state S10. So, if the incidents that caused its
suspension are resolved, the project would be passed on to state S09,
waiting also to obtain the technical resources necessary for returning to
the execution state S08.
Furthermore, the Project Manager is responsible, through subprocess
P7.6, for monitoring all those projects suspended in state S11, so that if
the incidents that caused their suspension are resolved, the project
would pass on to stateS09, waiting also to obtain the necessary technical
resources to be able to return to the S08 execution state.
Finally, the ITS will monitor, through the P7.4 process, all the pro­
jects in state S09 so that when the necessary resources are available, it
will go back to the execution state (S08).
In all cases, the affected promoters must be informed of the state
Table 4
Main processes identified.
Id Name Type Phase Initial State End of
State
Mission/Goal
P0 Launch of the SITPP call Implementation PH1 - - Launch of the next Strategic IT project portfolio call.
P1 Basic Report presentation of
the Project
Alignment PH2 IS S1 Basic identification and formalising of a strategic IT project.
P2 Preliminary Evaluation of a
Project
Alignment PH2 S01 S02, FSB Assessment of the feasibility / clarity / information provided / justification /
minimum strategic level /… of the project and of the report.
P3 Allocation of the Project’s
Basic Resources
Alignment PH2 S02 S03, FSB Assigning of the Project Manager, the project Financing to the IT project
(quantity and origin) and the promoter’s strategic evaluation.
P4 Initial Project Portfolio
Prioritisation Proposal
Alignment PH2 S03 S04 Preliminary ranking proposal of the submitted projects.
P5 Prioritisation of the IT Projects
Strategic Portfolio
Alignment PH3 S04 S05, S06,
S07 and
FSB
Publishing of the results of the project portfolio call, triggering the start of its
execution (Phase 4).
P6 Dynamic management of
strategic changes in the IT
project prioritisation
Governance PH4 S05, S06, S07 S05, S06,
S07
Keep SITPP’s prioritisation dynamically up-to-date in the face of change.
P7 Project Development
Governance
Governance PH4 S05 S08 (S09-
S10-S11)
Monitoring of Project Development Governance.
P8 Closing the Current Project
Portfolio Call
Alignment PH5 S08, S05, S06,
S07, S09, S10,
S11
FSC or
FSA
Finalize the development activity of SITPP projects and prepare a series of
final reports including achievements, incidents and proposals... aimed at:
- The GB for Strategic Decision-Making
- TheUniversity Community for accountability
P9 Extension of the project’s
execution to the next call
Governance PH5 S08 S08 (S08
next call)
Ensure the continuity of a current project that requires a relatively short
completion time.
F. Maciá Pérez et al.

--- PAGE 13 ---
Computer Standards & Interfaces 76 (2021) 103514
13
changes.
The P7.1 and P7.4 process tandem is the meeting point between the
Strategic Projects’ execution Governance and their Technical
Management.
The P7.4 process is tasked with ensuring the ITS’s maximum au­
tonomy in developing a project’s execution by applying methodologies,
standards and frameworks to develop IT software, services and sys­
tems—such as ISO / IEC 38500, ISO / IEC 20000, COBIT or ITIL—in
each case.
Finally, P9, called Extension of a project’s execution to the next call,
is responsible for ensuring the continuity of a current project requiring a
relatively short completion time. The P8 process is the natural process of
finalising fully developed processes. For its part, the P9 process will
allow projects that are currently running (state S08), are unaffected by
any incident that would prevent them from moving forward, and that
foreseeably have a sufficiently close end date, to be automatically
extended to the next portfolio call,moving onto the new call’s execution
state S08 (identified as S08*).
7. Case Studies and Validation
The IT Strategic Project Portfolio we put forward in our study is
defined and conceived as a governance tool. The fact that it is a gover­
nance tool, however, does not guarantee that it is an effective Good
Governance tool. The objective of this section is therefore to demon­
strate that it is, and this constitutes the main hypothesis of our work.
We based this demonstration on two studies. The first is an analysis
of nine use cases—specifically nine public universities that are imple­
menting or have implemented this model—via a series of interviews
with executives. The second is the in-depth analysis of the historical data
of one of these cases, that of the University of Alicante. Indeed, these
latter data are at our disposal and the authors of the present work
actively participated in all the phases of that project. The first study,
despite being mostly qualitative, is relevant because of the breadth of
the vision it offers, originating in the perceptions of the senior managers
involved in the implementation. The second study is a specific case,
though it is also more quantitative in nature. It includes accurate his­
torical data allowing for regressions and projections that help to un­
derstand how the proposal emerged, where it is heading and the impact
it has had, according to the directors and managers, on the progress
made towards Good Governance.
7.1. General study
Although the number has now grown, almost doubled in fact, we
needed in the present study for the proposals to be sufficiently sub­
stantive to obtain truly significant conclusions.
The study consisted of a double interview with each organisation’s
main actors at different levels of responsibility, from chancellors to di­
rectors of computer services. The double interview consisted of the same
written form addressed to all organisations and actors and a second
individualised personal interview. Both the full interviews and the
detailed conclusions can be found in [11]. The members of our research
group, within their role of researchers, contributed to creating the sur­
veys; one member, within the role of IT Vice-Manager of a participating
institution contributed to the implementation; and as a promoter and
co-author of the book, participated in the publication of the results [11].
This latter publication was mainly for dissemination purposes and the
interviews were merely designed to demonstrate the positive outcomes
of the proposed strategic approach to the top management of other or­
ganisations. Moreover, the information is mainly qualitative in nature.
Despite the above, given the interviewees’ high degree of qualification,
the extent of their implication, their diversity, and the striking coher­
ence of their answers—hardly any outliers were found—we believe that
these interviews constituted a rich source of information that is useful to
determine whether the prioritisation and governance of strategic IT
projects helps to improve institutions’ IT Governance and Good
Governance.
The methodology followed to draw the conclusions was as follows:
(a) all the answers in the interviews relating to changes in managers’
visions were identified, the information was standardised and syn­
thesised in a table (Table 5) that correlates these views before and after
applying the model; (b) the expressed advantages and disadvantages
were also retrieved from interview answers, and; (c) a table was finally
drawn up identifying the accomplishmentsregarding IT Governance and
Good Governance principles based on the previous analyses,
Table 5 accordingly summarises the managers’ generalised change of
vision regarding the significance of governing IT. As can be observed,
there is a clear trend towards involving all the actors in the governing of
their universities.
Below we summarise the main advantages of the model, as extracted
from the analysis of the questionnaires and interviews:
Fig. 9. Flowchart including the main IT Project governance processes and the main P7 activities focusing on the interactions between the government and the
management of IT projects via IT project governance.
F. Maciá Pérez et al.

--- PAGE 14 ---
Computer Standards & Interfaces 76 (2021) 103514
14
• In all the cases analysed, the portfolio’s implementation was
considered to have helped them to noticeably evolve both in their
project management maturity model and in the Good Governance
maturity model: the necessary governance and management struc­
tures were identified, created and, most importantly, consolidated;
the senior management’s involvement (principle of responsibility)
was achieved in IT project decision-making (we must remember that
IT projects are strategic for the organisation).
• In most of the cases studied, a series of viable and sustainable pro­
cesses were implemented over time ensuring the continuity of the
portfolio across changes in the government and management bodies
and structures.
• The objective of implementing the proposed portfolio model is to
advance IT Governance and Good Governance generally. Therefore,
it is also essential to verify in the implemented case study that in
practically all cases and for all the profiles interviewed, considerable
progress was believed to have been made in aligning IT projects with
business objectives and that the model was key in this evolution:
both to achieve it and to give it continuity over time.
• The ratio between the projects requested each year by different unit
managers and the projects that the organisation was able to execute
was normalised.
• It was possible to better understand and adjust the budgets and re­
sources dedicated to IT projects.
• Greater transparency was achieved in decision-making processes,
which, in turn, improved the communication between the organi­
sation’s different levels and structures. This was observable through
the senior management’s greater understanding and disposition to
abide by the decisions and strategic dispositions adopted regarding
IT projects.
• Senior management gradually understood the importance of stra­
tegic IT projects and the key role of their involvement in decision-
making.
A highly relevant fact obtained from the interviews is that in prac­
tically all cases, it was the CIO’s convincing and leadership that was key
to the success of the implementation, acting as a cohesive link between
Governance and Management; an additional factor was involving the
General Director, the Chancellor (or the CEO in general) and the gov­
ernment team in the project from the very beginning, i.e. immediately
relocating the Governance leadership.
Notwithstanding the above, there were also some negative aspects
that must be addressed in the future as well as certain recurring risks,
though they were not generalised. These aspects listed below:
• It is essential and very difficult to convince top management that
strategic IT project decisions be taken by the most senior government
levels.
• Resistance in the IT service due to the apparent loss of decision-
making power.
• The implementation of the portfolio is costly in effort and time:
agreeing on the criteria, defining the processes, evaluating the stra­
tegic weight of each aspect of the projects, adequately training the
personnel and, above all, achieving cultural change in the
organisation.
In short, the experience was deemed satisfactory in all cases (even in
cases in which it was not consolidated) and led to substantial growth in
the maturity model of both the project management and the organisa­
tion’s Good Governance.
Finally, the universities’ main achievements owing to the model’s
implementation are correlated with IT Governance and Good Gover­
nance principles (see Table 6). Once again, a clear improvement in the
systems of government can be observed, despite the data naturally being
of a qualitative nature.
Historical analysis of calls for strategic IT projects
In this section, we perform a detailed analysis of the results obtained
in one case: that of the University of Alicante. Our research group
participated and was directly responsible, not only for creating the
model, but also implementing and monitoring at this university. A
tangible result of this work is the creation of an application to manage
the strategic project portfolio [32] which includes, among many other
functionalities, a dashboard that supports the decision-making process
(Fig. 10 shows a screenshot of the application with data from the last
fiscal year). This dashboard allows analysing the entire process pre­
sented in this work: from the presentation of proposals, to the evaluation
of their impact after being launched, to the prioritisation and gover­
nance of development processes. Thanks to this tool, the entire
Table 5
Summary of the progressive changes in mentality detected in the organisations
after implementing the strategic portfolio model: prioritisation of projects and
governance regarding execution, development and evaluation.
Before the setup After the setup
The IT Service is in charge of identifying
and deciding which IT projects are
developed
The board decides which projects are to
be developed each year.
No complete annual planning exists and
the one that does exist is not made
public.
A planning exists and it is made public.
There is no information about what
kinds of IT projects are implemented.
The following is known:
• the amount of projects put forward or
rejected
• how they are aligned with strategic
objectives
• their execution status at any time
Only the IT Service is aware of each
project’s execution status.
Top management and each unit involved
in a project are informed of each
project’s implementation status.
There is no project portfolio or, if it does
exist, only IT knows about it.
A strategic project portfolio exists and
the information is available to the entire
community at all times.
The university community generally is
totally unaware of what projects are
being executed, according to which
criteria, etc. despite being the main
recipient of the services and
applications.
The university community can know at
any time which projects have been or are
being executed and can take part in the
process by presenting their own projects.
Among the top management, only the IT
Vice-Manager is directly involved in
IT projects.
The entire Board of Directors is involved
in IT projects, understanding that they
are transversal in the organisation.
An IT project is understood to be any
project that broadly involves
technologies and units. The
departments or usersto whichthey are
directed are considered as secondary.
An IT project is transversal in the entire
organisation.
No defined budget is agreed upon by the
whole government team for the
development of IT projects.
A global budget is established for all IT
actions. This budget is agreed upon by
the entire government team.
The strategic impact of the executed
projects is not known.
Indicators are proposed and each
project’s true impact is evaluated after
being launched.
Members of the management team
believe that only the IT Vice-Manager
should know and make decisions
about projects
All members of the governance team are
involved in making decisions about any
strategic IT project.
Management team members propose
projects that largely involve
technology without taking their
budget, impact and strategic
indicators into account. They do so,
guided only by the particular interests
of their domain of management.
The members of the governance team
propose IT projects that follow a strategic
line, aware that they have to compete for
all types of resources with the rest of the
projects proposed in other domains:
time, investment, strategy, opportunity,
etc.
Management team members do not feel
implicated in other projects that come
from other domains and believe that
each manager should focus solely on
their own field of action.
The members of the management team
understand the strategic importance of
projects and that they affect the
organisation’s overall strategy. They are
widely involved in decision-making.
F. Maciá Pérez et al.

--- PAGE 15 ---
Computer Standards & Interfaces 76 (2021) 103514
15
university community has access to detailed, quantitative and real-time
information on each IT project’s status and execution, both past and
present. The prioritisation criteria and the result of the process are also
disseminated on the IT Project Management Office’s website [33].
Additionally, much of the data considered useful to the research com­
munity or for entrepreneurship are published in the form of reusable
data sets in the University of Alicante’s Open Data portal [34]. If they
are not published, a request can be sent via the University of Alicante’s
Transparency Portal [35]. We will use some of this data to illustrate the
model’s advantages regarding improvements to IT project management
and progress in particular in IT Governance, as well as Good Gover­
nance, generally.
Fig. 11 summarises the historical data series (since 2014) at the
(annual) close of each call and shows the open call’s current status (call
2020) [33]. The data presented is quantitative in nature and focuses on
the states of each IT project (see section 4.C). The data from the last call,
although seemingly less relevant, help us to illustrate how the projects
behave throughout a call, in terms of achieved status. In addition, they
provide a better overview and a vision of the expected trend.
The first obvious conclusion that can be drawn from the finalised
calls is that it has seldom been necessary to definitively suspend a
development process that has already begun (FSC: Permanently sus­
pended). On the other hand, the share of projects that could not be
carried out due to a lack of time and resources (FSC: Rejected) ranges
from 20% to 30%. A strikingly big number of projects could not be
completed and had to be carried over to the next call (S08*: under
development of ITS) in all calls. In the same way, the number of fully
completed projects in each call (FSA: Completed) seems highly variable
and does not reach significant percentages.
To understand this seemingly erratic behaviour, Fig. 12 shows a
graph with a series of data aggregations, together with an analysis of the
trends of these aggregations based on a simple linear regressive study,
providing a much better illustration of the model’s general evolution
over time.
The main conclusion of this latter analysis is that the university has
gradually improved its capacity to develop new IT projects (Presented:
sum of all IT projects). This curve follows a linear trend (a 94% deter­
mination coefficient) with a slope close to 18%. The progress is all the
more notable if one considers that the IT resources, whether human or
material, have showed no variation throughout the historical series.
However, based on the conclusions obtained from all the cases under
study (Tables 5 and 6), the organisation and training of the entire chain
of command has substantially improved, from senior management to the
IT Service management, to the direction of the university’s different
functional units involved in each project (personnel, accounting, eco­
nomic affairs, faculty, students, academic management, research, social
affairs, international, studies, departments, faculties, institutes, etc.).
Based on all these analyses, the fact of incorporating a strategic vision,
appropriately articulated with the direction and management, has
clearly led to managing existing resources more efficiently and to largely
increasing the capacity to undertake IT projects.
A similar pattern regarding the capacity to finalise projects each year
can be observed (Developed: FSA + S08*). We have already seen that the
separate analysis of fully completed projects (FSA) and projects to be
extended to the next call (S08*) produces apparently erratic results, in
some cases considered as outliers. In reality, the extended projects
(S08*) are those having exceeded at least 80% of their execution. In
practice, some validation test or some small development is missing that
should not usually take more than a few weeks, or a month at most. For
this reason, aggregating these projects (S08*) with the completely
finalised projects (FSA) gives a more accurate reflection of the reality.
The result is the Developed curve (FSA + S08*). In this case, all the
existing information becomes more coherent and the apparent outliers
disappear (for example, in 2018). The regressive analysis of this ag­
gregation shows a power trend, with an R2
of 85% and a projection that
predicts a current call completion for over 150 completely finalised
projects or of which at least over 80% are finalised.
Finally, one can also observe an exponential trend (R2 of 70%) in the
rise of project rejections (Rejects: FSB + FSC). This is the point where
each organisation must decide whether to invest in more resources to
execute IT projects or prefer to stabilise the curves. From the data ob­
tained in the last 7 years, and despite the fact that the determination
coefficient barely reaches 70%, it is not possible yet to conclude that this
asymptote has been reached. It is foreseeable, however, that if the
conditions do not change, it will soon happen.
This quantitative analysis allows us to validate the model’s effec­
tiveness and its contribution to some specific aspects of IT Government
and Good Governance. But it is difficult to establish a direct link. To get
closer to the strategic vision, a simple survey was conducted with the
university executives following each call, from the IT Vice-Manager to
Table 6
Analysis of the evolution of the IT Government and Good Governance maturity
model based on the achievements regarding the underlying principles.
Principles Most relevant achievements supported by the
model’s implementation
Responsibility Board members have understood that IT projects are
strategic, transversal in the organisation, and that it is
the responsibility of the entire board to know these
projects and actively participate in decision-making.
Responsibility for an action goes hand in hand with the
authority to execute it.
Strategy Proposers understand the importance of justifying the
project’s strategic value, senior management
prioritises projects based on their strategic value,
taking into account current IT capabilities.
Acquisition The model proposes a common fund for the financing
of strategic IT project development. In this way, all
projects compete on an equal footing for this essential
resource through the allocation of a budget, naturally
linked to the organisation’s strategic interests.
Performance Thanks to the senior management’s involvement, the
role of IT is naturally linked to supporting the
organisation and providing services to fulfil current
and future business objectives. All project proposals
should provide indicators that allow evaluating each
project’s true impact on the overall strategy during the
completion phase.
Compliance Strategic alignment entails the obligation to comply
with all laws and regulations, both internal and
external.
Human factor The proposed model encourages IT projects to be
initiated by any university community: student
representatives, administration and services staff,
faculty and researchers. This ensures that current and
future needs of all those involved are taken into
account.
Transparency The entire community can access the information on
the process in real time through the management
platform (see Fig. 10). Full transparency regarding
each project’s prioritisation, implementation status
and evaluation results is thus ensured.
Participation This transparency throughout the process encourages,
in turn, not only senior management and intermediate
managers to take part, but also the whole community.
They can become involved at any time in proposals of
strategic IT projects and be aware of decisions and
results.
Responsibility and
Accountability
From the very start, each project must be accompanied
by a set of indicators allowing to measure its impact on
the community and its strategic value. This makes it
easier to hold senior management accountable for its
performance.
Reuse of information The moment the reuse of information is included in the
good governance principles incorporated into the
university’s strategic plans (thanks to the requirement
of strategic project alignment), the reuse of
information becomes a key factor through its
publication and dissemination in formats that enable
and promote its reuse and as a way to promote
entrepreneurship and create added value.
F. Maciá Pérez et al.

--- PAGE 16 ---
Computer Standards & Interfaces 76 (2021) 103514
16
the director of the IT service. They were asked their opinion about the
university’s status regarding the IT Governance and Good Governance
principles that best defined the objectives of our study: Responsibility,
Strategy, Acquisition, Performance, Compliance, Human factor, Trans­
parency, Participation, Responsibility, Accountability and Reuse of in­
formation. Participants only had to give a score between 0 and 100 (0:
the principle is not fulfilled to any extent and 100: the principle is
entirely fulfilled). The number of surveys varies each year depending on
the participants in the different IT projects and ranged from 8 to 11
managers [36]. For our validation, a summary of the arithmetic average
of these values was collected for each principle and call, expressing it as
a percentage. Fig. 13 shows a radar graph representing this perception
that was appropriately quantified to show the organisation’s evolution
over the years with respect to IT Governance and Good Governance
principles.
The graph in Fig. 13 illustrates the notable evolution of a number of
principles, such as transparency, human factor, performance and
accountability. It also shows some important shortcomings regarding
participation and acquisition. On the other hand, despite the principles
of Responsibility and Reuse of information undergoing a substantial
evolution, a clear stagnation in recent years can be observed.
We must remember that while this information is based on experi­
ence and highly representative, it is also of a subjective nature. Indeed, it
is based on the quantification of qualitative information and, most
significantly, no linear correspondence necessarily exists between the
evolution of a given principle and the model’s implementation. For
example, the transparency principle evolved to a greater extent than the
rest, though the University of Alicante did in fact launch its Trans­
parency Portal initiative over the same period. Moreover, this IT project
may not have been considered strategic had it not been for the priori­
tisation of IT projects. Improvements are also clearly visible and what
we wished to know was whether the information was consistent. For
this, a general maturity analysis was performed (see Fig. 14) based on a
regression study of the curve representing the sum of the evolution of all
the principles over time.
As shown in Fig. 14, the curve’s evolution followed a logarithmic
dynamic with an accommodation factor of 96%, which allows us to infer
that the model will continue to evolve in the coming years, although at
an increasingly slower speed.
To summarise, both studies perfectly complement each other and
although no formal framework is presented, they clearly illustrate that
the proposed strategic portfolio model based on strategic IT project
prioritisation and the definition of a clear governance protocol during
the projects’ development, launch and evaluation, effectively contrib­
uted to the organisation’s greater maturity regarding both, IT Govern­
ment and Good Government.
8. Conclusions
This work presented a methodology to implement and run a strategic
Fig. 10. Strategic Portfolio Dashboard Application available in the university’s cloud [32].
F. Maciá Pérez et al.

--- PAGE 17 ---
Computer Standards & Interfaces 76 (2021) 103514
17
Fig. 11. Evolution of the finalisation of strategic IT project calls by year. Data source [33].
Fig. 12. Trend in the capability to manage strategic IT projects. Data source [33].
F. Maciá Pérez et al.

--- PAGE 18 ---
Computer Standards & Interfaces 76 (2021) 103514
18
portfolio of IT projects.
From a more scientific viewpoint, the proposal provides a formal
model of a strategic IT project portfolio that succeeds in aligning IT
projects with business objectives and strategy.
From a functional and applied perspective, this type of strategic
portfolio can be a goodtool to strategically manageIT projects, thanks to
the fact that it elevates strategic decisions to an organisation’s most
senior management levels, strengthening leadership and improving
communication and cooperation. Yet it also ultimately constitutes a
series of good IT Governance and Good Governance practices.
The analysis of the different case studies shows that: the model is
reproducible in different organisations regardless of their structures;
that it is sustainable over time despite changes in the organisation; that
it is compatible with the organisation’s existing Governance and Man­
agement of IT projects–which is consistent with the standards of Good
Governance, Governance, Management and Operation (ISO/IEC 38500,
ISO/IEC 20000, COBIT, ITIL, etc.); it increases the organisation’s Good
Governance level of maturity; and it contributes effectively to the
principles of responsibility, strategy, acquisition and performance ex­
pected of Good Governance.
Currently, the model continues to be refined based on the results of
past experiences, it is being implemented in other organisations, and an
experience-sharing network is today under construction.
From a scientific perspective, some problems were identified and
need to be solved: a major bottleneck arises due, first to the huge amount
of information necessary for the decision-making in the project priori­
tisation phase, and second, due to many senior managers’ lack of
experience in these types of projects. To solve this problem, we are
currently working in the medium term on incorporating Artificial In­
telligence and Data Mining techniques in the medium term. The latter
will help to automate the prioritisation process and facilitate decision-
making by senior management.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Supplementary materials
Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in
the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.csi.2021.103514.
References
[1] I. Kawtar, D. Karim, B. Salah, Proposal model of change for Business IT Alignment,
Procedia Computer Science 164 (2019) 96–104.
[2] A. Al-Surmi, G. Cao, Y. Duan, The impact of aligning business, IT, and marketing
strategies on firm performance, Industrial Marketing Management 84 (2020)
39–49.
[3] G. Cserháti, L. Szabó, The relationship between success criteria and success factors
in organisational event projects, International Journal of Project Management 32
(4) (2014) 613–624.
[4] M. Chi, R. Huang, J.F. George, Collaboration in demand-driven supply chain: Based
on a perspective of governance and IT-business strategic alignment, International
Journal of Information Management (2020), 102062.
[5] ISO/IEC (2015) 38500: Governance of Information Technology for the
Organization. Geneva: ISO/IEC. http://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail?csnu
mber=62816. (last access 5/10/2020).
[6] M. Maryska, P. Doucek, L. Nedomova, Corporate Informatics and Strategic
Management, Procedia Economics and Finance 26 (2015) 651–656.
[7] Z. Alreemy, V. Chang, R. Walters, G. Wills, Critical success factors (CSFs) for
information technology governance (ITG), International Journal of Information
Management 36 (6) (2016) 907–916.
[8] Toomey, M. (2009). Waltzing With the Elephant: A Comprehensive Guide to Directing
and Controlling Information Technology. Available at: http://trove.nla.gov.au/v
ersion/45114006. ISBN: 9780980683004.
[9] ISACA (2012) COBIT 5: A Business Framework for the Governance and Management of
Enterprise IT. Available at: http://www.isaca.org/cobit/documents/cobit-5-int
roduction.pdf. ISBN: 978-1-60420-237-3.
[10] Gómez, J. (ed.) (2017). UNIVERSITIC 2017. Análisis de las TIC en las
Universidades Españolas. Crue Universidades Españolas, Madrid-España, 2017.
[11] A. Fernández-Martínez, F. Llorens-Largo, C. Juiz-García, F. Maciá-Pérez, J.
M. Aparicio-García, Cómo priorizar los proyectos TI estratégicos para tu
Universidad, Publicacions Institucionals de la Universitat d’Alacant, 2019.
[12] S. Kunisch, T. Keil, M. Boppel, C. Lechner, Strategic initiative portfolios: How to
manage strategic challenges better than one at a time, Business Horizons 62 (4)
(2019) 529–537.
[13] P.y Weill, J.W. Ross, IT Governance: How top performers manage IT decision
rights for superior results, Harvard Business School Press, Boston, 2004.
[14] M. Martinsuo, J. Geraldi, Management of project portfolios: Relationships of
project portfolios with their contexts, International Journal of Project Management
(2020).
[15] B. Gómez, B. Bermejo, C. Juiz, IT Governance and Its Implementation Based on a
Detailed Framework of IT Governance (dFogIT) in Public Enterprises. Information
Technology Governance in Public Organizations, Springer, Cham, 2017,
pp. 133–155.
[16] Mueller, L., Magee, M., Marounek, P., y Phillipson, A. (2008). IBM IT Governance
Approach Business: Performance Through It Execution.
[17] C. Juiz, M. Toomey, To govern IT, or not to govern IT? Communications of the
ACM 58 (2) (2015) 58–64.
[18] M. Gërvalla, N. Preniqi, P. Kopacek, IT infrastructure library (ITIL) framework
approach to IT governance, IFAC-PapersOnLine 51 (30) (2018) 181–185.
[19] T. Sethibe, J. Campbell, C. McDonald, IT governance in public and private sector
organisations: examining the differences and defining future research directions,
ACIS 2007, Proceedings (2007) 118.
[20] A. Khalfan, T.G. y Gough, Comparative analysis between the public and private
sectors on the IS/IT outsourcing practices in a developing country: a field study,
Logistics Information Management 15 (3) (2002) 212–222.
Fig. 13. Radar chart of the evolution of the principles ruling Good Governance
and IT Governance at the University of Alicante. Source of data: [36].
Fig. 14. Government Maturity Analysis. Source of data: [36].
F. Maciá Pérez et al.

--- PAGE 19 ---
Computer Standards & Interfaces 76 (2021) 103514
19
[21] N Al Qassimi, L Rusu, IT governance in a public organization in a developing
country: a case study of a governmental organization, Procedia Computer Science
64 (2015) 450–456.
[22] J. Gomes, N. de Macedo, L.Y. Kussam, R.M. Nogueira, C.H. Arima, Gestão de riscos
de segurança da informação e governança de TI no setor público, X Workhop de E
pós-graduaçao e Pesquisa do Centro Paula Souza: ENGEMA. São Paulo 7 (October
2015) (2016) 753–763.
[23] E. Orta, M. Ruiz, Met4ITIL: A process management and simulation-based method
for implementing ITIL, Computer Standards & Interfaces 61 (2019) 1–19.
[24] Y. Bounagui, A. Mezrioui, H. Hafiddi, Toward a unified framework for Cloud
Computing governance: An approach for evaluating and integrating IT
management and governance models, Computer Standards & Interfaces 62 (2019)
98–118.
[25] Maciá Pérez Francisco, Iren Lorenzo Fonseca, Berná Martínez, José Vicente,
A formal framework for modelling complex network management systems, Journal
of Computers 40 (2014) 255–269.
[26] F. Maciá-Pérez, I. Lorenzo-Fonseca, J.V. Berná-Martínez, J.M. Sánchez-Bernabéu,
Conceptual Modelling of Complex Network Management Systems, Journal of
Computers 10 (5) (2015) 309–320.
[27] H.E. Eriksson, M. Penker, Business Modeling with UML: Business Patterns at Work,
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 2000.
[28] M. Weske, Business Process Management: Concepts, Languages Architectures,
Springer, 2019, 3662594323. ISBN.
[29] AXELOS (2019). ITIL Foundation, ITIL 4 Edition. TSO TSO (The Stationery Office).
ISBN: 9780113316076.
[30] ISO/IEC (2015) 2000: ITIL Information Managemente. IT Service Management.A
practical guide. Avaliable at: https://www.iso.org/publication/PUB100441.html.
[31] F. Maciá Pérez, I. Lorenzo Fonseca, J. Berná Martinez, IT Strategic Project Portfolio
- Process Sheets, 2020.
[32] UACloud. Portfolio Projects. Aplicación para la gestión de la Cartera Estratégica
de Proyectos TI. https://si.ua.es/en/manuales/uacloud/uacarteraproyectos/port
folio-of-projects.html. (last access 05/10/2020).
[33] Oficina de Gestión de Proyectos TI, Vicerrectorado de Campus y Tecnología de la
Universidad de Alicante, Portal Web, https://web.ua.es/es/vr-campus/convoca
torias/cartera-de-proyectos/cartera-de-proyectos-ti-estrategica.html. (last access el
05/10/2020).
[34] Portal de Datos abiertos de la Universidad de Alicante, Portal Web, https://datos.
ua.es/ (last access 05/10/2020).
[35] Portal de Transparencia de la Universidad de Alicante, Portal Web, https://t
ransparencia.ua.es/ (last access 05/10/2020).
[36] Maciá Pérez, F., Berná Martinez, J., Lorenzo Fonseca, I., (2020). Dataset: IT
governance maturity and good governance surveys. http://hdl.handle.net/100
45/109540.
F. Maciá Pérez et al.