--- PAGE 1 ---
Digital Business 2 (2022) 100036
Available online 31 July 2022
2666-9544/© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Enhanced digital transformation supporting capabilities through enterprise
architecture management: A fsQCA perspective
Maurice Pattij*
, Rogier van de Wetering, Rob Kusters
Department of Information Science, Open University of the Netherlands, Valkenburgerweg 177, 6419, AT, Heerlen, the Netherlands
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Enterprise architecture management
Technical IT capabilities
Strategic IT alignment
fsQCA
Digital enterprise technology
A B S T R A C T
The rapid development of novel, innovative digital technologies significantly impact organizations and their
business ecosystem. Organizations must stay abreast of the latest developments and respond to them continu­
ously to remain competitive. Many organizations make significant investments in enterprise architecture man­
agement (EAM) to manage the transformation of their complex information technology (IT) and information
systems (IS) landscape and to guide their digital transformation. However, empirical research on EAM benefit
realization is limited. This research conceptualized EAM as a particular type of dynamic managerial capability.
Survey data (N = 110) was used in a set-theoretic approach (fsQCA) to identify EAM configurations that lead to a
presence of technical IT capabilities and strategic IT alignment. The results indicate the importance of system
changes induced by the EAM function itself to improve technical IT capabilities. Furthermore, setting up clear
standards and rules, and developing and planning the migration to target architectures is particularly important
to align business and IT in larger organizations. This research contributes to the academic knowledge base on
EAM benefit realization and supports the needed reconceptualization and evolution of EA and EAM to better
support organizations’ digital transformations. Furthermore, the outcomes can help decision-makers justify and
guide their EA investments while implementing a digital strategy.
1. Introduction
In the 1980s, organizations’ information technology (IT) and infor­
mation systems (IS) increased considerably. Inspired by classical archi­
tecture, organizations developed frameworks to describe an
organization and its IT/IS from different perspectives. These de­
scriptions aimed to increase insight into the organization’s core struc­
tures (or architectures) and its IT/IS. Furthermore, these descriptions
directed the execution of architectural changes (Zachman, 1987).
A great deal has changed since the introduction of Zachman’s
framework, especially in terms of the role of IT/IS in digitalization and,
namely, the use of digital technology in an organizational context. When
Zachman’s framework was introduced, digitalization mainly focused on
automating manual work routines. Several digitalization waves have
resulted in the internet as a communication infrastructure to connect
individuals and businesses globally, new internet-driven business
models, and customer expectations of digital technologies. Currently,
we are facing yet another wave in which new digital technologies, such
as social media, mobile computing, data analytics, the internet of things,
blockchain, artificial intelligence, and virtual reality, are expected to
impact almost every aspect of our private lives, the society, and the
business ecosystem (Khin & Ho, 2019; Legner et al., 2017; Urbach et al.,
2019).
These new technologies are integral to today’s business strategies
(Yeow, Soh, & Hansen, 2018). However, implementing these digital
strategies impacts all layers of the organization. This is not only the case
for organizational components that ‘traditionally’already depend on IT/
IS, but also organizational components that were barely part of the IT
landscape are now heavily dependent on new digital technologies. For
example, modern machining workshops can generate large amounts of
heterogeneous in-process data. This allows organizations to perform
data analyses that create valuable insights to improve the efficiency of
machining workshop processes (Li, Cheng, Jiang, & Katch­
asuwanmanee, 2022).
Organizations must transform their operations to utilize these new
technologies fully. To support this transformation, they can currently
choose from various architecture (EA) frameworks with different pur­
poses and applications (Lapalme et al., 2016). In contrast to the early
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: maurice.pattij@ou.nl (M. Pattij).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Digital Business
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/digbus
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.digbus.2022.100036
Received 31 March 2022; Received in revised form 16 July 2022; Accepted 23 July 2022

--- PAGE 2 ---
Digital Business 2 (2022) 100036
2
frameworks, such as Zachman’s framework, many of the current
frameworks available do not only focus on architectural descriptions,
but also pay much attention to enterprise architecture management
(EAM) emerged as a set of managerial activities to support the contin­
uous development and implementation ofEA (Aier, Gleichauf,& Winter,
2011; Schmidt & Buxmann, 2011). These frameworks include, for
example, The Open Group Architecture Framework (TOGAF), the most
used framework in organizations (Kotusev, 2018). Although EA frame­
works evolved and organizations make significant investments in
implementing and using them, there are some issues with the current
notion of the EA.
One of these issues entails a knowledge gap on how EA frameworks,
and particularly EAM, add value to organizations and how they support
an organization’s digital transformation. Most of the empirical research
that has investigated the value creation of EAM is based on variance-
based regression techniques or base their conclusions on the results of
case studies (Abraham, Aier, & Winter, 2012; Ahlemann, Legner, & Lux,
2020; Hylving, 2019; Lange, Mendling, & Recker, 2016; Lux, Riempp, &
Urbach, 2010; Schmidt & Buxmann, 2011). While these methods are
valuable to explore relevant concepts and their relation, and validate
causal path models including these concepts, their ability to reveal non-
linearity and equifinality is limited. However, organizational manage­
ment and IT/IS research recurrently emphasizes the importance of
equifinality, or in other words, the phenomenon that different combi­
nations of conditions can lead to the same outcome without showing
clear statistical linear relations (Doty, Glick, & Huber, 1993; Hair, Hult,
Ringle, & Sarstedt, 2016; Ketchen & Shook, 1996).
Another issue concerns the limitations of the currently predominant
paradigm on EA and EAM and the frameworks accompanying this
paradigm. First, frameworks like TOGAF strongly focus on enterprise-
wide architecture management within the IT domain. Furthermore,
they are often driven by formal end-to-end architectural processes and
demonstrate a clear division of roles supporting the creation and
implementation of architectural changes (TOGAF, 2018). However,
driven by the possibilities emerging new technologies, the lines between
business and IT are blurring increasingly, and the way business value is
created changed drastically. Therefore, scholars and practitioners argue
that reconceptualization is required, and EA should focus on the
performance-driven cohesion of the organization as a whole (Stovers, de
Ruijter, & Wagter, 2019). Second, organizations are increasingly
entangled with their business ecosystems resulting from inter-
organizational partnerships. However, the current notion of EA,
including frameworks such as TOGAF, lacks attention to architecture in
a business ecosystem (Mueller, Schuldt, Sewald, Morisse, & Petrikina,
2013; Tambo, 2017).
The goal of this research is two-folded. First, exploring the role of
non-linearity and equifinality and using fsQCA as a set-theoretic
approach to further unravel the complex nature of EAM value creation
(Fiss, 2007; Ragin, 2008). Understanding which specific EAM in­
gredients are essential to support an organization’s digital trans­
formation is not only a valuable contribution to the existing academic
knowledgebase, but could also help decision-makers to guide their EAM
investments. Second, this research aims to contribute to the further
evolution and reconceptualization of the EA practice. Knowing which
specific EAM elements help organizations with their digital trans­
formations today and enriches the foundation to develop the EA practice
of tomorrow.
This research focuses on identifying configurations that explain the
outcomes strategic IT alignment and technical IT capabilities, as they
both are articulated goals of organizations’ EAM efforts (Winter, Buckl,
Matthes, & Schweda, 2010). Furthermore, existing research provides
empirical evidence that strategic IT alignment and technical IT capa­
bilities are positively associated with implementing digital strategies
(Nwankpa & Roumani, 2016; Yeow et al., 2018).
In the proceeding sections of this paper, we will describe our theo­
retical foundation grounded in the resource-based view (RBV) and the
dynamic-capabilities view (DCV), present our research model and ex­
pectations, explain the usage of fsQCA as a set-theoretic approach, and
present and discuss our results.
2. Theoretical background
2.1. Enterprise architecture management and dynamic managerial
capabilities
Scholars emphasize the importance of organizational resources in
their search to explain how organizations can obtain competitive ad­
vantages (Barney, 1991; Teece, Pisano, & Shuen, 1997). These resources
include “all assets,capabilities, organizational processes, firmattributes,
information, and knowledge etc.” (Barney, 1991, p. 101). For instance,
the RBV theorizes that the extent to which an organization’s resources
are valuable, rare, inimitable, and non-substitutable (VRIN) are a rele­
vant predictor of its competitive performance (Barney, 1991). However,
one of the main criticisms of the RBV is that it does not consider the
dynamic environments of an organization. The DCV builds upon the
RBV and addresses the importance of dynamic capabilities to adapt to
the dynamic environment or even induce market change. Dynamic ca­
pabilities can be defined as “the capacity of an organization to pur­
posefully create, extend or modify its resource base” (Helfat et al., 2007,
p. 1).
Sirmon, Hitt, Ireland, and Gilbert (2011) state the importance of
managerial activities to orchestrate an organization’s resources. Their
research introduces the term resource orchestration as the integration of
resource management and asset orchestration. Resource management is
based on the idea that possessing the VRIN properties is not enough to
gain competitive advantages. Therefore, resource management concerns
structuring, bundling, and using resources to serve customers’ needs
(Sirmon, Hitt, & Ireland, 2007). While resource management is closely
related to asset management, asset orchestration is grounded in dynamic
capabilities literature. Specifically related to IT resources, Queiroz,
Tallon, Sharma, and Coltman (2018) propose a dynamic capability that
entails orchestration of the renewal/reconfiguration of an organiza­
tion’s resource base through the development and procurement of IT
applications and discontinuation of applications. Likewise, EAM in­
cludes the managerial activities to implement, maintain, and purpose­
fully design an organization’sEA, wherein EA describes the fundamental
structures of an organization’s current and future state, including its
capabilities and resources (Aier et al., 2011; Lapalme et al., 2016).
EAM processes can be divided into several clusters. First, activities
such as EA documentation, EA programming, and EA planning aim to
describe an organization’s resources, set the standards and guidelines to
migrate to the future state, and provide a roadmap to migrate to the
future state. Second, activities like EA implementation, EA support and
communication, and EA governance orchestrate the actual imple­
mentation of EA. Third, EA stakeholder participation entails involving
EA stakeholders, including IT and business managers, in decision-
making (Schmidt & Buxmann, 2011). Hence, EA stakeholder partici­
pation is essential in making timely and market-oriented EA develop­
ment decisions based on business managers’ insights on environmental
dynamics (Barreto, 2010).
We argue that EAM is a dynamic managerial capability that co­
ordinates the purposeful transformation from a current state to a future
state by renewing or reconfiguring organizations’ resources and capa­
bilities captured in its EA (van de Wetering, 2021). Therefore, we define
EAM as “a set of processes that (1) manages to leverage EA resources to
develop EA, and (2) to guide the continuous reconfiguration and
renewal of resources to transform an organization’s EA to new resource
configurations, to adapt to or induce market change” (Pattij, Van de
Wetering, & Kusters, 2020). Grounded in empirical research on dynamic
managerial capabilities, EA, and EAM, we argue that EAM directly im­
proves strategic IT alignment and technical IT capabilities (Abraham,
Aier, Labusch, & Winter, 2013; Aier et al., 2011; Queiroz et al., 2018).
M. Pattij et al.

--- PAGE 3 ---
Digital Business 2 (2022) 100036
3
2.2. Technical IT capabilities
Among an organization’s resources, IT-based resources are consid­
ered essential in responding to market change (Venkatraman, Hender­
son, & Oldach, 1993). IT capabilities allow organizations to effectively
mobilize these IT-based resources in combination with the organiza­
tion’s other resources and capabilities (Bharadwaj, 2000). Although past
research reveals differences in the taxonomy, it is generally accepted
that IT capabilities comprise a technical and a human dimension (Kim,
Shin, Kim, & Lee, 2011; Yoon, 2011). The technical dimensions often
refer to the flexibility to reconfigure the IT infrastructure with other
capabilities and resources. IT flexibility can be captured in the dimen­
sion of modularity and integration (Byrd & Turner, 2000). Modularity
refers to easily adding, modifying, or adjusting IT infrastructural com­
ponents without a significant overall effect on the IT landscape. Inte­
gration comprises connectivity and compatibility. Connectivity refers to
the IT component’s ability to easily make network connections or extent
existing network connections to other IT resources inside and outside
the organization’s boundaries. Compatibility focuses on how the IT in­
frastructure’s components are compatible with other IT hardware re­
sources (Byrd & Turner, 2000; Tallon & Pinsonneault, 2011).
Additionally, research has identified the importance of investing in
developing IT personnel to face today’s business environment. Similar to
Tallon’s (2008) conceptualization of technical IT capabilities, this
research considers the ability of IT personnel to adapt to infrastructural
changes. IT skills adaptability refers to IT personnel’s speed and dex­
terity to learn and apply IT skills, such as different programming
methodologies and IT platforms (Tallon, 2008).
Technical IT capabilities are also closely related to the creation of
digital options. Digital options refer to using IT-related capabilities in an
organization’s strategic choices, including digitized work processes and
knowledge systems. (Sambamurthy, Bharadwaj, & Grover, 2003).
Furthermore, previous research has revealed that organizations with
exceptional technical IT resources, knowledge, and skills are more likely
to evolve their ability to leverage novel digital technologies to enable
their digitaltransformations. Organizations possessingtheseexceptional
technical IT capabilities are more capable to digitalize their business
processes that facilitate product offerings and customer services. In
addition, exceptional technical IT capabilities allow organizations to
seize opportunities in the fast-growing digital marketplace faster than
competitors (Nwankpa & Roumani, 2016).
2.3. Strategic IT alignment
The concept of alignment or fit refers to the cohesion of two variables
(Venkatraman, 1989). In IT literature, strategic IT alignment refers to
the cohesion between an organization’s business and IT/IS strategy
(Chan, 1997; Chan & Reich, 2007). Researchers distinguish alignment as
a process and alignment as a state. The first school considers alignment a
continuous activity to align business, and IT/IS (Karpovsky & Galliers,
2015; Venkatraman et al.,1993). The second school considers alignment
as an outcome or a state. In contrast to the process view, this school of
researchers focuses on the extent to which an organization realizes
alignment of IT/IS with, for example, its business strategies (Chan,
1997). Further analysis of existing literature on management informa­
tion systems reveals several dimensions of alignment. These dimensions
include intellectual, structural, social, and cultural alignment (Chan &
Reich, 2007). This research focuses on EAM as a capability to support
the continuous planning and executing of reconfiguring an organiza­
tion’s resources based on its EA. Hence, strategic IT alignment refers to
the intellectual dimension of alignment. Furthermore, intellectual
alignment refers to how the IT strategies and plans are aligned with the
strategy and plans of the business (Chan & Reich, 2007; Reich & Ben­
basat, 1996).
More recent literature on the alignment of business and IT also fo­
cuses on alignment in relation to digitalization. Nowadays, digital
innovations emerge at a rapid pace. This leads to an increasing number
of organizations that adopt these innovations to enable a digitalization-
driven strategy. Digital strategies also have an impact on the concept of
strategic IT alignment. In contrast to more ‘traditional’ strategies, the
lines between business and IT are blurring, and new challenges emerge,
such as pursuing new forms of collaboration between business and IT
(Legner et al., 2017; Yeow et al., 2018).
3. Research model and expectations
Although EAM has been recognized as a discipline to support orga­
nizational change, organizations face several challenges in fully utilizing
the potential of EA. For example, Löhe and Legner (2014) argue that
EAM is seen as a distinct management approach and lacks the necessary
integration with an organization’s IT management. Furthermore,
research reveals several approaches to EAM, including traditional ap­
proaches where EAM follows a formal step-by-step process with
continuous attention to EA, informal processes with attention to EA
during business change, and approaches without a process and attention
to EA when needed (Kotusev, Singh, & Storey, 2015). EAM has been
linked to several benefits, including strategic IT alignment and IT ca­
pabilities, in previous empirical research despite these challenges and
different perspectives (Abraham et al., 2012; Aier et al., 2011; Lux et al.,
2010; Pattij et al., 2020). As depicted in Fig. 1, the research model shows
the positive effect of different configurations of EAM components on
strategic IT alignment and technical IT capabilities.
Previous research has shown that the individual EAM processes can
be considered stand-alone components that make up the EAM practice
(Aier et al., 2011; Schmidt & Buxmann, 2011). For example, research by
Aier et al. (Aier et al., 2011) identified several clusters of such in­
gredients. Their results imply that these ingredients do not necessarily
have to be part of an integral EAM process. In addition, Schmidt and
Buxmann (2011) found that tasks associated to the EAM components are
not consistently used and prioritized within different organizations. An
overview of relevant components used in this research, including a brief
explanation given by Schmidt and Buxmann (2011), is presented in
Table 1.
In Summary, existing research implies that there is no one-size-fits-
all EAM approach, and multiple combinations of components lead to
several approaches to EAM. Hence, as illustrated in the Venn diagram
shown in Fig. 1, we present the following core proposition.
Multiple configurations of EAM components lead to the presence of
strategic IT alignment and technical IT capabilities.
This research explores these configurations and includes organiza­
tions’ characteristics, size, and age. The proceeding of this section
further explains the research model as depicted in Fig. 1.
3.1. Enterprise architecture management and technical IT capabilities
Extant literature indicates that the architecture of an organization’s
IT landscape largely determines the technical dimension of IT capabil­
ities. However, since EA is simply a set of artifacts, EA management
processes are required to fully benefit from an EA practice (Foorthuis,
van Steenbergen, Brinkkemper, & Bruls, 2016). Essential managerial
dynamic capabilities processes are search, selection, and configuration
to modify or create organizational resources. Search and selection
concern the process of actively searching for solutions to a specific
problem and selecting the solution that fits best with the business
strategy. This process of searching and selecting also includes aligning
with relevant stakeholders and involving them in decision-making.
Configuration focuses on how to implement or acquire the selected so­
lution (Helfat et al., 2007; Zott, 2011). EAM processes, such as EA
stakeholder participation, and EA planning could contribute to search
and select processes. For example, enterprise architects could develop
M. Pattij et al.

--- PAGE 4 ---
Digital Business 2 (2022) 100036
4
target architectures based on cloud computing solutions to reduce costs
and improve IT flexibility (Luo, Zhang, Li, Bose, & Chung, 2018). The
involvement of EA stakeholders, such as CIOs could improve the man­
agement commitment to the proposed solution and facilitate decision-
making. EA implementation enables the configuration of organization
resources. Furthermore, an (cloud) architecture containing standardized
interfaces and modular designs developed by EA programming pro­
cesses is suggested to improve an organization’s ability to reconfigure its
IT and IS components (Rai & Tang, 2010).
Additionally, also architectural insights shared by the EA commu­
nication & support function could improve technical IT capabilities. For
example, research has found evidence that the degree to which the or­
ganization understands its architectural descriptions of the current and
future state and the extent to which projects comply to its organization’s
EA has a positive effect on direct benefits, such as a flexible IT landscape
(Foorthuis et al., 2016). Furthermore, clear EA roadmaps and proper
involvement of EA stakeholders can contribute to human IT resource’s
IT capabilities. First, standardization can reduce skills variation,
simplify troubleshooting, and focus on competence development
(Tamm, Seddon, Shanks, & Reynolds, 2011). Second, a clear architec­
tural roadmap can support CIOs and IT managers in aligning skills
development with future IT developments (Iyamu & Mphahlele, 2014;
Schmidt & Buxmann, 2011).
3.2. Enterprise architecture management and strategic IT alignment
Many organizations have indicated that their EAM practice’s main
goal is to improve aligning business and IT (Winter et al., 2010). How­
ever, an in-depth look at the alignment process is required to understand
whether this objective is achieved. Strategic IT alignment can be seen as
a continuous process of aligning the business and IT domains (Venka­
traman et al., 1993). Yeow et al. (2018) took the DCV as a theoretical
lens to investigate the alignment process in organizations that move
toward a digital strategy. The DCV comprises sensing, seizing, and
transforming capacities (Teece, 2014). According to Yeow et al. (2018),
these capacities support the continuous change of an organization’s
resources, routines, products, and services and, therefore, lead to a new
state of alignment wherein misalignment decreases (Yeow et al., 2018).
For example, seizing concerns the utilization of renewed business stra­
tegies derived from opportunities identified as part of the sensing ca­
pacity. Seizing includes activities such as designing, selecting options,
and getting commitment (Teece, Peteraf, & Leih, 2016; Yeow et al.,
2018). While EA artifacts captures these perspectives in the different
architectural layers, EA processes like EA planning and EA stakeholder
participation aims to ensure that business and IT stakeholders develop
target architectures in line with the renewed business strategy (Schmidt
& Buxmann, 2011). The transforming capacity refers to the continuous
adjustments to an organization’s strategy. Hence, resources must be
reconfigured or renewed to comply with the desired architectural state
(Abraham et al., 2012; Van de Wetering, Kurnia, & Kotusev, 2020).
However, we argue that alignment is not a one-way effort where IT
simply follows the business strategy, but also includes aspects like IT
involvement in strategy development, a common understanding be­
tween business and IT, business/IT partnerships, and strategically
prioritized IT projects. These aspects are key enablers of the alignment
process (Luftman & Brier, 1999). Involving the right EA stakeholder,
having up-to-dateand easy-to-access EA documentation, and developing
target architectures in line with the business strategies can facilitate
these aspects.
3.3. The influence of firm size and age
Organizational benefits as a result of an organization’s EA functions
are affected by contextual factors (Niemi & Pekkola, 2020). This
research also includes firmsizeand ageas causalconditions toexplain IT
capabilities and strategic IT alignment.
Fig. 1. Conceptual Research Model.
Table 1
EAM components.
EAM component Description
EA documentation “The process of capturing and describing the existing EA
using architectural descriptions” (Schmidt & Buxmann,
2011, p. 174)
EA planning “Agoal-oriented process ofdeveloping descriptionsofthe
target architecture based on global and long-term
requirements” (Schmidt & Buxmann, 2011, p. 174)
EA programming “The process of setting architecture rules and standards
to be obeyed by change projects” (Schmidt & Buxmann,
2011, p. 174)
EA implementation “The initiation and/or execution of system changes
through the EAM function itself” (Schmidt & Buxmann,
2011, p. 174)
EA Communication &
Support
“The extent of communication and support efforts
undertaken by the EAM function” (Schmidt & Buxmann,
2011, p. 174)
EA Governance “The degree to which EA-related decisions and guidelines
bind to the organization and may be enacted based on
formal processes” (Schmidt & Buxmann, 2011, p. 175)
EA Stakeholder
Participation
“The extent to which stakeholders are involved in EAM
decision making” (Schmidt & Buxmann, 2011, p. 175)
M. Pattij et al.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Digital Business 2 (2022) 100036
5
First, the size of an organization potentially has an impact on the
quantity of EA artifacts. Larger organizations tend to create more arti­
facts, such as, for example, architectural roadmaps (Kotusev, 2019).
Furthermore, larger companies are potentially more complex as their IT
landscape contains more systems. Additionally, they have a larger EA
stakeholder group to manage (Ross, Weill, & Robertson, 2006). Second,
organizational learning is a key success factor for a successful EAM
practice. Therefore, older organizations could reach higher levels of
EAM maturity as they had more time to develop their EAM practice
(Ross et al., 2006).
4. Methodology
4.1. Data collection
A survey was developed and distributed among key EA stakeholders
to collect data. After creating the initial version, the complete survey
was reviewed by two academics involved in research on information
management and EA. Additionally, the survey was pretested by asking
two EA stakeholders to complete the survey and provide feedback on the
survey’s consistency, clarity, and content. Since no sampling frame was
available, a quota sampling approach based on industrial categories
from previous research was used to improve generalizability (Aier et al.,
2011; Foorthuis et al., 2016). The refined version of the survey was
made available online. A personal invitation to complete the survey was
sent to 481 professionals. Removing the incomplete and not usable re­
sponses resulted in 110 useful responses, leading to a response rate of
23%. Table 2 further elaborates on the sample characteristics.
4.2. Fuzzy-set qualitative comparative analysis
In the research field that focuses on non-linear behavior and equi­
finality, two types of logic have been described to explain causality:
sufficient logic and necessity logic. Sufficient logic and necessity logic
must be considered when explaining a particular effect. For instance, a
condition might be necessary, but as a single condition not sufficient to
explain a certain effect (Dul, 2016). This logic also suggests that
different sufficient combinations of conditions can explain a cause (Fiss,
2011).
Hence, the logic of sufficiency allows researchers to identify con­
figurations of conditions required to explain an effect. Furthermore, the
logic of necessity will enable researchers to identify the necessary con­
ditions to explain an effect (Richter, Schubring, Hauff, Ringle, & Sar­
stedt, 2020). FsQCA is a suitable method to identify necessary and
sufficient conditions (Ragin, 2008; Vis & Dul, 2018). The method is a
case-oriented set-theoretic approach that uses truth table logic to iden­
tify configurations of conditions within cases that reveal a similar
outcome (Ragin, 2008). Compared to crisp-set logic, wherein all
conditions are represented as dichotomous variables; fuzzy set logic uses
membership scores based on qualitative anchorpoints (Skaaning, 2011).
Likert scales provide these qualitative anchors and are suitable for
calibration in fsQCA (Misangyi et al., 2016; Park, El Sawy, & Fiss, 2017).
We used fsQCA v3.1 to explore and unravel how EAM leads to strategic
IT alignment and technical IT capabilities (Ragin & Davey, 2016).
4.3. Measures
All the survey items were measured on a seven-point Likert scale.
Respondents were asked to what extent they disagreed or agreed with
statements about the concepts used in the research model. The Likert
scale ran from 1 (Strongly Disagree) to 7 (Strongly Agree). The survey
items and descriptive statistics are added to Appendix A.
4.3.1. Enterprise architecture management
We adoted measures from Schmidt and Buxmann (2011) who
developed a set of 28 items to measure the EAM components EA docu­
mentation, EA planning, EA programming, EA implementation, EA
communication & support, EA governance, and EA stakeholder partic­
ipation. Each of the components was measured by four items.
4.3.2. Technical IT capabilities
Items from Tallon (2008) were adopted to measure the IT in­
frastructure’s flexibility in terms of software modularity, hardware
compatibility, and network connectivity. Additionally, we measured the
IT personnel’s skills adaptability as a vital ingredient of an organiza­
tion’s physical IT resources (Tallon, 2008). Each aspect of the technical
IT capabilities construct was measured with four survey items.
4.3.3. Strategic IT alignment
Eight measures from Wu, Straub, and Liang (2015) were adopted to
measure an organization’s orientation toward the strategical dimensions
product, market, and quality. Furthermore, eight counterpart items
measured the implemented IT strategy toward these dimensions.
Alignment can be constructed as the interaction between a business
strategy-oriented item and its IT strategy counterpart. A ‘HIGH-HIGH’
combination leads to a higher degree of alignment than a ‘LOW-LOW’
combination. This method includes the catalyzing effect of an advanced
IT/IS infrastructural implementation on an organization’s business
strategy (Chan, 1997). Hence, we computed strategic IT alignment as
the product of the business strategy-oriented and their IT counterpart
items.
4.4. Fuzzy set calibration
The first step of fsQCA analysis is calibrating the outcome and the
causal conditions to determine their fuzzy set membership scores. We
applied the direct method for calibration and performed this procedure
using the fsQCA v3.0 software. The calibration function requires three
numeric values to transform an interval or ratio scale into fuzzy sets: the
threshold for full membership (0.95), the cross-over point (0.50), and
the threshold for full non-membership (0.05) (Ragin, 2008). We used the
qualitative anchors of our seven-point Likert scale. (1 = “Strongly
Disagree”, 7 = “Strongly Agree”) for calibration. Values >6 were
assigned as full membership threshold and values <2 as full non-
membership threshold. The center value of the scale (4 = “Neither
Disagree, nor Agree”) was set as the cross-over point (Misangyi et al.,
2016; Park et al., 2017). Before calibrating strategic IT alignment, the
measures were divided by seven as they were the product of two items
measured on a seven-point Likert scale.
Organizational size and age were coded as dichotomous crisp-sets.
Organizations with a size of 250 or less employees (SMEs) were reco­
ded to 0 and with >250 employees (large companies) to 1. For age,
organizations that were 10 years old or less (non-mature) were recoded
to 0 and organizations older than 10 years (mature) to 1.
Table 2
Sample characteristics.
Frequency Percentage
Industry Accountancy, banking, and finance 23 20.9%
Information technology 18 16.4%
Energy and utilities 13 11.8%
Healthcare 12 10.9%
Transport and logistics 12 10.9%
Others 32 29.1%
Position IT Architect 41 37.3%
Business Architect 11 10.0%
IT Manager 17 15.5%
Business / Management Consultant 24 21.8%
IT / Software Consultant 15 13.6%
Business Manager 2 1.8%
Size <100 employees 13 11.8%
Between 100 and 1000 employees 22 20.0%
>1000 employees 75 68.2%
M. Pattij et al.

--- PAGE 6 ---
Digital Business 2 (2022) 100036
6
4.5. Validity and reliability
The measurement model’s latent variables used as causal conditions
and outcome variables were assessed for construct reliability, discrimi­
nant validity, and convergent validity (Hair et al., 2016). The results are
shown in Table 3. Construct reliability was evaluated based on the
composition reliability (CR) and Cronbach α values. The constructs are
considered reliable when these values exceed the 0.7 threshold. All CR
and Cronbach α values exceed this threshold. However, Cronbach α and
CR values exceeding 0.95 could also be problematic as these values
could indicate redundant items. All our CR and Cronbach α remain
within the lower and upper thresholds, suggesting our constructs are
reliable. The average value extracted (AVE) was calculated to assess
convergent validity. All measures exceeded 0.5, indicating that the
constructs explain most of its indicators’ variance.
A confirmatory factor analysis was performed to assess how the in­
dividual survey items represent the latent variables these items repre­
sent. The item loadings are added to the table presented in Appendix A.
Some of the item loadings for technical IT capabilities are less than the
recommended threshold of 0.700. However, items should only be
removed if thisleads to increasedCR values oritem loadings are ≤0.400.
Since this is not the case for the items mentioned, these items were
retained (Hair et al., 2016).
To improve the items’ content validity, empirically validated mea­
sures were adopted from previous research. Furthermore, feedback from
pre-testing and peer-reviewing was used to ensure that the individual
items measured what they were supposed to measure.
We performed Harman’s single factor test to control for common
method bias (CMB). The analysis showed that no single factor attributes
to the majority of the variance, thus confirming our sample is not
affected by CMB (Podsakoff, MacKenzie, Lee, & Podsakoff, 2003).
5. Fuzzy-set qualitative comparative analysis results
This research followed the approach described by Ragin (2008), and
Schneider and Wagemann (2012) to identify necessary conditions and
sufficient configurations for the outcomes of technical IT capabilities
and strategic IT alignment.
5.1. Necessary conditions for technical IT capabilities and strategic IT
alignment
First, we conducted a necessary condition test to identify if the
presence and absence of one or more conditions are necessary for the
outcome technical IT capabilities. A condition is considered necessary if
the outcome’s fuzzy-set scores are consistently less than, or equal to
their corresponding condition’s fuzzy-set scores. As shown in Table 4,
the necessary condition test produces consistency and coverage scores
for the relation between each condition and the outcome. A consistency
value close to the maximum value of 1.0 implies the necessity of a
specific condition. The commonly accepted bottom threshold of 0.9
indicated that conditions with a consistency score between 0.9 and 1.0
are considered necessary (Ragin, 2008; Schneider & Wagemann, 2012).
The highest consistency score of 0.913 was found for the fuzzy-set
relationship between EA implementation and technical IT capabilities.
Furthermore, this score is the only score that exceeds the threshold. The
relatively high coverage value of 0.75 and a visual assessment of the XY
plot indicate that the necessary condition EA implementation is non-
trivial or relevant (Schneider & Wagemann, 2012, pp. 144–147).
Second, we repeated the same analysis for the outcome of strategic IT
alignment. As shown in Fig. 2, we observed that EA implementation,
similarly to technical IT capabilities demonstrates the highest consis­
tency score. However, in contrast to the necessity analysis for the
outcome technical IT capabilities, the consistency value (0.894) is lower
than the threshold value. Hence necessity is not present.
A sensitivity analysis described by Park et al. (2017) was performed
to check the robustness of the results under different calibrations. After
calibrating 7 as the full membership threshold, values <2 as the full non-
membership threshold, and 4 as the cross-over point, the necessary
condition analysis procedure was executed again. The results of this
robustness check led to the same conclusion.
5.1.1. Sufficient solutions for technical IT capabilities and strategic IT
capabilities
We used fsQCA to identify sufficient configurations of conditional
conditions that lead to the presence of the outcomes technical IT
Table 3
Reliability and validity.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Causal Conditions
EA Management
1. Planning 0.849
2. Communication & Support 0.703 0.855
3. Documentation 0.666 0.764 0.833
4. Governance 0.611 0.801 0.696 0.874
5. Implementation 0.580 0.693 0.661 0.699 0.831
6. Stakeholder Participation 0.581 0.783 0.655 0.791 0.653 0.906
7. Programming 0.692 0.782 0.749 0.778 0.778 0.703 0.824
Outcomes
8. Technical IT capabilities 0.401 0.542 0.469 0.551 0.634 0.463 0.521 0.722
9. Strategic IT Alignment 0.355 0.499 0.423 0.556 0.508 0.401 0.468 0.707 0.828
AVE 0.722 0.731 0.694 0.764 0.691 0.821 0.679 0.522 0.686
CR 0.912 0.916 0.900 0.928 0.899 0.948 0.894 0.945 0.946
Cronbach α 0.872 0.877 0.851 0.897 0.850 0.927 0.841 0.938 0.934
Table 4
Analysis of necessary conditions.
Technical IT Capabilities Strategic IT Alignment
Consistency Coverage Consistency Coverage
EA Documentation 0.759 0.806 0.733 0.424
EA Planning 0.840 0.736 0.831 0.405
EA Programming 0.862 0.778 0.840 0.391
EA Implementation 0.913 0.758 0.894 0.387
EA Communication &
Support
0.830 0.796 0.799 0.403
EA Governance 0.706 0.853 0.683 0.394
EA Stakeholder
Participation
0.746 0.787 0.718 0.402
Large Company (non-
SMEs)
0.874 0.586 0.893 0.372
Mature Company (>10
year)
0.825 0.596 0.853 0.355
M. Pattij et al.

--- PAGE 7 ---
Digital Business 2 (2022) 100036
7
capabilities and strategic IT alignment. The EAM components, organi­
zational size, and maturity were included as conditions in the fsQCA
analysis. Based on these conditions, the truth tables for both the out­
comes technical IT capabilities and strategic IT alignments were created.
Following the guidelines of Ragin (2008), and Schneider and Wagemann
(2012), the frequency threshold was set to two. This means only com­
binations of conditions with two empirical observations were selected
for further analysis. Additionally, the recommended consistency
threshold of 0.85 was used to select combinations of conditions in the
truth table as sufficient for the outcomes. We also assessed the propor­
tional reduction in inconsistency (PRI) measures to identify if condition
X is a subset of outcome Y and not of the negated ~Y outcome. Values
≤0.5 indicate significant inconsistency; hence, we only set the outcome
for rows with a PRI consistency score > 0.5 to one for the logical min­
imalization procedure (Pappas & Woodside, 2021; Ragin, 2008;
Schneider & Wagemann, 2012). The truth tables used as input for
analysis are shown in Appendix B – Truth Tables.
Next, we applied fsQCA’s Quine-McCluskey Boolean minimization
procedure. The procedure produces a complex, intermediate, and
parsimonious solution based on how logical remainders are treated.
Logical remainders refer to rows in the truth table for which not enough
empirical evidence is at hand. Complex solutions make no assumptions
about logical remainders. This can lead to many solutions that make the
interpretation difficult and impractical. Parsimonious solutions include
all remainders and lead to identifying the core conditions. Although this
procedure most likely leads to a limited number of short solutions, all
theoretical implausible assumptions on logical remainders are also
made. The procedure to produce the intermediate solution strikes a
balance between the two other solutions and only includes plausible
theoretical assumptions. This results in a solution that is more complex
than the parsimonious solution and less complex than the complex so­
lution. Therefore, intermediate solutions are particularly suitable for the
theoretical interpretation of the results (Pappas & Woodside, 2021;
Ragin, 2008; Schneider & Wagemann, 2012). We used the intermediate
solution for identifying sufficient solutions and the parsimonious solu­
tion to identify the core conditions. The final solutions, including the
different configurations of conditions to explain technical IT capabilities
and strategic IT alignment, are presented in Table 5.
5.1.2. Configuration for technical IT capabilities
The final solution for the outcome technical IT capabilities resulted
in five configurations. All configurations contain the condition EA
implementation and EA programming. The conditions EA Implementa­
tion*EA programming are, as a pair, the core conditions for the outcome
technical IT capabilities. Identifying EA implementation as one of the
core conditions supports our earlier findings identifying EA imple­
mentation as a necessary condition for technical IT capabilities. The
results also reveal the importance of each configuration individually.
Configurations with high raw consistency scores are empirically more
relevant than configurations with low raw consistency scores (Schneider
& Wagemann,2012). Scenariostwo, three, four, and five show relatively
high consistency scores compared to scenario one. These empirically
more relevant configurations do not contain any absent conditions. In
configurations two and three all EAM-related conditions are present.
The presence or absence of EA governance does not influence the
outcome in scenario four. Likewise, the presence or absence of EA
documentation does not affect the outcome in configuration five.
Configuration one shows three conditions that are absent and two
conditions that can both be absent or present.
5.1.3. Configurations for strategic IT alignment
Five configurations were identified to explain the outcome strategic
IT alignment. The core conditions for strategic IT alignment are the pairs
EA programming*large organization and EA implementation*large or­
ganization. Compared to configurations one and two, configurations
three, four, and five are empirically more relevant. Configuration three
Fig. 2. XY plot necessity.
M. Pattij et al.

--- PAGE 8 ---
Digital Business 2 (2022) 100036
8
shows the presence of all conditions. The presence or absence of EA
governance does not affect the outcome in configuration four. In
configuration five, the presence or absence of EA documentation does
not influence the outcome. Similarly, to the outcome IT capabilities,
configurations one and two contain conditions that can be both absent
or present or are absent. In contrast to the outcome technical IT capa­
bilities, an organization’s size is part of the core conditions. The con­
figurations for both outcomes show a mix of the presence or does not
matter for the condition of organizational maturity. In the discussion
and conclusion section we will further reflect on the findings of our
fsQCA analysis.
6. Discussion and conclusion
Grounded in the DCV, EAM was conceptualized as a specific dynamic
management capability and a research model was developed based on
this conceptualization. We used fsQCA to explore the phenomenon of
equifinality, and research identified several configurations of EAM
components that lead to the presence of technical IT capabilities and
strategic IT alignment. The results of this research are consistent with
existing work that suggests that there is no one-size-fits-all EAM
approach (Ahlemann et al., 2020; Aier et al., 2011). In the remainder of
the discussion and conclusion section the results and their implications
on theory and suggestions for future research are discussed, the impli­
cations for practice are described, limitations of this research are
addressed, and concluding notes are shared.
6.1. Implications for theory and suggestions for future research
Possessing digital options itself is not a guarantee for creating suc­
cessful digital opportunities. Appropriate capabilities are required to
leverage these options as part of a successful digital transformation
(Kahre, Hoffmann, & Ahlemann, 2017; Nwankpa & Roumani, 2016).
Yeow et al. (2018) emphasize the importance of selecting the appro­
priate capabilities (i.e., EAM) to continuously align the organization’s
resources with its business strategy to guide a digital transformation. In
addition, EAM can facilitate the reconfiguration of IT resources and lead
to digital transformation supporting IT capabilities (Nwankpa & Rou­
mani, 2016; Schmidt & Buxmann, 2011) Hence, based on the
conceptualization of EAM as a dynamic capability, we propose that
different configurations of EAM dimensions advance the possibilities for
digital strategies.
6.1.1. Discussion of configurations
The conceptualization of EAM as a dynamic capability enabled us to
use the DCV as a rigorous theoretical framework to interpret the fsQCA
results. The early conceptualization of Teece et al.’s (1997) dynamic
capabilities builds upon the RBV and implies idiosyncratic configura­
tions of resources and capabilities that demonstrate the VRIN attribute.
On the contrary, more recent research on dynamic capabilities has
emphasized the existence of commonalities and best practices in capa­
bility configurations (Barreto, 2010). The identification of EA imple­
mentation as a necessary condition and the core condition pair EA
implementation*EA programming for the presence of technical IT ca­
pabilities, and the core conditions pairs EA programming*large orga­
nization and EA planning*large organization strategic IT alignment
supports this more recent view on dynamic capabilities and reveals a
certain level of “best-practice” combinations.
Consistent with Schmidt and Buxmann (2011), our fsQCA results
emphasize the importance of implementing EA driven by the EAM
function to realize strong technical IT capabilities. These implementa­
tions often concern shared facets, such as general systems consolida­
tions,shared infrastructuralcomponents,and reusable businessservices.
These facets can be implemented as part of dedicated non-business
driven projects (Schmidt & Buxmann, 2011; Shanks, Gloet, Asadi
Someh, Frampton, & Tamm, 2018) or as part of business-driven projects
that comply with specific EAM goals (Foorthuis et al., 2016; Shanks
et al.,2018; Van Der Raadt, Bonnet, Schouten, & Van Vliet, 2010). While
the research identified that the implementation of EA through business-
driven as well as non-business driven (i.e., IT-driven) projects both have
a significant contribution to benefits such as improved IT systems and
platforms (Shanks et al., 2018), particularly business-driven projects
face the risk that shared facets are not adequately addressed. In contrast,
dedicated non-business-driven EA implementation projects can lead to
strong technical IT capabilities by accelerating the implementation of
these shared facets (Schmidt & Buxmann, 2011). The fsQCA results
support this view and imply that EA implementation is necessary to
obtain strong technical IT capabilities and, therefore, supports the
Table 5
EAM configurations.
For each configuration the table shows if a particular condition must be present ( ), absent ( ), or it
does not matter (<blank>) if the condition is present or absent. The core conditions are marked by a
combination of one or more large black dots in a specific configuration.
M. Pattij et al.

--- PAGE 9 ---
Digital Business 2 (2022) 100036
9
efficient implementation of digital strategies. Furthermore, the core-
condition pair EA implementation*EA programming implies the rele­
vance of clear standards and guidelines to guide the EA implementa­
tions. Although researchers discuss approaches, such as projects start
architectures, to facilitate the compliance of business-driven projects to
EAM goals, the exact mechanisms of how these projects contribute to EA
implementation remain unclear (Foorthuis et al., 2016). The increasing
application of agile methods, such as scrum, could be a reason for
concern since research exposes a lack of attention to architecture in
these methods (Van Waardenburg & Van Vliet, 2013).
EA implementation is also present in each configuration for the
outcome strategic IT alignment. However, the necessary condition
analysis indicates that EA implementation is not a necessary condition
for strategic IT alignment. The core conditions provide some valuable
insights to unravel further how EAM supports strategic IT alignment.
First, the combination of EA planning and organizational size (i.e., large
companies) was identified as a core condition. Second, the results
revealed a combination of EA programming and size as core conditions
for business IT alignment. Extant literature suggests that EA/EAM is of
interest to larger organizations, assuming these types of organizations
demonstrate more complex organizational structures, processes, and IT/
IS systems (Ahlemann et al., 2020; Jonkers et al., 2006; Schmidt &
Buxmann, 2011). These organizational properties and the need to
manage their complexity are the basis of the origination of EA (Zach­
man, 1987).
In contrast to the outcome technical IT capabilities, the inclusion of
size in both core conditions supports the assumption that especially
large organizations pursuing a high level of strategic IT alignment will
benefit from their EAM efforts. EA planning includes describing the
organization’s desired architectural state and a roadmap, including
timelines and different scenarios to reach this desired state (Schmidt &
Buxmann, 2011). Essentially, these desired states reflect the required
architecture to fulfill business requirements. This research also corre­
sponds to the importance of planning practices as proposed by Nikpay,
Ahmad, Rouhani, Naz, & Shamshirband, 2017, wherein the authors
emphasize the importance of the practices to align business re­
quirements with IT requirements. Additionally, the results imply that
standards and guidelines developed in the EA programming process play
an important role in aligning business and IT through an EAM function.
Standards and guidelines that reflect business strategies, can reduce
unwanted variation in the IT landscape, and simplify closing the gap
between business and IT. This research’s results are consistent with Boh
and Yellin (2007), who suggest that standards and guidelines can also
positively affect strategic IT alignment.
The fsQCA results also give some interesting insights into EA docu­
mentation and governance. First, EA documentation is present in most
empirical important configurations for the outcomes technical IT capa­
bilities and strategic IT alignment. This aligns with the document-driven
origin of EA to manage organizational complexity (Zachman, 1987).
However, other empirical important configurations for the outcomes
technical IT capabilities and strategic IT alignment imply that EA
documentation is irrelevant to demonstrating the outcomes. Addition­
ally, empiricalless important configurationseven show anabsence of EA
documentation. The fact that merely EA documentation, or artifacts do
not contribute to the EAM goals on their own could provide a potential
explanation (Schmidt & Buxmann, 2011). In addition, research on the
individual artifacts’ usefulness reveals that only a limited subset of the
prescribed architectural artifacts are deemed useful (Kotusev, 2019).
Hence, an extensive EA documentation process might also facilitate the
production of irrelevant documents. Future research could focus on the
exact mechanisms of how EA artifacts contribute to the EAM goals and
how this more traditional view of EA as an extensive set of EA artifacts
relates to other paradigms on EA artifacts, such as dynamical architec­
ture that embraces just enough, just in time principle (van den Berg,
Luijpers, van Steenbergen and Wagter, 2005). Second, empirically
relevant configurations reveal EA governance’s presence in sufficient
configurations for technical IT capabilities and strategic IT alignment
outcomes. These results support the established body of knowledge that
emphasizes EA governance structures’ importance to fully benefit from
an EA practice (Foorthuis et al., 2016; Schmidt & Buxmann, 2011;
Shanks et al., 2018). However, our results also reveal empirical relevant,
and sufficient configuration for both outcomes wherein the absence or
presence of EA governance does not influence the outcome.
Furthermore, EA governance is absent in less relevant empirical
sufficient configurations for both outcomes. While our conceptualiza­
tion of EA governance mainly focuses on centralized review and audit­
ing processes to enforce conformance to architectural plans and
compliance to standards and guidelines, research also regards EA
governance as a multi-faceted capability comprising multiple gover­
nance mechanisms (Boh & Yellin, 2007). For example, conformance to
architectural plans and compliance with standards and guidelines could
also be achieved by assigning clear responsibilities at the organization’s
lowest possible level (van den Berg et al., 2005). Furthermore, an or­
ganization’s business ecosystem is playing an increasing role in the
performance of an organization and its digital transformation. Re­
searchers argue that current conceptualizations of EAM can no longer
ignore the impact of organizations’ interdependencies. Particularly, the
role of EA governance has been discussed. Each organization is an
autonomous entity, making implementing central governance mecha­
nisms hard and maybe even impossible (Drews & Schirmer, 2014;
Wieringa, Engelsman, Gordijn, & Ionita, 2019). We argue that further
research is required to understand the mechanisms to establish EA
governance mechanisms in today’s digital business ecosystem and
development approaches, such as scrum driven by responsibilities at the
organization’s lowest possible level (Van Waardenburg & Van Vliet,
2013; van den Berg et al., 2005).
6.1.2. The evolution of enterprise architecture in practice and theory
Despite the contribution of our research to the existing theoretical
knowledge and practice, the field of EA and EAM is continuously
evolving in both theory and practice. Furthermore, digital strategies are
not only developed and implemented in branches that traditionally
depend on IT/IS, but also in, for example e-manufacturing where ma­
chines that used to operate stand-alone are increasingly integrated in an
the IT/IS landscape op manufacturers (Cheng & Bateman, 2008). We
argue that the results of this research contribute to the theoretical
foundation giving direction to the evolution process of EA and discuss
two recognizable movements in literature.
This research’s conceptualization perceives EAM as an incremental
dynamic capability to continuously make small adjustments to an or­
ganization’s resource base and a renewing dynamic capability to make
more drastic changes to its resource base. While these capabilities have
been suggested as beneficial in stable and dynamic environments, they
do not include changing how resources are reconfigured, or creating
new dynamic capabilities. These so-called regenerative dynamic capa­
bilities are suggested to help organizations to thrive in hyper-dynamic
environments. Additionally, such capabilities might even cross the
boundaries of an organization (Ambrosini, Bowman, & Collier, 2009).
However, the aspects remain underexposed in the existing literature and
are notaddressed incommonly used frameworkslike TOGAF. Therefore,
researchers call for a reconceptualization of EA and EAM to address
these relevant aspects for organizations operating in today’s digital
world (Drews & Schirmer, 2014; Korhonen, Lapalme, McDavid, & Gill,
2016; Mueller et al., 2013). Hence, future research should further
explore the role of EA and EAM in a hyper-volatile environment and
focus on the organization from a digital business-ecosystem perspective.
Another relevant topic is the evolution of (enterprise) architectural
thinking. Since the early days of EA, several paradigm shifts in archi­
tectural thinking have occurred. These paradigm shifts are, for example,
described by Wagter, Stovers, and Krijgsman (2015). They describe
three waves of architectural methods. First, the ‘framework-driven ar­
chitecture’ approach is characterized by filling frameworks that mainly
M. Pattij et al.

--- PAGE 10 ---
Digital Business 2 (2022) 100036
10
focus on managing an organization’s IT complexity. The Zachman
framework is one of the most well-known frameworks of this wave. The
second wave is called ‘process-driven architecture.’ This wave is char­
acterized by formalizing EA processes to develop and implement EA.
Currently, this is the predominant EA paradigm. This paradigm’s most
well-known and implemented framework is TOGAF (Kotusev, 2018).
However, Wagter et al. (Wagter et al., 2015) advocate the third wave of
architectural thinking. They call this wave ‘performance-driven archi­
tecture’. The main characteristics of this wave are coherence, holistic,
integral, recursion, causality, organic growth, and co-creation. While
our research is mainly focused on the currently predominant paradigm,
it also becomes evident that we are at the dawn of a significant paradigm
shift in architectural thinking.
6.2. Implications for practice
While academic research has revealed the added value of EA for an
organization, this research also emphasizes the importance of the
management processes to continuously develop and implement a digital
strategy supporting EA. When organizations implement EA to align
business and IT, or improve technical capabilities, investing in EAM is
essential to fully utilize the EA developed by enterprise architects.
However, EAM is not an activity that is limited to enterprise architects
and requires the participation of other stakeholders, varying from CIOs
to software developers. Furthermore, our fsQCA configurations could
help decision-makers to guide their EAM efforts. The results indicate the
importance of investing in non-business-driven projects to accelerate the
implementation of EA. Although such investments might not be bene­
ficial to business-driven projects directly, they are an important condi­
tion for creating a flexible IT infrastructure and support aligning
business and IT in the long run. These capabilities can be particularly
interesting for organizations implementing their digital strategy in a
turbulent environment as they lead to a more agile organization that is
better capable of responding to environmental changes (Tallon, 2008).
Additionally, our fsQCA results show that large organizations that
invest in an EAM practice to align business and IT should consider first
investing in the processes that facilitate the creation of architecture rules
and guidelines and the development of target architectures, including a
roadmap to implement this based on an organization’s long-term strat­
egy. Besides these core conditions, also the other EAM processes
included in this research require attention. However, multiple configu­
rations lead to the desired outcome. Hence, large organizations should
continuously develop their EAM practices and invest in EA and EAM
based on their current needs and/or shortcomings.
This research also suggests that EAM directly influences capabilities
(i.e., strategic IT alignment and technical IT capabilities) that, according
to existing literature, play a significant role in creating digital options or
supporting organizations in adopting a digital strategy. Hence, decision-
makers could use EAM as a management process to purposefully
reconfigure their organization’s resources to create a flexible IT infra­
structure and facilitate a tight alignment between business and IT. This
combination of capabilities provides a solid foundation to adopt a digital
strategy and take advantage of opportunities that novel and innovative
emerging technologies offer.
6.3. Limitations and future research
We also need to mention some limitations of our research. First, no
predefined sampling frame was available, and no random sampling
approach was used to collect data. Although a quota sampling approach
was applied to improve external validity, the data might not reflect the
total population as precisely as data collected using a random sampling
approach based on a predefined sample frame. Second, the dataset
contains responses from organizations that operate within the Benelux
area. Hence, factors such as, for example, the effect of cultural differ­
ences on an organization or local regulations and legislations could
differ per geographical area. This potentially influences the generaliz­
ability of the results to areas outside the Benelux. Third, the survey was
completed by a single respondent. These types of surveys could lead to
several forms of self-reporting bias (Podsakoff et al., 2003). Fourth, as
indicated in Table 2, the respondents have few business managers.
Although it was expected that the relevant EA stakeholders could judge
the organization’s EA activities, technical IT capabilities, and strategic
IT alignment, the perspective of the EA stakeholders (i.e., CEOs and
CFOs) that ‘receive’ the direct and indirect benefits of EAM could remain
underexposed. This could be particularly relevant for measuring stra­
tegic IT alignment as our measures focus on the extent to which IT
supports business goals. Last, fsQCA for data analysis provides an insight
into sufficient and necessary conditions within a group of cases. This
method offers a relatively new perspective on how EAM leads to bene­
ficial capabilities. However, like any method, also fsQCA has its limi­
tations, so it is recommended to use other methods complementary to
fsQCA (Schneider & Wagemann, 2009). For example, a case study could
be conducted to gain an in-depth understanding of why a specific
configuration led to the outcomes of strategic IT alignment and technical
IT capabilities.
6.4. Concluding notes
The DCV has provided a sound theoretical lens to conceptualize EAM
as a dynamic capability, focusing on orchestrating the continuous
renewal and reconfiguration of an organization’s resources and opera­
tional capabilities. The fsQCA analysis has proven beneficial in
exploring configurations of EAM conditions that lead to technical IT
capabilities and strategic IT alignment outcomes. Therefore, we
encourage approaching EA/EAM benefit realization from different an­
gles and promote using different methods, such as set-theoretic ap­
proaches, to unravel EA and EAM benefit realization further.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Appendix A. Survey items and descriptive statistics
Items Mean SD Loadings
Enterprise Architecture Management
EA Documentation
Our architectural descriptions reveal the major dependencies between business processes, applications, data and infrastructure components. 4.827 1.560 0.751
Our architectural descriptions are based on a common meta-model. 4.273 1.758 0.855
Architectural descriptions are stored within an integrated repository tool. 4.064 1.988 0.872
Our documentation of the Enterprise IT Architecture is updated continuously. 4.091 1.740 0.848
EA Planning
Architecture planning covers all relevant architectural domains (e.g., business, application, infrastructure and data architecture). 4.782 1.692 0.860
(continued on next page)
M. Pattij et al.

--- PAGE 11 ---
Digital Business 2 (2022) 100036
11
(continued)
Items Mean SD Loadings
Architecture planning is not restricted to certain segments of the overall IT landscape (e.g., loan applications). 5.009 1.745 0.846
Architecture planning often involves the application of systems engineering concepts ‘in the large’ (e.g., modularization, decoupling). 4.918 1.602 0.859
We frequently adjust architecture plans to better adapt them to changing conditions. 4.391 1.607 0.832
EA Programming
We make use of architecture principles to guide systems development and maintenance projects (e.g., service-orientation). 5.000 1.629 0.847
Our organization employs standard catalogues to restrict the use of IT components and technologies (e.g., DBMS, operating systems). 4.618 1.624 0.779
We utilize reference architectures to standardize the design of individual applications (e.g., Web Application Architecture). 4.691 1.622 0.875
Our organization has defined data to be shared across business units. 4.464 1.682 0.790
EA Implementation
We may carry out non-business-driven projects to accelerate architectural transformations. 4.473 1.661 0.758
We build and maintain common integration infrastructures to facilitate application integration (e.g., EAI platform). 4.991 1.665 0.858
We create and operate shared technical services (e.g., security). 5.318 1.433 0.861
Our organization develops and maintains reusable application services. 4.891 1.569 0.842
EA Communication & Support
Target architecture plans are communicated to all relevant stakeholder groups. 4.609 1.668 0.865
The documentation of rules and standards can be accessed easily by all relevant stakeholders (e.g., via the intranet). 4.255 1.734 0.851
Stakeholders are provided with consulting services concerning the application of rules and standards. 4.218 1.620 0.883
Architects work within projects to ensure the application of rules and standards. 4.855 1.798 0.820
EA Governance
We constantly evaluate and review conformance to architecture plans. 4.173 1.560 0.853
We have in place well-defined review and approval processes to ensure project conformance to rules and standards. 4.136 1.750 0.903
Internal directives require the compliance with rules and standards for all projects. 4.318 1.737 0.870
Violations of rules and standards are tracked and sanctioned consistently. 3.227 1.571 0.870
EA Stakeholder Participation
Target architecture plans are approved by governance committees representing all relevant stakeholders (e.g., architecture board). 4.464 1.862 0.914
Top-management is actively involved in architecture planning. 4.173 1.838 0.886
We ensure adequate stakeholder participation in setting rules and standards. 4.255 1.659 0.900
Rules and standards are set by governance committees representing all relevant stakeholders (e.g., architecture board). 3.991 1.750 0.923
Technical IT Capabilities
Hardware Compatibility
Software applications can be easily transported and used across multiple platforms. 3.736 1.611 0.750
Our user interfaces provide transparent access to all platforms and applications. 4.118 1.559 0.846
Our firm offers multiple interfaces or entry points (e.g., web access) to external users. 4.764 1.595 0.885
Our firm makes extensive use of middleware to integrate key enterprise applications. 4.791 1.794 0.648
Software Modularity
Reusable software modules are widely used throughout our systems development unit. 3.982 1.618 0.845
Legacy systems within our firm do not hamper the development of new IT applications. 3.555 1.735 0.792
Functionality can be quickly added to critical applications based on end-user requests. 4.045 1.580 0.880
Our firm can easily handle variations in data formats and standards. 4.345 1.575 0.867
Network Connectivity
Our company has a high degree of systems inter-connectivity. 4.891 1.580 0.826
Our systems are sufficiently flexible to incorporate electronic links to external parties. 4.655 1.632 0.849
Remote users can seamlessly access centralized data 4.691 1.628 0.833
Data is captured and made available to everyone in the firm in real time. 3.773 1.677 0.683
IT Skills Adaptability
Our IT personnel are encouraged to improve their technical skills. 5.182 1.556 0.836
Our IT personnel can quickly develop technical solutions to business problems. 4.664 1.448 0.891
Our IT personnel are adept at multi-tasking. 4.700 1.359 0.716
Our IT personnel are trained in a variety of programming methodologies and tools. 4.391 1.635 0.863
Strategic IT Alignment1
We attempt to be ahead of our competitors by ensuring that our products are distinctively different from our competitors. 4.945 1.723 0.890
Our current systems help us to distinguish our products from those of competitors. 4.073 1.635
We attempt to be ahead of our competitors by quality products rather than price. 5.045 1.650 0.865
Our current systems allow us to improve the quality of our products. 4.073 1.463
We attempt to be ahead of our competitors in introducing new products. 4.800 1.770 0.898
Our current systems enable us to introduce new products earlier than our competitors. 3.955 1.633
We attempt to be ahead of our competitors by offering a wide range of products. 4.482 1.841 0.828
Our current systems enable our company to diversify our products. 3.964 1.562
We constantly attempt to improve the efficiency of our production process. 5.282 1.409 0.814
Our current systems help in improving the efficiency of our production process. 4.445 1.530
We attempt to be ahead of our competitors by providing quality service to our customers. 5.745 1.411 0.779
Our current systems enable our company to provide quality customer service 4.827 1.514
We attempt to be ahead of our competitors by intensive marketing of our products. 4.473 1.749 0.775
Our current systems enable us to embark on an intensive marketing of our products. 3.991 1.656
We attempt to achieve growth by expanding into new markets. 4.518 1.841 0.770
Our current systems assist us in identifying new markets. 3.409 1.644
1
The loadings are based on the used indicators, thus the product of the business and IT related items.
M. Pattij et al.

--- PAGE 12 ---
Digital Business 2 (2022) 100036
12
Appendix B. Truth tables
Table B1
Truth table for technical IT capabilities.
EA DOC EA PLN EA PRG EA IMP EA COS EA GOV EA PAR Age Size number ITCA raw consist. PRI consist.
1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 0.950 0.800
0 1 1 1 0 0 0 1 1 2 1 0.942 0.736
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 3 1 0.940 0.915
0 1 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 3 1 0.936 0.734
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 2 1 0.928 0.788
0 0 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 2 1 0.925 0.541
0 0 1 1 0 0 0 1 1 2 1 0.909 0.567
0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 1 0.905 0.660
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 31 1 0.903 0.840
0 1 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 2 0 0.866 0.385
0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 3 0 0.820 0.376
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 6 0 0.639 0.178
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 2 0 0.479 0.010
EA DOC = EA Documentation; EA PLN = EA Planning; EA PRG = EA Programming; EA IMP = EA Implementation; EA COS = EA Communication & Support; EA GOV =
EA Governance; EA PAR = EA Stakeholder Participation; ITCA = Outcome Technical IT Capabilities
Table B2
Truth table for strategic IT alignment.
EA DOC EA PLN EA PRG EA IMP EA COS EA GOV EA PAR Age Size number SIA raw consist. PRI consist.
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 3 1 0.971 0.964
0 1 1 1 0 0 0 1 1 2 1 0.941 0.682
0 1 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 3 1 0.935 0.739
0 0 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 2 1 0.932 0.648
0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 1 0.926 0.756
0 1 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 2 1 0.917 0.545
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 31 1 0.889 0.834
1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 0.875 0.675
0 0 1 1 0 0 0 1 1 2 1 0.872 0.511
0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 3 0 0.823 0.365
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 6 0 0.811 0.389
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 2 0 0.810 0.558
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 2 0 0.484 0.069
EA DOC = EA Documentation; EA PLN = EA Planning; EA PRG = EA Programming; EA IMP = EA Implementation; EA COS = EA Communication & Support; EA GOV =
EA Governance; EA PAR = EA Stakeholder Participation; SIA = Outcome Strategic IT Alignment
References
Abraham, R., Aier, S., Labusch, N., & Winter, R. (2013). Understanding coordination
support of enterprise architecture management - Empirical analysis and implications
for practice. In , 5. 19th Americas conference on information systems, AMCIS 2013 -
Hyperconnected World: Anything, Anywhere, Anytime (pp. 3725–3733).
Abraham, R., Aier, S., & Winter, R. (2012). Two Speeds of EAM—A Dynamic Capabilities
Perspective. Enterprise Architecture Research and Practice-Driven and Practice-Driven
Research on Enterprise Transformation, 131(August 2014), 111–128.
Ahlemann, F., Legner, C., & Lux, J. (2020). A resource-based perspective of value generation
through enterprise architecture management (p. 103266). (January): Information and
Management.
Aier, S., Gleichauf, B., & Winter, R. (2011). Understanding enterprise architecture
management design – An empirical analysis. In In 10. Internationale Tagung
Wirtschaftsinformatik (WI) (pp. 645–654).
Ambrosini, V., Bowman, C., & Collier, N. (2009). Dynamic capabilities: An exploration of
how firms renew their resource base. British Journal of Management, 20(SUPP. 1).
Barney, J. (1991). Firm Resources and sustained competitive advantage. Journal of
Management, 17(1), 99–120.
Barreto, I. (2010). Dynamic capabilities: A review of past research and an agenda for the
future. Journal of Management, 36(1), 256–280.
Bharadwaj, A. S. (2000). A resource-based perspective on information technology
capability and firm performance: An empirical investigation. MIS Quarterly, 24(1),
169–196.
Boh, W. F., & Yellin, D. (2007). Using enterprise architecture standards in managing
information technology. Journal of Management Information Systems, 23(3), 163–207.
Byrd, T. A., & Turner, D. E. (2000). Measuring the flexibility of information technology
infrastructure: exploratory analysis of a construct. Journal of Management Information
Systems, 17(1), 167–208.
Chan, Y. E. (1997). Business strategic orientation, information systems strategic
orientation, and strategic alignment. Information Systems Research, 8(2), 125–150.
Chan, Y. E., & Reich, B. H. (2007). IT alignment: What have we learned? Journal of
Information Technology, 22(4), 297–315.
Cheng, K., & Bateman, R. J. (2008). e-Manufacturing: Characteristics, applications and
potentials. Progress in Natural Science, 18(11), 1323–1328. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.pnsc.2008.03.027
Doty, D. H., Glick, W., & Huber, G. (1993). Fit, equifinality, and organizational
effectiveness: a test of two configurational Theories Author (s): D. Harold Doty,
William H. Glick and George P. Huber. Academy of Management Journal, 36(6),
1196–1250.
Drews, P., & Schirmer, I. (2014). From enterprise architecture to business ecosystem
architecture: Stages and challenges for extending architectures beyond
organizational boundaries. In Proceedings - IEEE International Enterprise Distributed
Object Computing Workshop, EDOCW, (September), 13–22.
Dul, J. (2016). Necessary Condition Analysis (NCA): Logic and Methodology of
“Necessary but Not Sufficient” Causality. Organizational Research Methods, 19(1),
10–52.
Fiss, P. C. (2007). A set-theoretic approach to organizational configurations. Academy of
Management Review, 32(4), 1180–1198.
Fiss, P. C. (2011). Building better causal theories: A fuzzy set approach to typologies.
Academy of Management Journal, 54(2), 393–420.
Foorthuis, R., van Steenbergen, M., Brinkkemper, S., & Bruls, W. A. G. (2016). A theory
building study of enterprise architecture practices and benefits. Information Systems
Frontiers, 18(3), 541–564.
Hair, J. F., Hult, G. T. M., Ringle, C., & Sarstedt, M. (2016). A Primer on Partial Least
Squares Structural Equation Modeling (PLS-SEM) (2nd ed.). SAGE Publications.
Helfat, C. E., Finkelstein, S., Mitchell, W., Peteraf, M. A., Singh, H., Teece, D. J., &
Winter, S. G. (2007). Dynamic capabilities and organizational process. Dynamic
Capabilities: Understanding Strategic Change. in Organizations.
Hylving, L. (2019). Nuanced responses to enterprise architecture management: Loyalty,
voice, and exit. Journal OfManagement Information Systems, 36(1), 14–36.
Iyamu, T., & Mphahlele, L. (2014). The impact of organisational structure on enterprise
architecture deployment. Journal of Systems and Information Technology, 16(1), 2–16.
Jonkers, H., Lankhorst, M. M., Ter Doest, H. W. L., Arbab, F., Bosma, H., & Wieringa, R. J.
(2006). Enterprise architecture: Management tool and blueprint for the organisation.
Information Systems Frontiers, 8(2), 63–66.
Kahre, C., Hoffmann, D., & Ahlemann, F. (2017). Beyond business-IT Alignment -
DIGITAL business strategies as a paradigmatic shift: A review and research agenda.
M. Pattij et al.

--- PAGE 13 ---
Digital Business 2 (2022) 100036
13
In Proceedings of the 50th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (2017)
(pp. 4706–4715). https://doi.org/10.24251/hicss.2017.574
Karpovsky, A., & Galliers, R. D. (2015). Aligning in practice: From current cases to a new
agenda. Journal of Information Technology, 30(2), 136–160.
Ketchen, D., & Shook, C. (1996). The application of cluster analysis in strategic
management research: An analysis and critique. Strategic Management Journal, 17(6),
441–458.
Khin, S., & Ho, T. C. F. (2019). Digital technology, digital capability and organizational
performance: A mediating role of digital innovation. International Journal of
Innovation Science, 11(2), 177–195.
Kim, G., Shin, B., Kim, K. K., & Lee, H. G. (2011). IT capabilities, process-oriented
dynamic capabilities, and firm financial performance. Journal of the Association for
Information Systems, 12(7), 487–517.
Korhonen, J. J., Lapalme, J., McDavid, D., & Gill, A. Q. (2016). Adaptive enterprise
architecture for the future: Towards a reconceptualization of EA. In Proceedings of the
18th IEEE Conference on Business Informatics (pp. 272–281).
Kotusev, S. (2018). TOGAF-based enterprise architecture practice: An exploratory case
study. Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 43(1), 321–359.
Kotusev, S. (2019). Enterprise architecture and enterprise architecture artifacts:
Questioning the old concept in light of new findings. Journal of Information
Technology, 34(2), 102–128.
Kotusev, S., Singh, M., & Storey, I. (2015). Consolidating enterprise architecture
management research. In Proceedings of the annual hawaii international conference on
system sciences, 2015-March(June 2016) (pp. 4069–4078).
Lange, M., Mendling, J., & Recker, J. (2016). An empirical analysis of the factors and
measures of Enterprise Architecture Management success. European Journal of
Information Systems, 25(5), 411–431.
Lapalme, J., Gerber, A., Van Der Merwe, A., Zachman, J., De Vries, M., & Hinkelmann, K.
(2016). Exploring the future of enterprise architecture: A Zachman perspective.
Computers in Industry, 79, 103–113.
Legner, C., Eymann, T., Hess, T., Matt, C., Böhmann, T., Drews, P., … Ahlemann, F.
(2017). Digitalization: Opportunity and challenge for the business and information
systems engineering community. Business and Information Systems Engineering, 59(4),
301–308.
Li, P., Cheng, K., Jiang, P., & Katchasuwanmanee, K. (2022). Investigation on industrial
dataspace for advanced machining workshops: enabling machining operations
control with domain knowledge and application case studies. Journal of Intelligent
Manufacturing, 33(1), 103–119. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10845-020-01646-2
Löhe, J., & Legner, C. (2014). Overcoming implementation challenges in enterprise
architecture management: A design theory for architecture-driven IT Management
(ADRIMA). Information Systems and e-Business Management, 12(1), 101–137.
Luftman, J., & Brier, T. (1999). Achieving and sustaining business-IT alignment.
California Management Review, 1, 109–122.
Luo, X., Zhang, W., Li, H., Bose, R., & Chung, Q. B. (2018). Cloud computing capability:
its technological root and business impact. Journal of Organizational Computing and
Electronic Commerce, 28(3), 193–213. https://doi.org/10.1080/
10919392.2018.1480926
Lux, J., Riempp, G., & Urbach, N. (2010). Understanding the performance impact of
enterprise architecture management. 16th Americas Conference on Information
Systems 2010, AMCIS 2010, 4(August), 3002–3011.
Misangyi, V. F., Greckhamer, T., Furnari, S., Fiss, P. C., Crilly, D., & Aguilera, R. (2016).
Embracing causal complexity: The emergence of a neo-configurational perspective.
Journal of Management, 43(1), 255–282.
Mueller, T., Schuldt, D., Sewald, B., Morisse, M., & Petrikina, J. (2013). Towards inter-
organizational enterprise architecture management-applicability of TOGAF 9.1 for
network organizations. In , 5. 19th Americas Conference on Information Systems,
AMCIS 2013 - Hyperconnected World: Anything, Anywhere, Anytime (pp. 3648–3660).
Niemi, E., & Pekkola, S. (2020). The benefits of enterprise architecture in organizational
transformation. Business and Information Systems Engineering, 62(6), 585–597.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12599-019-00605-3
Nikpay, F., Ahmad, R. B., Rouhani, B. D., Naz, M., & Shamshirband, S. (2017). An
effective enterprise architecture implementation methodology. Information Systems
and e-Business Management, 15, 927–962.
Nwankpa, J. K., & Roumani, Y. (2016). IT capability and digital transformation: A firm
performance perspective. In 2016 International Conference on Information Systems,
ICIS 2016 (pp. 1–16).
Pappas, I. O., & Woodside, A. G. (2021). Fuzzy-set Qualitative Comparative Analysis
(fsQCA): Guidelines for research practice in Information Systems and marketing.
International Journal of Information Management, 58(February). https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2021.102310
Park, Y., El Sawy, O. A., & Fiss, P. C. (2017). The role of business intelligence and
communication technologies in organizational agility: A configurational approach.
Journal of the Association of Information Systems, 18(9), 648–686.
Pattij, M., Van de Wetering, R., & Kusters, R. (2020). Improving agility through
enterprise architecture management: The mediating improving agility through
enterprise architecture management. the mediating role of aligning business and IT
completed research. In AMCIS 2020 proceedings.
Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., Lee, J. Y., & Podsakoff, N. P. (2003). Common method
biases in behavioral research: A critical review of the literature and recommended
remedies. The Journal of Applied Psychology, 88(5), 879–903.
Queiroz, M., Tallon, P. P., Sharma, R., & Coltman, T. (2018). The role of IT application
orchestration capability in improving agility and performance. Journal of Strategic
Information Systems, 27(1), 4–21.
Ragin, C. (2008). Redesigning Social Inquiry: Fuzzy Sets and Beyond. University of Chicago
Press.
Ragin, C., & Davey, S. (2016). Fuzzy-Set/Qualitative Comparative Analysis 3.0. Irvine,
California: Department of Sociology, University of California.
Rai, A., & Tang, X. (2010). Leveraging IT capabilities and competitive process
capabilities for the management of interorganizational relationship portfolios.
Information Systems Research, 21(3), 516–542.
Reich, B. H., & Benbasat, I. (1996). Measuring the linkage between business and
information technology objectives. MIS Quarterly: Management Information Systems,
20(1), 55–77.
Richter, N. F., Schubring, S., Hauff, S., Ringle, C. M., & Sarstedt, M. (2020). When
predictors of outcomes are necessary: guidelines for the combined use of PLS-SEM
and NCA. Industrial Management and Data Systems, 3.
Ross, J. W., Weill, P., & Robertson, D. C. (2006). Enterprise architecture as strategy:
creating a foundation for business execution. In Enterprise architecture as strategy
business execution, (March), 1–10.
Sambamurthy, V., Bharadwaj, A., & Grover, V. (2003). Shaping Agility through digital
options: Reconceptualizing the role of information technology in contemporary
firms. MIS Quarterly, 27(2), 237–263.
Schmidt, C., & Buxmann, P. (2011). Outcomes and success factors of enterprise IT
architecture management: empirical insight from the international financial services
industry. European Journal of Information Systems, 20, 168–185.
Schneider, C. Q., & Wagemann, C. (2009). Standards guter Praxis in Qualitative
Comparative Analysis (QCA) und Fuzzy-Sets. In S. Pickel, G. Pickel, H.-J. Lauth, &
D. Jahn (Eds.), Methoden der vergleichenden Politik- und Sozialwissenschaft: Neue
Entwicklungen und Anwendungen (pp. 387–412). Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für
Sozialwissenschaften. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-531-91826-6_19.
Schneider, C. Q., & Wagemann, C. (2012). Set-theoretic methods for the social sciences.
Set-Theoretic Methods for the Social Sciences. https://doi.org/10.1017/
cbo9781139004244
Shanks, G., Gloet, M., Asadi Someh, I., Frampton, K., & Tamm, T. (2018). Achieving
benefits with enterprise architecture. Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 27,
139–156.
Sirmon, D. G., Hitt, M. A., & Ireland, R. D. (2007). Managing firm resources in dynamic
environments to create value: Looking inside the black box. Academy of Management
Review, 32(1), 273–292.
Sirmon, D. G., Hitt, M. A., Ireland, R. D., & Gilbert, B. A. (2011). Resource orchestration
to create competitive advantage: Breadth, depth, and life cycle effects. Journal of
Management, 37(5), 1390–1412.
Skaaning, S. E. (2011). Assessing the robustness of crisp-set and fuzzy-set QCA results.
Sociological Methods & Research, 40(2), 391–408.
Stovers, R., de Ruijter, J., & Wagter, R. (2019). GEA enterprisearchitectuur in de praktijk:
betere prestaties door sturen op samenhang.
Tallon, P. P. (2008). Inside the adaptive enterprise: An information technology
capabilities perspective on business process agility. Information Technology and
Management, 9(1), 21–36.
Tallon, P. P., & Pinsonneault, A. (2011). Competing perspectives on the link between
strategic information technology alignment and organizational agility: Insights from
a mediation model. MIS Quarterly, 35(2), 463–486.
Tambo, T. (2017). Enterprise architecture beyond the enterprise extended enterprise
architecture revisited. In ICEIS 2017 - Proceedings of the 19th international conference
on enterprise information systems, 3(Iceis) (pp. 381–390). https://doi.org/10.5220/
0006277103810390
Tamm, T., Seddon, P. B., Shanks, G., & Reynolds, P. (2011). How does enterprises
architecture add value to organisations? Communications of the Association for
Information Systems, 28(1), 141–168.
Teece, D., Peteraf, M., & Leih, S. (2016). Dynamic capabilities and organizational agility:
risk. Uncertainty and Strategy in the Innovation Economy, 58(4), 13–36.
Teece, D., Pisano, G., & Shuen, A. (1997). Dynamic capabilities and strategic
management: organizing for innovation and growth. Strategic Management Journal,
18(7), 509–533.
Teece, D. J. (2014). The foundations of enterprise performance: Dynamic and ordinary
capabilities in an (economic) theory of firms. Academy of Management Perspectives, 28
(4), 328–352. https://doi.org/10.5465/amp.2013.0116
TOGAF. (2018). The TOGAF® Standard, Version 9.2. TOGAF Library.
Urbach, N., Ahlemann, F., Böhmann, T., Drews, P., Brenner, W., Schaudel, F., &
Schütte, R. (2019). The impact of digitalization on the IT department. Business and
Information Systems Engineering, 61(1), 123–131.
Van de Wetering, R., Kurnia, S., & Kotusev, S. (2020). The effect of enterprise
architecture deployment practices on organizational benefits: A dynamic capability
perspective. Sustainability (Switzerland), 12(21), 1–21.
Van Der Raadt, B., Bonnet, M., Schouten, S., & Van Vliet, H. (2010). The relation between
EA effectiveness and stakeholder satisfaction. Journal of Systems and Software, 83
(10), 1954–1969.
Van Waardenburg, G., & Van Vliet, H. (2013). When agile meets the enterprise.
Information and Software Technology, 55(12), 2154–2171.
Venkatraman, N. (1989). The concept of fit in strategy research: Toward verbal and
statistical correspondence correspondence. Academy of Management Review, 14(3),
423–444.
Venkatraman, N., Henderson, J. C., & Oldach, S. (1993). Continuous strategic alignment:
Exploiting information technology capabilities for competitive success. European
Management Journal, 11(2), 139–149.
Vis, B., & Dul, J. (2018). Analyzing relationships of necessity not just in kind but also in
degree: Complementing fsQCA with NCA. Sociological Methods & Research, 47(4),
872–899.
Wagter, R., Stovers, R., & Krijgsman, W. (2015). Characteristics of The third wave of
architecture, (August), 0–11.
M. Pattij et al.

--- PAGE 14 ---
Digital Business 2 (2022) 100036
14
van den Berg, M., Luijpers, J., van Steenbergen, M., & Wagter, R. (2005). Dynamic
Enterprise Architecture: How to Make it Work. John Wiley & Sons.
van de Wetering, R. (2021). Understanding the impact of enterprise architecture driven
dynamic capabilities on agility: A variance and fsQCA study understanding the
impact of enterprise architecture driven dynamic capabilities on agility: A variance
and fsQCA study. Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 13(4),
32–68. https://doi.org/10.17705/1pais.13402
Wieringa, R., Engelsman, W., Gordijn, J., & Ionita, D. (2019). A business ecosystem
architecture modeling framework. In Proceedings - 21st IEEE conference on business
informatics, CBI 2019.
Winter, K., Buckl, S., Matthes, F., & Schweda, C. (2010). Investigating the state-of-the-art
in enterprise architecture management method in literature and practice. In
Proceedings of the Mediterranean Conference on Information Systems, (September), 1–12.
Wu, S. P., Straub, D. W., & Liang, T.-P. (2015). How Information technology governance
mechanisms and strategic alignment influence organizational performance: insights
from a matched survey of business and IT managers. MIS Quarterly, 29 (January
2016).
Yeow, A., Soh, C., & Hansen, R. (2018). Aligning with new digital strategy: A dynamic
capabilities approach. Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 27(1), 43–58.
Yoon, C. Y. (2011). Measuring enterprise IT capability: A total IT capability perspective.
Knowledge-Based Systems, 24(1), 113–118.
Zachman, J. A. (1987). A framework for information systems architecture. IBM Systmes
Journal, 26(3), 454–470.
Zott, C. (2011). Dynamic capabilities and the emergence of intraindustry differential firm
performance: Insights from a simulation study and the emergence dynamic
capabilities of firm differential performance: Insights from a simulation studY.
Strategic Management Journal, 24(2), 97–125.
M. Pattij et al.