--- PAGE 1 ---
HAL Id: hal-02478782
https://inria.hal.science/hal-02478782v1
Submitted on 14 Feb 2020
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive
for the deposit and dissemination of scientific re-
search documents, whether they arepublished or not.
Thedocumentsmaycomefromteachingandresearch
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or pri-
vate research centers.
L’archiveouvertepluridisciplinaireHAL,estdes-
tinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents scien-
tifiquesdeniveaurecherche, publiésounon, émanant
des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche
français ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou
privés.
Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 - Attribution - International License
Value-Added Services, Virtual Enterprises and Data Spaces
Inspired Enterprise Architecture for Smart Cities
Sobah Abbas Petersen, Zohreh Pourzolfaghar, Iyas Alloush, Dirk Ahlers, John
Krogstie, Markus Helfert
To cite this version:
Sobah Abbas Petersen, Zohreh Pourzolfaghar, Iyas Alloush, Dirk Ahlers, John Krogstie, et al.. Value-Added
Services, VirtualEnterprisesandDataSpacesInspiredEnterpriseArchitectureforSmartCities. 20thWorking
Conference on Virtual Enterprises (PRO-VE), Sep 2019, Turin, Italy. pp.393-402, ⟨10.1007/978-3-030-28464-
0_34⟩. ⟨hal-02478782⟩

--- PAGE 2 ---
Value-Added Services, Virtual Enterprises and Data
Spaces inspired Enterprise Architecture for Smart Cities
Sobah Abbas Petersen1
, Zohreh Pourzolfaghar2
, Iyas Alloush2
, Dirk Ahlers3,
John Krogstie1
and Markus Helfert2
1
Dept. of Computer Science, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Norway
2
Lero - The Irish Software Research Centre, School of Computing, Dublin City
University, Dublin, Ireland
3
Dept. of Architecture & Planning, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology, Norway
Email: {sap, krogstie, Dirk.ahlers}@ntnu.no;
{markus.helfert, Zohreh.Pourzolfaghar, iyas.alloush}@dcu.ie
Abstract. As a part of their digital transformation, municipalities across Europe
have taken initiatives to support Open Data platforms and provide services
leveraging on data. This challenges the traditional business driven IT strategy
promoted by several Enterprise Architecture methodologies, which are
designed to operate within a single enterprise that has a complete overview of
its data and ICT systems. We envisage scenarios where public and private
collaborative networks provide value added services to its citizens by
leveraging on data. In this paper, we propose an Enterprise Architecture
Framework for Cities to support them maneuvre smartly within their data space
to create value added services through a variety of collaborative networks or
Virtual Enterprises that bridge organisational boundaries. The novel elements of
this Enterprise Architecture Framework are a DataxChange, the Value-Added
Services and Virtual Enterprise layers. This work has been conducted within the
EU H2020 Smart City project +CityxChange.
Keywords: Data Spaces, Enterprise Architecture Framework, Smart Cities,
Collaborative Networks, Positive Energy Blocks.
1 Introduction
Sustainability and digital transformation and are two of the main driving forces for
cities and municipalities today. Current Smart City approaches have advanced from
monitoring various aspects of a city through sensor and other data to providing
services to its citizens in more collaborative ways [1, 2]. We adopt the view of a smart
city that integrates people, technology and information to create a sustainable and
resilient infrastructure that provides high quality services for its citizens [3]. The data
that is gathered through sensors and/or other sources are central to developing value
added services for the citizens. We envisage scenarios where public and private

--- PAGE 3 ---
386 S. A. Petersen
collaborative networks (CNs) provide value added services to its citizens by
leveraging on data and systems that bridge different organisations.
The work reported in this paper is motivated the EU H2020 project +CityxChange,
which focuses on Positive Energy Blocks (PEBs) to reduce emissions in cities and
communities towards reaching the Paris Climate Goals [4]. Taking a broad
perspective of cities and communities in the light of UN's Sustainable Development
Goals (SDG); in particular SDGs 7, 11 and 13 (Affordable Clean Energy, Sustainable
Cities and Societies and Climate action respectively), there is a need to engage
citizens and to develop a portfolio of value added services that will enable citizens to
increase their awareness about environmental sustainability and to help them make
better choices. Furthermore, cities are motivated to engage their private businesses
and other stakeholders in novel and innovative partnerships to provide value added
services to the citizens.
One of challenges faced by cities and service providers is the lack of access to
relevant data or indeed an overview of available data and relevant actors. Enterprise
Architecture (EA) used initially in the business world to bridge between the business
needs and the ICT strategy of a company has been used in Smart City contexts to
bridge the needs of a city with ICT, resulting in a number of Smart City Enterprise
Architecture Frameworks (EAFs). Our review of several EAFs from Smart City
projects show that while several of them identify the need for services, the emphasis
on the role of data is not so evident. We argue that the role of data must be a central
component of a Smart City EAF, to support the drive for digital transformation as
well as the effective use of available data.
In this paper, we propose a layered EAF for +CityxChange and Smart Cities in
general where a DataxChange lies at the heart of the EAF. The DataxChange bridges
the technology layers and the higher layers of the architecture, such as the business
collaborations and value added services. The proposed architecture builds upon
existing work, and complements them by emphasising the novel elements, which are
the DataxChange, the Value-Added Services and the Virtual Enterprise (VE) layers to
support CNs.
This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 describes the +CityxChange project;
Section 3 describes our vision for a Smart City EAF; Section 4 describes the
+CityxChange EAF to realise such a vision; Section 5 illustrates how value added
services can be supported by EAF; Section 6 gives an overview of related work and
Section 7 summarises the paper and provides an outline of the future work.
2 +CityxChange Project
The background and motivation for this paper is the EU H2020 funded +CityxChange
project [5] that aims to develop PEBs in smart cities and communities as part of
emission reductions to reach the Paris Climate Goals [4]. It is a Lighthouse project,
where Trondheim, Norway, and Limerick, Ireland, are the lighthouse cities, and five
follower cities showcase replication. The consortium of 32 partners include
universities, municipalities, utility and infrastructure providers and other private

--- PAGE 4 ---
Value-Added Services, Virtual Enterprises and Data Spaces for Smart Cities 387
entrepreneurs. It follows an integrative approach with a strong focus on city
integration, open innovation and replicability. The approach combines:
• Integrated Planning and Design of cities;
• Creation and Enabling of a Common Energy Market;
• A CommunityxChange with all stakeholders of the city to create connected
and engaged communities.
The project focuses on the technical solutions as well as the interactions and
integration between buildings, users, cities and the energy system. It also focuses on
the implications and impact on city planning, city systems, energy trading, citizen
involvement, policies and regulations, data and digitalisation and socio-economic
issues. A Positive Energy Blocks (PEB) is defined by the EU as several buildings that
actively manage their energy consumption and the energy flow between them and the
wider energy system1
. They achieve an annual positive energy balance through use,
optimization and integration of advanced materials, energy reduction, local renewable
energy production and storage, smart energy grids, demand-response, energy
management of electricity, heating and cooling, user involvement. PEBs or Positive
Energy Districts (PEDs) are designed as an integral part of the district energy system.
They should be intrinsically scalable up to positive energy districts and cities and are
well embedded in the spatial, economic, technical, environmental and social contexts.
New forms of integrated spatial, social, political, economic, regulatory, legal and
technological innovations are envisaged to deliver citizen observatories, innovation
playgrounds and regulatory sandboxes linked to Urban Living Labs. Municipalities
will develop Bold City Visions to engage civil society, local authorities, industry and
Research and Technology Organisations to scale up from PEBs to PEDs or Positive
Energy Cities, supported by a distributed and modular energy system architecture.
The ICT related challenges faced by the +CityxChange project include the lack of
a means or forum for discovering existing and available data and services and indeed
accessing and retrieving relevant data from available data sources [6], for use in
developing value added services. ICT is envisaged to play a central role as an enabler
for innovative value added services, stimulating new collaborations and in achieving
PEBs and scaling up to the district and city levels. Similarly, ICT will provide support
for the replication of solutions from the Lighthouse cities to the follower cities [4, 6].
3 Vision
Our vision for an EAF to support the +CityxChange project and Smart Cities in
general is driven by the need and availability of data and systems and the central role
that data plays in today's cities and how the data could be leveraged to provide value-
added services to the citizens. Many Smart City concepts are inherently multi-
disciplinary and need the collaboration of various stakeholders from different
domains, including cities and citizens [7]. New and innovative value added services
could be provided by diverse constellations of CNs or VEs, which are a group of
1
https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/portal/screen/opportunities/topic-
details/lc-sc3-scc-1-2018-2019-2020

--- PAGE 5 ---
388 S. A. Petersen
partners that collaborate to achieve a specific goal [8]. Our vision will address some
of the shortcoming of existing EAFs to meet the needs of smart cities.
We believe that data can play a central role in bridging the technology aspects to
the strategic and business aspects of an enterprise, such as the business collaborations
and value added services. The central role of data and its value to an organisation has
been discussed in many contexts, such as Industry 4.0 [9]. The need for supporting
collaborative data analysis and processing and enhancing collaboration support
among the data owners, data scientists and indeed service providers have received
attention [10]. Examples of leveraging on data in the context of smart cities have
appeared recently in the literature; in Helsinki, the city has been considered as a
Living Lab and the data that is collected has been used to develop services as mobile
applications [11]. The need for easy discovery of existing and available data and
services and indeed accessing and retrieving relevant data is increasing and is one of
the main challenges in the +CityxChange project. Thus, an EAF that supports an
overview of data and the meta-data related will be an important asset to the creation
and operation of value-added services in a smart city. If the stakeholders of a smart
city have an overview of data that is potentially accessible and available for them to
leverage on, the potential of value added services for the citizens can be enhanced.
CNs and VEs have long been discussed as means and drivers for value creation
[12]. More recently, they have been discussed as an important mechanism in the
context of leveraging on the vast amounts of data that are available in many contexts;
e.g. [13]. Bringing these concepts to the heart of an EAF is essential in supporting the
creation of innovative and value added services in the context of smart cities. This can
facilitate the integration of services vertically within a city such as technological
support, data processing as well as operational services, and connecting them to a
clearly identified value to the city and citizens. Similarly, it can ensure the integration
of the processes horizontally across the value chain around data, such as the data
owners, processors and data consumers. Furthermore, this can support empowerment
not only of the citizens, but provide opportunities for project partners to collaborate in
new and innovative CNs, VEs and business models.
4 +CityxChange Enterprise Architecture Framework
Based on the literature and the smart city EAFs developed in relevant EU projects,
such as the Smart City project SmartEnCity [2] and the standardisation efforts in
ESPRESSO [1], we propose a layered EAF for the +CityxChange project, as
illustrated in Figure 1. The main driver for the EA is the "service-based ecosystem",
identified as an objective for the EA in the +CityxChange project [6]. The scenarios
envisaged for the project span many application domains (or silos) such as energy,
transport, IoT, built environment and governance. An example of a value added
service considered in the project that spans several application domains is eMobility
as a service, across energy, transport and urban planning domain.
Several horizontal layers are defined in the EAF to support value added services,
which utilise data and are provided by collaborations among two or more enterprises;
i.e. by a VE. The thinking behind the layered approach is that each layer supports the

--- PAGE 6 ---
Value-Added Services, Virtual Enterprises and Data Spaces for Smart Cities 389
layer above it. Thus, the value-added services are supported by one or more
businesses or a VE, which are supported by one or many applications, which use data
from the +CityxChange DataxChange layer. The +CityxChange DataxChange is
supported by technologies and finally, the data is obtained from data sources.
Figure 1 +CityxChange Enterprise Architecture Framework
The +CityxChange DataxChange is at the heart of the EAF, where this layer
provides an overview of all available data and systems and relevant information about
the data that is required for creating value added services. Relevant information about
the data will include the owner of the data, how the data may be accessed and the
conditions and criteria that may be necessary to access or use the data. The
DataXchange plays a central role is providing a comprehensive overview of the
available data, providing the support that the various service providers need. Indeed, it
should provide information about the relevant and potential collaboration partners that
could participate in providing value added services to citizens, leveraging the data.
The DataXchange provides a means to bridge the lower levels of the EAF, such as
supporting technologies, and the higher levels of the EAF, such as the value added
services. Furthermore, this layer will also serve as a common “platform” for the lower
layers to facilitate access to data for the higher layers. Together with the Business
Layer, this layer is designed to support concepts such as data markets and data as a
commodity in the near future.
The highest layer of the EA is the context layer, which drives the services and the
business context. Value added services are created to meet the needs of the citizens or
to affect and change their behaviour to meet the strategy of the city or some business
actor. The Value added Service layer is below the Context layer, which both offers
services to and uses data and applications from the different application domains and
involves one or more actors. The Application and Data Processing Layer describes the
different applications that support the services. Applications may support processing
or analytics of data that are relevant for the service or other purposes such as
searching and navigating the information space, visualisation of information or other.
Two layers are defined below the DataXchange: Technologies layer and Data
Sources layer. The Technologies layer describes the different technologies that

--- PAGE 7 ---
390 S. A. Petersen
support the DataXchange and the higher layers of the EAF. Technologies include
hardware (e.g. servers and sensors, metering devices), applications such as databases
and infrastructure, e.g. for micro payments. As data is obtained from a variety of
sources such as IoT, sensors or local renewable energy production such solar panels
mounted on private property, the origin of the data is essential for data governance;
for ensuring the quality of the data, fostering trust among the users of the data, for
supporting transparency and integrity of data, and for adhering to regulatory
frameworks such as GDPR. Thus the Data sources layer is important to identify the
sources that provide the data.
Related to the horizontal layers, we have two perspectives: (i) Stakeholder
perspective to highlight the different stakeholders, their roles and perspectives; and
(ii) Data perspective to address the specific principles and guidelines that are relevant
in data-rich environments. These perspectives apply to all or most levels of the EAF
as shown in Figure 1. A number of high level principles were identified for the
+CityxChange EAF in [6]. These perspectives provide a means of structuring and
contextualising guidelines and principles for using the +CityxChange EAF. A detailed
description of principles and guidelines are provided in [14].
4.1 Stakeholder Perspectives
The +CityxChange project has a citizen focussed approach with several tasks
dedicated to citizen engagement. Similarly, the service-based ecosystem and the
participation of several public and private entities call for close attention to the
diverse stakeholders that are a part of the city-wide or +CityxChange-wide EA space.
Stakeholders describe the various entities involved in the city-wide EA space, which
include citizens, service providers and consumers, who develop service to create
added value. Stakeholders also include data owners, providers, processors and
consumers of data, public authorities, private enterprises, researchers and various
communities (e.g. a local housing complex).
Privacy and Trust describes the relevant principles and guidelines that need to be
followed not only to respect and protect the privacy of individual people and
organisations, but also support a network of trust among the various stakeholders of
the +CityxChange DataxChange and value added services. Given the focus on
stakeholders and the protection of individuals through the recent EU GDRP
regulations, we have chosen to separate privacy and trust from data security (although
they are dependent on one another). An EAF for a smart city spans beyond
organisational boundaries and consequently the potential of sharing privacy-related
data among stakeholders and data processors from a number of different prganisations
can be envisaged. Thus, the need to increase awareness of privacy-related issues and
designing to ensure privacy and trust and compliance to regulations, in particular with
respect to the use of stored data for multiple purposes, increases.
Policies and regulations describe the regulatory stakeholders that are involved in
the project, the influencers and stakeholders and services that are affected by the
specific policies and regulations. Ownership and access describe the relationships
between the stakeholders and the entities that will be represented in the layers of the

--- PAGE 8 ---
Value-Added Services, Virtual Enterprises and Data Spaces for Smart Cities 391
EAF. The scenarios envisaged in the project highlight that the relationships between
the data and other entities or the ownership or accessibility models for data elements
are not simple, uniform or trivial.
4.2 Data Perspectives
The +CityxChange project envisages value added services that leverage on data and
system integration that is available through the +CityxChange DataxChange or indeed
Open Data. Thus, there is a data perspective related to all layers of the EAF, from the
data sources to the value added services. This raises a need to address the data
perspectives.
Interoperability addresses how entities, through all the layers in the EAF, could be
brought together in a cohesive way to provide the value added services.
Interoperability applies to all the levels of the EAF.
Data security and risk assessment apply to all the layers of the EAF to ensure that
the data is handled in a secure and reliable manner. The security of data is not a static
state; i.e. data that is secure at any time may not be secure at a future time, and thus
requires regular assessments of risks and threats to the security of the data.
Data Governance ensures proper data management and ownership processes and
data quality and encompasses people, organisations and processes. Data governance
ensures that data is consistent, available and useable.
5 Value Added Services
One or more value added services (example services A, B and X) could be created by
using the data available from the +CityxChange DataxChange, as shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2 Value added Services as an instance in the +CityxChange EAF
Each of the services are likely delivered by collaboration among one or more
organisations; any organisation may participate in the delivery of one or more
services and participate in one or more VEs. For example, the municipality of a

--- PAGE 9 ---
392 S. A. Petersen
specific city may be a part of a VE that provides both the Services A and B. Similarly,
the same municipality may also play a role in Service X, perhaps different to that for
the Services A and B. This simple example illustrates that several elements
(data/services) from the DataxChange may be used by one or more services.
Based on the scenarios envisaged for the +CityxChange project and the visions of
the Lighthouse cities that have been shared and integrated so far, we see the need to
support such value added services and the need to share data and the ability to
incorporate new data that is generated through the value added services. The
+CityxChange DataxChange is designed to facilitate such activities.
6 Related Work
EA concerns the overall ICT landscape and alignment of the business strategy and its
ICT implementation. Several EAFs have been proposed for Smart Cities. Based on
the leading EAF in the industry [15], The Open Group's EA, TOGAF [16], several
Smart City EAFs are based on a multi-tier or layered approach proposed; e.g. [1, 17-
20]. The notion of services is identified explicitly in some of the EAFs [1, 2, 19, 21].
The service layer identifies the business and the stakeholder perspectives, often
considered as services offered by municipalities or the cities.
Of particular interest to our work is the Intelligent Data Spaces Reference
Architecture Model (IDS-RAM), proposed by the German Fraunhofer Institute and
the International Data Spaces Initiative [9]. They describe an Industrial Data Space as
a "virtual data space leveraging existing standards and technologies as well as
accepted governance models for the data economy, to facilitate the secure and
standardized exchange and easy linkage of data in a trusted business ecosystem".
Similar to other EAFs, IDS-RAM also takes a layered approach. However, a few
things distinguish it from the other frameworks and methodologies; e.g. it focuses on
the Industrial Data Space and it takes a data-centric approach and thus supports both
top-down and bottom-up approaches. A framework which describes foundation and
principles for Information Technology in smarter cities is proposed in [22]. It
incorporates instrumented data from sensors, Integration of data and intelligent
inclusion of complex analytics, modelling and optimization, and visualization in
operational business processes.
7 Summary and Future Work
An EAF to support a service-based ecosystem for the +CitxChange project is
proposed, which supports the creation of value added services that leverage available
data and services/systems. The novel elements of this Enterprise Architecture are the
DataxChange, the Value-Added Services and the Virtual Enterprise layers. A
DataxChange is at the heart of this architecture, which we argue is an essential part of
a Smart City EAF, and which will bring together all available data and relevant
information about the data to support the creation of value added services, by
collaborative networks of partners from public private and research sectors. The

--- PAGE 10 ---
Value-Added Services, Virtual Enterprises and Data Spaces for Smart Cities 393
DataXchange layer provides a bridge between the lower levels of the EAF, such as
supporting technologies and data sources, and the higher levels of the EAF, such as
the value added services.
The proposed architecture is work in progress and we are working on refining this
EAF by applying it to describe the different services that will be developed in the
project. Furthermore, this EAF is envisaged as a support in reaching out to the
partners who will participate in the VEs providing the value added services, and in
driving the dialogue in the iterative definitions of the value added services. As such, it
can also support many of the collaborative relationships within a complex project and
provide additional technical frameworks and collaboration spaces, based on a joint
understanding of the ICT relationships and networks within the project. These should
also support easier communication, information access, and knowledge finding and
sharing within the project. Our next steps are to describe a few scenarios and services
using this EAF and facilitate the service description process, while refining the EAF
based on the feedback.
Acknowledgements
+CityxChange is a smart city project under the Smart Cities and Communities topic
that is funded by the European Union's Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation
programme under Grant Agreement No. 824260. The authors would like to thank the
project partners from Trondheim Municipality, Limerick City Council and the
participants of work packages 1 and 2 as well as the whole project team.
References
[1] ESPRESSO project (systEmic Standardization apPRoach to Empower Smart citieS and
cOmmunities)), Deliverable D4.2 – Definition of Smart City Reference Architecture.
2016.
[2] SmartEnCity, Deliverable 6.3: Data Model Architecture Implementation. 2017.
[3] N. Villanueva-Rosales, R.L. Cheu, A. Gates, N. Rivera, O. Mondragon, S. Cabrera, and C.
Ferregut, A collaborative, interdisciplinary initiative for a smart cities innovation
network, in EEE First International Smart Cities Conference (ISC2). 2015, IEEE:
Guadalajara, Mexico. p. 25-28 Oct.
[4] United Nations Climate Change. What is the Paris Agreement? [cited 2019 20 May];
Available from: https://unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/the-paris-agreement/what-is-
the-paris-agreement.
[5] +CityXChange. Positive Energy Blocks. 2019 [cited 2019 19 May]; Available from:
http://cityxchange.eu/.
[6] D. Ahlers, L.W.M. Wienhofen, S.A. Petersen, and M. Anvaari, A Smart City Ecosystem
enabling Open Innovation, in 19th International Conference Innovations for
Community Services (I4CS). 2019: Wolfsburg, Germany.
[7] D. Ahlers, P. Driscoll, E. Löfström, J. Krogstie, and A. Wyckmans, Understanding Smart
Cities as Social Machines, in Workshop on the Theory and Practice of Social Machines
@ WWW2016, IW3C2, 2016. 2016.

--- PAGE 11 ---
394 S. A. Petersen
[8] S.A. Petersen, Virtual Enterprise Formation and Partner Selection: An Analysis Using Case
Studies. International Journal of Networking and Virtual Organisations, 2007 4(2): p.
201-215.
[9] B. Otto, S. Lohmann, S. Steinbuß, and A. Teuscher, IDS Reference Architecture Model,
Industrial Data Space, Veriosn 2.0. 2018, International Data Spaces Association &
Fraunhofer.
[10] K. Park, M.C. Nguyen, and H. Won, Web-based collaborative big data analytics on big
data as a service platform, in 17th International Conference on Advanced
Communication Technology (ICACT). 2015 IEEE.
[11] H. Hielkem and P. Hongisto, Developing the Helsinki Smart City: The Role of
Competitions for Open Data Applications. Journal of the Knowledge Economy, 2013.
4(2): p. 190–204.
[12] L. Camarinha-Matos and H. Afsarmanesh, COLLABORATIVE NETWORKS- Value
creation in a knowledge society, in: Knowledge Enterprise: Intelligent Strategies in
Product Design, Manufacturing, and Management. PROLAMAT 2006, K. Wang, G.L.
Kovacs, W. M., and F. M., Editors. 2006, Springer: Boston, MA.
[13] L. Camarinha-Matos, R. Fornasiero, and H. Afsarmanesh, Collaborative Networks as a
Core Enabler of Industry 4.0, in: Collaboration in a Data-Rich World. PRO-VE 2017,
L. Camarinha-Matos, R. Fornasiero, and H. Afsarmanesh, Editors. 2017, Springer,
Cham. p. 3-17.
[14] S.A. Petersen, I. Alloush, Z. Pourzolfaghar, and M. Helfert, +CityxChange - D1.2 Report
on the Architecture for the ICT Ecosystem - Initial Version. 2019.
[15] B.H. Cameron and E. McMillan, Analyzing the current trends in Enterprise Architecture
Frameworks. Journal of Enterprise Architecture, 2013. 9(1): p. 60-71.
[16] The Open Group, The Open Group Architecture Framework TOGAF Version 9.1. 2011.
[17] C. Harrison and I.A. Donnelly, A Theory of Smart Citie, in Proceedings of the 55th Annual
Meeting of the ISSS-2011. 2011: Hull.
[18] IEC International Electrotechnical Commission. ISO/IEC JTC 1 Information technology,
WG11 on Smart Cities. 2019 [cited 2019 29 April]; Available from:
https://www.iec.ch/dyn/www/f?p=103:14:34897880612264::::FSP_ORG_ID,FSP_LAN
G_ID:12973,25.
[19] Z. Pourzolfaghar, V. Bastidas, and M. Helfert, Standardisation of Enterprise Architecture
Development for Smart Cities. Journal of Knowledge Economy (under publication),
2019.
[20] R. Winter and R. Fischer, Essential Layers, Artifacts, and Dependencies of Enterprise
Architecture. Journal of Enterprise Architecture, 2007.
[21] D. Ferguson, J. Sairamesh, and S. Feldman, Open Frameworks for Information Cities.
Communications of ACM, 2004. 47(2): p. 45-49.
[22] C. Harrison, B. Eckman, R. Hamilton, P. Hartswick, J. Kalagnanam, Paraszczak, and P.
Williams, Foundations for Smarter cities. IBM J. RES. & DEV, 2010. 54(4): p. 1-16.