--- PAGE 1 ---
Australasian Journal of Information Systems Dang-Pham et al.
2022, Vol 26, Selected Papers from ACIS 2020 Digital Kaizen
1
Digital Kaizen: An Approach to Digital Transformation
Duy Dang-Pham
School of Business & Management, RMIT University, Vietnam
duy.dangphamthien@rmit.edu.vn
Ai-Phuong Hoang
School of Business & Management, RMIT University, Vietnam
Diem-Trang Vo
School of Communication & Design, RMIT University, Vietnam
Karlheinz Kautz
Department of Information Systems & Business Analytics, RMIT University, Melbourne,
Australia
Abstract
While digital transformation creates opportunities across all industries, many organisations
and practitioners struggle to grasp what conducting digital transformation entails and seek
directions for how digital transformation programs, especially large and complex ones, can
be executed. In response, recent studies have offered such directions and models for guiding
digital transformation and put forward suggestions for steps and phases of digital
transformation, as well as drivers, enablers, and inhibitors. Many of these proposals are
based on the dynamic capabilities framework as a theoretical foundation and invite more
research to develop further and/or to refine existing models for digital transformation,
especiallyinvestigatinghowdynamiccapabilitiescontributetodigitaltransformation.In this
case study, we explore Digital Kaizen, a systematic approach to conduct large-scale digital
transformation developed and applied at our case organisation FPT Software. This approach
integrates the Kaizen philosophy into digital transformation practices that lead to digital
improvements and transformation of some of the company’s human resource management
processes and its business model. Our analysis and our reflections on our findings lead us to
propose a novel Digital Kaizen process model for digital transformation informed by the
dynamic capabilities framework.
Keywords: Digital transformation, digital transformation implementation, digital
transformation approach, kaizen, digital kaizen, dynamic capabilities framework.
1 Introduction
Alongwiththedevelopmentofnewtechnologiessuchascloudcomputing,bigdataanalytics
or artificial intelligence (AI), the ways businesses operate have been transformed
significantly (Perkin and Abraham, 2017). These digital technologies have been integrated
into all areas of a business, changing the way organisations operate and deliver values to its
customers. In other words, businesses are embracing digital transformation to succeed in the
digital age (Urbach and Röglinger, 2018).
The concept of digital transformation refers to the technology-induced changes necessary for
digital business, in which organisations experience a fundamental and socio-technical
transformation (Legner et al., 2017). The current wave of digitalisation is not only enabled by

--- PAGE 2 ---
Australasian Journal of Information Systems Dang-Pham et al.
2022, Vol 26, Selected Papers from ACIS 2020 Digital Kaizen
2
the convergence of new information technology (IT) megatrends (e.g., social, mobile, big
data, cloud computing), but also modifies an organisation’s value creation logic, and in turn,
creates new types of businesses (Legner et al., 2017). Therefore, the new concept of digital
transformation refers to the manifold socio-technical phenomena and processes of using
these technologies in broader individual, organisational and societal contexts (Legner et al.,
2017). Nevertheless, despite the new opportunities that digital transformation has brought
to organisations, it has created new pressures for organisations to develop adequate
capabilities and capacities, to carry out such transformation (Horlach et al., 2016).
Many organisations and practitioners struggle to grasp what conducting digital
transformation entails and seek directions for how digital transformation programs,
especially large and complex ones, can be executed (Wessel et al., 2020). Recent studies have
offered such directions and models for guiding digital transformation (see e.g., Chirumalla,
2021; Warner and Wäger, 2019) and put forward suggestions for steps and phases of digital
transformation, as well as drivers, enablers, and inhibitors. Some of these are based on
Teece’s (2007) dynamic capabilities framework as a theoretical foundation and invite more
research to develop further and/or to refine existing models for digital transformation,
especially investigating how dynamic capabilities contribute to digital transformation
(Steininger et al., 2022; Vial, 2019; Warner and Wäger, 2019). Lacking an understanding of
digital transformation processes not only increases the risk of failing the transformation
programs, resulting in high organisational and sometimes societal costs, but also limits
knowledge of digital transformation strategies and how transformation efforts may differ
across contexts e.g., large enterprises versus small and medium ones.
Our research heeds the calls for research to explore digital transformation processes and
refine digital transformation strategies (Warner and Wäger, 2019) from the perspective of the
dynamic capabilities framework as a consistent approach for investigating digital
transformation (Ellström et al., 2022; Steininger et al., 2022).
Based on interviews with key informants, we explore Digital Kaizen, a systematic approach
to conduct large-scale digital transformation developed and applied at FPT Software1 , a
large software development and IT outsourcing company that turned into a digital
transformationserviceproviderin Vietnam.Thisapproach integratestheKaizenphilosophy,
which has mainly been applied in manufacturing to optimise production lines, into digital
transformation practices that lead to improvements and transformation of some of the
company’s human resource management processes, in regard to employee engagement,
empowerment, and talent management, and of its business model. This research answers
three research questions:
RQ1: What are the characteristics of the Digital Kaizen approach?
RQ2: What guidance can Digital Kaizen informed by the dynamic capabilities framework,
provide for digital transformation?
RQ3: What are possible outcomes of applying Digital Kaizen?
Our paper is structured as follows. The next section reviews the relevant literature about
digital transformation, enablers for digital transformation, the dynamic capabilities
1 FPT Software has registered Digital Kaizen as a company’s trademark.

--- PAGE 3 ---
Australasian Journal of Information Systems Dang-Pham et al.
2022, Vol 26, Selected Papers from ACIS 2020 Digital Kaizen
3
framework, and the Kaizen philosophy. The research approach section describes our data
collection and introduces the case setting at FPT Software including their Digital Kaizen
approach. In the following section, we present our analysis and the findings, comprising the
identified strategies, tactics, and enablers that in particular facilitated the successful
execution of two notable digital transformation initiatives and the transformation of the
business model at FPT Software. We then discuss and reflect on the relationship between the
Kaizen framework and DigitalKaizen,andbetween the dynamiccapabilities frameworkand
Digital Kaizen. The latter reflections lead us to propose a novel Digital Kaizen process model
fordigitaltransformationinformedbythedynamiccapabilitiesframework.Weconcludeour
paper with considerations and future research directions.
2 Literature review and theoretical background
2.1 Digital transformation
Previous studies on digital transformation concern two distinct but interrelated theoretical
approaches. The first approach is in line with previous findings about IT-enabled
transformation. From this perspective, digital transformation refers to the use of digital
technologies to significantly improve the performance or reach of a company (Bekkhus,
2016), through facilitating the changes in organisational structures, processes, and culture
(Bharadwaj et al., 2013; Matt et al., 2015). IT strategy is no longer restricted to the operational
level, and it is integrated into the organisation’s business strategy (Bharadwaj et al., 2013).
The second approach is based on the premises that digital transformation should go beyond
IT implementation and highlights the integration of digital technologies and structural
modification to generate new paths for value creation (Hess et al., 2016). Wessel et al. (2020)
argue that digital transformation activities should aim to redefine an organisation’s value
proposition rather than solely leveraging digital technology to reinforce the existing value
proposition. While IT-enabled transformation indicates a firm’s vision of developing digital
business models, digital transformation represents the organisation’s comprehensive
utilisation of digital technologies to alter its value creation processes (Vial, 2019). We
understand digital transformation is defined as the changes brought about by digital
technologies, with regard to an organisation’s businessmodels, value proposition, processes,
organisational identity and structures (Hess et al., 2016; Wessel et al., 2020).
Despite the prominence of digital transformation, the literature points to several challenges
that prevent organisations from effectively executing such transformation. First, digital
transformation is a complex concept (Hess et al., 2016; Wessel et al., 2020). Businesses are
unsure about what digital transformation is and do not know how to embark on their
transformation journey (von Leipzig et al., 2017; Wessel et al., 2020). Many enterprises are
hesitant to commit resources to major digital transformation projects, especially when they
are large in both scope and scale and contain uncertain outcomes (Kane et al., 2019). Hence,
they might disregard solutions that are favourable to the firm’s specific situation, which in
turn leads to unintended negative consequences to its transformation activities (Hess et al.,
2016).
Second, in some organisations, data is still utilised in organisational silos, thereby hindering
strategic and digital transformation activities (Rogers, 2016). The lack of a team mentality
and collaboration poses a challenge for digital transformation, as digital transformation

--- PAGE 4 ---
Australasian Journal of Information Systems Dang-Pham et al.
2022, Vol 26, Selected Papers from ACIS 2020 Digital Kaizen
4
requires a unity of efforts (Maedche, 2016). Digital transformation is not about changing
technology but about changing the way an organisation operates; new digital technologies
should be leveraged to promote more creativity through e.g., information and computing
capabilities that enable new forms of collaboration among networks of organisational actors
(Vial, 2019).
Third, the advancement of technologies has led to a shift in the business landscape across
industries (Meraviglia, 2018). While this generated opportunities for innovative start-ups to
create value for customers, it also sparked a digital transformation competition among
businesses (Rogers, 2016). Many companies are familiar with using technologies to improve
their performance; however, as these technologies become more available and affordable,
companies feel the pressure to rapidly transform themselves in an unprecedented manner or
they will lose out eventually.
2.2 Enablers for successful digital transformation
Successful digital transformation depends on anumber of strategicand operational enablers.
Strategies, visions, roadmaps, and business models are viewed as the backbone of successful
digital transformation (Mergel et al., 2019). A digital strategy requires from a company to
deploy digital technologies to target unmet customer needs; that is, to review the current
value propositions. Alternatively, it needs to come up with a new business model that
generates additional revenue streams (Loonam et al., 2018).
Defining scope is the first, most critical step in any transformation project. Common scopes
of digital transformation include creating customer value through software- and platform-
enabled services or improving efficiency by digitalising logistics activities with intelligence
and predictive maintenance (Correani et al., 2020). These projects often aim at making
continuous improvements, while acknowledging that an end state would not be achievable
(Mergel et al., 2019). This also means that organisations should avoid investing significant
sums in research and implementation, and more efforts should be spent on minimising risk
and motivating employees during this never-ending process (Mergel et al.,2019). A common
tactic used is implementing small, low-risk pilots for specific business lines in a stepwise
fashion (Henriette et al., 2016). As the benefits of digital transformation programs are
generally qualitative in nature, it is difficult for organisational members to realise those
benefits (Agrawal et al., 2019). The stepwise approach allows companies to present visible
results to stakeholders more easily and help to inspire changes (Henriette et al., 2016).
Organisational culture is another enabler of digital transformation. A supportive
organisational culture in which joint business and IT initiatives flourish is vital for successful
digitaltransformation(Osmundsen etal.,2018).An open cultureimprovestheorganisation’s
willingness to accept, implement, and promote changes, which creates a conducive
environment for digital transformation (Osmundsen et al., 2018). Cultural considerations
such as a focused vision statement and clear communication strategy are also necessary for
companies to manoeuvrethrough large-scale, rapid, and disruptive changes (Henriette et al.,
2016).
The commitment and involvement of top management are required (Henriette et al., 2016;
Rueckel et al., 2020). The lack of a sense of urgency is a barrier of digital transformation, as
complacent organisational leaders would not support transformation initiatives (Agrawal et
al., 2019). A shared digital vision among managers and executives is therefore essential.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Australasian Journal of Information Systems Dang-Pham et al.
2022, Vol 26, Selected Papers from ACIS 2020 Digital Kaizen
5
Successful initiatives highlight the role of a Chief Digital Officer (CDO), who oversees digital
transformation projects, and of strong support from the board of directors (Ivancic et al.,
2019).
Transformation also requires the inclusion of staff from the entire organisation; employees
must feel that they play an essential role in the implementation process (Ivancic et al., 2019).
Organisations can organise regular workshops to share the transformation status and assess
the attitude of managers toward the transformation (Chanias et al., 2019). Training should be
also arranged for new employees to receive mentorship from current ones, which helps to
flatten organisational hierarchies and makes it possible for entrepreneurial employees to
identify problems early and improve organisational efficiency (Li et al., 2018).
Enabler Description References
Strategy and
business model
The digital strategy must incorporate organisational goals
and visions, including reformulating the value proposition
of the business, reconfiguring value delivery models,
adapting new business models, and developing new
capabilities.
Agrawal et al. (2019);
Henriette et al. (2016);
Ivancic et al. (2019);
Loonam et al. (2018);
Osmundsen et al. (2018);
Rueckel et al. (2020)
Change
management
Change management is prioritised to deal with the potential
adverse effects created by digital disruptions. Digital
champions should be appointed to advocate the adoption of
a digital mindset and of tools through engaging with the
employees. Communication, including a clear and focused
vision statement, is critical in this process.
Agrawal et al. (2019);
Correani et al. (2020);
Ivancic et al. (2019);
Loonam et al. (2018);
Osmundsen et al. (2018)
Organisational
culture and
participation
Digital transformation demands collective participation of
all organisational members. It requires the endorsement and
support from top management to present a clear vision and
values. It also strives for a digital culture that involves
greater mobility, collaboration and learning.
Agrawal et al. (2019);
Henriette et al. (2016);
Ivancic et al. (2019);
Loonam et al. (2018);
Osmundsen et al. (2018)
Data and IT
infrastructures
Data and IT infrastructures lie at the core of digital
transformation as both its prerequisites and outcomes.
Outcomes include better data management and accessible
data platforms for internal and external stakeholders. Data
as a strategic asset of the company are synchronised,
structured, and made accessible to provide insights to
managers.
Correani et al. (2020);
Gaffley and Pelser (2021);
Ivancic et al. (2019);
Loonam et al. (2018);
Rueckel et al. (2020)
Human resource
management
New professional roles, e.g., digital advisors and digital
champions, may be created. Retaining digital talent and
improving digital skills are vital for developing new
workforce capabilities. New employees with digital skills
and proactive mindsets are preferable.
Correani et al. (2020);
Henriette et al. (2016);
Ivancic et al. (2019);
Rueckel et al. (2020)
Digital
ecosystem
The development of digital transformation programs often
responds to changing market needs, digital shifts in the
industry, and changes in the competitive landscape and
regulations. Customers are encouraged to participate in the
implementing process. Companies may utilise their existing
digital ecosystems and/or establish new strategic networks
and partnerships and cooperate with the academic
community for knowledge transfer.
Correani et al. (2020);
Ivancic et al. (2019);
Loonam et al. (2018);
Osmundsen et al. (2018)
Table 1. Enablers of successful digital transformation
Data and technology infrastructures are important assets in this never-ending process
(Correani et al., 2020; Gaffley and Pelser, 2021). Companies may need to accept that digital

--- PAGE 6 ---
Australasian Journal of Information Systems Dang-Pham et al.
2022, Vol 26, Selected Papers from ACIS 2020 Digital Kaizen
6
transformation introduces new cyber security and privacy issues due to the adoption of new
technologies and the increasing need for data collection. Thus, rather than fear, companies
should be aware of and face these cyber risks (Agrawal et al., 2019). Top managements need
to recognise data as an important asset for business, and business data (e.g., data on
personnel, financial reports, marketing information and sales performance) should be
synchronised and made accessible at a single source (Gaffley and Pelser, 2021).
Companies develop their human capital for digital transformation by retaining and
improving employees’ digital skills, as well as by fostering a culture for digital learning
(Gaffley and Pelser, 2021). Employees need to have specific skills and capabilities to fully
seize the opportunities created by digital technologies (Correani et al., 2020). The lack of
digital skills and talents is considered one of the most significant barriers to digital
transformation (Agrawal et al., 2019). Managers and leaders must therefore devise proper
training programs to improve employees’ digital capabilities and to foster a digital spirit
(Correani et al., 2020; Ivancic et al., 2019).
Both the involvement of internal and external stakeholders is essential. For instance, new
digital solutions should be designed according to an end-to-end customer journey so that the
new products and services offer novel values (Loonam et al., 2018). Integration with digital
ecosystems is necessary for successful digital transformation, such as companies should
cooperate with the academic community to enable knowledge transfer (Ivancic et al., 2019;
Osmundsen et al., 2018; Rueckel et al., 2020). Digital transformation not only involves
digitising existing processes, forms, documents, and services, but also digitally leveraging
the relationships with their stakeholders (Mergel et al., 2019). For instance, to maintain order
in its business ecosystem, Alibaba constantly pushes new certification services forward to
verify the credits and qualifications of both buyers and sellers using the large amount of
transaction data accumulated on its platform (Li et al., 2018).
Table 1 summarises the identified enablers of digital transformation and their descriptions
that we extracted from our review of the extant literature.
2.3 Dynamic capabilities and digital transformation
Scholars have investigated digital transformation through various theoretical lens. Among
these, the dynamic capabilities framework (Teece, 2007) has been widely applied and
considered as a consistent approach to study digital transformation (Ellström et al., 2022;
WarnerandWäger,2019).Atthecoreofthisframeworkisahierarchyofcapabilities,ranging
from ordinary capabilities i.e., operational processes that are carried out by most companies,
to mircofoundations i.e., less commonly employed routines that allow firms to integrate or
reconfigure resources, and to dynamic capabilities at the top of the hierarchy (Teece, 2018).
Dynamic capabilities are closely related to digital transformation since they enable firms to
formulate strategies for refining existing and designing new business models in
considerations of current and future contingencies, which are the key objectives of digital
transformation programs (Warner and Wäger, 2019).
According to Teece (2007) what matters for organisations is corporate agility which is
achieved through three dynamic capabilities, namely sensing, seizing, and transforming.
Sensing capabilities focus on a firm’s scanning of the ‘local’ and ‘distant’ environments to
detect opportunities and threats and involves research and development activities and
engagement with different stakeholders. Once opportunities are detected, seizing

--- PAGE 7 ---
Australasian Journal of Information Systems Dang-Pham et al.
2022, Vol 26, Selected Papers from ACIS 2020 Digital Kaizen
7
capabilities allow firms to capture the values of those opportunities, mainly through
informed decision-making, investments, and commercialisation strategies. The re-designing
or creation of new business models or architectures, with updated technological
competences, are key activities that reflect the seizing capabilities (Teece, 2007).
Transforming capabilities concern the firm’s redeployment and reconfiguration of resources
to sustain profitability in response to the changing business environment.
The dynamic capabilities framework is used to study firms’ change capacity and to inform
strategies for effective digital transformation (Warner and Wäger, 2019). Prior studies
developed and proposed process models focusing on dynamic capabilities, which describe
the relationships between these capabilities, triggers and enablers of digital transformation,
and identify the necessary mircofoundations or routines for developing the dynamic
capabilities (see e.g., Chirumalla, 2021; Ellström et al., 2022; Warner and Wäger, 2019). For
instance, data-driven sensing, flexible root cause discovery, agile cross-functional teams,
continuous improvement strategy, and training support were determined to be
mircofoundations for developing capabilities for digital transformation (Chirumalla, 2021).
Similarly, Ellström et al. (2022) identified cross-industrial and inside-out digital sensing,
determining enterprise boundaries i.e., what to do in-house and what to outsource, and
decomposing digital transformation into specified projects as mircofoundations. The
dynamic capabilities and the specific mircofoundations are linked to the enablers of digital
transformation, some of which were identified in our review above, such as data
infrastructure, executive support, and strategies (Chirumalla, 2021; Warner and Wäger,
2019).
2.4 The Kaizen philosophy
Kaizen is a Japanese business philosophy which refers to the “continuous improvement”
approach led and supported by management. It involves the concept of change (kai) and to
become good (zen) (Newitt, 1996; von Leipzig et al., 2017). Therefore, organisations adopting
a Kaizen philosophy continuously identify and develop new or improved processes to
achieve outcomes that contribute to organisational goals (Brunet and New 2003). The Kaizen
philosophy and methodology focuses on three aspects: process, standards, and people
(Masaaki, 1986; Suárez-Barraza and Lingham, 2008).
First, Kaizen emphasises the idea that processes need to be improved before good results can
beobtained(Masaaki,1986).Duetotherapidtransitionofbusinesslandscapes,organisations
are in a constant state of flux (Perkin and Abraham, 2017). The philosophy emphasises the
key idea that there is no end to the continuous improvement process that leverages good
teamwork and flexibility in performing work (Wickens, 1990). In this sense, it promotes
process-oriented thinking rather than result-oriented thinking (Wittenberg, 1994).
Second, standardisation is another essential feature of the Kaizen philosophy (Wittenberg,
1994). Kaizen focuses on establishing and maintaining standards, then making small and
continuous improvements while following such standards. Standards refer to policies,
guidelines, rules, and procedures (Masaaki, 1986). These standards are to be reviewed and
revised whenever people are unable to adhere to them, so that their effectiveness is
reinforced, and they remain the practical guidelines for the employees (Wittenberg, 1994).
Third, Kaizen is people-centric and involves everyone within an organisation. It introduces
a force of making improvements that draws on a spirit of team cooperation (Malloch, 1997).

--- PAGE 8 ---
Australasian Journal of Information Systems Dang-Pham et al.
2022, Vol 26, Selected Papers from ACIS 2020 Digital Kaizen
8
Kaizen assumes that positive changes in people’s attitudes and efforts are more likely to
produce improvements in the long run (Wittenberg, 1994). Similarly, researchers suggested
group-oriented Kaizen as a mechanism to improve work methods, routines, and procedures
(Masaaki, 1986). Kaizen not only starts with people’s needs and focuses on their efforts, but
also concerns the collaborations between employees during work processes.
While Kaizen is widely applicable as a management philosophy and methodology, previous
studies discussedwhether Kaizen couldhinderinnovation.While researchers suggested that
innovation is implemented by abrupt changes, Kaizen refers to a gradual process to
introduce improvements (Wittenberg, 1994). As a result, the philosophy is said to be better
suited for a slowly growing economy, whereas the capability to come up with innovations is
needed for a fast-growing economy (Wittenberg, 1994).
In practice, the Kaizen philosophy covers many management techniques including quality
circles, total productive maintenance, just-in-time, and robotic process automation
(Wittenberg, 1994). For example, Masaaki (1986) highlighted that Kaizen is an overarching
concept for total quality management, which is a system of management where every
employee continuously improves their standards of work in every aspect of a company’s
operation. Likewise, Mizuno (1988) emphasised that companywide quality control, a
Japanese-rooted system for integrating quality technology in different departments to
achieve customer satisfaction, is also based on the Kaizen approach. In sum, the philosophy
has affected many organisations’ productivity, and supported businesses to produce high-
quality organisational outcomes (Macpherson et al., 2015; Newitt, 1996; Singh and Singh,
2009).
The literature review suggests that Kaizen and digital transformation share similar
characteristics. First, Kaizen focuses on making continuous improvements, while digital
transformation demands continual changes and innovative technology deployment (Newitt,
1996; von Leipzig et al., 2017; Vial, 2019). Second, Kaizen aims to influence organisations’
productivity to achieve better customer satisfaction, and similarly, changes enabled by
digital technologies focus on bringing about value creation processes that benefit both
organisational activities and a company’s stakeholders (Macpherson et al., 2015; Hess et al.,
2016; Wessel et al., 2020). Third, both Kaizen and digital transformation draw on people and
processes to encapsulate the changes (Masaaki, 1986; Suárez-Barraza and Lingham, 2008;
Hess et al., 2016; Wessel et al., 2020). These similarities and connections between Kaizen and
digital transformation support the conceptualisation of the Digital Kaizen concept as an
approach to digital transformation.
3 Research approach
3.1 Research method and data collection
The objective of this research is to investigate Digital Kaizen as an approach for conducting
digital transformation. Given the nature of our research inquiries and the uniqueness of the
approach, as developed by FPT Software, we decided to follow a qualitative approach to
explore the phenomenon (Creswell and Creswell, 2018). Specifically, we opted for the
interpretive case study approach (Walsham, 1995), which involved conducting in-depth
interviews with three key informants who would be reasonably expected to have the best
knowledge about the research topic: (1) the Chief Executive Officer (CEO), (2) the Chief

--- PAGE 9 ---
Australasian Journal of Information Systems Dang-Pham et al.
2022, Vol 26, Selected Papers from ACIS 2020 Digital Kaizen
9
Digital & Technology Officer (CD&TO) cum Executive Vice President, and (3) the Head of
Digital Innovation (HDI). They were working in Ho Chi Minh City, Ha Noi, and Japan,
respectively.
Interpretive case studies aim to understand both the context and processes related to the use
of information systems, and how these two elements influence each other (Walsham, 1995).
The research took place in a single organisation rather than several case organisations.
Investigating a representative case introduces ideal types, as opposed to multiple cases, that
are considered to be prototypical of a phenomenon (Kautz and Bjerknes, 2015). While the
generalisability of the findings drawn from this approach may be limited, the interpretive
case study provides a detailed account of empirical findings that contribute to the existing
literature.
We conducted our first interview with the HDI, and then we were introduced to the CD&TO
and CEO through the snowballing method. The open-ended interviews were conducted
online via Skype and audio-recorded, each of which lasted one hour on average. After each
interview, we reviewed the findings and revised the questions to follow up with the next
informant. The HDI and CD&TO were interviewed twice, where the second interviews
aimed to clarify some findings and probed for more information, which resulted in a total of
five interviews. The interview data was coded openly and thematically analysed for
similarities and patterns, as well as for disparities. The findings were sent back to the
informants for feedback to ensure external validity (Dubé and Paré, 2003). Direct quotes are
provided in this paper to ensure research rigor (Dubé and Paré, 2003).
Initially, we announced our research objective to investigate strategies for conducting large-
scaledigitalinnovation on LinkedIn foramonth.Amongthereceivedacceptancesfromthree
differentcompaniestoparticipatein theresearch project,weselectedtoconductthisresearch
with FPT Software for three reasons. First, it is an internationally recognised and established
technology and digital transformation enterprise. Second, it offered the opportunity to
investigate the Digital Kaizen methodology, which we considered as a potential for
generating findings that could contribute to both theory and practice. Third, the company
was highly committed to the project and promised access to key executive members for data
collection.
Our qualitative data set contains a small set of five interviews with three key informants at
FPT Software, who are executive members of the company. While this can be considered a
limitation of our study, such an approach was feasible during the pandemic, when strict
lockdowns that lasted for several months in Vietnam created challenges for data collection.
To add interpretive rigor, we conducted additional desk research which involved examining
documents, news articles, reports, and other materials concerning the company’s Digital
Kaizen approach. Moreover, we consider the five interviews with the key informants to be
sufficient and adequate to answer our research questions pertaining to the characteristics of
theuniqueDigitalKaizen approach andits potential in guiding digitaltransformation efforts
due to the following reasons.
First, the key informants, whom we interviewed, are among the few staff at FPT Software
who contributed to the creation of the Digital Kaizen approach and observed its
implementation since its inception. Therefore, these informants hold the vision and in-depth
knowledge about the characteristics of the approach and how it was intended to be used for

--- PAGE 10 ---
Australasian Journal of Information Systems Dang-Pham et al.
2022, Vol 26, Selected Papers from ACIS 2020 Digital Kaizen
10
digital transformation. Second, our study does not investigate and analyse the impact of
Digital Kaizen on elements at the micro level of the company such as the workforce or work
processes at FPT Software, therefore input and insights of other stakeholders such as other
employees were not within the scope of this research and were omitted. Third, our study is
exploratory by nature and despite the process model for Digital Kaizen, which we propose,
does not aim at achieving a generalisation of our findings. Thus, it was critical to focus on
extracting insights from the relevant informants to understand the phenomenon rather than
on achieving a large sample size.
3.2 Case setting
FPT Software is a part of FPT Corporation – a large technology and IT services group
headquartered in Vietnam (FPT Software, 2020). FPT Software was established in 1999 with
the mission to bring technological innovations to its international customers while being
dedicated to the country’s prosperity and developing skills of young Vietnamese employees.
In 2020, FPT Software achieved nearly USD$1.2 billion in revenue and has become one of
Vietnam’s largest and fastest growing IT companies that is able to provide digital solutions
to clients globally, ranging from the Asia-Pacific, Oceania, North America and to Europe.
Currently, it has more than 100 customers across 45 countries with key companies in diverse
sectors, rangingfrom automotive industry (e.g., Toyota) to the aviation industry (e.g., Airbus
and Palantir). In the next 10 years, FPT Software sets the ambition to become one of the top
50 technology service providers in the world.
Kaizen Framework Digital Kaizen
Step 1: Discover improvement potential
• Maintain awareness, through experience and
training, of the opportunities or challenges that
can bring changes to improve processes the
organisation’s processes
• Cross-functional pain points are identified by
conducting regular and mandatory workshops
which are attended by department managers
Step 2: Analyse the current method of work
• Understand the process inside the improvement
area, use various analysis techniques
• Managers provide feedback about operational
issues which are encountered during the daily
work and collaboration
Step 3: Generate original ideas
• Brainstorm the problems using creative and
analytical thinking of each participant
• Managers discuss and come up with digital
transformation solutions to address cross-
functional pain points
• A steering committee evaluates the proposed
projects to determine their priority based on clear
criteria
Steps 4 & 5: Develop and implement the plan
• Decide who will do what, where, how, by when,
and why
• Coordinate the different implementation teams
• Flexible change management techniques are
used to increase users’ adoption of
improvement solutions
• Focus is on small and quick wins to raise
employees’ morale with the goal of
implementation not only being immediate
results but also nurturing change capability and
digital maturity
Step 6: Evaluate the new method of work
• Compare results with the conditions before the
improvement initiatives and decide whether
further improvements are necessary and possible
• Digital transformation projects are evaluated
based on specific criteria which are linked to
strategic objectives

--- PAGE 11 ---
Australasian Journal of Information Systems Dang-Pham et al.
2022, Vol 26, Selected Papers from ACIS 2020 Digital Kaizen
11
• If successful, standardise the solution • Successful digital transformation projects are
refined, packaged, and sold to clients
Table 2. Mapping the Kaizen Framework onto the Digital Kaizen Approach
FPT Software created its own digital transformation methodology which they called ‘Digital
Kaizen’ that involves conducting a series of small yet effective digital transformation
initiatives within short time frames, where they mapped the six steps of the Kaizen
Framework (Smalley and Kato, 2010), discover improvement potential, analyse the current
method of work, generate ideas, develop and implement the improvement plan, and
evaluate the new method of work to fit their objectives. Table 2 summarises the mapping of
the Kaizen Framework onto the Digital Kaizen approach at FPT Software.
The company’s digital transformation principle is simple: ‘driving business and
technological transformation through people engagement.’ To achieve that, FPT Software
identified the ‘pain points’ or cross-functional problems that are encountered by employees
at the operational level in their daily work. By adopting Digital Kaizen, according to our
informants the company’s digital transformation delivers continuous improvements in a
manner that maximises the adoption of digital technologies, optimises procedures, and
minimiseswaste.Thecompany’sdigitaltransformation principleissimple:‘drivingbusiness
and technological transformation through people engagement.’ To achieve that, FPT
Software identified the ‘pain points’ or cross-functional problems that are encountered by
employees at the operational level in their daily work. By adopting Digital Kaizen, the
company’s digital transformation delivers continuous improvements in a manner that
maximises the adoption of digital technologies, optimises procedures, and minimises waste.
Out of five digital transformation initiatives that recently had been implemented in FPT
Software, two, MyFPT and AkaLink, have been investigated in this research. These two
examples highlight how the company enacts its digital transformation strategy by relating to
the alignment between employees’ needs and organisational goals, and how the focus on
continuous improvements through delivering small digital transformation initiatives
provided a spill over effect that nurtured and lead to a high level of digital maturity (Kane
et al., 2019) of the company. This focus also contributed to the transformation of the
company’s business model from a software development and IT outsourcing firm to an IT
consultancy.
4 Analysis and Findings
To manage its digital business transformation, FPT Software adapted the Kaizen philosophy
and created its own approach which they named Digital Kaizen. Digital Kaizen prioritises
making a series of small initiatives and quick wins that build towards long-term success
rather than creating a ‘big-bang’ disruption. It aims to continuously tackle cross-functional
issues that are aligned with their strategic business goals, through implementing digital
technologies that improve business processes and people engagement. These small, when
successful, transformations in turn lead to sustainable and scalable digital transformation
solutions.
Cross-functional pain points are the starting point of the company’s stepwise digital
transformation strategy.They representtheissuesthatexist in thecompany’s operations that

--- PAGE 12 ---
Australasian Journal of Information Systems Dang-Pham et al.
2022, Vol 26, Selected Papers from ACIS 2020 Digital Kaizen
12
have direct impacts on the employees. To identify these, the company conducts regular and
mandatory workshops throughout the four quarters of a year, in which managers from
different departments participate and provide feedback about the operational issues
encountered during the daily work interactions between departments.
“The process of generating cross-function pain points addresses the concerns of employees who
are directly involved in daily business operations. Every few months, FPT Software organises a
workshop that aims to understand these cross-functional pain points. After the annual core
missions of the entire company are identified, managers of all departments, who are related to
those missions, gatherandperform brainstorming activityto produce alist of painpoints. These
pain points are then ranked and prioritised based on some metrics. Digital transformation
projects are created to address the important pain points, and specific tasks are assigned to the
relevant teams.” – CD&TO
These jointworkshops aim to address twoissues of digital transformation.First, whileit may
be easier for each department to recognise and address its own pain points, it is of greater
importance to FPT Software to define the cross-functional pain points that affect multiple
departments and hinder shared work processes. Second, the CD & TO appreciated that
digital transformation is more effective when it is motivated by the common needs of
different organisational functions, as compared to by the needs of each company’s separate
department (Sidhu, 2019).
“When it comes to identifying organisational problems, people often think that the problem is
caused by other departments and not by themselves; department A may tend to attribute the
pain point to department B and vice versa. As a result, nobody tackles the pain points since they
think those pain points are not their responsibility. Solving these problems will improve the
work engagement between departments and thus benefit the whole business process. As such, it
is effective when cross-functional teams work together in the workshops to identify the pain
points.” – CD&TO
Then, project proposals for digital transformation solutions are developed to address the
pain points, and these proposals are evaluated by a steering committee to determine their
priority. Among the evaluation criteria used to assess the solutions’ priority, the key criteria
are feasibility, urgency, and potential values. First, feasibility refers to the speed of the
project’s completion and the evaluation of return on investment (ROI) that is typically
anticipated to be achieved within three or six months. Second, urgency is determined by the
critical level of the pain points that the proposed projects aim to tackle. Forexample,a project
that focuses on a new business process that is needed for complying with a new regulation
has a higher priority than others. Third, a proposed project is deemed to have high potential
value if it contributes to the key annual missions of FPT Software, which often aim at
providing value to the human and technological resources of the company.
“The rule of thumb is that no project is allowed to take more than 6 months to complete. After
six months, we should be able to evaluate the project’s ROI. Not only the project must support
the company’s business strategy in the next three to five years, but ideally it should also yield
enough revenue to sustain itself, or this revenue can be re-invested in other projects. Apart from
solvingthecritical painpoints,theproject isconsideredasvaluablewhenitbenefitsthepersonal
development of the employees or increases technological capital, which then contribute to other
digital transformation projects.” – CEO

--- PAGE 13 ---
Australasian Journal of Information Systems Dang-Pham et al.
2022, Vol 26, Selected Papers from ACIS 2020 Digital Kaizen
13
After completion, successful digital transformation projects are refined and packaged
together with the Digital Kaizen approach as digital transformation solutions, which as part
of IT consultancy assignments are sold to FPT Software’s clients afterwards. From its
database of clients, FPT Software identifies and approaches clients, who may have the issues
or pain points that can be addressed by such digital transformation solutions. As such FPT
Software does not primarily sell off-the-shelf software packages anymore but provides
bespoke digital transformation solutions that are tailored to their clients’ business context
and needs.
“When selling digital transformation solutions to our clients, we sell the methodology rather
than the software package. While digital technologies are just tools, Digital Kaizen is a
methodological framework that guides the whole transformation process. When working with
clients, FPT Software serves as a consultant or advisor and not as a one-time seller. Through
conducting workshops with the clients, which are similar to what we do in FPT Software, we
identify clients’ pain points and come up with the solutions based on their context and needs.
This approach therefore encourages the clients to adopt the Digital Kaizen spirit and to embrace
continuous improvements rather than sticking to one fixed solution.” – CEO
Two notable internal digital transformation projects that successfully addressed two of FPT
Software’s pain points were MyFPT and AkaLink. They were considered by the informants
as key digital transformation solutions of FPT, which contributed significantly to the
business-critical operations of the company in 2020. While MyFPT aimed to tackle pain
points that were related to retention, AkaLink focused on solving problems related to both
resource fulfilment and retention. As these projects were concerned with achieving human
resources-related objectives, they illustrate the process from identifying pain points to
developingdigitaltransformation solutionsthatwerealignedwith FPT’sstrategicobjectives.
The following three subsections focus on the analysis of these two initiatives.
4.1 MyFPT: a mobile app for people engagement
From 2017 to 2018, employee engagement was one of the key challenges of FPT Software.
Due to its fast-growing development, the number of employees increased significantly,
which made it difficult for managers to provide personalised engagement with their
employees and retain them. At that time, it was common for a manager to have about 200
employees who reported directly to him/ her. In addition, there was a lack of adequate
processes and systems to evaluate the performance of these employees, thereby leading to
poor performance review experiences and employees felt unacknowledged for their efforts.
As a result, this one-year period witnessed a high turnover rate of 30 percent, where
approximately 1,500 of 5,000 new employees left the company. At the same time, the
interviews with informants revealed that they considered the time spent on training new
staffs was a possible waste. It took every new employee 14 days to understand the
procedures and systems and get along with key supporters before they could perform their
tasks. This time-consuming onboarding process was not a challenge of any particular
department but a cross-functional problem for all involved departments. The ineffective
employeeengagementmethodsandlengthyonboardingprocesswereidentifiedasthecross-
functional pain points between multiple departments and across organisational levels.
These identified pain points were addressed by developing and introducing an all-in-one
mobile application called MyFPT, which transformed staff engagement and onboarding

--- PAGE 14 ---
Australasian Journal of Information Systems Dang-Pham et al.
2022, Vol 26, Selected Papers from ACIS 2020 Digital Kaizen
14
process. The mobile app contains a wide range of functionalities of both an enterprise social
network and an online marketplace. For example, with a database of frequently asked
questions (FAQs), new employees have easy access to and the opportunity to familiarise
themselveswith theworkproceduresandsystemsin FPTSoftware.In addition,personalised
feedback about performance from managers to employees can be sent via this mobile app,
and the employees can send each other appreciations and congratulations on special
occasions. The app also provides features to improve the employees’ work experience at FPT
Software. For example, they can give ratings and reviews for the meals served at the
company’s cafeteria, and a function is implemented on the app to suggest new or matching
dishes based on each employee’s unique dining patterns and needs. By interacting with the
app, employees can earn and receive reward points, which the company calls ‘company
golds’ and use these to buy lunches at work or other goods.
A series of engagement programs were promoted on the mobile app to increase the
employees’ adoption of the app. For example, FPT Software incorporated MyFPT into its
social event “Run for Green”, in which the company pledged to plant a tree for every 10-
kilometer run by each employee as recorded on the app. Other work-related daily activities
are also integrated into the app. For instance, the employees get extra points when they
commute to work by company buses. The tangible benefits (e.g., bus tickets, redeemable
points) are presented as an incentive for the employees’ trial of the application, and the app’s
features (e.g., food reviews, feedback, appreciation) are used to maintain their engagement
with the app in the long run. The HDI of FPT Software explained the approach to persuade
employees to adopt MyFPT as part of this digital transformation project:
“While the Digital Kaizen as a framework instructs us on what and how to implement digital
transformations, top management needs to be creative in designing every implementation step.
On one hand, MyFPT is created to serve the essential needs of the employees to engage with the
company; therefore, the initial adoption by some employees can be anticipated and is
understandable. On the other hand, when the app as part of the digital transformation needs to
be adopted at a larger scale, it needs to be flexibly changed to promote its adoption.” – HDI
After six months of implementing the MyFPT project, several achievements were recorded.
First, new employees no longer had to spend too much time to get familiarized with the
company's procedures and systems, as they could find the necessary information on MyFPT.
As a result, the time required for the onboarding process was reduced from 14 days to five
days, which amounted to a large saving in terms of monetary value. Second, the human
resources department and top management were now able to engage better with the
employees and retain new hires more effectively, which led to a significant decrease in the
company’s high turnover rate. Currently, 15,000 employees use MyFPT daily for various
purposes, from booking transport and ordering food, to reviewing their evaluations and
communicating with colleagues. The large number of active daily users indicates a high level
of engagement between FPT Software and their employees. In total, 22 strategic pain points
were resolved through the digitally transformed onboarding and engagement processes.
4.2 AkaLink: a digital platform for skill inventory management
During the 2018–2019 period, FPT Software faced an issue related to the management of the
company’s skill inventory. Traditionally, human resources management activities involve
updating and assessing the current skill inventory, forecasting the availability for core skills

--- PAGE 15 ---
Australasian Journal of Information Systems Dang-Pham et al.
2022, Vol 26, Selected Papers from ACIS 2020 Digital Kaizen
15
and sourcing talents to meet business needs in a timely manner. As the company was
growing rapidly, there was a growing demand for increasing the speed of these activities
and for continuous monitoring of the organisational skill inventory. These requirements
were identified as the cross-functional pain points of multiple departments that needed to be
addressed.
FPT Software developed AkaLink to improve the skill inventory management processes.
AkaLinkisan onlinedigitalplatformthatprovidesprojectmanagementandenterprisesocial
networking functionalities. Employees register and update their skills after every project,
and their colleagues can endorse each other’s skills. AkaLink also allows employees to
volunteer for tasks in other departments, and the system recommends new projects to the
employees which match their nominated skills and career development plans. As such,
AkaLink empowers employees to make decisions on their career development. The platform
also provides top management with more accurate and timely information about the
employees’ participation in projects, and an overview of the skills thatare currentlyavailable
in the company. This information in turn enables the top management to plan for training
programs and hiring strategies more effectively. It was estimated that this digital
transformation project had yielded a total revenue of about USD$700,000 in June 2020.
4.3 MyFPT and AkaLink as Digital Kaizen-driven digital transformation
solutions
For both digital transformation solutions, the six steps of Digital Kaizen were executed as
follows: in step 1 (discover improvement potential) top management set strategic objectives
and department managers were organised in workshops to identify and discuss pain points
as a foundation to generate relevant digital transformation solutions; in step 2 (analyse
current method of work) lack of adequate employee engagement and an inefficient
onboarding process were identified as particular cross-functional pain points. In step 3
(generate original ideas), potential digital transformation solutions which aimed at
improving employee engagement and onboardingwere prioritised based on their feasibility,
urgency, potential values, and alignment with the organisation’s strategic objectives.
Subsequently in steps 4 and 5 (Develop and implement the improvement plan), change
management techniques were employed to increase the employees’ adoption of the digital
transformation solutions; and in step 6 (evaluate the new method of work), the achievements
of the new methods of work were recorded in terms of monetary gain, time saved, and
number of addressed pain points. As an additional outcome, the employee engagement
platform AkaLink has been advertised and successfully been sold to clients.
The two projects are instances of FPT Software’s digital transformation solutions that
resulted in not only monetary values but according to our informants, their evaluation
showed that they also had spill over effects that impacted the whole organisation (see also
subsection 3.2 ‘Case setting’). First, as employees engaged in these digital transformation
projects, they further increased their readiness to adapt to the organisational changes related
to using new technologies. Second, these projects addressed and resolved cross-functional
pain points that directly impacted operational staff in their daily work, which in turn
increased their job satisfaction. Third, as the pain points were successfully addressed in a
short time frame of three to six months, the employees’ morale increased and top

--- PAGE 16 ---
Australasian Journal of Information Systems Dang-Pham et al.
2022, Vol 26, Selected Papers from ACIS 2020 Digital Kaizen
16
management gained trust from the employees, which again motivated their participation in
other, subsequent digital transformation activities, as the CEO stated.
“It should be noted that digital transformation projects must benefit employees at the
operational level first. Digital transformation projects should not be about creating new tasks
for them but offer new solutions to increase their productivity and performance. This will make
the employees find the digital transformations more relevant to them and feel willing to get
involved in transformation activities.” – CEO
4.4 The enablers of digital transformation at FPT Software
FPT Software’s initial motivation for digital transformation was to improve in-house
businessprocessesby addressingtheir cross-functionalpain pointswith digital technologies.
In light of the first enabler that we identified from the literature review (see table 1), strategy
and business model, FPT Software’s strategy for digital transformation was originally
internally focused. The approach for planning and implementing the digital transformation
at FPT Software was operationalised and involved regular assessments of the status quo, as
shown in theirconductingofthefrequent,mandatoryworkshopstoidentifycross-functional
pain points. Our informants at FPT Software emphasised the role of the strategic objectives
as the guiding vision with which digital transformation efforts and solutions had to align.
However, FPT Software did not stop at internally addressing the pain points, they also
commercialised and sold their digital transformation solutions to their clients. Their
motivation for digital transformation is to both improve internal processes and to service the
market at the same time. The challenge of having such a dual motivation is to ensure the
relevance of the company’s internal priorities to those of the clients, so that their
commercialised digital transformation solutions will be appealing to and accepted by their
clients. In our case, FPT Software leveraged the advantage of being a large enterprise with a
long history of doing business with both local and global customers, which provided them
with the knowledge of the common pain points of their clients (see also subsection 4.5 ‘The
transformation of the company’s business model’).
With regard to the two enablers, organisational participation and human resource
management, it can be seen that learning and collaboration are also the prevalent themes of
the digital transformation at FPT Software. For FPT Software, the benefits of their initial
digital transformation are not limited to the developed digital artifacts as digital
transformation solutions, but more importantly the participating employees also improved
their digital skills and mindset i.e., their digital readiness for future transformation solutions
(see also subsection 4.3‘MyFPT andAkaLink asDigitalKaizen-driven digital transformation
solutions). Interestingly, FPT Software realised the transformation of the employees’ digital
readiness as a spill over effect rather than what they had intended to achieve, suggesting that
digital transformation may bring unexpected results to organisations. Top management
support of digital transformation was not explicitly mentioned in our interviews.
Nevertheless, it can be implied that a common vision for digital transformation was shared
among managers and employees, as was evident through their active participation in the
assessment of the company’s status quo and the implemented change management
techniques.
In terms of change management, FPT Software’ approach for implementing digital
transformation is a stepwise and iterative approach, following the Digital Kaizen

--- PAGE 17 ---
Australasian Journal of Information Systems Dang-Pham et al.
2022, Vol 26, Selected Papers from ACIS 2020 Digital Kaizen
17
methodology that emphasises making small and quick wins during the transformation
process to maintain employees’ high morale. While the role of a digital champion is
mentioned in several digital transformation studies, such role did not surface in our
interviews with FPT Software. Instead, the successful digital transformation implementation
at FPT Software relied more on their execution of employee engagement techniques,
including the use of incentives to encourage the adoption of digital technologies.
As a software development and IT outsourcing company, it is unsurprising that FPT
Software had the capabilities to develop the two applications in-house, which is part of their
‘data and IT infrastructures’ enabler of digital transformation. However, the interviewees
claimed that FPT Software’s successful digital transformation comes not only from their
technological infrastructures but also their active assessment of the status quo that was
carried out by conducting the workshops to identify operational pain points. With regard to
digital ecosystems, we did not find evidence that, beyond FPT Software’s regular business
interactions with their large client base, the company engaged further with external
stakeholderssuch ascustomers,businesspartners,ortheacademiccommunityin theirinitial
digital transformation projects.
4.5 The transformation of the company’s business model
The application of the Digital Kaizen approach also transformed FPT Software’s business
model, from being a software development and IT outsourcing company to a digital
transformation and change management service provider. According to the CD&TO and the
HDI, this transformation of the business model was motivated both intrinsically and
extrinsically.
“Between 2018 and 2019, FPT Software changed its strategic business direction to not only
provide software outsourcing services, but also to become a global digital transformation
services provider. In other words, FPT Software offers digital transformation services to
multinational clients, to FPT Corporation and FPT Software itself.” – CD&TO
“There was a change of direction within the company. We started to rely on our core strengths
such as our staff and large data sets to build and use our own digital solutions. Once we found
the solutions effective, we used them as case studies and sell them to international corporates.
After convincing these corporates to purchase our solutions, we then sell them to the local
market.” – HDI
Externally, the HDI explained, that the IT outsourcing market had changed drastically
between 2018 and 2019, where competition became more intense, and clients became more
demanding with increasing needs for open-source solutions, more customisation, and
complex integration of multiple data sources for software solutions. The IT outsourcing
model of FPT Software at that time was deemed no longer sustainable in such market.
Internally, the adoption of the Digital Kaizen approach to continuously and rapidly enhance
the workplace with digital innovations had resulted in FPT Software becoming, quoting the
CEO, a giant ‘test bed’. With the identity of a test bed in mind, the board of management
realisedthelargescaleofFPTSoftware–with morethan 16,000employeesandmultinational
clients in key markets such as the Asia-Pacific, Japan, Oceania, North America and Europe,
in particular Germany – as a strategic advantage, that most of the internal problems

--- PAGE 18 ---
Australasian Journal of Information Systems Dang-Pham et al.
2022, Vol 26, Selected Papers from ACIS 2020 Digital Kaizen
18
addressed by the company’s digital transformation solutions would be relevant to almost
any other company.
“We are implementing the digital transformation solutions for the whole FPT Corporation and
notjustforFPTSoftware–anenterprisewithmorethan36,000people,sevenmembercompanies,
and offices in morethan 30countries. It isindeed a complex organisation. Therefore, we may have
a lot of pain points that are also encountered by other companies.” – CEO
When the transformation of the business model happened, changes in terms of
organisational structures and business objectives were also implemented. For instance, the
HDI shared that:
“In the past, we would take jobs from any clients without a specific focus on any domains. From
2018, we created a unit to cater for manufacturing and logistics clients in Japan, the US, and
Germany, due to the fast development in the manufacturing and logistics sectors in these
countries. Then, when our clients in Germany asked us to transform their outdated banking
systems to modern ones, we also created a dedicated team for this line of work.” – HDI
The business objectives of FPT Software now include developing long-term partnerships
with their clients, not only through providing high-quality services, but also through
buildingtrustandconfidencebyprojectingaprofessionalimageof acompanywith adequate
governance, fast problem-solving capability, and employees with an excellent workplace,
which all resulted according to the informants from the adoption of Digital Kaizen.
Displaying such a professional image was particularly important as it signalled the
company’s resilience to their clients, in particular during the pandemic period.
5 Discussion
Our case analysis supports Wessel et al.’s (2020) argument that digital transformation
redefines organisations’ value propositions and leads to the creation of a new organisational
identity. Throughout its digital transformation endeavours, FPT Software not only deployed
digital technologies such as cloud computing and big data analytics but also experienced the
constant shift of the company’s business model, products, and processes (Wessel et al., 2020).
FPT Software changed from a software development to a digital transformation consultancy
company (FPT Software, 2019) and started offering digital transformation services as a value
proposition to its customers. This change of organisational identity is mirrored in the
company’s transformed business strategy and organisational structure, with task forces in
charge of digital transformation solutions, a committee responsible for evaluating digital
transformation projects’ priority, and mandatory workshops in place where managers in
incubator teams identify cross-functional pain points and develop proposals for possible
solutions.
5.1 The Kaizen framework and Digital Kaizen
The Digital Kaizen methodology was built on the principles of the original Kaizen
philosophy for the context of implementing digital transformation. In line with the original
version, this methodology emphasizes the three aspects: process, standards, and people
(Masaaki, 1986; Suárez-Barraza and Lingham, 2008) (see also subsection 2). For instance,
rather than making a big-bang disruption, incremental digital changes are conducted within
the organisation. This approach encourages digital transformation to undergo a continuous

--- PAGE 19 ---
Australasian Journal of Information Systems Dang-Pham et al.
2022, Vol 26, Selected Papers from ACIS 2020 Digital Kaizen
19
process with no ends. Furthermore, people are recognized as the main driver of digital
transformation activity, and increased people engagement leads to improved organisational
change management capability and higher digital maturity.
The Digital Kaizen approach adds a new perspective to the current Kaizen literature. While
Kaizen has been applied widely in management practices of various industries (Wittenberg,
1994), Digital Kaizen was created at FPT Software specifically for digital transformation
practices. The original Kaizen approach is primarily applied in production to reduce costs,
minimisewastes, andto increaseproductivity,whereas DigitalKaizen aimsatfacilitatingthe
effective and efficient implementation of digital innovations that transform people and
business processes. The focus on solving cross-functional pain points and implementing
digital innovations to achieve quick and small improvements in the organisation expands
beyond eliminating waste and improving efficiency in the production line.
The application of Kaizen philosophy in the field of digital transformation signals the
capability of Kaizen in creating innovations. In contrast to some prior studies that argued
Kaizen is more suitable for a slowly growing economy (Wittenberg, 1994), our case study of
FPT Software shows that organisations can practice Kaizen and generate innovations at the
same time (Imai, 2007). With the help of digital technologies, organisational initiatives that
aim to bring about new business models, products, and value creation processes can be
created clients.
5.2 The dynamic capabilities based Digital Kaizen process model
We have so far focussed on Digital Kaizen’s role for the development of digital
transformationsolutionsanditsimpactonthetransformation ofthecasecompany’sbusiness
model. We also identified the enablers of digital transformation at the company and
discussed the original Kaizen framework in relation to Digital Kaizen.
We established earlier (see subsection 2.3) that digital transformation has been investigated
through the dynamic capabilities framework. We will now discuss and apply the framework
in relation to the Digital Kaizen methodology based on our empirical data and its analysis
which leads us to develop and propose a Digital Kaizen process model informed by the
framework.
We find an alignment between Digital Kaizen and the dynamic capabilities framework and
argue that Digital Kaizen encompasses mircofoundations, which are required for the
development and exploitation of dynamic capabilities. Dynamic capabilities refer to an
organisation’s ability to integrate, build, and reconfigure internal and external competences
to address the changing environments (Teece, 2007). Underpinning these capabilities are
foundational capabilities, the mircofoundations, which enable the sensing, seizing, and
transforming activities of a company (Teece, 2007). The activities of the Digital Kaizen
approachasperformedatFPTsoftware(seesection4)canbeconsideredasmircofoundations
because (a) they contribute to the sensing, seizing, and transforming capabilities and (b) they
are not ordinary processes that would be carried out by any firm (Teece, 2007).
In the following three subsections we describe and discuss how the dynamic capabilities, i.e.
sensing, seizing, and transforming, the steps of Digital Kaizen, and the activities and
mircofoundations are related and mapped onto each other in the Digital Kaizen process

--- PAGE 20 ---
Australasian Journal of Information Systems Dang-Pham et al.
2022, Vol 26, Selected Papers from ACIS 2020 Digital Kaizen
20
model andin subsection 5.3 wethen discussintended and possible target outcomesof as part
of the process model. Figure 1 summarises the model.
5.2.1 Sensing and the Digital Kaizen process model
Sensing refers to the analytical methods, tools, and techniques that companies use to detect,
identify,andfilteropportunitiesfordevelopingnewproductsandservices(Teece,2007).The
learning capacities of the individuals within a company, innovation models such as open
innovation, and generative sensing capabilities that use technologies such as artificial
intelligence or big data, are part of the routines that contribute to this dynamic capability
(Chirumalla, 2021; Warner and Wäger, 2019). The processes related to R&D and working
with suppliers and customers to gather market insights and select new technologies are the
mircofoundations of the sensing capability (Teece, 2007). In terms of Digital Kaizen, the
mircofoundations reside in the process in which managers identify cross-functional pain
points via mandatory workshops. Digital Kaizen stresses the need for collaboration between
cross-functional teams, forming a continuous digital improvement strategy, and pursuing a
bottom-upevolutionaryapproach,in linewith Chirumalla(2021).Thesensingcapabilityand
its microfoundations relate to the ‘Discover improvement potential’ stage of the Digital
Kaizen approach, which aim to understand the current business situation and discover
improvement opportunities (see table 2).
5.2.2 Seizing and the Digital Kaizen process model
Seizing refers to the decision-making capability of a firm to invest in the identified
opportunities and take actions (Teece, 2007). Seizing enables capturing the values of the
identified opportunities by deciding the necessary changes that are needed by firms
(Ellström et al., 2022). The mircofoundations of the seizing capability include the processes
and structures to create or revise business models, and build commitment by demonstrating
leadership, culture, and effective communication (Chirumalla, 2021; Teece, 2007). Being able
to identify the cross-functional pain points is not enough to take actions. The Digital Kaizen
process model provides further activities to address these identified problems, where
managers come up with proposals for digital transformation solutions and based on a
steering committee’s rating criteria rank both the pain points and the proposed solutions to
satisfy the company’s strategic objectives. These are the mircofoundations of Digital Kaizen
for seizing opportunities. The seizing capability and its microfoundations help to crystalise
the discussed digital solutions and turn them into concrete action points, which are in line
with the ‘Analyse the current method of work’ and ‘Generate original ideas’ stages of Digital
Kaizen.
5.2.3 Transforming and the Digital Kaizen process model
Transforming capabilities sustain the profitability of a business in a turbulent and uncertain
environment (Teece, 2007). Transforming entails the redeployment and reconfiguration of
assets and routines, which require mircofoundations such as achieving decentralised
structures and managing complementary assets, as well as knowledge management and
corporate governance capacities (Chirumalla, 2021; Teece, 2007; Warner and Wäger, 2019).
The implementation of the digital solutions paired with engagement programs to encourage
employees to participate in the uptake of the solutions reconfigures practices and assets and
introduces new work processes and transformative technologies such as MyFPT and
AkaLink at FPT Software to the workplace. This ultimately leads to a new business model

--- PAGE 21 ---
Australasian Journal of Information Systems Dang-Pham et al.
2022, Vol 26, Selected Papers from ACIS 2020 Digital Kaizen
21
which may include the commercialisation of these solutions as offerings and service
packages to clients as was the case at FPT software. The transformation capability, which
involves enacting changes and evaluating their outcomes, can be mapped to the ‘Develop
and implement the improvement plan’ and ‘Evaluate the new method of work’ steps of
Digital Kaizen.
Figure 1. A Digital Kaizen process model informed by the dynamic capabilities framework

--- PAGE 22 ---
Australasian Journal of Information Systems Dang-Pham et al.
2022, Vol 26, Selected Papers from ACIS 2020 Digital Kaizen
22
5.3 Intended target outcomes of the Digital Kaizen process model
With a focus on the Kaizen philosophy’s aspects, process, standards, and people (see also
subsection 2.4), the dynamic capabilities and their microfoundations intend to achieve some
target outcomes that contribute to the set organisational goals.
The sensing and seizing capabilities and their microfoundations prompt cross-functional
collaboration and a shared understanding between organisational stakeholders. Tangible
outcomes of these capabilities are a list of pain points and/or opportunities, and the
respective solutions. In Digital Kaizen, solving the ‘right problems’ is more crucial for digital
transformation than ‘solving these problems the right way’. As such, all managers are
involved in the identification of functional pain points that are later systematically evaluated
and prioritised according to their relevance and importance.
Other intended target outcomes are created and realised through the transforming
capabilities. Adopting transformation solutions leads to changes in organisational processes.
Thus, a new business process and/ or a new business model might emerge. As employees are
involved in all activities, and benefit from the changes, employees’ morale and agility are
improved. At FPT Software, the issues were identified by members from all departments,
which supported a more objective and possibly accurate identification process. The focus on
the pain points that directly impact the employees’ daily operations motivates employees to
adopt digital solutions. The Digital Kaizen process model thus recommends and includes
these activities and their micofoundations.
While focusing on small successes and having an agile mindset are recommended for
successful digital transformation (see e.g., Henriette et al., 2016; Agrawal et al., 2019;
Schaupensteiner et al., 2021), the complexity of large digital transformation agendas may
lead to issues of “scope creep”, especially when the transformation aims at addressing
multiple objectives. The Digital Kaizen approach encourages organisations to address
problems that are cross-functional (see also subsection 5.2.1) and obtains measurable
outcomes, e.g., monetary gain and time saved.
The alignment between strategic and operational objectives is another important intended
outcome. Implementing digital transformation by decomposing a large transformation
initiativeintosmallerinitiativeswithquick-winsolutionspavesthewayformeetingstrategic
objectives (Ellström et al., 2022). FPT Software transformed from a software development to
a digital transformation consultancy and solution provider. In this context, the company
successfully repackaged and commercialised their in-house digital transformation solutions.
The commercialisation of internal solutions is part of the company’s transforming capability,
since the emerging solutions are re-packaged (i.e., redeployment and reconfiguration of
resources) and sold to clients (i.e., to sustain profitability). The design and development of
thesesolutionsarebasedentirelyontheorganisation’sinternalproblems,which reflectstheir
sensing and seizing capabilities. FPT Software is not just reselling the digital transformation
solutions i.e., software packages, but primarily the Digital Kaizen methodology and its
success stories.
Prior research on dynamic capabilities and digital transformation recommended that
organisations broaden their sensing capabilities by engaging with a wide range of internal
and external stakeholders as well as by using digital infrastructures such as AI and big data
technologies (Chirumalla, 2021; Warner and Wäger, 2019). That is, maintaining an awareness

--- PAGE 23 ---
Australasian Journal of Information Systems Dang-Pham et al.
2022, Vol 26, Selected Papers from ACIS 2020 Digital Kaizen
23
of the business’s entire ecosystem is critical for sensing opportunities and threats (Ellström
et al., 2022; Teece, 2007). The commercialisation of internally generated digital
transformation solutions as a possible outcome of digital transformation in the proposed
model derived from the empirical data at FPT Software. It demonstrates that a company that
uses sensing and subsequently other capabilities to gain awareness of its own situation, can
actively influence its ecosystem through selling these solutions and the Digital Kaizen
methodology. While we acknowledge that not all companies would want to sell their digital
transformation solutions, this aspect contributes an interesting insight to the discussion of
the impact of digital transformation on an organisation’s business model from a dynamic
capabilities perspective.
6 Future research
This case study presents Digital Kaizen as a new methodology and practical approach for
conducting digital transformation. As the key informants were leaders and managers, the
findings reflect the leadership team’s beliefs and visions, rather than being based on a
detailed account of how the approach impacted the activities at the micro level of the
company. While we acknowledge this limitation as a further avenue for future research, the
case analysis contributes insights into the philosophy, approach, and potential of Digital
Kaizen as a process to guide digital transformation and build and exploit dynamic
capabilities for digital transformation. We propose future research directions, which aim to
advance theoretical and practical understanding of the process to implement digital
transformation.
The concept of enablersmight give the impression of a checklist of prerequisites that indicate
organisational readiness for digital transformation. However, digital transformation is a
dynamic process where the current state is constantly assessed, and new digital
enhancements are continuously added. Thus, the enablers’ importance will change as a
company progresses through different stages of digital transformation. At FPT Software, we
did not find evidence of external stakeholders’ participation or explicit involvement in an
ecosystem during the company’s digital transformation process. This direct participation
might take place at a later stage of the company’s digital transformation process. Moreover,
the enablers will probably also have different levels of importance according to the context
of transformation e.g., the company’s position in the supply/value chain or industry.
Therefore, research in this areaisnecessary tounderstand thechangingroles andimportance
of the enablers (as well as the inhibitors) of digital transformation. Future research should
also investigate the conditions and capabilities that enable a company to focus on sensing its
internal problems, rather than scouting the entire ecosystem to seize digital transformation
opportunities.
Our research suggests the integration of the Kaizen philosophy into digital transformation
practices. Future research may determine a more rigorous and comprehensive list of criteria
and techniques for ranking and prioritising digital transformation solutions that are parts of
a complex transformation program. It will also be helpful to focus on investigating the
practices, such as the workshops, to unpack complex digital transformation programs into
meaningfulandmanageablesolutionsthatcan becarriedoutintheDigitalKaizenway.More
empirical studies adopting the dynamic capabilities framework and our proposed Digital
Kaizen process model are also necessary. The viability of Digital Kaizen in different contexts

--- PAGE 24 ---
Australasian Journal of Information Systems Dang-Pham et al.
2022, Vol 26, Selected Papers from ACIS 2020 Digital Kaizen
24
and workplace cultures, e.g., large versus small and medium enterprises should be
considered. In this regard, action research to investigate empirically the Digital Kaizen
approach will be valuable.
The nature of digital transformation, as organisational changes that involve both technology
adoption and change management, opens opportunities for research that can combine
theoretical frameworks in both fields to unpack digital transformation-related phenomena at
the micro level of an organisation. The relevancy or fit of the technological solutions is one
of the many aspects that should be considered (Goodhue, 1995), and a positive change
experience or change history is another critical aspect that can contribute to the change
management literature (Pettigrew et al., 2001).
7 Conclusion
The Digital Kaizen methodology addresses the identification and resolution of cross-
functional pain points that are aligned with a company’s strategic goals, through
implementingincrementaldigitalimprovementsthatenhancebusinessprocessesandpeople
engagement, which in turn lead to sustainable and scalable digital transformation solutions.
We put forward Digital Kaizen and the proposed Digital Kaizen process model that
encompasses dynamic sensing, seizing, and transformation capabilities as a viable digital
transformation approach that leverages digital technologies to re-define an organisation’s
value proposition and identity (Wessel et al., 2020). Our examination of the Digital Kaizen
approach contributes to research on the relationship between dynamic capabilities and
digital transformation as called for by e.g., Vial, (2019) and Warner and Wäger (2019). Its
people-centric approach to conducting digital transformation identifies the employees as the
main drivers of digital transformation, and people engagement as critical for developing and
sustaining digital maturity.
Digital transformation programs are often large and complex, consisting of multiple related
projects which depend on each other. Consequently, it is useful to have an approach that
separates such large programs into smaller and more manageable pieces of work. In our
study, the digital transformation program at FPT Software aimed at addressing several
human resource-related issues, which were considered strategic objectives of the company.
The workshops to identify the specific pain points and define digital transformation
solutions, i.e., MyFPT and AkaLink, proved to be effective for achieving the intended
decomposition of the large overall envisioned digital transformation program.
The case of FPT Software confirmed that successful digital transformation is strategically
motivated and can be carried out in a stepwise manner that employs change management
and communication techniques to engage with the employees, especially by striving for and
demonstrating quick wins during the transformation process to gain their buy-in. Moreover,
the studyuncovered thatthe stepwise approach ofDigitalKaizen contributes to a company’s
digital readiness for further transformation.
References
Agrawal, P., Narain, R., & Ullah, I. (2019). Analysis of barriers in implementation of digital
transformation of supply chain using interpretive structural modelling approach.
Journal of Modelling in Management, 15(1), 297-317.

--- PAGE 25 ---
Australasian Journal of Information Systems Dang-Pham et al.
2022, Vol 26, Selected Papers from ACIS 2020 Digital Kaizen
25
Bekkhus, R. (2016). Do KPIs used by CIOs decelerate digital business transformation? The case of
ITIL. Paper presented at the Digital Innovation, Technology, and Strategy Conference,
Dublin, Ireland. In the Proceedings of DIGIT 2016. https://aisel.aisnet.org/digit2016/16
Bharadwaj, A., El Sawy, O. A., Pavlou, P. A., & Venkatraman, N. (2013). Digital business
strategy: Toward a next generation of insights. MIS Quarterly, 37(2),471-482.
Brunet, A. P., & New, S. (2003). Kaizen in Japan: An empirical study. International Journal of
Operations & Production Management, 23(12),1426-1446
Chanias, S., Myers, M. D., & Hess, T. (2019). Digital transformation strategy making in pre-
digital organizations: The case of a financial services provider. The Journal of Strategic
Information Systems, 28(1), 17-33. doi:10.1016/j.jsis.2018.11.003
Chirumalla, K. (2021). Building digitally-enabled process innovation in the process
industries: A dynamic capabilities approach. Technovation 105, 102256.
Correani, A., De Massis, A., Frattini, F., Petruzzelli, A. M., & Natalicchio, A. (2020).
Implementing a digital strategy: Learning from the experience of three digital
transformation projects. California Management Review, 62(4), 37-56.
doi:10.1177/0008125620934864
Creswell, J. W.A, & Creswell, J. D. (2018). Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed
Methods Approaches (Fifth edition. ed.). Thousand Oaks, California: SAGE Publications,
Inc.
Dubé, L., & Paré, G. (2003). Rigor in information systems positivist case research: current
practices, trends, and recommendations. MIS Quarterly, 27(4), 597-636.
Ellström, D., Holtström, J., Berg, E., & Josefsson, C. (2022). Dynamic capabilities for digital
transformation. Journal of Strategy and Management, 15, 272–286.
FPT Software (2019). Being Digital Transformation Consultant, FPT enhances global
competitiveness FPT-Investor relations. Retrieved from
https://www.fpt.com.vn/en/ir/featured-news/being-digital-transformation-consultant-
fpt-enhances-global-competitiveness
FPT Software (2020). About FPT Software.
Retrieved from https://www.fpt-software.com/about-fpt-software/
Gaffley, G., & Pelser, T. G. (2021). Developing a digital transformation model to enhance the
strategy development process for leadership in the South African manufacturing
sector. South African Journal of Business Management, 52(1). doi:10.4102/sajbm.v52i1.2357
Goodhue, D.L. (1995). Understanding User Evaluations of Information Systems. Management
Science, 41, 1827–1844.
Henriette, E., Feki, M., & Boughzala, I. (2016). Digital Transformation Challenges. In the
Proceedings of MCIS 2016. http://aisel.aisnet.org/mcis2016/33
Hess, T., Matt, C., Benlian, A., & Wiesböck, F. (2016). Options for formulating a digital
transformation strategy. MIS Quarterly Executive, 15(2).
https://aisel.aisnet.org/misqe/vol15/iss2/6

--- PAGE 26 ---
Australasian Journal of Information Systems Dang-Pham et al.
2022, Vol 26, Selected Papers from ACIS 2020 Digital Kaizen
26
Horlach, B., Drews, P., & Schirmer, I. (2016). Bimodal IT: Business-IT alignment in the age of
digital transformation. In V. Nissen, D. Stelzer, S. Straßburger & D. Fischer (eds).
Multikonferenz Wirtschaftsinformatik (MKWI), 1417-1428.
Imai, M., (2007). Gemba Kaizen. A Commonsense, Low-Cost Approach to Management in
Das Summa Summarum Des Management. Springer, 7-15.
Ivancic, L., Vuksic, V. B., & Spremi, M. (2019). Mastering the Digital Transformation Process:
Business Practices and Lessons Learned. Technology Innovation Management Review, 9.
Kane, G. C., Phillips, A.N., Copulsky, J. R., & Andrus, G. R. (2019). The technology fallacy: How
people are the real key to digital transformation. Cambridge, Massachusetts: TheMIT Press.
Kautz, K., & Bjerknes, G., (2015). Tales of IT Consultants: Understanding Psychological
ContractMaintenanceandEmploymentTermination.AustralasianJournalofInformation
Systems, 19, 71-95.
Legner, C., Eymann, T., Hess, T., Matt, C., Böhmann, T., Drews, P., Mädche, A., Urbach, N.,
& Ahlemann, F., (2017). Digitalization: Opportunity and Challenge for the Business
and Information Systems Engineering Community. Business & Information Systems
Engineering, 59(4), 301-308.
Li, L., Su, F., Zhang, W., & Mao, J.-Y. (2018). Digital transformation by SME entrepreneurs: A
capability perspective. Information Systems Journal, 28(6), 1129-1157.
doi:10.1111/isj.12153
Loonam, J., Eaves, S., Kumar, V., & Parry, G. (2018). Towards digital transformation: Lessons
learned from traditional organizations. Strategic Change, 27(2), 101-109.
doi:10.1002/jsc.2185
Macpherson, W. G., Lockhart, J. C., Kavan, H., & Iaquinto, A. L. (2015). Kaizen: A Japanese
philosophy and system for business excellence. Journal of Business Strategy, 36(5), 3-9.
https://doi.org/10.1108/JBS-07-2014-0083
Maedche, A. (2016). Interview with Michael Nilles on “What Makes Leaders Successful in
the Age of the Digital Transformation?”. Business & Information Systems Engineering,
58(4), 287-289. doi:10.1007/s12599-016-0437-1
Malloch, H. (1997). Strategic and HRM aspects of Kaizen: a case study. New Technology, Work
and Employment, 12(2), 108-122.
Masaaki, I. (1986). Kaizen: The key to Japan's competitive success. New York, ltd: McGraw-
Hill.
Matt, C., Hess, T., & Benlian, A. (2015). Digital transformation strategies. Business &
Information Systems Engineering, 57(5), 339-343.
Meraviglia, L. (2018). Technology and counterfeiting in the fashion industry: Friends or foes?
Business Horizons, 61(3), 467-475.
Mergel, I., Edelmann, N., & Haug, N. (2019). Defining digital transformation: Results from
expert interviews. Government Information Quarterly, 36(4). doi:
10.1016/j.giq.2019.06.002

--- PAGE 27 ---
Australasian Journal of Information Systems Dang-Pham et al.
2022, Vol 26, Selected Papers from ACIS 2020 Digital Kaizen
27
Mizuno, S. (1988). Company-wide total quality control. Tokyo, Japan: Asian Productivity
Organization.
Newitt, D. (1996). Beyond BPR & TQM-Managing through processes: Is Kaizen enough? Paper
presented at the IEE Colloquium on Beyond TQM and Re-Engineering-Managing
Through Process, 31.
Osmundsen, K., Iden, J., & Bygstad, B. (2018). Digital Transformation: Drivers, Success
Factors, and Implications. In the Proceedings of MCIS 2018.
https://aisel.aisnet.org/mcis2018/37
Perkin, N., & Abraham, P., (2017). Building the Agile Business through Digital Transformation.
Kogan Page Publishers.
Pettigrew, A.M., Woodman, R.W., & Cameron, K.S. (2001). Studying Organizational Change
and Development: Challenges for Future Research. The Academy of Management Journal,
44, 697–713.
Rogers, D. L., (2016). The Digital Transformation Playbook : Rethink Your Business for the Digital
Age. New York: Columbia Business School Publishing.
Rueckel,D.,Muehlburger,M.,& Koch,S.(2020).AnUpdatedFrameworkofFactorsEnabling
Digital Transformation. Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 12,
1-26. doi:10.17705/1pais.12401
Schaupensteiner, N., González, S., & Borgmann, J. (2021). Impact of the Digital
Transformation on the Transformation of the Workforce. In N. Urbach, M.
Roeglinger, K. Kautz, R.A. Alias, C. Saunders & M. Wiener (eds.), Digitalization Cases
Vol. 2 (pp. 305-325). Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
Sidhu, S. (2019). Executive interview: Opportunities and challenges of digital transformation
for Vietnam’s businesses. Retrieved from https://vietnaminsider.vn/executive-
interview-opportunities-and-challenges-of-digital-transformation-for-vietnams-
businesses/
Singh, J., & Singh, H. (2009). Kaizen philosophy: a review of literature. IUP Journal of
Operations Management, 8(2), 51.
Smalley, A., & Kato, I. (2010). Toyota Kaizen Methods: Six Steps to Improvement. Portland:
Portland: Productivity Press.
Steininger, D.M., Mikalef, P., Pateli, A., & Ortiz-De-Guinea, A. (2022). Dynamic Capabilities
in Information Systems Research: A Critical Review, Synthesis of Current Knowledge,
and Recommendations for Future Research. Journal of the Association for Information
Systems, 23, 447–490.
Suárez-Barraza, M. F., & Lingham, T. (2008). Kaizen within Kaizen teams: continuous and
process improvements in a Spanish municipality. Asian Journal on Quality, 9(1), 1-21.
Teece, D.J. (2007). Explicating dynamic capabilities: The nature and microfoundations of
(sustainable) enterprise performance. Strategic Management Journal, 28, 1319–1350.
Teece, D.J. (2018). Dynamic capabilities as (workable) management systems theory. Journal of
Management and Organization, 24, 359–368.

--- PAGE 28 ---
Australasian Journal of Information Systems Dang-Pham et al.
2022, Vol 26, Selected Papers from ACIS 2020 Digital Kaizen
28
Urbach, N., & Röglinger, M. (2018). Introduction to Digitalization Cases. How Organizations
Rethink Their Business for the Digital Age. In N. Urbach & M. Röglinger (2018),
Digitalization Cases. How Organizations Rethink Their Business for the Digital Age (pp. 1-
14). Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
Vial, G. (2019). Understanding digital transformation: A review and a research agenda. The
Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 28(2), 118-144.
von Leipzig, T., Gamp, M., Manz, D., Schöttle, K., Ohlhausen, P., Oosthuizen, G., Palm, D.,
& von Leipzig, K., (2017). Initialising Customer-Orientated Digital Transformation in
Enterprises. Procedia Manufacturing (8), 517-524.
Walsham, G. (1995). Interpretive case studies in IS research: nature and method. European
Journal of Information Systems, 4(2), 74-81.
Warner, K.S.R.,& Wäger,M. (2019). Building dynamic capabilities for digital transformation:
An ongoing process of strategic renewal. Long Range Planning, 52, 326–349.
Wessel, L., Baiyere, A., Ologeanu-Taddei, R., Cha, J., & Jensen, T. B., (2020). Unpacking the
Difference between Digital Transformation and IT-Enabled Organizational
Transformation. Journal of Association of Information Systems, 22(1), 102-129.
Wickens, P. D. (1990). Production management: Japanese and British approaches. IEEE
Proceedings A (Physical Science, Measurement and Instrumentation, Management and
Education), 137(1), 52-54.
Wittenberg, G. (1994). Kaizen-The many ways of getting better. Assembly Automation, 14(4),
12-17.
Copyright: © 2022 authors. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Australia License, which permits non-
commercialuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, providedthe original author
and AJIS are credited.
doi: https://doi.org/10.3127/ajis.v26i0.3851