--- PAGE 1 ---
The Enterprise Engineering Series
Founding Editors
Jan L. G. Dietz, Technical University of Delft, Delft, The Netherlands
José Tribolet, Instituto Superior Tecnico, Technical University of Lisbon, Lisboa,
Portugal
Editors-in-Chief
David Aveiro , Faculty of Exact Sciences and Engineering, University of Madeira,
Funchal, Portugal
Robert Pergl, Faculty of Information Technologies, Czech Technical University in
Prague, Praha 6, Czech Republic
Henderik A. Proper , TU Wien Informatics, Vienna, Austria
Editorial Board Members
Joseph Barjis, Institute of Engineering and Management, San Francisco, USA
Giancarlo Guizzardi , Free University of Bozen-Bolzano, Bolzano, Italy
Jan A. P. Hoogervorst, Antwerp Management School, Antwerp, Belgium
Hans B. F. Mulder , University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium
Martin Op’t Land, Antwerp Management School, Antwerp, Belgium
Marné de Vries, Industrial and Systems Engineering, University of Pretoria,
Pretoria, South Africa
Robert Winter, Institute for Information Management, University of St. Gallen,
St. Gallen, Switzerland

--- PAGE 2 ---
Enterprise Engineering is an emerging discipline for coping with the challenges
(agility, adaptability, etc.) and the opportunities (new markets, new technologies,
etc.) faced by contemporary enterprises, including commercial, nonprofit and
governmental institutions. It is based on the paradigm that such enterprises are
purposefully designed systems, and thus they can be redesigned in a systematic and
controlled way. Such enterprise engineering projects typically involve architecture,
design, and implementation aspects.
The Enterprise Engineering series thus explores a design-oriented approach that
combines the information systems sciences and organization sciences into a new
field characterized by rigorous theories and effective practices. Books in this series
should critically engage the enterprise engineering paradigm, by providing sound
evidence that either underpins it or that challenges its current version. To this end,
two branches are distinguished: Foundations, containing theoretical elaborations
and their practical applications, and Explorations, covering various approaches and
experiences in the field of enterprise engineering. With this unique combination of
theory and practice, the books in this series are aimed at both academic students and
advanced professionals.

--- PAGE 3 ---
Henderik A. Proper • Bas van Gils • Kazem Haki
Editors
Digital
Enterprises
Service-Focused, Digitally-Powered,
Data-Fueled

--- PAGE 4 ---
Editors
Henderik A. Proper
Institute of
Information Systems Engineering
TU Wien
Vienna, Austria
Kazem Haki
Campus Battelle, Bâtiment B
Haute Ecole de Gestion de Genève
Geneva, Switzerland
Bas van Gils
Strategy Alliance
Amersfoort, the Netherlands
ISSN 1867-8920 ISSN 1867-8939 (electronic)
The Enterprise Engineering Series
ISBN 978-3-031-30213-8 ISBN 978-3-031-30214-5 (eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-30214-5
©TheEditor(s)(ifapplicable)andTheAuthor(s),underexclusivelicensetoSpringerNatureSwitzerland
AG 2023
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether
the whole or part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse
of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar
or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
Theuseofgeneraldescriptivenames,registerednames,trademarks,servicemarks,etc.inthispublication
does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors, and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or
the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any
errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland
Paper in this product is recyclable.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Preface
The creation of this book was triggered by three, mutually amplifying, trends that
drive enterprises to become “digital enterprises”: the transition to the digital age, the
emergence of service ecosystems, and the growing role of data as a key underlying
resource. As a result of these intertwined, and mutually amplifying, trends, modern-
day enterprises (including commercial businesses, government agencies, etc.) are
confronted with several challenges that profoundly impact their design, from
the definitions of products and services offered to their clients, via the business
processes that deliver these products and services and the information systems that
support these processes, to the underlying IT infrastructure.
At the same time, there are no simple answers to these challenges; there is no
one-size-fits-all approach to deal with them. Therefore, in editing this book, our
goal was to explore different relevant aspects of these challenges in more detail
while at the same time also providing concrete suggestions for enterprises to meet
the resulting challenges. As such, the target audiences of this book are both MSc-
and PhD-level students who want to gain insights into key aspects of the challenges
confronting digital enterprises, as well as enterprise architects and information
managers working in enterprises that are on the road to become a digital enterprise.
In line with this, we have brought together contributions covering four key
perspectives, covered in four parts of the book:
• Part I: Involving experience reports on the way enterprises currently already need
to meet the discussed challenges
• Part II: Looks at the need for a new design logic, in terms of a need for new ways
of thinking regarding the design of enterprises
• Part III: Is concerned with the coordination needed among different stakeholders
of the ensuing (continuous) transformations
• Part IV: Reflects on the ensuing consequences for enterprise modeling, as used
to capture both the current affairs of an enterprise and design/study its possible
future affairs.
v

--- PAGE 6 ---
vi Preface
Finally, we would also like to thank our respective employers at the time of
authoring and editing this book: the ITIS department of the Luxembourg Institute of
Science and Technology, Luxembourg; Strategy Alliance, the Netherlands; and the
Institute of Information Management of the University of St. Gallen, Switzerland.
Vienna, Austria Henderik A. Proper
Amersfoort, the Netherlands Bas van Gils
Geneva, Switzerland Kazem Haki

--- PAGE 7 ---
Abstract
Ever since the Industrial Revolution, change has often been driven by the intro-
duction of new technology. It seems that the organization that is best at leveraging
technology wins in the marketplace—meaning that keeping up (or even ahead) of
developments has become a crucial capability for modern organizations. The word
leveraging is emphasized to stress the fact that technology is not a differentiator
per se. Only when it is used successfully does it have any effect. Some claim that
the people factor is actually key (Kane et al., 2019). The plethora of changes that
the digital transformation has brought about, and the many more that we are not
even aware of yet or have not even been thought of yet, provides organizations with
deep and fundamental challenges. How to excel as an enterprise, while everything
is changing constantly? There are hardly any securities left; traditional business
models are continuously challenged by digitally inspired and empowered startups.
The creation of this book was triggered by three, mutually amplifying, funda-
mental trends driving enterprises to change: the transition to the digital age, the
emergence of service ecosystems, and the growing role of data as a key underlying
resource. As a result of these trends, modern-day enterprises are confronted with
several challenges. These challenges impact the “design” of these enterprises, from
the definitions of products and services offered to their clients, via the business
processes that deliver these products and services and the information systems that
support these processes, to the underlying IT infrastructure.
When using the term enterprise, we specifically do not only refer to commercial
businesses, but rather more broadly to any purposeful undertaking by a socio-
technical system. This indeed includes commercial businesses, but also includes
government agencies, NGOs, factories, mobility networks, logistics networks, etc.
The aim of this book is, therefore, to explore different relevant aspects in more
detail while at the same time also providing concrete suggestions for enterprises
to meet the resulting challenges. In line with this, this book brings together
contributions covering four key perspectives:
1. Experience reports on how enterprises deal with these trends in practice
2. The need for a new design logic
vii

--- PAGE 8 ---
viii Abstract
3. The consequences for architectural coordination of the needed transformations
4. The ensuing consequences for enterprise modeling
Each of these perspectives will be covered in a separate part of this book, containing
stand-alone parts with contributions by several authors. Each of the parts contains
a concluding chapter reflecting on the key insights provided by the different
contributions.

--- PAGE 9 ---
Contents
1 Introduction ................................................................. 1
Kazem Haki, Bas van Gils, and Henderik A. Proper
Part I Experience Reports
2 Introduction ................................................................. 11
Kazem Haki, Bas van Gils, and Henderik A. Proper
3 Investigating 5,140 Digital Transformation Projects ................... 13
Hans Mulder, Jim Johnson, Klaas Meijer, and Jim Crear
4 From Product-Oriented Insurance Company to
Customer-Centric Service Provider ...................................... 33
Ralph van Vliet and Joppe Ter Meer
5 How Blockchain Technology Affects the Performance of
Financial Services........................................................... 53
Martin Smits, Hans Weigand, Joost de Kruijff, and Jerom de Valk
6 Analysis and Design of Digital Value Co-creation Networks:
Insights from Digital Platforms ........................................... 73
Michael Blaschke
7 ArchiMate Extension to Value Co-creation: The Smart
Airport Case Study ......................................................... 105
Christophe Feltus, Henderik A. Proper, Andreas Metzger,
and Juan Francisco Garcia López
8 Conclusion................................................................... 135
Kazem Haki, Bas van Gils, and Henderik A. Proper
ix

--- PAGE 10 ---
x Contents
Part II The Need for a New Design Logic
9 Introduction ................................................................. 139
Kazem Haki, Bas van Gils, and Henderik A. Proper
10 Digital Transformation Requires a New Organizational Logic........ 141
Janne J. Korhonen
11 Organizational Identity and Self-Awareness: Creating
Convergence Between Enterprise Engineering and
Organizational Design ..................................................... 157
Rodrigo Magalhães, José Tribolet, and Marielba Zacarias
12 Conclusion................................................................... 177
Kazem Haki, Bas van Gils, and Henderik A. Proper
Part III An Architectural Coordination Perspective
13 Introduction ................................................................. 181
Kazem Haki, Bas van Gils, and Henderik A. Proper
14 IT Architecture Principles: Foundation
for Digital Transformation? ............................................... 183
Michiel Borgers and Frank Harmsen
15 The Need for New Architectural Truths ................................. 201
Marlies van Steenbergen
16 Presentation and Validation of an Integrative Approach for
Digital Transformation Evaluation ....................................... 211
Tamara Högler, Johan Versendaal, and Ronald Batenburg
17 Conclusion................................................................... 231
Kazem Haki, Bas van Gils, and Henderik A. Proper
Part IV An Enterprise Modeling Perspective
18 Introduction ................................................................. 235
Bas van Gils, Kazem Haki, and Henderik A. Proper
19 Enterprise Cartography: From Theory to Practice .................... 237
Pedro Sousa, José Tribolet, and Sérgio Guerreiro
20 A Conceptual Model for Expressing the Evolution of
Enterprise Architecture Models .......................................... 265
Nuno Silva, Pedro Sousa, and Miguel Mira da Silva
21 Next-Generation Enterprise Modeling ................................... 279
Bas van Gils and Henderik A. Proper

--- PAGE 11 ---
Contents xi
22 Conclusion................................................................... 307
Bas van Gils, Kazem Haki, and Henderik A. Proper
Part V Epilogue
23 Final Conclusions and Outlook ........................................... 311
Henderik A. Proper, Bas van Gils, and Kazem Haki
Bibliography ...................................................................... 315

--- PAGE 12 ---
About the Editors
Henderik A. Proper Erik to friends, is Full Professor in Enterprise and Process
Engineering at the TU Wien (Vienna University of Technology), in Austria. His
general research interest concerns the foundations and applications of domain
modeling in an enterprise context. He has regularly lectured within different MSc
programs offered by the University of Luxembourg (LU), the University of Lorraine
(FR), TU Wien (AT), the University of Namur (BE), Antwerp Management School
(BE), and the TIAS Management School (NL).
Erik received his master’s degree from the University of Nijmegen, the Nether-
lands, in May 1990 and received his PhD (with distinction) from the same university
in April 1994. After receiving his PhD, Erik became Senior Research Fellow
at the Computer Science Department of the University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Australia. In 1995, he became Lecturer at the School of Information Systems from
the Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia.
From 1997 to 2001, Erik worked in industry: first as a consultant at Origin, Ams-
terdam, the Netherlands, and later as a research consultant and principal scientist at
the Ordina Institute for Research and Innovation, Gouda, the Netherlands.
In June 2001, Erik returned to academia, to become Professor at the Radboud
University Nijmegen. In January of 2008, he went back to combining industry
and academia, by combining his professorship with consulting and innovation at
Capgemini, with the aim of more tightly combining his theoretical and practical
work.
In May 2010, Erik moved to the Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technol-
ogy as FNR PEARL Laureate and Senior Research Manager. Initially, he continued
combining this with his part-time chair at the Radboud University Nijmegen in the
Netherlands, to then in June 2017 following this up with an adjunct chair in Data
and Knowledge Engineering at the University of Luxembourg.
Finally, in January 2023, Erik moved to the TU Wien (Vienna University of
Technology) to take up a Full Professorship in Enterprise and Process Engineering.
xiii

--- PAGE 13 ---
xiv About the Editors
Bas van Gils is a driven and experienced consultant, trainer, and researcher. He
is a managing partner at Strategy Alliance, which is also the home for his consulting
activities. The last few years, he has helped professionals and organizations in
realizing their digital aspirations: from strategy to realization. The core disciplines
in his work are (1) digital transformation, (2) enterprise architecture, and (3) data
management. His motto is: in an increasingly digital world, you have to put the
people first. He has worked in different industries, both in Europe and the United
States as a teacher and consultant.
He is also Professor at Antwerp Management School, which is where his
academic work is presently rooted. He is involved in courses with a broad range
of topics, including architecture and data management. Bas frequently publishes
both academic and professional papers and books. He is a frequent speaker at
conferences.
It is increasingly apparent that data is one of the key assets for many organiza-
tions. The corollary is that data management is becoming more and more important.
Bas has helped many organizations in their journey to become more data driven.
These projects cover a wide spectrum of topics, ranging from data management
processes, organization structures (CDO Office), and training of professionals. The
key is to get just enough grip on data in order to create value with data. Recently,
Bas has published his experiences in this field with a book: Data Management: A
Gentle Introduction. This book covers both the theory and practice of this exciting
field.
Kazem Haki is Associate Professor at the Geneva School of Business Admin-
istration (HES-SO, HEG Genève). He obtained his habilitation qualification (Venia
Legendi) in information systems (IS) from the University of St. Gallen, Switzerland,
and a doctorate’s degree in the same field from the University of Lausanne (HEC
Lausanne), Switzerland. His research interests include the dynamics and evolution
of socio-technical phenomena such as digital platforms, platform ecosystems, and
enterprise architecture. His studies have been published in leading IS journals such
as MIS Quarterly (FT50 journal), Journal of the Association for Information Sys-
tems, European Journal of Information Systems, Business & Information Systems
Engineering, and MIS Quarterly Executive, among others. His studies also appear
in the proceedings of flagship IS conferences such as International Conference on
Information Systems and European Conference on Information Systems.

--- PAGE 14 ---
About the Authors
Andreas Metzger is Adjunct Professor at the University of Duisburg-Essen and
heads the group “Adaptive Systems” at paluno, The Ruhr Institute for Software
Technology. His current research interests include the use of machine learning in
software engineering and business process management. He received his diploma
and his PhD in computer science from the Technical University of Kaiserslautern in
1998 and 2004, respectively.
Andreas is Steering Committee Vice Chair of the European Technology Platform
NESSI (The Networked European Software and Services Initiative) and was Deputy
General Secretary of BDVA (The Big Data Value Association) from 2015 to 2021.
Among other leadership roles in EU projects, he was the technical coordinator of the
Big Data Value PPP lighthouse project TransformingTransport and chief architect
of the Future Internet projects FInest and FIspace.
He has co-authored over 100 peer-reviewed papers, articles, and book chapters.
He was PC chair of several international conference tracks and workshops, such
as the Euromicro Conference on Software Engineering and Advanced Applications
(SEAA), and acted as program committee member for numerous international con-
ferences and workshops, such as the European Software Engineering Conference
(ESEC/FSE), the International Conference on Services Computing (SCC), and the
International Conference on Information Systems (ICIS).
Christophe Feltus graduated as an electromechanics engineer from the Institut
Supérieur Industriel des Art et Métiers Pierrard (Belgium) and doctor of science
(computer science) from the University of Namur (Belgium). He worked for
several years in private companies as Production Head at Pfizer SA in Jette,
Project Coordinator at Nizet Entreprise in Louvain-la-Neuve, and Assessor for
the Civil Belgium Aviation Administration in Brussels, Belgium. Then, he joined
Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology (LIST—formerly the Public
Research Centre Henri Tudor) in the Grand-Duchy of Luxembourg as Senior
Engineer in 1999 to work in the field of service science and innovation. There he has
taken part in projects related to IT security, IT governance, enterprise architecture
xv

--- PAGE 15 ---
xvi About the Authors
modelling, optimization, and data science. During his research, Christophe has
actively contributed to the writing of scientific articles for journals, conferences,
and book chapters, to the organization of scientific conferences and workshops, and
to the supervision of master’s and doctoral students.
Frank Harmsen has an MSc in Computer Science from Radboud University
Nijmegen and a PhD in Computer Science and Management Science from the
University of Twente. In 1995, he was a visiting researcher in the area of Situational
Method Engineering at Tokyo Institute of Technology. He has been working as
a consultant, project and program manager, and director since 1996. Since 2008,
he has been Endowed Professor at Maastricht University (School of Business and
Economics), in the digital transformation space.
Hans Mulder is an entrepreneur and founder of Viagroep nv, Professor at Antwerp
Management School (AMS), and Lecturer at the Police Academy of the Netherlands
and Nyenrode Business Universiteit. Hans holds a PhD from Delft University of
Technology, published over 100 articles in specialist journals and international
magazines, and is (co-)author of several books such as Enterprise Ontology and
Éénvoud in Complexiteit. Hans is regularly engaged as an IT expert when conflicts
between companies need to be resolved in or out of court, such as participating in
arbitration, mediation, and expert reports.
Hans Weigand is Associate Professor in the Information Management Group of
the Tilburg University School of Economics and Management (TiSEM). In general,
he is interested in how organizational and technical aspects of information systems
interact, taking a language/action approach. His research topics include business
ontologies, shared ledger systems, design science research, and smart auditing.
Janne J. Korhonen is Adjunct Postdoctoral Researcher at the Department of Indus-
trialEngineering and Management, AaltoUniversitySchool ofScience. Hereceived
his D.Sc. (Tech) degree in Enterprise Systems at Aalto University in 2018, M.Sc.
(Tech) degree in Computer Science at Helsinki University of Technology in 2003,
and B.A. degree in Cognitive Science at University of Helsinki in 2007. His research
interests include organization design, organizational change and transformation,
and organizational capabilities. Dr. Korhonen is also an independent organization
design consultant, enterprise architect, coach, and advisor, specialized in diagnostic
assessment and development of organizational and leadership capabilities. His
multi-sector business and IT consulting experience spans 25 years.
Jerom de Valk is presently Digital Trust Manager at PwC in the Netherlands.
Jim Crear is Chief Information Officer and Architect for The Standish Group’s
Master Adjudicator. He is an experienced executive with over 50 years of experience
in the field of information technology. He has had a diverse career leading global

--- PAGE 16 ---
About the Authors xvii
IT organizations including academia, biomedical, manufacturing, and software
companies. For over 30 years, Jim was intimately involved in all aspects of the
CHAOS research and publications. As The Standish Group’s Master Adjudicator
and manager of the adjudication department, Jim has personally reviewed tens of
thousands of project profiles that make up the over 25 years of project information
in our CHAOS database. Jim has been a stalwart of contributions to over a dozen
books and thousands of research reports.
Jim Johnson is the founder of The Standish Group International Inc. in 1985
and is the current chairman and chief dreamer. The Standish Group is the leading
information technology research advisory firm specializing in the analysis of project
and system failures. Jim has been involved in the computer industry professionally
foralmost60yearsandistheauthorofoveradozenbooksandthousandsofresearch
papers and articles. Jim is a frequent keynote speaker at conferences and educational
events. He has a combination of technical, marketing, and research achievements
focused on mission-critical applications and technology. As a former professor at
Antwerp Management School, Jim is the world’s leading authority on software
project performance.
Johan Versendaal has been Professor at HU University of Applied Sciences
Utrecht since 2008. In 2014, he also became Professor of E-business at the Open
University of the Netherlands. In these roles, he co-authored scientific papers in the
field of business/IT alignment, business process and rules management, and digital
transformation and data science. His current research interest includes the ethical
perspective of the design and implementation of ICT, which is also reflected in the
name of the research group at HU: digital ethics.
Johan studied computer science at Delft University of Technology and obtained
his PhD on design methods and software architectures for information systems.
From 1991 to 2002, he worked in business for the Bureau for System Development
(currently Atos) and Baan (currently Infor). From 2002 to 2012, he also worked as
Assistant Professor at Utrecht University.
JoostdeKruijffisanindependentconsultantandPhDstudentatTilburgUniversity.
His research focus is on commitment-based smart contract languages.
Joppe Ter Meer is Senior Management Consultant at the Dutch consulting firm
Novius/RHDHV Digital. Joppe Ter Meer is specialized in digital transformations,
leading organizations through complex transformations, guiding innovation pro-
cesses, and bridging business and IT. Furthermore, Joppe has expertise in strategy
to execution, enterprise architecture, and project and program management.

--- PAGE 17 ---
xviii About the Authors
Joppe performs well in complex projects without a well-defined structure. He
works with a close eye for the people behind the content. Currently, Joppe operates
as Digital Transformation Manager for ABN AMRO.
José Tribolet is Emeritus Distinguished Professor of Instituto Superior Técnico,
University of Lisbon, Portugal, and founder and ex-president of INESC—Instituto
de Engenharia de Sistemas e Computadores (1970–2020). He is Researcher Emeri-
tus at the Information and Decision Support Systems Group at INESC-ID.
Hismainacademicinterestsareinenterprisearchitecture,enterpriseengineering,
enterprise governance, and enterprise transformation. He was General Chairman of
the EEWC Conference in 2014 (Funchal, Portugal) and in 2019 (Lisbon, Portugal).
He was until December 2016 an associate editor of the journal BISE—Business
& Information Systems Engineering. He was until July 2020 co-editor and is now
co-editor emeritus of the Springer Enterprise Engineering book series.
Juan Francisco Garcia López is Strategy and Innovation Manager in Airport
Department at Indra, leading the participation of Indra Airport Department in R&D
projects (7th Framework Program, Horizon 2020, SESAR).
Juan Francisco holds a master’s degree in computer science and engineering
from the Universidad Politecnica de Madrid and a Project Management Professional
(PMP) certification.
He is passionate about airport operations and one of his main interests is to
contribute to the improvement of flight operations and passenger experience in
airports through the introduction of innovative concepts and systems.
During a career of more than 20 years in the airport systems engineering field,
Juan Francisco started developing airport systems, continued leading projects as
project manager, and is now contributing to the definition and implementation of
new operational concepts and airport systems in some European programs. As part
of his responsibilities, Juan Francisco is working on the alignment of the prototypes
developed in those innovation programs with the road map of airport products in
Indra, ensuring the outcomes of these R&D projects are finally deployed in real
airport environments.
Klaas Meijer is an experienced IT project and program manager who worked for
global IT organizations as well as governmental institutes over the last 35 years. He
has led multiple kinds of projects and programs mainly at utilities, insurance firms,
and governmental departments with international teams.
Marielba Zacarias has devoted her career to the information systems field. From
1982 to 2000, she worked as a programmer, as a systems analyst, and later as a
software project manager in Venezuela. In 2001, she moved to Portugal where she
started lecturing and research activities at Algarve University in Faro, Portugal. In
2008, she completed her PhD degree in Informatics and Computers Engineering
at the Instituto Superior Técnico of Lisbon. She is currently Assistant Professor at

--- PAGE 18 ---
About the Authors xix
Algarve University and Researcher at the Research Centre for Tourism, Sustain-
ability and Well-Being (CinTurs). Her main academic interests are in enterprise
architecture, enterprise engineering, enterprise ontologies, and interaction design,
having several scientific papers published in these areas.
Marlies van Steenbergen was a principal consultant of enterprise architecture
at Sogeti Netherlands for more than 20 years. In this capacity, she helped many
enterprises to professionalize their enterprise architecture function. Before that,
she worked as a researcher and enterprise architect at KPN Telecom. In 2011,
she did her PhD on the maturity and effectiveness of enterprise architecture at
Utrecht University. She is a frequent lecturer and publisher in both academic and
professional outlets. She is a co-author of various books on enterprise architecture
and co-founder of the dynamic architecture (DYA) approach. In 2018, she received
the NAF medal for her meaningful contribution to the IT architecture community in
the Netherlands. Since 2017, she is Professor of digital ethics at Utrecht University
of Applied Science.
Martin Smits is Associate Professor of Information Systems and Management at
the Tilburg School of Economics and Management (TiSEM) of Tilburg University.
He is a member of the CentER (Center for Research in Economics and Business)
and Tranzo (the Center for Research in Care and Wellbeing at the Tilburg School
of Social and Behavioral Sciences (TSB)). His research focuses on the impact of
IT on performance of business processes in organizations and business networks.
Topics include business process analysis, IT strategy, and innovation. He is par-
ticularly interested in electronic markets, intermediation, and market performance.
He designs and analyzes process models, system dynamics models, and business
models, in particular to analyze and predict the impact of technology innovations in
health care (e-health), government (e-government), and financial services (fintech).
Michael Blaschke is Management Consultant with international work experience
at Kearney Digital, Accenture Strategy, and SAP. Michael advises clients globally
on technology strategy, architecture, and transformation. He is a member of the
Metaverse core team at Kearney Digital and was a member of the Digital Asset
core team at Accenture. He serves as a co-host on the podcast Bitcoin, Fiat
& Rock’n’Roll. Michael holds a bachelor’s degree in information systems, a
master’s degree in computer science, and a PhD in information systems from the
University of St. Gallen (HSG) and the London School of Economics (LSE). In
foundational research supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF),
he investigates digital platforms to publish in the proceedings of key international
conferences and journals.
Michiel Borgers finished his study in Computer Science at the TU Delft in 1997.
After advising organizations for 12 years, he became Chief Architect at the Dutch
Tax and Customs Administration in 2008. Between 2017 and 2022, Michiel was

--- PAGE 19 ---
xx About the Authors
the CIO of Maastricht University. Since August 2022, he is the IT Director of the
Dutch Ministry of Defense. Michiel received his PhD in 2021. Over the years, he
published more than 40 articles, including many scientific papers. Michiel was a
visiting lecturer at several universities and colleges and supervisor of several master
students. Since 2022, Michiel has joined the MUSTS research program as a guest
researcher at Maastricht University.
Miguel Mira da Silva is Full Professor of information systems at the Instituto
Superior Técnico (University of Lisbon, Portugal) and the Coordinator of the Digital
Transformation Group at the INOV research institute. Miguel also coordinates an
online master’s degree in enterprise information systems, as well as several training
programs and courses. He graduated and received an MSc degree in computer
engineering from the Instituto Superior Técnico, a PhD in computing science
from the University of Glasgow, a Sloan Fellowship master degree in management
from the London Business School, and more recently a habilitation (agregação) in
information systems from the Instituto Superior Técnico.
Nuno Silva is an enterprise architect at NOS SGPS and a business architecture
contributor at the TM Forum. Nuno graduated and received an MSc and PhD
in Information Systems and Computing Engineering from the Instituto Superior
Técnico (University of Lisbon, Portugal). Nuno has been involved in information
systems research and practice for 8 years. Both his research and professional
interests are in Agile methodologies, IT strategy, and business/IT alignment through
the adoption, use, and maintenance of enterprise architectures. Throughout his
career, Nuno has been involved in several projects focusing on Agile digital
transformation and helping define IT strategies.
Pedro Sousa is Associate Professor in the Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Instituto Superior Técnico, Lisbon University, where he created and
has been responsible for the courses on enterprise architecture (EA) and business
process management (BPM) and engineering.
He is a senior consultant in the domain of EA, BPM, and IT governance for over
25 years. He has worked in large companies across multiple industries, both in the
public and private sector, in several countries in Europe, Africa, and South America.
He is also the author and responsible for the Atlas Enterprise Cartography
Tool to support low-effort architecture creation and maintenance, from strategic
and capabilities to business processes and services down to information and IT
architectures.
Ralph van Vliet At the time of production of the respective chapter, Ralph van
Vliet was a business consultant at the Dutch consulting firm Novius/RHDHV
Digital. Ralph is specialized in organizational transformation and design, enterprise
architecture, and data management.

--- PAGE 20 ---
About the Authors xxi
As a driven professional, Ralph receives energy from solving customers’ chal-
lenges on the interface of business and IT. Ralph holds an entrepreneurial and
analytical mindset and is social, creative, and loyal by nature. Ralph is fascinated
and intrigued by emerging and disruptive innovations in the IT domain. Currently,
Ralph operates as business consultant for Share a Byte.
Rodrigo Magalhães is a retired professor of management, currently affiliated as a
researcher to INESC, Lisbon, Portugal. He was Dean of Business Management at
the Kuwait College of Science and Technology and formerly a faculty member at
the School of Management and Economics at the Catholic University of Portugal.
He also held a visiting position at the Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Instituto Superior Tecnico, University of Lisbon. Prof. Magalhães
was Co-Editor-in-Chief of the Springer journal Organizational Design and Enter-
prise Engineering and has an extensive publishing record in the areas of design
management, information systems management, organizational change, knowledge
management, organization learning, business process management, and e-learning.
Ronald Batenburg is trained as a sociologist and obtained his masters at Utrecht
University and his PhD at Groningen University, the Netherlands. How job struc-
tures evolve within economies, sectors, and organizations and how these determine
the quality of work of professionals are the central questions he worked on at
different universities and research institutes. As of 2009, he is a program coordinator
at the Netherlands Institute for Health Services Research (Nivel) and specialized
in the area of human resources for health. The main projects he leads concern the
labormarket,work,andeducationinhealth.Thisincludeshowinstitutionalreforms,
organizational development, task delegation, and substitution change job structures
and the work of healthcare professionals. From a policy perspective, he evaluates
how healthcare policy and management—in particular (strategic) health workforce
planning—can improve the alignment between healthcare demands and the critical
supply of human resources for health. Since 2017, Ronald is Endowed Professor
in health workforce and organization studies at Radboud University Nijmegen,
Department of Sociology.
Sérgio Guerreiro is Assistant Professor at the Instituto Superior Técnico, Univer-
sidade de Lisboa, Portugal. Concluded the PhD degree in Information Systems and
Computer Engineering at the Instituto Superior Técnico/Technical University of
Lisbon (IST/UTL) in 2012. Concluded the MSc degree in 2003 and the BSc degree
in 1999. Both degrees also in Information Systems and Computer Engineering at
IST/UTL.
Tamara Högler has a diploma in geo-ecology from the KIT Karlsruhe Institute
of Technology and obtained her PhD in economics at the Open University of the
Netherlands. Throughout her career, Tamara was involved in or coordinated national
and European R&D as well as industrial projects with a focus on digitalization

--- PAGE 21 ---
xxii About the Authors
and innovation support for SMEs. Based on this experience, Tamara works as an
independent consultant, advising SMEs on digital transformation and supporting
them in acquainting and implementing R&D projects, mainly in the broad field of
IT.
Between 2001 and the time of production of the respective chapter, Tamara
worked for several acknowledged German research institutions, companies, and a
non-profit organization in research or leading positions.