--- PAGE 1 ---
SoftwareandSystemsModeling(2023)22:551–571
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10270-022-01059-0
SPECIAL SECTION PAPER
OnenterprisecoherencegovernancewithGEA:a15-yearco-evolution
ofpracticeandtheory
Henderik A. Proper1,2 · Roel Wagter3 · Joost Bekel4
Received:28February2022/Revised:10July2022/Accepted:5October2022/Publishedonline:28October2022
©TheAuthor(s)2022
Abstract
General Enterprise Architecting (GEA) is an enterprise architecture method which has emerged out of a need in practice,
and has been developed and matured over the past 15 years. The GEA method differs from other enterprise architecture
approaches in that it has a strong focus on enterprise coherence and the explicit governance thereof. This focus followed
from the observed need to move beyond the Business-IT alignment and ‘Business-to-IT’ stack thinking that is embodied
in most of the existing enterprise architecture approaches. The main objective of this paper is to report, and reflect on, the
development of the GEA method (so-far), which involved a co-evolution between theory and practice. In doing so, we also
present core elements of (the current version of) GEA, and illustrate these in terms of a real-world (social housing) case. We
will, furthermore, also discuss some of the lessons learned in applying GEA across different organizations.
Keyword Enterprise architecture
1 Introduction
The environment in which modern day enterprises (includ-
ing commercial companies, government agencies, etc.) need
to operate, changes constantly. As a result, enterprises trans-
formalmostcontinuouslytokeepupwiththesechanges.One
could even go as far as to say that enterprises need to stay
‘in motion’ [35]. The involved transformations may range
from changes in value propositions and business processes,
via changes to the information systems used to support the
business processes, to changes of the supporting software
applications and IT infrastructures. Furthermore, the trans-
Communicated by E. Serral Asensio, J. Stirna, J. Ralyté, and J. Grabis.
B Henderik A. Proper
e.proper@acm.org
Roel Wagter
roel.wagter@solventa.nl
Joost Bekel
joost.bekel@casema.nl
1 Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology (LIST),
Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg
2 TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
3 Solventa B.V., Nieuwegein, The Netherlands
4 Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands
formations may be the result of a ‘premeditated’ (strategy
driven) desire to change, but they can also be the outcome
of numerous ‘spontaneous’ changes as a result of locally
needed, or induced, changes.
Enterprise transformations are also likely to touch upon a
rich mix of aspects of the enterprise, such as human resourc-
ing, finance, organizational structures, reporting lines, etc.;
i.e.notjust‘Business’and‘IT’.Asaconsequence,enterprise
transformations typically involve many stakeholders [55]
with differing stakes and interests, who (should) influence
the direction, or the speed, of the transformation.
To make (premeditated) enterprise transformations feasi-
bleandmanageable,theyaretypicallymanagedasaportfolio
of transformation programmes, where these programmes are
split further into projects. Such a portfolio of programmes
and projects, together with the ‘spontaneous’ (bottom-up)
changes, all need to be mutually coordinated, while, at the
sametime,alsomaintainingastrongcohesionwiththeenter-
prise’s strategy. A lack of such coordination will likely lead
to ‘local optimizations’ favouring short-term, or local, inter-
ests over the overall longer-term interests of the enterprise.
Thelatterultimatelyleadstoadegradationoftheenterprise’s
coherence in terms of a logical, consistent, and connected,
structure across the enterprise’s strategy, the implementation
of its key capabilities as an integrated whole, and its portfo-
lioofproductsandservices[21,22,38,42].Morespecifically,
123

--- PAGE 2 ---
552 H.A.Properetal.
LeinwandandMainardi[21,22]haveshowntheretobeapos-
itive correlation between an enterprise’s level of coherence
and its level of performance.
Project and programme management have, traditionally,
been put forward as being responsible to guard, or even
improve, such coherence during transformations. However,
these approaches focus primarily on the management of
typical project parameters such as budgets, resource use,
deadlines,etc.;i.e.“ontimeandwithinbudget”.Whenbeing
too focused on such project parameters, one runs the risk of
conductingonlylocalandorpartialimprovementsatthelevel
of specific projects [38]. For example, when making design
decisions that have an impact which transcends a specific
project, projects are likely to aim for solutions that provide
the best costs/benefits trade-off within the scope of that spe-
cific project, while not looking at the overall picture [30,38].
Regretfully, however, in practice such local optimizations
do not just remain a potential risk. More often than not, this
riskmaterializes,resultinginreducedstructuralcoherenceof
importantaspectsoftheenterprise(suchashumanresources,
services, customers, processes, marketing, finance, physical
infrastructures, software applications, IT, etc.). As a result,
enterprises often fail to actually realize the desired transfor-
mation; even when the involved projects may have finished
ontimeandwithinbudget.In[30],theauthorsprovideasum-
mary of possible causes for failures of strategic initiatives:
“The road from strategy formulation to strategy execution,
including the use of programmatic steering, is certainly not
an easy one to travel. Research shows that less than 60% of
the strategic objectives in organizations are reached”.
Asananswertothis,enterprisearchitecturehasbeenposi-
tioned as a means to enable the needed coordination [7,30,
38,46]. At the same time, however, one has to observe how
most existing enterprise architecture approaches,1 includ-
ing the Zachman framework [41], DYA [48], TOGAF [44],
IAF [66], and ArchiMate [13,17], follow an ‘engineering
oriented’ style towards enterprise transformation embodied
in a pre-defined ‘design framework’ identifying different
(design) perspectives in terms of which the (architecture of
the) enterprise should be designed. In general, these design
frameworks follow a ‘Business-to-IT-stack’ [65] style of
thinking in identifying the different (design) perspectives.
In practice, we have also observed how the traditional notion
of Business-IT alignment [9] often results in a de-facto use
of a design framework involving only two perspectives: (1)
everything pertaining to IT, and (2) everything else. In many
organizations,thisessentiallyresultsina‘Businessasevery-
thing non-IT’ mindset.
What is also important to acknowledge, is the fact that
enterprise architecture as a discipline ‘grew’ out of the IT
1 Used loosely here to refer to enterprise architecture-related general
frameworks, modelling languages, and methods.
domain [36,65]. This is illustrated by, for example, the his-
tory of TOGAF [44], which started out from the IT focused
TAFIM [43], as well as the discussion between enterprise
architecture and enterprise-wide IT architecture [36] What
is also interesting to note is that the original paper on the
Zachmanframework[41],claimedbymanyasbeingstarting
pointofenterprisearchitecture,speaksprimarilyaboutinfor-
mation systems architecture (as its title suggests), while not
referring to ‘enterprise’ at all. In practice we have observed,
including organizations involved in GEA’s development2,
how these ‘IT roots’ strengthen the ‘Business as everything
non-IT’ mindset.
While the design frameworks, as proposed by existing
enterprisearchitectureapproaches,areusefultostructurethe
actualdesigneffort byprovidingaclearframeworkofpoten-
tially relevant aspects of the design, they are less suitable to
structure the needed coordination among stakeholders and
concernsthatplayaroleinaspecificenterprise.Forinstance:
the Zachman framework [41] only provides a design frame-
work; IAF [66] provides a design framework and a set of
concepts (essentially a meta-model) in terms of which an
architecture can be described; DYA [48] provides a design
frameworkaswellasanoverallprocessonhowtostructurea
‘just enough architecture’ based process; ArchiMate [13,17]
provides a design framework and a modelling language to
capture enterprise architectures in line with this framework.
TOGAF[44]doessuggesttoinitiatean‘ArchitectureBoard’,
whichtosomeextentcouldplayapositiveroletowardscoher-
ence. However, TOGAF does not provide a structural way to
identify which concerns and groups of stakeholders should
be represented on the ‘Architecture Board’.
To coordinate change, and ultimately ensure enterprise
coherence [21,22], stakeholder interests, formal and infor-
mal power structures within enterprises and its context, as
well as the associated processes of creating win-win situ-
ations and forming coalitions, should be taken as a starting
point[23,47,55,62];i.e.notjustasanafterthoughtintermsof
stakeholderspecific‘viewpoints’[19].Asmentionedbefore,
theworkbyLeinwandandMainardi[21,22]hasshownthere
tobeapositivecorrelationbetweenalevelofcoherenceanda
level of performance. The need to take stakeholder interests,
formalandinformalpowerstructures,etc.,asastartingpoint
to improve and/or ensure coherence, can also be motivated
in terms of what Conklin [5] refers to as fragmentation in
thecontextofprojectsand/orprogrammes:“Fragmentation
suggests a condition in which the people involved see them-
selvesasmoreseparatethanunited,andinwhichinformation
and knowledge are chaotic and scattered. The fragmented
pieces are, in essence, the perspectives, understandings, and
intentions of the collaborators. ”
As we will see in Sect. 2, GEA identifies organiza-
tion specific enterprise coherence perspectives to coordinate
transformationsandgovernenterprisecoherence.GEAcases
123

--- PAGE 3 ---
OnenterprisecoherencegovernancewithGEA… 553
(see Table 2 on page 17) usually involve around 10 such
perspectives. Of these perspectives, a majority of these
(enterprise coherence) perspectives involve different aspects
acrossthe‘Business-to-ITstack’.AswewillalsoseeinSect.
2,theexistingdesignframeworkscertainlyhaveanimportant
role to play in further structuring the (topics to be involved
in the) coordination between the enterprise coherence per-
spectives.
In 2006, these insights triggered the Dutch consultancy
firm Ordina to initiate a multi-client research programme to
develop an enterprise architecture method that would indeed
focusonenterprisecoherenceandtheneedtomoreexplicitly
coordinateandgovernthiscoherenceduringenterprisetrans-
formations.By2007thisresultedintheformalestablishment
of a multi-party2 research and development program.3 This
programme has resulted in the development (and ongoing
evolution) of the GEA method [42,46,50].
Even though the group2 of (Netherlands based) organiza-
tions participating in the development of the GEA method
includes, for example, banks, pension funds, and logistic
companies, there is a strong presence of governmental agen-
cies. This may be a natural consequence of three factors.
Firstly, the specific branch of Ordina that initiated the devel-
opmentofGEAwasOrdinaPublic,whichspecificallytargets
clients in the public sector. Secondly, government-related
organizations generally (certainly within the Netherlands)
are open to collaborative improvement and maturation of
enterprise/digital transformation. Thirdly, such transforma-
tions in a public context tend to involve a wider variety of
stakeholder across different organizational entities, while at
the same time requiring a more consensus based decision
making process. With the latter we do not want to imply that
this is necessarily different in other sectors (e.g. industry,
finance, etc.). However, the combination of these factors did
lead to a strong participation from the public sector.
The goal of this paper, which provides an elaboration
on [37], is to (1) reflect on the development of GEA as
a co-evolution between theory and practice, while also (2)
presentingthecoreof(thecurrentversionof)GEAandillus-
trating this in terms of a real-world (social housing) case, as
well as (3) discuss several lessons learned in applying GEA
across different organizations. In line with this, the remain-
der of this paper is structured as follows. We start, in Sect.
2 During different stages of the GEA research program, the fol-
lowing client organizations participated: ABN-AMRO Bank; ANWB;
Achmea; Belastingdienst—Centrum voor ICT; ICTU; ING; Kappa
Holding; Ministerie van Binnenlandse Zaken en Koninkrijksrelaties;
Ministerie van Defensie; Ministerie van Justitie—Dienst Justitiële
Inrichtingen; Ministerie van Landbouw, Natuur en Voedselkwaliteit—
Dienst Regelingen; Nederlandse Spoorwegen; PGGM; Politie Neder-
land; Prorail; Provincie Flevoland; Rabobank; Rijkswaterstaat; UWV;
Wehkamp.
3 https://www.groeiplatformgea.nl.
2, with a discussion of the core elements of the (current ver-
sion of) the GEA method, where we will use the real-world
case of a Social Housing Foundation (De Key4) to illustrate
these elements. Section 3 then briefly reports on the research
methodological setup of the GEA development programme.
We continue in Sect. 4 with a report on the development of
theGEAmethodasaco-evolutionofpracticeandtheory,and
someofthelessonslearnedrelatedtothis.Indoingso,wewill
also clarify why we prefer to speak about co-evolution, and
why we put practice before theory. In Sect. 5, we then reflect
on the use of GEA across multiple (large) cases. Finally, in
concluding, we will also discuss some further directions in
which we plan and expect GEA to (co)evolve further.
2 Main elements of GEA
In this section, we present the main elements of the GEA
method [42]. GEA considers enterprise architecture to
involveasetofguidingstatements,processes,products,peo-
ple, and means that are used to direct the development of
an enterprise, with a focus on coherence. The GEA method
aims to contribute to the improvement of the coherence of
an enterprise by way of an active participation of enter-
prise architects in the governance and control processes of
an enterprise, while providing senior management with con-
tinuous insights into the coherence of relevant aspects of the
enterprise and its environment. In doing so, GEA intends
to complement existing enterprise architecture approaches,
such as Zachman [41], DYA [48], TOGAF [44], IAF [66],
and ArchiMate [13,17].
Below we summarize the key elements of the GEA
method,asitcurrentlystands,after15yearsofuseinpractice
and regular improvements [42]. We will start, in Sect. 2.1,
with a discussion of enterprise coherence which is the key
focal point for the GEA method. For a given enterprise, the
generic notion of enterprise coherence is operationalized in
termsofitslevelofpurposeandlevelofdesign,whicharedis-
cussed in Sects. 2.2 and 2.3, respectively. This is followed in
Sect. 2.4 with the notion of enterprise issue, which captures
the main driver for ‘doing’ a GEA iteration. The ‘solution’
ofanenterpriseissueiscapturedintermsofanintegralsolu-
tion contour, which will be discussed in Sect. 2.5. Finally,
to guide the process of applying GEA to a (new) enterprise
issue, the GEA method provides a road-map; which we will
summarize in Sect. 2.6.
We will illustrate main elements in terms of a recent case
in which GEA was applied, involving a social housing foun-
dation De Key4. This case also features as an illustrative case
in [37,42]. In this paper, we only provide a summary of the
4 https://www.dekey.nl.
123

--- PAGE 4 ---
554 H.A.Properetal.
Fig.1 The elements of coherence at level of purpose [42]
De Key case. For a more elaborated discussion of this case,
please refer to [42, pp. 100–114].
2.1 Enterprisecoherence
In [22], Leinwand and Mainardi define coherence, in the
context of companies, as: “For a company to be described
as coherent, it must be resolutely focused and clear-minded
about three critical elements: its market position (its chosen
‘way to play,’ if you will); its most distinctive capabili-
ties, which work together as a system; and its products and
services portfolio”. The GEA method subscribes to this def-
inition, but starts out from a more generic vantage point by
defining enterprise coherence as “the extent to which all
relevant aspects of an enterprise are interconnected, such
that these connections facilitate an enterprise in achieving
its management’s desired results” [42]. GEA’s “achieving
its management’s desired results” is a more generic way of
considering the Leinwand and Mainardi’s “market position
(its chosen ‘way to play,’ if you will)” and choices regarding
which capability are to be considered to be “most distinctive
capabilities”. Furthermore, the “the extent to which all rel-
evant aspects of an enterprise are interconnected” in GEA’s
definition is a more generalized way to refer to the “which
work together as a system” in the context of “most distinc-
tive capabilities, which work together as a system; and its
products and services portfolio”.
Theoperationalizationofthe(generic)definitionofenter-
prise coherence in the context of a specific enterprise
involves the creation of an enterprise specific GEA frame-
work[59,61].Thisframeworkinvolvestenkindsofelements
of coherence (see Fig. 2, on page 7, for an overview) that,
for a given enterprise, operationalize the “relevant aspects
of an enterprise” that need to be interconnected. This frame-
work revolves around the notions of level of purpose and
level of design, which are discussed in Sects. 2.2 and 2.3,
respectively, where, for example, the relevant relationships
embody the “the extent to which” from GEA’s definition of
enterprise coherence.
2.2 Levelofpurpose
The level of purpose is the level at which GEA considers
the meaning and purpose of an enterprise. At this level,
GEA essentially adopts the “Strategic Development Process
Model” as proposed by Kaplan & Norton [15], the “Strategy
Formulation”approachbyThenmozhi[45]andthenotionof
endless pursuit of a company’s mission from “Building Your
Company’s Vision” by Collins & Porras [4]. These ways
of thinking were at use at, or at least know to, the initial
members2 of the GEA project. As such, it was a pragmatic
choiceinthedevelopmentofGEAtousethesewaysofthink-
ing as a starting point. Based on this, GEA distinguish five
key elements to capture the level of purpose: mission, vision,
core values, goals and strategy, see Fig. 1.
Themissioninvolvesabrief,typicallyonesentence,state-
ment that defines the fundamental purpose of the organiza-
tion [15] that is “enduringly pursued but never fulfilled” [4].
Itshouldincludewhattheorganization providestoitsclients
and inform executives and employees about the overall goal
they have come together to pursue [15]. The “enduringly
pursued but never fulfilled” qualification refers to the fact
thattheactofachieving amissionisneverfinished;realizing
the fundamental purpose is an ongoing effort.
The vision is a concise statement that operationalizes the
mission in terms of the mid to long-term goals of the orga-
nization. The vision should be external and market oriented
and should express – preferably in aspirational terms—how
the organization wants to be perceived by the world [15].
Core value statements prescribe a desired behaviour, charac-
terandculture[15]andarerequiredforanenterprisetobe,or
become, successful within its formulated vision. Goal state-
mentsinvolveaformulationofadesiredstageofdevelopment
for an enterprise working towards achieving the enterprise’s
123

--- PAGE 5 ---
OnenterprisecoherencegovernancewithGEA… 555
vision [15]. The strategy involves a comprehensive master
plan in which it is stated how an enterprise will achieve its
goals. It should also maximize the competitive advantages
and minimize competitive disadvantages [45].
De Key: Levelofpurpose
The mission of De Key is5 (translated from Dutch): “De
Key contributes to the dynamics of the city of Amsterdam
by enabling people to take their first steps on the housing
market, inside, or just outside the A10 ring.” (The A10 is a
highway around the core of the city.)
While capturing the level of purpose, in terms of Fig. 1,
all elements are confronted to each other using matrices
‘ﬂowing’downthetriangle.Inotherwords,coreelements
from the mission were confronted to the statements of
the vision, these were then confronted with statements
capturing the core values, etc.
At De Key, this involved: 1 mission statement, 14 vision
statements, 4 core values, 8 goal statements, and 15 strat-
egy statements. Table 1 provides an excerpt of the matrix
linking vision statements to key elements in the mission.
It is interesting to note that in some organizations there
might be some scepticism, or even ‘change fatigue’, towards
the formulation and realization of the level of purpose. We
wouldarguethatthisisoftenactuallyanindicationofastrong
lackofcoherencebetweenthelevelorpurposeandthe(actu-
ally realized) level of design.
2.3 Levelofdesign
The level of design, is concerned with a high level perspec-
tive on the design of the enterprise, by which the level of
purposeisinstantiated.Thislevelconcernsperspectives,core
concepts,guidingstatements,coremodels,andrelevantrela-
tionships:
– (Coherence) perspectives concern the vantage points
from which one would like to contemplate and to govern
the enterprise. The set of perspectives used in a specific
enterprise depend very much on its formal and informal
power structures. Both internally, and externally. Typical
examples are culture, customer, products and services,
businessprocesses,informationprovision,finance,value
chain, corporate governance, etc.
– Core concepts define the main vantage points in terms of
which one wishes to contemplate and to govern a per-
spective.
– Guiding statements are internally agreed and published
statements which give direction to desirable behaviour.
5 https://www.dekey.nl/Media/9b0b72d9c89e08f9232917106b273dc0/
original/ruimte_voor_beweging.pdf/.
These statements may involve overall policy statements,
more specific objectives, as well as principles.
– Core models are models of one or more perspectives,
based on, and in line with, the guiding statements of the
corresponding perspective(s). Such core models can typ-
ically pertain to any aspect of the ‘business-to-IT stack’,
from value propositions, via business processes to the
supporting software applications and IT infrastructures.
– Relevant relationships are descriptions of the connec-
tions between the guiding statements from different
perspectives.
As an indication across multiple cases, Table 2 (page 17)
provides some indicators of the number of perspectives and
guidingstatementsfortypicalcases(someofwhichhavealso
been published).
It should be noted that next to the relevant relationships
betweentheguidingstatements(fromdifferentperspectives),
there are other relationships between the ten different GEA
elements that are investigated within the GEA method, to
assess and/or improve enterprise coherence. More specif-
ically: (1) mission statement versus vision statements (see,
forexample,Table1),(2)missionstatement andvisionstate-
mentsversuscorevalues,(3)goalsversusmissionstatement,
vision statements, and core values, (4) strategy statements
versus goals, (5) goals versus objectives, (6) core values
versusprinciples,(7)strategystatementsversuspolicystate-
ments. This kind of confrontation leads to a number of
matrices, such as the one shown in Table 1. The analysis is
performedbythecoreteammembers.Nexttobasiccrossref-
erentialanalysis(asisthecaseforTable1),thisalsoinvolves
the creation of matrices that express the degree of support.
For instance expressing the level at which a mission state-
ment supports the vision statement, or the level at which a
goal supports a core value, etc. In the cells of such matri-
ces, the degree of support is expressed in terms of the range
from −3 to +3. This ranking is discussed with the board
with regard to the level of purpose and with the perspective
owners at design level. As we will discuss in Sect. 6, this
activity can certainly benefit from automated support. Even
more, the scoring should ideally also be based on some form
of quantifiable evidence.
The resulting structure is exemplified in Fig. 2. The per-
spectives as shown there are just illustrative. The actual set
of relevant perspectives in a specific situation is organiza-
tion specific. Note that even though Fig. 2 only shows three
relevant relationships, the general experience is that there
will be about twice as many such relations as there are per-
spectives. These relationships provide the primary focus of
the needed coherence between the different perspectives, in
order to achieve and maintain an overall enterprise coher-
ence.
123

--- PAGE 6 ---
556 H.A.Properetal.
Table1 Excerpt of De Key’s Mission-Vision matrix [42]
Vision statements Mission elements
De Key Dynamics of the city Ring A10 People First steps Housing market
We are in line with current developments and remain
true to values that have traditionally determined De
Key’s identity.
× ×
Spatial the urbanization has consequences: for exam-
ple, to build homes, more high-rise buildings are
needed.
× × ×
Our contribution to the dynamism in Amsterdam is to
create and manage affordable forms of housing that
are attractive to people who want to take their first
steps in the housing market.
× × × × ×
We continue to build current home ownership with
activeportfoliomanagement,innovativehousingcon-
cepts and by supporting initiatives.
× × ×
Thedesignframeworksunderlyingenterprisearchitecture
approaches1 suchas:Zachman[41],DYA[48],TOGAF[44],
IAF [66], and ArchiMate [13,17], can be used to further
structure, across each of the identified (coherence) perspec-
tives, the scopes of the core concepts, guiding statements,
core models and relevant relationships. More specifically,
core models can be expressed in modelling languages such
as ArchiMate [13,17], BPMN [29], or UML [28].
De Key: Levelofdesign
At De Key, ten perspectives were identiﬁed: Finance, Cus-
tomer, Real estate, Services, Suppliers, Governance, Employ-
ees, Stakeholders, Processes, and Information provision. As
an illustration, Fig. 3 shows for each of the identiﬁed per-
spectives the number, and kinds of, guiding statements
that were formulated.
What was interesting is that for the Real estate and
Stakeholders perspectives no principles were formulated,
while for the Suppliers perspective no objectives were
formulated. These observations raised concerns for the
respective perspective owners. For instance, for a social
housingfoundationitisrather‘odd’tomanagerealestate
without clear (business) principles. Similarly, one would
expect that for the management of suppliers there to be
clear objectives.
2.4 Enterpriseissue
The main driver for enterprises to apply GEA is to deal
with an enterprise issue, since such issues either trigger
(top-down)enterprisetransformations,emergeduring,orare
caused by, ongoing (bottom-up or top-down) transforma-
tions. In general, an enterprise issue is defined as a problem,
bottleneck, challenge, or alleged solution, which is consid-
eredandcontrolledfromthecontextofdifferentperspectives
within an enterprise. An enterprise issue can be a ‘positive’
issue, such as the desire to innovate, move towards new mar-
kets, apply new technologies to become more efficient, etc.
It can also be a ‘negative’ issue, such as a need to become
more efficient, reduce costs, manage/avoid a loss of market
share, become GDPR compliant, etc.
Enterprise issues can have both external and internal
‘causes’. Examples of external causes include the need to
respond to changes in the environment, such as legislation,
technological developments, demographic trends or chang-
ing competitive relationships. Examples of internal causes
include a need to increase efficiency, cost control, and com-
pliance with (legal) norms and standards. When the existing
(base-line)structuresofanenterprisehasbeendocumentedin
terms of, for example, (up-to-date) ArchiMate [13,17] mod-
els, then these can be used to support such an analysis.
Enterprise issues may originate from the strategic level,
i.e. primarily influenced by and/or influencing the elements
at the level of purpose. They may, however, also pertain to
more operational issues (more directly linked to the level of
design), such as a major security breach (with the need to
report this to a national authority), or discovered evidence of
GDPR non-compliance.
De Key: Theenterpriseissue
DeKeyisalargesocialhousingcorporationinAmsterdam
withtwooﬃces.Ithadanissuethat,inshort,couldbebest
described as “a required strengthening of the ﬁnancial
function”. The underlying causes of this issue concerned
changesinDutchﬁnanciallegislation,whichimposednew
requirements with respect to ﬁnancial accountability for
enterprises,aswellasfromtheperspectiveofthesupervi-
sorybodiesthatcontrolledtheseaspectsthatrequiredDe
Key to produce more detailed ﬁnancial reports.
123

--- PAGE 7 ---
OnenterprisecoherencegovernancewithGEA… 557
Fig.2 Elements of the GEA framework, [42]
More speciﬁcally, the necessary data for external super-
visors was missing from the ﬁnancial reports, which was
partly the result of new legislation and regulations for the
Dutch housing market. This mainly concerned new data
that had to be gathered, registered and processed, and
consequently provided to the ﬁnancial administration by
all business units; eﬀectively having a deep impact on the
enterprise-wideinternaldataﬂowunderlyingtheﬁnancial
reporting.
De Key’s responsible ﬁnancial director immediately real-
ized that this issue could not be solved within the
ﬁnancial administration alone, but that a strong depen-
dency existed with other functions within De Key (across
diﬀerent business units) and that solving these ‘ﬁnancial’
issues would require the active cooperation of all man-
agersoftheinvolvedfunctions.Inotherwords,anintegral
solution was need.
2.5 Integralsolutioncontour
AswillbediscussedinSect.2.6,‘solving’anenterpriseissue
involves the development of an integral solution contour at
Fig.3 Guiding statements per perspective, [42]
a global level. The integral solution contour is more than
the sum of change initiatives, it is about meaningful coher-
enceandthecreationofmutuallysupportiveinitiatives,while
also reinforcing changes within an enterprise to support and
improve its performance. Initially, there may be contradic-
tions with other change initiatives, there may be overlap,
123

--- PAGE 8 ---
558 H.A.Properetal.
and change initiatives may clash with guiding statements
from other perspectives. All change initiatives, starting with
the initiatives with the highest priority must be examined
for these problems. Any disagreements must be brought to
the attention of the relevant perspective owners who must
decide how these matters will be resolved. Once the dis-
agreements have been solved, an integral solution contour
can be described and submitted to the board of the enterprise
for decision making.
In developing and capturing an integral solution con-
tour, an enterprise architecture modelling framework such
as ArchiMate [13,17] can be used to express the solution
contour, while also analysing inter-dependencies between
different change initiatives [19]. Where needed, the solution
contour can be elaborated further in terms of finer grained
models(see[18])expressedinlanguagessuchasBPMN[29]
or UML [28].
De Key: Developingtheintegralsolutioncontour
A one-day workshop was organized, which included the
perspective owners from De Key, issue owners, some De
Key board members and two GEA supervisors.
Once the GEA supervisors had explained the workshop
andmakingtheaforementioneditemsavailable,theissue
ownersexplainedtheresultsoftheissueanalysis(Sect.2.6,
step3)indepthusingtheir(earlier)preparedpresentation.
Oncealltheissuesoftheparticipantshadbeenaddressed,
the workshop moved to a level where it became clear
that all the participants really understood the issue, and
its degree of importance and urgency. Subsequently,
the integral solution contour for the relevant issue as
described above was co-created.
2.6 Road-map
Insolvingenterpriseissues,theGEAmethodsuggeststheuse
oftheroad-mapasshowninFig.4.Thisroad-mapdefinesthe
stepsrequiredtoarriveatanintegralsolutionforanenterprise
issue. In the case of De Key, for now, only the first four steps
oftheroad-maphavebeenperformed(thedarkgreyelements
in Fig. 4).
The road-map as shown in Fig. 4 is intended to be a ref-
erence model, which will need situational adjustments to a
specificenterprisecontext[42].Assuch,theroad-mapshould
be seen as a guide and checklist, and not as a ‘cook-book’
thatmustbestrictlyadheredto.Furthermore,thetaskswithin
a step do not necessarily have to be carried out sequentially.
They can often be done in parallel. The road-map involves
different roles (such as enterprise architect, sponsor, stake-
holders, perspective owners, issue owner, portfolio manager
and programme manager), these are discussed in more detail
in [42, page 136 ff.].
It should also be noted that this road-map is part
of a broader methodological framework, as provided by
GEA [42], for the governance of enterprise coherence. This
includes mechanisms to monitor enterprise coherence, while
the enterprise is ‘in motion’ [35] (due to bottom-up and/or
top-down changes) [42].
The road-map starts with Step 1: initiating. The purpose
of this initial step is to achieve clarity about the (change)
process in terms of expected results, scope, staffing, every-
one’s involvement and the starting documentation. This step
involves four tasks:
1. Orienting to the situation— Before starting a GEA pro-
cess, it is necessary to clarify the motivation/driver for
doing so, while also assessing if GEA is a suitable tool to
apply in the situation at hand.
2. Determining the scope of the enterprise— It is important
to choose the scope of the enterprise in such a way that
the influence of management on the implementation of
the change initiatives is expected to be high enough to
solve the enterprise issue.
3. Identifying interlocutors— Before starting substantive
work, it is important to identify relevant interlocutors,
who represent (with mandate) the different stakes, inter-
ests,andconcerns,thatneedtobetakenintoconsideration
in solving (the) enterprise issue(s).
4. Assessing initial documentation— Once the enterprise
issue and the scope of the enterprise have been deter-
mined, the next task is to collect all the relevant vision
andpolicydocuments.Theseinclude,forexample,annual
reports, annual plans, strategy notes, etc.
One of the important deliverables of this step is an arte-
fact that identifies potential coherence perspectives and their
potential owners (and stakeholders). This artefact serves as
animportantinputtothenextstep,whichaimstoanalysethe
(existing)extentofenterprisecoherence,alsofurtherrefining
the artefact.
The overall goal for Step 2: analysing the coherence is to
makeenterprisecoherenceexplicit(andvalidated)intermsof
a first version of the organization specific GEA framework
(in terms of the enterprise’s level of purpose and level of
design as discussed in Sects. 2.2 and 2.3, respectively). This
step involves three tasks:
1. Analysing and categorizing statements, purpose and
design level— Selected source documents from the enter-
prise are analysed and all the statements considered to be
relevant are selected for the GEA framework.
2. Analysing the coherence— The analysis of the coherence
takes place after identifying and categorizing the state-
mentsfromtheprevioustask,andinvolvesanexamination
to what extent these statements are consistent and com-
123

--- PAGE 9 ---
OnenterprisecoherencegovernancewithGEA… 559
Fig.4 The generic GEA road-map [42]; In dark grey the steps performed at De Key so-far
plete. This happens at the level of purpose, the level of
design and between the levels of purpose and design (see
Sects. 2.2 and 2.3).
3. Validating level of purpose and design— It is very impor-
tant that the right stakeholders approve the explicitly
determined levels of coherence found in their enterprise.
This must be done to avoid discussions about the correct-
ness and completeness of the guiding GEA framework
used to develop a solution contour to an enterprise’s par-
ticular issue(s).
Subsequently,theenterpriseissueitselfisanalysedinStep
3:analysingissue,withtheaimofobtaininganunambiguous
and clear description of the enterprise issue to hand. The
overallgoalofthisstepistoprovideagoodunderstandingof
the enterprise issue for the perspective owners, so that they
can achieve an integral solution contour for the enterprise
issue at hand. This step involves three tasks:
1. Analysing the issue— A substantive analysis of the enter-
prise issue is performed in a workshop with the owners
of the issue. An issue owner is the person responsible
within an enterprise for the specific issue and responsible
for implementing an effective solution.
2. Analysing the GEA guiding framework based on the
problem— Based on a description of the issue to hand,
it is necessary to test whether the GEA framework is suf-
ficiently complete to use it to perform step 4.
3. Adjusting the guiding framework and preparing an inte-
gral solution contour workshop— The previous analysis
canleadtoadjustmentsoftheGEAframework,onthelev-
els of purpose and design. These changes are discussed
here with comments on those responsible for them, i.e.
board members and/or perspective owners.
The goal of Step 4: developing integral solution contour
is to achieve an integral solution contour for the enterprise
issue at hand. This step involves three tasks:
1. Obtaining change initiatives— An inventory of possible
change initiatives for the enterprise issue needs to be cre-
ated. This is commonly done in the form of a one-day
workshop with the issue owner and perspective owners
present.
2. Compiling an integral solution contour— The identified
changeinitiativesaregroupedintotheactualintegralsolu-
tion contour.
3. Processing the integral solution contour in the GEA
framework— When developing the integral solution con-
tour, it is certainly possible that adjustments and/or
updates have to be made to the GEA framework. There-
fore, in this task, the GEA framework is (optionally)
updated and it can be used in solving future enterprise
issues.
The development of the integral solution contour does
require a prioritization; especially in relation to, for exam-
ple,thelevelofpurpose,theenterpriseissue,goalsofchange
initiatives,principles,etc.InapplyingGEAindifferentorga-
nizations,itwasfoundtobeimportanttoorganizeworkshops
withthe‘perspectiveowners’,involvingamixofgroupwork
and plenary sessions.This allows, ina relatively shortperiod
of time, for an identification (and commitment for) the most
importantchangeinitiatives.Duringsuchworkshops,thepri-
123

--- PAGE 10 ---
560 H.A.Properetal.
oritization of change initiatives is supported both during the
group work and the plenary sessions, and explicitly related
to the interrelationships between the change initiatives and
the triggers/causes, risks and implications of the issue at
hand, as well as the extent to which the change initiatives
are supported by existing guiding statements in terms of pol-
icy statements, principles and objectives.
TheaimofStep5:creatingrealizationplan(forthe)solu-
tion contour is to develop a project/programme plan for the
realizationoftheintegralsolutioncontour.Thisstepinvolves
three tasks:
1. Translating solution contour into planning— Plot the
change initiatives over time.
2. Estimating required capacity— For an enterprise to be
abletoaccommodatethechangeinitiativesandtheassoci-
ateddevelopmentsinitsportfolio,insightintotherequired
capacity is also required to make the changes.
3. Drawing up a realization plan for the solution contour—
When the integral solution contour has been set in time
and capacity, the core team must draw up the realization
plan for the solution contour.
Finally, Step 6: including developments in portfolio
involves the (continuous) alignment of the realization of the
realization plan with other changes taking place within the
enterprise. It involves three tasks:
1. Sharing knowledge and background about realization
plan— To position all changes from the change plan the
right place in an enterprise’s overall change portfolio, it
is critical that the managers responsible for the portfo-
lio have a good understanding of the necessary change
initiatives to be realized within their enterprise.
2. Analysing the relationship between the realization plan
and existing portfolio— This involves a more in-depth
analysis of how the activities in realization plan relate to
the enterprise’s existing portfolio of changes.
3 Research methodological perspective
In this Section, we provide a summary of the research
methodological perspective on the development of GEA. A
more detailed discussion can be found in [63].
3.1 DesignScienceasthebasicapproach
In developing GEA, the GEA programme used the Design
ScienceResearch(DSR)methodology [11,24].Morespecif-
ically, Fig. 5 shows how DSR has been applied in the GEA
programme.
Theboxontheleft-handsideofFig.5representstheprob-
lem domain of the research programme, i.e. the environment
of enterprise coherence governance consisting of organiza-
tions in the public and industrial area with more than 200
employees, a high degree of multiple forms of labour divi-
sion, the business issues that influence the level of coherence
and the people involved in enterprise coherence governance.
The boxes in the middle of Fig. 5 represent the two major
phases of the research programme, i.e. the develop/build
phase and the evaluation phase of the intended theory and
artefacts(i.e.GEA).Theboxontheright-handsideofshows
examples of the theories, frameworks, instruments, con-
structs, models, techniques, measures and validation criteria
thatwereadoptedtodevelopGEA,sothatitsupportstheexe-
cutionofenterprisecoherencegovernance. Fig.5alsoshows
that the GEA method actually consists of three components:
ECA (Enterprise Coherence-governance Assessment) [56,
59], ECF (Enterprise Coherence Framework) [61] and ECG
(Enterprise Coherence Governance-approach) [57,62].
3.2 AdoptionofDSRguidelines
Hevner, et al [11] provide seven guidelines for DSR. Below
we highlight how the GEA programme has endeavoured to
meet these guidelines.
Guideline 1: Design as an artefact— DSR must produce a
viable artefact in the form of a construct, a model, a method,
or an instantiation [11].
Thekeyartefactresultingfromtheresearchprogrammeis
theGEAmethod,consistingofatheoryandthecoreartefacts
ECF, ECG and ECA.
Guideline 2: Problem Relevance— The objective of DSR
is to develop ‘technology-based solutions’ to important and
relevant business problems [11].
AsshownintheleftpartofFig.5,thechallengeaddressed
in the GEA research programme was the improvement of
enterprise coherence governance.
Guideline 3: Design Evaluation— The utility, quality, and
efficacyofadesignartefactmustberigorouslydemonstrated
via well-executed evaluation methods. Evaluation of an arte-
fact can be done using empirical and qualitative research
methodssuchasobservational,analytical,experimental,test-
ing or descriptive-oriented methods [11].
The lower box in the middle part of Fig. 5 shows the
evaluationmethodusedintheprogramme,beingthemultiple
case study research approach from Yin [67].
Guideline 4: Research Contributions— Effective DSR must
provide clear and verifiable contributions in the areas of the
design artefact, design foundations, and/or design method-
ologies [11].
The lower middle part of Fig. 5 shows that the main con-
tribution of the research programme to the knowledge base
consist of the GEA method and its associated artefacts ECA,
123

--- PAGE 11 ---
OnenterprisecoherencegovernancewithGEA… 561
Fig.5 Adoption of Design Science approach by the GEA programme [10,11]
ECF and ECG as well as the publications reporting on its
effect in practice.
Guideline 5: Research Rigor— DSR relies upon the appli-
cation of rigorous methods in both the construction and
evaluation of the design artefact. DSR artefacts are created
basedonexistingfoundationsandmethodologiesinaknowl-
edge base which include theories, frameworks, instruments,
constructs,models,methods,instantiations,experiences,and
expertise [11].
The right part of Fig. 5 shows the foundations and
methodologies (i.e. existing literature) that we adopted in
the development of GEA. The bottom of the left part of
Fig. 6 shows that existing literature and experiences was be
applied in the design, evaluation, and modifying phases of
the research programme.
Guideline6:DesignasaSearchProcess—Thesearchforan
effective artefact requires utilizing available means to reach
desired ends while satisfying laws in the problem environ-
ment [11]. Design involves iterative research activities such
asconstructing,evaluating,andrefiningtheartefactbasedon
findings [10].
The major design activities that were carried out in the
research programme to achieve the research objectives are
shown in the right part of Fig. 6. It also shows that all the
developmentactivitiestoconductintheresearchprogramme
have been grouped into phase 1, phase 2 and phase 3. The
result of phase 1 consist of the first version of GEA and the
evaluation phase 2 formed the basis to modify GEA during
phase 3 into the final version of GEA. In the left part of
Fig. 6 the evaluation methods that were used in the research
programme are shown.
While using DSR as the overall research approach, the
GEA programme also used:
– The Multiple Case Study Research Approach as sug-
gested by Yin [67] to conduct phase 2.
– TheAnatomyofaDesignTheory byGregoretal.[8]was
used to evaluate GEA.
– The DSR Methodology for Information System Research
byPeffersetal.[32]wasusedasa‘template’fortheGEA
design process.
– In order to develop the initial versions of several of
the GEA artefacts the group decision technique Meta-
Plan [40] was used.
Guideline 7: Communication of Research— DSR must be
presented effectively both to technology-oriented as well
as management-oriented audiences. Communication of the
research programme was targeted both at academic and
123

--- PAGE 12 ---
562 H.A.Properetal.
Research Phase 1: Major tasks done in the design of GEA theory and GEA artifacts
1. Identify the triggers to the research programme
2. Translate triggers into research problem definition based on an
exploratory survey among decision makers, influencers and enterprise architects
3. Proof the research problem exists via development and exploration
of an enterprise coherence governance assessment (ECA)
4. Define the research questions and research objectives based on the
research problem and ECA results
6. Set up requirements based on relevant literature, the conducted ECA and
the exploratory survey
5. Review literature on enterprise governance, enterprise architecture, and research
methodologies that is relevant to research questions and research objectives
7. Formulate a theory on improving enterprise coherence (version 1)
8. Design/build the artifacts ECF, ECG, ECA (version 1)
9. Check if GEA theory including GEA artifacts meet the requirements
10. Set up meta model GEA (version 1)
Research Phase 2: Evaluation Phase of GEA
11. Prepaire for observational evaluation of GEA
12. Select cases
13. Set up data collection protocol
14. Conduct cases
15. Draw cross case conclusions
Research Phase 3: Modify GEA theory and GEA artifacts
16. Set up meta model GEA (version 2) based on cross case conclusions
17. Compare meta model GEA version 1 and meta model GEA version 2
18. Modify GEA theory including GEA artifacts based on comparison meta models and
cross case conclusions
Multiple case study research
approach from Yin
Prepaire
Evaluate
Evaluation methods used
in research phase 1,2,3
The Anatomy of a Design
Theory from Gregor et al.
Design Science in Information
Systems Research from
Hevner et al.
White paper 1-8,
parallel tasks 1-10
Review white papers by
decision makers, influencers,
enterprise architects
Scientific paper 1-7,
parallel tasks 1-15
Publish
Comments
Review scientific papers
by scientists
Reviews:
Research methodologies:
Literature on enterprise
governance, enterprise
architecture, and
research methodologies
Rigor into design
Rigor into evaluation
A Design Science Research
Methodology for Information
System Research from
Peffers et al.
Fig.6 Activities conducted to achieve the research objectives
industrialaudiences,morespecificallyleadingtoseveralsci-
entific and industrial publications.
3.3 ImplementationoftheGEAprogramme
The GEA research programme itself was structured in terms
of four groups:
1. Acoreteamconsistingofsixtoeightpeoplewithin-depth
knowledge in the field of enterprise architecture.
2. Acustomerreferencegrouprepresentingthetwentymajor
enterpriseswhoco-financed theprogramme.Theserepre-
sentativesinvolvedpolicymakers,managersofenterprise
architecture departments and lead enterprise architects.
3. An expert review team involving thirty lead enterprise
architects.
4. A steering committee with seven leading representatives
from science and industry.
To participate in one of these groups, candidate participants
had to meet strict criteria:
1. For the core team, the participants were required to have
in-depthknowledgeofthefieldofenterprisearchitecture
and a willingness to spent a considerable amount of time
on the activities of the research programme.
2. For the customer reference group, participants were
required:
– to be working in one of the participating client orga-
nizations,
– haveastrongaffinitywiththedisciplineofenterprise
architecture,
– identifywiththetriggersandresearchproblemofthis
research,
– to be willing to discuss the interim results of this
research on a regular basis and
– to be willing (as an organization) to co-fund the
research effort.
3. To be part of the expert review team, members were
required to have an in-depth knowledge in the field of
enterprise architecture and the willingness to thoroughly
evaluate the interim results of this research within a rel-
atively short time-span.
123

--- PAGE 13 ---
OnenterprisecoherencegovernancewithGEA… 563
4. The scientific members of the steering committee were
requiredtobeamongtheleadersintheirfield.Theindus-
trial members of the steering committee were required to
be employed/working at the boardroom level. All mem-
bers of the steering committee were required to have the
willingness (and commitment) to discuss the innovation
strategy of this research on a regular basis.
Theactualinvolvement(andcomposition)ofthesegroups
depended on the specific phase of the research programme.
The results of the research activities, as conducted by the
core team, were regularly discussed with (and evaluated by)
the customer reference group. The members of the expert
review team were charged with the responsibility to guard
thequality bythoroughly evaluation theresults.Thesteering
committee regularly assessed the progress of the programme
and the development strategy followed.
During phase 2 (see Fig. 6), the GEA method (or parts
thereof)wasappliedinmultipleorganizationswiththegoalto
evaluatethemethod,andmakeimprovementswhereneeded.
In selecting the case studies, the focus was on large organi-
zations involving a broad application of the GEA results.
During this phase, the primary case studies included:
– Professionalization in administrative body of a ministry
of the Dutch government [62].
– An impact assessment ofthe introduction ofa new law at
the Custodial Institutions Agency of the Dutch Ministry
of Public Safety and Justice [64].
– Digitization of the document flow at a ministry of the
Dutch government [58,60].
In line with Yin [67], the case studies involved the use of
an explicit data collection protocol. Yin suggests to use five
levels of questions in collecting data:
1. Questions to specific interviewees.
2. Questions at the level of an individual case (these are the
questions in the case study protocol to be answered by
theinvestigatorduringasinglecase,evenwhenthesingle
case is part of a larger, multiple-case study).
3. Questions focused on finding patterns across multiple
cases.
4. Questions at the level of the entire research effort (for
example, calling on information beyond the case study
evidence and including literature or published data that
may have been reviewed).
5. Normative questions about policy recommendations and
conclusions, going beyond the narrow scope of the study.
The evaluation questions used in the GEA programme are,
for each level, listed in appendix A. These questions were
validated by the core team.
The data gathering, structuring and analysis resulted in
the validation of evaluation criteria such as: degree of accep-
tance by stakeholders, extend of applicability, achieved level
of coherence governance, degree of transferability, balance
between interests of different stakeholders, and level of inno-
vation.
4 Lessons learned from GEA’s development
In this Section, we reflect on some of the practical expe-
riences in the development of GEA. We start with a short
discussion of the general background, and then structure the
remainder of this Section around some of the key lessons
learned.
As discussed in the introduction, the initiative to develop
the GEA method was taken by the Dutch consultancy firm
Ordina in 2006. As a prelude to the actual start of the devel-
opment, a survey was conducted among the participating
organizationstoidentifytherequirementsonthedesiredout-
comes. It also validated the need to more explicitly govern
enterprise coherence, beyond mere Business-IT alignment.
Morerecentpublications[21,22]providefurther(aposterior)
support for this motivation.
4.1 Organizetheneed
From the start out, the ambition of the GEA research pro-
gramme was to follow a science-driven approach. From a
research methodological perspective [63], the development
of GEA involved a design science [10] effort, with an impor-
tantroleforcasesstudies[68]asawaytodrivetheiterations.
It was, therefore, also important to have a good understand-
ing of the needs for/requirements on GEA in practice, and it
was necessary to have access to real-world cases. Therefore,
the next step was the creation of the multi-client2 research
program3 involving clients (i.e. future ‘users’ of the method)
that saw a real need for the method.
4.2 Validationofneedbyfinancialcommitment
In the initial stages (i.e. the first five years) of the research
program, the participating members were also required to
provideafinancialcontributiontotheprogram.Thisfinancial
contribution was not only meant to cover (some of) the costs
oftheprogram.Requiringasubstantialfinancialcontribution
also implied a (1) validation of the shared understanding of
the need to develop GEA, and (2) commitment to the devel-
opment of GEA (e.g. by way of real-world cases).
Obtainingthisfinancialcommitment,alsohelpedmitigat-
ing conflicting interests within Ordina. The development of
GEAalsorequiredaninvestmentonOrdina’ssideintermsof
hours spent by senior consultants, who would otherwise be
123

--- PAGE 14 ---
564 H.A.Properetal.
able to report ‘billable hours’ with clients. This caused some
tension with their respective managers who had to deliver
thesehoursattheexpense oftheirrevenue targets.Requiring
the participating organizations to also contribute financially
(in moderation) to the development of GEA, mitigated this.
4.3 Valueforpracticebeforerigorforscience
Next to the industrial partners, the research programme also
involved an advisory board involved five senior researchers
from different Universities, covering management sciences,
organizational sciences, and business informatics. This is
also where a first interaction between practice and theory
tookplace.TheneedforthedevelopmentofGEAwasclearly
born in practice. However, already at the start, the senior
researchers in the advisory board were then able to already
provide input regarding relevant existing theories and meth-
ods that could be integrated into the design of the GEA
method. This resulted in a series of white papers [50,51,53]
(in Dutch) documenting the need for GEA, its initial design,
as well as positioning in relation to existing related instru-
ments(suchasthebalancedscorecard[14],andMcKinsey’s
7s model [3]).
SoonafterthestartoftheGEAprogrammeitbecameclear
that, for the programme to succeed from the perspective of
theindustrialpartners,itwasnecessarytofirstfocusonestab-
lishing value for practice. In line with this, during the first
stages of the GEA programme, the primary focus had to be
ondoingreal-worldcases(inreal-worldcircumstances)with
the project partners, and then at a later stage leverage these
towards scientific reflection and publications. This, never-
theless, did result in a number of white papers (e.g. [49,52])
providinginitialdocumentationofthefirstGEAcases(which
werealsobeneficialinattractingadditionalprojectpartners).
At a later stage, once the programme was well on its way,
and the first version of GEA had been documented in terms
of a book [46], there was room for more scientific reflection
and rigor [47,54–64].
4.4 Evaluation:dataversusrealism
Research methodological publications on DSR (and case
study research) suggest different ways to conduct evalua-
tions.They typicallyprescribeways to(1)identifywhatdata
(andwithwhatquality)tocollect,(2)howtoprocessthedata,
and (3) how to interpret the findings, what remains open is
the question if the data can be collected at all.
In the case of design artefacts that are developed for a
real world context, like the GEA method, the ultimate eval-
uation is the use of the artefact in real world circumstances
they were intended for (e.g. by way of the different cases in
which GEA has been applied). At the same time, however,
in a such commercial (and political) context there are sev-
eral constraints that make it hard to actually collect data. For
instance, due to budget and time pressures, there may not be
timetocollectdata.Evenwhenthedatacollectingisdoneby
researchers that are external to the project (and its budget),
project managers are likely to frown upon it, as the pres-
ence of these ‘observers’ and their questions, will (at least
givetheperceptionof)slow(ing)downtheproject’sprogress
and/or impact the project’s focus. In addition, there may be
political sensitivities about the project that different stake-
holders may not want to become exposed. These challengers
certainly emerged in some of the GEA cases.
As such, it would be good for DSR to also provide more
guidelines on how to conduct evaluations in such critical
circumstances. Obtaining ideal evaluation data might not
always be possible when aiming to evaluate a design arte-
fact in the actual circumstances it is aimed for. As such, it
sees a trade-off needs to be made between the completeness
andqualityofthedatathatneedstobegather,andtherealism
of the actual case.
4.5 Looselycoupledco-evolutionofpractice&
theory
Next to the earlier mentioned lesson learned on value for
practice before rigor for science, the ongoing work in the
GEAprogramme also resultedina seriesof parallel research
activities. These research activities were formally separate
from the GEA programme, but partly inspired by the find-
ings within the GEA programme, while some of the findings
of these parallel research activities flowed back to the GEA
programme.
For instance, an important concept in GEA is the notion
of guiding statement, which involves of policy statements,
objectives, and principles. The need for a better understand-
ingoftheseconceptsalsotriggeredmoreexplicitworkonthe
concept of architecture principles, which a.o. resulted in [7].
The latter then, in its turn, also enabled the GEA programme
to further mature these concepts within the GEA context.
The need for more coordination in enterprise transfor-
mation to ensure enterprise coherence, was also one of the
triggers for a broader Architectural Coordination of Enter-
prise Transformation programme [38].6 Ph.D. candidates
involved in the latter project also interacted with the project
members of the GEA programme, to obtain case material for
their work. Conversely, different results reported in [38] pro-
vide(d)moretheoreticalunderpinning(s)oftheGEAmethod.
The need to involve multiple stakeholders in a collabora-
tive setting, also inspired work towards an approach to use
collaboration engineering concepts to structure such interac-
6 An FNR and SNFS co-funded research project involving the Luxem-
bourg Institute of Science and Technology, the University of Luxem-
bourg, and the University of St. Gallen in Switzerland.
123

--- PAGE 15 ---
OnenterprisecoherencegovernancewithGEA… 565
tions[26,27].Theseresultsareexpectedtobeintegratedinto
future versions of GEA, in particular when developing more
explicit tool support for the method (see the discussion on
future research in Sect. 6).
Finally, now that the GEA method is well established
(and also internationally available [42]) there is a growing
need (and ambition) to be able to more explicitly quantify
enterprise coherence and its impact on the performance of
enterprises. First steps in this direction have already been
published [1,2].
In each of these examples, the needs from GEA-related
practices inspired the development of new concepts and the-
ories, while some of the latter then flow(ed) back towards
the further development of GEA. As such, we also prefer
to speak about co-evolution from practice and theory, con-
sciouslyputtingpracticefirst(ratherthantheoftenusedorder
of theory and practice), while using the word ‘co-evolution’
ratherthantheoftenused“frompracticetotheoryandback”.
4.6 Controlledinitiation;independentgrowth
As mentioned the GEA programme was initiated by the
consultancy firm Ordina. Having one organization in clear
control of the development proved valuable in order to
organize the need, financial commitments towards the joint
development, etc.
However, after the establishment of a first stable version,
and making this widely accessible [46] (to a professional
audience), enterprise architects working at other consul-
tancyfirmsalsobecameinterestedinco-developingtheGEA
method. This then triggered the transfer of the GEA method
to an independent foundation. This foundation7 now man-
ages the further development of GEA from a more neutral
position.
5 Lessons learned from applying GEA
Overthepast10to15years,GEAhasbeenappliedtoseveral
cases. This includes several smaller cases, but also a number
of larger cases. In the remainder of this Section, we discuss
some of the lessons learned.
Applying GEA in each of the (larger and smaller) cases
has resulted in several lessons learned. Table 2 shows (par-
tiallyanonymized)someofthekeyfiguresofthelargercases.
Case 5 to 7, were conducted at the early stages of the devel-
opment of GEA. For those stages, no detailed breakdown of
the number of guiding statements is available.
7 https://www.groeiplatformgea.nl/groeiplatform-gea/stichting/.
5.1 Limitstotheapplicability
GEA does not claim to be applicable in all situations. In
practice,thisrequiresexplicitexpectationmanagement.This
isalsowhyathoroughproblemanalysisisalwayscarriedout
beforehandtodeterminewhether:(1)theenterpriseismature
enough for a GEA approach, (2) the leadership style is of a
sufficiently democratic level and (3) the enterprise issue in
question is of a strategic level.
Furthermore, GEA is primarily intended to be used by
organizations (or business units) involving a few hundred
employeeswitharelativelyhighdegreeofdivisionoflabour,
a ‘democratic’ leadership style, and already fairly mature
management and governance processes in place.
InapplyingGEAinthecontextofagivenenterpriseissue,
it is also common to test the suitability of the issue on the
basis of the following three key questions:
1. Isthetimehorizoninthecontextoftheissuesignificantly
long?
2. Is the relevant investment level significantly high?
3. Is the solution to the problem expected to have an impact
on a broad range of business segments?
Ifallthreequestionsareansweredintheaffirmative,wecon-
sider a GEA approach to be useful in addition to meeting the
aforementioned organizational characteristics.
5.2 Neededinvolvement
On average the larger cases (see Table 2) require a 5 person-
month involvement of external consultants and/or core team
members, and on average 0.25 person-month (per perspec-
tive) of the perspective owners. Combined, this is an average
of 5 + 0.25 × 10 = 7.5 person-months in total, per case.
These involvements include, more specifically:
1. 3 to 4 members from senior management, to validate the
documents reporting on the level of purpose.
2. Producing the analysis of an enterprise issue (including
the presentation), requires a typical involvement of 1 to 2
‘owners’ of the enterprise issue at hand.
3. The validation of documents reporting on the level of
design requires the involvement of (on average) 2 per-
spective owners (for, on average, 10 perspectives)
4. The validation of the solution contour typically involves
3 to 4 members from senior management, including a
project/programme portfolio manager.
As mentioned in Sect. 2.3, generally there about twice as
many relevant relationships as there are perspectives. These
relationships provide the primary focus of the needed coher-
ence between the different perspectives, in order to achieve/
123

--- PAGE 16 ---
566 H.A.Properetal.
Table2 Overall indicators per project (first time iterations of the GEA road-map)
Case Perspectives Guiding statements # Guiding statements %
Policy statements Objectives Principle Total Policy statements Objectives Principle Total
1 [58,60] 12 111 51 73 235 47 22 31 100
2 10 75 64 152 291 26 22 52 100
3 9 347 93 20 460 75 20 5 100
4 [42] 10 108 95 66 269 40 35 25 100
5 [64] 10
6 11
7 10
maintain enterprise coherence. In gathering these relevant
relationships (as part of Step 2 of the road-map), it is sug-
gested to do this in terms of a workshop of half a day,
involving the perspective owners. The perspective owners
typically are divided in 4 groups of about 5, and are tasked to
identifyabout5,intheiropinion,mostrelevantrelationships.
These arethen plenary discussed,whileremoving redundan-
cies and prioritizing. Afterwards, usually around 20 of such
relevant relationships remain.
It should be noted that the above mentioned number of
7.5 person-month pertains to the first time iteration of the
GEA road-map (Fig. 4). In follow-up iterations of the road-
map, steps 1 and 2 require much less (if at all) effort. In
these cases, the involvement reduces to 1.4 person-month
involvementofexternalconsultantsand/+orcoreteammem-
bers, and on average 0.1 person-month (per perspective)
of the perspective owners. Combined, this is an average of
1.5 + 0.1 × 10 = 2.5 person-months in total, per follow-up
iteration.
5.3 Benchmarkinnumbers
Based on the experience across the different cases the fol-
lowing average numbers seem to be relevant benchmarks for
larger (1000+ employees) enterprises:
1. The number of perspectives will be between 9 and 11.
2. The average number of key concepts will be 4 to 8 per
perspective.
3. The number of guiding statements for a large enterprise
will be between 200 and 400.
4. Thedistributionoftheguidingstatementswillbeapprox-
imately10to25%principles,30to45%policystatements
and 30 to 45% objectives.
Without assuming these numbers to represent an absolute
truth, they provide important indicators of when a strong
deviation from the patterns is visible in an enterprise. When
strong deviations do occur, it is important to discuss these
deviations with those responsible, such as the perspective
owners, and to see whether it is necessary to change, to
removeortoaddelementsatthelevelofdesign.Inthecaseof
De Key, we already saw (in Sect. 2) that there were less than
expectedprinciplesfortherealestateperspective,whilethere
were no objectives formulated for the suppliers perspective.
In another case, a GEA survey found that there to be 198
policystatements,1principlestatementand1objectivestate-
ment. This is a striking example of a not very result-oriented
enterprise, which is stuck in policy-making processes.
5.4 AddedvalueofusingGEA
It is, of course, an interesting question what the added value
of using GEA is in practice. Regretfully, given the size, the
complexity, and situatedness, of enterprise transformations
ingeneral,acomparativestudybetweentransformationsthat
applied GEA and transformations that did not, is difficult.
One overall observation is that, since the presence of a
good documented enterprise mission, vision, core values,
goals and strategy are prerequisites to determine the level
of purpose and level of design, taking the first steps of the
GEA road-map (Sect. 2.6) also results in a deeper reflection
by senior management regarding the validity and coherence
of the level of purpose. Furthermore, the explicit involve-
ment of the different stakeholders (owners of the enterprise
issue, the perspective owners, and project/programme port-
folio management), also results in a stronger commitment to
the chosen direction (as expression in the solution contour)
and resulting portfolio of projects. This, in itself, is already
an added value when applying GEA.
Inaddition,acrosstheprojectsinwhichGEAwasapplied,
several ‘feats of arms’ can be identified, such as:
– With the help of GEA, the EU-accreditation of a large
Dutch government agency, which had gotten completely
out of control, was safeguarded within one year.
123

--- PAGE 17 ---
OnenterprisecoherencegovernancewithGEA… 567
– At a Dutch ministry, the unnecessary start-up of a large
(and costly) project, initially triggered by a change of a
law, was prevented [58,60].
– In the context of a large digitization programme at a
ministry, GEA was used to break (within two months)
a stalemate in a decision-making process that had been
stuck for a year [64].
– With the help of GEA, the financial function of a large
housing corporation was brought up to the level required
by regulators within 3 months. This pertains to the De
Key case as briefly reported on in this paper, while a
more detailed description of this case is reported in [42].
– With the help of GEA, the guardianship order put on a
large municipality was lifted within one year.
As one could imagine, these cases often involve (politically)
sensitive issues. This makes it difficult, if not impossi-
ble, to publish openly about such cases. In [42] additional
(anonymized) cases are reported on as well.
6 Conclusion & further research
In this paper, we reported on the GEA method for enterprise
architecture, and its development as a co-evolution between
practiceandtheory,aswellasassociatedlessonslearned.We
presented the core elements of (the current version of) GEA,
and have illustrated these in terms of a real-world (social
housing)case.Finally,wealsodiscussedsomeofthelessons
learned in applying GEA across different organizations.
Towards the future, we see several challenges for the fur-
ther co-evolution between practice and theory. Here, we see
five main clusters of challenges:
1. Quantifying and smartening enterprise coherence—
Thereisaclearneedtobetterquantifythenotionofenter-
prise coherence, and for instance also provide evidence
underpinning the scores for the matrices used to express
the coherence between the different elements (see, for
example, the discussion in Sect. 2.3). Initial work in this
direction has already been reported in [1,2], but much
more work remains.
Once the notion of enterprise coherence has been quan-
tified more explicitly, it also becomes possible to find
causal relations between (the level of) enterprise coher-
ence and the concept of EBIT(D)A; i.e. an enterprise’s
economical performance in terms of earnings before
interest, taxes, (depreciation), and amortization.
As can be inferred from the discussion of the GEA road-
map (Sect. 2.6), the creation of an organization specific
GEA framework, and further monitoring the level of
enterprisecoherence,canbetime-consuming.Especially
as it involves the analysis of many different data sources.
From a research perspective, also this provides ample
opportunitiesto‘smarten’thisworkusingenablinginfor-
mationtechnologies,includingnaturallanguageprocess-
ing, enterprise cartography, process mining, and AI in
general.
2. Integration with existing approaches— As mentioned in
the introduction, with its focus on enterprise coherence,
GEAiscomplementarytoexistingenterprisearchitecture
approaches. We also identified different ways in which
thiscomplementarycanbeoperationalized.Forinstance,
the design frameworks underlying these approaches can
be used to provide more structure to the descriptions of
the level of design, as well as the elaboration an integral
solution contour.
In practice, we observe there to be a need to define such
relations more explicitly. In particular (but not only) to
the ArchiMate [13,17] standard. Furthermore, the pur-
pose of an enterprise is also closely linked to its business
model and its position in value networks, making it rel-
evant to explore the relationships to, for example, the
Business Model Canvas [31] and Value Modelling [6],
respectively.
3. Organizationaloperationalizationandinstitutionalization—
As mentioned before, the GEA programme was also
linked to the broader Architectural Coordination of
EnterpriseTransformation (ACET)researchprogramme
[38]. The ACET programme already identified the need
for further research into the institutionalization of enter-
prise architecture processes in organizations (see chapter
12 of [38]). Further work regarding the institutionaliza-
tion of GEA-related processes is certainly called for.
As also identified in the ACET programme (chapter 8
of[38];buildingontheworkbyHofstede[12])organiza-
tional culture can have a profound impact on the success
of enterprise architecture-related activities. Since GEA
has been applied mainly in the context of Dutch Govern-
mentAgenciesandlargerwell-establishedorganizations,
there is a need to investigate to what extend the GEA
method has a ‘cultural bias’ toward such environments.
4. Managingorganizationalcomplexity—InapplyingGEA
in practice across different organizational contexts, it
became clear [42] that strategies are needed to deal with
organizational complexity. Based on the experiences so-
far,suchcomplexitiesseemtobeduetotwomaincauses:
(a) Inherent complexities of the enterprise— For exam-
ple, enterprises involving multiple management lay-
ers,matrixstructures,mixesofregionalandbusiness-
line based structures, etc.
Enterprisescanalsobeconnectedtootherenterprises
in various forms of cooperation, including alliances,
chains, and networks.
123

--- PAGE 18 ---
568 H.A.Properetal.
(b) Inherent complexities of the enterprise issue— The
enterprise issue that triggers a GEA iteration may
have a root cause and/or implications that have an
inherent complexity. Examples include: the intro-
duction of new regulations, shifting of the relevant
business ecosystem towards cloud-based platforms,
or major changes to social/legal obligations (e.g.
changes to social security, or pension-related rules).
In [42] some strategies are suggested to deal with such
complexities. However, more theoretical and empirical
underpinning is certainly needed.
5. Collaborative decision making and capturing— Another
result from the interaction between the GEA programme
andtheACETprogrammehasbeenworktowardsexplicit
decision making strategies and ways to capture the
rationale of such decisions (see chapter 15 of [38],
and [33,34]). These results can be used to further under-
pin the (collaborative) decision making activities in the
GEA roadmap (especially the activities requiring joint
prioritization and committed to decisions; e.g. Step 4 or
the GEA road-map). Related to this, we also see oppor-
tunities for the integration of existing work regarding
collaborativeapproachestoenterprisemodelling[16,20],
enterprise architecture [27] and policy formulation [25].
Acknowledgements We would like to thank the anonymous review-
ers from both the Software and Systems Modeling journal as well as
the Practice of Enterprise Modeling (PoEM 2021) conference. Their
feedback has resulted in many improvements to the original paper. In
addition,wewouldliketothanktheparticipantsofPoEM2021,fortheir
participation in the on-line discussions regarding the original version
of this paper. These discussions have also provided us with additional
inspirations for improvements and extensions to the original paper.
Funding Open access funding provided by TU Wien (TUW).
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution4.0InternationalLicense,whichpermitsuse,sharing,adap-
tation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indi-
cate if changes were made. The images or other third party material
in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence,
unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material
is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your
intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the
permitteduse,youwillneedtoobtainpermissiondirectlyfromthecopy-
right holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecomm
ons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
A Case evaluation questions
A.1Level1:
– At the time of the validation process of the ECF:
1. Are the guiding statements valid and up to date?
2. Do the representatives of the perspectives agree with
the identified perspectives, the identified core con-
cepts within it and the related guiding statements?
– At the time of the ECG analysis process of a major busi-
ness issue:
1. Do the causes, triggers, sub-problems, risks, impli-
cations, etc., of the business issue lead to change
initiatives?
2. Do the (existing) guiding statements result in addi-
tional change initiatives or restrictions (the so called
solution space)?
A.2Level2:
– Are the documents at the level of purpose present and
accessible?
– Doesthedefinitionofthelevelorpurposeresultinaclear
understanding of the sense of purpose and design of the
organization?
– Is one able to identify, and engage, the right represen-
tatives for each of the perspectives? This engagement
should cover both the identification and validation of the
cohesive GEA elements and the analysis processes to
solve the business issue.
– Aretherepresentativesoftheperspectivesabletovalidate
the ECF?
– Aretherepresentativesoftheperspectives,usingthevali-
datedECF,abletoexecutetheanalysisprocessestosolve
major business issues?
– Does the development of the ECF lead to an increase of
enterprise coherence?
– Does the use of GEA lead to an integral solution that
contributes to the coherence of the organization?
– Is the organization able to, autonomously, specify a busi-
nessissuethatcanserveasinputtoaGEAbasedanalysis?
– Dotheownersofthebusinessissuesucceedinspecifying
thebusinessissueinsuchawaytherepresentativesofthe
perspectivescanperformthecompleteGEAanalysisand
develop an integral solution?
A.3Level3:
– Degree of acceptance by stakeholders?
– Extend of applicability?
– Extend of matching required dynamics?
– Extend of compliance with required integrality?
– Degree of accessibility?
– Degree of transferability?
– Extend of balance of interests?
– Degree of innovativeness?
123

--- PAGE 19 ---
OnenterprisecoherencegovernancewithGEA… 569
A.4Level4:
– Did the execution of the cases result into detectable per-
formance improvements?
– Does the literature support the answers to the above find-
ings?
A.5Level5:
– What recommendations can be made towards the fur-
ther development and expansion of the area of enterprise
coherence?
References
1. Bekel, J., Wagter, R.: Measurement of enterprise coherence by
meansoftheGeaC-Index-afirstinvestigation.In:22ndIEEECon-
ference on Business Informatics, CBI 2020, Antwerp, Belgium,
June 22–24, 2020. Vol. 2, pp. 57–64. IEEE (2020). https://doi.org/
10.1109/CBI49978.2020.10058
2. Bekel, J., Wagter, R.: Enterprise coherence metrics in enter-
prise decision making. In: Aveiro, D., Guizzardi, G., Pergl, R.,
Proper, H.A. (eds.) Advances in Enterprise Engineering XIV—
10th Enterprise Engineering Working Conference, EEWC 2020,
Bozen-Bolzano, Italy, September 28, October 19, and November
9–10, 2020, Revised Selected Papers, Lecture Notes in Business
Information Processing, vol. 411, pp. 213–227. Springer, Heidel-
berg (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-74196-9_12
3. Channon, D.F., Caldart, A.A.: McKinsey 7S model. Strategic
Manag. J. 12 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118785317.
weom120005
4. Collins, J., Porras, J.: Building Your Company’s Vision. Harvard
Business Review (1996)
5. Conklin,J.:DialogueMapping:BuildingSharedUnderstandingof
Wicked Problems. Wiley, New York (2005)
6. Gordijn,J.,Akkermans,H.:Valuebasedrequirementsengineering:
Exploringinnovativee-commerceideas.Requir.Eng.J.8(2),114–
134 (2003). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00766-003-0169-x
7. Greefhorst, D., Proper, H.A.: Architecture Principles: The Cor-
nerstones of Enterprise Architecture. The Enterprise Engineering
Series. Springer, Heidelberg (2011). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-642-20279-7
8. Gregor, S., Jones, D.: The anatomy of a design theory. J. Assoc.
Inf. Syst. 8(5), 312–335 (2007)
9. Henderson,J.C.,Venkatraman,N.:Strategicalignment:leveraging
information technology for transforming organizations. IBM Syst.
J. 32(1), 4–16 (1993)
10. Hevner,A.R.:Athreecycleviewofdesignscienceresearch.Scand.
J. Inf. Syst. 19(2), 87–92 (2007)
11. Hevner, A.R., March, S.T., Park, J., Ram, S.: Design science in
information systems research. MIS Q. 28, 75–106 (2004)
12. Hofstede, G.H., Hofstede, G.J., Minkov, M.: Cultures and Orga-
nizations: Software of the Mind: Intercultural Cooperation and Its
Importance for Survival, 3rd edn. McGraw-Hill, New York (2010)
13. Iacob, M.E., Jonkers, H., Lankhorst, M.M., Proper, H.A.: Archi-
Mate 1.0 Specification. The Open Group (2009)
14. Kaplan, R.S., Norton, D.P.: The Balanced Scorecard: Measures
that Drive Performance. Harvard Business Review (Jan–Feb), pp.
71–79 (1992)
15. Kaplan, R.S., Norton, D.P., Barrows, E.A.: Developing the Strat-
egy:Vision,ValueGaps,andAnalysis.BalancedScorecardReview
(2008)
16. Koç, H., Sandkuhl, K., Stirna, J.: Design thinking and enter-
prise modeling: an investigation of eight enterprise architecture
management projects. In: Augusto, A., Gill, A., Nurcan, S.,
Reinhartz-Berger, I., Schmidt, R., Zdravkovic, J. (eds.) Enterprise,
Business-Process and Information Systems Modeling. BPMDS
EMMSAD 2021, Lecture Notes in Business Information Process-
ing,vol.421.Springer,Heidelberg(2021).https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-030-79186-5_15
17. Lankhorst, M.M., Hoppenbrouwers, S.J.B.A., Jonkers, H., Proper,
H.A., Torre, L.v.d., Arbab, F., Boer, F.S.d., Bonsangue, M., Iacob,
M.E., Stam, A.W., Groenewegen, L., Buuren, R.v., Slagter, R.J.,
Campschroer, J., Steen, M.W.A., Bekius, S.F., Bosma, H., Cuve-
lier, M.J., ter Doest, H.W.L., van Eck, P.A.T., Fennema, P., Jacob,
J., Janssen, W.P.M., Jonkers, H., Krukkert, D., van Leeuwen, D.,
Penders, P.G.M., Veldhuijzen van Zanten, G.E., Wieringa, R.J.:
Enterprise Architecture at Work – Modelling, Communication and
Analysis, 4th edn. The Enterprise Engineering Series. Springer,
Heidelberg (2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-53933-0
18. Lankhorst, M.M., Proper, H.A., Jonkers, H.: The anatomy of the
ArchiMate language. Int. J. Inf. Syst. Model. Des. 1(1), 1–32
(2010). https://doi.org/10.4018/jismd.2010092301
19. Lankhorst, M.M., Torre, L.V.D., Proper, H.A., Arbab, F., Steen,
M.W.A.: Viewpoints and visualisation. In: Enterprise Architecture
at Work—Modelling, Communication and Analysis[17], pp. 171–
214. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-53933-0_8
20. Lantow, B., Sandkuhl, K., Stirna, J.: Enterprise modeling with
4EM: perspectives and method. In: Karagiannis, D., Lee, M.,
Hinkelmann,K.,Utz,W.(eds.)Domain-SpecificConceptualMod-
eling.Springer,Heidelberg(2022).https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
030-93547-4_5
21. Leinwand, P., Mainardi, C.: The Coherence Premium. Harvard
Business Review (2010)
22. Leinwand, P., Mainardi, C.R.: The Essential Advantage: How to
WinwithaCapabilities-DrivenStrategy.HarvardBusinessReview
Press (2010)
23. Magalhães, R., Proper, H.A.: Model-enabled design and engineer-
ingoforganisations.Organ.Des.EnterpriseEng.1(1),1–12(2017).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s41251-016-0005-9
24. March, S.T., Smith, G.F.: Design and natural science research on
information technology. Decision Support Syst. 15(4), 251–266
(1995)
25. Nabukenya, J., Bommel, P.v., Proper, H.A.: A theory-driven
design approach to collaborative policy making processes. In: 42st
Hawaii International International Conference on Systems Sci-
ence (HICSS-42 2009), Proceedings (CD-ROM and online), 5–8
January 2009, Waikoloa, Big Island, HI, USA, pp. 1–10. IEEE
Computer Society, Los Alamitos, California (2009). https://doi.
org/10.1109/HICSS.2009.44
26. Nakakawa, A., Bommel, P.v., Proper, H.A.: Definition and valida-
tion of requirements for collaborative decision-making in enter-
prise architecture creation. Int. J. Cooperative Inf. Syst. 20(1),
83–136 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1142/S021884301100216X
27. Nakakawa, A., Bommel, P.V., Proper, H.A., Mulder, J.B.F.: A situ-
ational method for creating shared understanding on requirements
for an enterprise architecture. Int. J. Cooperative Inf. Syst. 27(4),
1850,010 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1142/S0218843018500107
28. OMG:UML2.0SuperstructureSpecification:FinalAdoptedSpec-
ification. Tech. Rep. ptc/03–08–02, Object Management Group,
Needham, Massachusetts (2003)
29. OMG: Business Process Modeling Notation, V2.0. Tech. Rep.
OMG Document Number: formal/2011-01-03, Object Manage-
ment Group, Needham, Massachusetts (2011)
123

--- PAGE 20 ---
570 H.A.Properetal.
30. Op ’t Land, M., Proper, H.A., Waage, M., Cloo, J., Steghuis, C.:
Enterprise Architecture: Creating Value by Informed Governance.
The Enterprise Engineering Series. Springer, Heidelberg (2008).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-85232-2
31. Osterwalder,A.,Pigneur,Y.:BusinessModelGeneration:AHand-
book for Visionaries, Game Changers, and Challengers. Self
Published, Amsterdam (2009)
32. Peffers, K., Tuunanen, T., Rothenberger, M.A., Chatterjee, S.:
A design science research methodology for information systems
research. J. Manag. Inf. Syst. 24(3), 45–77 (2007)
33. Plataniotis, G., Kinderen, S.d., Linden, D.J.T.V.d., Greefhorst, D.,
Proper, H.A.: An empirical evaluation of design decision concepts
in enterprise architecture. In: Grabis, J., Kirikova, M., Zdravkovic,
J., Stirna, J. (eds.) The Practice of Enterprise Modeling—6th IFIP
WG 8.1 Working Conference, PoEM 2013, Riga, Latvia, Novem-
ber6-7,2013,Proceedings,LectureNotesinBusinessInformation
Processing, vol. 165, pp. 24–38. Springer, Heidelberg (2013).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-41641-5_3
34. Plataniotis, G., Kinderen, S.d., Proper, H.A.: Capturing design
rationales in enterprise architecture: a case study. In: Frank, U.,
Loucopoulos,P.,Pastor,O.,Petrounias,I.(eds.)Proceedingsofthe
7th IFIP WG 8.1 working conference on the Practice of Enterprise
Modeling (PoEM 2014), Lecture Notes in Business Information
Processing, vol. 197, pp. 133–147. Springer, Heidelberg (2014).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-45501-2_10
35. Proper, H.A.: Enterprise architecture: Informed steering of enter-
prises in motion. In: Hammoudi, S., Cordeiro, J., Maciaszek, L.A.,
Filipe,J.(eds.)EnterpriseInformationSystems–15thInternational
Conference, ICEIS 2013, Angers, France, July 4-7, 2013, Revised
Selected Papers, Lecture Notes in Business Information Process-
ing, vol. 190, pp. 16–34. Springer, Heidelberg (2014). https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-319-09492-2_2
36. Proper, H.A., Lankhorst, M.M.: Enterprise architecture: towards
essential sensemaking. Enterprise Model. Inf. Syst. Archit. 9(1),
5–21 (2014). https://doi.org/10.18417/emisa.9.1.1
37. Proper,H.A.,Wagter,R.,Bekel,J.:EnterprisecoherencewithGEA
- A 15 year co-evolution of practice and theory. In: Serral, E.,
Stirna, J., Ralyté, J., Grabis, J. (eds.) The Practice of Enterprise
Modeling - 14th IFIP WG 8.1 Working Conference, PoEM 2021,
Riga, Latvia, November 24–26, 2021, Proceedings, Lecture Notes
in Business Information Processing, vol. 432, pp. 3–18. Springer
(2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-91279-6_1
38. Proper, H.A., Winter, R., Aier, S., Kinderen, S.d. (eds.): Architec-
tural Coordination of Enterprise Transformation. The Enterprise
Engineering Series. Springer, Heidelberg (2018). https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-319-69584-6
39. Rinderle-Ma, S., Sanz, J.L., Bai, X.Y. (eds.): 14th IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Commerce and Enterprise Computing, CEC
2012, Hangzhou, China, September 9–11, 2012. IEEE Computer
Society Press, Los Alamitos, California (2012). http://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/xpl/mostRecentIssue.jsp?punumber=6470764
40. Schnelle,E.:NeueWegederKommunikation. Spielregeln,Arbeit-
stechniken und Anwendungsfälle der Metaplan-Methode. Heft 10.
Hanstein, Königstein/Taunus, Germany (1978). In German
41. Sowa,J.,Zachman,J.A.:Extendingandformalizingtheframework
for information systems architecture. IBM Syst. J. 31(3), 590–616
(1992)
42. Stovers, R., Ruijter, J.D., Wagter, R.: GEA Enterprise Architecture
in Practice: BetterPerformance by Managing Coherence. Dialoog,
Zaltbommel, the Netherlands (2021)
43. TAFIM: Department of Defence Technical Architecture Frame-
work for Information Management: Architecture Concepts and
Design Guidance. Tech. rep., Defence Information Systems
Agency Center for Standards, United States of America (1996)
44. The Open Group: TOGAF Version 9. Van Haren Publishing, Zalt-
bommel, The Netherlands (2009)
45. Thenmozhi, M.: Module 9—Strategic Management. Lecture
Notes, Department of Management Studies, Indian Institute of
Technology, Madras, India (2009). https://www.coursehero.com/
file/6713100/9-1/
46. Wagter,R.:SturenopsamenhangopbasisvanGEA-Permanenten
event driven. Van Haren Publishing, Zaltbommel, the Netherlands
(2009). (In Dutch)
47. Wagter, R.: Enterprise Coherence Governance. Ph.D. thesis, Rad-
boud University, Nijmegen, the Netherlands (2013)
48. Wagter, R., van den Berg, M., Luijpers, J., van Steenbergen, M.E.:
Dynamic Enterprise Architecture. How to make it work. Wiley,
New York (2005)
49. Wagter, R., Nijkamp, G., Proper, H.A.: Applying GEA to a busi-
ness issue. White Paper GEA-5, Ordina, Utrecht, the Netherlands
(2007). (In Dutch)
50. Wagter, R., Nijkamp, G., Proper, H.A.: Overview 1th Phase:
General Enterprise Architecturing. White Paper GEA-1, Ordina,
Utrecht, the Netherlands (2007). (In Dutch)
51. Wagter,R.,Nijkamp,G.,Proper,H.A.:TheElementsofthe“GEA-
Structure”. White Paper GEA-2, Ordina, Utrecht, the Netherlands
(2007). (In Dutch)
52. Wagter, R., Nijkamp, G., Stovers, R., Proper, H.A.: E-Government
using GEA and NORA. White Paper GEA-4, Ordina, Utrecht, the
Netherlands (2007). (In Dutch)
53. Wagter, R., Nijkamp, G., Witte, D., Proper, H.A.: GEA in relation
toothersteeringinstruments.WhitePaperGEA-8,Ordina,Utrecht,
The Netherlands (2008). (In Dutch)
54. Wagter, R., Proper, H.A.: Coherence management dashboard for
ACET. In: Proper et al. [38], chap. 18, pp. 183–191. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-319-69584-6
55. Wagter, R., Proper, H.A.: Involving the right stakeholders: enter-
prise coherence governance. In: Proper et al. [38], chap. 10, pp.
99–110. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-69584-6
56. Wagter, R., Proper, H.A., Witte, D.: Enterprise coherence assess-
ment. In: Harmsen, A.F., Grahlmann, K., Proper, H.A. (eds.)
Practice-Driven Research on Enterprise Transformation: Third
Working Conference, PRET 2011, Luxembourg-Kirchberg, Lux-
embourg, September 6, 2011. Proceedings, Lecture Notes in
BusinessInformationProcessing,vol.89,pp.28–52.Springer,Hei-
delberg (2011). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-23388-3_2
57. Wagter, R., Proper, H.A., Witte, D.: Enterprise architecture:
a strategic specialism. In: Rinderle-Ma et al. [39], pp. 1–8.
https://doi.org/10.1109/CEC.2012.11. http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
xpl/mostRecentIssue.jsp?punumber=6470764
58. Wagter, R., Proper, H.A., Witte, D.: Enterprise coherence in
the Dutch ministry of social affairs and employment. In: Bajec,
M., Eder, J. (eds.) Advanced Information Systems Engineer-
ing Workshops—CAiSE 2012 International Workshops, Gdańsk,
Poland,June25–26,2012.Proceedings,LectureNotesinBusiness
Information Processing, vol. 112, pp. 600–607. Springer, Heidel-
berg (2012). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-31069-0_50
59. Wagter, R., Proper, H.A., Witte, D.: The extended enterprise
coherence-governance assessment. In: Aier, S., Ekstedt, M.,
Matthes„ F. Proper, H.A., Sanz, J. (eds.) Trends in Enterprise
ArchitectureResearchandPractice-DrivenResearchonEnterprise
Transformation – 7th Workshop, TEAR 2012, and 5th Working
Conference, PRET 2012, Held at The Open Group Conference
2012, Barcelona, Spain, October 23–24, 2012. Proceedings, Lec-
ture Notes in Business Information Processing, vol. 131, pp.
218–235. Springer, Heidelberg (2012). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-642-34163-2_13
60. Wagter,R.,Proper,H.A.,Witte,D.:OntheuseofGEAattheDutch
ministry of social affairs and employment. In: Rinderle-Ma et al.
[39], pp. 115–119. https://doi.org/10.1109/CEC.2012.26. http://
ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/mostRecentIssue.jsp?punumber=6470764
123

--- PAGE 21 ---
OnenterprisecoherencegovernancewithGEA… 571
61. Wagter, R., Proper, H.A., Witte, D.: A practice-based framework
forenterprisecoherence.In:Proper,H.A.,Harmsen,A.F.,Gaaloul,
K., Wrycza, S. (eds.) Practice-Driven Research on Enterprise
Transformation—4th Working Conference, PRET 2012, Gdańsk,
Poland, June 27, 2012. Proceedings, Lecture Notes in Business
InformationProcessing,vol.120,pp.77–95.Springer,Heidelberg,
Germany, Gdansk, Poland (2012). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
642-31134-5_4
62. Wagter, R., Proper, H.A., Witte, D.: A theory for enterprise coher-
ence governance. In: Saha, P. (ed.) A Systematic Perspective to
Managing Complexity with EA. IGI Publishing, Hershey, Penn-
sylvania (2013)
63. Wagter, R., Proper, H.A., Witte, D.: Developing the GEA method
– design science and case-study research in action. In: Franch,
X., Soffer, P. (eds.) Advanced Information Systems Engineer-
ing Workshops – CAiSE 2013 International Workshops, Valencia,
Spain, June 17–21, 2013. Proceedings, Lecture Notes in Business
InformationProcessing,vol.148,pp.43–57.Springer,Heidelberg,
Germany, Valencia, Spain (2013). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
642-38490-5_4
64. Wagter, R., Proper, H.A., Witte, D.: Enterprise coherence gover-
nance in the public sector—custodial institutions agency of the
Dutch ministry of security and justice. In: IEEE 15th Conference
on Business Informatics, CBI 2013, Vienna, Austria, July 15–18,
2013, pp. 117–124. IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos,
California (2013). https://doi.org/10.1109/CBI.2013.25
65. Winter,R.,Fischer,R.:Essentiallayers,artifacts,anddependencies
of enterprise architecture. J. Enterprise Archit. 3(2), 7–18 (2007)
66. Wout, J.V., Waage, M., Hartman, H., Stahlecker, M., Hofman, A.:
The Integrated Architecture Framework Explained. Springer, Hei-
delberg, Germany (2010)
67. Yin, R.K.: Case Study Research: Design and Methods, 4th edn.
Sage Publications, London (2009)
68. Yin, R.K.: Case Study Research: Design and Methods (Applied
Social Research Methods). Sage Publications, London (2013)
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to juris-
dictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Henderik A. Proper for friends,
is an FNR PEARL Laureate, and
senior research manager within
the Computer Science (ITIS)
department of the Luxembourg
Institute of Science and Technol-
ogy (LIST) in Luxembourg. He
is also Adjunct Professor in Data
and Knowledge Engineering at the
University of Luxembourg, and a
visiting professor at the TU Wien
in Austria. Erik has a mixed back-
ground, covering a variety of roles
in both academia and industry.
His core research drive is the
development of theories that work, while his general research inter-
est concerns the foundations and applications of domain modelling.
Over the past 20 years, he has applied this research drive and gen-
eral research interest towards the further development of the field of
enterprise engineering, and enterprise modelling in particular. As of
January 2022, Erik is vice-chair of the IFIP 8.1 working group, while
also being the representative for the Netherlands in IFIP’s TC8 techni-
cal committee. He is also the Stellvertretender Sprecher of the EMISA
working group of the German Computer Science Society (Gesellschaft
für Informatik), as well as a member of the management team of the
Enterprise Engineering Network.
Roel Wagter is a management
consultant, associate partner at Sol-
venta, co-supervisor of several Ph.D.
candidates, lecturer in masterclass
enterprise architecture at the Nether-
lands Digital Architecture Network,
lecturer at Business University Nyen-
rode, and chairman of the GEA
Growth Platform
Foundation. He obtained his doc-
torate from Radboud University
Nijmegen in the field of enterprise
architecture and has held many
directorial, management and advi-
sory positions in which he has
gained more than 30 years of experience. This experience forms the
basis of his ideas in the field of enterprise architecture, including
the use of this field in the world of mergers & acquisitions. He is
the founding father and first author of the internationally renowned
method DYA (Dynamic Enterprise Architecture). In early 2006, he ini-
tiated and became responsible for the ‘General Enterprise Architecting
(GEA)’ innovation program. Between 2007 and 2022 he published
about 60 books, scientific papers and articles in professional journals
in the field of enterprise architecture. He founded the GEA Growth
Platform Foundation as part of this innovation program. In 2016 he
was awarded the NAF medal by the Netherlands Architecture Forum.
Joost Bekel has worked for more than
fifteen years in the financial sector in
the field of solution, domain, and enter-
prise architecture. Currently, he is a
member of the strategy and architec-
ture team of the Dutch Central Bank
(DNB). He holds a master in Physics
and a master in Business Administra-
tion. Next to his work at the DNB, he
is also doing a part-time PhD on the
quantification of enterprise coherence.
123