--- PAGE 1 ---
HAL Id: hal-04323846
https://inria.hal.science/hal-04323846v1
Submitted on 5 Dec 2023
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive
for the deposit and dissemination of scientific re-
search documents, whether they arepublished or not.
Thedocumentsmaycomefromteachingandresearch
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or pri-
vate research centers.
L’archiveouvertepluridisciplinaireHAL,estdes-
tinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents scien-
tifiquesdeniveaurecherche, publiésounon, émanant
des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche
français ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou
privés.
Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 - Attribution - International License
Enterprise Coherence with GEA – A 15 year Co-evolution of
Practice and Theory
Henderik A. Proper, Roel Wagter, Joost Bekel
To cite this version:
Henderik A. Proper, Roel Wagter, Joost Bekel. Enterprise Coherence with GEA – A 15 year Co-evolution of
Practice and Theory. 14th IFIP Working Conference on The Practice of Enterprise Modeling (PoEM), Nov
2021, Riga, Latvia. pp.3-18, ⟨10.1007/978-3-030-91279-6_1⟩. ⟨hal-04323846⟩

--- PAGE 2 ---
This document is the original author manuscript of a paper submitted to an IFIP
conference proceedings or other IFIP publication by Springer Nature. As such, there
may be some differences in the official published version of the paper. Such
differences, if any, are usually due to reformatting during preparation for publication or
minor corrections made by the author(s) during final proofreading of the publication
manuscript.

--- PAGE 3 ---
Enterprise Coherence with GEA –
A 15 Year Co-evolution of Practice and Theory
Henderik A. Proper1,2
, Roel Wagter3
, and Joost Bekel4
1
Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology, Luxembourg
2
University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg
3
Solventa B.V., the Netherlands
4
Radboud University, the Netherlands
e.proper@acm.org, roel.wagter@solventa.nl, joost.bekel@ru.nl
Abstract. GEA (General Enterprise Architecting) is an enterprise ar-
chitecture method which has been developed and matured over the past
15 years. The GEA method has emerged out of needs from practice,
and differs from other enterprise architecture approaches in that it has a
strong focus on enterprise coherence and the explicit governance thereof.
This focus followed from the observed need to move beyond the Business-
IT alignment and ‘Business-to-IT’ stack thinking that is embodied in
most of the existing enterprise architecture approaches.
In this paper, we reflect on the development of the GEA method (so-
far), which involved a co-evolution between theory and practice. We
then present the core elements of (the current version of) GEA, and
illustrate these in terms of a real-world (social housing) case. Finally, we
also discuss some of the lessons learned in applying GEA across different
organizations.
1 Introduction
The environment in which modern day enterprises (including commercial com-
panies, government agencies, etc.) need to operate, changes constantly. As a
result, enterprises transform almost continuously to keep up with these changes.
One could even go as far as to say that enterprises need to stay ‘in motion’ [19].
The involved transformations may range from changes in value propositions and
business processes, via changes to the information systems used to support the
business processes, to changes of the underlying IT infrastructures. Furthermore,
the transformations may be the result of a ‘premeditated’ (strategy driven) desire
to change, but they can also be the outcome of numerous ‘spontaneous’ changes
as a result of locally needed/induced changes. Enterprise transformations are
also likely to touch upon a rich mix of aspects of the enterprise, such as human
resourcing, finance, organizational structures, reporting structures, etc.; i.e. not
just ‘Business’ and ‘IT’. As a consequence, enterprise transformations typically
involve many stakeholders [35] with differing stakes and interests, who (should)
influence the direction and/or speed of the transformation.
To make (premeditated) enterprise transformations feasible and manageable,
they are typically managed as a portfolio of transformation programs, where

--- PAGE 4 ---
these programs are split further into projects. Such a portfolio of programs and
projects, together with the ‘spontaneous’ (bottom-up) changes, all need to be
mutually coordinated while, at the same time, also maintaining alignment to
the enterprise’s strategy. A lack of such a coordination will likely lead to ‘local
optimizations’ favoring short term and/or local interests over the overall interests
of the enterprise. The latter ultimately leads to a degradation of the enterprise’s
coherence [13, 12, 20, 23], which GEA defines as the extent to which all relevant
aspects of an enterprise are interconnected, such that these connections facilitate
an enterprise in achieving its management’s desired results [20, 23].
Traditionally, project management and program management are put for-
ward as being responsible for such coordination tasks. However, these approaches
focus primarily on the management of typical project parameters such as bud-
gets, resource use, deadlines, etc.; i.e. “on time and within budget”. When being
too focused on such project parameters, one runs the risk of conducting only
local and or partial improvements at the level of specific projects [20]. For ex-
ample, when making design decisions that have an impact which transcends a
specific project, projects are likely to aim for solutions that provide the best
cost/benefits trade-off within the scope of that specific project, while not look-
ing at the overall picture [18, 20]. Regretfully, however, in practice such local
optimizations do not just remain a potential risk. More often than not, this risk
materializes, and consequently results in reduced structural coherence of impor-
tant aspects of the enterprise (such as human resources, services, customers,
processes, marketing, finance, physical infrastructures, IT, etc.). As a result, en-
terprises often fail to actually realize the desired transformation; even when the
involved projects may have finished on time and within budget.
As an answer to this, enterprise architecture has been positioned as a means
to enable such coordination and associated governance of enterprise coherence [18,
26, 6, 20]. At the same time, however, one has to observe how most existing en-
terprise architecture approaches, such as Zachman [22], DYA [28], TOGAF [24],
IAF [45], and ArchiMate [11, 8], follow a rather ‘engineering oriented’ style to-
wards enterprise transformation [42, 27, 14, 35]. This engineering oriented style
is typically embodied in an underlying architecture/design framework (typically
involving of several columns and/or rows) in terms of which one is expected
to architect/design the enterprise. This is also where we find the traditional
Business-IT alignment and the Business-to-IT-stack thinking. These engineering-
style approaches correspond to what De Caluwé [5] refers to as the Blue-print
style of thinking regarding change.
To coordinate change, and ultimately ensure enterprise coherence [13, 12],
stakeholder interests, formal and informal power structures within enterprises
and its context, as well as the associated processes of creating win-win situations
and forming coalitions, should be taken as a starting point [42, 27, 14, 35];
i.e. not just as an afterthought in terms of stakeholder specific ‘viewpoints’.
In terms of De Caluwé [5], a more Yellow-print style of thinking about change
needs to be embraced (while also involving the other ‘colors’). Where the more
traditional engineering-style approaches involve a set of pre-determined aspects
2

--- PAGE 5 ---
of an enterprise that should be aligned, the notion of enterprise coherence aims
to go beyond this by focusing on “the extent to which all relevant aspects of an
enterprise are interconnected” [20, 23], where the set of relevant aspects is highly
organisation specific.
In 2006, these insights triggered the Dutch consultancy firm Ordina to initi-
ate a multi-client research program to develop an enterprise architecture method
that would indeed focus on enterprise coherence and the need to more explicitly
govern this coherence during enterprise transformations. By 2007 this resulted
in the formal establishment of a multi-party5
research and development pro-
gram6
. This program has resulted in the development (and ongoing evolution)
of the GEA method [30, 26, 23]. Even though the group5
of (Netherlands based)
organizations participating in the development of the GEA includes e.g. banks,
pension funds, and logistic companies, there is a strong presence of governmental
agencies. This may be a natural consequence of three factors. Firstly, the spe-
cific branch of Ordina that initiated the development of GEA was Ordina Public,
which specifically targets clients in the public sector. Secondly, enterprise/digital
transformation in the (e)governmental/public context typically involve multiple
stakeholder across different organizational entities. Thirdly, government-related
organizations generally (certainly within the Netherlands) are open to collabo-
rative improvement and maturation of enterprise/digital transformation.
The goal of this paper is to (1) reflect on the development of GEA as a co-
evolution between theory and practice, while also (2) presenting the core of (the
current version of) GEA and illustrating this in terms of a real-world (social
housing) case, as well as (3) discuss several lessons learned in applying GEA
across different organizations. In line with this, the remainder of this paper
is structured as follows. We start, in Section 2, with a discussion of the core
elements of the (current version of) the GEA method, where we will use the
real-world case of a Social Housing Foundation (De Key7
) to illustrate these
elements. We then continue in Section 3 with a brief report on the development
of the GEA method as a co-evolution of practice and theory, and some of the
lessons learned related to this. In doing so, we will also clarify why we prefer to
speak about co-evolution, and why we put practice before theory. In Section 4,
we then reflect on the use of GEA across multiple (large) cases. Finally, in
concluding, we will also discusses some further directions in which we plan/
expect GEA to (co)evolve further.
5
During different stages of the GEA research program, the following client organi-
zations participated: ABN-AMRO Bank; ANWB; Achmea; Belastingdienst – Cen-
trum voor ICT; ICTU; ING; Kappa Holding; Ministerie van Binnenlandse Za-
ken en Koninkrijksrelaties; Ministerie van Defensie; Ministerie van Justitie – Di-
enst Justitiële Inrichtingen; Ministerie van Landbouw, Natuur en Voedselkwaliteit
– Dienst Regelingen; Nederlandse Spoorwegen; PGGM; Politie Nederland; Prorail;
Provincie Flevoland; Rabobank; Rijkswaterstaat; UWV; Wehkamp.
6
https://www.groeiplatformgea.nl
7
https://www.dekey.nl
3

--- PAGE 6 ---
2 Main Elements of GEA
In this Section, we present the main elements of the GEA method [23], covering
the notion of enterprise issue, the overall perspectives of the enterprise’s level of
purpose and level of design, and the integral solution contour. In doing so, we
will also illustrate these elements in terms of a recent case in which GEA was
applied, involving a social housing foundation De Key7
. This case also features
as an illustrative case in [23].
Enterprise Issue – The main driver for enterprises to apply GEA is to deal with
an enterprise issue, since such issues either trigger enterprise transformations,
or emerge during an ongoing transformation. In general, an enterprise issue is
a problem, bottleneck, challenge, or alleged solution, which is considered and
controlled from the context of different perspectives within an enterprise. An
enterprise issue can be a ‘positive’ issue, such as the desire to innovate, move
towards new markets, apply new technologies to become more efficient, etc. It
can also be a ‘negative’ issue, such as a need become more efficient, reduce costs,
manage/avoid a loss of market share, become GDPR compliant, etc.
Enterprise issues can have both external and internal ‘causes’. Examples
of external causes include the need to respond to changes in the environment,
such as legislation, technological developments, demographic trends or changing
competitive relationships. Examples of internal causes include a need to increase
efficiency, cost control, and compliance with (legal) norms and standards.
De Key: The enterprise issue
De Key is a large social housing corporation in Amsterdam with two offices. It had an issue
that, in short, could be best described as “a required strengthening of the financial func-
tion”. The underlying causes of this issue concerned changes in Dutch financial legislation,
which imposed new requirements with respect to financial accountability for enterprises, as
well as from the perspective of the supervisory bodies that controlled these aspects that
required De Key to produce more detailed financial reports.
De Key’s responsible financial director immediately realized that this issue could not be
solved within the financial discipline only, but that a strong dependency existed with other
disciplines within De Key and that solving these ‘financial’ issues would require the active
cooperation of all managers of the involved disciplines.
In solving enterprise issues, the GEA method suggests the roadmap as shown
in Fig. 1. This suggested roadmap may, of course, need situational adjustments
to a specific enterprise context. In the case of De Key, for now, only the first four
steps of the roadmap have been performed (the dark gray elements in Fig. 1). It
should be noted that this roadmap is part of a broader framework [], provided by
GEA, for the governance of enterprise coherence. For instance, the (organisation
specific) GEA framework, as will be illustrated below in terms of Fig. 4, can also
be used to monitor the coherence of an enterprise while it is ‘in motion’ (due to
bottom-up and/or top-down changes).
The roadmap as shown in Fig. 1 largely speaks for itself, so due to space
limitations, we take the liberty of not discussing it in detail and only highlight
some key considerations. A first aspect to note is (in step 1) the role of the
4

--- PAGE 7 ---
2. GEA IN PRACTICE | 101
relevant at De Key, and that solving these‘financial’issues would require the active cooper-
ation of all the managers of those disciplines.
After some explorations of the GEA method, it was decided by De Key’s board to apply this
method to achieve an integral solution contour for the issue.The steps taken from the‘stan-
dard’GEA roadmap that were applied in the De Key case are shown in Figure 38.
Figure 38. De Key Roadmap shown on a standard GEA roadmap
Step 1: Initiating
In a final step to obtain full support for the assignment, an extensive GEA presentation was
given to the decision-making board members of De Key. This was done to get the neces-
sary support and to indicate clearly what their role in this process involved in terms of the
required commitment and effort, and also to:
• examine whether and to what extent situational adaptation of the method would be
appropriate
• determine the start and end of the assignment
• determine the‘scope’of the enterprise
• determine the purpose and result of the assignment
• determine the tooling to be used
• determine the members of the core team to be established
• assess the initial documentation
ﬁguur 38
Determining the
scope of the
enterprise
Identifying
interlocutors
Assessing initial
documentation
STEP 1:
INITIATING
Orienting to the
situation
Analysing the
coherence
Validating level
of purpose
and design
STEP 2:
ANALYSING
COHERENCE
Analysing and
categorising
statements
(level of purpose
and design)
Analysing the
issue
Analysing guiding
framework
from issue
(architect)
STEP 3:
ANALYSING
ISSUE
Adjusting the
guiding
framework and
preparing an
integral solution
contour workshop
Translating
solution contour
into planning
Estimating
required capacity
Drawing up a
realisation plan
for the solution
contour
STEP 5:
CREATING
REALISATION
PLAN SOLUTION
CONTOUR
Compiling
integral solution
contour
Processing
integral solution
contour in GEA
framework
STEP 4:
DEVELOPING
INTEGRAL SOLUTION
CONTOUR
Obtaining change
initiatives
Staying connected
with portfolio
management
STEP 6:
INCLUDING
DEVELOPMENTS IN
PORTFOLIO
Sharing
knowledge and
background about
realisation plan
Analysing
relationship
between the
realisation plan
and the existing
portfolio
Fig.1. Generic GEA roadmap [23]; In dark gray the steps performed at De Key so-far
interlocutors, who represent (with mandate) the different stakes, interests, and
concerns, that need to be taken into consideration. As mentioned before, the key
difference between GEA and existing enterprise approaches lies in GEA’s focus
on enterprise coherence. Therefore, step 2 involves an analysis of the existing
enterprise coherence. It does so, both at the level of purpose and the level of
design, which we will discuss below. This analysis is then used in the further
steps to direct/guide the further analysis of the enterprise issue at hand (step
3), and then gradually develop and implement a ‘solution’ (steps 4 to 6).
1. SOLVING ENTERPRISE ISSUES USING GEA | 27
1.3.1 Elements and coherence at level of purpose
The governance elements at the level of purpose within an enterprise are: mission, vision,
core values, goals and strategy [143,152]. These elements together provide content for the
purpose of an enterprise. We assume that these elements are generally present in an enter-
prise and that they form an important basis for the elements at the design level.The level of
purpose elements are well-known terms, but they are often used in different ways in archi-
tectural practice.That is why, for clarity, we have defined below what we mean by this terms
when using GEA (see Figure 4); this will facilitate adaptation of the terminology in practice.
It is especially important that these governance elements are made explicit and available.
Figure 4. The elements of coherence at level of purpose
Mission
A mission is a brief, typically one sentence, statement that defines the fundamental pur-
pose of an enterprise [44] that is‘enduringly pursued but never fulfilled’[18]. This statement
requires the mission statement to be derived from the vision of an enterprise and the sum-
mary of this to be communicated well, for example, in a motto aimed at the enterprise’s
market and the values of other important stakeholders. The mission statement is a formula-
tion of a higher goal of an enterprise that suggests a sustainable presence in the market. For
example, Walt Disney expressed its higher goal to be:‘To make people happy’. Furthermore,
a mission statement often indicates what type of products and services an enterprise’s man-
agement see its reason for existence.
ﬁguur 4
Mission - fundamental purpose of the enterprise
enduringly pursued but never fulﬁlled.
Vision - concise, ambitious statement about
how the enterprise should be viewed by the
world in pursuit of its mission.
Core values - soul of the enterprise, which
prescribes the desired behavior, character and
culture.
Goals - results that represent the realisation of
the vision.
Strategy - extensive master plan, in which states
how the enterprise will achieve its goals.
MISSION
VISION
CORE VALUES
GOALS
STRATEGY
Fig.2. The elements of coherence at level of purpose [23]
Level of purpose – The level of purpose is the consideration level where GEA
considers the meaning and purpose of an enterprise. At this level, GEA essen-
tially adopts the “Strategic Development Process Model” as proposed by Kaplan
& Norton [10], the “Strategy Formulation” approach by Thenmozhi [25] and the
notion of endless pursuit of a company’s mission from “Building Your Company’s
Vision” by Collins & Porras [4]. Based on these theories we distinguish five key
concepts: mission, vision, core values, goals and strategy, see Fig. 2.
The mission involves a brief, typically one sentence, statement that defines
the fundamental purpose of the organization [10] that is “enduringly pursued but
never fulfilled” [4]. It should include what the organization provides to its clients
and inform executives and employees about the overall goal they have come
5

--- PAGE 8 ---
together to pursue [10]. The “enduringly pursued but never fulfilled” qualification
refers to the fact that the act of achieving a mission is never finished; realising
the fundamental purpose is an ongoing effort.
The vision is a concise statement that operationalizes the mission in terms
of the mid to long-term goals of the organization. The vision should be external
and market oriented and should express – preferably in aspirational terms – how
the organization wants to be perceived by the world [10]. Core value statements
prescribe a desired behaviors, character and culture [10] and are required for an
enterprise to be, or become, successful within its formulated vision. Goal state-
ments involve a formulation of a desired stage of development for an enterprise
working towards achieving the enterprise’s vision [10]. The strategy involves a
comprehensive master plan in which it is stated how an enterprise will achieve
its goals. It should also maximize the competitive advantages and minimize com-
petitive disadvantages [25].
2. GEA IN PRACTICE | 105
ence at the level of purpose in preparation for validation by the board members of De Key,
and three: preparation of the validation of the design elements by the perspective owners.
In the De Key case the core team consisted of high level excutives, and making the initial
inventory of possible perspective owners did not pose a problem. This inventory takes the
form of a proposal to an enterprise’s board, which will then make the final decisions with
respect to who shall be invited to play a role in the enterprise’s perspective owners team.
The core team carries out research and further mapping of the coherence at the level of
purpose as follows: all elements at the level of purpose are confronted with each other
using matrices. To this end, the enterprise’s mission is first broken down into its important
keywords, the mission elements. These mission elements are then confronted by the core
team with its enterprise’s vision statements. See Figure 42.
Figure 42. Matrix mission elements / vision statements
ﬁguur 42
Vision statements Mission elements
De Key Dynamics
of the
city
Ring
A10
People First
steps
Housing
market
We are in line with current developments and remain true to values that have traditionally
determined De Key’s identity.
x x
Spatial the urbanisation has consequences: for example, to build homes, more high-rise
buildings are needed.
x x x
Our contribution to the dynamism in Amsterdam is to create and manage affordable forms of
ho sing that ar attracti to p opl who want to ta th ir rst st ps in th ho sing mar t.
x x x x x
We continue to build current home ownership with active portfolio management, innovative
housing concepts and by supporting initiatives.
x x x
D in sts its n rg and capital in r sid ntial prod cts for p opl who ar not t nan
ciall s lf s f ci nt in th ho sing mar t.
x x x x
We create customised services based on a wide variety of standard products. x x
We are open to initiatives from others (for example by helping self-construction groups to get
started or by supporting housing cooperatives with advice and assistance).
x x x x
Social return is the motive for our activities x x x x
r nancial polic is a pr condition for ma ing o r acti iti s s staina l . x x
A clear face to the outside requires good coordination, internally and with our customers and
partners.
x x
Trust: is the basis for the way we work and the way we treat our customers. x x
Many people do not look for the security of a house for life, but for a solution that suits their
situation at the time. This is all the more true for entrants on the housing market.
x x x
Amsterdam is a dynamic city, a city on the move. This dynamic is crucial for the development
of Amsterdam as a metropolis.
x x
The integrity of the organisation largely determines the legitimacy of the organisation. x x x
Fig.3. Excerpt of De Key’s Mission-Vision matrix [23]
De Key: Level of purpose
The mission of De Key is8
(translated from Dutch): “De Key contributes to the dynamics
of the city of Amsterdam by enabling people to take their first steps on the housing market,
inside, or just outside the A10 ring.” (The A10 is a highway around the core of the city.)
In capturing the level of purpose, in terms of Fig. 2, all elements were captured, and
confronted to each other using matrices ‘flowing’ down the triangle. In other words, core
elements from the mission were confronted to the statements of the vision, these were then
confronted with statements capturing the core values, etc.
At De Key, this involved: 1 mission statement, 14 vision statements, 4 core values, 8 goal
statements, and 15 strategy statements. Fig. 3 provides an excerpt of the matrix linking
vision statements to key elements in the mission.
Level of design – The level of design, is concerned with a (high level perspec-
tive) on the design of the enterprise, by which the level of purpose is instantiated.
This level concerns perspectives, core concepts, guiding statements, core models,
and relevant relationships.
Perspectives concern the angles from which one wishes to contemplate and
to govern the enterprise. The set of perspectives used in a specific enterprise de-
8
https://www.dekey.nl/Media/9b0b72d9c89e08f9232917106b273dc0/original/
ruimte_voor_beweging.pdf/
6

--- PAGE 9 ---
pend very much on its formal and informal power structures. Both internally, and
externally. Typical examples are culture, customer, products/services, business
processes, information provision, finance, value chain, corporate governance, etc.
Core concepts concern the core concepts in terms of which one wishes to con-
template and to govern a perspective. Guiding statements are internally agreed
and published statements which give direction to desirable behavior. They may
involve overall policy statements, more specific objectives, as well as principles.
Core models are models of one or more perspectives, based on and in line with the
guiding statements of the corresponding perspective(s). Relevant relationships
are descriptions of the connections between guiding statements from different
perspectives.
Combined, this leads to the structure as exemplified in Fig. 4. The perspec-
tives as shown there are just illustrative. The actual set of relevant perspectives
in a specific situation is organization specific.
38 | GEA ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE IN PRACTICE
1.3.2 Elements and coherence at design level
The elements of coherence at the level of design are: perspective, core concept, guiding
statement, core model and relevant relationship [125, 152].
These elements together provide content and direction to the design of an enterprise and,
like the elements of the level of purpose, are derived from the strategic documentation.
The elements at the level of design, the blue circle, are shown schematically in Figure 8.
These elements of coherence at the design level can not, and must not, be seen in isolation
from the elements at the level of purpose, as discussed in the previous section.
Figure 8. Elements of the GEA framework
ﬁguur 8
Perspective
Core concept
Core model
Relevant relationship
Guiding statement
Chain
collaboration
MISSION
VISION
CORE VALUES
GOALS
STRATEGY
Services
Processes
Culture
Customer
Finance Governance
Employees
Inf.provision
Etc.
Fig.4. Elements of the GEA framework, [23]
De Key: Level of design
At De Key, ten perspectives were identified: Finance, Customer, Real estate, Services,
Suppliers, Governance, Employees, Stakeholders, Processes, and Information provision. As
an illustration, Fig. 5 shows for each of the identified perspectives the number, and kinds
of, guiding statements that were formulated.
What was interesting is that for the Real estate and Stakeholders perspectives no principles
were formulated, while for the Suppliers perspective no objectives were formulated. These
observations raised concerns for the respective perspective owners. For instance, for a
social housing foundation it is rather ‘odd’ to manage real estate without clear (business)
principles. Similarly, one would expect that for the management of suppliers there to be
clear objectives.
7

--- PAGE 10 ---
46 | GEA ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE IN PRACTICE
Looking at Figure 10, we see a practical situation in which, quick insight was offered into the
situation for the relatively important perspectives ‘real estate’ and ‘stakeholders’ where no
principles were formulated and no objectives were formulated for the ‘suppliers’ perspective of
the enterprise. A lot can also be read from the distribution of the number of guiding statements.
In particular, where people had apparently payed more or less governance attention to the
various situations.
These situations were assigned to the respective perspective owners for reconsideration and to
solve the omissions.
Example 12. Review level of design.
Figure 10. Guiding statements per perspective, broken down into policy statements, objectives
and principles.
ﬁguur 10
Policy statement
Objective
Principle
Finance
Customer
Real estate
Services
Suppliers
Governance
Employees
Stakeholders
Processes
Info. provision
0
10
15
20
25
30
35
5
Fig.5. Guiding statements per perspective, [23]
Integral solution contour – As shown in Fig. 1, based on the analysis from
step 2 and 3, step 4 involves the development of an integral solution at ‘contour’
level. The design of this ‘integral solution countour’ will need to answer the
insights from the two analysis steps.
The integral solution contour is more than the sum of change initiatives, it
is about meaningful coherence and the creation of mutually supportive and re-
inforcing changes within an enterprise to support and improve its performance.
Initially, there may be contradictions with other change initiatives, there may
be overlap, and change initiatives may clash with guiding statements from other
perspectives. All change initiatives, starting with the initiatives with the high-
est priority must be examined for these problems. Any disagreements must be
brought to the attention of the relevant perspective owners who must decide
how these matters will be resolved. Once the disagreements have been solved,
an integral solution contour can be described and submitted to the board of the
enterprise for decision making.
De Key: Developing the integral solution contour
A one-day workshop was organized, which included the perspective owners from De Key,
issue owners, some De Key board members and two GEA supervisors.
Once the GEA supervisors had explained the workshop and making the aforementioned
items available, the issue owners explained the results of the issue analysis (Fig. 1, step 3)
in depth using their (earlier) prepared presentation.
Once all the issues of the participants had been addressed, the workshop moved to a level
where it became clear that all the participants really understood the issue, and its degree of
importance and urgency. Subsequently, the integral solution contour for the relevant issue
as described above was co-created.
8

--- PAGE 11 ---
3 The Development of GEA
In this Section, we discuss the experiences in the development of GEA. We
start with short discussion of the general background, and then structure the
remainder of this Section around some of the key lessons learned.
As discussed in the introduction, the initiative to develop the GEA method
was taken by the Dutch consultancy firm Ordina in 2006. As a prelude to the
actual start of the development, a survey was conducted among the partici-
pating organizations to identify the requirements on the desired outcomes. It
also validated the need to more explicitly govern enterprise coherence, beyond
mere Business-IT Alignment. More recent publications [13, 12] provide further
(a posteri) support for this motivation.
Organize the need – From the start out, the ambition of the GEA research
program was to follow a science-driven approach. From a research methodological
perspective [43], the development of GEA involved a design science [7] effort,
with an important role for cases studies [46] as a way to drive the iterations.
It was, therefore, also important to have a good understanding of the needs
for/requirements on GEA in practice, and it was necessary to have access to
real-world cases. Therefore, the next step was the creation of the multi-client5
research program6
involving clients (i.e. future ‘users’ of the method) that saw
a real need for the method.
Validation of need by financial commitment – In the initial stages (i.e.
the first five years) of the research program, the participating members were
also required to provide a financial contribution to the program. This financial
contribution was not only meant to cover (some) of the costs of the program.
Requiring a substantial financial contribution also implied a (1) validation of the
shared understanding of the need to develop GEA, and (2) commitment to the
development of GEA (e.g. by way of real-world cases).
Value for practice before rigor for science – Next to the industrial part-
ners, the research program also involved an advisory board involved five senior
researchers from different Universities, covering management sciences, organiza-
tional sciences, and business informatics. This is also where a first interaction
between practice and theory took place. The need for the development of GEA
was clearly born in practice. However, already at the start, the senior researchers
in the advisory board were then able to already provide input regarding relevant
existing theories/methods that could be integrated into the design of the GEA
method. This resulted in a series of white papers [30, 31, 33] (in Dutch) docu-
menting the need for GEA, its initial design, as well as positioning in relation to
existing related instruments (such as the balanced score card [9], and McKinsey’s
7s model [3]). Next to the advisory board with senior researchers, there was also
a clear intention (and commitment from Ordina) to sponsor a part-time PhD
candidate [27].
Nevertheless, soon it became clear that for the GEA program to succeed
from the perspective of the industrial partners, and thus for the continuity of
the program, it was necessary to first focus on establishing value for practice.
9

--- PAGE 12 ---
This also meant that, e.g. towards the research needed for the part-time PhD
project, the primary focus had to be on doing real-world cases (in real-world
circumstances) with the project partners, and then at a later stage leverage these
towards scientific reflection and publications. This also resulted in additional
white papers (e.g. [29, 32]) documenting the cases (which were also beneficial in
attracting additional project partners). At a later stage, once the program was
well on its way, and the first version of GEA had been documented in terms of
a book [26], there was room for more scientific reflection and rigor [43, 44, 39,
37, 41, 40, 38, 36, 34, 35, 42]. This also resulted in the finalization of the PhD
project [27] sponsored by the GEA program.
Loosely coupled co-evolution of practice and theory – Next to the pre-
vious lesson learned on value for practice before rigor for science, the ongoing
work in the GEA program also resulted in a series of parallel research activi-
ties. These research activities were formally separate from the GEA program,
but partly inspired by the findings within the GEA program, while some of the
findings of these parallel research activities flowed back to the GEA program.
For instance, an important concept in GEA is the notion of guiding statement,
which involves of policy statements, objectives, and principles. The need for a
better understanding of these concepts also triggered more explicit work on the
concept of architecture principles, which a.o. resulted in [6]. The latter then, in
its turn, also enabled the GEA program to further mature these concepts within
the GEA context.
The need for more coordination in enterprise transformation to ensure enter-
prise coherence, was also one of the triggers for the Architectural Coordination
of Enterprise Transformation project [20]. PhD candidates involved in the lat-
ter project also interacted with the project members of the GEA program, to
obtain case material for their work. Conversely, different results reported in [20]
provide(d) more theoretical underpinning(s) of the GEA method.
The need to involve multiple stakeholders in a collaborative setting, also
inspired work towards an approach to use collaboration engineering concepts to
structure such interactions [17, 16]. These results are expected to be integrated
into future versions of GEA, in particular when developing more explicit tool
support for the method (see the discussion on future research in Section 5).
Finally, now that the GEA method is well established (and also internation-
ally available [23]) there is a growing need (and ambition) to be able to more
explicitly quantify enterprise coherence and its impact on the performance of
enterprises. First steps in this direction have already been published [2, 1].
In each of these examples, the needs from GEA-related practices inspired the
development of new concepts and theories, while some of the latter then flow(ed)
back towards the further development of GEA. As such, we also prefer to speak
about co-evolution from practice and theory, consciously putting practice first
(rather than the often used order of theory and practice), while using the word
‘co-evolution’ rather than the often used “from practice to theory and back”.
Controlled initiation; independent growth – As mentioned the GEA pro-
gram was initiated by the consultancy firm Ordina. Having one organization in
10

--- PAGE 13 ---
clear control of the development proved valuable in order to organize the need,
financial commitments towards the joint development, etc.
However, after the establishment of a first stable version, and making this
widely accessible [26] (to a professional audience), enterprise architects working
at other consultancy firms also became interested in co-developing the GEA
method. This then triggered the transfer of the GEA method to an independent
foundation. This foundation9
now manages the further development of GEA
from a more neutral position.
4 Lessons Learned From Applying GEA in practice
Over the past 10 to 15 years, GEA has been applied to several cases. This
includes several smaller cases, but also a number of larger cases. Table 1 shows
(partially anonimized) some of the key figures of the larger cases. Case 5 to 7,
were conducted at the early stages of the development of GEA. For those stages,
no detailed breakdown of the number of guiding statements is available.
On average these cases involved 2.5 person-month involvement of two ex-
ternal consultants, and on average 0.25 person-month per perspective owners.
Combined, this is an average of 2.5×2+0.25×10 = 7.5 person-months in total,
per case.
Guiding statements # Guiding statements %
Policy Case Policy
Case Perspectives statements Objectives Principle Total statements Objectives Principle Total
1 [40, 38] 12 111 51 73 235 47 22 31 100
2 10 75 64 152 291 26 22 52 100
3 9 347 93 20 460 75 20 5 100
4 [23] 10 108 95 66 269 40 35 25 100
5 [44] 10
6 11
7 10
Table 1. Overall indicators per project
Applying GEA in each of the (larger and smaller) cases has resulted in several
lessons learned. In the remainder of this Section, we discuss some of these lessons.
Good inputs for level of purpose – The presence of a good documented
enterprise mission, vision, core values, goals and strategy are preconditions to
be able to determine the content of the cohesive elements on the design level of
the organization and they are the essential resources for this determination.
Benchmark in numbers – Based on the experience across the different cases
the following average numbers seem to be relevant benchmarks for larger (1000+
employees) enterprises:
1. The number of perspectives will be between 9 and 11.
2. The average number of key concepts will be 4 to 8 per perspective.
3. The number of guiding statements for a large enterprise will be between 200
and 400.
9
https://www.groeiplatformgea.nl/groeiplatform-gea/stichting/
11

--- PAGE 14 ---
4. The distribution of the guiding statements will be approximately 10 to 25%
principles, 30 to 45% policy statements and 30 to 45% objectives.
Without assuming these numbers to represent an absolute truth, they provide
important indicators of when a strong deviation from the patterns is visible in
an enterprise. When strong deviations do occurs, it is important to discuss these
deviations with those responsible, such as the perspective owners, and to see
whether it is necessary to change, to remove or to add elements at the level of
design. In the case of De Key, we already saw (in Section 2) that there were
less than expected principles for the real estate perspective, while there were
no objectives formulated for the suppliers perspective. In another case, a GEA
survey found that there to be 198 policy statements, 1 principle statement and
1 objective statement. This is a striking example of a not very result-oriented
enterprise, which is stuck in policy-making processes.
Of course, an interesting question is what the added value is of using GEA in
practice. Given the size, the complexity, and situatedness, of enterprise transfor-
mations in general, a comparative study between transformations that applied
GEA and transformations that did not, is difficult. However, across the projects
in which GEA was applied, several ‘feats of arms’ can be identified, such as:
– With the help of GEA, the EU-accreditation of a large agency, which had
gotten completely out of control, was safeguarded within one year.
– At a Dutch ministry, the unnecessary start up of a large (and costly) project,
initially triggered by a change of a law, was prevented.
– In the context of a large digitization program at a ministry, GEA was used
to break (within two months) a stalemate in a decision-making process that
had been stuck for a year.
– With the help of GEA, the financial function of a large housing corporation
was brought up to the level required by regulators within 3 months.
5 Conclusion & Further Research
In this paper, we reported on the GEA method for enterprise architecture, and
its development as a co-evolution (so-far) between practice and theory, as well
as associated lessons learned. We presented the core elements of (the current
version of) GEA, and illustrate these in terms of a real-world (social housing)
case. Finally, we also discussed some of the lessons learned in applying GEA
across different organizations.
Towards the future, we see several challenges for further co-evolution be-
tween practice and theory. Firstly, there is a need to better quantify the notion
of enterprise coherence. Initial work in this direction has already been reported
in [1, 2], but much more work remains. Once the notion of enterprise coherence
has been quantified more explicitly, it also becomes possible to find causal rela-
tions between (the level of) enterprise coherence and the concept of EBIT(D)A;
i.e. an enterprise’s economical performance in terms of earnings before interest,
taxes, (depreciation), and amortization.
12

--- PAGE 15 ---
A second challenge involves the growing desire to develop more tool support
for GEA. Doing so, however, requires a more explicit meta-model. As one of the
next steps, we also foresee the development of more explicit meta-models.
A third challenge involves the integration with existing enterprise architec-
ture approaches. The fact that GEA differs from other enterprise architecture
approaches by its strong orientation towards the governance of enterprise coher-
ence, does not mean that existing enterprise modeling/architecting/engineering
approaches cannot be combined. Even more, we see potential benefit in doing so
in terms of e.g. the core models used at the level of design, as well as the elabo-
ration of such models towards actual solutions. These models may, for instance,
provide some (organization specific) standardization of the modeling constructs
used to express core models.
Finally, we also see opportunities to more explicitly support collaborative
processes involved in gathering guiding statements across the different perspec-
tives (and stakeholders), and the development of the integral solution contour.
There we plan to investigate the integration of existing work regarding collabo-
rative approaches to enterprise architecture (e.g. CAEDA [17]) and support by
collaborative tools for policy formulation [15].
References
1. Bekel, J., Wagter, R.: Measurement Of Enterprise Coherence By Means Of The Gea
C-Index-A First Investigation. In: 22nd IEEE Conference on Business Informatics,
CBI 2020, Antwerp, Belgium, June 22-24, 2020. Volume 2. pp. 57–64. IEEE (2020)
2. Bekel, J., Wagter, R.: Enterprise coherence metrics in enterprise decision making.
In: Aveiro, D., Guizzardi, G., Pergl, R., Proper, H.A. (eds.) Advances in Enterprise
Engineering XIV – 10th Enterprise Engineering Working Conference, EEWC 2020,
Revised Selected Papers. LNBIP, vol. 411, pp. 213–227. Springer (2021)
3. Channon, D.F., Caldart, A.A.: McKinsey 7S model. Strategic Management Journal
12 (2015)
4. Collins, J., Porras, J.: Building Your Company’s Vision. Harvard Business Review
(1996)
5. De Caluwé, L., Vermaak, H.: Learning to Change: A Guide for Organization
Change Agents. Sage Publications, London, UK (2003)
6. Greefhorst, D., Proper, H.A.: Architecture Principles – The Cornerstones of En-
terprise Architecture. Springer (2011)
7. Hevner, A.R.: A Three Cycle View of Design Science Research. Scandinavian Jour-
nal of Information Systems 19(2), 87–92 (2007)
8. Iacob, M.E., Jonkers, H., Lankhorst, M.M., Proper, H.A.: ArchiMate 1.0 Specifi-
cation. The Open Group (2009)
9. Kaplan, R.S., Norton, D.P.: The Balanced Scorecard – Measures that Drive Per-
formance. Harvard Business Review (Jan-feb,), 71–79 (1992)
10. Kaplan, R.S., Norton, D.P., Barrows, E.A.: Developing the Strategy: Vision, Value
Gaps, and Analysis. Balanced Scorecard Review (January–February 2008)
11. Lankhorst, M.M., Hoppenbrouwers, S.J.B.A., Jonkers, H., Proper, H.A., Torre,
L.v.d., Arbab, F., Boer, F.S.d., Bonsangue, M.M., Iacob, M.E., Stam, A.W., Groe-
newegen, L., Buuren, R.v., Slagter, R.J., Campschroer, J., Steen, M.W.A., Bekius,
13

--- PAGE 16 ---
S.F., Bosma, H., Cuvelier, M.J., ter Doest, H.W.L., van Eck, P.A.T., Fennema, P.,
Jacob, J., Janssen, W.P.M., Jonkers, H., Krukkert, D., van Leeuwen, D., Penders,
P.G.M., Veldhuijzen van Zanten, G., Wieringa, R.J.: Enterprise Architecture at
Work – Modelling, Communication and Analysis. Springer (2005)
12. Leinwand, P., Mainardi, C.: The Coherence Premium. Harvard Business Review
(2010)
13. Leinwand, P., Mainardi, C.R.: The Essential Advantage: How to Win with a
Capabilities-Driven Strategy. Harvard Business Review Press (2010)
14. Magalhães, R., Proper, H.A.: Model-enabled Design and Engineering of Organisa-
tions. Organisational Design and Enterprise Engineeering 1(1), 1–12 (2017)
15. Nabukenya, J., Bommel, P.v., Proper, H.A.: A theory-driven design approach to
collaborative policy making processes. In: 42st Hawaii International International
Conference on Systems Science (HICSS-42 2009). pp. 1–10. IEEE Computer Soci-
ety, California (2009)
16. Nakakawa, A., Bommel, P.v., Proper, H.A.: Definition and validation of require-
ments for collaborative decision-making in enterprise architecture creation. Inter-
national Journal of Cooperative Information Systems 20(1), 83–136 (2011)
17. Nakakawa, A., Bommel, P.v., Proper, H.A., Mulder, J.B.F.: A situational method
for creating shared understanding on requirements for an enterprise architecture.
International Journal of Cooperative Information Systems 27(4), 1850010 (2018)
18. Op ’t Land, M., Proper, H.A., Waage, M., Cloo, J., Steghuis, C.: Enterprise Ar-
chitecture – Creating Value by Informed Governance. Springer (2008)
19. Proper, H.A.: Enterprise architecture: Informed steering of enterprises in motion.
In: Hammoudi, S., Cordeiro, J., Maciaszek, L.A., Filipe, J. (eds.) Enterprise In-
formation Systems – 15th International Conference, ICEIS 2013, Revised Selected
Papers. LNBIP, vol. 190, pp. 16–34. Springer (2014)
20. Proper, H.A., Winter, R., Aier, S., Kinderen, S.d. (eds.): Architectural Coordina-
tion of Enterprise Transformation. Springer (2018)
21. Rinderle-Ma, S., Sanz, J.L., Bai, X.Y. (eds.): 14th IEEE International Conference
on Commerce and Enterprise Computing, CEC 2012, Hangzhou, China, September
9-11, 2012. IEEE Computer Society Press, California (September 2012)
22. Sowa, J., Zachman, J.A.: Extending and formalizing the framework for information
systems architecture. IBM Systems Journal 31(3), 590–616 (1992)
23. Stovers, R., Ruijter, J.d., Wagter, R.: GEA Enterprise Architecture in Practice –
Better Performance by Managing Coherence. Dialoog, Zaltbommel, the Nether-
lands (2021)
24. The Open Group: TOGAF Version 9. Van Haren Publishing, Zaltbommel, the
Netherlands (2009)
25. Thenmozhi, M.: Module 9 – Strategic Management. Lecture Notes, Department of
Management Studies, Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, India (2009)
26. Wagter, R.: Sturen op samenhang op basis van GEA – Permanent en event driven.
Van Haren Publishing, Zaltbommel, the Netherlands (2009), in Dutch
27. Wagter, R.: Enterprise Coherence Governance. Ph.D. thesis, Radboud University,
Nijmegen, the Netherlands (2013)
28. Wagter, R., van den Berg, M., Luijpers, J., van Steenbergen, M.E.: Dynamic En-
terprise Architecture; How to make it work. John Wiley & Sons, New York, New
York (February 2005)
29. Wagter, R., Nijkamp, G., Proper, H.A.: Applying GEA to a business issue. White
Paper GEA-5, Ordina, the Netherlands (2007), in Dutch
30. Wagter, R., Nijkamp, G., Proper, H.A.: Overview 1th Phase – General Enterprise
Architecturing. White Paper GEA-1, Ordina, the Netherlands (2007), in Dutch
14

--- PAGE 17 ---
31. Wagter, R., Nijkamp, G., Proper, H.A.: The Elements of the “GEA-Structure”.
White Paper GEA-2, Ordina, the Netherlands (2007), in Dutch
32. Wagter, R., Nijkamp, G., Stovers, R., Proper, H.A.: E-Government using GEA and
NORA. White Paper GEA-4, Ordina, the Netherlands (2007), in Dutch
33. Wagter, R., Nijkamp, G., Witte, D., Proper, H.A.: GEA in relation to other steering
instruments. White Paper GEA-8, Ordina, the Netherlands (2008), in Dutch
34. Wagter, R., Proper, H.A.: Coherence Management Dashboard for ACET. In:
Proper et al. [20], chap. 18, pp. 183–191
35. Wagter, R., Proper, H.A.: Involving the right stakeholders – Enterprise coherence
governance. In: Proper et al. [20], chap. 10, pp. 99–110
36. Wagter, R., Proper, H.A., Witte, D.: Enterprise coherence assessment. In: Harm-
sen, A.F., Grahlmann, K., Proper, H.A. (eds.) Practice-Driven Research on En-
terprise Transformation – Third Working Conference, PRET 2011, Luxembourg-
Kirchberg, Luxembourg, September 6, 2011. Proceedings. LNBIP, vol. 89, pp. 28–
52. Springer, Delft, the Netherlands (September 2011)
37. Wagter, R., Proper, H.A., Witte, D.: Enterprise architecture: A strategic special-
ism. In: Rinderle-Ma et al. [21], pp. 1–8
38. Wagter, R., Proper, H.A., Witte, D.: Enterprise coherence in the dutch ministry of
social affairs and employment. In: Bajec, M., Eder, J. (eds.) Advanced Information
Systems Engineering Workshops – CAiSE 2012 Workshops, Gdańsk, Poland, June
25-26, 2012. Proceedings. LNBIP, vol. 112, pp. 600–607. Springer (2012)
39. Wagter, R., Proper, H.A., Witte, D.: The extended enterprise coherence-
governance assessment. In: Aier, S., Ekstedt, M., Matthes, F., Proper, H.A., Sanz,
J. (eds.) Trends in Enterprise Architecture Research and Practice-Driven Research
on Enterprise Transformation – 7th Workshop, TEAR 2012, and 5th Working Con-
ference, PRET 2012, Barcelona, Spain, October 23-24, 2012. Proceedings. LNBIP,
vol. 131, pp. 218–235. Springer (October 2012)
40. Wagter, R., Proper, H.A., Witte, D.: On the use of GEA at the dutch ministry of
social affairs and employment. In: Rinderle-Ma et al. [21], pp. 115–119
41. Wagter, R., Proper, H.A., Witte, D.: A practice-based framework for enterprise co-
herence. In: Proper, H.A., Harmsen, A.F., Gaaloul, K., Wrycza, S. (eds.) Practice-
Driven Research on Enterprise Transformation – 4th Working Conference, PRET
2012, Gdańsk, Poland, June 27, 2012. Proceedings. LNBIP, vol. 120, pp. 77–95.
Springer, Gdansk, Poland (June 2012)
42. Wagter, R., Proper, H.A., Witte, D.: A Theory for Enterprise Coherence Gover-
nance. In: Saha, P. (ed.) A Systematic Perspective to Managing Complexity with
EA. IGI Publishing, Hershey, Pennsylvania (2013)
43. Wagter, R., Proper, H.A., Witte, D.: Developing the GEA method – design science
and case-study research in action. In: Franch, X., Soffer, P. (eds.) Advanced Infor-
mation Systems Engineering Workshops – CAiSE 2013 International Workshops,
Proceedings. LNBIP, vol. 148, pp. 43–57. Springer, Valencia, Spain (June 2013)
44. Wagter, R., Proper, H.A., Witte, D.: Enterprise coherence governance in the public
sector – custodial institutions agency of the dutch ministry of security and justice.
In: IEEE 15th Conference on Business Informatics, CBI 2013, Vienna, Austria,
July 15-18, 2013. pp. 117–124. IEEE Computer Society Press, California (2013)
45. Wout, J.v., Waage, M., Hartman, H., Stahlecker, M., Hofman, A.: The Integrated
Architecture Framework Explained. Springer (2010)
46. Yin, R.K.: Case Study Research: Design and Methods (Applied Social Research
Methods). Sage Publications, London, UK (2013)
15