--- PAGE 1 ---
HAL Id: hal-03753144
https://inria.hal.science/hal-03753144v1
Submitted on 17 Aug 2022
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive
for the deposit and dissemination of scientific re-
search documents, whether they arepublished or not.
Thedocumentsmaycomefromteachingandresearch
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or pri-
vate research centers.
L’archiveouvertepluridisciplinaireHAL,estdes-
tinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents scien-
tifiquesdeniveaurecherche, publiésounon, émanant
des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche
français ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou
privés.
Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 - Attribution - International License
Enterprise Architecture Method for Continuous
Improvement of PLM Based on Process Mining
Eugen Rigger, Thomas Vosgien, Samuel Bitrus, Piroska Szabo, Benoit Eynard
To cite this version:
EugenRigger,ThomasVosgien,SamuelBitrus,PiroskaSzabo,BenoitEynard. EnterpriseArchitectureMethod
forContinuousImprovementofPLMBasedonProcessMining. 17thIFIPInternationalConferenceonProduct
Lifecycle Management (PLM), Jul 2020, Rapperswil, Switzerland. pp.563-575, ⟨10.1007/978-3-030-62807-9_45⟩.
⟨hal-03753144⟩

--- PAGE 2 ---
This document is the original author manuscript of a paper submitted to an IFIP
conference proceedings or other IFIP publication by Springer Nature. As such, there
may be some differences in the official published version of the paper. Such
differences, if any, are usually due to reformatting during preparation for publication or
minor corrections made by the author(s) during final proofreading of the publication
manuscript.

--- PAGE 3 ---
Enterprise Architecture Method for Continuous Im-
provement of PLM based on Process Mining
Eugen Rigger1
*, Thomas Vosgien2
, Samuel Bitrus1
, Piroska Szabo2
, Benoit Eynard3
1 V-Research GmbH, Digital Engineering, Austria
2 Hilti Befestigungstechnik AG, 69121 Heidelberg, Swiss
3 Université de Technologie de Compiègne, Department of Mechanical Systems Engineering,
France
eugen.rigger@v-research.at
Abstract. The complexity and dynamics of IT landscapes and related PLM strate-
gies of engineering enterprises are continuously growing due to trends such as Industry
4.0 and ever shorting product development cycles. To ensure interoperability, robust-
ness, flexibility and efficiency of the IT systems and PLM, methods are needed that can
handle these dynamics and complexities. In this paper, a method is presented that com-
bines principles from enterprise architecture as well as business process mining to en-
able continuous improvement of PLM processes and the related IT systems. In partic-
ular, process mining is applied to validate the alignment of IT systems with related
PLM processes. The method is demonstrated using an industrial case study that high-
lights the requirements from industrial practice and the applicability of the approach
for PLM related processes. The method is shown to be particularly beneficial for the
enterprise architects to support them with quantitative data as a basis for the design of
continuous improvement cycles to make the PLM evolve. Future work will address the
application of process mining for PLM related processes with distributed IT systems
and the handling of the related complexity.
Keywords: PLM, Enterprise Architecture, Process Mining, Continuous Im-
provement.
1 Introduction
Digitalization of engineering companies [1] which builds upon trends such as Indus-
try 4.0 [2] lead to increasing complexities in the IT landscape of engineering enter-
prises. In this context, Enterprise Architecture (EA) aims to ensure interoperability
among IT applications as well as the related business processes and infrastructure sat-
isfying the needs of an enterprise regarding robustness, flexibility and efficiency [3].
EA methods for modeling and management of architectures [3] have been proven to be
beneficial in industrial practice with respect to monitoring and making enterprises
evolve [4],[5] but are still subject to improvement with respect to new challenges stem-
ming from the new opportunities in digital engineering and production [6].
With respect to handling of data and applied tools among the lifecycle of a product,
Product Lifecycle Management (PLM) is applied as a strategic management approach

--- PAGE 4 ---
2
for product information, engineering workflows and related applications [7]. Hence, it
can be governed and supported by enterprise architecture methods.
However, ever shortening product development cycles, the application of new tech-
nologies in industry such as Industrial Internet of Things or web-based technologies in
general as well as the use of domain specific applications in engineering render the
monitoring of enterprise architecture in a PLM context a challenge [1] calling for agile
approaches to manage the continuous changes [8]. Hence, strategic approaches such as
PLM and enterprise architecture require means to monitor and validate theoretically
derived models of the enterprise architecture based on the actual operational use of
applications. In this respect, process mining has been established as a means to validate
and analyze business processes with respect to conformance based on analysis of event
logs [9]. This enables to consolidate and optimize processes. Hence, the processes that
are being applied in an enterprise, can be reengineered based on log data from the used
systems. However, currently, process mining is applied to business processes with vast
amount of data and single IT solutions which makes it difficult to be applied in a PLM
context.
In response to these needs, this paper proposes a method enabling continuous PLM
improvement combining principles from enterprise architecture as well as business pro-
cess mining. The needs for this method are validated based on a use case reflecting the
requirements from industrial practice and the actual method is illustrated using a refer-
ence process from PLM. Thus, this paper contributes by introducing a means that sup-
port business and operation excellence in the PLM area.
In the following, Section 2 reviews the state of the art and state of practice regarding
business process mining.Following this, enterprisearchitecture methods areintroduced
and critically reviewed with respect to the applicability in agile and dynamic contexts.
Section 2 is then summarized highlighting the research gaps that build the motivation
and basis for derivation of the method that is presented in Section 3. Section 4 intro-
duces case studies reflecting the current situation and application scenarios of the
method in an industrial context. Section 5 comprehensively discusses these findings
and Section 6 closes this paper by some concluding remarks.
2 Background
In this section the state of the art as well as state of practice of business process mining
are discussed. Focus is put on currently applied industrial use cases of business process
mining and its application in a context of product lifecycle management. Similarly, ex-
isting methodologies and supporting methods regarding enterprise architecture are re-
viewed. The background section is concluded by a summary highlighting the research
gaps.
2.1 Business Process Mining vs. PLM
Process mining is a set of analysis techniques in the field of business process man-
agement [10] that applies machine learning and data mining to re-engineer and dis-
cover business process models using logs of information systems [9]. Correspondingly,

--- PAGE 5 ---
3
the threemainfields of application of business process mining refer to discovery, where
a model is generated from event logs; conformance checking, where the data obtained
from the model are compared to identify deviations from actual execution of a business
process; and enhancement, where an existing process model is improved and optimized
[11]. Recent reviews of the technology show that business process mining is an estab-
lished technology [12] and multiple commercial platforms exist that address open re-
search issues related to usability and understandability of the techniques with respect
to non-experts.
In the context of PLM, reported applications of business process mining mainly fo-
cus on the improvement of manufacturing processes based on data from manufacturing
execution systems [13]–[16] or decision making duringoperation of systems [17].Con-
sidering the central data management systems that build the core of PLM such as the
product data management system (PDM), only few works can be identified. The work
presented in [18] claims PDM related process improvement. However, the work is
available in Korean, only. Zhaoxia et al. [19] extends the attributes of the data format
within the standardized Mining XML format [20] that enables mining of events related
to data management in PDM systems such as the approval process of documents. Mon-
itoring of process in PDM are particularly important due to the rapid evolution of new
tools and technologies from fields such as CAx or design automation each interfacing
with PDM.
2.2 Enterprise Architecture
Enterprise Architecture (EA) provides means to describe, analyze, represent and design
different dimensions of an enterprise [3], [21]. EA aims to manage the organizational
structure and related processes of an enterprise as well as the supporting information
systems and infrastructure so to understand complexity and manage change [22], [23,
p. 201]. Multiple EA methods and standards have emerged since the origins of enter-
prise architecture in the late 1980s [21], e.g. [24], [25], [26], [27].
An essential part of PLM is concerned with the design process that is hard to for-
mally model due to its situated [28] and iterative [29] character. Further, the engineer-
ing domain is characterized by domain specific tools featuring support for highly spe-
cific tasks, e.g. CAx [30] or design automation [31], [32]. Still, the works presented in
[33], [34] have shown that the principles of enterprise architecture are also applicable
in a PLM context. Hence, in this work methods of enterprise architecture are also used
for the design and monitoring of PLM strategies.
Regardingtheformalmodeling of theenterprise architectureso to communicate and
validate the knowledge about enterprise architecture, the ArchiMate graphical model-
ing language has been established as a standard [35]. Archimate features task prece-
dence modeling in the three relevant layers for formalization of an enterprise architec-
ture, namely business, application, and technology. The graphical modeling supports
communication [36], participation and reengineering of enterprise architectures [37].
Archimate differentiates itself from other standardized notations for task precedence
modeling, e.g. BPMN [38] or IDEF3 [39], by enabling modelling of the additional lay-
ers for applications and technologies.

--- PAGE 6 ---
4
2.3 Summary
Business process mining is an established technology that has gained recent interest
inaPLMcontextdueto theavailability ofstructureddatawithintherelatedinformation
systems. However, there is a lack of methods with respect to systematic integration of
business process mining in the context of the core applications of PLM such as the
PDM to enable continuous improvement of the related business processes for data man-
agement. Existing EA methods need to be elaborated on to incorporate analysis and
improvement cycles based on the monitoring capabilities provided by business process
mining.
3 EA Method for continuous improvement of PLM
As highlighted in the review of the state of the art, existing methods from the field of
enterprise architecture do not feature the continuous evolution process required to man-
age the dynamics of enterprise architecture within thefield ofPLM. Hence,in this work
we propose a method featuring both the agility and flexibility required to account for
the opportunities stemming from emerging technologies in the context of PLM as well
as the monitoring capabilities required to guarantee streamlined application of these
technologies based on process mining. The method is illustrated in Figure 1.
Fig. 1. Overview of the A Method for continuous improvement of PLM

--- PAGE 7 ---
5
As can be seen in Figure 1, the method presented in this work is based on the main
principles of continuous improvement [40], [41] so that the dynamics of PLM can be
taken into account. The method is constituted by the following steps:
1. The enterprise architecture is formalized using the ArchiMate modelling lan-
guage. The business processes, related applications as well as the supporting
infrastructure are captured holistically in one model repository. Each architec-
ture artifact is then documented with additional metadata that will be used for
the EA assessment.
2. The enterprise architecture is evaluated based on a comparison of the formal-
ized EA with the practically applied PLM processes. The monitoring of pro-
cesses as well as the evaluation of multiple dimensions of PLM maturity [42],
[43] such as the level of IT alignment allow to draw a balanced scorecard in-
dicating the maturity of a selected process.
3. Based on the yielded score card, informed decisions regarding the adaptation
of the EA can be taken. Potential actions include the adaption of business pro-
cesses, the inclusion/exclusion of specific application functions etc.
4. A potential solution reflecting the changes within the EA to realize the previ-
ouslydefinedaction isdesignedbythesolutionarchitects.Definingapotential
solution follows basic software development principles as defined in ISO
25010 [44]
5. Thepotentialsolution isevaluatedwith respecttonon-functionalrequirements
reflecting the EA conformance.
6. When conformance is guaranteed, the solution is implemented and integrated
to the enterprise IT systems.
7. The newly integrated IT solution is reviewed with respect to functional re-
quirements and if necessary adapted.
8. The EA model is adapted to incorporate the newly integrated IT solutions.
Step 1 and step 8 encompass the same activity of EA modeling. Hence, these actions
indicated the continuous character of the method that should be permanently applied to
ensure robustness, flexibility and efficiency of modern engineering companies.
4 Case Study
In the following, the current state of application of the method in an engineering
enterprise producing a large variety of high value-added manufacturing systems for the
construction industry. In a first step, the challenges of this business with respect to EA
are briefly introduced. Following this, the current state of application of the EA Method
for continuous improvement of IT system is presented. Thereby, focus is put on assess-
ment of the EA based on process mining as well as heat maps that enable multi-dimen-
sional assessment of business processes and the related EA. Finally, an outlook includ-
ing a representative PLM process is presented to highlight how the company wants to
move towards comprehensive application of the method to fully grasp the potential of
simultaneous application of enterprise architecture and business process mining.

--- PAGE 8 ---
6
4.1 Industrial Challenges for Applying EA in the PLM Area
The industrial case deals with products of large system complexity and like any other
manufacturing industry product data is cross-functionally used among the various de-
partments of thecompany, e.g.product data is shared and exchanged among the various
disciplines involved in the design process. The IT systems that enable product data and
configuration management processes require a stable and robust IT landscape where IT
architecture guidelines and principles are fully applied. Contrarily, the cross-function-
ality and multidisciplinary character of the product development call for a variety of IT
systems and authoring applications, which makes the PLM IT landscape particularly
difficult to govern from an EA perspective. For example,theengineering business units
ask for flexibility and efficiency in implementation of desired authoring applications
without necessarily taking care of applying the company standards, whereas these
standards are necessary for ensuring the full traceability and consistency of the pro-
cessed product data. Eventually, this leads to data quality issues downstream the prod-
uct life cycle.
From another perspective, the emergence of cloud solution for PLM enabling IT
systems poses additional challenges to the enterprise architecture, since a mix of on-
premise,desktopandcloudsolutionsneedstobeintegrated.ThismakesEAgovernance
and EA principles difficult to apply and requires the definition of new integration pat-
terns.
Finally, to align PLM enabling IT systems with the IT strategy of the company, costly
and risky PLM transformation projects are necessary. However, complex PLM IT sys-
tems need to be validated regarding the operational usage in order to assess the align-
ment of the IT systems with the business process and eventually the IT strategy. This
is particularly truefor the PLMsystems forproductdata management thatneed to cover
many business use cases and are complex. This leads to gaps between the defined and
applied processes. Therefore,potential future solutions need to be assessed with respect
to the possibilities for setting up process mining cases for the application.
4.2 State of Practice of Application of Enterprise Architecture
This section shows how the EA Method for continuous improvement of PLM intro-
duced in section 3 is currently applied in practice to general business processes. Focus
is put on the second step of the method, i.e. the EA assessment necessary to align the
PLM IT systems with the EA strategy and principles of the company. The assessment
itself consists of a compliance assessment with respect to EA architecture principles
and also relies on a process mining solution to identify the state of application of a
specific IT solution with respect to applied processes.
Assessment of Systems’ Compliance and Maturity to EA Principles
Regarding the assessment of a systems maturity, the company introduced “assess-
ment” metadata attributes for IT systems directly within modeling environment ADOit.
Metadata comprises information such as the operating model (e.g. On Premise, XaaS),
the mission criticality of a system, the level of customization of a system, the used

--- PAGE 9 ---
7
integration patterns and technologies, lifecycle information, etc. This enables the solu-
tion architects and enterprise architects to classify and assess the various software ap-
plications based on different IT strategy and principles criteria. Given the complete
assessment of the corporate IT systems, a heatmap of IT systems maturity can be drawn
as shown in Fig. 2 so that a comprehensive overview of the current state of IT system
maturity is given. Alternatively, this data can also be visualized using balanced score-
cards. One of the first principles which is checked is “A system is supporting and is
aligned with business processes and avoids functional redundancy”. Until now, this
assessment was based on the qualitative and subjective evaluation of the architect
and/or owner of the solution. In this paper,we propose now to complete this assessment
by applying process mining to the respective supported business processes.
Fig. 2. Excerpt of EA heat map report with columns indicating the different levels of IT system
maturity. The systems are hidden for confidentiality reasons.
PLM Process Mining for Operational Alignment between PLM IT Systems and
Processes
In the following, the application of process mining to assess the alignment of the
used ERP/PDM system SAP S/4 HANA with applied engineering change management
process. The case has been implemented using the Celonis process mining toolbox.
Whereas the company already applies the proposed method in the context of sales
and marketing business processes (e.g. purchase-to-pay and order-to-cash), the PLM
related processes are currently not yet operationally mined. One of the reasons is that
the PLM environment is subject to current major changes and the engineering change
management processes is currently involving several software applications which are
currently not yet in the scope and roadmap of the process mining initiative. Moreover,
each new process mining case requires additional costs, efforts and time, not only for
integrating Celonis with other software systems but also for formalizing, setting up,
implementing, executing the case and analyzing the results.
In the following, the data model of SAP S/4 HANA is investigated with respect to
its capabilities to support and monitor the engineering change management process
(ECM). ECM is taken as a representative PLM process since it is critical with respect
to its impact on data quality and information traceability required in downstream engi-
neering processes. Hence, misalignments between the software implementation and its
usage by the end-users are critical and need to be avoided.
Fig. 3 depicts the engineering change management reference process and the related
data structure in SAP S/4 HANA as implemented in the company. This allows the iden-
tification of business processes based on the analysis of interrelations of the identified
Software
Systems
EA Score
A systemis aligned with
business processes and avoids
functional redundancy
A systemfollows "best
practice" architectures to
foster reliability
A system has a
managed lifecycle
A system has managed
interfaces and follows
interoperability standards
Principle Score 53.6 78.6 85.0 67.9
System A 65.9 P M M M
System B 75.0 L M M F
System C 68.2 M L F L
System D 75.0 L F F F
System E 54.5 P M M P
System F 84.1 M F F F
System G 72.7 M M M P

--- PAGE 10 ---
8
processactivities.Giventhisinformation, thedefinition ofprocessactivitiesas required
for setting up a process mining case can be performed.
Fig. 4 shows some of the proof of concept results for the analysis of the ECM process.
Even though the details cannot be provided due to confidentiality, it can be seen that
multiple variants of processes are identified when tracking the data event logs for engi-
neering change request/orders. This information can then be used to elaborate on the
defined processes as well as to support the assessment of the IT system with regards to
its capabilities alignment with their operational usage. In this specific case, the results
of the process mining enabled the enterprise architect to adjust the EA assessment “A
system is supporting and is aligned with business processes and avoids functional re-
dundancy” so that a qualitative estimation is replaced by quantitative evaluations. Fur-
ther, the setup of process mining cases right from the start of implementation of a new
IT system in the PLM context, will be used to monitor the adoption of new systems so
to enable continuous improvement of the IT systems also in a PLM context.
Fig. 3. Engineering Change Management Process and related data structure in SAP S/4 HANA.

--- PAGE 11 ---
9
Fig. 4. Process deviations report in Celonis for the usage of SAP S/4 HANA.
5 Discussion
In the following, the work and results presented in this work are discussed with its
impact with respect to industry as well as academia.
Regarding the contributions with respect to industry, the business case introduced in
Section 4 summarizes the challenges of a manufacturing engineering enterprise with
respect to PLM and EA adoption. Building upon these challenges, different dimensions
of PLM / IT systems maturity are introduced to assess these challenges and enable con-
tinuous improvement of the PLM / IT systems. In this work, the application of process
mining is proposed to support the assessment of PLM / IT systems also based on quan-
titative data stemming from the evaluation of data logs. In this respect, the results stem-
ming from the process mining case can be used to rework the processes as well as the
supporting IT systems and application functions. The enterprise architectures benefit
from this data since it enables them to lead informed discussions with related stake-
holders based on quantitative data rather than qualitative estimations. Further, the en-
hanced understanding of the As-Is state of the enterprise architecture also increases
applicability and quality of the potential To-Be states since reality is reflected in more
detail.
The introduced process mining case in Section 4 indicates how the ability to setup a
process mining for a potential IT system can be an evaluation criterion for the evalua-
tion of IT systems. Having the ability to conduct process mining for PLM related pro-
cesses is key to improve the collaboration of the different engineering disciplines. Dif-
ferent disciplines have different requirements for product data management leading to

--- PAGE 12 ---
10
potential misalignments in applied processes. Having the overview of different pro-
cesses, established processes can be adapted eventually leading to a better data quality
when PLM processes are well adopted by the different users. Considering the overview
of the various instances of PLM processes from an applied process mining case, the
origins of misalignments in data can be identified, e.g. when adiscipline keeps ignoring
specific process activities. Using this information, the related users can be identified
and informed with respect to the effects of this misalignments. Thus, motivation of the
related stakeholders can be increased to actively contribute to PLM and EA design and
compliance. With regards to the number of observed process deviations, the real com-
plexityofthecaseismuchhigherthanexpected.Thisleadsto considersomelimitations
regarding the application of process mining in industrial practice. These great number
of process deviations have been observed by analyzing the data logs of only one IT
systems, whereas, in practice,the ECM process’ actorsgenerally uses severaldataman-
agement and authoring systems. Reflecting the operational reality would require more
investigations and more process mining investments. On the other hand, by mining
other data sources, the amount of data to analyze as well as the amount of process de-
viations would increase, leading to the risk of not being able to efficiently analyze these
deviations. Therefore, industrialists must be careful when willing to apply process min-
ing excessively. One of the challenges is to coordinate and align the process mining
activities with the PLM transformation roadmap to avoid a negative perception or non-
adoption of the approach by both management and process ‘actors point of views.
With respect to academia, the proposed work contributes by the introduction of an
EA framework that considers state-of-the-art technologies and puts a focus on the chal-
lenges stemming from the PLM domain. This work particularly takes into account the
point highlighted in [23] that the future directions of EA need to push the boundaries
of EA by integrating different field and pursue a multidisciplinary approach and there-
fore increase visibility and dynamics in the field.
The future workneeds tofocuson the actual implementationof PLM process mining
cases and the development of a method to detect isolated (non-integrated) IT systems
within PLM based on process mining.
6 Conclusion
This work contributes by introducing an enterprise architecture-based method for con-
tinuous improvement of PLM processes and the related IT systems. To quantitatively
evaluate the As-Is state of PLM, the method applies process mining monitor the align-
ment of IT systems with the related PLM processes. The validation of the method based
on an industrial case shows the applicability to support enterprise architects in the re-
view of the As-Is state to enable continuous improvement of PLM. Further, the method
contributes by merging different previously unconnected fields of research.
However, the industrial case also shows the complexity of process evaluation in a PLM
context. Hence, future work needs to address the development of methods that enable
the application of process mining for PLM related processes with distributed IT sys-
tems.

--- PAGE 13 ---
11
Acknowledgements
This work has been supported and funded by the Austrian Research Promotion Agency
(FFG) via the “Austrian Competence Center for Digital Production” (CDP) under the
contract number 854187.
References
[1] Y. Xin and V. Ojanen, “The impact of digitalization on product lifecycle management:
How to deal with it?,” in 2017 IEEE International Conference on Industrial Engineering
and Engineering Management (IEEM), Singapore, 2017, pp. 1098–1102, doi:
10.1109/IEEM.2017.8290062.
[2] E. Oztemel and S. Gursev, “Literature review of Industry 4.0 and related technologies,”
Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 127–182, Jan. 2020, doi:
10.1007/s10845-018-1433-8.
[3] F. Gampfer, A. Jürgens, M. Müller, and R. Buchkremer, “Past, current and future trends
in enterprise architecture—A view beyond the horizon,” Computers in Industry, vol. 100,
pp. 70–84, Sep. 2018, doi: 10.1016/j.compind.2018.03.006.
[4] J. Váchal and J. Straková, “Enterprise Architecture within the Process of Permanent
Change,” SHS Web of Conferences, vol. 61, p. 01029, 2019, doi:
10.1051/shsconf/20196101029.
[5] G. Shanks, M. Gloet, I. Asadi Someh, K. Frampton, and T. Tamm, “Achieving benefits
with enterprise architecture,” The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, vol. 27, no.
2, pp. 139–156, Jun. 2018, doi: 10.1016/j.jsis.2018.03.001.
[6] P. Saint-Louis, M. C. Morency, and J. Lapalme, “Defining Enterprise Architecture: A
Systematic Literature Review,” in 2017 IEEE 21st International Enterprise Distributed
Object Computing Workshop (EDOCW), Quebec City, QC, 2017, pp. 41–49, doi:
10.1109/EDOCW.2017.16.
[7] M. Abramovici, “Future Trends in Product Lifecycle Management (PLM),” in The Future
of Product Development, P. D.-I. F.-L. Krause, Ed. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2007, pp.
665–674.
[8] F. Gampfer, “Managing Enterprise Architecture in Agile Environments,” in Projektma-
nagement und Vorgehensmodelle 2018, PVM 2018: der Einfluss der Digitalisierung auf
Projektmanagementmethoden und Entwicklungsprozesse, M. Mikusz, A. Volland, M.
Engstler, M. Fazal-Baqaie, E. Hanser, and O. Linssen, Eds. Düsseldorf: Gesellschaft für
Informatik e.V. (GI), 2018.
[9] W. van der Aalst, Process mining: discovery, conformance and enhancement of business
processes. Berlin: Springer, 2011.
[10] W. M. P. van der Aalst, M. La Rosa, and F. M. Santoro, “Business Process Management:
Don’t Forget to Improvethe Process!,” Business & InformationSystems Engineering, vol.
58, no. 1, pp. 1–6, Feb. 2016, doi: 10.1007/s12599-015-0409-x.
[11] W. van der Aalst, “Process Mining: Overview and Opportunities,” ACM Trans. Manage.
Inf. Syst., vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 1–17, Jul. 2012, doi: 10.1145/2229156.2229157.

--- PAGE 14 ---
12
[12] M. Cho, M. Song, M. Comuzzi, and S. Yoo, “Evaluating the effect of best practices for
business process redesign: An evidence-based approach based on process mining tech-
niques,” Decision Support Systems, vol. 104, pp. 92–103, Dec. 2017, doi:
10.1016/j.dss.2017.10.004.
[13] A. Rozinat, I. S. M. de Jong, C. W. Gunther, and W. M. P. van der Aalst, “Process Mining
Appliedto the Test Process of WaferScannersin ASML,”IEEE Transactions onSystems,
Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications and Reviews), vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 474–479,
Jul. 2009, doi: 10.1109/TSMCC.2009.2014169.
[14] H. Yang, M. Park, M. Cho, M. Song, and S. Kim, “A system architecture for manufactur-
ing process analysis based on big data and process mining techniques,” 2014, pp. 1024–
1029, doi: 10.1109/BigData.2014.7004336.
[15] M. Park, M. Song, T. H. Baek, S. Son, S. J. Ha, and S. W. Cho, “Workload and Delay
Analysis in Manufacturing Process Using Process Mining,” in Asia Pacific Business Pro-
cess Management, vol. 219, J. Bae, S. Suriadi, and L. Wen, Eds. Cham: Springer Interna-
tional Publishing, 2015, pp. 138–151.
[16] S. Son et al., “Process Mining for Manufacturing Process Analysis: A Case Study,” in
Procedia of 2nd Asia Pacific Conference on Business Process Management, Brisbane,
Australia, 2015, p. 5.
[17] W. Es-Soufi, E. Yahia, and L. Roucoules, “A Process Mining Based Approach to Support
Decision Making,” in Product Lifecycle Management and the Industry of the Future, Se-
villa, Spain, 2017, vol. 517, pp. 264–274, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-72905-3_24.
[18] S.-I. Lee, K.-Y. Ryu, and M.-S. Song, “Process Improvement for PDM/PLM Systems by
Using Process Mining,” Transactions of the Society of CAD/CAM Engineers, vol. 17, no.
4, pp. 294–302, Aug. 2012, doi: 10.7315/CADCAM.2012.294.
[19] W. Zhaoxia, W. Jianmin, W. Lijie, and L. Yingbo, “Extracting Real-Life Log with Data
Perspective in PLM System for Business Process Analysis,”in2009 WRIWorld Congress
on Computer Science and Information Engineering, Los Angeles, California USA, 2009,
pp. 664–668, doi: 10.1109/CSIE.2009.645.
[20] B. F. van Dongen and W. M. P. van der Aalst, “A Meta Model for Process Mining Data,”
in Proceedings of the CAISE’05 Workshops, 2005, 2005, pp. 309–320.
[21] P. Bernus, L. Nemes, and G. J. Schmidt, Handbook on enterprise architecture. Springer
Science & Business Media, 2003.
[22] M. Lankhorst, Enterprise Architecture at Work, 4th ed. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Ber-
lin Heidelberg, 2017.
[23] J. Lapalme, A. Gerber, A. Van der Merwe, J. Zachman, M. D. Vries, and K. Hinkelmann,
“Exploring the future of enterprise architecture: A Zachman perspective,” Computers in
Industry, vol. 79, pp. 103–113, Jun. 2016, doi: 10.1016/j.compind.2015.06.010.
[24] J. A. Zachman, “A framework for information systems architecture,” IBM Systems Jour-
nal, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 276–292, 1987, doi: 10.1147/sj.263.0276.
[25] The Open Group, The open group architecture framework (TOGAF), vol. 1. Reading,
United Kingdom: The Open Group, 2009.
[26] ISO/IEC/IEEE, “ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010 - Systems and software engineering -- Architec-
ture description.” 2011.
[27] D. Nightingale, J. Srinivasa, and J. Mize, “Enterprise Transformation Roadmap.” MIT
Press, 2010.

--- PAGE 15 ---
13
[28] J. S. Gero and U. Kannengiesser, “The situated function–behaviour–structure frame-
work,” Design Studies, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 373–391, Jul. 2004, doi: 10.1016/j.des-
tud.2003.10.010.
[29] D. C. Wynn and C. M. Eckert, “Perspectives on iteration in design and development,”
Research in Engineering Design, pp. 1–32, 2016, doi: 10.1007/s00163-016-0226-3.
[30] S. Vajna, C. Weber, K. Zeman, P. Hehenberger, D. Gerhard, and S. Wartzack, CAx für
Ingenieure. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2018.
[31] E. Rigger, T. Stanković, and K. Shea, “Task Categorization for Identification of Design
Automation Opportunities,” Journal of Engineering Design, 2018, doi:
10.1080/09544828.2018.1448927.
[32] E. Rigger, T. Vosgien, K. Shea, and T. Stankovic, “A top-down method for the derivation
of metrics for the assessment of design automation potential,” Journal of Engineering
Design, pp. 1–31, Oct. 2019, doi: 10.1080/09544828.2019.1670786.
[33] D. McKendry, R. I. Whitfield, and A. H. B. Duffy, “Business and information manage-
ment architectures for delivering Product Lifecycle Management (PLM) in Engineering
To Order (ETO) products,” in Proceedings of ICCAS 2015, Bremen, Germany, 2015, pp.
1–9, doi: 10.3940/rina.iccas.2015.16.
[34] T. Vosgien, E. Rigger, M. Schwarz, and K. Shea, “A Federated Enterprise Architecture
and MBSE Modeling Framework for Integrating Design Automation into a Global PLM
Approach,” in PLM 2017: Product Lifecycle Management and the Industry of the Future,
Cham, 2017, vol. 517, pp. 36–48, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-72905-3_4.
[35] The Open Group, ArchiMate 3.1 Specification. Reading, United Kingdom: The Open
Group, 2019.
[36] D. C. Wynn and P. J. Clarkson, “Process models in design and development,” Research
in Engineering Design, 2018, doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00163-017-0262-7.
[37] N. Melao and M. Pidd, “A conceptual framework for understanding business processes
and business process modelling,” Information Systems Journal, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 105–
129, Apr. 2000, doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2575.2000.00075.x.
[38] S. A.White and D. Miers, BPMN modelingand referenceguide: understanding and using
BPMN; develop rigorous yet understandable graphical representations of business pro-
cesses. Lighthouse Point, Fla: Future Strategies Inc, 2008.
[39] R. J. Mayer, C. P. Menzel, M. K. Painter, P. S. Dewitte, T. Blinn, and B. Perakath, “In-
formation integration for concurrent engineering (IICE),” KNOWLEDGE BASED
SYSTEMS INC COLLEGE STATION TX, DEF3 process description capture method
report, 1995.
[40] S. Taghizadegan, Essentials of lean six sigma. Butterworth-Heinemann, 2010.
[41] T. Pyzdek and P. A. Keller, The six sigma handbook. McGraw-Hill Education New York,
2014.
[42] J. Stark, “Product Lifecycle Management,” in Product Lifecycle Management, Cham:
Springer International Publishing, 2015, pp. 1–29.
[43] M. Probst, “Anwendung eines PLM Reifegradmodells als strategisches Instrument.” In-
telliact AG, 2016.
[44] ISO/IEC, “ISO/IEC 25010: Systems and software Quality Requirements and Evaluation
(SQuaRE) — System and software quality models.” 2011.