--- PAGE 1 ---
[No extractable text on this page]

--- PAGE 2 ---
Copyright	2006	Jeanne	W.	Ross,	Peter	Weill,	and	David	C.	Robertson
All	rights	reserved
No	part	of	this	publication	may	be	reproduced,	stored	in	or	introduced	into	a
retrieval	system,	or	transmitted,	in	any	form,	or	by	any	means	(electronic,
mechanical,	photocopying,	recording,	or	otherwise),	without	the	prior
permission	of	the	publisher.	Requests	for	permission	should	be	directed	to
permissions@	hbsp.harvard.edu,	or	mailed	to	Permissions,	Harvard	Business
School	Publishing,	60	Harvard	Way,	Boston,	Massachusetts	02163.
First	eBook	Edition:	August	2006
ISBN:	978-1-4221-4817-4
Contents
Copyright
Preface	and	Acknowledgments
1:	To	Execute	Your	Strategy,	First	Build	Your	Foundation
2:	Define	Your	Operating	Model
3:	Implement	the	Operating	Model	via	Enterprise	Architecture
4:	Navigate	the	Stages	of	Enterprise	Architecture	Maturity
5:	Cash	In	on	the	Learning
6:	Build	the	Foundation	One	Project	at	a	Time
7:	Use	Enterprise	Architecture	to	Guide	Outsourcing
8:	Now—Exploit	Your	Foundation	for	Profitable	Growth
9:	Take	Charge!	The	Leadership	Agenda

--- PAGE 3 ---
Notes
About	the	Authors
Preface	and
	
Acknowledgments
In	1995	we	started	our	study	of	enterprise	architecture—we	just	didn’t	know	it.
At	the	time	we	thought	we	were	studying	information	technology	infrastructure
transformations.	In	1998	we	thought	we	were	studying	enterprise	system
implementations.	In	2000	it	was	e-business.	But	sometime	in	2000,	we
recognized	that	each	of	these	studies	examined	basically	the	same	thing:
enterprise	architecture.	We	saw	a	pattern	across	those	studies	of	what	smart	and
profitable	companies	did	differently.	These	companies	made	a	commitment	to	a
way	of	operating,	and	they	were	using	IT	to	digitize	that	commitment.	These
companies	kept	getting	better,	faster,	and	more	profitable	at	what	they	did	while
other	companies	were	still	figuring	out	what	to	do.
Most	of	the	effort	to	define	enterprise	architecture	has	been	located	in
companies’	IT	units.	But	the	historic	ineffectiveness	of	IT	architecture	efforts	in
large	organizations	has	troubled	us	for	years.	In	presentations	we	have	railed
against	traditional	IT	architecture	efforts	for	their	remoteness	from	the	reality	of
the	business	and	their	heavy	reliance	on	mind-numbing	detail	represented	in
charts	that	look	more	like	circuit	diagrams	than	business	descriptions	and	that
are	useful	as	little	more	than	doorstops.	All	three	of	us	have	been	frustrated	by
our	inability	in	our	research	and	executive	education	to	make	a	breakthrough	in
understanding	and	improving	IT	architecture	efforts.	Until	now	.	.	.
It	is	now	clear	our	problem	was	the	level	of	analysis.	As	Albert	Einstein
famously	remarked,	“The	significant	problems	we	face	cannot	be	solved	by	the
same	level	of	thinking	that	created	them.”	The	problem	with	our	efforts	to
understand	IT	architecture	was	that	the	level	of	analysis	was	all	wrong.	The
focus	needs	to	be	higher—on	
enterprise	architecture,
	
the	organizing	logic	for
core	business	processes	and	IT	infrastructure	reflecting	the	standardization	and
integration	of	a	company’s	operating	model.	We	have	come	to	understand	that
enterprise	architecture	boils	down	to	these	two	concepts:	business	process
integration	and	business	process	standardization.	In	short,	enterprise	architecture

--- PAGE 4 ---
is	not	an	IT	issue—it’s	a	business	issue.
The	breakthrough	in	our	understanding	lay	in	an	apparent	contradiction.	In	a
business	world	that	is	changing	faster	than	ever	before,	the	top-performing	firms
create	a	stable	base—they	digitize	their	core	processes	and	embed	those
processes	into	a	foundation	for	execution.	This	stable	foundation	makes	a
company	both	more	efficient	and	more	agile	than	its	competitors.	With	global
supply	chains,	pressure	for	ever	faster	time	to	market,	more	complex	regulation,
and	huge	shifts	in	customer	demographics	and	desires,	companies	cannot	predict
the	future.	But	they	can	decide	what	makes	them	great.	And	then	they	can	create
a	low-cost,	high-quality	core	of	stability	and	constancy	in	a	turbulent	world.
With	a	strong	digitized	core,	great	companies	slide	smoothly	into	the	next
opportunity	while	their	competitors	stumble.
Top-performing	companies	define	how	they	will	do	business	(an	operating
model)	and	design	the	processes	and	infrastructure	critical	to	their	current	and
future	operations	(enterprise	architecture),	which	guide	the	evolution	of	their
foundation	for	execution.	Then	these	smart	companies	exploit	their	foundation,
embedding	new	initiatives	to	make	that	foundation	stronger,	and	using	it	as	a
competitive	weapon	to	seize	new	business	opportunities.	And	what	makes	this
capability	a	competitive	advantage	is	that	only	a	small	percentage	of	companies
do	it	well—we	estimate	5	percent	of	firms	or	less.
The	objective	of	this	book	is	to	structure	and	explain	what	top-performing
companies	do	so	others	can	follow	and	improve.	To	inspire	and	illustrate	what
works	well,	we	provide	many	examples	of	outstanding	companies,	including	7-
Eleven	Japan,	CEMEX,	Dow	Chemical,	ING	DIRECT,	MetLife,	Schneider
National,	Toyota	Motor	Europe,	UNICEF,	UPS,	and	others.	This	book	is	about
what	makes	a	company	great.	Ultimately,	of	course,	people	make	the	difference.
Good	people	design	the	operating	model,	build	the	foundation,	execute,	and
innovate.	But	good	people	need	direction,	leadership,	and	incentives	to	perform
at	their	best.	This	book	is	for	managers,	both	business	and	IT,	who	sense	the
business	problem	and	want	to	lead	their	organizations	to	build	a	solution—a
unique	digitized	foundation	for	execution	for	their	company.
The	Research
The	insights	in	the	book	come	from	a	series	of	research	projects	exploring
enterprise	architecture	in	more	than	200	companies	(and	another	256	companies

--- PAGE 5 ---
where	our	focus	was	on	IT	governance)	from	1995	to	2005.	Most	of	the	research
was	done	at	the	MIT	Sloan	School’s	Center	for	Information	Systems	Research
(CISR);	the	European	work	was	done	by	David	Robertson	at	IMD.	The	main
studies	were:
Case	studies	of	eighteen	firms’	implementations	of	new	infrastructure
capabilities,	enterprise	resource	planning	systems,	and	e-business	initiatives
by	Jeanne	Ross,	Michael	Vitale,	and	Peter	Weill	between	1995	and	2005.
The	cases	focused	on	transformations	leading	to—and	in	some	cases	driven
by—new	IT	capabilities.	Companies	included	Australia	Post,	Brady	Corp.,
Chase	Manhattan,	the	District	of	Columbia’s	city	government,	Dow
Corning,	GTECH,	JC	Penney,	Johnson	&	Johnson,	Manheim	Auctions,
MetLife,	Schneider	National,	Texas	Instruments,	Travelers,	and	five	others.
Case	studies	at	eight	companies	on	the	relationship	between	IT	and	business
strategy	by	Jeanne	Ross	and	Peter	Weill	during	2001	and	2002.	We	studied
how	firms	developed	IT	capabilities	in	response	to	business	strategy.	We
also	looked	at	how	IT	units	were	developing	and	managing	enterprise
architecture.	Companies	included	Air	Products	and	Chemicals,	Citibank
Asia	Pacific,	Delta	Air	Lines,	DuPont,	Merrill	Lynch,	Nestlé	USA,	Toyota
USA,	and	UPS.
Case	studies	on	enterprise	architecture	at	sixteen	companies	in	the	United
States	and	Europe	by	David	C.	Robertson,	Jeanne	Ross,	George	Westerman,
and	Nils	O.	Fonstad	in	2002.	We	studied	how	IT	architecture	enabled	and
constrained	business	initiatives.	We	also	looked	at	how	companies	defined
and	managed	business	and	technology	standards.	Cases	were	based	on
interviews	with	the	CIO,	IT	architect,	two	project	heads,	and	others	at	Akzo
Nobel,	BIC	Graphic	Europe,	BT,	Campbell	Soup	Co.,	Canon	Europe,
Carlson	Companies,	ING	DIRECT,	Marriott,	Novartis,	Panalpina,	Partners
HealthCare,	Pfizer,	Sécheron,	Swisscom	Mobile,	Tetra	Pak,	and	Toyota
Motor	Marketing	Europe.
Surveys	of	103	firms	to	assess	architecture	outcomes	by	Jeanne	Ross	and
Nils	O.	Fonstad	in	2004.	We	examined	IT	investments,	architecture
management	practices,	architecture	maturity,	and	IT	and	business	outcomes.
Surveys	of	eighty	firms’	IT	and	business	process	outsourcing	initiatives	by
Jeanne	Ross	and	Cynthia	Beath	in	2004	in	conjunction	with	Lorraine
Cosgrove	at	
CIO	Magazine
	
.	We	examined	the	services	outsourced,	the
characteristics	of	those	services,	the	vendor-client	relationship,	architecture
implications,	and	outcomes.
Case	studies	of	architectural	implications	of	outsourcing	at	eight	firms	by

--- PAGE 6 ---
Jeanne	Ross,	Cynthia	Beath,	Jeff	Sampler,	and	Nils	O.	Fonstad	during	2004
and	2005.	We	studied	the	role	of	enterprise	architecture	in	outsourcing
decisions	and	outcomes.	The	companies	were	Campbell	Soup	Co.,	Carlson
Companies,	Dow	Chemical,	eFunds,	JM	Family	Enterprises,	Tecnovate,
and	two	others.
Case	studies	by	David	C.	Robertson	and	Nils	O.	Fonstad	of	Toyota	Motor
Marketing	Europe,	BT,	ING	DIRECT,	and	fifteen	other	companies	to
explore	the	key	issues	around	establishing	effective	engagement	models.
In	addition,	we	drew	on	a	body	of	research	on	IT	governance,	including	a
study	on	effective	IT	governance	led	by	Peter	Weill	with	many	colleagues
from	2001	to	2004.	We	studied	more	than	three	hundred	enterprises	in
twenty-three	countries,	including	more	than	twenty-five	in-depth	case
studies.	We	studied	how	enterprises	made	five	key	IT	decisions,	including
architecture.	We	also	measured	governance	and	financial	performance	and
what	practices	worked	best.
Who	Should	Read	this	Book
This	book	is	written	for	all	executives	who	have	ever	wondered	why	some	firms
—and	not	others—achieve	superior	execution	and	are	able	to	build	on	what	they
do	well	to	achieve	both	agility	and	profitability.	We	describe	the	vision	and	steps
to	design	an	enterprise	architecture	and	create	a	foundation	for	execution,
highlighting	the	roles	of	both	business	and	IT	managers.	We	discuss	the
enterprise	architecture	decisions	with	enough	detail	to	guide	implementation.
The	language,	style,	data,	examples,	and	lessons	are	about	business	issues	that
rely	on	technology.
We	encourage	senior	managers,	strategists,	operational	managers,	marketing
managers,	financial	managers,	and	IT	managers	to	read	this	book	and	discuss
building	a	foundation	for	execution	in	their	companies.	For	simplicity	of
language	we	adopted	the	word	
company
	
in	this	book.	However,	our	comments
relate	equally	to	all	organizations—whether	they	are	large	or	small;	for	profit,
not	for	profit,	or	government.	Our	intention	is	to	capture	the	imagination	and
challenge	the	assumptions	of	managers	in	all	industries	as	they	build	foundations
for	execution.
Whom	We	Would	Like	to	Thank
We	gratefully	acknowledge	the	support	of	MIT	CISR’s	patron	and	sponsor	firms:

--- PAGE 7 ---
Aetna,	Allstate,	American	Express	Company,	AstraZeneca	Pharmaceuticals	LP,
Biogen	Idec,	Inc.,	Boston	Consulting	Group,	BT	Group	plc,	Campbell	Soup	Co.,
CareFirst	Blue	Cross	Blue	Shield,	CARE	USA,	Celanese,	Chevron,	Det	Norske
Veritas,	DiamondCluster	International,	Direct	Energy,	eFunds	Corporation,	EMC
Corporation,	Gartner,	Florida’s	Pasco	County	government,	Guardian	Life
Insurance,	Hewlett-Packard,	ING	Groep	N.V.,	Intel	Corporation,	International
Finance	Corp.,	Merrill	Lynch	&	Company,	Inc.,	MetLife,	Microsoft	Corp.,
Mohegan	Sun,	Motorola,	Inc.,	Nomura	Research	Institute,	Ltd.,	PepsiAmericas,
Inc,	Pfizer,	Inc.,	PFPC	Inc.,	Raytheon	Company,	State	Street	Corp.,	Tata
Consultancy	Services–America,	TD	Banknorth,	Telenor	ASA,	Trinity	Health
System,	TRW	Automotive,	the	U.N.’s	Department	of	Economic	and	Social
Affairs,	and	the	U.S.	Federal	Aviation	Administration.	Executives	from	these
enterprises	not	only	inform	and	fund	our	research	but	also	probe	our
assumptions,	test	our	ideas,	debate	our	findings,	and	implement	and	improve	our
work.	We	could	not	do	this	work	without	you.
During	research	and	writing	we	have	had	the	opportunity	to	work	with	many
extraordinary	managers	and	academic	colleagues	who	have	influenced	our
thinking	and	reinforced	our	passions.	First,	we	would	like	to	acknowledge	the
managers	who	shared	their	insights	and,	in	many	cases,	provided	the	examples
for	the	book.	These	managers	included	Toshifumi	Suzuki,	Makoto	Usui,	and
Yuka	Ozaki	at	7-Eleven	Japan;	Al-Noor	Ramji,	Sinclair	Stockman,	Jan	Cylwik,
and	Jim	Crookes	at	BT;	Doreen	Wright	at	Campbell	Soup	Co.;	Steve	Brown,
formerly	of	Carlson	Companies;	Karl	Wachs	at	Celanese;	John	Bloom	at
Chevron;	Frank	Luijckx	at	Dow	Chemical;	Clyde	Thomas	and	Kathleen
Flanagan	at	eFunds;	Dennis	Callahan	at	Guardian	Life	Insurance;	Martin	Vonk
and	Rob	Manders	at	ING	DIRECT;	Martin	Curley	and	Malvina	Nisman	at	Intel;
Ken	Yerves	and	Tom	Holmes	at	JM	Family	Enterprises;	David	Henshaw	and
Phil	Halsall	at	Liverpool	Direct	Ltd.;	Jim	McGrane	at	MeadWestvaco;	Andy
Brown	at	Merrill	Lynch;	Steve	Sheinheit	and	Jerry	Foster	at	MetLife;	Chris
Johnson	at	Nestlé;	Monika	Ribar	at	Panalpina;	Ron	Carter	at	Pfizer;	Michael
Harte	at	PFPC;	Rebecca	Rhoads,	Kristine	Ten	Eck,	Cassandra	Matthews,	and
Alan	G.	Redfern	at	Raytheon;	Brent	Glendening	at	Schindler;	Joe	Antonellis,
Ron	Strout,	and	David	Saul	at	State	Street	Corp.;	John	Petrey	at	TD	Banknorth;
Peter	Heinckiens	at	Toyota	Motor	Marketing	Europe;	Andre	Spatz	at	UNICEF;
Mike	Eskew,	Ken	Lacy,	Jim	Medeiros,	and	Dave	Barnes	at	UPS.
We	want	to	gratefully	acknowledge	all	the	managers	who	participated	in	case
study	interviews	and	those	who	took	the	time	to	answer	our	survey	questions,

--- PAGE 8 ---
add	their	own	insights,	and	probe	our	assumptions.	We	are	grateful	to	all	of	you
for	making	this	book	possible.
Colleagues	at	other	universities	who	contributed	to	the	research	in	this	book
include	Professor	Cynthia	M.	Beath	at	the	University	of	Texas	at	Austin,
Professor	Michael	Vitale	at	the	Australian	Graduate	School	of	Management,
Professor	Jeff	Sampler	at	Oxford,	and	Professor	Don	Marchand	at	IMD.
We	want	to	especially	thank	Drs.	Nils	O.	Fonstad	and	George	Westerman,
research	scientists	at	CISR,	who	participated	in	much	of	this	research.	Their
contributions	to	this	work	were	invaluable.
Thanks	to	Professor	Ben	Bensaou	at	INSEAD	and	Koki	Yodokawa	and	Kei
Nagayama	at	Nomura	Research	Institute	in	Japan	who	helped	us	understand	why
7-Eleven	Japan	is	so	successful.	Frank	Erbrick	at	McKinsey	&	Co.	and	Charlie
Feld	at	EDS	enlightened	us	about	enterprise	architecture.	We	also	want	to	thank
the	many	people	who	provided	important	feedback	on	the	research	in	this	book,
including	Juan	Ayala,	Shafeen	Charania,	and	Dinesh	Kumar	at	Microsoft;	Len
Fehskens	at	HP;	Con	Kenney	at	the	U.S.	Federal	Aviation	Administration;
Chuck	Rieger	at	IBM;	and	Chris	Curran	and	John	Sviokla	at	DiamondCluster
International.	We’d	also	like	to	thank	the	members	of	the	Advanced	Practices
Council	of	the	Society	for	Information	Management	for	their	thoughtful
feedback	on	this	research.	Thanks	also	to	the	many	executives	who	made
comments	during	our	presentations	or	came	up	afterward	to	share	their	insights
and	critique.
In	addition	to	three	anonymous	reviewers,	three	colleagues	read	the	entire
manuscript	and	provided	not	only	valuable	comments	but	also	much	appreciated
enthusiasm	and	debate:	Chris	Curran	at	DiamondCluster,	Dinesh	Kumar	at
Microsoft,	and	Chuck	Gibson	at	MIT	CISR.	Thank	you	for	your	input—you	will
see	your	comments	reflected	in	this	final	version.
We	also	want	to	acknowledge	Shafeen	Charania	of	Microsoft	for	his	insightful
discussions	and	his	strong	advocacy	of	applying	IT	value	research	to	enterprises
around	the	world.
We	wish	to	thank	Lenny	Zeltser,	Charles	Zedlewski,	and	Niraj	Kumar,	all
researchers	at	MIT	CISR	who	helped	solicit	companies	and	conduct	interviews,
and	Mingdi	Xin	at	New	York	University,	who	did	detailed	and	painstaking

--- PAGE 9 ---
quantitative	analysis	for	this	book.	Individually	and	together	as	a	team	they
added	precision,	professionalism,	collegiality,	and	insight.	We	thank	them.
Our	MIT	CISR	colleague	David	Fitzgerald	III	managed	the	book	production
process	with	enthusiasm	and	professionalism.	David	devised	the	chapter
template,	produced	the	figures,	enforced	version	control,	tracked	down	citations,
checked	for	contradictions,	and	almost	kept	us	on	schedule.	We	benefited	from
his	experience	and	appreciated	his	dedication,	flexibility,	and	especially	his	good
humor.
The	writing	of	this	book,	as	well	as	our	ongoing	research	efforts,	would	not	be
possible	without	the	support	of	our	other	colleagues	at	MIT	CISR	and	the	MIT
Sloan	School	of	Management.	Chris	Foglia	brings	extraordinary	talent	and
energy	to	the	role	of	MIT	CISR’s	center	manager.	She	has	proved	that	there	is	no
technical,	financial,	artistic,	or	organizational	issue	at	MIT	CISR	that	she	cannot
address.	Julie	Coiro	provides	the	friendly	interface	to	MIT	CISR.	She	has
managed	the	organizational	details	that	keep	MIT	CISR	as	a	research	center—
and	each	of	us	as	individuals—running	smoothly.	And	we	are	indebted	to	our
research	colleagues	George	Westerman,	Nils	Fonstad	(who	co-authored	chapter
6	of	this	book),	Chuck	Gibson,	Jack	Rockart,	and	Sinan	Aral.	We	have	benefited
enormously	from	their	insights,	enthusiasm,	hard	work,	and	collegiality.
MIT	CISR	is	a	research	center	in	the	Sloan	School	of	Management.	We	feel	very
fortunate	to	work	in	such	a	rich	and	exciting	research	environment.	We	have
benefited,	in	particular,	from	the	support	and	encouragement	of	Dean	Richard
Schmalensee,	Dean	Steven	Eppinger,	Professor	Don	Lessard,	Professor	Wanda
Orlikowski,	and	Professor	Tom	Malone.
We	would	also	like	to	thank	Peter	Lorange	and	Jim	Ellert	at	IMD	for	the
generous	support	IMD	has	provided	for	the	European	part	of	this	research.
Comparing	experiences	and	testing	our	assumptions	in	a	European	context	has
deepened	our	understanding	of	the	issues	and	broadened	our	thinking.
We	are	delighted	to	work	with	Kirsten	Sandberg	at	Harvard	Business	School
Press.	Kirsten,	as	our	editor	on	this	and	three	previous	books,	knows	just	when
to	push	and	when	to	leave	us	to	our	own	devices.	Kirsten	adds	value	in	all	the
right	places,	and	we	thank	her	and	her	colleagues	at	HBS	Press.
We	undertook	this	book	with	a	bit	of	trepidation	as	to	the	viability	of	writing	as	a

--- PAGE 10 ---
trio.	Getting	three	people	to	agree	on	ideas,	text,	figures,	and	organizing	logic
might	have	been	exponentially	tougher	than	two.	Instead,	we	discovered	that
three	heads	are	considerably	better	than	one	or	two.	Our	different	experiences,
research	styles,	and	perspectives	led	to	interesting	and	valuable	debates.	And	the
opportunity	to	work	together	was	a	joy.	In	writing	this	manuscript	we	found
enormous	satisfaction	in	the	process	of	bringing	together	our	different	skills,
challenging	our	assertions,	and	learning	together.	We	are	all	more	than	ready	to
rededicate	ourselves	to	our	families,	but	we	might	even	do	this	again.
A	Personal	Note	from	Jeanne
I’d	first	like	to	thank	my	family.	I	will	remember	this	past	summer	fondly,	not
because	of	this	book,	but	because	our	family	of	five	adults	had	six	precious
weeks	together.	I	reveled	in	our	togetherness—five	people	loving	one	another,
fixing	meals,	playing	games,	watching	movies,	telling	stories,	sharing	joys,
unloading	frustrations,	eating	(constantly),	teasing,	laughing,	and	doing	the	little
things	that	make	us	a	family.	It	doesn’t	get	any	better.	Thank	you,	Adam,	for
your	curiosity	and	sensitivity;	Julie,	for	your	sense	of	adventure	and	fun;	and
Steffie,	for	your	sweetness	and	joy.	You	are	extraordinary	blessings.
And	to	my	husband,	Dan,	thank	you	for	letting	me	be	me.	I	appreciate	all	the
sacrifices	you	made	so	that	I	could	finish	this	manuscript.	Thank	you	for	your
intensive	reading	of	every	chapter—you	knew	how	to	say	“this	doesn’t	make
sense”	in	amazingly	gentle	and	creative	ways.	This	book	is	better	for	your
contribution.	And	I	am	a	better	person	for	being	married	to	you.
Finally,	thank	you	to	my	parents,	Mary	and	Russ	Wenzel,	and	my	in-laws,
Jeanne	and	Irv	Imburg—who	offer	their	unwavering	love	and	support,	even	as
they	wonder	whether	I’m	taking	on	too	much—and	to	my	siblings,	Pat	and	Jim,
Jo,	Barb	and	Mark,	Russ	and	Diane,	and	Dave	and	Jill,	who	continue	to	teach	me
the	joy	of	being	family.
A	Personal	Note	from	Peter
The	last	year	has	been	an	amazing	experience.	In	addition	to	having	one	of	the
greatest	jobs	in	the	world	as	director	of	MIT	CISR	and	working	on	this	book,	I
experienced	a	physical	renewal.	I	went	from	not	being	able	to	walk	without	pain
to	regaining	a	normal	life.	I	would	like	to	thank	Dr.	Andrew	Shimmin	and	his
colleagues	at	the	Melbourne	Orthopaedic	Group	in	Australia	for	giving	me	a

--- PAGE 11 ---
new	hip	and	a	new	lease	on	life.	Thanks	also	to	Tim	Schleiger	who	made	the
rehab	work	both	interesting	and	effective.
To	my	wife,	Margi	Olson,	thank	you	for	your	understanding,	support,	love,	and
friendship.	Without	you	this	work	would	be	meaningless.	Somehow	despite
having	your	demanding	day	job	as	dean	of	Business	and	the	Graduate	School	at
Bentley	College,	you	managed	to	be	encouraging	and	delightful.	Thank	you	for
enthusiastically	participating	in	endless	dinner	discussions	on	the	difference
between	infrastructure	and	architecture	and	why	some	companies	perform	so
well.
I	hope	the	MBA	students	and	executive	education	participants	in	my	Sloan
School	courses	recognize	their	input	into	this	book.	I	thank	them	all	as	they
contributed	much	in	the	way	of	learning,	clarity,	and	focus	during	the	countless
discussions	in	session	and	out.	I	am	constantly	amazed	and	grateful	about	how
much	I	learn	from	our	interactions.
To	my	mother,	Hidle	Betty	Weill.	Thank	you	for	your	good	genes,	good	humor,
generous	spirit,	and	most	of	all,	love	and	support.	To	my	brother	Steve,	as	well
as	to	Lois,	David,	and	Simon—I	love	you	guys.	Together	you	complete	my
family	in	Australia	and	make	my	hometown	so	special.	Finally,	to	my	U.S.-
based	family,	Geoffrey,	Noa,	and	Ben	Weill—thank	you	for	making	me	feel	part
of	a	small	but	wonderful	family	Weill.
A	Personal	Note	from	David
First,	a	thank	you	to	my	colleagues	at	IMD	who	three	years	ago	took	a	chance	on
a	former	enterprise	software	executive	with	no	teaching	experience.	Many	of
you	took	extra	time	out	of	your	busy	schedules	to	help	me	learn	the	trade.	IMD
is	a	case	study	in	how	a	high-performing	organization	can	also	be	supportive	and
fun.
Thanks	to	Peter	and	Jeanne	for	keeping	the	wonderful	institution	of	MIT	CISR
alive	and	thriving.	MIT	CISR	has	been,	and	continues	to	be,	an	island	of	sanity
in	the	strange	and	wonderful	world	of	MIT.	Thank	you	both	for	letting	me	be
part	of	such	a	great	organization	once	again.
This	work	has	benefited	from	many	spirited	discussions	in	IMD	classrooms.
Thanks	especially	to	the	participants	from	Credit	Suisse,	EMC,	and	Siemens	for
the	many	ideas	you	brought	to	this	book.	I	look	forward	to	continuing	to	work

--- PAGE 12 ---
with	you	and	learn	from	you.
To	Phoebe,	Alan,	and	Alice,	thank	you	for	all	your	love	and	support.	To	Gordon
and	Caroline,	thank	you	for	the	constant	joy	you	create.	And	to	Anne,	my
foundation,	thank	you	for	your	friendship,	encouragement,	and	love.
1
To	Execute	Your	Strategy,
	
First	Build	Your	Foundation
DOES	IT	FEEL	AS	IF
	
the	employees	in	your	company	are	working	harder	and	harder,
but	you’re	still	losing	ground?	You’ve	got	great	people,	you	invest	carefully,	and
you	believe	you	have	the	right	strategy.	You	watch	the	market,	listen	to	your
customers,	and	react	as	quickly	as	you	can	to	competitors’	moves.	In	short,	you
do	everything	the	management	literature	says	you	should,	but	you	still	can’t	get
ahead.
And	the	signs	aren’t	encouraging	for	the	future.	You	see	Chinese	companies
taking	over	manufacturing	in	industry	after	industry.
	
1
	
Indian	companies
providing	more	and	more	services.
	
2
	
Small,	agile	competitors	from	around	the
world	picking	off	niche	after	niche	in	your	markets.	Competition	is	only	getting
tougher.
Yet	some	companies—some	of	your	competitors—seem	to	be	able	not	just	to
survive	but	to	thrive.	In	the	face	of	tough	global	competition,	companies	like
Dell,	ING	DIRECT,	CEMEX,	Wal-Mart,	and	others	are	growing	and	making
money.	These	companies	have	more-productive	employees,	get	more	from	their
investments,	and	have	more	success	with	their	strategic	initiatives.	What	are	they
doing	differently?
We	believe	these	companies	execute	better	because	they	have	a	better	foundation
for	execution.	They	have	embedded	technology	in	their	processes	so	that	they
can	efficiently	and	reliably	execute	the	core	operations	of	the	company.	These
companies	have	made	tough	decisions	about	what	operations	they	must	execute
well,	and	they’ve	implemented	the	IT	systems	they	need	to	digitize	those
operations.	These	actions	have	made	IT	an	asset	rather	than	a	liability	and	have

--- PAGE 13 ---
created	a	foundation	for	business	agility.
We	surveyed	103	U.S.	and	European	companies	about	their	IT	and	IT-enabled
business	processes.	Thirty-four	percent	of	those	companies	have	digitized	their
core	processes.	Relative	to	their	competitors,	these	companies	have	higher
profitability,	experience	a	faster	time	to	market,	and	get	more	value	from	their	IT
investments.
	
3
	
They	have	better	access	to	shared	customer	data,	lower	risk	of
mission-critical	systems	failures,	and	80	percent	higher	senior	management
satisfaction	with	technology.	Yet,	companies	who	have	digitized	their	core
processes	have	25	percent	
lower
	
IT	costs.	These	are	the	benefits	of	an	effective
foundation	for	execution.
In	contrast,	12	percent	of	the	companies	we	studied	are	frittering	away
management	attention	and	technology	investments	on	a	myriad	of	(perhaps)
locally	sensible	projects	that	don’t	support	enterprisewide	objectives.	Another	48
percent	of	the	companies	are	cutting	waste	from	their	IT	budgets	but	haven’t
figured	out	how	to	increase	value	from	IT.	Meanwhile,	a	few	leading-edge
companies	are	leveraging	a	foundation	for	execution	to	pull	further	and	further
ahead.
As	such	statistics	show,	companies	with	a	good	foundation	for	execution	have	an
increasing	advantage	over	those	that	don’t.	In	this	book,	we	describe	how	to
design,	build,	and	leverage	a	foundation	for	execution.	Based	on	survey	and	case
study	research	at	more	than	400	companies	in	the	United	States	and	Europe,	we
provide	insights,	tools,	and	a	language	to	help	managers	recognize	their	core
operations,	digitize	their	core	to	more	efficiently	support	their	strategy,	and
exploit	their	foundation	for	execution	to	achieve	business	agility	and	profitable
growth.
	
4
What	Is	a	Foundation	for	Execution?
Every	human	being	performs	a	variety	of	critical,	fairly	complex	tasks	without
actually	thinking	about	them.	These	tasks	include	breathing,	hearing,
swallowing,	and	seeing.	With	experience,	humans	can	take	on	more-deliberate
tasks	like	walking,	riding	a	bike,	driving	a	car,	and	making	coffee.	At	first,	these
more-deliberate	tasks	require	some	concentration	and	adaptation,	but	they
quickly	become	second	nature.	Over	time,	different	humans	develop
distinguishing	capabilities.	A	talented	musician	learns	how	to	play	piano;	a	great
athlete	plays	basketball;	a	famous	chef	prepares	extraordinary	meals.	Each	of

--- PAGE 14 ---
these	distinctive	capabilities	has	repeatable,	routine	activities	that	would	be	hard
for	a	novice	but	that	the	expert	can	perform	without	thinking.	Because	experts
need	not	focus	on	the	routine	activities	in	their	field,	they	can	concentrate	on
achieving	greatness.
Companies	are	not	blessed	with	the	equivalent	of	the	human	brain,	which
coordinates	all	of	a	person’s	activities.	Activities	as	simple	as	sending	an
invoice,	taking	an	order,	or	mailing	a	package	can	easily	go	wrong—even	after
considerable	practice.	To	focus	management	attention	on	higher-order	processes,
such	as	serving	customers,	responding	to	new	business	opportunities,	and
developing	new	products,	managers	need	to	limit	the	time	they	spend	on	what
should	be	routine	activities.	They	need	to	automate	routine	tasks	so	those	tasks
are	performed	reliably	and	predictably	without	requiring	any	thought.
A	manufacturing	company,	for	example,	needs	transparent	information	on
customer	orders,	products	shipped,	finished	goods	inventory,	raw	materials
inventory,	work	in	process,	invoices	sent,	payments	received,	and	a	host	of
related	transaction	data—just	to	perform	at	a	minimally	acceptable	level.	A
mistake	in	any	of	that	data	can	have	ripple	effects	on	a	company’s	financial
performance,	its	employee	satisfaction,	or	its	relationships	with	customers	or
suppliers.	This	is	where	a	foundation	for	execution	enters	the	picture.	The
foundation	for	execution	digitizes	these	routine	processes	to	provide	reliability
and	predictability	in	processes	that	must	go	right.	The	best	companies	go	beyond
routine	processes	and	digitize	capabilities	that	distinguish	them	from	their
competitors.
For	example,	7-Eleven	Japan	(SEJ)	has	built	a	foundation	for	execution	that	has
helped	make	the	convenience	store	chain	the	eighth-largest	retailer	in	the	world.
5
	
SEJ’s	foundation	for	execution	allows	each	of	the	company’s	10,000	stores	to
individually	manage	inventory	while	ensuring	that	they	all	generate	rapid
turnover	on	their	large	stocks	of	fresh	foods.	The	underpinning	for	SEJ’s
foundation	for	execution	is	a	network	of	70,000	computers	that	collect	data	at
the	point	of	sale	on	every	customer	and	every	item	sold.	Each	day	the	point-of-
sale	data	is	analyzed	for	use	the	next	morning.	Other	digitized	processes	allow
each	store	to	place	orders	and	receive	deliveries	three	times	each	day.	SEJ	trains
all	of	its	200,000	employees	to	use	available	point-of-sale,	product,	weather,	and
regional	information	not	only	to	order	from	existing	product	lists	but	also	to
create	hypotheses	about	possible	new	products.	SEJ’s	foundation	then	connects
employees	with	manufacturers	to	develop	and	test	new	items.	The	effect?	In	the

--- PAGE 15 ---
average	7-Eleven	store	in	Japan,	70	percent	of	the	products	sold	each	year	are
new.
In	short,	a	
foundation	for	execution
	
is	the	IT	infrastructure	and	digitized	business
processes	automating	a	company’s	core	capabilities.	As	with	human
development,	a	company’s	foundation	for	execution	evolves—usually	beginning
with	a	few	basic	infrastructure	services	(e.g.,	employee	hiring	and	recruiting,
purchasing,	desktop	support,	and	telecommunications),	then	encompassing	basic
transaction	processes	(sales,	accounts	payable),	and	eventually	including	unique
and	distinguishing	business	capabilities.	Building	a	foundation	doesn’t	focus
only	on	competitively	distinctive	capabilities—it	also	requires	rationalizing	and
digitizing	the	mundane,	everyday	processes	that	a	company	has	to	get	right	to
stay	in	business.
	
6
Paradoxically,	digitizing	core	business	processes	makes	the	individual	processes
less	flexible	while	making	a	company	more	agile.	To	return	to	the	human
analogy,	a	great	athlete	will	have	muscles,	reflexes,	and	skills	that	are	not	easily
changed.	But	these	capabilities	give	athletes	a	tremendous	ability	to	react,
improvise,	and	innovate	in	their	chosen	sport.
	
7
	
Similarly,	digitizing	business
processes	requires	making	clear	decisions	about	what	capabilities	are	needed	to
succeed.	And	once	these	new	processes	are	installed,	they	free	up	management
attention	from	fighting	fires	on	lower-value	activities,	giving	them	more	time	to
focus	on	how	to	increase	profits	and	growth.	Digitized	processes	also	provide
better	information	on	customers	and	product	sales,	providing	ideas	for	new
products	and	services.	The	foundation	for	execution	provides	a	platform	for
innovation.
Do	You	Have	a	Good	Foundation
	
for	Execution?
In	our	visits	to	dozens	of	companies,	we	have	learned	to	recognize	the	warning
signs	of	a	company	that	doesn’t	have	a	foundation	that	supports	its	strategy.
Comments	from	senior	executives	like	the	following	are	indicators:
Different	parts	of	our	company	give	different	answers	to	the	same	customer
questions.
Meeting	a	new	regulatory	or	reporting	requirement	is	a	major	effort	for	us,
requiring	a	concerted	push	from	the	top	and	significant	infrastructure

--- PAGE 16 ---
investment.
Our	business	lacks	agility—every	new	strategic	initiative	is	like	starting
from	scratch.
IT	is	consistently	a	bottleneck.
There	are	different	business	processes	completing	the	same	activity	across
the	company,	each	with	a	different	system.
Information	needed	to	make	key	product	and	customer	decisions	is	not
available.
A	significant	part	of	people’s	jobs	is	to	take	data	from	one	set	of	systems,
manipulate	it,	and	enter	it	into	other	systems.
Senior	management	dreads	discussing	IT	agenda	items.
We	don’t	know	whether	our	company	gets	good	value	from	IT.
As	those	comments	suggest,	companies	without	an	effective	foundation	for
execution	face	serious	competitive	and	regulatory	threats.
An	effective	foundation	for	execution	depends	on	tight	alignment	between
business	objectives	and	IT	capabilities.	Toward	that	end,	most	companies	put	in
business	processes	and	IT	systems	using	a	fairly	straightforward	logic.	First,
management	defines	a	strategic	direction;	then	the	IT	unit,	ideally	in	conjunction
with	business	management,	designs	a	set	of	IT-enabled	solutions	to	support	the
initiative;	and,	finally,	the	IT	unit	delivers	the	applications,	data,	and	technology
infrastructure	to	implement	the	solutions.	The	process	starts	over	each	time
management	defines	another	strategic	initiative.
This	process	goes	wrong	in	at	least	three	ways.	First,	the	strategy	isn’t	always
clear	enough	to	act	upon.	General	statements	about	the	importance	of
“leveraging	synergies”	or	“getting	close	to	the	customer”	are	difficult	to
implement.	So	the	company	builds	IT	solutions	rather	than	IT	capabilities.
Second,	even	if	the	strategy	is	clear	enough	to	act	upon,	the	company
implements	it	in	a	piecemeal,	sequential	process.	Each	strategic	initiative	results
in	a	separate	IT	solution,	each	implemented	on	a	different	technology.	Third,
because	IT	is	always	reacting	to	the	latest	strategic	initiative,	IT	is	always	a
bottleneck.	IT	never	becomes	an	asset	shaping	future	strategic	opportunities.
Figure	1-1	shows	the	combined	effect	of	traditional	approaches	to	IT
development—a	set	of	silos.	Individually,	the	applications	work	fine.	Together,
they	hinder	companies’	efforts	to	coordinate	customer,	supplier,	and	employee
processes—they	do	not	form	a	foundation	for	execution.	And	the	company’s

--- PAGE 17 ---
data,	one	of	its	most	important	assets,	is	patchy,	error-prone,	and	not	up	to	date.
Companies	often	extract	from	silos	to	aggregate	data	from	multiple	systems	in	a
data	warehouse	(the	cloud	in	figure	1-1).	But	the	warehouse	is	useful	only	as	a
reference—it	does	not	offer	real-time	data	across	applications.
The	many	squiggly	lines	in	figure	1-1	reflect	efforts	to	integrate	isolated	systems
supporting	an	end-to-end	process.	One	IT	executive	in	an	investment	banking
company	claimed	that	80	percent	of	his	company’s	programming	code	was
dedicated	to	linking	disparate	systems,	as	opposed	to	creating	new	capabilities.
This	executive	bragged	that	his	developers	were	able	to	link	together	systems	so
effectively	that	no	human	being	ever	touched	a	transaction—every	process	was
supported	end-to-end	by	meticulously	integrated	silo	applications.	But	then	he
noted,	“It’s	a	miracle	they	work.”	Eventually	this	company’s	lack	of	a	foundation
for	execution	made	it	a	juicy	takeover	target.	Today	these	systems	are	being
replaced	with	those	of	the	acquiring	company.
FIGURE	1-1
Few	companies	are	comfortable	with	a	dependency	on	miracles.	They	want
technology	to	reliably	support	existing	processes.	What’s	more,	they’d	like	their
existing	technology	to	enable	future	capabilities.	These	companies	need	to	take	a
different	approach	to	implementing	IT-enabled	business	processes.
How	Do	You	Build	a
	

--- PAGE 18 ---
Foundation	for	Execution?
The	foundation	for	execution	results	from	carefully	selecting	which	processes
and	IT	systems	to	standardize	and	integrate.	Just	as	humans	must	learn	how	to
ride	a	bicycle	(and	think	hard	about	what	they	are	doing	while	they	are	learning),
the	processes	built	into	a	foundation	for	execution	require	a	great	deal	of
concentration—for	a	while.	Eventually	routine	business	activities—just	like
bicycle	riding—become	automatic.	Outcomes	become	predictable.	The
foundation	for	execution	takes	on	another	layer.	A	company’s	identity	becomes
clearer,	and	executives	can	focus	their	attention	on	the	future
To	build	an	effective	foundation	for	execution,	companies	must	master	three	key
disciplines:
1
.	
Operating	model.
	
–The	
operating	model
	
is	the	necessary	level	of	business
process	integration	and	standardization	for	delivering	goods	and	services	to
customers.	Different	companies	have	different	levels	of	process	integration
across	their	business	units	(i.e.,	the	extent	to	which	business	units	share
data).	Integration	enables	end-to-end	processing	and	a	single	face	to	the
customer,	but	it	forces	a	common	understanding	of	data	across	diverse
business	units.	Thus,	companies	need	to	make	overt	decisions	about	the
importance	of	process	integration.	Management	also	must	decide	on	the
appropriate	level	of	business	process	standardization	(i.e.,	the	extent	to
which	business	units	will	perform	the	same	processes	the	same	way).
Process	standardization	creates	efficiencies	across	business	units	but	limits
opportunities	to	customize	services.	The	operating	model	involves	a
commitment	to	how	the	company	will	operate.
2
.	
Enterprise	architecture.
	
–The	
enterprise	architecture
	
is	the	organizing	logic
for	business	processes	and	IT	infrastructure,	reflecting	the	integration	and
standardization	requirements	of	the	company’s	operating	model.	The
enterprise	architecture	provides	a	long-term	view	of	a	company’s	processes,
systems,	and	technologies	so	that	individual	projects	can	build	capabilities
—not	just	fulfill	immediate	needs.	Companies	go	through	four	stages	in
learning	how	to	take	an	enterprise	architecture	approach	to	designing
business	processes:	Business	Silos,	Standardized	Technology,	Optimized
Core,	and	Business	Modularity.	As	a	company	advances	through	the	stages,
its	foundation	for	execution	takes	on	increased	strategic	importance.
3
.	
IT	engagement	model.
	
–The	
IT	engagement	model
	
is	the	system	of
governance	mechanisms	that	ensure	business	and	IT	projects	achieve	both

--- PAGE 19 ---
local	and	companywide	objectives.	The	IT	engagement	model	influences
project	decisions	so	that	individual	solutions	are	guided	by	the	enterprise
architecture.	The	engagement	model	provides	for	alignment	between	the	IT
and	business	objectives	of	projects,	and	coordinates	the	IT	and	business
process	decisions	made	at	multiple	organizational	levels	(e.g.,
companywide,	business	unit,	project).	To	do	so,	the	model	establishes
linkages	between	senior-level	IT	decisions,	such	as	project	prioritization
and	companywide	process	design,	and	project-level	implementation
decisions.
FIGURE	1-2
Figure	1-2	illustrates	how	companies	apply	these	three	disciplines	to	create	and
exploit	their	foundation	for	execution.	Based	on	the	vision	of	how	the	company
will	operate	(the	operating	model),	business	and	IT	leaders	define	key
architectural	requirements	of	the	foundation	for	execution	(the	enterprise
architecture).	Then,	as	business	leaders	identify	business	initiatives,	the	IT
engagement	model	specifies	how	each	project	benefits	from,	and	contributes	to,
the	foundation	for	execution.
Why	Is	a	Foundation	for
	
Execution	Important?

--- PAGE 20 ---
Our	research	found	that	companies	with	a	solid	foundation	had	higher
profitability,	faster	time	to	market,	and	lower	IT	costs.	These	outcomes	are
universally	beneficial	and	timeless—they	were	valuable	twenty	years	ago	and
will	be	just	as	valuable	twenty	years	from	now.	But	there	are	a	number	of	more-
recent	developments	that	highlight	the	increasing	importance	of	a	foundation	for
execution.	Companies	without	a	solid	foundation	face	a	number	of	serious	risks
that	weren’t	present	just	ten	years	ago.
Growing	Complexity	in	Companies’	Systems
	
Can	Fossilize	Operations
As	with	the	investment	bank	whose	systems	were	so	complex	that	it	was	a
miracle	they	worked,	legacy	systems	cobbled	together	to	respond	to	each	new
business	initiative	create	rigidity	and	excessive	costs.	The	Internet	boom
exposed	the	inflexibility	of	many	companies’	technology	and	process
environments,	which	led	to	an	inability	to	adapt	to	new	channels.	This
inflexibility	was	not	the	result	of	a	digitized	foundation	for	execution.	It	was	the
result	of	systems	so	complex	that	any	change	required	individually	rewiring
systems	to	all	the	other	systems	they	connect	to.	Developing	and	testing	new
capabilities	in	such	a	complex	environment	is	time	consuming,	and	every	change
becomes	a	risky,	expensive	adventure.
The	complexity	has	not	added	value.	Most	managers	can	list	processes	they
perform	in	many	different	ways	in	multiple	parts	of	the	company	and	support
with	many	different	systems.	As	more	competitors	aggressively	pursue	reuse	of
standard	processes	and	systems	across	their	product	lines,	services,	or	business
units,	the	inefficiencies	of	non-value-added	variations	create	strategic
disadvantages.	The	CIO	at	a	$5	billion	manufacturing	company	reported	that	a
global	implementation	of	three	modules	of	a	large,	packaged	enterprise	resource
planning	system	(make	to	ship,	account	to	report,	and	order	to	cash)	eliminated
450	applications	and	3,150	interfaces,	mostly	by	eliminating	redundancy.
Implementing	standardized,	digitized	processes	carries	costs,	particularly	those
associated	with	organizational	change,	but	the	benefits	are	simpler	technology
environments,	lower-cost	operations,	and	greater	agility.
	
8
Business	Agility	Increasingly	Depends	on
	
a	Foundation	for	Execution

--- PAGE 21 ---
Business	agility	is	becoming	a	strategic	necessity.	Greater	globalization,
increasing	regulation,	and	faster	cycle	times	all	demand	an	ability	to	quickly
change	organizational	processes.	Managers	cannot	predict	what	will	change,	but
they	can	predict	some	things	that	won’t	change.	And	if	they	digitize	what	is	not
changing,	they	can	focus	on	what	is	changing.	In	this	way	the	foundation	for
execution	becomes	a	foundation	for	agility.
There	are	many	types	of	agility,	but	one	indicator	of	agility	is	a	company’s
percentage	of	revenue	generated	from	new	products.	Our	research	on	147
companies	found	that,	from	1998	to	2002,	on	average,	24	percent	of	a	company’s
sales	were	from	new	products	introduced	in	the	prior	three	years.	But	this
percentage	varied	greatly	from	company	to	company—even	between	those	in	the
same	industry.	For	example,	in	manufacturing	the	average	was	24	percent.
However,	a	third	of	companies	achieved	50	percent	of	sales	from	new	products
introduced	in	the	prior	three	years.
	
9
	
These	more-agile	companies	also	had	a	high
percentage	of	their	core	business	processes	digitized.	While	there	are	many
possible	explanations	for	differences	in	a	single	type	of	agility,	having	a	digitized
foundation	for	execution	probably	enabled	managers	in	these	companies	to
spend	more	time	focusing	on	what	products	would	succeed	and	then	bringing
those	products	to	market.
Current	National	and	Political	Environments
	
Demand	Business	Discipline
Companies	are	buffeted	by	constant	changes	in	regulations,	such	as	Sarbanes-
Oxley,	Basel	II,	and	HIPAA.
	
10
	
As	companies	become	more	global,	they	become
accountable	for	increasingly	complex	reporting	requirements.	And	some
industries,	particularly	health	care	and	financial	services,	face	different	laws	and
regulations	in	different	regions	of	the	same	country.
For	many	companies,	new	regulations	mean	massive	expenditures	with	no	added
value.	But	companies	with	a	solid	foundation	for	execution	have	more
transparent	information	and	the	ability	to	access	data	more	quickly.	For	example,
a	financial	services	company	executive	commented	that	Sarbanes-Oxley	had	not
involved	any	system	changes	in	his	company;	the	required	data	was	already
available	due	to	processes	the	company	had	implemented.	Companies	may	not
be	able	to	anticipate	new	regulations,	but	they	can	increase	the	likelihood	that
needed	data	is	readily	available	or	can	easily	be	accumulated.

--- PAGE 22 ---
Building	a	Foundation	Is	Less	Risky
	
and	Expensive	Than	the	Alternative
Many	managers,	scarred	by	their	experiences	in	the	late	1990s	with	enterprise
resource	planning	system	implementations,	think	that	implementing
improvements	is	going	to	be	an	expensive,	risky	proposition.
	
11
	
However,	as	we
will	describe	in	
chapter	6
	
,	most	companies	don’t	have	to	make	massive
investments	in	their	foundation.	The	foundation	for	execution	can	be
implemented	one	project	at	a	time.	By	spending	smarter	rather	than	more,
companies	can	use	ongoing	projects	to	steadily	build	their	foundation	for
execution.	And	as	the	foundation	gets	built,	IT	costs	decrease	and	business
efficiencies	increase,	paying	dividends	on	the	original	investment.
How	Does	a	Foundation	for
	
Execution	Create	Business	Value?
To	illustrate	the	concept	of	a	foundation	for	execution	and	its	potential	impact	on
a	company,	we	provide	two	brief	case	studies.	The	first	is	on	UPS,	a	company
well	known	for	its	use	of	IT	in	business	processes.	UPS	has	been	building	and
leveraging	its	foundation	for	execution	since	the	late	1980s.
UPS:	Building	New	Services	on	a	Solid	Foundation
Around	1986	senior	management	at	UPS	became	concerned	about	the
company’s	inability	to	respond	to	competitors’	technology-based	market
initiatives.	UPS	had	dominated	the	U.S.	package	delivery	market	for	much	of	its
eighty	years,	but	management	recognized	that	the	company	would	need	a	strong
IT	capability	to	compete	in	the	future.	Over	the	next	ten	years,	UPS	built	a
foundation	for	execution	that	has	permitted	it	to	seize	global	market
opportunities	not	only	in	package	delivery	but	also	in	a	variety	of	related	areas.
Although	its	immediate	concern	was	package	tracking	(i.e.,	reporting	on	the
whereabouts	of	a	package	in	transit),	UPS	set	out	to	build	a	foundation	for
execution	embodying	its	industrial-engineering	tradition	(figure	1-3).	The
company	has	long	employed	a	large	staff	of	industrial	engineers	who	study
efficiency	and	design	optimal	business	processes.	Industrial	engineers	have
specified	efficient	processes	for	a	wide	range	of	tasks	at	UPS,	including	which

--- PAGE 23 ---
foot	a	driver	should	put	into	the	truck	first.	The	company	implements	these
processes	as	global	standards.	Thus,	when	the	company	was	debating	the
requirements	of	an	IT	capability,	it	was	clear	to	all	key	decision	makers	that
systems	would	have	to	support	UPS’s	global	process	standards.	In	addition,
management	agreed	that	the	nature	of	package	delivery	demanded	highly
integrated	systems,	so	that	a	package	could	not	be	lost	en	route.
UPS’s	new	CIO	and	his	staff	developed	an	enterprise	architecture	to	reflect	the
company’s	goals.	A	key	characteristic	of	the	enterprise	architecture	was	the
specification	for	a	single	package	database.	The	CIO	did	not	want	multiple
package	databases,	which	would	risk	the	integrity	of	the	data.	The	CIO’s	team
also	emphasized	the	need	for	a	global	telecommunications	capability	so	that	the
package	data	could	be	captured	and	accessed	from	anywhere	a	package	might	be
picked	up	or	delivered.	The	company	developed	strict	rules	about	architectural
standards,	and	IT	was	authorized	to	enforce	the	rules	whenever	a	breach	could
compromise	reliability	or	efficiency.
FIGURE	1-3
On	the	business	process	side,	senior	management	defined	four	core	processes:
package	delivery,	product	development,	customer	relationship	management,	and
customer	information	management.	UPS	standardized	tasks	within	these
processes	as	appropriate	so	that	new	initiatives	could	leverage	existing

--- PAGE 24 ---
capabilities.	Starting	from	package	tracking	and	related	core	processes,	UPS
leveraged	its	systems	and	process	capabilities	first	by	adding	channels,	such	as
the	Internet.	Then	UPS	expanded	into	new	services.	For	example,	Flex	Global
View	allowed	customers	to	receive	advance	notification	of	incoming	packages
and	to	track	packages	traveling	with	freight	forwarders	or	other	UPS	partners.
Flex	Global	View	also	notified	customers	if	any	packages	would	arrive	late.
Building	on	these	capabilities,	UPS	grew	from	a	package	delivery	company	into
a	global	commerce	company.	UPS	Trade	Direct,	one	of	the	company’s	newer
offerings,	provides	integrated	door-to-door	service	for	international	packages,
including	consolidated	billing,	customs	brokerage	and	clearance,	and
international	package	tracking.
UPS’s	innovations	build	on	or	leverage	its	existing	foundation	for	execution	and
create	new	opportunities.	Because	of	the	strategic	importance	of	IT	at	UPS,	IT
leaders	are	consistently	involved	in	strategy	discussions	and	propose	new
products	and	services	based	on	existing	capabilities.	Regarding	the	IT	unit’s
input	to	strategy	discussions,	Mike	Eskew,	UPS’s	CEO	comments,	“I	get	that
kind	of	happy	surprise	from	IT	all	the	time.”
	
12
	
Happy	surprises	from	IT—that’s
what	a	foundation	for	execution	has	done	for	UPS.
Washington,	D.C.:	Customer-Focused	Service	Delivery
Throughout	the	book	we	mostly	refer	to	the	needs	of	companies.	But	the
principles	of	the	foundation	for	execution	are	equally	relevant	for	public	and
private	companies,	government	agencies,	and	not-for-profit	organizations.
Performance	objectives	and	some	metrics	may	differ	by	type	of	organization,	but
the	need	to	enable	efficient,	reliable,	agile	operations	is	the	same.	The
government	of	the	District	of	Columbia	has	been	building	a	foundation	for
execution	since	1999.	Organizations	of	all	kinds	might	find	its	experience
instructive.
Excluding	its	public	school	system,	Washington,	D.C.,	has	21,000	employees
and	a	$5.4	billion	budget,	managed	by	an	appointed	city	administrator	who	is
accountable	to	the	mayor	and	the	D.C.	council.	Services	are	provided	through
seventy-four	operating	agencies,	ten	of	which	provide	centralized	administrative
services	(e.g.,	purchasing,	human	resources,	information	technology,	legal
services),	and	sixty-four	of	which	provide	customer-facing	services	(e.g.,	law
enforcement,	children’s	services,	transportation).	When	Anthony	Williams	was
inaugurated	as	mayor	in	January	1999,	the	District	of	Columbia	was	half	a

--- PAGE 25 ---
billion	dollars	in	debt.	Its	public	services	were	ranked	at	the	bottom	of	big-city
service	ratings,	and	control	of	the	district’s	administration	was	in	the	hands	of	a
federally	appointed	board.	Citizens	complained	of	poor	service:	the	process	of
registering	a	car	could	take	a	full	day,	and	small-business	owners	often	hired
experts	to	represent	them	in	the	maze	of	offices	at	the	Department	of	Consumer
and	Regulatory	Affairs.
Mayor	Williams	committed	to	turning	the	district	around	and	improving	services
to	the	city’s	residents	and	visitors.	The	CTO,	Suzanne	Peck,	recognized	that	as	a
public	service—as	opposed	to	a	business—the	district’s	customers	had	no	choice
about	interacting	with	its	agencies.	If	residents	wanted	a	license,	or	dog	tags,	or
to	pay	their	taxes,	they	had	to	deal	with	the	government	agencies.	The	Williams
administration’s	goal	was	to	make	these	interactions	as	pleasant	and	efficient	as
possible.	Consequently,	the	CTO	adopted	the	following	set	of	operating	tenets
for	interactions	with	constituents:
A	single	point	of	entry.
	
–All	citizen	requests	must	be	routed	to	a	central
point	of	entry	so	that	citizens	are	not	left	to	wander	helplessly	among
seventy-four	agencies	to	find	what	they	need.
Guaranteed	closure.
	
–All	citizens	must	be	assured	that	their	requests,	once
submitted,	will	be	fulfilled,	no	matter	which	agency	or	how	many	agencies
are	involved	in	the	transaction.
Benign	service	delivery.
	
–Residents	have	no	choice	but	to	deal	with
government,	so	the	CTO’s	office	will	make	dealing	with	the	government	as
positive	as	possible.	Peck	emphasized	the	goal	of	benign	service	delivery:
“As	a	District,	the	finest	thing	I	can	do	for	you,	the	residents,	is	to	give	you
benign	service	delivery.	I	can	make	it	easy	for	you	to	deal	with	me.	I	can
make	it	not	horrible.”
	
13
The	district’s	operating	model—including	its	concept	of	benign	service	delivery
—called	for	standardization	of	common	processes.	The	operating	model	also
provided	for	end-to-end	integration	of	processes,	as	well	as	data	sharing,
between	related	agencies	(figure	1-4).	At	the	heart	of	the	district’s	enterprise
architecture	are	nine	service	modernization	programs,	which	represent	functional
clusters	of	the	district’s	multiagency	systems.	Each	of	the	district’s	370	systems
fits	functionally	into	one	of	those	nine	programs:	administrative,	customer,
educational,	enforcement,	financial,	human,	motorist,	property,	and
transportation	services.	The	service	programs	create	standard,	multiagency,	end-
to-end	processes	for	the	district.

--- PAGE 26 ---
FIGURE	1-4
Before	beginning	any	major	application	process	improvements,	Peck	focused	on
first	stabilizing	operations	and	developing	some	core	infrastructure	services,
including	WAN	and	wireless	services;	the	consolidation	of	servers,	storage,	and
software;	and	the	introduction	of	disciplined	management	practices	such	as
development	standards.	The	new	infrastructure	services	introduced	cost	savings
and	new	capabilities.	For	example,	the	cost	of	telephony	services	decreased	by
33	percent	while	capacity	increased	by	a	factor	of	1,600.
The	first	major	application	improvement	project	was	the	administrative	services
program.	Although	administrative	services	was	not	customer	facing,	the
agencies	that	were	customer	facing	reported	that	poor	administrative	services—
such	as	snafus	in	hiring,	lost	grant	applications,	and	purchasing	difficulties—
were	severely	hindering	their	ability	to	service	customers.	As	with	all
improvements,	the	first	step	was	to	define	a	concept	of	operations	that	described
the	desired	customer	experience	with	the	service.
The	administrative	services	modernization	program	kicked	off	in	2001	as	a	five-
year	$71	million	program	with	measurable	cost	savings	of	$150	million.	An
architecture	review	board	reviewed	each	concept	of	operations	for	architectural

--- PAGE 27 ---
compliance	and	continued	to	monitor	the	architecture	throughout	the
implementation	of	each	new	process.	In	the	third	year	of	the	program,
management	had	already	documented	$50	million	in	annual	cost	savings	due	to
improved	procurement,	recruiting	and	hiring,	and	related	services.
The	district	has	been	initiating	new	projects	incrementally,	building	on	its
experiences	with	prior	projects,	and	reusing	infrastructure	introduced	for	one
project	in	subsequent	projects.	For	example,	the	office	of	the	CTO	is	building	a
portal	that	has	become	a	key	interface	as	new	services	are	introduced.	The	D.C.
government’s	Web	site	grew	from	twenty	pages	in	1999	to	almost	200,000	in
2005.	The	Web	site	transformed	from	a	public	embarrassment	to	one	that
Government	Technology
	
magazine	named	the	number	one	Web	portal	in
government.	More	important,	in	just	a	few	years,	the	D.C.	government	has	gone,
in	the	words	of	Suzanne	Peck,	“from	worst	to	first.”
Goals	and	Overview	of	the	Book
UPS’s	experience	with	happy	surprises	from	IT	and	its	ability	to	design	new
products	and	services	that	leverage	its	foundation	for	execution	is	exceptional
relative	to	most	companies	we’ve	studied.	But,	like	the	District	of	Columbia
government,	companies	are	increasingly	experiencing	incremental,	but
significant,	operating	improvements	as	they	build	and	leverage	a	foundation	for
execution.	Building	a	foundation	is	not	a	quick	or	easy	process.	This	book	is	a
call	to	action	for	those	companies	that	have	not	yet	started	on	this	journey	and	a
handbook	for	those	who	are	in	the	midst	of	building	their	foundation.	In	this
book	we	describe	how	to	(1)	define	an	operating	model,	(2)	design	and
implement	an	enterprise	architecture,	and	(3)	adopt	an	IT	engagement	model.	In
doing	so,	we	describe	how	your	company	can	achieve	greatness	with	a
foundation	for	execution.
Companies	that	build	a	solid	foundation	for	execution	do	achieve	greatness.
Throughout	this	book	we	will	describe	the	IT	and	business	process	capabilities
of	companies	generating	strategic	benefits	from	their	foundations.	These
companies	include	the	following:
ING	DIRECT:
	
–the	number	one	direct	bank	(in	terms	of	retail	funds
entrusted)	in	every	one	of	the	nine	countries	in	which	it	operates.	ING
DIRECT’s	operational	costs	are	only	0.43	percent	of	assets,	as	compared	to
2.5	percent	for	a	typical	full-service	bank,	allowing	the	company	to	offer

--- PAGE 28 ---
higher	savings	rates	and	lower-cost	loans	than	other	banks.	The	result	has
been	phenomenal	growth.	In	the	first	quarter	of	2005,	ING	DIRECT	grew
an	average	of	250,000	new	customers	and	more	than	$5	billion	in	new
assets	each	month.
7-Eleven	Japan:
	
–the	most	profitable	retailer	in	Japan	and	the	eighth-largest
retailer	in	the	world.	Since	its	inception	as	a	single	store	in	1973,	7-Eleven
Japan	has	grown	to	10,800	stores	in	Japan.	Worldwide	7-Eleven	Japan	has
28,000	stores	and	annual	revenues	of	¥25,000	billion	(approx	US$22
billion).	Gross	margins	per	store	have	increased	from	5	percent	to	more
than	30	percent	from	1977	to	2004.	Management	has	reduced	stock
turnover	from	25.5	days	in	1977	to	fewer	than	8.7	days	in	2004.
	
14
TD	Banknorth:
	
–
Forbes’s
	
“best	managed”	bank	for	2004,	due	to	the
company’s	steady	earnings	growth	of	10	percent	or	more.	TD	Banknorth
has	acquired	twenty-six	banks	in	the	past	eleven	years,	and	since	1989,	it
has	grown	from	$2	billion	to	$32	billion.	TD	Banknorth	is	second	among
banks	in	the	
Fortune
	
1000	in	total	return	to	shareholders	(a	37%	annual	rate
from	1991	to	2001).
	
15
This	book	is	intended	for	senior	managers	who	have—or	believe	they	should
take—responsibility	for	developing	and	overseeing	their	company’s	foundation
for	execution.	Business	executives	should	finish	this	book	with	a	clear
understanding	of	what	they	need	to	do	to	lead	the	change	and	engage	their
business	and	IT	colleagues	in	discussions	on	how	to	create	a	foundation	for
execution.	IT	executives	should	finish	this	book	with	a	clear	frame	of	reference
for	their	work	and	the	tools	to	successfully	work	with	their	business	colleagues.
Building	a	foundation	for	execution	requires	extraordinary	IT-business
alignment,	so	both	IT	and	business	leaders	need	to	exert	influence	on	the
process.	The	result	is	worth	the	trouble.
The	structure	of	the	book	is	as	follows:
Chapter	2:
	
Define	Your	Operating	Model.
	
–In	
chapter	2
	
we	introduce	the
first	discipline	for	creating	the	foundation	for	execution:	the	operating
model	and	its	two	key	dimensions—business	process	standardization	and
integration.	Four	different	types	of	operating	models	are	described:
Unification,	Coordination,	Replication,	and	Diversification.	We	explore
how	the	operating	model	concept	is	applied	to	both	companies	and	business
units.	Case	studies	of	JM	Family	Enterprises,	Merrill	Lynch,	Dow
Chemical,	TD	Banknorth,	and	Schneider	National	provide	examples	of

--- PAGE 29 ---
different	operating	models.
Chapter	3:
	
Implement	the	Operating	Model	Via	Enterprise	Architecture.
	
–In
chapter	3
	
we	introduce	the	second	discipline	for	creating	the	foundation	for
execution:	the	enterprise	architecture.	The	key	elements—digitized	business
processes,	IT	infrastructure,	shared	data,	and	customer	interfaces—are
identified	and	linked	in	the	enterprise	architecture.	The	one-page	core
diagram	is	introduced,	and	comparative	diagrams	are	developed	for	each	of
the	four	operating	models.	Four	case	studies	of	firms	and	their	enterprise
architecture	designs	illustrate	effective	practices:	MetLife,	ING	DIRECT,
Carlson	Companies,	and	Delta	Air	Lines.
Chapter	4:
	
Navigate	the	Stages	of	Enterprise	Architecture	Maturity.
	
–In
chapter	4
	
we	introduce	the	four	stages	of	enterprise	architecture	maturity:
Business	Silos,	Standardized	Technology,	Optimized	Core,	and	Business
Modularity.	Companies	traverse	these	stages	as	they	learn	new
organizational	processes	and	change	their	IT	investment	practices.	We
describe	how	the	strategic	value	of	IT	evolves	as	companies	mature	their
enterprise	architectures.	A	number	of	short	examples	illustrate	the	concepts,
and	we	conclude	with	a	discussion	of	how	to	apply	the	architecture	stages
in	your	company.
Chapter	5:
	
Cash	In	on	the	Learning.
	
–In	
chapter	5
	
we	explain	how
companies	get	unique	business	benefits	at	each	of	the	four	stages	of
maturity	by	using	various	management	practices	and	roles.	We	explain	how
achieving	these	benefits	requires	implementing	different	management
mechanisms	at	each	stage	to	formalize	organizational	learning.	A	case	study
of	Schindler	illustrates	how	the	role	of	the	CIO	evolves	as	companies	move
through	the	maturity	stages.
Chapter	6:
	
Build	the	Foundation	One	Project	at	a	Time.
	
–In	
chapter	6
	
we
introduce	the	third	discipline	for	creating	the	foundation	for	execution:	the
IT	engagement	model.	The	IT	engagement	model	has	three	ingredients:	IT
governance,	project	management,	and	linkages	connecting	the	two.	A	good
engagement	model	enables	a	company	to	build	its	foundation	one	project	at
a	time.	Case	studies	of	Raytheon	and	Toyota	Motor	Marketing	Europe
illustrate	the	different	ingredients	of	the	model.
Chapter	7:
	
Use	Enterprise	Architecture	to	Guide	Outsourcing.
	
–	In	
chapter
7
	
we	describe	how	outsourcing	can	contribute	to	enterprise	architecture
maturity	but	warn	that	outsourcing	success	is	far	from	guaranteed.	To
improve	the	likelihood	of	success,	we	show	how	to	use	the	operating	model
and	enterprise	architecture	to	determine	what	and	when	to	outsource.	We
distinguish	between	three	different	types	of	outsourcing—strategic

--- PAGE 30 ---
partnerships,	cosourcing	alliances,	and	transaction	relationships.	Analyzing
the	experiences	of	Campbell	Soup	Co.	and	the	City	of	Liverpool,	we
discuss	how	outsourcing	can	affect	enterprise	architecture,	and	vice	versa.
A	case	study	illustrates	how	Dow	Chemical	aggressively	uses	outsourcing
—driven	by	its	enterprise	architecture—to	move	to	what	it	calls	the
“Federated	Broker	Model.”
Chapter	8:
	
Now—Exploit	Your	Foundation	for	Profitable	Growth.
	
–	In
chapter	8
	
we	make	the	urgent	case	for	increased	agility	in	companies	that
must	compete	in	a	global	economy.	Case	studies	of	UPS,	7-Eleven	Japan,
and	MetLife	illustrate	the	growth	potential	of	different	operating	models.	A
case	study	of	CEMEX	highlights	the	architectural	challenges	created	by
acquisitions.	We	close	the	chapter	with	a	look	at	what’s	coming	next—the
fifth	stage	of	architecture	maturity.
Chapter	9:
	
Take	Charge!	The	Leadership	Agenda.
	
–
Chapter	9
	
summarizes
the	key	ideas	in	the	book	with	a	review	of	the	symptoms	of	an	ineffective
foundation	for	execution.	We	follow	with	a	set	of	six	steps	for	rethinking
your	foundation	for	execution.	Then	we	provide	ten	leadership	principles
for	building	and	leveraging	a	foundation	for	execution.
2
Define	Your	Operating	Model
GENERAL	H.	NORMAN	SCHWARZKOPF
	
once	observed,	“Leadership	is	a	potent
combination	of	strategy	and	character.	But	if	you	must	be	without	one,	be
without	the	strategy.”
	
1
	
Few	business	executives	would	be	comfortable	leading
without	a	strategy.	Business	strategy	provides	direction,	an	impetus	for	action.
Most	companies	also	rely	on	strategy	to	guide	IT	investments.	Accordingly,	IT
executives	work	to	align	IT	and	IT-enabled	business	processes	with	stated
business	strategy.	But	business-IT	strategic	alignment	can	be	an	elusive	goal.
Business	strategies	are	multifaceted,	encompassing	decisions	as	to	which
markets	to	compete	in,	how	to	position	the	company	in	each	market,	and	which
capabilities	to	develop	and	leverage.	In	addition,	strategic	priorities	can	shift	as
companies	attempt	to	respond	to	competitor	initiatives	or	to	seize	new
opportunities.	As	a	result,	strategy	rarely	offers	clear	direction	for	development
of	stable	IT	infrastructure	and	business	process	capabilities.

--- PAGE 31 ---
To	best	support	a	company’s	strategy,	we	recommend	that	the	company	define	an
operating	model.	An	
operating	model
	
is	the	necessary	level	of	business	process
integration	and	standardization	for	delivering	goods	and	services	to	customers.
An	operating	model	describes	how	a	company	wants	to	thrive	and	grow.	By
providing	a	more	stable	and	actionable	view	of	the	company	than	strategy,	the
operating	model	drives	the	design	of	the	foundation	for	execution.
The	choice	of	an	operating	model	is	a	critical	decision	for	a	company.	It’s	the
first	step	in	building	a	foundation	for	execution.	An	operating	model	enables
rapid	implementation	of	a	range	of	strategic	initiatives.	But	that	same	operating
model	will	fail	to	support	initiatives	that	are	inconsistent	with	the	assumptions
it’s	built	on.	Thus,	the	operating	model	is	a	choice	about	what	strategies	are
going	to	be	supported.	Take,	for	example,	the	ease	with	which	Charles	Schwab
introduced	online	brokerage	relative	to	Morgan	Stanley.	Schwab	had	already
implemented	low-touch	systems	and	processes.	In	contrast,	Morgan	Stanley	had
built	its	capabilities	for	more	customer-intimate	(and	higher-cost)	operations.
Similarly,	Amazon	could	add	consumer	products	to	its	product	list	because	its
operating	model	highlighted	its	capabilities	in	distribution	and	online	customer
interactions.	Barnes	&	Noble’s	operating	model	was	ill-suited	to	online	sales	but
adapted	easily	to	a	partnership	with	Starbucks,	which	enhanced	its	customers’	in-
store	shopping	experience.
The	operating	model	decision	(or	lack	thereof)	has	a	profound	impact	on	how	a
company	implements	business	processes	and	IT	infrastructure.	A	company
without	a	clear	operating	model	brings	no	automated,	preexisting,	low-cost
capabilities	to	a	new	strategic	pursuit.	Instead,	with	each	new	strategic	initiative
the	company	must	effectively	begin	anew	to	identify	its	key	capabilities.	But
selecting	an	operating	model	is	a	commitment	to	a	way	of	doing	business.	That
can	be	a	daunting	choice.
Our	research	suggests	the	payoff	for	making	that	choice	can	be	huge.	Companies
with	a	foundation	for	execution	supporting	an	operating	model	reported	17
percent	greater	strategic	effectiveness	than	other	companies—a	metric	positively
correlated	with	profitability.
	
2
	
These	companies	also	reported	higher	operational
efficiency	(31%),	customer	intimacy	(33%),	product	leadership	(34%),	and
strategic	agility	(29%)	than	companies	that	had	not	developed	a	foundation	for
execution.
	
3
In	this	chapter	we	will	first	define	the	dimensions	of	the	operating	model—

--- PAGE 32 ---
standardization	and	integration—and	then	describe	the	four	types	of	operating
models:	Diversification,	Coordination,	Unification,	and	Replication.	We	will
describe	the	critical	components	of	each	model	and	show	how	an	operating
model	shapes	future	strategic	choices.	We	will	then	discuss	important
considerations	in	choosing	an	operating	model.
Integration	and	Standardization:
	
Key	Dimensions	of	an	Operating	Model
An	operating	model	has	two	dimensions:	business	process	standardization	and
integration.	Although	we	often	think	of	standardization	and	integration	as	two
sides	of	the	same	coin,	they	impose	different	demands.	Executives	need	to
recognize	standardization	and	integration	as	two	separate	decisions.
Standardization
	
of	business	processes	and	related	systems	means	defining
exactly	how	a	process	will	be	executed	regardless	of	who	is	performing	the
process	or	where	it	is	completed.	Process	standardization	delivers	efficiency	and
predictability	across	the	company.	For	example,	using	a	standard	process	for
selling	products	or	buying	supplies	allows	the	activities	of	different	business
units	to	be	measured,	compared,	and	improved.	The	result	of	standardization—a
reduction	in	variability—can	be	dramatic	increases	in	throughput	and	efficiency.
Yet	greater	standardization	has	a	cost.	In	exchange	for	increased	predictability,
standardized	processes	necessarily	limit	local	innovation.	And	the	transition	to
standardization	usually	requires	that	perfectly	good	(and	occasionally	superior)
systems	and	processes	be	ripped	out	and	replaced	by	the	new	standard.	This	can
be	politically	difficult	and	expensive.
Integration
	
links	the	efforts	of	organizational	units	through	shared	data.	This
sharing	of	data	can	be	between	processes	to	enable	end-to-end	transaction
processing,	or	across	processes	to	allow	the	company	to	present	a	single	face	to
customers.	For	example,	an	automobile	manufacturer	may	decide	to	integrate
processes	so	that	when	a	sale	is	recorded,	the	car	is	reserved	from	among	the
cars	currently	in	production.	By	seamlessly	sharing	data	between	the	order
management	and	manufacturing	scheduling	processes,	the	company	improves	its
internal	integration	and,	consequently,	its	customer	service.	In	financial	services,
sharing	data	across	processes	enables	a	loan	officer	to	review	a	customer’s
checking,	savings,	and	brokerage	accounts	with	the	bank,	providing	better

--- PAGE 33 ---
information	about	the	customer’s	financial	situation	and	enabling	better	risk
assessments	for	loans.
The	benefits	of	integration	include	increased	efficiency,	coordination,
transparency,	and	agility.	An	integrated	set	of	business	processes	can	improve
customer	service,	provide	management	with	better	information	to	make
decisions,	and	allow	changes	in	one	part	of	the	business	to	alert	other	parts	of
actions	they	need	to	take.	Integration	can	also	speed	up	the	overall	flow	of
information	and	transactions	through	a	company.
The	biggest	challenge	of	integration	is	usually	around	data.	End-to-end
integration	requires	companies	to	develop	standard	definitions	and	formats	for
data	that	will	be	shared	across	business	units	or	functions.	For	business	units	to
share	customer	information,	they	must	agree	on	its	format.	Similarly,	they	must
share	a	common	definition	for	terms	like	
sale,
	
which	can	be	said	to	occur	when	a
contract	is	signed,	when	money	is	paid,	or	when	product	is	delivered.	These	can
be	difficult,	time-consuming	decisions.
Four	Types	of	Operating	Models
We	have	developed	a	straightforward	two-dimensional	model	with	four
quadrants,	representing	different	combinations	of	the	levels	of	business	process
integration	and	standardization	(figure	2-1).	Every	company	should	position
itself	in	one	of	these	quadrants	to	clarify	how	it	intends	to	deliver	goods	and
services	to	customers.
The	four	general	types	of	operating	models	are:
1
.	
Diversification	(low	standardization,	low	integration)
2
.	
Coordination	(low	standardization,	high	integration)
3
.	
Replication	(high	standardization,	low	integration)
4
.	
Unification	(high	standardization,	high	integration)
FIGURE	2-1

--- PAGE 34 ---
Companies	adopt	an	operating	model	at	the	enterprise	level	and	may	adopt
different	operating	models	at	the	division,	business	unit,	region,	or	other	level.
To	decide	which	quadrant	your	company	(or	business	unit)	belongs	in,	ask
yourself	two	questions:
1
.	
To	what	extent	is	the	successful	completion	of	one	business	unit’s
transactions	dependent	on	the	availability,	accuracy,	and	timeliness	of	other
business	units’	data?
2
.	
To	what	extent	does	the	company	benefit	by	having	business	units	run	their
operations	in	the	same	way?
The	first	question	determines	your	integration	requirements;	the	second,	your
standardization	requirements.	What	operating	model	you	choose	will	drive
important	design	decisions	around	the	autonomy	of	business	unit	managers	and
the	role	of	IT.	Compare	your	answers	to	the	characteristics	of	each	operating
model	in	figure	2-1	to	see	where	your	company	fits.
Diversification:	Independence	with	Shared	Services

--- PAGE 35 ---
Diversification	applies	to	companies	whose	business	units	have	few	common
customers,	suppliers,	or	ways	of	doing	business.	Business	units	in	diversified
companies	offer	different	products	and	services	to	different	customers,	so	central
management	exercises	limited	control	over	those	business	units	(see	the
Diversification	quadrant	in	figure	2-1).
JM	Family	Enterprises	(JMFE)	has	a	Diversification	operating	model.
Headquartered	in	Deerfield	Beach,	Florida,	JMFE	had	revenues	of	$8.2	billion	in
2004,	making	it	the	United	States’	fifteenth-largest	privately	held	company.
	
4
JMFE	comprises	four	closely	related	businesses:
1
.	
Southeast	Toyota	Distributors	(SET)	serves	more	than	160	dealers	in
Florida,	Georgia,	Alabama,	and	North	and	South	Carolina	with	vehicles,
parts,	and	accessories.	SET	dealers	sell	approximately	20	percent	of	all
Toyotas	sold	in	the	United	States.
2
.	
World	Omni	Financial	Corp.	(WOFC)	is	a	diversified	financial	services
company	that	provides	a	broad	range	of	financial	products	and	services	to
consumers,	dealers,	and	lenders.	Its	offerings	include	automotive	financial
products	and	services,	third-party	servicing	solutions,	wholesale	floor-plan
accounting	and	risk	management	systems,	full-service	inspection,
automated	risk	decision	software,	and	automotive	remarketing	services.
3
.	
JM&A	Group	offers	a	variety	of	automotive	finance	and	insurance	(F&I)
products	and	services,	such	as	new-	and	used-vehicle	protection	plans,
used-vehicle	certification	programs,	prepaid	maintenance	plans,	credit	life
and	disability	insurance,	and	F&I	training	and	consulting	services.
4
.	
JM	Lexus	is	the	largest-volume	retail	dealership	of	Lexus	cars	and	sport-
utility	vehicles	in	the	world.
The	lower	left	quadrant	of	figure	2-2	describes	JMFE’s	Diversification	operating
model.	Because	the	business	units	are	synergistic,	they	can	generate	business	for
one	another.	For	example,	JM	Lexus	is	a	customer	of	JM&A;	SET	sells
automobiles	to	dealers	whose	customers	often	finance	those	vehicles	through
WOFC;	and	WOFC	offers	loans	to	dealers	to	finance	the	vehicles	in	stock,
helping	increase	orders	to	SET.
JMFE	provides	some	centralized	services	to	its	business	units	through	the	JM
Service	Center.	The	largest	of	the	shared	services	is	IT;	the	others	are
procurement	services,	financial	services,	salon,	fitness	center,	benefits
administration,	food	services,	corporate	staffing,	distributive	and	document

--- PAGE 36 ---
services,	facilities,	relocation,	and	dealer	services.	Motivation	for	forming	shared
services	in	2001	included	cutting	costs	on	these	services	and	realizing	quick
economies	following	expected	acquisitions.
Historically,	JMFE	has	grown	primarily	through	the	growth	of	individual
business	units.	SET	has	become	the	world’s	largest	franchised	Toyota	distributor,
and	WOFC	is	one	of	the	world’s	largest	automotive	finance	companies.	As
JMFE’s	current	markets	become	saturated,	the	company	is	preparing	to	grow
through	acquisitions—a	common	characteristic	of	Diversification	companies.
Because	JMFE’s	business	units	are	run	autonomously,	each	of	them	has	an
operating	model	capturing	its	individual	integration	and	standardization
requirements.	By	building	a	foundation	for	execution	to	support	their	individual
operating	models,	these	business	units	contribute	profitable	growth	to	JMFE.
FIGURE	2-2

--- PAGE 37 ---
The	organizing	logic	for	Diversification	companies	is	based	on	synergies	from
related,	but	not	integrated,	business	units.	Business	units	might	create	demand
for	one	another	or	increase	the	company’s	brand	recognition,	which	generates
enterprisewide	value	despite	autonomous	management.	Companies	with	a
Diversification	model	may	pursue	economies	of	scale	through	shared	services,
but	they	typically	grow	through	the	success	of	the	individual	business	units	and
acquisitions	of	other	related	businesses.
Coordination:	Seamless	Access	to	Shared	Data
Coordination	calls	for	high	levels	of	integration	but	little	standardization	of
processes.	Business	units	in	a	Coordination	company	share	one	or	more	of	the

--- PAGE 38 ---
following:	customers,	products,	suppliers,	and	partners.	The	benefits	of
integration	can	include	integrated	customer	service,	cross-selling,	and
transparency	across	supply	chain	processes.	While	key	business	processes	are
integrated,	however,	business	units	have	unique	operations,	often	demanding
unique	capabilities.
For	companies	with	a	Coordination	model,	low	cost	is	usually	not	the	primary
driver	in	companywide	decisions.	Autonomous	business	heads	execute	their
processes	in	the	most	efficient	manner	possible,	but	corporate	directives	and
negotiations	focus	on	providing	the	best	service	to	the	customer.	Strong	central
management	defines	the	need	for	cooperation.	Successful	companies	rely	on
incentive	systems	and	management	training	to	encourage	companywide	thinking
at	the	business	unit	level.	(See	the	Coordination	quadrant	of	figure	2-1.)
Merrill	Lynch,	one	of	the	world’s	largest	financial	services	companies,	is
composed	of	three	major	business	units:	the	Global	Markets	&	Investment
Banking	Group,	Merrill	Lynch	Investment	Managers,	and	Global	Private	Client.
Its	Global	Private	Client	(GPC)	business	provides	an	example	of	a	Coordination
operating	model	(figure	2-2).	GPC	delivers	wealth	management	products	and
services	to	individuals	and	small	businesses	through	more	than	14,000	financial
advisers	in	approximately	630	offices	around	the	world.	While	financial	advisers
each	serve	their	individual	customers,	their	services	are	integrated	through
what’s	called	the	Total	Merrill	platform,	which	gives	all	advisers	access	to	the
full	range	of	Merrill	products:	commission-	and	fee-based	investment	accounts,
credit	products,	banking	services,	cash	management	and	credit	cards,	trust	and
generational	planning,	consumer	and	small-business	lending,	retirement	services,
and	insurance	products.
	
5
GPC	focuses	on	delivering	comprehensive,	innovative	solutions	to	meet	the
financial	needs	of	its	target	customers.	These	customers	want	to	do	business	with
Merrill	Lynch	through	a	variety	of	channels,	such	as	the	telephone	call	center,
the	Internet,	and	advice-based	interactions	with	financial	advisers.	In	addition,
customers	want	access	to	non-Merrill	products.	GPC’s	operating	model,
therefore,	coordinates	services	to	its	customers	by	providing	integrated	access	to
products	across	customers	and	integrated	access	to	customer	data	across
products	and	channels.	Such	service	requires	highly	standardized	product	and
customer	data,	but	it	allows	financial	advisers	to	customize	their	individual
interactions	to	the	needs	of	their	customers.	Merrill	Lynch	calls	its	model
providing	“all	things	to	some	people,”	and	customized	service	is	important	to

--- PAGE 39 ---
retaining	high-value	customers.
	
6
Merrill	Lynch’s	GPC	grows	by	increasing	the	number	of	financial	advisers	who,
with	their	access	to	product	data,	can	identify	and	then	serve	more	customers.
GPC	also	regularly	innovates	to	expand	its	product	line,	recently	adding
products	such	as	new	credit	cards	and	loan	management	services.	These	new
services	help	GPC	provide	a	strong	portfolio	of	products	as	it	seeks	to	retain	its
ability	to	provide	a	full	range	of	services	to	clients.
GPC’s	standard	technology	platform	and	access	to	shared	business	data	enable
the	company	to	productively	employ	the	largest	number	of	financial	advisers	in
the	industry.	These	financial	advisers	have	the	industry’s	best	revenue	per
adviser,	earnings	per	adviser,	and	assets	per	adviser.
	
7
Like	GPC,	most	companies	in	the	Coordination	quadrant	can	grow	by	extending
their	reach	to	defined	customer	segments	in	new	markets.	They	can	also	increase
services	to	meet	new,	but	related,	customer	demands.	By	integrating,	but	not
standardizing,	product	lines	or	functions,	the	Coordination	model	fosters	process
expertise	while	enhancing	customer	service.	This	expertise	attracts	new
customers	and	sells	more	products	to	existing	customers,	thus	enabling
profitable	growth.
Replication:	Standardized	Independence
Replication	models	grant	autonomy	to	business	units	but	run	operations	in	a
highly	standardized	fashion.	In	a	Replication	model	the	company’s	success	is
dependent	on	efficient,	repeatable	business	processes	rather	than	on	shared
customer	relationships.	The	business	units	are	not	dependent	on	one	another’s
transactions	or	data;	the	success	of	the	company	as	a	whole	is	dependent	on
global	innovation	and	the	efficiency	of	all	business	units	implementing	a	set	of
standardized	business	processes.	Accordingly,	business	unit	managers	have
limited	discretion	over	business	process	design,	even	though	they	operate
independently	of	other	business	units.	McDonald’s,	like	other	franchise
operations,	provides	a	clear	reference	point	for	a	Replication	model.	(See	the
Replication	quadrant	of	figure	2-1.)
TD	Banknorth,	one	of	the	thirty-five	largest	commercial	banking	companies	in
the	United	States,	also	provides	an	example	of	a	Replication	model	(figure	2-2).
Over	the	past	decade,	the	company	has	grown	by	a	factor	of	ten	from	a	small

--- PAGE 40 ---
community	bank	to	the	largest	bank	headquartered	in	New	England.	TD
Banknorth’s	core	strategy	is	to	grow	through	acquisitions	of	community	banks
with	customer-focused	corporate	cultures.	The	company	adds	value	by
introducing	economies	of	scale	and	providing	its	banks’	customers	with	new	and
improved	products.
	
8
Founded	in	Vermont	in	1824,	TD	Banknorth	grew	with	the	objective	of
understanding	its	customers	better	than	anyone	else.	As	a	result,	each	local	bank
developed	its	own	processes	and	infrastructures	to	meet	the	perceived	needs	of
its	specific	customers.	But	when	John	Petrey	became	the	company’s	CIO	in
September	2001,	he	set	out	to	integrate	and	standardize	its	information
technology.	Petrey	created	standardized	processes	for	bringing	new	banks	onto
TD	Banknorth’s	foundation.
These	new	standardized	processes	are	converting	TD	Banknorth	from	a
Diversification	model,	with	independent	operations	in	each	of	the	company’s
banks,	to	a	Replication	model,	in	which	banks	are	run	independently	but	with	the
same	IT	infrastructure	and	a	set	of	standardized	core	processes.	To	facilitate	this
transition,	a	new	Enterprise	Projects	Committee,	headed	by	COO	Peter	Verrill,
reviews	projects	for	their	strategic	impact	in	light	of	the	company’s	focus	on
developing	synergies	across	its	banks.	While	Banknorth	looks	for	the
efficiencies	and	predictability	of	standardized	processes,	however,	it	also	aims	to
preserve	the	image	of	a	community	bank	by	retaining	local	decision	making
wherever	feasible.
Many	Replication	companies	grow	through	acquisition	like	TD	Banknorth,	but
most	Replication	companies	can	also	build	new	businesses	from	scratch.
Whether	companies	are	growing	organically	or	through	acquisition,	the
Replication	model	helps	them	increase	profits	when	management	quickly	installs
its	standardized	practices	and	technology	foundation	into	a	new	unit	and	then
allows	a	local	manager	to	build	the	business.
Unification:	Standardized,	Integrated	Processes
When	organizational	units	are	tightly	integrated	around	a	standardized	set	of
processes,	companies	benefit	from	a	Unification	model.	Companies	applying
this	model	find	little	benefit	in	business	unit	autonomy.	They	maximize
efficiencies	and	customer	services	by	presenting	integrated	data	and	driving
variability	out	of	business	processes.

--- PAGE 41 ---
Unification	companies	typically	have	integrated	supply	chains,	creating
interdependence	between	distributed	business	units.	These	business	units	share
transaction	data,	often	including	global	customer	and	supplier	data.	Standardized
processes	support	global	integration	and	increase	efficiency.	The	Unification
operating	model	often	benefits	from	implementation	of	large	packaged	systems
to	support	company	standardization	and	integration	requirements.	(See	the
Unification	quadrant	in	figure	2-1.)
The	Dow	Chemical	Company	has	adopted	a	Unification	model	for	its	core
chemicals-manufacturing	business.
	
9
	
Founded	in	1897,	Dow	Chemical	develops
and	sells	innovative	chemical,	plastic,	and	agricultural	products	and	services	to
customers	in	more	than	175	countries	around	the	world.	From	1994	to	2004,
despite	a	downturn	in	the	market,	Dow	nearly	doubled	its	revenues	while
growing	its	employee	base	less	than	10	percent—a	productivity	improvement	of
8	percent	per	year.	Management	attributes	much	of	the	company’s	success	to	its
well-tuned	globally	integrated	processes	(figure	2-2).
Managers	at	Dow	estimate	that	approximately	60	percent	of	the	company’s	work
processes	are	standardized.	For	example,	financial	work	processes	are	common
around	the	globe.	Manufacturing	has	common	processes	for	building	plants,
driven	in	part	by	the	need	for	those	facilities	to	be	highly	cost	effective	and
environmentally	secure.	Standardized	human	resource	processes	allow	Dow	to
do	performance	management	and	to	plan	salaries	and	incentives	around	the
globe	in	three	weeks,	equitably	and	transparently,	even	taking	into	account
multiple	currencies	and	differing	rates	of	inflation.	Finally,	some	supply	chain
work	processes	(e.g.,	order	to	cash)	are	globally	standardized;	others	(e.g.,
planning	and	scheduling)	are	specific	to	particular	products	or	regions.
Dow	constantly	reengineers	processes	to	introduce	greater	standardization	and
automation,	as	appropriate.	These	efforts	are	intended,	first	and	foremost,	to	cut
costs,	but	they	also	increase	quality,	safety,	and	security—other	important
organizational	objectives.	Dow	invests	substantial	resources	in	understanding	the
costs	of	its	processes	and	the	impacts	of	its	improvement	efforts.
Dow	sustains	its	integration	and	standardization	through	global	systems,	such	as
SAP’s	enterprise	resource	planning	system,	and	through	a	management	structure
that	assigns	owners	to	the	various	global	processes.	Five	of	Dow’s	eight	global
processes	are	housed	in	a	shared	services	organization	that	includes	IT,
purchasing,	supply	chain	services,	and	customer	service	(including	e-business),

--- PAGE 42 ---
along	with	expertise	on	six-sigma	and	work	processes.	Dow’s	matrixed
management	structure,	in	which	managers	often	report	to	product	and	process
heads	or	to	product	and	geographic	heads,	further	encourages	global	integration.
Unification	companies	invariably	have	highly	centralized	management
environments.	Management	drives	out	inefficiencies	and	then	grows	the
company	by	leveraging	economies	of	scale.	Since	minimizing	variation	is	key	to
driving	efficiencies,	Unification	is	best	suited	to	companies	whose	products	and
services	are	largely	commodities.	Companies	more	focused	on	innovation	may
find	that	the	costs	of	standardization	outweigh	its	benefits.
Applying	the	Operating	Model
An	operating	model	represents	a	general	vision	of	how	a	company	will	enable
and	execute	strategies.	Each	operating	model	presents	different	opportunities	and
challenges	for	growth.	For	example,	the	need	to	integrate	business	processes,	as
in	Coordination	and	Unification	operating	models,	makes	acquisition	more
challenging	because	the	new	company	must	reconcile	disparate	data	definitions.
On	the	other	hand,	the	process	integration	of	the	Coordination	and	Unification
models	facilitates	organic	growth	through	expansion	into	new	markets	or
extensions	of	current	product	lines.
Process	standardization,	as	in	Unification	and	Replication	models,	enables
growth	through	a	rip-and-replace	approach	to	acquisitions.	When	the	acquisition
is	intended	to	create	a	mirror	image,	a	company	can	replace	the	systems	and
processes	of	the	acquired	business	with	its	own.	But	both	the	Unification	and
Replication	models	depend	on	leveraging	processes	already	in	place.	Neither
model	offers	much	leverage	when	a	company	chooses	to	expand	into	synergistic,
but	operationally	distinct,	lines	of	business.
FIGURE	2-3

--- PAGE 43 ---
The	Diversification	model	imposes	fewer	constraints	on	the	organic	growth	of
individual	business	units	and	fewer	challenges	in	an	acquisition.	But	it	also
leverages	fewer	capabilities	than	the	other	models,	thus	offering	fewer
opportunities	to	create	shareholder	value.	Figure	2-3	summarizes	the	growth
opportunities	presented	by	each	of	the	operating	models.
Deploying	Operating	Models	at
	
Different	Organizational	Levels
Although	most	companies	can	identify	processes	fitting	every	operating	model,
they	need	to	select	a	single	operating	model	to	guide	management	thinking	and
system	implementations.	Management	can	then	organize	responsibilities	for
business	units	and	IT	based	on	principles	about	how	the	company	will	operate
most	of	the	time.	One	way	companies	respond	to	conflicting	demands	is	to	adopt
different	operating	models	at	different	organizational	levels.	For	example,	a
company	with	a	Diversification	model,	like	JM	Family	Enterprises,	often	adopts
different	models	in	its	business	units.
Johnson	&	Johnson	(J&J)	has	long	operated	in	the	Diversification	quadrant.
General	managers	in	the	company’s	more	than	200	operating	companies	have
always	had	significant	autonomy,	and	for	most	of	J&J’s	100-plus	years	of
existence,	analysts	believed	that	this	decentralized	management	style	was	key	to
the	company’s	success.	But	as	major	global	customers	increasingly	demand

--- PAGE 44 ---
integration	across	multiple	business	units,	J&J	responds	by	introducing	new
organizational	levels	that	can	provide	shared	customer	data	across	subsets	of
related	business	units.
	
10
J&J’s	U.S.	pharmaceutical	group	applies	a	Coordination	model,	presenting	a
single	face	to	health-care	professionals.	In	Europe,	its	Janssen	Pharmaceutical
Products	applies	a	Replication	model,	providing	low-cost,	standardized
processes	for	drug	marketing,	delivery,	and	monitoring.	Having	different
operating	models	at	different	organizational	levels	allows	J&J	to	meet	the
multiple	objectives	of	large,	complex	companies	while	keeping	organizational
design	reasonably	simple	at	the	individual	operating	company	level.
Many	companies	in	the	Diversification	quadrant,	including	DuPont,	Citicorp,
and	General	Electric,	have	multiple	organizational	levels,	each	adopting	a
different	operating	model	so	that	it	can	simultaneously	meet	the	company’s	and
its	own	business	objectives.
Transforming	to	a	New	Operating	Model
An	operating	model	helps	define	the	range	of	strategic	initiatives	a	company	can
readily	pursue.	As	long	as	the	operating	model	presents	attractive	options,	it
provides	a	stable	approach	for	delivering	goods	and	services.	If	a	company
determines	that	its	existing	operating	model	is	not	well	suited	to	its	market
realities,	the	company	must	shift	to	a	new	operating	model.	Shifting	from	one
operating	model	to	another	is	transformational.	A	transformation	disrupts	a
company,	imposing	new	ways	of	thinking	and	behaving.
	
11
	
But	while	companies
would	not	want	to	regularly	introduce	new	operating	models,	such	changes	are
sometimes	necessary.
From	Diversification	to	Unification:
	
a	European	packaging	company
A	European	packaging	company	recognized	a	need	to	change	operating	models
in	the	late	1990s.
	
12
	
At	the	time,	the	company	was	organized	into	separate
country-based	business	units,	each	of	which	was	responsible	for	its	own
operations.	Different	countries	had	different	enterprise	resource	planning	(ERP)
systems,	order	management	processes,	invoice	formats,	and	even	pricing.	Each
country	made	its	own	decisions	about	IT	systems	and	data	standards,	which	was

--- PAGE 45 ---
a	slow,	inefficient,	and	expensive	way	to	do	business.	Alarmingly,	management
discovered	some	corporate	customers	were	taking	the	same	order	to	multiple
organizations	to	drive	down	the	price	by	bidding	one	country-based	unit	against
others!
The	management	team	decided	its	key	operations	were	sales,	order	processing,
new	product	introductions,	and	after-sales	service.	Management	decided	it	could
accomplish	those	operations	better	with	a	Unification	model	than	with	a
Diversification	model.	The	company	didn’t	need	to	adopt	a	new	strategy—it	was
still	delivering	the	same	products	to	the	same	customers.	The	change	in
operating	model	was	designed	to	help	it	deliver	products	and	services	faster,
better,	and	more	efficiently.
To	transform	its	operating	model,	management	replaced	the	different	order
management	systems	in	each	country	with	a	central	ERP	system	and	process.
The	countries	now	enter	orders	through	a	browser	interface	with	one	product	list,
price	list,	and	order	management	system	for	the	entire	business.
The	company’s	new	operating	model	dramatically	reduced	order	management
cycle	time,	lowered	operational	costs,	and	increased	business	flexibility	and
agility.	In	the	old	operating	model,	adding	a	product	with	a	new	pricing	structure
required	updating	15	different	systems,	which	could	take	weeks.	In	the	new
system,	one	central	change	is	made,	usually	in	a	matter	of	hours.	But	the	new
operating	model	had	dramatic	effects	on	the	power	structure	of	the	company,
making	the	transition	difficult.	In	the	old	model,	a	country	manager	could,	within
limits,	make	independent	decisions	about	products,	pricing,	and	promotions.
That	authority	was	greatly	reduced,	and	local	managers	naturally	resisted	the
change.
Shifting	from	Diversification	to	Unification	introduces	traumatic	organizational
change.	As	companies	attempt	to	increase	standardization	and	integration,	they
obsolete	existing	systems,	processes,	and	organizational	structures	and	roles.
Successful	transformations	of	this	kind	are	costly,	time	consuming,	risky—and
sometimes	necessary.	As	we	saw	with	the	packaging	company,	the	rewards	of
the	change	can	be	substantial.
From	Unification	to	Diversification:
	
Schneider	National

--- PAGE 46 ---
Schneider	National,	a	large,	privately	held	trucking	company,	built	a	strong
Unification	model	in	the	early	1990s.
	
13
	
Schneider	had	highly	standardized	and
integrated	operations	processes	and	systems	built	around	a	centralized
management	model	in	which	most	employees	were	based	in	Green	Bay,
Wisconsin.	The	company	had	long	been	recognized	as	an	industry	leader	in	the
effective	use	of	IT.	Schneider	was	the	first	trucking	company	to	implement
satellite	tracking	systems	and	then	the	first	to	integrate	its	tracking	systems	with
both	operations	and	customer	service	applications.	But	management	decided	in
the	early	nineties	that	many	of	the	United	States’	50,000	trucking	companies
were	dropping	prices	and	pushing	down	margins	throughout	the	industry.	Any
person	with	a	truck	could	go	into	the	trucking	business,	making	it	increasingly
difficult	for	Schneider	to	grow	profitably.
Responding	to	the	requests	of	some	of	the	company’s	key	customers,	Schneider
decided	to	offer	logistics	services.	Management	recognized	that	a	new	logistics
business	could	not	leverage	the	company’s	existing	foundation	for	execution.
Trucking	demands	centralization,	standardization,	and	integration	to	serve
customers	who	need	reliable	service	delivery	and	accompanying	information.
Schneider	intended	to	provide	localized,	customized	logistics	services,	managed
by	logistics	representatives	who	would	sit	at	customer	sites	and	access	local
databases.	Thus,	the	operating	platform	that	had	regularly	enabled	innovation	in
the	trucking	business	was	not	a	good	fit	for	logistics.	So	when	Schneider
launched	the	logistics	business,	it	did	so	with	a	new	and	separate	management
structure	and	segregated	IT	processes	and	operations.
Over	time,	Schneider	has	found	synergies	between	its	two	businesses.	In
particular,	the	trucking	business	has	benefited	from	some	of	the	newer
technologies	introduced	to	support	logistics.	But	Schneider	has	two	foundations
for	execution:	one	for	the	Unification	operating	model	of	the	trucking	business
and	one	for	the	Replication	operating	model	of	the	logistics	business.	As	a
whole,	Schneider	has	a	Diversification	model	with	some	shared	infrastructure
and	services	to	benefit	both	businesses.	Companies	with	a	core	business
adopting	a	Unification	model,	like	Schneider,	may	run	out	of	opportunities	to
leverage	that	core.	A	Diversification	model	provides	opportunities	to	feed	the
core	business.
The	Operating	Model	as	Company	Vision
Focusing	on	the	operating	model	rather	than	on	individual	business	strategies

--- PAGE 47 ---
gives	a	company	better	guidance	for	developing	IT	and	business	process
capabilities.	This	stable	foundation	enables	IT	to	become	a	proactive—rather
than	reactive—force	in	identifying	future	strategic	initiatives.	In	selecting	an
operating	model,	management	defines	the	role	of	business	process
standardization	and	integration	in	the	company’s	daily	decisions	and	tasks.
The	operating	model	concept	requires	that	management	put	a	stake	in	the	ground
and	declare	which	business	processes	will	distinguish	a	company	from	its
competitors.	A	poor	choice	of	operating	model—one	that	is	not	viable	in	a	given
market—will	have	dire	consequences.	But	not	choosing	an	operating	model	is
just	as	risky.	Without	a	clear	operating	model,	management	careens	from	one
market	opportunity	to	the	next,	unable	to	leverage	reusable	capabilities.	With	a
declared	operating	model,	management	builds	capabilities	that	can	drive
profitable	growth.
Because	the	choice	of	an	operating	model	guides	development	of	business	and
IT	capabilities,	it	determines	which	strategic	opportunities	the	company	should
—and	should	not—seize.	In	other	words,	the	operating	model,	once	in	place,
becomes	a	driver	of	business	strategy.	In	addition,	the	required	architecture—as
well	as	the	management	thinking,	practices,	policies,	and	processes	characteristic
of	each	operating	model—is	different	from	one	operating	model	to	another.	As	a
result,	the	operating	model	could	be	a	key	driver	of	the	design	of	separate
organizational	units.
We	encourage	senior	managers	to	debate	their	company’s	operating	model.	This
debate	can	force	managers	to	articulate	a	vision	for	how	the	company	will
operate	and	how	those	operations	will	distinguish	the	company	in	the
marketplace.	In	clarifying	this	vision,	management	provides	critical	direction	for
building	a	foundation	for	execution.
3
Implement	the
	
Operating	Model	via
	
Enterprise	Architecture

--- PAGE 48 ---
IN
	
1884	Sarah	Winchester,	heiress	to	the	Winchester	Repeating	Arms	Co.
fortune,	bought	a	six-room	house	in	Santa	Clara	while	it	was	still	under
construction.	She	quickly	discarded	the	building	plans	and	instead	met	with	her
foreman	every	morning	to	describe	the	work	she	wanted	done	that	day.	With	no
master	plan,	she	kept	twenty-two	carpenters	at	work,	year	round—for	thirty-six
years!	The	house	had	three	elevators,	forty-seven	fireplaces,	rooms	built	around
rooms,	staircases	leading	to	nowhere,	doors	opening	to	blank	walls,	doors
opening	to	steep	drops	to	the	lawn	below,	and	a	variety	of	other	curiosities.	The
house	had	every	type	of	heating	technology	available.	The	design	is	so	complex
that	no	one	knows	for	sure	the	number	of	rooms	in	the	house—though	most
counters	agree	it’s	around	160.
	
1
Crazy	as	it	seems,	the	architecture	of	the	Winchester	House	is	perfectly	designed
to	meet	the	needs	of	its	owner.	Sarah	Winchester	wanted	to	confound	the	spirits
of	the	men	who	had	been	killed	by	the	Winchester	rifle	and	might	want	to	harm
her.	As	companies	cobble	together	their	systems	and	processes—year	after	year,
often	for	more	than	thirty-six	years—they	run	the	risk	of	having	an	architecture
much	like	Winchester	House.	But	since	few	companies	are	battling	evil	spirits,	a
confounding	architecture	may	just	be	the	result	of	poor	management,	rather	than
the	intended	chaos	of	Sarah	Winchester.
Responding	to	market	opportunities	is	critical	to	any	business—particularly	in
new	areas	where	the	company	must	establish	a	presence	and	a	value	proposition
quickly.	For	example,	many	companies	sprang	into	action	in	response	to	the
Internet	boom	in	early	2000.	One	such	company	was	Manheim	Auctions,	a
division	of	Cox	Communications	and	the	largest	automobile	auction	company	in
the	world.	In	February	2000	Manheim	Auctions	launched	Manheim	Interactive,
a	business-to-business	Internet	company.	By	the	end	of	its	first	year,	Manheim
Interactive	had	275	employees	dedicated	to	rapidly	building	new,	innovative
technology-based	tools	to	help	dealers,	manufacturers,	and	other	automobile
marketers	manage	the	used-car	remarketing	process.	The	focus	on	rapid
introduction	of	a	stream	of	new	products	and	services	superseded	architectural
concerns.	Short-term,	Manheim	Interactive	generated	the	desired	results	from	its
efforts,	but	eventually,	management	had	to	examine	the	underlying	architecture
of	its	IT	and	business	process	capabilities.	As	Steve	Crawford,	director	of
software	development	at	Manheim	Interactive,	explains,	“The	ability	to	always
quickly	respond	eventually	became	a	problem.	We	became	very	good	at
scrambling	to	meet	demands	very	quickly.	But	that	has	a	cost	and	eventually	we
just	said,	‘Okay,	we’re	out	of	magic	dust	now.	We	need	to	rethink.’”
	
2

--- PAGE 49 ---
Companies	looking	to	build	a	strong	foundation	for	execution	need	more	detail
than	the	operating	model	provides—they	need	an	enterprise	architecture	to	guide
their	efforts.	The	operating	model	outlines,	in	general	terms,	the	expectations	for
integration	and	standardization	across	business	units;	the	enterprise	architecture
delineates	the	key	processes,	systems,	and	data	composing	the	core	of	a
company’s	operations.	Enterprise	architecture	directs	the	digitization	of	the
foundation	for	execution.
Unfortunately	the	term	
architecture
	
has	acquired	a	negative	connotation	in	some
companies.	Many	companies	have	questioned	the	value	of	their	architecture
initiatives.	Some	of	those	initiatives	are	viewed	as	IT	ivory	towers	that	are
isolated	from	business	reality.	The	chief	architect	of	a	large	telecommunications
company	confirmed	this	idea,	saying,	“Architectures,	like	fondue	sets	and
sandwich	makers,	are	rarely	used.	We	occasionally	dig	them	out	and	wonder
why	we	ever	spent	the	money	on	them.”
	
3
In	this	chapter	we	discuss	how	to	make	enterprise	architecture	a	powerful
management	tool	for	aligning	business	and	technology	initiatives	throughout	a
company.	We	define	what	we	mean	by	the	term	
enterprise	architecture
	
.	We	then
show	how	four	different	organizations	draw	and	describe	their	architecture.	In
doing	so,	we	explain	how	companies	convert	the	fairly	general	vision	of	the
operating	model	into	a	guide	for	their	business	processes	and	IT	capabilities.
The	Enterprise	Architecture
Enterprise	architecture
	
is	the	organizing	logic	for	business	processes	and	IT
infrastructure	reflecting	the	integration	and	standardization	requirements	of	the
company’s	operating	model.
Many	companies	attack	the	enterprise	architecture	exercise	with	lots	of	drawings
and	analysis	of	both	existing	and	hoped-for	systems	capabilities.	But	massive
analytical	efforts	do	not	focus	resources	on	what	matters.	The	key	to	effective
enterprise	architecture	is	to	identify	the	processes,	data,	technologies,	and
customer	interfaces	that	take	the	operating	model	from	vision	to	reality.
The	key	elements	of	enterprise	architecture	are	different	for	each	of	the	four
operating	models.	For	JM	Family	Enterprises,	which	runs	its	business	units
autonomously,	the	key	element	of	enterprise	architecture	is	its	shared	technology
environment.	For	Merrill	Lynch’s	Global	Private	Client,	which	works	to	meet

--- PAGE 50 ---
the	total	financial	needs	of	each	individual	customer,	the	key	element	of
enterprise	architecture	is	the	customer’s	data	and	the	interface	that	captures	and
accesses	that	data.	For	Dow	Chemical,	which	prides	itself	in	the	cost-
effectiveness	and	safety	of	its	manufacturing	and	distribution	processes,	the	key
element	of	enterprise	architecture	is	the	set	of	standardized	processes	and	shared
data	built	on	its	single	instance	of	an	ERP	system.	TD	Banknorth’s	success
depends	on	implementation	of	a	shared	technology	and	business	process
environment.
Distinguishing	Between	Enterprise
	
Architecture	and	IT	Architecture
T
	
he	enterprise	architecture	core	diagrams	we	describe	in	this	chapter	are
focused	on	communicating	the	high-level	business	process	and	IT	requirements
of	a	company’s	operating	model.	They	do	not	provide	the	necessary	detail	to
map	out	technical	or	process	design	requirements.	The	IT	unit	typically
addresses	four	levels	of	architecture	below	the	enterprise	architecture:	business
process	architecture	(the	activities	or	tasks	composing	major	business	processes
identified	by	the	business	process	owners);	data	or	information	architecture
(shared	data	definitions);	applications	architecture	(individual	applications	and
their	interfaces);	and	technology	architecture	(infrastructure	services	and	the
technology	standards	they	are	built	on).
The	term	
enterprise	architecture
	
can	be	confusing	because	the	IT	unit	in	some
companies	refers	to	one	of	these	architectures—or	the	set	of	all	four
architectures—as	the	enterprise	architecture.	Our	use	of	the	term	refers	to	the
high-level	logic	for	business	processes	and	IT	capabilities.
For	the	most	part,	non-IT	people	need	not	be	involved	in	the	development	of	the
detailed	technical	and	applications	architectures	guiding	development	of
technical	capabilities.	However,	they	need	to	provide	enough	detail	on	how	they
will	execute	processes,	and	what	data	those	processes	depend	on,	for	the	IT	unit
to	develop	current	solutions	meeting	long-term	needs.	A	high-level	enterprise
architecture	creates	shared	understanding	of	how	a	company	will	operate,	but	the
convergence	of	people,	process,	and	technology	necessary	to	implement	that
architecture	demands	shared	understanding	of	processes	and	data	at	a	more
detailed	level.

--- PAGE 51 ---
The	IT	unit	will	develop	far	more	detailed	architectures	of	applications,	data	and
information,	and	technology.
	
a
	
When	these	drawings	elaborate	on	enterprise
architecture,	they	have	considerable	long-term	value	because	they	provide	the
long-term	context	for	immediate	solutions.	When	IT	units	attempt	to	develop
detailed	architectures	without	a	clear	understanding	of	the	company’s	enterprise
architecture,	they	may	have	developed	the	equivalent	of	a	fondue	pot—an
ornament	rather	than	a	tool.
a.
	
Detailed	architecture	development	conducted	within	the	IT	unit	is	an
important	element	of	building	a	foundation	for	execution.	However,	it	is	outside
the	scope	of	this	book.	A	variety	of	resources	describe	the	IT	unit’s	role	in
enterprise	architecture.	Some	highlight	one	specific	type	of	architecture	(e.g.,
information	or	application	architecture).	For	an	overview	of	the	IT	unit’s	role,
see	Steven	H.	Spewak,	
Enterprise	Architecture	Planning:	Developing	a
Blueprint	for	Data,	Applications,	and	Technology
	
(New	York:	Wiley,	1993)	or
John	A.	Zachman,	“A	Framework	for	Information	Systems	Architecture,”	
IBM
Systems	Journal
	
26,	no.	3	(1987):	276–292.
All	four	of	these	companies	have	legacy	systems	and	processes	that	aren’t	a
perfect	fit	with	current	technologies	and	business	goals.	But	these	companies
understand	their	operating	models,	and	they	capture	the	critical	components	of
their	operating	model	in	their	enterprise	architecture.	They	use	their	architecture
to	continually	improve	their	foundation	for	execution.
Encapsulating	Enterprise	Architecture
	
in	a	Core	Diagram
While	the	architecture	for	a	new	building	is	captured	in	blueprints,	enterprise
architecture	is	often	represented	in	principles,	policies,	and	technology	choices.
Thus,	the	concept	can	be	difficult	for	managers	to	get	their	arms	around.	We
have	found	that	a	simple	picture,	which	we	refer	to	as	the	“core	diagram,”	helps
managers	debate	and	eventually	come	to	understand	their	company’s	enterprise
architecture.	This	simple	one-page	picture	is	a	high-level	view	of	the	processes,
data,	and	technologies	constituting	the	desired	foundation	for	execution.	The
core	diagram	provides	a	rallying	point	for	managers	responsible	for	building	out
and	exploiting	the	enterprise	architecture.	It	also	has	implications	for	the	design
of	organizational	roles	and	structures.	Although	these	structural	requirements	are
not	usually	captured	in	the	core	diagram,	roles	and	reporting	relationships	also

--- PAGE 52 ---
need	to	be	aligned	with	the	enterprise	architecture.
All	companies	have	entrenched	legacy	systems	that	are	the	accumulation	of
years	of	IT-enabled	business	projects.	Intentionally	or	not,	the	resulting
capability	locks	in	assumptions	about	internal	and	external	relationships	and
business	process	definitions.	The	role	of	the	one-page	core	diagram	is	to	help
facilitate	discussions	between	business	and	IT	managers	to	clarify	requirements
for	the	company’s	foundation	for	execution	and	then	communicate	the	vision.
Although	different	companies	take	different	approaches	to	developing	their	core
diagram,	all	highlight	key	components	of	their	foundation	for	execution.	We
have	observed	four	common	elements	in	enterprise	architecture	core	diagrams:
1
.	
Core	business	processes.
	
–This	small	set	of	enterprise	processes	defines	the
stable	set	of	company-wide	capabilities	the	company	needs	to	execute	its
operating	model	and	respond	to	market	opportunities.
2
.	
Shared	data	driving	core	processes.
	
–This	data	may	be	the	customer	files
shared	across	the	product	lines	of	a	full-service	financial	services	institution
or	the	master	supplier	and	item	data	shared	across	the	business	units	of	a
company	instituting	a	global	supply	chain.
3
.	
Key	linking	and	automation	technologies.
	
–These	technologies	include
software	known	as	“middleware”	(i.e.,	a	linking	technology),	which	enables
integration	of	applications	and	access	to	shared	data,	and	major	software
packages,	such	as	ERP	systems	(i.e.,	an	automation	technology).	Key
technologies	also	include	portals	providing	standardized	access	to	systems
and	data	or	a	customer	interface	distinguishing	a	company	from	its
competitors.	Electronic	interfaces	to	key	stakeholder	groups	(employees,
customers,	partners,	suppliers)	also	might	appear	on	an	enterprise
architecture	core	diagram.
4
.	
Key	customers.
	
–These	show	the	major	customer	groups	(e.g.,	channels	or
segments)	served	by	the	foundation	for	execution.
The	key	elements	highlighted	in	a	core	diagram	are	specific	to	that	company’s
operating	model.	Thus,	we	tend	to	see	similarities	between	the	core	diagrams	of
companies	adopting	the	same	operating	model.	We	will	now	describe
characteristics	of	the	enterprise	architecture	for	the	four	operating	models.	To
illustrate	an	architecture	for	each,	we	will	start	with	a	company	example	and
then	provide	a	general	template	and	steps	for	designing	the	core	diagram.	We
will	look	at	Delta	Air	Lines,	Carlson	Companies,	MetLife,	and	ING	DIRECT.

--- PAGE 53 ---
Enterprise	Architecture	for	a	Unification	Model
In	a	Unification	operating	model,	both	integration	and	standardization	of
business	processes	are	required	to	serve	different	key	customer	types.
Technology	is	used	to	link	as	well	as	to	automate	processes.	Delta	Air	Lines	has
arguably	the	best	foundation	for	execution	of	any	of	the	full-service	airlines.
In	1997	Leo	Mullin	became	CEO	of	Delta	Air	Lines,	the	United	States’	third-
largest	airline	in	terms	of	revenues	and	passenger	miles	flown.
	
4
	
Mullin	quickly
learned	that	Delta’s	IT	capability	had	been	constructed	in	response	to	a	failed
outsourcing	effort.	Unhappy	with	the	outsourcer’s	services,	each	of	Delta’s
seventeen	functional	units	had	effectively	built	its	own	IT	capability.	The	firm
had	as	many	IT	platforms	as	it	had	functions,	and	those	platforms	were	not
capable	of	communicating	with	one	another.	The	predictable	outcome	was	that
Delta’s	ticket	agents,	reservation	agents,	gate	agents,	baggage	handlers,	and
others	often	lacked	the	information	they	needed	to	do	their	jobs—frustrating
both	customers	and	employees.	Negotiating	the	core	diagram	helped	Delta’s
management	and	IT	staff	reach	a	common	understanding	of	the	capabilities	the
company	would	develop	to	support	future	strategies.
As	a	first	step	in	clarifying	the	vision,	the	management	team	defined	four	core
processes:	customer	experience,	operational	pipeline,	business	reflexes,	and
employee	relationship	management	(figure	3-1).	The	customer	experience
identified	all	the	ways	Delta	touched	its	customers.	The	operational	pipeline	was
concerned	with	loading,	moving,	unloading,	and	maintaining	planes.	Business
reflexes	focused	on	how	the	company	made	money:	scheduling,	pricing,	and
financial	processes.	Employee	relationship	management	encompassed	processes
involved	in	the	scheduling,	compensation,	and	development	of	Delta’s	highly
mobile	workforce.
Once	the	management	team	agreed	on	the	core	processes,	they	identified	nine
types	of	data	critical	to	process	execution.	These	nine	databases	are	shown	in	the
center	of	the	core	diagram.	Surrounding	the	shared	data	in	this	diagram	is	the
Delta	nervous	system—software	that	accesses	the	company’s	shared	data	for
real-time	updates.	The	Delta	nervous	system	is	designed	to	make	data	available
to	customers,	employees,	and	the	company’s	core	processes	on	a	need-to-know
basis.	This	linking	technology	is	a	key	element	to	enabling	Delta’s	highly
standardized	and	integrated	operating	model.
FIGURE	3-1

--- PAGE 54 ---
In	early	2001,	Mullin	noted	that	technology	and	process	improvements	resulting
from	enterprise	architecture	efforts	had	shifted	Delta	from	regularly	appearing	in
last	place	on	key	performance	indicators	(in	1997)	to	being	the	only	airline	that
was	consistently	in	the	top	three	on	the	most	important	metrics:	on-time
performance,	lost	baggage,	and	customer	complaints.	Delta’s	enterprise
architecture,	however,	was	not	sufficient	to	save	the	company	from	bankruptcy
after	difficult	times	hit	the	major	airlines	in	late	2001.	Delta’s	current	financial
woes	are	a	sobering	reminder	that	a	foundation	for	execution	cannot	sustain	a
company	if	its	market	strategy	is	not	viable.
The	top	half	of	figure	3-2	identifies	the	process	for	designing	the	enterprise
architecture	core	diagram	of	a	Unification	company.	For	the	core	diagram	of	a
Unification	company,	three	elements	are	required.	Start	by	identifying	the	key
customers	(i.e.,	segments	and/or	channels)	the	company	serves.	Next,	list	the	key
processes	to	be	standardized	and	integrated.	Then	identify	the	shared	data
needed	to	better	integrate	processes	and	serve	customers.	Finally,	if	there	are	key
technologies	that	either	automate	or	link	processes,	these	can	be	shown	as	well
(optional	elements	are	identified	with	a	dashed	outline	in	the	figure).
FIGURE	3-2

--- PAGE 55 ---
The	bottom	half	of	figure	3-2	presents	the	enterprise	architecture	core	diagram	of
a	company	with	a	Unification	operating	model.	The	diagram	reflects	a	highly
standardized	and	integrated	environment	with	standard	processes	accessing
shared	data	to	make	products	and	services	available	to	customers.	The	core
diagram	may	or	may	not	show	key	technologies,	depending	on	the	significance
of	any	particular	technology	to	the	management	vision.
Enterprise	Architecture	for	a	Diversification	Model
The	Diversification	operating	model	is	the	opposite	of	the	Unification	model	and
entails	both	low	integration	and	low	standardization.	Each	business	is	run	more
or	less	independently,	although	there	can	be	opportunities	for	shared	services
across	the	company.
Carlson	Companies,	a	$20	billion	company	in	the	marketing,	hospitality,	and
travel	business,	has	a	Diversification	model.
	
5
	
Carlson’s	portfolio	includes
Radisson	Hotels,	T.G.I.	Friday’s	restaurants,	Carlson	Marketing	Group,	Carlson
Wagonlit	Travel,	Radisson	Seven	Seas	Cruises,	and	the	Gold	Points	Reward
Network.
Even	though	these	companies	are	run	autonomously,	Carlson	has	captured	cost
savings	and	synergies	with	a	world-class	shared	services	capability,	which	was
awarded	the	2004	International	Productivity	and	Quality	Council’s	award	for	the

--- PAGE 56 ---
“best	mature	shared	services	organization.”	Carlson’s	Shared	Services
organization	is	set	up	to	operate	as	a	business,	offering	IT	and	financial	services
with	plans	to	offer	more.
Carlson’s	enterprise	architecture	core	diagram	emphasizes	technologies,
reflecting	management’s	belief	that	technical	infrastructure	services	should	be
shared	while	business	units	retain	control	over	local	business	processes	and	IT
applications.	Carlson’s	Diversification	model	calls	for	a	lean	core	diagram	at	the
overall	company	level.	Thus,	the	core	diagram	capturing	Carlson’s	enterprise
architecture	shows	only	shared	services	and	the	technical	infrastructure	needed
to	provide	them	(figure	3-3).
	
6
FIGURE	3-3
An	extreme	example	of	Diversification	would	be	a	total	lack	of	an	enterprise
architecture—a	company	intending	to	have	no	synergies	across	its	businesses.
More	often,	companies	adopting	the	Diversification	operating	model	establish
economies	of	scale	through	a	shared	technology	platform.	These	shared
technologies	are	the	key	element	of	the	enterprise	architecture	core	diagram.
Shared	technologies	and	services	often	include	data	centers,	the
telecommunications	network,	offshore	systems	development	and	maintenance
capability,	centralized	vendor	negotiations,	and	help	desks.	Diversification
companies	that	value	other	shared	services	might	also	represent	some	standard
processes	or	even	shared	data	in	their	core	diagram,	particularly	if	a	subset	of

--- PAGE 57 ---
business	units	is	sharing	data	but	hasn’t	created	a	formal	structure	to	manage	it
(figure	3-4).
When	designing	a	Diversification	model	core	diagram,	start	with	the
technologies	that	can	be	shared	to	provide	economies	of	scale,	standardization,
or	other	benefits.	Incorporate	the	remaining	elements—key	customer	types,
business	processes,	and	data—only	when	needed	for	the	operating	model.	For
example,	some	Diversification	companies	require	a	standardized	process	and
data	for	financial	reporting,	risk	management,	and	compliance	across	their
business	units.	Providing	a	single	interface	to	common	customers	in	a
Diversification	company,	however,	is	rare.
FIGURE	3-4
Enterprise	Architecture	for	a	Coordination	Model
The	Coordination	model	provides	integrated	service	to	each	key	customer	group.
The	integration	results	from	sharing	key	data	across	the	business	units	to	present
a	common	face	to	the	customer.	Because	of	their	wide	range	of	distinctive
products,	many	large	financial	services	institutions,	such	as	MetLife,	have
adopted	a	Coordination	model.	Coordination	allows	companies	to	integrate
untold	numbers	of	products	or	processes	without	forcing	standardization.

--- PAGE 58 ---
MetLife	is	a	leading	provider	of	insurance	and	other	financial	services	to
millions	of	individual	and	institutional	customers	throughout	the	United	States.
	
7
Through	its	subsidiaries	and	affiliates,	MetLife	offers	life	insurance,	annuities,
automobile	and	home-owner’s	insurance,	and	retail	banking	services	to
individuals,	as	well	as	group	insurance,	reinsurance,	and	retirement	and	savings
products	and	services	to	corporations	and	other	institutions.	Outside	the	United
States,	the	MetLife	companies	have	direct	insurance	operations	in	Asia	Pacific,
Latin	America,	and	Europe.
Following	a	series	of	mergers	in	the	1990s,	MetLife’s	management	worked	to
reduce	costs	through	increased	standardization	of	business	functions	and
common	processes,	such	as	finance,	human	resources,	and	regulatory
compliance.	But	like	most	insurance	companies,	MetLife	had	built	systems
supporting	key	operations,	such	as	underwriting,	payments,	workflow,	and
account	origination,	into	individual	insurance	products.	Extracting	processes
from	individual	products	was	a	slow,	costly	proposition.	More	important,
individual	products	and	product	lines	required	specialized	knowledge,	thereby
limiting	opportunities	for	standardization	across	products	and	business	units.
Accordingly,	MetLife	focused	on	developing	a	strategy	and	operating	model	to
provide	integrated	customer	service	across	products—a	Coordination	model.
This	integrated	view	of	the	customer	required	extracting	customer	information
from	individual	products	and	making	it	centrally	available.	MetLife’s	enterprise
architecture	core	diagram	reflects	the	importance	of	integrated	data	by	locating
at	the	center	of	its	diagram	an	integration	hub—software	developed	in-house
using	commercial	packages	to	access	customer	data	from	existing	systems
(figure	3-5).
MetLife	is	now	building	a	centralized	data	store	to	hold	customer	data	and	other
information	separate	from	individual	insurance	products.	This	data	store	is	a
long-term	project,	so,	as	it	is	being	developed,	the	integration	hub	accesses	data
embedded	in	legacy	applications	and	provides	exclusive	access	to	the	customer
information	file.	Subject	to	MetLife’s	privacy	and	other	compliance
requirements,	most	stakeholders	gain	access	to	the	data	using	a	standardized
portal,	shown	on	the	left-hand	side	of	the	diagram.	A	separate	electronic	link	to
the	integration	hub	provides	MetLife’s	partners	(labs,	brokerages,	regulatory
agencies,	etc.)	with	access	to	certain	company	systems	and	data.	The	processes
listed	on	the	right-hand	side	of	the	core	diagram	are	examples	of	the	systems	and
processes	the	integration	hub	accesses.	Unlike	the	processes	in	the	Delta	core

--- PAGE 59 ---
diagram	(and	any	Unification	model),	most	insurance	processes	will	not	be
standardized	across	all	business	units	or	products.	However,	
within
	
individual
business	units	and	product	lines,	MetLife	is	moving	toward	a	Unification	model
to	capture	potential	efficiencies	and	enable	predictability.
FIGURE	3-5
The	enterprise	architecture	core	diagram	for	the	Coordination	operating	model
encapsulates	a	company’s	integration	emphasis	and	thus	focuses	on	shared	data
(figure	3-6).	Often,	the	core	diagram	will	also	highlight	important	technology
that	depicts	how	stakeholders	can	access	that	data.	Because	most	processes	in	a
Coordination	model	are	unique,	it	is	less	important	to	show	them	on	the	core
diagram.	However,	it	can	be	useful	to	show	at	least	some	of	the	processes	to	be

--- PAGE 60 ---
coordinated.
When	designing	a	Coordination	model	core	diagram,	start	with	the	key
customers	(e.g.,	segments	and	channels)	to	be	shared	across	business	units.	For
MetLife	this	was	a	combination	of	internal	and	external	groups	that	tie	into	the
portal.	Next,	identify	the	subset	of	the	company	data	that	must	be	shared	across
the	business	units	to	serve	key	customers.	Then,	identify	any	technology	that	is
key	to	the	data	integration.	It	is	not	essential	to	reflect	the	technology,	but	it	is
usually	helpful	for	business	and	IT	managers	to	understand,	at	a	high	level,	the
key	to	data	integration.	Finally,	consider	whether	to	include	business	process
elements.
FIGURE	3-6
Enterprise	Architecture	for	a	Replication	Model
Replication	operating	models	are	successful	when	key	processes	are
standardized	across	the	company	and	supported	by	automating	technology.	This
Replication	allows	rapid	expansion	and	scalability	of	the	business,	as
demonstrated	by	ING	DIRECT.
ING	DIRECT,	a	subsidiary	of	the	Dutch	financial	services	giant	ING	Groep,	was
founded	in	1997	as	a	telephone	bank	in	Canada.
	
8
	
One	of	the	fastest-growing
companies	in	history,	ING	DIRECT	is	a	direct-to-customer	operation,	offering

--- PAGE 61 ---
simple	banking	products	to	13	million	customers	of	nine	country-based	bank
organizations	in	Europe,	North	America,	and	Australia.	Customers	access	ING
DIRECT	via	the	Internet,	mail,	or	phone.	There	are	no	branches	and	few	ATMs.
Products	are	transparent	and	easy	to	understand	with	no	fees	or	minimum
deposits	and	simple	features	with	no	confusing	fine	print	or	complex	rules.	ING
DIRECT	has	only	a	limited	number	of	product	offerings,	including	savings
accounts,	simple	mortgages,	certificates	of	deposit,	and	a	handful	of	mutual
funds.	The	company’s	low	fees,	high	returns,	and	multiple	channels	appeal	to	a
broad	range	of	customers.
ING	DIRECT’s	country-based	businesses	operate	autonomously,	but	they	share
a	common	set	of	standardized	business	solutions	as	well	as	standardized
technical	infrastructure	components.	ING	DIRECT	selects	business	solutions	on
behalf	of	all	business	units	with	a	joint	request-for-proposal	process	reflecting
shared	requirements.	Architectural	fit	and	global	support	are	key	requirements.
Country	managers	can	decide	which	modules	they	would	like	to	adopt,	but	they
cannot	introduce	customized	local	solutions	for	key	components	(although	some
customized	solutions	are	allowed	when	it’s	unavoidable).	Module	reuse	keeps
operational	costs	low	(0.43%	of	assets,	as	compared	to	2.5%	for	a	typical	full-
service	bank)	and	allows	the	company	to	offer	higher	savings	rates	and	lower-
cost	loans.
	
9
ING	DIRECT’s	enterprise	architecture	core	diagram	reflects	its	Replication
operating	model	(figure	3-7).	The	modularity	of	ING	DIRECT’s	systems	is
highlighted	by	seven	service	groupings.	Even	external	services,	such	as
prospecting	and	publishing	agency	reports,	are	designed	as	modules	interfacing
with	the	ING	DIRECT	infrastructure.	Customer	relationship	services	allow	each
country-based	bank	to	manage	its	customer	data	and	interactions.	These	modules
are	distinct	from	common	business	service	modules,	which	manage	interactions
between	systems	as	transactions	are	processed.	For	example,	when	a	new
customer	signs	up	for	an	ING	DIRECT	product,	common	business	service
modules	update	the	customer	information	file,	contact	history	file,	and	customer
relationship	management	system.	These	common	business	services	also	record	a
customer’s	deposit	and	process	the	transaction.	A	different	set	of	services—the
channel	services—connect	back-end	systems	to	systems	that	communicate	with
customers.
FIGURE	3-7

--- PAGE 62 ---
ING	DIRECT’s	service	modules	digitize	standardized	processes	across	its
businesses,	thereby	enabling	ING	DIRECT’s	Replication	operating	model.	By
identifying	major	service	categories,	the	enterprise	architecture	core	diagram
helps	management	understand	existing	capabilities	and	target	new	opportunities.
The	core	diagram	shows	no	data	because	the	nine	country-based	banks	do	not
share	data	(each	bank	serves	its	own	customers—regardless	of	where	they	are	at
the	time	they	seek	service).	Instead,	the	core	diagram	highlights	the	key	process
components,	which	management	refers	to	as	“services.”
Replication	operating	models	revolve	around	standardized	processes.	Thus	an
enterprise	architecture	core	diagram	will	show	key	standard	processes	and,	in
most	cases,	the	key	technologies	enabling	those	processes	(figure	3-8).	Data
rarely	appears	in	the	core	diagram	because	Replication	companies	don’t
typically	share	data	across	business	units.	To	improve	the	economics	of
Replication	these	companies	automate	key	processes,	often	creating	reusable
business	modules	(shown	as	business	processes	surrounded	by	technology	in
figure	3-8).	The	enterprise	architecture	core	diagram	also	typically	shows	shared
technologies	linking	the	standardized	processes.
When	designing	a	Replication	model	core	diagram,	start	with	the	key	processes
to	be	standardized	and	replicated	across	the	business	units.	Next,	identify	the

--- PAGE 63 ---
technologies	automating	those	key	processes.	Then	consider	what	linking
technologies,	if	any,	can	be	shared	across	the	business	units.	It	is	not	usually
necessary	in	a	Replication	model	to	share	data	or	identify	key	customers.
Instead,	each	business	unit	makes	those	decisions	locally.
FIGURE	3-8
Who	Should	Design
	
Enterprise	Architecture?
In	many	companies	enterprise	architecture	design	is	the	responsibility	of	a	small
IT	staff	sequestered	in	a	back	room	for	several	months,	emerging	only	after
drawing	a	book’s	worth	of	diagrams.	These	drawings	often	map	out	the	linkages
between	existing	systems.	The	exercise	is	justified	by	an	expectation	that
mapping	out	existing	legacy	systems	will	lead	to	reduced	complexity	in	the
systems	environment.	Most	of	these	architecture	exercises	end	up	abandoned	on
a	shelf.	Detailed	architectural	drawings	of	business	processes	and	systems
applications—apart	from	a	specific	business	process	initiative—can	make
companies	feel	as	if	someone	is	doing	something	about	complexity,	but	they	are
rarely	acted	upon.
Instead,	the	enterprise	architecture	process	should	start	with	senior	management
debating	the	operating	model.	The	templates	for	the	core	diagram	for	each

--- PAGE 64 ---
operating	model	provide	a	starting	point	for	helping	management	teams	design
their	foundation	for	execution.	In	the	process	of	populating	an	enterprise
architecture	core	diagram,	management	must	decide	what	is	really	core	to	the
company.	Choosing	an	operating	model	forces	a	decision	on	a	general	vision.
Identifying	the	key	customer	types,	core	processes,	shared	data,	and	technologies
to	be	standardized	and	integrated	demands	a	commitment	to	a	particular	course
of	action.	As	a	company	builds	the	capabilities	defined	in	the	core	diagram,
implementing	strategies	around	the	core	becomes	easier,	faster,	and	cheaper.
However,	once	the	core	is	in	place,	it	is	difficult	to	change	the	way	the	company
does	business.	Not	only	must	a	company	redesign	and	implement	technical
capabilities—its	people	must	relearn	processes.	Thus,	enterprise	architecture
embodies	tough	decisions	by	experienced	managers.	When	it	leads	to	process
and	system	reuse,	the	benefits	are	enormous;	when	it	forces	standardization	that
doesn’t	fit	business	needs,	it’s	very	costly.
The	idea	that	enterprise	architecture	discussions	should	involve	senior
management	will	not	be	a	surprise	to	most	IT	executives.	But	many	IT	leaders
find	themselves	taking	the	lead.	We	have	seen	two	successful	strategies	to
involve	senior	executives:	IT-facilitated	senior	management	discussions	and
senior	management	approval	of	IT-led	designs.
IT	Facilitates	Senior	Management	Discussions
For	some	companies,	enterprise	architecture	design	efforts	start	with	establishing
core	capabilities.	Development	of	these	capabilities	will	involve	operational	and
often	organizational	reengineering.	The	scope	of	the	changes	is	significant—and
usually	traumatic.	These	changes	require	senior	management	leadership,	and
start	with	mapping	out	the	operating	model	and	then	the	enterprise	architecture
core	diagram.	Companies	using	this	approach	include	Delta	Air	Lines,	BT,	and
State	Street	Corp.	At	BT	and	State	Street,	the	CEOs	announced	transitions	from
Diversification	models	to	more	integrated	models	through	initiatives	they	called
“OneBT”	and	“One	State	Street”	respectively.
Enterprise	architecture	core	diagrams	are	tough	to	draw	because	they	force
management	to	develop	a	simple	vision	of	a	complex	organization.	Management
is	trying	to	articulate	the	essence	of	the	company	in	the	core	diagram.	Charlie
Feld	estimated	that	the	management	team	at	Delta	Air	Lines	required	sixty
iterations	to	complete	the	drawing	of	its	core	diagram.	But	once	complete,
management	should	anticipate	that,	despite	rapidly	changing	business

--- PAGE 65 ---
conditions,	the	essence	of	the	company	will	stay	the	same.	The	goal	is	to	digitize
the	core	to	make	it	predictable,	reusable,	and	reliable.	By	digitizing	the	core
processes,	data,	and	technologies	depicted	in	the	core	diagram,	management
expects	to	provide	a	foundation	for	execution,	not	a	set	of	handcuffs.
The	inclination	of	some	management	teams	is	to	include	too	many	processes	or
too	much	detail	in	the	enterprise	architecture	core	diagram.	Agreeing	on	what
not
	
to	include	can	be	a	challenging	but	fruitful	exercise	in	management	focus.
Intense	management	debate	can	expose	options	for	the	foundation	for	execution.
The	enterprise	architecture	design	exercise	forces	clarification	of	a	workable
vision.
IT	Leaders	Design	the	Core	Diagram
At	MetLife	business	managers	looked	to	the	IT	unit	to	provide	systems
rationalization	as	they	drove	benefits	from	prior	and	future	acquisitions.	The
company	lacked	IT	capabilities	needed	to	elicit	the	value	expected	from	its
acquisitions.	IT	leaders	developed	the	core	diagram,	offering	a	vision	of	the
company	that	IT	could	start	to	deliver	on	quickly	(figure	3-5).	This	core	diagram
envisioned	significant	business	change,	so	senior	managers	needed	to	support
and	communicate	the	vision.	Today,	the	integration	hub	has	become	a	key
capability	in	the	company’s	operating	vision.	Fittingly,	IT	took	the	lead.
MetLife	architects	use	their	core	diagram	to	communicate	to	senior	managers
and	business	partners	the	underlying	logic	for	IT	development.	The	core	diagram
shows	how	the	architecture	enables	business	objectives	by	providing	a	common
customer	view,	improving	information	integrity,	and	reducing	redundancy.	It
also	guides	the	development	of	new	applications	by	explaining	how	IT	will
deliver	on	the	company’s	operating	model.
Now	What?
We	have	observed	that	some	management	teams	can	develop	and	share	a	clear
vision	without	the	benefit	of	core	diagrams.	But	many	management	teams	find	a
core	diagram	to	be	a	helpful	tool	to	create	a	shared	understanding	of	how	the
company	will	function	and	then	to	communicate	that	shared	vision	to	the	rest	of
the	organization.	By	thoughtfully	preparing	an	enterprise	architecture	core
diagram,	management	commits	to	IT	and	IT-enabled	business	processes	that
build	and	leverage	a	foundation	for	execution.	Now	comes	the	hard	part—

--- PAGE 66 ---
building	and	using	it!
The	building	process	is	a	journey.	Companies	learn	from	early	initiatives	how	to
build	capabilities	and	how	to	get	value	from	them.	In	the	next	chapter	we
describe	this	learning	through	four	stages	of	enterprise	architecture	maturity.
4
Navigate	the	Stages	of
	
Enterprise	Architecture
	
Maturity
IN
	
1991	the	city	of	Boston,	Massachusetts,	began	a	multiyear	construction
project	to	replace	7.8	miles	of	its	elevated	inner-city	highway.	Built	in	the	1950s,
the	old	highway	had	long	been	a	source	of	controversy.	During	the	decade	it	was
constructed,	the	old	highway	displaced	20,000	residents,	cut	off	the	North	End
and	waterfront	neighborhoods	from	Boston’s	economic	hub,	and	blocked
daylight	and	disrupted	business.	By	the	early	nineties,	the	highway,	which	was
designed	to	carry	75,000	vehicles	per	day,	was	experiencing	near-constant
congestion.	Each	day	200,000	vehicles	crowded	the	highway,	accidents
happened	four	times	more	than	the	national	average	for	urban	interstates,	and
traffic	was	bumper-to-bumper	for	six	to	eight	hours—and	getting	worse.
	
1
Boston	officials	wanted	a	solution	that	not	only	handled	greater	numbers	of
vehicles	but	also	eliminated	an	eyesore	and	enhanced	the	city’s	quality	of	life.
The	resulting	vision	was	an	underground	highway	system	that	would	dismantle
the	elevated	highway	and	allow	development	of	parks	and	walkways	to	reunite
the	neighborhoods	divided	by	the	old	highway.	Unofficially	dubbed	the	“Big
Dig”	(the	official	name	was	the	Central	Artery/	Tunnel	Project),	the	project	was
intended	to	transform	the	highway	system	in	Boston	without	crippling	the	city.
Major	components	of	the	project	included	(1)	building	the	widest	cable-stayed
hybrid	bridge	ever	built	and	the	first	using	an	asymmetrical	design;	(2)	creating	a
casting	basin	where	sections	of	an	underwater	tunnel	could	be	built	and	then
floated	out	to	the	precise	position	where	they	would	be	lowered	into	the	channel;
and	(3)	applying	a	technique	called	“slurry	walls,”	which	reduced	the	area	to	be

--- PAGE 67 ---
excavated	in	the	building	of	the	underground	tunnels,	thus	minimizing
disruptions	to	existing	traffic.
Initial	project	estimates	called	for	a	budget	of	$2.6	billion	and	a	completion	date
of	1998.
	
2
	
But	the	project	was	not	completed	until	mid-2005	and	cost	nearly	$15
billion.	While	many	management	decisions	and	some	engineering	mistakes
contributed	to	the	delays	and	cost	overruns,	the	biggest	factor	was	simple
miscalculation.	The	Big	Dig	became	the	biggest	public-works	project	in	U.S.
history.	Key	managers	had	underestimated	the	task	involved	in	maintaining
existing	transportation	capabilities	while	implementing	a	new	infrastructure.
In	building	a	foundation	for	execution,	companies	face	some	of	the	same
challenges.	New	information	technologies,	changing	industry	boundaries,	and
the	expanding	global	economy	are	creating	new	opportunities.	But	many	of	the
processes	and	systems	a	company	has	built	over	time	constitute	obstacles	to	a
new	business	vision.	Management	cannot	shut	down	the	company	and	start	from
scratch.	Building	a	foundation	for	execution	requires	changing	core	processes
and	systems	even	as	the	company	is	depending	on	them	to	complete	its	daily
operations.	Management	needs	to	redesign	and	then	implement	new	systems,
processes,	and	IT	infrastructure	without	sabotaging	daily	operations.
Fortunately,	unlike	the	Big	Dig,	firms	navigate	a	fairly	predictable	path	to
achieve	a	foundation	for	business	execution	and	follow	a	consistent	pattern	for
building	out	their	enterprise	architectures.	We	label	this	pattern	the	“four	stages
of	architecture	maturity.”
	
3
	
The	four	stages	are:
1
.	
Business	Silos	architecture:
	
–where	companies	look	to	maximize	individual
business	unit	needs	or	functional	needs
2
.	
Standardized	Technology	architecture:
	
–providing	IT	efficiencies	through
technology	standardization	and,	in	most	cases,	increased	centralization	of
technology	management
3
.	
Optimized	Core	architecture:
	
–which	provides	companywide	data	and
process	standardization	as	appropriate	for	the	operating	model
4
.	
Business	Modularity	architecture:
	
–where	companies	manage	and	reuse
loosely	coupled	IT-enabled	business	process	components	to	preserve	global
standards	while	enabling	local	differences
Companies	move	through	these	stages	by	first	building	and	then	leveraging	a
foundation	for	execution.	Each	stage	involves	organizational	learning	about	how

--- PAGE 68 ---
to	apply	IT	and	business	process	discipline	as	strategic	capabilities.	Advancing
through	the	stages	requires	lots	of	persistence,	but	as	companies	advance	from
the	first	stage	to	later	stages,	they	realize	benefits	ranging	from	reduced	IT
operating	costs	to	greater	strategic	agility.	In	this	chapter	we	discuss	how	to
navigate	the	enterprise	architecture	journey	where	companies	learn	to	build	and
leverage	their	foundations	for	execution.
The	Four	Stages	of	Architecture	Maturity
As	companies	build	out	their	enterprise	architecture,	they	gradually	shift	their
investments	in	IT	and	business	process	redesign.	In	particular,	they	identify
where	global	synergies	offer	greater	value	than	local	autonomy.	Figure	4-1
shows	the	relative	IT	investments	in	data,	shared	infrastructure,	enterprise
systems,	and	local	applications	in	each	of	the	four	architecture	stages.
FIGURE	4-1
Stage	1:	Business	Silos
In	the	Business	Silos	stage,	companies	focus	their	IT	investments	on	delivering
solutions	for	local	business	problems	and	opportunities.	These	companies	may
take	advantage	of	opportunities	for	shared	infrastructure	services	like	a	data
center,	but	such	shared	services	accommodate	the	unique	needs	of	the	local
business	units.	Companies	in	this	stage	do	not	rely	on	an	established	set	of
technology	standards.
The	role	of	IT	in	the	Business	Silos	stage	is	to	automate	specific	business

--- PAGE 69 ---
processes.	Thus,	IT	investments	are	usually	justified	on	the	basis	of	cost
reductions.	In	a	well-managed	Business	Silos	environment,	business	managers
design	business	processes	and	specify	required	IT	functionality.	IT	then	develops
or	buys	an	application	to	fully	meet	the	requirements.	Ideally,	systems	delivery
in	this	stage	generates	a	100	percent	solution	to	the	specified	business	need.
Organizationally,	applications	in	the	Business	Silos	stage	align	naturally	with	a
company’s	business	unit,	functional,	or	geographic	structures.	The	architecture
imposes	no	constraints	on	business	units’	activities,	thereby	encouraging
innovation.	Strategic	initiatives	can	be	executed	with	few,	if	any,	constraints
from	other	parts	of	the	business.	Consequently,	functional,	plant,	and	geographic
managers	often	respond	positively	to	applications	developed	in	silos.	Business
silos	can	compete	for	capital	funding	using	locally	focused	cost-benefit	analysis.
System	benefits	are	predictable	(albeit	frequently	overstated),	and	outcomes	are
measurable.
Solutions	developed	in	a	Business	Silos	architecture	can	enhance	company
competitiveness	within	the	context	of	local	specialization.	For	example,	in	an
investment	bank,	IT	is	the	product.	New	investment	products	are	most	profitable
when	they	are	first	introduced	(i.e.,	until	competitors	introduce	a	similar
product).	Thus,	time	to	market	is	critically	important	in	investment	banking—
each	day	a	new	product	is	on	the	market	without	a	competing	product	can	mean
millions	of	dollars	to	the	innovating	company.	Investment	banks	generate	huge
profits	from	these	IT-based	investment	products.
These	one-off	solutions,	however,	create	a	legacy	of	systems	that	cannot	talk	to
each	other.	Many	IT	professionals	are	quite	adept	at	making	disparate	systems
look	integrated,	but	the	code	required	to	link	applications	becomes	increasingly
complex.	Over	time,	key	systems	have	so	many	links	to	other	systems	that	even
small	changes	are	time	consuming,	expensive,	and	risky.	More	important,	a
Business	Silos	environment	obstructs	integration	and	standardization	of	business
processes.
Only	12	percent	of	the	companies	in	our	research	were	in	the	Business	Silos
stage;	most	companies	had	already	moved	past	this	first	architecture	stage.	It	is
not	the	frustration	of	isolated	systems	that	usually	drives	management	from	this
stage.	It’s	the	cost.	More-lucrative	industries,	such	as	investment	banking	and
pharmaceuticals,	have	thus	been	among	the	last	to	abandon	the	Business	Silos
architecture.	New,	fast-growing	businesses	can	easily	fall	into	the	trap	of

--- PAGE 70 ---
addressing	immediate	business	needs	without	regard	for	future	capabilities.
Eventually,	the	need	for	efficiency	in	IT	operations	and	the	desire	to	build	a	solid
data	and	process	platform	to	support	the	business	forces	companies	to	move	to
the	Standardized	Technology	stage.
Stage	2:	Standardized	Technology
In	the	Standardized	Technology	stage,	companies	shift	some	of	their	IT
investments	from	local	applications	to	shared	infrastructure	(figure	4-1).	In	this
stage,	companies	establish	technology	standards	intended	to	decrease	the	number
of	platforms	they	manage.	Fewer	platforms	mean	lower	cost.	In	our	study,
Standardized	Technology	companies	had	IT	budgets	that	were	15	percent	lower
than	Business	Silos	companies.
	
4
	
But	fewer	platforms	also	mean	fewer	choices
for	IT	solutions.	Companies	are	increasingly	willing	to	accept	this	trade-off.
Forty-eight	percent	of	companies	in	our	study	were	in	the	Standardized
Technology	stage.
As	in	the	Business	Silos	stage,	the	role	of	IT	in	the	Standardized	Technology
stage	is	to	automate	local	business	processes.	The	emphasis	in	IT	management,
however,	shifts	from	concerns	about	the	functionality	of	the	applications	to	the
cost-effectiveness	and	reliability	of	the	company’s	systems.	Thus,	the
management	of	technology	standards	is	key	to	this	stage.
Early	in	this	stage,	most	business	unit	managers	and	developers	cling	to	the
belief	that	business	needs	should	drive	technology.	The	initial	encounter	with
technology	standards	is	the	first	time	management	allows	IT	to	shape	business
solutions.	Soon	business	managers	see	that	standardization	reduces	risk,	and	the
costs	of	shared	services	(such	as	support,	maintenance,	and	purchasing)	and
reliability,	security,	and	development	time	improves.	When	these	benefits
become	apparent—usually	through	benchmarking	of	IT	unit	costs	and	system
quality—business	unit	managers	quickly	become	believers.	As	one	CIO	noted:
“We’ve	had	successes	where	we’ve	been	able	to	reduce	people’s	costs	by
bringing	in	standardization.	That	has	given	us	credibility.	Their	jaws	hit	the	table
when	they	saw	the	impact	of	standardization	on	their	bottom	line.”
Most	companies	move	into	the	Standardized	Technology	stage	by	creating	a
corporate	CIO	role	or	by	endowing	the	incumbent	CIO	with	authority	to
mandate	IT-related	behaviors.	The	CIO	then	introduces	efficiencies	by
standardizing	and	consolidating	technology	platforms	and	providing	shared

--- PAGE 71 ---
infrastructure	services.	The	migration	to	a	Standardized	Technology	architecture
fundamentally	changes	a	company’s	approach	to	solutions	delivery.	Instead	of
defining	the	solution	and	looking	for	technology	that	best	delivers	that	solution,
companies	in	this	stage	negotiate	the	best	possible	solution	given	the	acceptable
technology	platforms.	The	commitment	to	technical	standards	means	that	the	IT
application	representing	the	best	fit	in	terms	of	functionality	may	be	rejected
because	it	doesn’t	work	with	the	company’s	technology	architecture.
In	addition	to	consolidating	and	standardizing	hardware,	companies	in	the
standardized	technology	stage	start	to	reduce	the	number	of	software	products
performing	similar	functions.	For	example,	one	manufacturer	reduced	the
number	of	order	management	systems	from	twenty-eight	to	four—a	common
outcome	of	Standardized	Technology	initiatives.	Technology	standardization,
however,	does	not	readily	overcome	the	Business	Silos	problem	of	data
embedded	in	applications.	Companies	in	this	second	stage	usually	increase
access	to	shared	data	by	introducing	data	warehouses,	but	transaction	data	is	still
embedded	in	individual	applications.
Companies	that	have	achieved	significant	cost	savings	and	reliability	through
Standardized	Technology	include	Guardian	Life	Insurance,	Johnson	&	Johnson,
Carlson	Companies,	Brady	Corp.,	and	Pfizer.	These	organizations’	managers
found	that	early	resistance	to	standards	fades	because	after	a	while,	early	battles
are	forgotten	and	people	stop	questioning	the	value	of	standards	or	shared
infrastructure.	This	evolution	positions	companies	for	the	optimized	core	stage,
where	standardization	practices	expand	to	incorporate	data	and	business
processes.
Stage	3:	Optimized	Core
In	the	Optimized	Core	stage,	companies	move	from	a	local	view	of	data	and
applications	to	an	enterprise	view.	IT	staff	eliminate	data	redundancy	by
extracting	transaction	data	from	individual	applications	and	making	it	accessible
to	all	appropriate	processes.	In	this	stage	companies	are	also	developing
interfaces	to	critical	corporate	data	and,	if	appropriate,	standardizing	business
processes	and	IT	applications.	Thus,	IT	investments	shift	from	local	applications
and	shared	infrastructure	to	enterprise	systems	and	shared	data	(figure	4-1).
Thirty-four	percent	of	companies	in	our	study	were	in	the	optimized	core	stage.
These	companies	are	working	to	digitize	their	core	data	and/or	business

--- PAGE 72 ---
processes	to	capture	the	essence	of	their	business.	Companies	choose	to	optimize
their	data,	business	process,	or	both	depending	on	whether	they’re	using	a
Diversification,	Coordination,	Replication,	or	Unification	operating	model.	Once
optimized	and	digitized,	making	fundamental	changes	to	the	business	process	or
data	becomes	more	difficult,	but	building	new	products	and	services	onto	the
core	becomes	easier	and	faster.
The	role	of	IT	in	the	Optimized	Core	stage	is	to	facilitate	achievement	of
company	objectives	by	building	reusable	data	and	business	process	platforms.
Senior	managers	who	lead	the	adoption	of	Optimized	Core	architectures
embrace	the	principle	that	standardization	enables	innovation.	In	providing
predictable	business	outcomes,	standardized	data	and	processes	allow	for
process	innovation	closer	to	the	customer.
Companies’	reusable	data	and	business	process	platforms	are	composed	of	a	set
of	totally	predictable	core	processes.	Both	at	Air	Products	and	Chemicals	and	at
Nestlé,	management	is	digitizing	supply	chains	using	ERP	systems.	UPS	built	its
business	around	a	single	package	database	supporting	its	package	delivery
business.	Delta	Air	Lines	created	its	Delta	Nervous	System	to	capture	the
interrelated	requirements	of	the	customer	experience	and	airline	operations.
Citibank	Asia	Pacific	established	a	core	set	of	standardized	banking	processes
that	could	be	centrally	served	out	of	Singapore	to	both	existing	and	new	markets.
In	all	of	those	cases,	digitizing	the	company’s	core	data	and	processes	provided	a
foundation	for	existing	and	future	operations	and	customer	interactions.	Each
company’s	unique	strategic	advantage	resulted	from	building	on	that	foundation.
Optimizing	the	core	processes	and	data	in	a	company	is	a	formidable	technical
challenge,	but	the	corresponding	management	challenges	are	even	more
demanding.	Standardizing	shared	data	and	core	business	processes	involves
taking	control	over	business	process	design	from	local	business	unit	leaders.
Thus,	the	optimized	core	stage	is	a	much	harder	sell	to	business	managers	than
technology	standardization.	One	CIO	we	interviewed	described	data	and	process
standardization	as	“the	most	top-down	effort	we’ve	ever	made	in	this
organization.”
In	the	Optimized	Core	stage,	senior	IT	and	business	managers	learn	together
how	to	articulate	the	company’s	operating	model	and	how	to	identify	the	IT
capabilities	required	to	implement	the	operating	model.	The	architecture
matures,	enabling	the	company	to	optimize	the	core	while	identifying

--- PAGE 73 ---
opportunities	to	leverage	it.	A	more	modular	architecture	is	the	next	stage	of
maturity	and	business	value.
Stage	4:	Business	Modularity
The	Business	Modularity	architecture	enables	strategic	agility	through
customized	or	reusable	modules.	These	modules	extend	the	essence	of	the
business	built	into	the	infrastructure	in	the	Optimized	Core	stage.	Few
companies	have	reached	the	Business	Modularity	stage—6	percent	in	our	study
—so	it	is	difficult	to	assess	how	IT	investment	patterns	change	as	companies
move	from	the	third	to	the	fourth	stage	(figure	4-1).
In	the	fourth	stage	management	refines,	and	increasingly	modularizes,	the
processes	that	were	digitized	in	the	third	stage.	Management	can	take	two
approaches	to	this	task.	One	is	to	create	reusable	modules	and	allow	business
units	to	select	customer-oriented	processes	from	a	menu	of	options.	For	example,
through	a	technology	known	as	“Web	services,”	companies	can	create	reusable
business	services	with	standard	interfaces	for	accessing	those	modules	and	the
related	data.
	
5
	
Web	services	can	select	modules	from	both	internal	and	external
sources.	A	second	approach	is	to	grant	business	unit	managers	greater	discretion
in	the	design	of	front-end	processes,	which	they	can	individually	build	or	buy	as
modules	connecting	to	core	data	and	back-end	processes.	In	effect,	managers	get
the	freedom	to	bolt	functionality	onto	the	Optimized	Core.
In	either	case,	the	role	of	IT	in	a	Business	Modularity	architecture	is	to	provide
seamless	linkages	between	business	process	modules.	Modularity	does	not
reduce	the	need	for	standardization.	Individual	process	modules	build	on	the
standard	core	and	link	to	other	internal	and	external	processes	through
standardized	interfaces.	To	continue	to	provide	all	the	benefits	of	the	Optimized
Core	stage—efficiency,	single	face	to	the	customer,	process	integration—
modular	architectures	extend,	rather	than	replace,	Optimized	Core	architectures.
By	ensuring	the	predictability	of	core	processes,	modular	architectures	provide	a
platform	for	innovation.	The	modular	architecture	enables	local	experiments,
and	the	best	ones	can	be	spread	throughout	the	company.	To	enable	this,	the
Business	Modularity	stage	requires	negotiations	between	senior	management
and	IT	executives	to	clarify	which	processes	are	standardized,	which	are
required,	and	which	may	be	developed	locally.

--- PAGE 74 ---
To	benefit	from	modular	architectures,	companies	must	learn	how	to	quickly
identify	the	strategic	opportunities	that	best	leverage	their	core	and	then	how	to
develop	or	reuse	modules	that	extend	the	core.	Reusable	modules	will	build	a
thicker,	denser	core,	providing	greater	efficiencies	while	allowing	local
customization.	Quickly	developed	and	very	focused	add-on	modules	allow
strategic	experiments	that	respond	to	changing	market	conditions.	In	the
Business	Modularity	stage,	companies	reuse	expertise	in	process,	data,	and
technology	standardization	gained	in	earlier	stages.
Organizational	Learning:	Key	to	Generating
	
Value	from	Enterprise	Architecture
As	companies	transition	through	the	architecture	stages,	they	fundamentally
change	how	they	do	business.	Companies	in	stage	1,	which	implement	IT-
enabled	processes	with	little	regard	for	business	synergies	with	other	processes,
look	nothing	like	companies	in	stage	4,	where	reusable	business	process	modules
have	become	a	core	discipline	and	the	company	has	carefully	delineated	between
enterprise	and	local	processes	and	data.	Getting	from	stage	1	to	stage	4	is	a
journey.	Some	companies	choose	not	to	make	that	journey;	others	falter	along
the	way.	Understanding	both	the	general	nature	of	the	organizational	change	at
each	stage	and	the	specific	learning	enables	companies	both	to	generate	value
from	the	current	stage	and	to	prepare	for	the	next.
Changing	from	a	Local	to	a	Companywide	Perspective
As	companies	migrate	through	the	architecture	stages,	they	shift	from	a	focus	on
local	optimization	to	global	optimization.	This	evolution	has	important
implications	for	organizational	flexibility.	Most	notably,	through	the	second	and
third	stages,	companies	are	exchanging	local	flexibility	for	global	flexibility.
Figure	4-2	describes	this	change.
In	the	first	stage,	business	unit	managers	have	full	control	over	their	business
and	IT	decisions.	From	an	enterprisewide	perspective,	this	limits	global
flexibility.	For	the	company	to	introduce	global	change,	all	business	unit
managers	first	have	to	agree	on	the	change,	and	then	they	need	to	simultaneously
implement	it.	On	the	other	hand,	stage	1	companies	can	be	highly	responsive	to
local	market	changes	because	they	are	not	constrained	by	global	mandates.	In
addition,	because	they	can—at	least	in	theory—insist	on	the	100	percent	solution

--- PAGE 75 ---
to	their	business	needs,	they	can	design	their	business	processes	to	their	precise
specifications	and	define	IT	requirements	to	support	those	processes.
FIGURE	4-2
In	the	standardized	technology	stage	(stage	2),	business	units	give	up	some
discretion	over	technical	decisions.	Working	within	the	constraints	(and	benefits)
of	technical	standards,	local	business	unit	managers	increasingly	settle	for	the	80
percent	solution,	which	reduces	local	flexibility.	However,	the	use	of
standardized	technologies	increases	global	flexibility	by	reducing	technical
complexity	and	thus	reducing	implementation	time.
Organizational	change	is	felt	most	profoundly	in	the	third	stage.	Optimized	core
means	that	local	managers	lose	discretion	over	core	business	processes	and
sometimes	over	the	people	and	systems	that	execute	them.	Companywide	data
and	process	standards	disrupt	local	decision-making	patterns.	In	some	cases,
standardized	process	designs	(e.g.,	purchasing)	introduce	processes	that	are
locally	suboptimal	in	favor	of	processes	best	suited	to	the	company’s	global
needs.	But	global	flexibility	increases	as	data	becomes	more	transparent	and
processes	become	more	comparable	and	predictable.
In	the	fourth	stage,	Business	Modularity,	flexibility	grows	both	locally	and
globally.	With	a	solid	platform	of	core	processes,	data,	and	technology,	a
company	can	plug	and	play	business	modules	on	either	level,	and	modular
interfaces	make	changes	simpler	to	implement.	For	example,	ING	DIRECT
allows	local	managers	to	adjust	what	modules	they	use	in	response	to	local

--- PAGE 76 ---
regulations	and	requirements,	but	the	company	expects	its	country-based
managers	to	use	standardized	modules	wherever	possible	to	keep	costs	low.
Executives	can	choose	how	much	flexibility	they	want	local	managers	to
exercise.	MeadWestvaco,	as	a	paper	manufacturer,	focuses	on	controlling	cost.
Building	modules	on	its	ERP	system	will	give	local	managers	greater	autonomy
over	marketing	decisions.	Manufacturing	decisions,	on	the	other	hand,	will
remain	more	standardized	to	maximize	efficiencies.
	
6
	
The	ability	to	customize
global	capabilities	as	appropriate	is	the	benefit	of	the	Business	Modularity	stage.
The	shifting	of	flexibility	between	local	and	global	management	highlights	the
magnitude	of	change	as	companies	move	through	the	architecture	maturity
stages.	In	some	cases,	managers	will	resist	these	changes.	In	all	cases,	they	will
need	to	learn	new	behaviors.	The	time	required	to	learn	new	behaviors	means
that	the	expected	benefits	of	architecture	maturity	may	be	delayed.	It	is
important	that	both	IT	and	business	managers	recognize	the	need	to	allow	time
for	learning.	Otherwise,	anxious	managers	may	allocate	large	sums	of	money	to
technical	upgrades,	only	to	find	that	the	organization	is	unable	to	absorb	the
capabilities	the	new	technology	makes	available.
Because	of	the	major	organizational	changes	encountered	at	each	new	stage,	we
have	found	that	companies	cannot	skip	stages.	We	observed	a	number	of
unsuccessful	attempts	to	skip	stages—for	example,	a	manufacturing	company
implementing	an	ERP	system	skipping	from	stage	1	to	stage	3	and	an	investment
bank	implementing	Web	services	skipping	from	stage	1	to	stage	4.	These
companies	invested	significant	resources	in	technologies	intended	to	enable
transformations.	Management	found,	however,	that	the	organizational	changes
exceeded	the	companies’	capacity	for	change.
	
7
	
Following	a	major	ERP
implementation,	one	plant	manager	reported,	“I	feel	like	we	turned	out	the	lights
but	we	keep	trying	to	do	our	jobs	anyway.”	Another	stated,	“It’s	like	I’m
standing	on	my	head	but	still	trying	to	manage.”	In	several	of	the	companies	we
spoke	to,	ERP	implementations	that	tried	to	skip	stages	had	to	be	halted	or	scaled
back.
Learning	How	to	Benefit	from
	
the	Four	Architecture	Stages
Companies	gradually	learn	to	adapt	to	the	changes	demanded	by	each	new	stage.
Through	this	learning	process	companies	generate	value	from	their	current	stage.

--- PAGE 77 ---
Table	4-1	provides	a	summary	of	the	changes	associated	with	each	new	stage.
Two	characteristics	define	all	four	stages:	(1)	the	IT	capability	being	developed
and	(2)	the	strategic	business	implications	of	that	capability.	To	support	these
evolving	characteristics,	companies	must	acquire	learning	in	five	areas:
1
.	
Business	objectives	as	captured	in	a	formal	business	case	(a	document
identifying	expected	costs	and	benefits)
2
.	
Funding	priorities,	specifying	the	focus	of	major	IT	initiatives
3
.	
Management	capabilities	key	to	generating	benefits	from	new	IT
capabilities
4
.	
Managers	taking	primary	responsibility	for	defining	applications
5
.	
Critical	IT	governance	issues
Successful	organizational	learning	in	each	dimension	results	in	greater	business
value	and	enhances	the	strategic	importance	of	IT	in	the	company.	The	bottom
row	of	table	4-1	identifies	the	strategic	implications	of	each	stage.

--- PAGE 78 ---
Business	objectives	for	IT
In	stage	1,	companies	usually	create	a	business	case	for	IT	investments
estimating	the	financial	return	on	investment.	Expected	project	outcomes	tend	to
be	localized	and	measurable.	In	stage	2,	companies	typically	build	their	business
case	based	on	companywide	IT	cost	reductions.	As	long	as	a	company’s	IT	unit
costs	are	documented	prior	to	standardization,	the	impact	of	new	IT	investments
can	be	assessed.	By	stage	3,	management	has	the	more	difficult	challenge	of
measuring	process	improvements	across	functions	or	business	units.	The	benefits
may	be	difficult	to	trace	to	the	bottom	line,	observable	instead	in	increased

--- PAGE 79 ---
customer	satisfaction,	reduced	inefficiencies	in	the	use	of	organizational
resources,	or	more-efficient	operations.	In	the	fourth	stage,	the	business	case	is
based	on	metrics	such	as	speed	to	market	or	strategic	agility.	Moving	from	stage
1	to	stage	4	generally	increases	reuse	of	IT	services	(stage	2),	data	and	processes
(stage	3),	and	business	modules	(stage	4)	with	associated	improvements	in	cost
and	speed	to	market.	In	the	process	of	transitioning	from	one	stage	to	the	next,
companies	learn	how	to	tackle	these	metrics.
Funding	priorities
Consistent	with	business	case	changes,	funding	priorities	change	as	companies
move	through	the	stages.	These	changes	align	with	changes	in	their	investment
patterns	discussed	earlier	in	the	chapter.
Key	management	capabilities
To	generate	value	from	IT	investments,	managers	must	lead	the	process	changes
enabled	by	new	technology.	If	business	processes	don’t	change	when	new
technology	is	installed,	the	investment	has	less	value.	As	companies	mature	their
architecture,	management	focus	extends	beyond	local	business	process	changes.
Managers	develop	the	capability	to	lead	companywide	change,	first	around
technology	standards	and	then	around	data	and	process	standards.	By	the	time
the	company	reaches	stage	4,	the	entire	organization	has	become	comfortable
with	the	discipline	of	implementing,	maintaining,	and	benefiting	from	standards.
The	company	is	ready	to	tackle	the	stage	4	challenge	of	building	onto	its
standard	platforms	with	internally	and	externally	designed	business	process
modules.
The	transition	from	stage	1	to	stage	2	introduces	new	levels	of	discipline	in
organizational	process.	This	discipline	starts	slowly	and	focuses	on	IT
management	and	use.	The	third	stage	greatly	expands	the	need	for	discipline,
and	the	fourth	stage	is	dependent	upon	a	culture	of	discipline.	Organization
members	learn	over	time	how	to	design,	implement,	and	leverage	standards.	An
individual	can	view	any	standard	as	an	unnecessary	constraint	or	as	a
simplifying	mechanism.	The	individual’s	perception	will	be	largely	shaped	by
the	extent	to	which	a	company	has	adopted	a	culture	of	discipline.	A	key
component	of	this	discipline	includes	aligned	incentives	(e.g.,	the	right	balance
of	companywide	or	local	performance	targets).

--- PAGE 80 ---
Who	defines	applications
In	the	first	stage,	local	business	managers	usually	define	applications	to	support
local	business	needs.	By	stage	2,	IT	leaders	assume	greater	leadership	across	the
company.	Business	leaders	still	establish	requirements,	but	IT	leaders	define
possible	solutions	and	technology	standards	impose	limits.	In	stage	3,	the	quest
for	enterprise	solutions	involves	senior	management	and	eventually	high-level
corporate	process	leaders.	By	the	fourth	stage,	industry	leaders	are	helping
define	applications	by	establishing	industry	standards	while	business	and	IT
leaders	negotiate	solutions	for	their	company.	The	change	in	who	defines
applications	is	reflected	in	implementation	challenges.	As	business	leaders	lose
tight	control	over	applications	requirements,	it	is	more	difficult	for	them	to	own
business	process	changes.
IT	governance
In	stage	1,	IT	governance	focuses	on	ensuring	effective	IT	investments	and
accountability	through	careful	business	case	development	and	effective	project
management.	In	the	second	stage,	the	company	needs	to	set	up	effective
governance	mechanisms	for	implementing	and	maintaining	technical	standards.
Stage	3	governance	emphasizes	the	need	to	implement	enterprise	business
objectives,	and	stage	4	demands	governance	of	business	process	modules.
Learning	Takes	Time—Don’t	Skip	Stages
Although	companies	can	hire	managers	with	experience	in	stage	3—and
possibly	even	stage	4—companies	cannot	hire	leadership	that	allows	the
company	as	a	whole	to	skip	a	stage.	Learning	takes	time.	Companies	differ	in
how	long	these	transitions	take,	but	for	large	companies	each	stage	is	several
years.	At	Delta	Air	Lines	and	the	government	of	the	District	of	Columbia,	the
distinction	between	Standardized	Technology	and	Optimized	Core	was	blurred.
Both	organizations	were	in	crisis	when	they	started	their	architecture	efforts.
Delta	was	concerned	about	its	ability	to	survive	Y2K	and	the	D.C.	government
was	in	bankruptcy.	At	Delta,	management	moved	aggressively	from	Business
Silos	through	Standardized	Technology	and	into	Optimized	Core	between	1997
and	2001.	The	D.C.	government	took	six	years	(1999–2005)	to	make	the	same
transition.	These	two	organizations	accelerated	the	Standardized	Technology
stage	but	allowed	an	extended	period	of	time	to	develop	their	Optimized	Core.

--- PAGE 81 ---
Changes	are	less	disruptive	at	companies	that	pursue	the	stages	one	at	a	time.
Guardian	Life	Insurance	recognized	significant	cost-cutting	benefits	over	a
three-year	Standardized	Technology	stage.
	
8
	
Guardian	management	focused	on
extracting	maximum	value	from	that	stage	before	moving	on	to	the	next.	Air
Products	and	Chemicals	also	eased	the	shock	of	organizational	change.	While
many	companies	in	the	oil	and	gas	industry	were	attempting	to	skip	from	stage	1
to	stage	3	by	implementing	ERP	systems,	Air	Products	instead	worked
deliberately	through	Standardized	Technology	before	embarking	on	Optimized
Core.	The	result	was	an	easier	transition	from	stage	2	to	stage	3	and	a	single
global	implementation	of	its	ERP	system.
	
9
Given	the	forces	driving	companies	to	optimize	their	cores,	it	can	be	difficult	to
work	through	the	stages	one	by	one.	But	it	is	our	experience	that	there	is	no
other	way.	Learning	through	the	architecture	stages	encompasses	both
technology	and	business	processes.	On	the	technology	side,	companies	learn
how	to	invest	their	IT	dollars	for	greatest	impact,	how	to	estimate	the	value	of
different	IT	investment	opportunities,	how	to	manage	technology	standards	and
secure	compliance,	and	how	to	assess	and	communicate	the	value	of	IT.	On	the
business	process	side,	organizations	learn	how	to	design	and	manage	enterprise
processes,	how	to	instill	discipline	in	process	execution,	how	to	leverage	IT
capabilities	in	their	business	process	initiatives,	how	to	lead	IT-enabled	change,
and	how	to	define	business	process	components.	It	is	not	enough	for	only	senior
managers	to	understand	these	concepts.	Organizational	learning	must	seep
throughout	a	company	for	businesses	to	leverage	IT	and	core	business	processes.
Building	out	an	enterprise	architecture	is	a	long,	challenging	process.	It	involves
ongoing	negotiations	about	a	company’s	business	strategy	and	how	IT	both
shapes	and	responds	to	that	strategy.	It	also	involves	defining	a	target	technology
architecture	(i.e.,	applications,	data,	and	infrastructure	technology)	and	doggedly
pursuing	that	architecture	even	at	times	when	immediate	business	needs	beg	for
trade-offs.
How	to	Apply	Architecture	Maturity	Stages
	
in	Your	Company
As	companies	embark	on	their	enterprise	architecture	journeys,	they	face	their
own	Big	Dig.	Their	challenge	is	to	grow	new	business	capabilities	before
dismantling	the	old.	Like	Boston’s	Big	Dig—which	separately	opened	a	major

--- PAGE 82 ---
tunnel,	then	a	major	bridge,	then	a	major	artery,	and	eventually	a	set	of	important
interchanges—companies	can	generate	significant	benefits	from	incremental
enhancements	to	their	architecture.	Unlike	the	Big	Dig	project,	companies	have
the	benefit	of	a	road	map	derived	from	other	successful	companies	making	the
same	journey.	As	an	added	incentive,	companies	regularly	generate	benefits
from	small	projects	addressing	a	specific	business	need	as	they	move	toward	an
enterprise	architecture	and	a	platform	for	execution.	For	example,	Guardian
Life’s	CIO,	Dennis	Callahan,	found	that	the	company’s	IT	unit	costs	started
dropping	early	in	its	stage	2	efforts,	and	they	kept	dropping	in	subsequent	years.
The	objective	of	the	enterprise	architecture	is	not	so	much	to	achieve	a	particular
end	state	as	it	is	to	recognize	what	direction	the	company	is	going.	Transitioning
through	the	architecture	stages	allows	companies	to	rack	up	benefits.	The	four-
stage	model	offers	a	number	of	lessons	to	companies	attempting	to	generate
more	value	from	IT	and	implement	greater	process	discipline:
Focus	architecture	efforts	on	strategic	organizational	processes.
	
–
Architecture	exercises	attempting	to	establish	linkages	between
applications,	data,	and	infrastructure	for	all	of	a	company’s	business
processes	will	almost	certainly	stall.	No	company	can	afford	to	eliminate	all
its	silos.	The	best	companies	are	focused	on	eliminating	those	silos	that	are
limiting	business	efficiency	and	agility.
Move	incrementally.
	
–Skipping	stages	leads	to	either	failures	or	delayed
benefits.	Companies	will	benefit	more	from	small	improvements	in	their
existing	stage	than	from	higher-risk	and	premature	moves	into	later	stages.
Recognize	that	complex	organizations	have	enterprise	architectures	at
multiple	levels.
	
–Because	architectures	at	different	levels	of	the	company
support	different	business	objectives,	they	can	be	at	different	maturity
stages.	Each	stage	requires	its	own	set	of	management	practices	(see	table
4-1),	which	should	then	be	coordinated	across	the	company.
Build	an	architecture	capability	in-house.
	
–Inexperienced	managers	might
want	help,	but	negotiations	leading	to	an	understanding	of	business	strategy
and	IT	architecture	require	a	close	working	relationship	between	business
and	IT.	An	ongoing	dialogue	about	the	relationship	between	IT	and
business	process	is	essential	for	effective	enterprise	architecture.	And,	as
we	will	discuss	in	
chapter	7
	
,	you	can	outsource	architectural	initiatives,	but
you	can’t	outsource	architectural	decision	making.
Aim	for	business	modularity.
	
–Our	research	found	that	companies	with
more-mature	architectures	reported	greater	success	in	achieving	strategic

--- PAGE 83 ---
goals.	And	companies	reporting	greater	success	in	achieving	their	strategic
goals	achieved	higher	average	return	on	invested	capital.
	
10
Companies	with	a	Diversification	operating	model	may	have	little	need	to
advance	beyond	stage	1	or	stage	2	(although	even	Diversification	companies
increasingly	implement	shared	services	that	benefit	from	thinking	about
architecture	maturity).	All	other	companies	will	benefit	from	the	flexibility	that
Business	Modularity	offers.
Companies	reap	a	number	of	benefits	from	building	out	enterprise	architecture.
But	the	process	of	generating	those	benefits	involves	a	great	deal	of	learning—
about	the	strategic	direction	of	the	company,	about	how	IT	contributes	to	that
direction,	and	about	how	to	manage	IT	and	business	process	capabilities.	In	the
next	chapter	we	will	discuss	the	benefits	effective	architecture	can	deliver	at
each	stage	as	well	as	the	management	practices	that	help	companies	acquire	and
formalize	the	necessary	learning.
5
Cash	In	on	the	Learning
WHEN	LARGE	NUMBERS	OF	BUSINESSES
	
first	installed	electricity	in	their	plants	in	the
1890s,	they	saw	few	immediate	benefits.	Electric	generators	replaced	steam
engines,	but	underlying	business	processes	changed	very	little.	Most	factory
engineers	placed	the	new	electrical	generators	in	the	same,	central,	cleverly
architected	position	in	the	factory	that	enabled	the	steam	engine	to	power	as
many	machines	as	possible	via	mechanical	driveshafts.	It	took	decades	for	most
factory	engineers	to	redesign	workflow	and	factory	layout	to	take	advantage	of
the	increased	flexibility	and	efficiency	of	electrical	power.	Not	until	forty	years
after	the	first	central	power	station	opened	did	electricity	make	a	significant
impact	on	business	productivity.
	
1
	
The	delay	represented	the	learning	required	to
take	advantage	of	electrical	capabilities
In	the	auto	industry,	Henry	Ford	was	the	first	to	realize	the	potential	of	electric
motors,	and	he	used	this	knowledge	to	change	forever	the	terms	of	competition
in	the	industry.
	
2
	
Rather	than	power	his	factories	with	one	or	a	few	large	engines,
Ford	used	smaller	electric	motors	to	power	each	workstation,	which	allowed	him
to	change	the	structure	of	his	factory	into	an	assembly	line.	As	this	new	way	of

--- PAGE 84 ---
working	was	implemented,	productivity	increased,	costs	declined,	and	Ford
steadily	reduced	the	price	of	his	cars.	Sales	took	off—the	first	auto	to	be
produced	this	way,	the	Model	T,	saw	sales	grow	from	6,000	in	1908	to	230,000
in	1914.	As	of	1919,	half	of	all	cars	manufactured	were	produced	using
electrified	manufacturing	processes	.	.	.	all	of	them	Fords.
Today’s	managers	must	redesign	their	companies	as	Ford	did—this	time,	to	take
advantage	of	the	potential	of	modern	information	technologies.	Designing	an
enterprise	architecture	is	the	first	step	in	building	a	foundation	for	execution
capable	of	delivering	the	benefits	of	new	technologies.	But	moving	from
architecture	blueprint	to	realizing	benefits	requires	managers	to	think	differently
about	how	business	will	be	conducted.
In	earlier	chapters	we	have	argued	that	to	align	IT	with	a	company’s	strategic
business	initiatives,	management	must	first	define	an	operating	model	and	then
design	and	build	out	an	enterprise	architecture.	So	far,	however,	we	have
provided	little	evidence	of	the	benefits	of	these	efforts.	In	this	chapter,	we
describe	the	evidence	of	the	payoff	from	enterprise	architecture.	We’ve	found
that	companies	can	start	generating	benefits	soon	after	they	commence	the
architecture	maturity	journey.	These	benefits	grow	as	companies	move	into	later
architecture	stages.	We	have	also	found	that	the	goal	is	not	to	reach	a	particular
endpoint.	Companies	learn,	through	their	management	practices,	how	to	generate
value	from	IT	early	in	the	journey.	Those	benefits	multiply	as	long	as	the
company	continues	to	learn.
The	Benefits	of	Enterprise	Architecture
An	enterprise	architecture	is	critical	for	building	a	foundation	for	execution
because	it	maps	out	important	processes,	data,	and	technology	enabling	desired
levels	of	integration	and	standardization.	In	the	process	of	implementing	the
enterprise	architecture	(i.e.,	building	the	foundation	for	execution),	companies
achieve	a	number	of	benefits,	many	of	which	can	be	tracked	independently.
Successful	implementation	of	each	stage	of	an	enterprise	architecture	generates
new	or	expanded	technology	and	business	benefits.	These	benefits	are	evident	in
five	areas:	IT	costs,	IT	responsiveness,	risk	management,	managerial
satisfaction,	and	strategic	business	outcomes.
Reduced	IT	Costs

--- PAGE 85 ---
At	most	companies,	concerns	about	IT	costs	drive	the	initial	interest	in	enterprise
architecture.	In	most	cases,	systems	built	to	achieve	immediate	business	needs
have	become	expensive,	redundant,	and	difficult	to	maintain.	One	financial
services	IT	executive	describes	a	familiar	dilemma:	“In	the	late	90s,	accounts
were	growing	exponentially	.	.	.	We	had	no	time	to	look	internally	at
rationalization	or	architecture.	We	grew	our	customer	base	through	acquisition.
We’d	do	the	barebones,	integrate	the	general	ledger,	make	sure	the	networks
could	talk	to	each	other	and	then	move	on	to	the	next	thing.	In	2000	and	beyond,
market	growth	slowed	down.	All	of	a	sudden,	we’re	not	acquiring,	we’re
protecting	current	accounts.	That’s	when	we	saw	all	these	legacy	problems,	the
problems	of	yesterday	that	we’re	dealing	with	today.”
	
3
As	enterprise	architecture	introduces	discipline	in	systems	and	processes,
companies	start	to	control	the	high	costs	of	business	silos.	Companies	can	expect
to	reduce	at	least	two	types	of	IT	costs:
IT	operations	unit	costs:
	
–the	actual	cost	of	services,	such	as	laptop
provision	and	support,	the	help	desk,	application	operations,	access	to
enterprise	data,	network	capacity,	and	e-mail.	Use	of	these	services	grows
over	time,	but	the	unit	costs	should	decrease	with	architecture	maturity.
Applications	maintenance	costs:
	
–the	time	and	total	cost	for	making
changes	to	existing	applications	to	reflect	business	and	technology	changes.
Figure	5-1	shows	the	magnitude	of	change	in	average	IT	costs	as	companies
mature	their	enterprise	architectures.	The	biggest	impact	on	cost	is	achieved	in
stage	2,	as	companies	move	to	consolidate	data	centers,	reduce	the	number	of
technologies	in	use,	and	introduce	standards	to	guide	the	platform	design	of	new
systems.	On	average,	companies	in	stage	2	have	15	percent	lower	IT	budgets
than	companies	in	stage	1.
	
4
	
Global	companies,	and	companies	that	have
experienced	repeated	mergers,	often	cite	much	higher	savings.	For	example,	at
Celanese,	a	more	than	$5	billion	chemical	company,	standardizing	technology
addressed	the	negative	IT	cost	impacts	of	several	mergers	and	acquisitions.
According	to	CIO	Karl	Wachs,	“We	went	from	a	very	diverse	system	and
process	landscape	to	a	pretty	homogenous	environment,	and	we	cut	costs	by	30
to	40	percent	within	four	years.	And,	now,	we	deliver	better	services.”
	
5
FIGURE	5-1

--- PAGE 86 ---
As	shown	in	figure	5-1,	the	main	reason	for	the	decrease	in	costs	is	that
companies	are	investing	in	more	shared	(as	opposed	to	business-unit-specific)
capability.	The	shared	IT	capability—which	includes	technical	infrastructure,
shared	data,	and	enterprise	systems—increases	from	64	percent	to	75	percent	of
the	company’s	IT	investment	between	stage	one	and	stage	two.
The	trend	toward	increased	shared	IT	capability	continues	into	the	Optimized
Core	stage,	growing	to	84	percent	of	total	IT	investment.	In	the	process,	IT	costs
drop	another	10	percent;	IT	budgets	of	stage	3	companies	are	75	percent	of	stage
1	budgets.	Even	though	companies	typically	make	big	investments	in	the	third
stage	as	part	of	business	process	integration	and	standardization	efforts,	their	IT
budgets,	on	average,	decrease.	The	drop	in	local	departmental	or	divisional
spending	offsets	the	increase	in	the	central	budget.	Charlie	Feld,	former	CIO	at
Delta	Air	Lines,	explains	the	phenomenon	this	way:	“Even	though	we	spent
hundreds	of	millions	of	dollars	on	the	infrastructure	.	.	.	we	were	spending	it
anyway.	That’s	the	fallacy	in	what	most	people	think.	When	it’s	being	spent	in
departments	and	in	divisions	the	money	is	being	spent.	It’s	just	not	being	seen.”
	
6
By	stage	4,	even	though	companies	are	continuing	to	invest	in	shared	IT
capability,	their	IT	costs	rebound.	IT	budgets	in	stage	4	companies	(for	our	small
sample)	are	20	percent	higher	than	stage	1	budgets,	an	increase	of	45	percent
over	stage	3	budgets.	The	increase	in	IT	costs	in	the	Business	Modularity	stage

--- PAGE 87 ---
may	result	from	several	different	factors.	For	example,	costs	that	were
previously	hidden	in	business	budgets	may	be	converted	to	IT	costs	in	stage	4	as
business	process	modules	are	formed	and	true	costs	are	allocated.	In	addition,
early	adopters	of	stage	4	architectures	may	experience	higher	costs	associated
with	being	on	the	leading	edge.	But	the	most	important	reason	why	Business
Modularity	may	have	higher	costs	is	companies’	increased	investment	in	leading
edge	innovation.
Companies	moving	into	Business	Modularity	have	developed	a	solid	foundation
for	execution.	They	have	digitized	their	core	business	processes	and	have	access
to	the	critical	customer	and	product	data	they	need	to	develop	new	products	and
services.	They	start	to	see	new	opportunities	to	develop	this	core.	These	IT-
enabled	opportunities	require	IT	investments,	but	the	returns	are	easy	to	justify.
These	investments	increase	IT	costs,	but	they	also	create	new	business
opportunities.
Increased	IT	Responsiveness
In	a	standardized	environment,	IT	and	business	leaders	have	fewer	technology
choices	and	thus	spend	less	time	making	technology	decisions	or	addressing
unexpected	technical	problems.	The	result	is	reduced	development	time,
including	both	the	elapsed	time	and	total	development	hours	required	to
implement	a	new	system.	When	companies	are	still	relatively	new,	they	can
build	silo	applications	rapidly,	but	as	the	silos	multiply,	those	silos	increasingly
act	as	inhibitors	to	future	development.	In	our	research,	IT	executives	noted	a
significant	improvement	in	development	time	as	a	result	of	moving	into	stage	2
and	working	on	more-standardized	platforms.
The	incremental	improvement	in	IT	responsiveness	from	moving	to	stage	3	is
minimal.	Many	companies	are	implementing	major	enterprise	systems	in	this
stage.	These	projects	are	large	and,	for	most	companies,	both	IT	and	business
expertise	on	these	systems	is	limited.	But	IT	responsiveness	ratings	climb
dramatically	as	companies	move	into	Business	Modularity	(average	rating	up	37
percent	over	stage	3).	Whereas	the	third	stage	involves	large-scale	projects,	stage
4	involves	reusing	or	customizing	smaller	modules.	By	definition,	faster
development	time	should	be	a	key	benefit	of	achieving	stage	4	architecture
maturity.	Figure	5-2	shows	how	CIOs	rated	the	impact	of	architecture	maturity
on	IT	responsiveness	and	other	benefits

--- PAGE 88 ---
Improved	Risk	Management
Cleaning	up	IT	infrastructure,	shared	data,	and	enterprise	applications	provides	a
more	manageable	IT	environment.	This	contributes	to	at	least	three	risk-related
benefits:
FIGURE	5-2
Reduced	business	risk:
	
–the	extent	to	which	systems	are	consistently	and
reliably	up	and	running	as	needed	to	support	the	business
Increased	disaster	tolerance:
	
–the	ability	to	minimize	business	losses
during	outages	or	natural	disasters
Reduced	security	breaches:
	
–avoidance	of	computer	viruses	and
inappropriate	access	(both	internal	and	external)	to	private	or	confidential
data
While	enterprise	architecture	demonstrates	a	positive	impact	on	risk
management,	the	impact	is	smaller	than	it	is	for	the	other	benefits.	However,	in
companies	focused	on	building	risk	management	into	their	enterprise
architecture,	the	impact	is	much	more	dramatic.	For	example,	PFPC,	a
subsidiary	of	PNC	Financial	Services	Group,	provides	a	variety	of	financial
services	to	corporate	clients	who	demand	a	very	high	level	of	security	and
reliability.	When	Michael	Harte	became	corporate	CIO,	he	was	expected	to	cut

--- PAGE 89 ---
costs	and	improve	service	quality.	He	identified	risk	management	as	key	to
fulfilling	his	charge:	“When	I	got	here,	I	saw	the	need	to	position	information
technology	as	a	business	center	that	would	enable	the	company	to	move	from
being	focused	on	back	office	processing	to	being	a	leader	in	solution	integration
and	information	products.	The	first	stage	in	that	transformation	was	to	bring
greater	discipline	to	risk	management	and	governance	as	the	foundation	for
change.”
	
7
PFPC’s	architecture	efforts	revolved	around	a	Global	Enterprise	Platform
initiative.	Key	efforts	in	this	initiative	reduced	the	number	of	technologies	the
company	used,	created	a	single	portal	for	customer	access	to	PFPC	services,	and
restructured	applications.
Early	efforts	on	the	Global	Enterprise	Platform	initiative	succeeded	in	taking
PFPC	through	stage	2	of	architecture	maturity.	IT	spending	decreased	from	32
percent	to	24	percent	of	total	expenses.	In	addition,	a	U.S.	Federal	Reserve	audit
indicated	that	Harte	had	greatly	improved	PFPC’s	risk	management	competence.
As	the	company	now	pursues	business	process	and	IT	application	improvements,
Harte	expects	more	risk	management	improvements.
Global	events	ranging	from	terrorists	attacks	to	legislation	like	Sarbanes-Oxley
will	likely	focus	more	attention	on	risk	management	as	an	outcome	of	enterprise
architecture	maturity.	Companies	with	more-mature	architectures	are	better
positioned	to	meet	these	new	demands	for	risk	management.
Increased	Management	Satisfaction
Satisfaction	is	a	more	subjective	measure,	but	it’s	important	for	generating
enterprisewide	commitment	to	architectural	improvements	and	the
organizational	changes	those	improvements	enable.	Satisfaction	scores	indicate
the	confidence	of	non-IT	executives	in	the	IT	unit’s	ability	to	deliver	business
value:
Greater	senior	management	satisfaction	with	IT	reflects	reactions	of
corporate	leaders.
Greater	business	unit	leader	satisfaction	with	IT	reflects	attitudes	of
managers	toward	the	impact	of	IT	on	local	business	results	(e.g.,	costs,
business	value,	service	levels,	reliability).

--- PAGE 90 ---
Satisfaction	increases	dramatically	at	each	architecture	stage.	Despite	the
discomfort	caused	by	major	organizational	change,	senior	managers	clearly
value	the	benefits.	In	advancing	from	stage	1	to	stage	2,	management	sees	the
reductions	in	IT	costs—	invariably	accompanied	by	increased	IT	responsiveness
and	improved	IT	services.	From	stage	2	to	stage	3,	senior	managers	become
more	involved	in	aligning	IT	with	the	strategic	direction	of	the	company.	Jim
Barrington,	CIO	of	Novartis,	a	$28	billion	pharmaceutical	company,	describes
how	the	conversation	about	IT	changes:
I	really	to	want	to	find	out	what	[business	managers’]	real	business
issues	are—what	works	well	in	the	business,	what	doesn’t	work	well
in	the	business.	And,	then,	perhaps	try	to	figure	out	from	an	IT
perspective	how	we	can	address	some	of	those	areas,	particularly	the
ones	that	don’t	work	well,	or	to	understand	their	top	three	strategic
drivers,	let’s	say.	In	consumer	health,	it’s	customer	excellence.	So,	I
want	to	know	all	about	customer	excellence	so	that	we	can	direct	some
of	our	IT	resources	to	see	what	it	means	for	us.	Does	it	mean
technology?	Does	it	mean	more	understanding	of	process?	Does	it
mean	bringing	systems	from	multiple	business	units	together?	What
information	do	they	need	to	drive	the	business?
	
8
Management	satisfaction	increases	again	in	stage	4.	Ideally,	by	stage	4,	the
distinction	between	IT	and	business	disappears.
Enhanced	Strategic	Business	Outcomes
While	all	the	benefits	identified	thus	far	can	have	bottom-line	impacts,	the	most
compelling	need	for	enterprise	architecture	is	to	enable	strategic	business	goals.
Companies	derive	four	important	strategic	outcomes	from	enterprise
architecture:
1
.	
Better	operational	excellence:
	
–low-cost,	reliable,	and	predictable
operations,	with	an	emphasis	on	cost
2
.	
More	customer	intimacy:
	
–extraordinary	customer	service,	responsiveness,
and	relationships,	based	on	deep	customer	knowledge
3
.	
Greater	product	leadership:
	
–first	to	market	with	innovative	products	and
services,	usually	dependent	on	rapid	R&D	to	develop	and	commercialize
4
.	
More	strategic	agility:
	
–the	ability	to	respond	rapidly	to	competitor
initiatives	and	new	market	opportunities	
9

--- PAGE 91 ---
Strategic	business	outcomes	increase	dramatically	from	the	first	to	the	second
and	the	third	to	the	fourth	stages	of	architecture	maturity.	The	lesser	impact	of
the	transition	to	stage	3	is	likely	related	to	the	scope	of	the	organizational
change.	Managers	at	companies	like	Dow	Corning,	for	example,	have	noted	that
major	enterprise	systems	cause	significant	discomfort	before	they	start
delivering	measurable	business	and	IT	benefits.
	
10
The	payback	for	higher	IT	expenses	in	stage	4	is	evident	in	the	strategic	impact
of	enterprise	architecture	initiatives.	Overall,	executives	rated	strategic	business
benefits	40	percent	higher	in	stage	4	than	in	stage	3.	These	benefits	come	from
having	a	set	of	well-engineered	business	modules	that	provide	a	platform	for
execution	and	agility	at	a	more	granular	level	than	that	of	stage	3.	For	example,
Citibank	Asia	Pacific	developed	a	new	credit-card-processing	module	yielding	a
50	percent	reduction	in	processing	costs.	The	company	then	reused	this	module
to	quickly	enter	new	markets	in	Asia	and	Eastern	Europe.	
Chapter	8
	
provides
detailed	examples	of	how	UPS,	7-Eleven	Japan,	MetLife,	and	CEMEX	have
reaped	strategic	benefits	from	enterprise	architecture	maturity.
Management	Practices	for	Realizing	Value
	
from	Architecture	Maturity
Generating	the	expected	benefits	of	a	foundation	for	execution	results	not	just
from	changing	IT	investment	patterns	(as	described	in	
chapter	4
	
),	but	also	from
new	management	practices.	These	new	management	practices	formalize
organizational	learning	about	how	to	leverage	IT	capabilities	and	adopt	business
process	changes.	Practices	include	both	formal	roles	(e.g.,	project	architects,
enterprise	process	owners,	steering	committees)	and	managerial	processes	(e.g.,
architecture	exception	processes,	postimplementation	reviews,	business	case
development).
Many	architecture	practices	are	widely	deployed,	but	the	impact	of	each	practice
varies	with	how	effectively	a	company	has	implemented	it	(figure	5-3).	For
example,	less	than	70	percent	of	companies	have	created	full-time	enterprise
architecture	teams,	but	those	that	have	rate	the	teams	as	highly	valuable.	In
contrast,	a	similar	number	of	companies	have	implemented	an	architecture
exception	process,	but	they	find	that	this	practice	is	considerably	less	effective	in
generating	business	value.

--- PAGE 92 ---
Different	stages	place	different	demands	on	management,	so	some	management
practices	are	important	for	capturing	the	benefits	of	early	stages	while	other
practices	are	less	important—and	sometimes	unnecessary—until	later	stages.
Figure	5-4	shows	the	stage	at	which	key	management	practices	become
important.	The	need	for	growing	numbers	of	management	practices	reflects	that
increased	learning	is	important	to	first	building	and	then	generating	value	from	a
foundation	for	execution.	As	a	company	implements	each	practice	in	figure	5-4,
organizational	learning	accumulates	for	future	organizational	change	processes.
FIGURE	5-3


--- PAGE 93 ---
FIGURE	5-4
Stage	1	Management	Practices
In	our	research	only	two	practices	proved	critical	for	supporting	companies’
efforts	to	generate	value	from	the	Business	Silos	stage:
1
.	
Business	cases:
	
–accurate	and	compelling	analyses	of	the	expected	costs
and	benefits	of	a	proposed	change	to	a	business	process	or	technology
2
.	
Standardized	project	methodology:
	
–a	disciplined,	consistent	approach	to
converting	an	approved	project	concept	into	an	improved	business	process

--- PAGE 94 ---
This	finding	suggests	that	no	IT	governance	or	organizational	change	processes
are	necessary	in	the	first	stage.	When	a	business	unit	owns	its	IT	projects,	good
leaders	see	to	it	that	the	project	generates	value.	Getting	business	cases	and
project	methodology	right	doesn’t	sound	very	hard—but	for	most	companies,	it
takes	lots	of	practice!
It	is	unwise	to	move	into	the	second	stage	of	architecture	maturity	before	these
two	management	practices	have	become	part	of	the	company’s	DNA.	These	first
two	practices	help	companies	generate	value	in	the	first	stage,	but	the	value	these
practices	generate	actually	increases	as	companies	mature	their	architectures.
Companies	with	weak	business	case	and	project	methodology	practices	will	need
to	acquire	those	management	practices	while	simultaneously	attempting	to
develop	practices	specific	to	later	stages.
Stage	2	Management	Practices
Stage	2	presents	companies	with	far	more	daunting	management	challenges.	As
they	standardize	technology,	companies	force	new	behaviors	on	their	business
unit	leaders	and	IT	developers.	When	it	comes	to	IT	decisions,	these	leaders
need	to	start	thinking	about	what’s	best	for	the	company	in	addition	to	the
business	units’	needs.	This	change	in	thinking	affects	how	companies	fund	IT
and	initiatives	to	change	business	processes	as	well	as	how	they	manage	the
standardized	technologies	they	are	introducing.
Three	critical	management	practices	in	stage	2	address	issues	related	to	more
centralized	IT	funding:
1
.	
An	IT	steering	committee:
	
–a	small	group	of	executives	held	accountable
for	determining	IT	priorities
2
.	
Centralized	funding	of	enterprise	applications:
	
–capital	budget	allocations
supporting	implementation	of	enterprisewide	standards
3
.	
An	infrastructure	renewal	process:
	
–a	funding	mechanism	for	projects
intended	primarily	to	retire	aging	technologies	and	upgrade	the	technology
base
Four	other	practices	relate	to	managing	a	standardized	technology	environment:
1
.	
A	formal	architecture	compliance	process:
	
–a	process	for	ensuring	new
projects	are	adopting	standard	technologies
2
.	
Architects	on	project	teams:
	
–individuals	responsible	for	ensuring	that

--- PAGE 95 ---
technical	standards	are	observed	or	that	necessary	exceptions	are	adopted
3
.	
An	architecture	exception	process:
	
–a	formal	process	for	identifying	when
exceptions	to	standards	add	value
4
.	
A	centralized	standards	team:
	
–technical	experts	who	identify	appropriate
standards	and	recognize	when	to	retire	or	update	those	standards
The	seven	practices	important	to	stage	2	reflect	the	growing	need	to	address	the
challenges	of	using	IT	as	a	companywide,	rather	than	business	unit	or	functional,
asset.	Combined,	they	represent	a	significant	difference	in	managing	a	stage	2
environment	relative	to	a	stage	1.	For	example,	in	1996	a	$5	billion	process
manufacturer	learned	that	the	company’s	IT	spending	represented	3.6	percent	of
sales	compared	to	an	industry	average	of	2	percent.	To	bring	IT	costs	under
control,	management	supported	a	transition	to	Standardized	Technology.	The
CIO	noted	that	this	decision	led	to	a	number	of	important	changes:	“So,	over	the
ensuing	five	years	we	repatriated	all	of	the	IT	from	the	groups	and	the
geographies—that	all	reports	centrally	now.	We	standardized	the	desktop;	we
standardized	the	service	offerings	and	our	approach	to	services,	which	changed
the	budgeting	mechanisms	and	governance	mechanisms	to	focus	on	fewer
higher-impact	things	rather	than	the	literally	thousands	of	small	projects	that
were	getting	done.”
As	a	result	of	initiating	all	seven	of	the	recommended	practices	for	stage	2,
management	had	developed	habits	easing	the	transition	into	the	Optimized	Core.
In	2001,	with	its	IT	costs	around	industry	average,	the	company	began	an	ERP
implementation.	By	2004	management	declared	that	key	business	processes
were	globally	standard	and	efforts	to	transform	the	company	had	resulted	in	an
18	percent	increase	in	revenues	and	a	52	percent	increase	in	operating	income
over	the	prior	year.
Stage	3	Management	Practices
The	practices	implemented	in	stage	2	are	not	sufficient	to	help	companies
succeed	in	stage	3.	Rebecca	Rhoads	is	vice	president	and	CIO	at	Raytheon,	a
$21	billion	aerospace	and	defense	company	that	has	grown	to	its	current	form
through	mergers	with	Texas	Instruments,	Hughes,	General	Dynamics,	and	E-
Systems.	She	explains	that	the	practices	guiding	Raytheon	to	Standardized
Technology	following	the	mergers	were	just	the	first	step	in	learning	how	to
generate	value	from	IT:

--- PAGE 96 ---
Over	time,	you	will	outgrow	the	governance	model	that	makes	you
successful.	And	it	took	me	awhile	to	figure	that	out	because	we	had
developed	a	governance	model	that	was	so	effective—everybody	was
so	supportive	of	it.	We	had	buy-in	and	alignment,	and	it	was	a
governance	model	that	helped	us	consolidate	and	shape	the	company.
So	once	we	reduced	a	couple	thousand	legacy	applications,	once	we
went	from	150	payroll	systems	to	one,	28	email	systems	to	one,	we
reduced	IT	spend	by	over	40	percent.	That’s	what	we	needed	to	do
over	the	first	three	to	four	years	of	being	the	new	company,	because	if
you	don’t	get	the	synergy	of	the	merger	in	that	timeframe,	you’re	not
going	to	ever	be	able	to	come	up	for	air.
	
11
Stage	3	management	practices	help	companies	to	understand	the	need	for
process	integration	and	standardization	and	to	adjust	to	the	resulting
organizational	changes.	Process	standardization	depends	on	senior	management
leadership.	Five	practices	emerging	as	important	in	stage	3	include:
1
.	
Enterprisewide	process	owners:
	
–individuals	who	own,	design,	and
implement	one	or	more	enterprisewide	processes
2
.	
A	statement	of	enterprise	architecture	guiding	principles:
	
–tough	choices
specifying	how	IT	will	be	applied	in	the	company	(e.g.,	to	serve	customer
interests	versus	to	cut	business	process	costs)
3
.	
Business	leadership	of	project	teams:
	
–high-level	managers	accountable	for
generating	expected	benefits	and	actively	involved	in	project	management
4
.	
Senior	executive	oversight	of	enterprise	architecture:
	
–high-level	reviews
of	enterprise	architecture	initiatives	and	design	of	incentives	to	encourage
adoption
5
.	
IT	program	managers:
	
–individuals	who	coordinate	systems	and	projects	to
map	integration	and	minimize	redundancy
Rhoads	found	that,	following	the	cost-cutting	success,	Raytheon’s	senior
management	team	started	to	adopt	practices	articulating	business	direction	and
defining	companywide	processes.	At	Raytheon,	Rhoads	says,	these	practices
focused	on	how	the	company	would	grow:
We	had	fine-tuned	a	governance	model,	a	financial	model,	planning
tools,	everything	around	consolidating	legacy	systems	
and
	
reducing
our	spend.	We	were	successful	in	pulling	down	and	getting	the	right
systems	in	place	for	the	company	to	manage	human	capital	and

--- PAGE 97 ---
finances.	What	we	found	next	was	that	very	quickly,	once	we	had	kind
of	declared	victory	around	that,	the	shoe	was	too	small—the
governance	model	didn’t	fit	right	anymore.	When	we	looked	at	our
growth	strategy	and	the	fact	that	we	had	to	start	making	some
important	investments,	and	maybe	even	some	aggressive	investments,
the	governance	model	didn’t	support	that.
	
12
As	the	name	implies,	the	Optimized	Core	stage	involves	digitizing	key	business
processes	into	the	foundation	for	execution.	The	critical	management	practices
in	stage	3	ensure	that	senior	management	is	defining	what	processes	are	built
into	the	foundation	and	providing	ongoing	leadership	to	protect	and	enhance	the
capabilities	constituting	the	foundation.
Stage	4	Management	Practices
Companies	in	the	fourth	stage	are	sophisticated	users	of	IT.	They	have	developed
disciplined	business	processes	and	are	learning	how	to	define	standard	process
components,	enabling	greater	agility	in	response	to	different	business
opportunities	and	customer	needs.	The	critical	management	practices	in	this
stage	focus	on	how	companies	communicate	architecture	goals	and	assess	their
IT-enabled	business	change	initiatives.	Four	practices	are	key	to	stage	4:
1
.	
A	one-page	core	diagram:
	
a	tool	that	communicates	a	high-level	picture	of
integration	and	standardization	requirements	(as	described	in	
chapter	3
	
)
2
.	
Postimplementation	assessment:
	
a	formal	process	for	securing	and
communicating	lessons	learned	from	each	project
3
.	
A	formal	research	and	adoption	process:
	
a	process	for	identifying	the	new
technologies	that	could	have	a	significant	impact	on	the	company
4
.	
A	full-time	enterprise	architecture	team:
	
IT	staff	who	help	fit	immediate
business	needs	into	the	company’s	longer-term	vision
These	practices	accelerate	learning	about	the	role	of	IT	in	enabling	the	business.
BT,	formerly	British	Telecom,	is	a	£18.6	billion	U.K.	company	in	the	midst	of
transforming	from	a	telephone	company	to	a	provider	of	telecommunications
solutions.	To	support	the	transformation,	BT	is	aggressively	pursuing	the
benefits	associated	with	accelerated	learning	by	instituting	ninety-day	project
cycles.	Al-Noor	Ramji,	Group	CIO	of	BT,	describes	the	company’s	review
process	at	the	end	of	each	cycle:	“Every	ninety	days,	every	IT	program
undergoes	a	postimplementation	review,	or	PIR.	We	use	PIRs	to	make	sure	every

--- PAGE 98 ---
program	is	delivering	on	its	commitments;	if	they	don’t	deliver,	the	PIR	process
will	cut	them	off.	The	important	thing	is	to	measure	and	then	calibrate	all	the
programs	every	ninety	days.	It’s	a	new	way	of	working,	but	after	a	few	cycles,
people	get	used	to	it.”
	
13
As	Ramji	notes,	people	get	used	to	this	kind	of	learning.	In	fact,	by	stage	4,
companies	have	learned	how	to	squeeze	additional	benefits	from	practices
instituted	in	stage	1.	For	example,	postimplementation	reviews	inform	the
business	case	by	providing	evidence	of	the	actual	benefits	received	from	earlier
projects.	Consequently,	the	estimated	benefits	for	proposed	projects	become
more	predictable	and	realistic	as	companies	move	through	the	architecture
maturity	stages.
Lessons	from	Top	Performers:
	
What	Helps	the	Most?
Large	companies	reaping	benefits	from	stage	4	architectures	have	generally
implemented	most,	if	not	all,	of	the	practices	in	figure	5-4.	All	of	these	practices
can	make	enterprise	architecture	efforts	more	valuable,	but	they	are	not	equally
important.	Specifically,	top	performers	distinguish	themselves	from	other
companies	in	three	ways:	greater	senior	management	involvement	in	enterprise
architecture	issues;	greater	effort	to	build	architecture	into	project	methodology;
and	more	mature	enterprise	architecture	(table	5-1).
TABLE	5-1
	
	
Lessons	from	high-performing	companies	
	
	
Characteristic	
	
	
Low	strategic	strategic
effectiveness	(n	=	78	firms)	
	
	
High	strategic
effectiveness	(n	=	25	firms)	
	Senior	management	involvement	
			
			
	Senior	management	explicitly	defined
architecture	requirements	
	25%	(of	firms)	
	44%	(of	firms)	
	Senior	management	oversees
architecture	initiatives	
	45%	(of	firms)	
	60%	(of	firms)	
	Senior	managers	who	can	describe	high-
level	architecture	
	19%	(of	managers)	
	39%	(of	managers)	
	Architecture	built	into	project
methodology	
			
			
	Project	teams	with	architects	assigned	
	49%	(of	projects)	
	81%	(of	projects)	

--- PAGE 99 ---
	Projects	subject	to	architecture
compliance	review	
	60%	(of	projects)	
	80%	(of	projects)	
	Median	architecture	maturity	stage	(1-
4)	
	2	
	3	
	
	
o	e	
	
:	Statistically	significant	difference	between	the	responses	of	top	25%	of	firms	on	strategic
effectiveness.	Strategic	effectiveness	is	measured	as	strategic	outcomes	(operational	excellence,	customer
intimacy,	product	innovation,	and	strategic	agility)	of	architecture	initiatives	weighted	by	their	relative
importance	to	each	firm.	The	top	25%	of	firms	on	strategic	effectiveness	reported	significantly	higher
profitability,	which	correlated	with	industry-adjusted	measures	of	companywide	profitability.
	©	2005	MIT	Sloan	Center	for	Information	Systems	Research.	Used	with	permission.	
Greater	Senior	Management	Involvement
High	performers	on	strategic	effectiveness	enjoy	greater	senior	management
involvement	in	enterprise	architecture	planning	and	implementation.	For
example,	senior	management	teams	explicitly	define	the	requirements	for
enterprise	architecture	at	almost	half	of	the	top-performing	companies,	but	at
only	one-quarter	of	the	other	companies.	And	senior	management	involvement
does	not	stop	at	the	planning	stage.	Senior	managers	in	high	performers	are	also
more	than	twice	as	likely	as	their	counterparts	in	other	firms	to	be	able	to
describe	their	company’s	enterprise	architecture.	They	also	provide	oversight	on
architecture	initiatives.
In	big	companies,	it’s	easy	to	imagine	overwhelming	senior	managers	and
everyone	else	with	IT	and	business	process	issues.	Ramji	explains	how	BT
brought	its	priorities	into	focus:
When	I	arrived	at	BT,	there	were	4,300	active	projects.	The	average
person	was	working	on	5.3	projects	at	any	given	time.	To	introduce
greater	discipline	and	focus,	we	developed	an	ROI	model	and	pushed
everything	through	it;	as	a	result,	we	now	have	under	30	programs	.	.	.
and	the	programs	are	judged	on	ROI.	If	there’s	no	ROI	because	it’s	a
speculative	program,	CEO	sign-off	is	required.	Now,	that’s	discipline,
and	it	frames	the	discussion	around	the	right	issues.	Why	would	we	do
this	without	an	ROI	or	a	CEO	signature?	We	shouldn’t	do	it	just
because	someone	dreamt	it	up.
	
14
Like	many	companies	with	more-mature	architectures,	BT	has	reduced	the
number	of	projects	it	pursues	at	one	time.	Otherwise,	management	attention	can
be	diluted	on	projects	of	little	significance	to	the	company.	The	increased	focus

--- PAGE 100 ---
afforded	by	fewer	initiatives	improves	outcomes	on	the	projects	that	matter
most.
Architecture	Built	into	Project	Methodology
Companies	realizing	strategic	benefits	from	enterprise	architecture	have	project
methodologies	emphasizing	the	importance	of	architecture.	Successful
companies	involve	IT	architects	early	in	project	design	and	typically	demand
that	projects	pass	an	architectural	compliance	review.	In	these	companies	the	IT
architect	plays	a	pivotal	role	in	project	implementation.
For	example,	at	one	financial	services	firm,	an	IT	architect	is	assigned	to	every
project.	The	architect	reviews	requirements	and	identifies	any	needed
capabilities	that	are	inconsistent	with	architecture	standards.	The	architect	is
authorized	to	take	actions	in	the	company’s	best	interest—which	may	involve
forcing	a	compromise	on	functionality	to	maintain	architectural	integrity	or,
conversely,	allowing	an	exception	to	the	standards	to	meet	a	unique	business
need.	As	in	many	companies	that	have	established	a	key	role	for	IT	architects	on
business	projects,	the	architects	in	this	company	play	the	additional	role	of
jointly	establishing	architecture	standards.	This	means	identifying	when	standard
technologies	are	outdated.	It	also	means	identifying	the	need	for	new
infrastructure	capabilities	and	defining	a	standard	before	a	new	project	chooses
one	by	default.	Recently,	this	financial	services	company	defined	a	standard	for
an	integrated	voice	response	system	in	anticipation	of	several	upcoming
initiatives	that	otherwise	would	have	sought	their	own	solutions.
Greater	Architecture	Maturity
As	companies	mature	their	architectures,	they	position	themselves	for	greater
strategic	impact	from	IT	because	their	focus	shifts	from	technology
standardization	to	IT-enabled	process	standardization	and	integration.	Maturing
involves	transitioning	from	systems	and	platforms	that	resemble	a	plate	of	cold
spaghetti	to	modular	architectures	suited	to	a	plug-and-play	business	model.
Companies	generate	benefits	in	every	stage,	but	they	don’t	acquire	strategic
business	benefits	until	later	stages.	Not	surprisingly,	then,	top-performing
companies	have	more-mature	architectures.

--- PAGE 101 ---
The	Evolving	Role	of	the	CIO
The	CIO	is	a	key	driver—in	most	companies,	the	CIO	is	
the
	
key	driver—of
enterprise	architecture	benefits.	As	companies	advance	through	the	architecture
stages,	they	need	different	CIO	skills	and	governance	models.	Brent	Glendening
is	the	CIO	of	the	elevators	and	escalators	division	of	Schindler,	an	SFr	8.3	billion
(approximately	$6.3	billion)	manufacturer	located	in	Ebikon,	Switzerland.	He
has	led	his	company	from	Business	Silos	through	Standardized	Technology	into
Optimized	Core,	and	is	now	moving	it	into	Business	Modularity.
	
15
	
He	is	one	of
the	few	CIOs	in	our	research	who	has	led	his	company	through	more	than	one
transformation.	He	describes	his	role	in	migrating	from	stage	1	to	stage	2	as
having	a	technical	focus:	“Back	in	the	early	1990s	the	CIO	role	was	very
technical.	Both	my	country	IT	managers	and	myself	had	to	understand	the
technology,	keep	it	running,	and	manage	the	vertical	projects	under	our	control.
We	saw	that	hardware	standardization	was	a	critical	success	factor	for	the	tasks
at	hand	and	was	a	prerequisite	for	moving	to	an	optimized	core.”
Glendening	led	the	introduction	of	a	number	of	critical	stage	2	management
practices:
The	challenge	was	to	choose	the	right	platforms	and	enforce	the
standards.	Coordination	with	finance	and	purchasing	was	critical	to
ensure	that	the	benefits	of	a	standardized	environment	were	not	eroded
by	rogue	purchases.	Enforcing	and	deploying	the	standards	also
provided	us	with	the	opportunity	to	set	up	IT	steering	committees	in
each	country	to	explain	and	enforce	IT	decisions.	The	IT	steering
committees	consisted	of	the	country	president,	key	business	owners,
and	the	country	IT	managers.	As	standards	were	deployed,	these
committees	evolved	from	enforcement	to	the	establishment	of	IT
strategy	and	the	prioritization	of	projects	and	resources.
By	the	late	nineties,	Glendening	was	helping	the	business	assess	the	need	for	a
transition	to	stage	3:
The	move	to	standardized	processes	was	three	to	four	times	more
difficult	than	the	move	to	standardized	hardware.	There	were	three
stages	of	learning	we	had	to	take	the	country	presidents	through.	The
first	was,	“Will	it	work?”	Will	a	standard	process	be	able	to	fully

--- PAGE 102 ---
support	the	needs	of	my	country?	The	next	stage	was,	“What	does	it
mean	for	my	business?”	How	will	the	structure,	roles,	and
performance	of	my	business	unit	change?	Then,	finally,	“What	does	it
mean	for	me?”	How	would	the	job	of	a	country	president	change?
Only	after	answering	all	of	these	questions	would	they	trust	us	enough
to	jointly	redesign	their	entire	business	processes,	based	on	uniform
corporate	products	and	processes.
Glendening	found	he	had	to	transform	his	own	skills,	as	he	attempted	to	guide
the	business	transformation:	“To	make	the	leap	to	standardized	processes,	you
must	earn	the	trust	of	the	business	unit	presidents	and	key	executives.	That	will
only	happen	if	you	understand	how	the	business	works	and	can	talk	about	the
business	in	their	language.	You	have	to	be	a	businessman	first	and	a	technologist
second.”
Glendening’s	experience	is	representative	of	other	CIOs	we	surveyed.	Each
transformation	required	new	leadership	skills,	as	summarized	in	table	5-2.	We
also	found	that	as	these	skills	evolved,	the	titles	of	the	CIOs	we	surveyed
evolved	as	well.	In	the	companies	in	the	Business	Silos	stage,	the	head	of	IT	had
only	the	CIO	or	vice	president	of	IT	title.	Of	the	companies	in	the	Standardized
Technology	stage,	36	percent	of	the	CIOs	had	a	second,	business-oriented	title
such	as	vice	president	of	strategy	or	vice	president	of	logistics.	Of	the	companies
in	Optimized	Core	or	Business	Modularity,	50	percent	of	the	CIOs	had	these
second	titles.	This	evolution	of	titles	is	a	signal	to	the	organization	about	the
skills,	knowledge,	and	responsibilities	of	the	CIO.
There	is	no	reason	that	one	person,	or	a	top	team	of	two	or	three	leaders,	cannot
have	all	the	skills	listed	in	table	5-2	and	provide	the	leadership	needed	to	move
the	company	through	multiple	phases.	But	hiring	the	right	CIO	requires	that
companies	understand	where	they	are	going	in	the	longer	term	with	their
operating	model	and	architecture.	More	top-level	support	should	strengthen	the
recent	trend	of	longer	tenures	for	CIOs.
TABLE	5-2
	
	
As	the	company’s	architecture	matures,	the	CIO	role	evolves	
			
	
	
Business	Silos	
	
	
Standardized
Technology	
	
	
Optimized	Core/	Business
Modularity	
	
	
Key	skills	of
the	CIO	
	
	
	

--- PAGE 103 ---
•	Technical	knowledge	to
help	with	standards
decisions
•	Ability	to	implement
standard	project
methodology	and	oversight
•	Ability	to	work	with	top
management	team	to
establish	basic	governance
•	Ability	to	make	business
case	for	standardization	
•	Detailed
knowledge	of	how
the	business
functions
•	Ability	to	manage
large	organizational
change	efforts
•	Credibility	with
business	unit	or
functional	heads
•	Ability	to	manage
large	central	budget
•	Understanding	of
architecture	as	a
business	enabler	
•	Ability	to	facilitate	innovation	off	new
platform
•	Detailed	knowledge	of	core	business-
could	potentially	run	a	business	unit	if
necessary
•	Ability	to	delegate	ownership	of	key
process	and	data	modules	while	still
ensuring	adherence	to	standards
•	Understanding	of	strategic	benefits	of
architecture	
	
	
Reports	to:	
	CEO	or	CFO	
	CEO	
	CEO	
	
	
Percentage	of
IT	heads	with
second	title			
*
	0%	
	26%	
	50%	
*	Percentage	of	CIOs	having	second	VP	title,	from	samples	of	25	CIOs	in	the
United	States	and	Europe.
©	2005	IMD.	Used	with	permission.
6
Build	the	Foundation
	
One	Project	at	a	Time
SEVERAL	YEARS	AGO
	
a	friend	of	ours	invited	an	interior	decorator	to	refurbish	the
living	room	in	her	family’s	house.	The	decorator	pointed	out	that	any	change	to
the	living	room	would	force	changes	in	the	adjoining	dining	room	if	the	home
was	to	look	“put	together.”	No	problem.	But	the	eventual	theme	of	the	living
room	and	dining	room	argued	for	redoing	the	stairs	to	the	second	floor.	Of
course,	the	carpet	on	the	stairs	extended	throughout	the	second	floor	(and

--- PAGE 104 ---
quantity	discounts	were	available),	so	the	carpet	in	the	entire	house	was	slated
for	replacement.	Unfortunately,	the	temptation	to	choose	new	and	exciting	colors
for	the	carpet	proved	too	much	to	resist.	But	that	meant	the	new	carpet	wouldn’t
match	the	existing	walls	or	draperies.	Ultimately,	the	family	had	to	move	out	of
the	house	for	six	weeks	so	the	decorator	could	fulfill	her	vision.	The	final	effect
was,	to	be	sure,	magnificent.	And	expensive.	
*
Companies	encounter	similar	temptations	when	they	map	out	their	foundation
for	execution.	Once	a	vision	is	clear,	it	seems	logical	that	the	fastest	way	to
create	the	foundation	is	to	tear	out	existing—typically	functional—processes	and
systems.	In	times	of	crisis	or	disruptive	change,	massive	projects	that	build	a
new	foundation	can	make	sense.	A	company	may	need	to	transform	quickly	to
survive.	But	massive	change	is	expensive	and	risky,	sometimes	
too
	
expensive
and	risky	for	a	company	to	pursue	all	at	once.
Large	systems-based	implementations	have	a	lousy	track	record	of	success.
Many	companies	have	implemented	extensive	ERP	systems,	expecting	their	core
business	processes	to	be	automated	into	a	foundation.	The	size,	complexity,
disruption,	cost,	and	learning	required	all	contributed	to	the	failure	of	more	than
50	percent	of	these	implementations,	with	millions	of	dollars	and	much
management	goodwill	going	down	the	drain.
	
1
The	alternative	to	the	“big-bang”	implementations	is	to	build	the	foundation	one
project	at	a	time.	To	do	so,	every	business	project	must	not	only	meet	its	short-
term	business	goals	but	also	help	implement	(or	at	least	not	undermine)	the
company’s	architecture.	Assigning	each	project	responsibility	for	implementing
a	piece	of	the	architecture	has	at	least	three	benefits.	First,	it	ensures	that	the
architecture	isn’t	an	ivory-tower	abstraction	of	the	world,	but	a	useful	model	for
how	to	do	business.	Second,	it	ensures	that	the	foundation	for	execution	becomes
increasingly	robust	as	the	business	and	available	technology	evolve.	Finally,	it
can	cut	costs	dramatically	by	distributing	the	costs	and	risks	of	implementing	the
company’s	enterprise	architecture	across	many	smaller	and	more-manageable
projects.	It	is	often	no	more	expensive	to	implement	project	solutions	in	an
architecturally	sound	manner,	and	over	time	the	progress	toward	implementing
the	company’s	desired	architecture	is	substantial.
The	IT	Engagement	Model
Building	a	foundation	one	project	at	a	time	requires	the	engagement	of	key

--- PAGE 105 ---
stakeholders	in	the	design,	implementation,	and	use	of	new	IT	and	business
process	capabilities—an	IT	engagement	model.	We	define	the	
IT	engagement
model
	
as	the	system	of	governance	mechanisms	assuring	that	business	and	IT
projects	achieve	both	local	and	company-wide	objectives.
	
2
	
At	top	performing
companies	the	engagement	model	has	three	main	ingredients:
1
.	
Companywide	IT	governance:
	
–decision	rights	and	accountability
framework	to	encourage	desirable	behavior	in	the	use	of	IT
2
.	
Project	management:
	
–formalized	project	methodology,	with	clear
deliverables	and	regular	checkpoints
3
.	
Linking	mechanisms:
	
–processes	and	decision-making	bodies	that	align
incentives	and	connect	the	project-level	activities	to	the	overall	IT
governance
In	large	companies,	the	IT	engagement	model	contains	six	key	stakeholder
groups:	the	overall	company	management,	business	unit	management,	and	line
or	project	management—each	of	which	exists	on	both	the	IT	and	business	sides
of	the	company.	(See	figure	6-1.)	The	different	perspectives,	objectives,	and
incentives	of	these	groups	create	two	challenges:	coordination	and	alignment.
At	the	company	level,	senior	leaders	set	direction,	create	a	climate	for	success,
and	design	incentives	to	meet	companywide	goals.	Business	unit	leaders	focus
on	the	performance	of	their	business	unit.	Project	leaders	are	typically	entirely
focused	on	the	success	of	their	projects,	garnering	all	the	company	resources
they	can	find,	beg,	borrow,	or	steal	to	get	the	job	done.
The	IT	engagement	model	
coordinates
	
these	three	different	levels:	company,
business	unit,	and	project.	The	IT	governance	establishes	high-level	goals	and
incentives.	Project	management	applies	the	best	practices	of	company-specific
project	management	tools	and	techniques	to	every	major	project,	ensuring	local
project	success.	Linking	mechanisms	ensure	that,	as	projects	move	forward,	they
reflect	and	inform	the	goals	and	priorities	of	all	parties.
The	second	challenge	of	engagement	is	to	
align
	
the	company’s	IT	and	business
activities	to	ensure	that	value	is	generated	from	IT	investments.	In	some	top-
performing	companies,	IT-business	alignment	is	ingrained	in	every	management
process.	More	often,	however,	the	IT	and	business	managers’	conflicting
priorities	lead	to	unresolved	differences.	IT	executives	focus	on	providing	the
most	powerful,	risk-free	IT	environment	possible.	Business	leaders	focus	on

--- PAGE 106 ---
cutting	costs	and	delivering	rapid	solutions.	Constructive	tension	between
business	and	IT	leads	to	effective	resolution	of	these	discrepancies.	The	IT
engagement	model	helps	leaders	recognize	and	resolve	their	differences	in
accordance	with	companywide	business	objectives.
FIGURE	6-1
By	linking	IT	governance	and	project	management,	the	engagement	model
coordinates	and	aligns.	Without	an	engagement	model,	project	leaders	execute	in
isolation.	They	choose	solutions	that	meet	project	goals,	but	the	company’s
overall	goals	for	integration	and	standardization	are	ignored	and	the	foundation
for	execution	never	emerges.	In	this	chapter	we	further	describe	the	ingredients
of	the	IT	engagement	model	and	give	examples	of	each.	We	then	show	all	three
in	action	using	a	case	example.
IT	Governance
IT	governance	is	the	decision	rights	and	accountability	framework	for
encouraging	desirable	behaviors	in	the	use	of	IT.	IT	governance	reflects	broader
corporate	governance	principles	while	focusing	on	the	management	and	use	of
IT	to	achieve	corporate	performance	goals.
	
3
	
IT	governance	shouldn’t	be
considered	in	isolation	because	IT	is	linked	to	other	key	company	assets	(i.e.,
financial,	human,	know-how/intellectual	property,	physical,	and	relational

--- PAGE 107 ---
assets).	Thus,	IT	governance	might	share	mechanisms,	such	as	executive
committees	and	budget	processes,	with	other	asset-governance	processes,
thereby	aligning	companywide	decision-making	processes.
IT	governance	encompasses	five	major	decision	areas	related	to	the	management
and	use	of	IT	in	a	firm,	all	of	which	should	be	driven	by	the	operating	model:
1
.	
IT	principles:
	
–high-level	decisions	about	the	strategic	role	of	IT	in	the
business
2
.	
Enterprise	architecture:
	
–the	organizing	logic	for	business	processes	and	IT
infrastructure
3
.	
IT	infrastructure:
	
–centrally	coordinated,	shared	IT	services	providing	part
of	the	foundation	for	execution
4
.	
Business	application	needs:
	
–business	requirements	for	purchased	or
internally	developed	IT	applications	that	both	use	and	build	the	foundation
for	execution
5
.	
Prioritization	and	investment:
	
–decisions	about	how	much	and	where	to
invest	in	IT,	including	project	approval	and	justification	techniques
Each	of	these	decisions	can	be	made	by	corporate,	business	unit,	or	functional
managers—or	some	combination—with	the	operating	model	as	a	guide.	Thus,
the	first	step	in	designing	IT	governance	is	to	determine	who	should	make,	and
be	held	accountable	for,	each	decision	area.	To	help	think	about	who	should
make	these	decisions,	we	provide	in	table	6-1	a	sample	of	the	questions	that	each
decision	area	should	cover.
Every	company	engages	in	IT	decision	making,	but	firms	differ	considerably	in
how	thoughtfully	they	have	defined	
accountability
	
and	how	rigorously	they
formalize	and	communicate	decision-making	processes.	Without	formal	IT
governance,	individual	managers	are	left	to	resolve	isolated	issues	as	they	arise.
These	individual	actions	can	be	at	odds	with	each	other	and	can	lead	to
misalignment	and	a	lack	of	coordination.	For	example,	the	CIO	at	a	global
transportation	firm	was	instructed	to	cut	the	corporate	IT	budget.	This	CIO
introduced	a	charge-back	system	to	curtail	demand	for	IT	services.	Unhappy
with	the	new	charges,	managers	within	each	of	the	business	units	hired	local
technical	specialists	to	provide	services.	The	new	technical	specialists	did	not
show	up	in	the	corporate	IT	budget,	so	it	looked	as	if	the	CIO	had	achieved	his
goal,	but	the	new	business	unit	hires	increased,	rather	than	decreased,	the	firm’s
total	IT	spending.	Worse,	the	business	unit	employees	developed	local	services

--- PAGE 108 ---
that	compromised	the	integrity	of	the	company’s	architecture,	reducing	the
quality	of	service	for	customers	of	more	than	one	business	unit.
In	contrast,	when	UNICEF’s	senior	managers	recognized	that	IT	was	playing	an
increasingly	strategic	(and	expensive)	role	in	enabling	the	organization’s	mission
of	delivering	services	to	children,	the	senior	management	team	defined	the	role
of	IT	in	the	organization,	decided	on	project	priorities	and	funding	levels,
clarified	the	need	for	shared	services,	and	established	organizationwide
standardization	and	integration	requirements.
	
4
	
These	managers	held	division
directors	accountable	for	implementation	of	global	systems,	and	the	CIO	was
held	accountable	for	delivering	key	infrastructure	services	and	coordinating	IT
use	for	the	company.
TABLE	6-1
	
	
Key	issues	for	each	IT	decision	
	
	
IT	principles	
	
	
How	does	the	operating	model	translate	to	IT	principles	to	guide	IT	decision
making?
What	is	the	role	of	IT	in	the	operating	model?
What	are	IT-desirable	behaviors?
How	will	IT	be	funded-by	the	company	or	by	business	units?
	
	
Enterprise
architecture	
	
	
What	are	the	company’s	core	business	processes?	How	are	they	related?
What	information	drives	these	core	processes?	How	must	this	information	be
integrated?
What	technical	capabilities	should	be	standardized	companywide	to	support	IT
efficiencies	and	facilitate	process	standardization	and	integration?
What	activities	must	be	standardized	companywide	to	support	data	integration?
What	technology	choices	will	guide	the	company’s	approach	to	IT	initiatives?
	
	
IT	infrastructure	
	
	
What	infrastructure	services	are	most	critical	to	achieving	the	company’s

--- PAGE 109 ---
operating	model?
What	infrastructure	services	should	be	implemented	companywide?
What	are	the	service-level	requirements	of	those	services?
How	should	infrastructure	services	be	priced?
What	is	the	plan	for	keeping	underlying	technologies	up	to	date?
What	infrastructure	services	should	be	outsourced?
	
	
Business
application	needs	
	
	
What	are	the	market	and	business	process	opportunities	for	new	business
applications?
How	can	business	needs	be	addressed	within	architectural	standards?
When	does	a	business	need	justify	an	exception	to	the	standards?
Who	will	own	the	outcomes	of	each	project	and	institute	organizational
changes	to	ensure	value?
What	strategic	experiments	should	we	take	on?	How	should	we	measure
success?
	
	
IT	investment	and
prioritization	
	
	
What	process	changes	or	enhancements	are	strategically	most	important	to	the
company?
What	is	the	distribution	in	the	current	IT	portfolio?	Is	this	portfolio	consistent
with	the	company’s	objectives?
What	is	the	relative	importance	of	companywide	versus	business	unit
investments?	Do	actual	investment	practices	reflect	their	relative	importance?
What	is	the	right	balance	between	top-down	and	bottom-up	projects	to	balance
standardization	and	innovation?
	©	2005	MIT	Sloan	Center	for	Information	Systems	Research.	Used	with	permission.	
Over	the	past	few	years,	IT	has	fundamentally	transformed	the	way	UNICEF
operates.	Andre	Spatz,	UNICEF’s	CIO,	explains:
As	a	CIO,	I	invest	a	lot	of	my	time	in	making	governance	work	at	all
levels,	to	educate,	coach,	mentor	and	lobby.	In	a	global	organization,
governance	is	quite	a	challenge.	We	face	high	pressures	for	synergy
across	UNICEF	and	at	the	same	time,	we	have	high	pressures	for	local

--- PAGE 110 ---
autonomy	from	the	regional	and	country	offices.	CIO	leadership	in	a
global	IT	organization	is	not	just	command	and	execute.	We	need	to
continually	empower	people	with	a	vision	and	execution	strategy,	and
position	governance	elements	within	a	global	framework.	Part	of	my
role	is	to	ensure	that	we	do	not	centralize	too	much	and	that	our	IT
organization	adapts	to	the	different	cultural	environments	we	work	in.
5
Companies	with	effective	IT	governance	have	profits	that	are	20	percent	higher
than	companies	pursuing	similar	strategies.
	
6
	
But	IT	governance	is	a	mystery	to
many	key	decision	makers	at	most	companies.	Our	research	indicates	that,	on
average,	only	38	percent	of	senior	managers	in	a	company	know	how	IT	is
governed.	And	ignorance	is	not	bliss.	Senior	management’s	awareness	of	IT
governance	processes	proved	to	be	the	best	indicator	of	governance
effectiveness.	At	top-performing	firms,	as	many	as	80	percent	of	senior
executives	are	aware	of	how	IT	is	governed.
In	our	study	of	almost	three	hundred	companies	around	the	world,	we	did	not
identify	a	single	best	formula	for	governing	IT.
	
7
	
However,	one	thing	is	clear:
effective	IT	governance	doesn’t	happen	by	accident.	Top-performing	companies
carefully	design	governance,	and	managers	throughout	those	companies	make
daily	decisions	putting	that	design	into	practice.
Project	Management
Project	management	has	emerged	as	a	critical	competence	in	many,	if	not	most,
companies.	Increasingly,	companies	are	adopting	standardized	project
methodologies—either	homegrown	or	industry-developed	approaches.	A	good
project	management	methodology	has	well-defined	process	steps	with	clear
deliverables	to	be	reviewed	at	regular	checkpoints,	often	called	“gates.”	Many
companies	design	metrics	for	assessing	project	performance	and	conduct
postimplementation	reviews	to	improve	project	managers’	skills	and	the
company’s	methodology.
IT-related	projects	have	long	been	guided	by	a	project	life	cycle.	Variations	of
the	life	cycle	define	a	set	of	four	to	eight	project	phases	(e.g.,	proposal,
requirements,	specification,	development,	implementation,	and	change
management),	each	with	a	specific	set	of	objectives,	deliverables,	and	metrics.
	
8
Good	project	management	establishes	a	set	of	gates	that	check	on	projects’

--- PAGE 111 ---
progress	and	assess	their	chances	for	meeting	their	goals.	Companies	may	have
as	many	as	twelve	to	fifteen	gates	during	a	project.	Disciplined	project
management	processes	are	a	necessary	condition	for	good	engagement.	They
ensure	that	all	projects	execute	certain	tasks	at	certain	times.
Few	companies	have	integrated	project	governance	into	their	DNA	like
Raytheon.
	
9
	
Raytheon,	the	aerospace	and	defense	company,	has	80,000
employees	worldwide	with	about	80	percent	of	revenue	from	government	and
defense.	Raytheon	also	provides	and	manages	nearly	every	air-traffic-control
system	around	the	world.	About	30	percent	to	40	percent	of	Raytheon’s	revenue
is	generated	outside	the	United	States.	The	company’s	customers	are	typically
men	and	women	in	uniform	(e.g.,	military,	pilots).	To	manage	the	large	number
of	programs	within	its	seven	semiautonomous	business	units,	Raytheon	has
developed	a	single	approach	for	all	projects.	Rebecca	Rhoads,	vice	president	and
CIO,	explains:
“When	you	have	8,000	programs,	you	very	quickly	develop	a
governance	model	that	manages	your	exceptions.	You	have	to	have
flawless	execution.	But	if	you	start	reviewing	8,000	programs	every
month	to	make	sure	you’re	okay	and	that	you’re	executing	properly,
you’ll	never	finish	before	you’ve	got	to	start	again.	So	we	have	a
governance	model	and	a	structure	that	reviews	the	programs	on	an
exception	basis.	We	have	scorecards	and	metrics	and	don’t	look	at	the
program	in	detail	unless	it’s	triggered	an	exception	on	the	scorecard.”
Figure	6-2	presents	a	simplified	version	of	Raytheon’s	integrated	product
development	system	(IPDS)—the	multi-gate	process	for	managing	all	projects	at
Raytheon.	IPDS	is	used	to	develop	any	solution,	whether	it’s	big	or	small,	or	it’s
software,	hardware,	or	integrated.	Every	project	starts	with	a	bidding	process	and
ends	at	gate	10—the	readiness	review—after	which	Raytheon	is	ready	to	go	into
production.	Gate	11	is	the	postimplementation	review.	The	gates	at	the	top	of
figure	6-2	are	used	to	govern	all	projects	at	Raytheon.	The	boxes	on	the	figure
are	the	IT	reviews	that	occur	at	each	gate	in	IPDS.	Below	the	boxes	are	the
committees	and	processes	monitoring	the	project	from	both	business	and	IT
perspectives.
For	IT	project	governance	Raytheon	builds	on	what	makes	it	a	strong	company
—the	ability	to	manage	8,000	programs.	At	each	gate	any	project	goes	through	a
number	of	business	and	IT	reviews.	For	example,	project	initiation	triggers	gate

--- PAGE 112 ---
5,	start-up	review,	requiring	approvals	from	the	program	management	office	and
the	enterprise	architecture	and	standards	council.	The	integration	of	IT	project
management	into	business	project	management	meets	companywide	IT
objectives	of	building	a	foundation	for	execution	one	project	at	a	time.
Linking	Mechanisms
Companies	with	effective	IT	governance	and	disciplined	project	management
can	still	have	ineffective	IT	engagement.	The	third	essential	ingredient	of	the	IT
engagement	model	is	the	linking	mechanisms	connecting	companywide
governance	and	projects.	Good	IT	governance	ensures	that	there’s	clear	direction
on	how	to	evolve	the	company’s	foundation.	Good	project	management	ensures
that	projects	are	implemented	effectively,	efficiently,	and	in	a	consistent	manner
to	maximize	learning.	Good	linking	mechanisms	ensure	that	projects
incrementally	build	the	company’s	foundation	and	that	the	design	of	the
company’s	foundation	(its	operating	model	and	enterprise	architecture)	is
informed	by	projects.
FIGURE	6-2

--- PAGE 113 ---
Figure	6-3	describes	three	important	types	of	linking	mechanisms	for	any	IT
engagement	model:	architecture	linkage,	business	linkage,	and	alignment
linkage.	These	three	types	of	linking	mechanisms	address	the	key	alignment	and
coordination	concerns	of	the	company	as	long	as	key	stakeholders	take
responsibility	for	them—and	IT	governance	and	project	management	are
effective.
Architecture	linkage
	
establishes	and	updates	standards,	reviews	projects	for
compliance,	and	approves	exceptions.	Architecture	linkage	connects	the	IT
governance	decisions	about	architecture	with	project	design	decisions.	For
example,	a	company	working	to	increase	integration	may	have	a	mechanism	for
insisting	that	a	supply	chain	project—rather	than	focus	narrowly	on	its	own	data

--- PAGE 114 ---
needs—restructure	an	inventory	database	so	that	it	facilitates	anticipated	future
uses	of	the	inventory	data.	Companies	may	fulfill	architecture	linkage	with	one
mechanism,	such	as	an	architecture	review	board.	More	commonly,	firms
employ	multiple	mechanisms,	ranging	from	architect	training	programs	to
architecture	exception	processes.
FIGURE	6-3
Similarly,	
business	linkage
	
ensures	that	business	goals	are	translated	effectively
into	project	goals.	Business	linkage	coordinates	projects,	connects	them	to	larger
transformation	efforts,	and	focuses	projects	on	attacking	specific	problems	in	the
best	possible	way.	For	example,	a	key	linking	mechanism	for	companies
pursuing	companywide	standardized	processes	is	the	use	of	process	owners	with
primary	responsibility	for	designing	and	updating	processes.	Business	linkage
also	includes	incentive	programs	to	guide	behavior	as	new	projects	demand	new
ways	of	thinking.
Alignment	linkage
	
mechanisms	ensure	ongoing	communication	and	negotiation
between	IT	and	business	concerns.	Business-IT	relationship	managers	or
business	unit	CIOs	are	typically	a	critical	linkage	for	translating	back	and	forth
between	business	goals	and	IT	constraints.	Other	mechanisms	in	this	category
include	a	project	management	office,	training	and	certification	of	project
managers,	and	metrics	for	assessing	projects.

--- PAGE 115 ---
Effective	engagement	models	have	all	three	types	of	linking	mechanisms
implemented	via	a	few	well-understood	mechanisms.	Earlier	we	noted	that	a
company’s	management	practices	evolve	through	the	stages	of	architecture
maturity.	Many	of	these	evolving	practices	are	linking	mechanisms.	As	they	are
implemented	and	improved,	they	contribute	to	increasing	sophistication	of	the	IT
engagement	model.	Over	time,	linking	mechanisms	can	become	increasingly
embedded	in	IT	governance	and	project	management	processes	so	that	linking
becomes	an	organizational	habit.
A	case	study	of	Toyota	Motor	Marketing	Europe	illustrates	how	a	company	links
its	projects	to	higher-level	objectives	to	build	a	foundation	for	execution	one
project	at	a	time.
Toyota	Motor	Marketing	Europe:
	
Continuous	Architecture	Improvement
Toyota	Motor	Co.	is	one	of	the	world’s	leading	automobile	manufacturers,
offering	a	full	range	of	models,	from	small	passenger	vehicles	to	trucks.
	
10
Toyota’s	global	annual	sales,	combined	with	those	of	Hino	and	Daihatsu,	totaled
7.5	million	units	in	2004,	which	generated	almost	$130	billion	in	net	revenues.
Toyota	has	forty-six	manufacturing	companies	in	twenty-six	countries	and
regions,	excluding	Japan,	and	markets	vehicles	in	more	than	140	countries,
supported	by	a	consolidated	workforce	of	264,000	people.
Toyota	Motor	Europe	is	a	holding	company	for	Toyota	Motor	Marketing	Europe
(which	handles	the	wholesale	marketing	of	Toyota	and	Lexus	vehicles,	parts,	and
accessories	in	Europe)	and	Toyota	Motor	Engineering	&	Manufacturing	Europe
(which	manages	Toyota’s	European	manufacturing	and	engineering	operations).
Sales	in	Toyota’s	European	operations	increased	10	percent	from	2003	to	2005
and	represented	13.4	percent	of	total	company	revenues.	Net	income	in	Europe
has	revived	from	a	loss	in	2002	and	small	gain	in	2003	to	a	respectable	6.3
percent	of	sales	in	fiscal	year	2005.
Over	the	past	ten	years,	Toyota	Motor	Marketing	Europe’s	(TMME)	operations
have	changed	dramatically.	European	operations	started	as	a	central
headquarters,	handling	only	supply	and	demand	management	for	Toyota’s	many
independently	managed	country-based	operations.	As	Toyota’s	sales	grew	in

--- PAGE 116 ---
Europe,	the	management	team	realized	it	needed	to	take	more	control	over
operations	if	the	company	was	to	serve	its	European	customers	well.	For
example,	before	1999	inventories	of	new	cars	were	maintained	within	country-
based	units—a	customer	desiring	a	green	Corolla	with	an	automatic	transmission
would	have	to	wait	months	to	get	it	while	that	exact	car	could	be	just	over	the
border,	a	few	kilometers	away.	The	same	situation	was	true	for	repair	parts.
Management	realized	that	TMME	had	to	start	acting	like	a	single	European
entity	rather	than	like	individual	country-based	units.
Architecture	Principles
To	address	this	challenge,	the	IT	unit	in	TMME	has	been	working	to	build	a
foundation	for	execution	to	support	a	European	operating	model.	Members	of
the	architecture	group	did	not	find	the	company’s	European	strategy	statements
specific	enough	to	give	them	the	direction	they	needed.	So	they	surveyed	the
ongoing	strategic	initiatives	to	understand	the	operational	capabilities	that	the
company	was	trying	to	build.	They	condensed	these	into	a	simple	statement	that
they	used	to	guide	the	design	of	the	architecture.	Ludo	Vandervelden,	CIO	and
vice	president	of	the	vehicle	logistics	group,	explained:	“Complete	customer
satisfaction	and	the	realization	of	cost	reduction	are	the	pillars	around	which	we
designed	our	customer-centric	processes.	Enterprise	architecture	is	the	road	map
to	turn	processes	into	efficient	and	effective	solutions.”
	
11
From	the	statement	of	these	desired	capabilities,	the	architecture	group	designed
a	high-level	set	of	architectural	principles	showing	how	each	principle	helped
the	company	achieve	its	goals.	These	principles	drove	the	architecture	linking
process	for	TMME.	In	2000	the	management	team	endorsed	the	principles.	The
IT	unit	then	used	the	principles	to	start	conversations	with	country-based	units
about	the	need	to	comply	with	a	regional	enterprise	architecture.	Peter
Heinckiens,	chief	architect	and	deputy	general	manager	of	IT	strategy,
explained:	“It	was	important	to	connect	the	architecture	principles	to	the
company’s	goals.	If	we	were	to	talk	to	project	managers	only	about	architectural
compliance,	they	would	dismiss	it.	By	connecting	the	architecture	with	the
strategy	of	the	company,	we	make	architecture	relevant.	Now,	if	managers	resist
complying	with	the	architecture,	we	simply	point	out	that	this	means	that	they
are	not	supporting	Toyota’s	strategy.	That	changes	the	conversation.”
Project	Methodology

--- PAGE 117 ---
The	architecture	group	then	began	implementation.	After	a	few	initial	missteps,
the	group	realized	that	the	only	way	to	effectively	ensure	that	business	projects
didn’t	violate	the	architecture	was	to	install	a	disciplined	process	for	them	and	to
assign	an	architect	to	each	one	(with	some	architects	handling	many	different
projects	simultaneously).	To	introduce	discipline	into	the	project	management
process,	the	architecture	group	adapted	and	installed	a	standard	project
methodology.
Incentives
Heinckiens	assigned	a	project	architect	to	each	team	and	created	a	unique	reward
system	for	these	architects.	The	first	and	most	basic	requirement	used	to	evaluate
a	project	architect	was	whether	his	or	her	project	succeeded.	If	the	project	was
successful—even	if	it	violated	the	architecture	to	some	degree—the	architect
was	judged	to	have	“nearly	achieved”	his	or	her	goals.	If	the	project	was
successful,	and	the	project	helped	implement	the	enterprise	architecture,	then	the
architect	“fully	achieved”	goals.	And	if	the	project	was	successful,	helped
implement	the	enterprise	architecture,	and	the	architecture	work	resulted	in
improvements	to	the	design	of	the	overall	enterprise	architecture,	then	the
architect	“exceeded”	goals.	This	focus	on	successful	project	delivery	contributed
to	the	project	teams’	acceptance	of	the	project	architects	and	further	ensured	that
the	architectural	solutions	were	realistic	and	aligned	with	business	goals.	These
changes	facilitated	the	implementation	of	the	architecture	linkage	at	TMME.
Funding
Another	key	element	of	the	engagement	model	at	TMME	was	funding.	The
central	architecture	group	had	a	limited	pool	of	funds	to	support	projects.	For
example,	if	a	project	had	to	connect	to	a	spare-parts	inventory	database	that
required	updating,	then	that	project	was	given	the	task	of	updating	the	database
and	its	interface.	In	some	cases,	this	led	to	a	higher	project	cost,	which	prompted
the	architecture	group	to	look	for	other	projects	that	also	required	interaction
with	that	database	to	share	the	cost.	If	no	other	projects	could	be	found,	then	the
architecture	group	funded	the	extra	development	cost	itself.	Heinckiens
explained:	“If	you	have	good	engagement,	most	architecture	efforts	get	funded
through	the	projects.	The	projects	need	to	do	the	work	anyway,	so	all	you’re
doing	is	asking	them	to	do	the	work	in	an	architecturally	sound	way.	The	cost	of
doing	something	right	is	usually	no	greater,	and	often	leads	to	overall	savings	for
the	project.”

--- PAGE 118 ---
Enforcement	Authority
Another	important	component	of	TMME’s	engagement	model	is	the	authority	to
“pull	the	line”	on	a	project.	Because	of	the	careful	linkage	of	the	architecture
with	the	company’s	strategic	goals	and	extensive	education	about	the	importance
of	architecture,	the	architecture	team	has	gained	the	credibility	and	authority	it
needs	to	stop	a	project	if	necessary.	This	is	an	authority	that	is	rarely	used,	but	it
is	an	integral	part	of	the	Toyota	culture.
	
12
	
This	option	gives	the	architects	some
added	power	to	achieve	TMME’s	goals	and	adds	weight	to	the	architecture
linking	process.
Initial	Appraisal
But	the	architecture	group	found	that	this	level	of	engagement	was	not	enough.
Projects	were	commissioned	that	were	fundamentally	out	of	line	with	the
enterprise	architecture,	and	no	amount	of	effort	from	the	project	architects	could
prevent	architecture	violations.	The	architecture	group	realized	that	it	had	to
engage	earlier	in	the	project	life	cycle—it	had	to	be	involved	in	the	creation	of
the	project.	Group	members	created	a	new	first	phase	in	the	project	methodology
—called	“appraisal”—in	which	the	architecture	group	worked	with	the
management	team	to	ensure	that	the	project	was	defined	in	a	way	that	would
support	the	enterprise	architecture.
The	appraisal	phase	now	effectively	achieves	alignment	linkage	at	TMME.	For
example,	the	IT	group	was	asked	to	create	a	Web-based	service	to	allow
customers	to	select	automotive	accessories—steering	wheel	covers,	gearshift
knobs,	and	the	like.	The	goal	was	to	provide	customers	with	pictures	of	the
accessories	and	the	ability	to	choose	the	ones	they	wanted.	The	architecture
group	realized	that	the	underlying	data	was	located	in	a	number	of	places,
including	in	an	application	whose	vendor	had	gone	out	of	business.	Rather	than
build	an	application	on	top	of	this	data	structure,	the	architecture	group	worked
with	business	managers	to	rescope	the	project	and	incorporate	the	design	and
construction	of	a	new	accessories	database.	The	initial	project	only	had	to
implement	one	small	piece	of	this	new	database,	but	the	design	made	it	easy	for
future	projects	to	finish	the	job.	By	being	involved	before	the	start	of	the	project
and	rescoping	the	project,	the	architecture	group	helped	push	the	architecture
forward,	without	increasing	the	cost	of	the	original	project.
Outcomes

--- PAGE 119 ---
TMME	measures	the	effectiveness	of	its	architecture	efforts	with	a	number	of
metrics.	It	uses	these	metrics	to	measure	the	degree	of	architectural	compliance
of	projects	and	how	the	architecture	is	contributing	to	business	success.	The
technical	architectural	compliance	of	projects	increased	from	26	percent	in	2001
to	93	percent	in	2005.	In	addition,	the	company	assessed	the	degree	to	which	its
enterprise	architecture	enabled	strategic	initiatives.	The	score	on	this	assessment
improved	by	76	percent	between	2001	and	2005.
	
13
Toyota	Motor	Marketing	Europe’s	engagement	model	has	helped	transform
Toyota’s	European	operations	from	a	set	of	independent	country-based	units	to	a
more	integrated	operating	model.	And	the	results	have	been	positive:	Toyota’s
European	delivery	lead	time	for	vehicles	was	reduced	by	35	percent,	and	the
inventory	of	spare	parts	was	reduced	by	almost	50	percent.	And	Toyota’s
European	unit	sales	have	grown	by	more	than	11	percent	per	year	from	2001
through	2004.
What	Is	Good	Engagement?
Independently	and	together,	the	three	ingredients	of	engagement	create	business
value.	Without	effective	IT	governance,	there	is	no	clarity	about	who	makes
what	decision	and	how	those	people	are	held	accountable.	Without	good	project
management,	projects	risk	cost	and	schedule	overruns	and	failure	to	meet
objectives.	Without	effective	linking	mechanisms,	there	are	no	regular
opportunities	to	have	discussions	and	make	decisions	about	a	project’s	ability	to
leverage	the	foundation	and	contribute	to	the	foundation’s	evolution.	Together,
the	engagement	model	ingredients	reinforce	desirable	behavior	to	create	a
foundation	for	execution	one	project	at	a	time.
Based	on	case	study	research	at	eighteen	companies,	we	have	identified	some
principles	for	ensuring	that	IT	governance,	project	management,	and	linking
mechanisms	lead	to	successful	engagement:
Clear,	specific,	and	actionable	objectives.
	
–Effective	IT	engagement	models
clarify	strategic	objectives	so	standardization	and	integration	requirements
are	clear.	The	first	activity	of	TMME’s	architecture	group	was	creating	this
clear	statement	and	gaining	top	management’s	endorsement	of	it.
Motivation	to	meet	company	goals.
	
–Formal	incentives	(e.g.,	bonus	plans,
annual	reviews,	and	performance	metrics)	help	focus	business	unit	leaders
and	project	managers	on	company,	business	unit,	and	project	goals.	For

--- PAGE 120 ---
TMME,	these	were	embodied	in	the	reward	systems	of	the	project
managers	and	project	architects.
Enforcement	authority.
	
–Complementary	to	formal	incentives	are	formal
enforcements.	Both	help	build	an	effort’s	credibility.	Enforcement	provides
a	process	for	changing,	discontinuing,	or	granting	an	exception	to	a	project
that	is	not	compliant	with	the	target	enterprise	architecture.	In	several
companies,	the	first	project	to	actually	get	penalized	for	noncompliance
(either	by	being	delayed	or	losing	funding)	was	an	important	tipping	point
that	boosted	the	credibility	of	engagement	efforts.
Early	intervention	and	prevention.
	
–Successful	IT	groups	engage	with
business	projects	during	the	earliest	stages	of	development	to	prevent	bad
solutions	from	being	designed	in	the	first	place	and	to	learn	how	to	improve
the	target	architecture.	For	example,	Raytheon’s	IT	organization	engages
with	business	projects	in	the	first	stages.
Transparent,	regular,	two-way	communication.
	
–With	good	engagement	it
is	clear	to	everyone	how	the	model	works	and	who	is	involved.	In	addition,
alignment	and	coordination	are	not	simply	achieved;	they	are	maintained
through	regular	dialogue	between	business	and	IT	and	across	business	units.
This	helps	dispel	perceptions	that	engagement	processes	are	simply	a	way
for	the	corporate	center	or	IT	to	assert	its	will;	it	enables	parties	to	learn
from	each	other,	negotiate	differences,	and	develop	a	common
understanding	of	the	foundation	for	execution.
And,	as	noted	in	
Chapter	5
	
,	the	results	of	engagement	can	be	profound.
Companies	whose	architectural	initiatives	were	strategically	effective	had
architects	on	81	percent	of	their	project	teams;	less	successful	companies	had
architects	on	only	49	percent	of	teams.	Successful	companies	reviewed
significantly	more	of	their	projects	for	architectural	compliance	and	involved
more	of	their	senior	managers	in	the	definition	and	oversight	of	architectural
initiatives.
SOSCO:	The	Engagement	Model	in	Action
One	large	U.S.-based	software	and	services	company	had	traditionally	been
structured	to	encourage	business	unit	specialization.
	
14
	
The	company,	which	we
will	call	“SOSCO,”	had	no	agents	or	branches.	Instead,	each	business	unit
developed	a	call	center	with	specialized	customer	service	representatives.	When
a	new	CEO	was	hired	in	early	2000,	he	created	a	vision	for	a	more	integrated
operating	model	(a	Coordination	model,	with	high	integration	and	low

--- PAGE 121 ---
standardization).	IT	management	used	this	vision	to	develop	a	new	enterprise
architecture.	The	new	architecture	specified	that	SOSCO	customers	would	gain
access	to	the	company’s	products	and	services	through	multiple	channels
integrated	through	a	standardized	technology	and	data	environment.
Designing	IT	Governance	for	Companywide	Synergies
To	implement	the	new	vision	for	a	more	integrated	firm,	SOSCO	made	structural
changes	emphasizing	companywide	processes.	For	example,	the	business	unit
marketing	departments	were	consolidated	in	a	corporate	marketing	function.	A
key	change	was	the	creation	of	a	new	companywide	operations	(CWO)	unit.
Headed	by	an	executive	vice	president,	CWO	is	responsible	for	all	company-
wide	projects.
In	addition	to	structural	changes,	SOSCO	designed	IT	governance	processes	to
encourage	companywide	synergies.	SOSCO	clarified	IT	decision	rights	for	each
of	the	key	IT	decisions	(see	table	6-2),	vesting	decision-making	responsibilities
in	five	different	groups:
1
.	
SOSCO’s	executive	committee:
	
–consists	of	the	CEO,	the	presidents	of	the
seven	major	operating	companies,	the	CIO,	and	the	head	of	CWO.	This
committee	meets	monthly	to	clarify	companywide	goals	and	distinguish
company	and	business	unit	boundaries.
2
.	
Companywide	operations:
	
–defines	and	implements	major	projects
reflecting	the	companywide	goals	specified	by	the	executive	committee.
CWO	has	a	staff	of	275,	including	15	program	managers	who	coordinate
multiple	projects	related	to	a	single	business	process	(e.g.,	customer
relationship	management).
3
.	
The	IT	unit:
	
–headed	by	the	corporate	CIO.	Business	unit	CIOs	have	dual
reporting	relationships—to	the	CIO	and	to	the	general	managers	of	their
business	units.	The	IT	unit	designs	shared	IT	services	and	delivers	service-
level	agreements	negotiated	with	each	of	the	business	units.	The	IT	unit
takes	responsibility	for	ensuring	that	investments	in	the	company’s
technical	infrastructure	move	the	company	toward	its	foundation	for
execution.
4
.	
The	architecture	committee:
	
–a	subset	of	key	technologists	within	the	IT
unit.	The	fifteen-member	architecture	committee	defines	technical
standards	and	works	with	IT	architects	to	identify	common	needs	across	the
company’s	several	hundred	business	unit	and	companywide	projects.

--- PAGE 122 ---
5
.	
The	investment	steering	committee:
	
–establishes	project	priorities.	Chaired
by	the	executive	vice	president	of	CWO,	this	nine-member	committee
includes	senior	managers	representing	each	of	the	major	business	units.	In
establishing	project	priorities,	the	committee	considers	the	potential	value
to	the	company	of	both	business-unit-specific	and	company	projects.	The
committee	also	considers	the	availability	of	needed	infrastructure	and	the
readiness	of	the	firm	to	effectively	implement	each	project.
SOSCO	ensures	coordination	of	IT	decisions	through	overlapping	memberships
in	these	decision	structures.	For	example,	CWO’s	executive	vice	president	is	on
the	executive	committee	and	heads	the	investment	steering	committee.	Thus,	as
the	executive	committee	defines	company	priorities,	the	executive	vice	president
takes	responsibility	for	reflecting	those	priorities	in	the	funding	decisions	of	the
investment	steering	committee	and	the	project	designs	of	CWO.
TABLE	6-2
		
	
SOSCO’s	IT	governance	arrangements		
		
	
IT	decision		
		
	
Process		
		
	
IT	principles		
		Executive	committee	of	CEO,	CIO,	executive	vice	president	of	companywide	operations	(CWO),	7	business	unit	general	managers		
		
	
Enterprise	architecture		
		Architecture	committee	of	15	senior	technologists	headed	by	CTO		
		
	
IT	infrastructure	strategies		
		Senior	IT	management	team		
		
	
Business	needs		
		CWO	unit	for	companywide	systems;	business	unit	leaders	for	needs	local	systems		
		
	
IT	investment	and	prioritization		
		Investment	steering	committee	of	9	senior	managers,	including	IT,	headed	by	executive	vice	president	of	CWO		
		©	2005	MIT	Sloan	Center	for	Information	Systems	Research.	Used	with	permission.		
Project	Management
Each	project	at	SOSCO	follows	a	standard	project	development	methodology
mandating	an	eight-phase	project	life	cycle.	Every	senior	manager	and	project
team	member	is	familiar	with	the	company’s	internally	developed	project
methodology.	Early	phases	of	the	project	life	cycle	help	determine	the	viability
of	the	project—ability	to	implement,	likelihood	of	receiving	benefits,	and
availability	of	needed	infrastructure.	For	companywide	projects,	management
assigns	a	project	sponsor	in	the	key	business	unit	as	well	as	coleaders	from
CWO	and	the	business	unit.
Linkages	Between	IT	Governance	and
	

--- PAGE 123 ---
Project	Management
SOSCO	has	implemented	a	set	of	roles	and	processes	at	the	project	level	to
ensure	that	IT	governance	decisions	are	communicated	to	the	projects	and
enacted	throughout	the	firm.	To	link	project	management	with	IT	governance,
SOSCO	has	implemented	the	three	major	types	of	linking	mechanisms	to
coordinate	project	goals	with	the	company’s	overall	goals	and	to	achieve	on-
time,	on-budget	results.
The	architecture	linking	mechanisms	consist	of	a	network	of	key	decision
makers,	including	project	architects,	CWO,	and,	with	the	most	important
projects,	the	CEO.	Like	TMME,	SOSCO	assigns	an	IT	architect	to	each	project
team.	These	project	architects	are	responsible	for	ensuring	that	individual
projects	are	compliant	with	technology	standards	and	that	related	projects	reuse
technologies	as	appropriate.	If	a	project	architect	feels	an	exception	to	the
standards	is	warranted,	he	or	she	either	seeks	approval	from	one	of	the	assistant
vice	presidents	authorized	to	grant	exceptions	or	refers	the	request	to	the
architecture	committee.
CWO	members	lead	companywide	projects	and	take	responsibility	for	the
business	linkage.	In	addition,	to	ensure	that	major	projects	are	on	track,	the	CEO
meets	with	business	unit	presidents	every	month	to	review	financials	and	discuss
progress.	These	one-on-one	meetings	serve	to	identify	the	need	for	any	senior
management	intervention,	to	reassess	resource	allocations	and	goals,	and	to
avoid	surprises	in	business	unit	or	company	outcomes.	These	meetings	are	an
important	business	linkage	mechanism.
Finally,	the	CEO	encourages	behavior	consistent	with	his	vision	through	a	bonus
program	for	all	employees	based	on	company	goals.	In	2004	every	SOSCO
employee—from	the	mailroom	clerk	to	the	top	executive—received	a	15	percent
bonus	to	recognize	achievement	of	those	goals.	Senior	managers	were	also
compensated	for	operating	company	results	and	their	success	in	meeting	their
individual	objectives.	In	this	way,	SOSCO	has	supported	its	engagement
processes	with	an	incentive	system	that	rewards	desired	behavior.
IT	governance	and	project	management	are	explicitly	connected	via	business,
architecture,	and	alignment	linking	mechanisms.	As	a	result,	the	project
management	process	reinforces	high-level	governance	decisions.	Typically
SOSCO	spends	only	2	percent	of	project	expenses	on	projects	eventually

--- PAGE 124 ---
declared	non-viable	while	delivering	99	percent	of	its	projects	on	time	and	on
budget.
Using	Enterprise	Architecture	as	an
	
Organizational	Compass
Describing	the	challenges	of	implementing	an	IT	architecture,	Jim	Crookes,
chief	architect	at	BT,	remarked:	“Architecture	implementation	is	like	sailing.
You	have	to	use	the	energy	of	the	wind,	but	it’s	not	always	blowing	in	the	same
direction	you	want	to	go.	It’s	a	lot	easier	to	tack	your	way	forward	than	to	row
into	the	teeth	of	the	wind,	which	is	what	architects	sometimes	try	to	do.	You
have	to	use	the	momentum	of	business	projects	to	get	to	where	you	want	to	go,
even	if	it	means	you’re	not	always	heading	directly	toward	your	goal.”
	
15
Companies	building	a	foundation	for	execution	should	use	their	enterprise
architecture	as	a	compass,	directing	the	company	toward	its	intended	operating
model.	To	stay	on	track	these	companies	use	an	IT	engagement	model	to
influence	the	direction	of	projects	and	ensure	that	each	project	achieves	both
local	and	companywide	objectives.
By	embedding	architectural	improvements	in	projects,	the	costs	of	architectural
transformation	are	spread	over	those	projects	with	little	incremental	cost	to
individual	ones.	By	engaging	with	projects	early	and	regularly,	a	company	can
ensure	that	each	project	helps	build	out	the	architecture	and	that	the	architecture
is	realistic	and	aligned	with	company	goals.	Effective	engagement	ensures	that
all	key	stakeholders	share	the	risks	and	responsibilities	associated	with	changing
business	process	and	IT	systems	necessary	for	achieving	companywide
synergies.	And	with	good	engagement,	the	company	ensures	that	the	right
foundation	gets	built	steadily	and	reliably,	one	project	at	a	time.
7
Use	Enterprise	Architecture	to	Guide	Outsourcing
IN	THE	EARLY	1970S
	
,	Mazda	and	Isuzu	entered	the	U.S.	market	for	small	pickup
trucks.	But	rather	than	manufacturing	the	trucks	themselves,	they	outsourced	the
final	assembly	to	Ford	and	GM.	Why?	Because	of	the	price	of	chickens	in

--- PAGE 125 ---
Germany.
	
1
Ten	years	earlier,	a	trade	war	had	erupted	between	the	United	States	and	West
Germany	over	the	sale	of	U.S.	poultry	in	the	West	German	market.	Concerned
about	the	health	of	its	domestic	industry,	the	European	Economic	Community,
led	by	West	Germany	and	France,	designated	poultry	as	an	important	growth
industry	and	tripled	the	tariffs	on	U.S.	poultry.	Exports	of	U.S.	chickens	to
Europe	dropped	from	more	than	$30	million	to	less	than	$600,000.	To	retaliate,
the	United	States	slapped	a	tariff	of	25	percent	on	“automobile	trucks,”	targeting
the	import	of	VW	cargo	vans	and	pickup	trucks.	The	sales	of	VW	light	trucks	in
the	United	States	dropped	by	a	third	the	following	year	and	ended	soon	after.
When	the	Japanese	entered	the	U.S.	market	ten	years	later,	the	“chicken	tariff”
found	a	new	target.	The	Japanese	realized	that	to	avoid	the	tariff,	they	had	to	do
the	final	assembly	of	their	trucks	in	the	United	States.	The	cost	of	building
assembly	plants	was	prohibitive,	so	they	found	U.S.	partners	to	help	them.	To
this	day,	more	than	99	percent	of	the	light	trucks	on	U.S.	roads	are	assembled	in
the	United	States.
Like	Japanese	automakers,	many	companies	find	that	for	cost,	regulatory,	or
other	reasons,	they	have	to	outsource	critical	activities.	IT	and	IT-enabled
business	processes	are	candidates	for	outsourcing,	but	the	importance	of	a
company’s	foundation	for	execution	argues	for	exercising	caution.	Outsourcing
can	be	a	valuable	approach	to	helping	mature	an	architecture,	but	a	company	can
lose	ground	if	outsourcing	is	inappropriately	applied.	In	this	chapter	we	discuss
how	architecture	can	be	a	guide	to	outsourcing	decisions.
Three	Types	of	Outsourcing	Relationships
Companies	outsource	IT	and	IT-enabled	business	processes	for	a	number	of
reasons,	including	lower	costs,	variable	capacity,	risk	mitigation,	process
reengineering,	and	the	opportunity	to	focus	on	core	capabilities.	Consistent	with
other	studies,	our	study	of	eighty	outsourcing	efforts	found	that	executives	most
often	cite	variable	capacity	(almost	90%	of	respondents)	and	cost	savings	(more
than	70%)	as	key	objectives	for	outsourcing	(figure	7-1).
	
2
	
Less	than	a	third	of
executives	cite	objectives	related	more	specifically	to	supporting	architectural
initiatives,	such	as	process	reengineering	or	business	process	discipline.
To	understand	the	architectural	implications	of	outsourcing,	it’s	useful	to

--- PAGE 126 ---
recognize	the	differences	between	three	types	of	outsourcing	relationships:	(1)	a
strategic	partnership,
	
in	which	an	outsourcer	takes	on	responsibilities	for	an
integrated	set	of	client	operations;	(2)	a	
cosourcing	alliance,
	
in	which	the	client
and	vendor	share	management	responsibility	for	project	success;	and	(3)	a
transaction	relationship,
	
in	which	an	outsourcer	executes	a	well-defined,
repeatable	IT	or	IT-enabled	business	process	for	a	client.	These	three	types	of
outsourcing	relationships	have	different	benefit-risk	profiles	(figure	7-2).	Each
also	has	different	implications	for	enterprise	architecture.
FIGURE	7-1
FIGURE	7-2

--- PAGE 127 ---
Strategic	Partnerships
In	a	strategic	partnership,	vendors	provide	an	integrated	set	of	operational
services.	For	example,	a	single	strategic	partnership	deal	might	encompass
mainframe	operations,	WAN	and	LAN	management,	telephony,	Web	hosting,
and	help	desk	services.	Similarly,	outsourcing	of	an	IT-intensive	function	like
human	resource	management	can	include	processes	such	as	reward	and
recognition,	learning	and	development,	employee	documentation,	and	advisory
services.
	
3
	
By	integrating	service	offerings,	the	vendor	adds	value	beyond	the
value	of	the	individual	services.
How	strategic	partnerships	build	a
	
foundation	for	execution

--- PAGE 128 ---
Strategic	partnerships	should	allow	companies	to	focus	on	core	capabilities
while	a	vendor	handles	major	operational	responsibilities.
	
4
	
Strategic
partnerships	often	deliver	cost	savings	(at	least	initially)	by	introducing	more
disciplined	processes	and	by	providing	variable	capacity	to	limit	a	company’s
need	to	build	excess	capacity.	Vendors	profit	from	strategic	partnerships	by
leveraging	economies	of	scale	and	scope,	unique	expertise,	and	disciplined
management	practices.	Despite	the	potential	for	mutual	benefit,	these	deals	are
risky.	In	our	study	only	50	percent	of	strategic	partnerships	were	viewed	as
successful	by	the	client	company.
Metrics	are	part	of	the	problem.	While	vendors	expect	to	earn	a	margin	on	the
integrated	set	of	services,	clients	often	assess	their	partners	based	on	the	price
and	performance	of	each	individual	service-level	agreement.	If	the	client’s
management	practices	are	sloppy,	the	vendor	can	introduce	efficiencies,	and	both
parties	can	realize	value	from	the	relationship.	However,	some	of	the	efficiencies
are	realized	only	if	clients	forgo	entrenched	behaviors.	In	IT	partnerships	many
companies	struggle	with	behavior	changes	that	require	adhering	to	technology
standards	or	limiting	the	number	of	discretionary	changes	to	systems	and	system
schedules.	Without	behavioral	changes,	there	may	not	be	enough	real	savings	for
both	client	and	vendor	to	achieve	their	bottom-line	objectives.
The	behavior	changes	necessary	for	outsourcing	success	are	also	required	for
building	a	foundation	for	execution.	Strategic	partnerships	involving	IT	or	IT-
intensive	functions	(e.g.,	human	resources,	accounting)	engage	external	experts
in	the	process	of	defining	and	implementing	standardized	technologies	and
management	practices.	For	companies	in	the	Business	Silos	stage	or	early	in	the
Standardized	Technology	stage,	vendors’	best	practices	will	inevitably	lead	to
consolidation	of	existing	technical	platforms	and	a	reduction	in	the	variety	of
technologies	in	use.	A	strategic	partnership	forces	a	shared-services	mentality,
requiring	business	leaders	to	come	to	agreement	on	which	services	will	be
provided	centrally	and	which	will	be	provided	locally.	Of	course,	companies	can
introduce	shared	services	without	external	assistance,	but	they	need	expertise
and	a	commitment	to	continuously	improving	their	administrative	functions.
A	strategic	partnership	is	particularly	valuable	early	in	stage	2	(Standardized
Technology)	because	it	helps	move	a	company	toward	increased	standardization.
In	an	effective	partnership,	the	client	benefits	from	world-class	operations
without	having	to	invest	in	the	development	of	world-class	skills.	Campbell
Soup	Co.	provides	an	example	of	how	such	partnerships	can	work	to	help	a

--- PAGE 129 ---
company	develop	its	foundation	for	execution.
Case	study	of	a	strategic	partnership:
	
Campbell	Soup	Co.
Campbell	Soup	Co.,	a	$7	billion	food	company,	sells	more	than	just	soup.
	
5
	
Its
brands	in	the	United	States	include	Pepperidge	Farm,	Godiva,	V8,	Pace,	and
Prego	as	well	as	Campbell’s.	In	FY	2004,	Campbell	had	approximately	24,000
employees	in	twenty-two	countries	and	earned	$647	million	(an	increase	of	8.7%
over	FY	2003).
At	the	turn	of	the	last	century,	Campbell,	like	other	companies	in	the	consumer
packaged-food	industry,	was	experiencing	competitive	pressures	from	many
sides.	Consumers	were	both	price	and	health	conscious.	Significant
consolidation	in	the	industry	meant	that	Campbell,	a	medium-sized	firm,
competed	in	an	industry	dominated	by	giants	such	as	Kraft,	Unilever,	and	Nestlé.
Moreover,	Campbell’s	upstream	agribusiness	partners	and	downstream	retail
partners	were	consolidating	and,	as	a	result,	had	become	increasingly	powerful
in	their	dealings	with	Campbell	and	its	peers.	Meanwhile,	the	downstream
retailers	were	increasing	their	offerings	in	private-label	foods.
In	2002	CEO	Doug	Conant	committed	to	moving	Campbell	from	a
Diversification	operating	model	(low	standardization	and	low	integration)	to	a
Unification	model	(high	standardization	and	high	integration).	His	planned
transformation	had	huge	implications	for	IT,	and	he	brought	in	Doreen	Wright	as
senior	vice	president	and	the	company’s	first	corporate	CIO,	to	address	the	IT
challenge.	According	to	Wright:
Looking	at	the	IT	function	is	like	having	the	company	look	at	itself	in
the	mirror:	Whatever’s	wrong	with	the	company	will	show	up	in	the	IT
function.	Clearly,	Campbell	had	been	run	as	a	portfolio	of	independent
businesses—too	independent.	Similarly,	the	various	IT	groups	were
independent	.	.	.	We	were	a	hodgepodge	of	disparate	computing
platforms	and	network	protocols	without	an	enterprise	[architecture].
We	had	every	conceivable	technology	running	somewhere.	[We	were]
a	confederation	of	global	IT	groups,	with	little	or	no	governance	and
an	inflexible	IT	infrastructure	that	was	very	costly	to	support.

--- PAGE 130 ---
To	transform	itself,	Campbell’s	management	team	pursued	a	strategy	of
distinguishing	between	core	and	noncore	business	activities.	The	company	is
managing	core	activities—sales,	marketing,	R&D,	retail	execution,	trade
management,	and	product	life	cycle	management—for	differentiation	and
growth.	In	contrast,	Campbell	is	managing	noncore	activities	for	low	cost.
Outsourcing	is	one	approach	to	managing	those	noncore	activities.	Wright	says:
Because	we	are	trying	to	transform	ourselves,	not	just	from	a
technology	perspective,	but	much	more	importantly	from	a	business
perspective,	the	thing	that	I	need	more	than	anything	else	is
management	capacity.	I	need	the	capacity	of	my	staff	to	introduce	the
new,	to	understand	it,	and	keep	up.	I’ve	got	business	people	clamoring
to	do	data	synchronization	and	collaborative	planning	with	our
customers,	and	introducing	new	R&D	capabilities,	and	trade
promotion	capabilities,	all	of	that	kind	of	stuff.	The	last	thing	I	want	to
soak	up	my	leaders’	heads	with	is	the	running	of	the	computers
themselves.	I	need	everybody’s	mind	on	introducing	the	new.	So,	I
completely	outsource	the	infrastructure.	The	running	of	infrastructure
is	all	done	by	IBM.	The	maintaining	of	the	legacy	applications	is
probably	seventy-five	percent	outsourced.	In	almost	all	cases,	I	hire	a
third	party	as	my	integrator.	That	doesn’t	mean	we	don’t	have	a	high
level	of	involvement,	but	I	have	the	expertise	of	a	partner	who	knows
how	to	integrate.
Consistent	with	its	business	strategy,	the	IT	unit	at	Campbell	has	adopted	an	“IS
Lite”	organization	model.
	
6
	
In	an	IS	Lite	model	many	traditional	IT	services
(applications	development,	maintenance,	and	computer	operations)	are
outsourced.	Technical	governance,	strategy	(i.e.,	architecture),	and	shared
infrastructure	are	centralized	for	coherence	and	cost-efficiency.	Relationship
management,	business	process	analysis,	and	solution	delivery	are	localized	in	the
businesses	to	ensure	business	alignment	and	speed	to	market.
Between	2002	and	2004	Campbell	moved	its	architecture	from	stage	one
(Business	Silos)	to	late	stage	2	(Standardized	Technology).	With	the	help	of
IBM,	its	strategic	partner,	Campbell	achieved	virtually	100	percent	global
commonality	with	respect	to	standards,	networks,	and	e-mail.	Except	for	some
international	facilities,	the	company	is	running	common	operating	systems,
platforms,	and	middleware.	This	standardization	has	reduced	IT	unit	costs;
improved	IT	service	quality,	reliability,	and	security;	improved	IT’s	alignment

--- PAGE 131 ---
and	relationships	with	the	business;	and	strengthened	vendor	relationships.	From
2002	to	2004,	IT	banked	nearly	$5	million	in	one-time	savings	and	$8	million	in
annual	savings.	CIO	Wright	credits	more	than	half	of	the	annual	savings	to
various	adjustments	in	Campbell’s	sourcing	arrangements,	including	improved
service	levels	at	no	additional	cost	and	various	cost-saving	upgrades,	migrations,
and	replacements.
Despite	the	cost	savings,	Wright	believes	the	real	value	of	outsourcing	lies
elsewhere:	“There	are	things	that	you	do	as	a	company	which	are	critical.	You
couldn’t	run	your	company	without	them,	but	they	should	not	differentiate	you.
They	should	be	as	standard	as	possible.	And	if	you	can	find	someone	who	can	do
it	as	well	or	better	at	an	equal	or	lower	cost,	why	would	you	not	do	that?	What
you	would	get	out	of	that	is	management	capacity	to	focus	on	the	things	that	are
core	and	differentiating	to	your	company.”
Campbell	is	now	moving	its	architecture	into	stage	3	(Optimized	Core).	To
achieve	this	transition,	the	company	has	engaged	IBM	to	lead	its	implementation
of	an	ERP	system.	With	a	reliable,	secure	infrastructure	as	a	base,	Campbell
managers	will	take	responsibility	for	business	process	design	and	for	changing
organizational	behaviors.	IBM	project	managers	will	lead	the	technical	side	of
the	implementation.	To	make	this	arrangement	work,	both	parties	have	made	a
long-term	commitment	to	enhance	Camp-bell’s	IT	capabilities.	Says	Wright:
You	know,	if	I	were	providing	my	own	data	center	services,	I	would
blow	it	sometimes.	I	would	make	bad	decisions.	It	is	not	different
when	you	have	an	outsourcer.	What	is	important	is	that	the	two	sides
are	each	deriving	benefits,	that	they	trust	each	other,	and	that	each
gives	and	takes.	A	good	number	of	our	IBM	people,	including	the
manager,	sit	right	with	us	in	Camden	[New	Jersey].	The	manager
reports	to	the	Campbell	CTO	and	is	at	every	staff	meeting.	They	have
obviously	signed	confidentiality	agreements.	They	have	access	to	our
business	and	IT	strategic	plans,	and	the	senior	IBM	partner	has	strong
relationships	with	many	of	our	business	leaders,	in	addition	to	me.
They	have	a	huge	vested	interest	in	this	company.	They	want	us	to	win
like	we	want	us	to	win,	and	there	is	a	very,	very	high	level	of	trust.
An	effective	strategic	partnership	involves	constant	negotiation	around
inevitable	changes	in	business	and	technology.	Clients	need	vendors	to	adapt
their	offerings	and	processes	to	changing	business	conditions;	vendors	need

--- PAGE 132 ---
clients	to	adjust	their	behaviors	to	permit	appropriate	process	innovations	and
service	changes.	Successful	partnerships	like	the	Campbell-IBM	partnership
often	apply	a	first-choice	provider	principle,	meaning	that	the	strategic	partner	is
favored	(although	not	always	chosen)	when	new	activities	are	to	be	outsourced.
This	reduces	search	costs	for	the	client	and	sales	costs	for	the	vendor—and	it
encourages	both	partners	to	focus	on	strategic	value,	not	just	lower	costs,	from
the	outsourcing	arrangement.
As	the	Campbell	case	shows,	a	strategic	partnership	can	continue	to	reap
benefits	beyond	stage	2,	as	managers	in	the	client	company	focus	on	addressing
new	strategic	opportunities,	rather	than	ongoing	operations.	But	a	stage	3
relationship	may	benefit	even	more	from	a	cosourcing	alliance.
Cosourcing	Alliances
In	a	strategic	alliance,	responsibilities	are	assigned	clearly	to	one	partner.	The
client	and	vendor	define	boundaries	distinguishing	the	responsibilities	of	each
party.	In	a	cosourcing	alliance,	clients	and	vendors	share	responsibilities,	usually
in	a	project-oriented	environment.	Team	members	from	both	client	and	vendor
converge	and	form	a	team	to	meet	a	business	objective.	Cosourcing	is	a	growing
model	for	delivering	new	systems	and	processes	that	demand	both	business	and
technology	expertise.
For	example,	one	large	financial	services	company	has	engaged	an	offshore
company	to	handle	much	of	its	development.	The	vendor	partner	has	brought
project	management	staff	to	the	client’s	site	so	that	teams	comprise	client	staff,
and	on-site	and	offshore	vendor	staff.	As	is	typical	of	cosourcing	alliances,	this
relationship	draws	on	both	the	client’s	deep	business	knowledge	and	the
vendor’s	specialized	skills	in	technology	and	project	management.
	
7
How	cosourcing	alliances	build	a
	
foundation	for	execution
Client	interest	in	cosourcing	arises	from	the	desire	to	access	technical	and
project	management	expertise	on	an	as-needed	basis.	In	addition,	clients	see
opportunities	for	cost	savings	in	their	alliances.	Vendors	meet	these	demands	by
building	project	management,	industry,	and	technical	expertise	and	then
leveraging	that	expertise	across	multiple	projects	with	multiple	clients.	Vendors

--- PAGE 133 ---
meet	client	demands	for	cost	savings	by	adding	offshore	resources	to	their	talent
pools.	A	cosourcing	alliance	allows	a	client	firm	to	rely	on	a	core	set	of	project
team	members—some	internal,	some	external.	In	response	to	shifts	in	project
loads,	clients	rely	on	vendors	to	provide	supplemental	resources.	Vendors	build
in	protections	against	extreme	and	unanticipated	variations	but	can	normally
shift	talent	between	clients.
Cosourcing	alliances	are	not	as	risky	as	strategic	partnerships.	In	our	study	63
percent	of	clients	felt	their	alliance	was	successful,	and	75	percent	felt	the
vendor	was	making	money	on	the	relationship	(figure	7-2).	The	risks	of
cosourcing	can	be	managed	through	negotiation	of	accountabilities.	As	with
strategic	partnerships,	however,	metrics	can	be	a	challenge.	In	an	effective
alliance,	both	the	vendor	and	client	populate	project	teams.	While	the	project
leader—often	from	the	vendor—is	ultimately	accountable	for	the	outcome,	it	is	a
team	that	delivers	(or	doesn’t	deliver).	Thus,	the	contribution	of	the	outsourcer	in
a	cosourcing	alliance	is	difficult	to	isolate	from	the	contribution	of	the	client’s
employees.	Dow	Chemical,	which	deploys	project	teams	with,	on	average,	four
vendor	employees	for	every	internal	team	member,	has	a	set	of	metrics	to	assess
team	productivity	on	factors	such	as	function	points.	But	ultimately,	the	CIO
notes,	the	measure	of	success	for	the	outsourcing	arrangement	is	the	project
outcome.	He	considers	his	alliance	a	success	because	alliance	teams	consistently
deliver	high	functionality	on	time	and	on	budget.
Cosourcing	proves	particularly	valuable	for	companies	in	the	third	architecture
maturity	stage	(Optimized	Core).	Companies	attempting	to	integrate	their	data
and	standardize	their	processes	often	have	to	rip	out	legacy	systems	and	replace
those	systems	with	new	ones	with	which	they	have	little	experience	(e.g.,	ERP
systems,	Web	services,	customer	relationship	management	systems,	enterprise
application	integration	software).	Rather	than	internally	develop	expertise	in
these	new	technologies,	companies	can	rely	on	experienced	third	parties.
	
8
Vendors	can	help	implement,	maintain,	upgrade,	and	where	necessary,	link	to
other	technologies.	They	can	also	help	with	process-reengineering	efforts.	With
this	kind	of	help	from	a	vendor,	the	client	can	focus	management	attention	on	the
organizational	changes	necessary	to	implement	more	standardized	and	integrated
environments.
Cosourcing	alliances	can	take	a	variety	of	forms.	Liverpool	Direct	Ltd.	(LDL)	is
a	cosourcing	alliance	established	as	a	joint	venture	between	Liverpool	City
Council	and	BT.	The	case	provides	an	example	of	how	a	cosourcing	alliance

--- PAGE 134 ---
allowed	an	organization	(in	this	case	a	local	government)	to	achieve	improved
processes,	lower	costs,	and	architecture	maturity.
Case	study	of	a	cosourcing	alliance:
	
Liverpool	Direct	Ltd.
Liverpool,	the	sixth-largest	city	in	the	United	Kingdom,	is	famous	as	the	home
of	the	Beatles	and	Liverpool	Football	Club.
	
9
	
Once	a	dominant	trading	center,
Liverpool	fell	on	hard	times	during	the	second	half	of	the	twentieth	century.	The
shipping	industry,	in	which	it	had	its	roots,	was	in	decline.	The	city’s	population
of	468,000	was	decreasing.	The	outward	migration	of	younger,	skilled	people
had	resulted	in	a	higher	proportion	of	dependent	people.	In	1998,	33	percent	of
the	population	was	unemployed,	retired,	or	unable	to	work.
David	Henshaw,	who	became	chief	executive	of	Liverpool	City	Council	(LCC)
in	October	1999,	inherited	an	organization	in	collapse.	Out	of	426	local
authorities,	LCC	was	third	from	the	bottom	in	terms	of	service	quality,	and	it	had
the	highest	local	tax	in	the	United	Kingdom.	Delivery	of	social	services	such	as
housing,	medical	care,	educational	support,	and	financial	benefits	was	slow,
error-prone,	and	inefficient.
Henshaw	was	charged	with	achieving	the	city	council’s	goal	of	“making
Liverpool	a	premier	European	city	again.”	He	wanted	to	reengineer	the	council’s
services	around	the	needs	of	its	customers,	stripping	out	bureaucracy	and
focusing	on	frontline	service	delivery.	IT	was	integral	to	this	vision	of	improving
service,	quality,	and	cost.
In	2001,	to	deliver	new	processes	and	underlying	technology	support,	LCC
entered	the	joint	venture	with	BT.	LDL	took	responsibility	for	five	services,
cosourced	with	LCC:	(1)	revenues	and	benefits,	(2)	HR,	(3)	payroll,	(4)
information	technology,	and	(5)	call	center	functions.	LDL	was	managed	via	a
joint	venture	board	made	up	of	the	CEO,	four	BT	directors,	and	two	LCC
representatives.	Staff	(30	from	BT	and	880	from	LCC)	who	joined	LDL	reported
to	LDL	management	but,	partly	to	appease	union	requirements,	remained
employees	of	their	respective	companies,	with	their	existing	salary	and	benefits.
According	to	the	joint	venture	and	shareholders	agreement,	LCC	paid	the	joint
venture	£30	million	a	year	for	the	ten	years	of	the	contract.	This	annual	payment

--- PAGE 135 ---
represented	LCC’s	estimate	of	how	much	it	would	cost	the	council	to	run	the
five	services	cosourced	with	LDL.	The	annual	£30	million	payment	covered	the
salaries	of	LCC	employees	and	the	interest	on	an	operating	lease,	a	financial
arrangement	that	allowed	BT	to	spread	its	agreed-upon	investment	in	IT	over	the
life	of	the	contract.	BT	is	entitled	to	the	remainder	of	the	annual	payment	to
cover	its	own	costs	and	generate	a	profit.
LDL’s	first	move	was	to	rationalize	and	standardize	the	IT	infrastructure.
Standards	for	hardware	were	defined	for	all	new	PCs	and	peripherals.	Staff
began	to	consolidate	the	council’s	500	different	databases	into	a	single	database.
Software	standards	ensured	compatibility	between	services	and	facilitated	the
transfer	of	information.
More	important,	LDL	improved	the	delivery	of	city	services	to	residents.	In	the
revenues	and	benefits	department,	LDL	reengineered	business	processes	and
introduced	a	document	management	system.	These	changes	reduced	the
department’s	backlog	from	60,000	queries	to	4,000—a	reduction	of	about	a
year’s	worth	of	work.	Revenue	collection	also	improved,	resulting	in	an
estimated	gain	of	£1.5	million	from	high-rent	debtors	who	had	disputes	with	the
council.	LDL	implemented	a	new	customer	relationship	management	system	to
redirect	most	resident	inquiries	to	the	call	center.	By	June	2002	the	call	center
handled	and	resolved	90	percent	of	inquiries	at	the	first	point	of	contact.
Abandoned	calls	dropped	from	25	percent	to	12	percent.	In	parallel,	the	service
grew	from	80	seats	taking	40,000	calls	per	month	during	office	hours	to	a	24/7
operation,	with	225	seats	handling	160,000	calls.	LDL	also	implemented	an	ERP
system	to	replace	the	old	paper-based	processes	in	HR	and	payroll.	The	new
system	offered	self-administration	of	transactions	via	an	intranet	and	reduced	the
number	of	staff	by	50	percent.
The	benefits	of	this	partnership	were	obvious	for	the	council.	The	number	of
council	staff	was	reduced	from	23,500	to	19,800	while	the	quality	of	services
sharply	improved;	75	percent	of	the	council’s	key	performance	indicators
improved	from	rock	bottom	to	the	upper	quartile	of	local	government
performance.	Moreover,	LCC	was	able	to	announce	a	3	percent	reduction	in
council	tax.	Increased	morale	resulted	in	a	six-day	cut	in	annual	absenteeism
rates,	from	sixteen	days	to	the	national	average	of	ten	days	per	person.	The
council	expected	these	benefits	to	grow	over	time.
Although	most	cosourcing	alliances	don’t	have	a	formal	joint	venture

--- PAGE 136 ---
arrangement,	all	cosourcing	alliances	depend	on	the	efforts	of	joint	client-vendor
teams.	Cosourcing	can	help	companies	standardize	technologies	in	the	second
stage	of	architecture	maturity	(as	in	the	case	of	Liverpool	City	Council),	but
cosourcing	alliances	are	particularly	valuable	for	helping	companies	through
stage	3	(Optimized	Core).	It	is	in	stage	3	that	a	vendor	can	provide	IT	expertise,
business	process	design,	and	project	management	support	to	assist	with	the
transformation	to	more	standardized	and	integrated	business	processes.	Yet	as
companies	move	into	the	fourth	stage	(Business	Modularity)	and	rely	more	on
external	processes	for	their	plug-and-play	environments,	cosourcing	may	give
way	to	more	transaction	relationships.
Transaction	Relationships
Transaction	relationships—sometimes	called	“out-tasking”—out-source	specific
services	like	accounts	payable	processing,	expense	reporting,	desktop
provisioning,	backup,	and	disaster	recovery.	Like	strategic	partnerships,
transaction	relationships	assign	clear	responsibility	to	the	vendor	for	executing
the	outsourced	processes,	but	they	are	much	more	narrowly	defined,	arm’s-
length	relationships.	Transaction	relationships	outsource	not	only	business
process	and	IT	support	but	also	ownership	of	the	software	and	the	design	of	the
process.	Transaction	relationships	are	appropriate	for	activities	guided	by	clear
business	rules	that	are	common	across	many	organizations.
Benefits	and	risks	of	transaction	relationships
Transaction	relationships	enjoy	statistically	significantly	greater	satisfaction	than
either	of	the	other	types	of	relationships.	Respondents	in	our	study	considered
their	transaction	outsourcing	to	be	a	success	for	both	client	and	vendor	in	90
percent	of	cases.	Clients	have	three	key	objectives	in	their	transaction
relationships:	access	to	best	practices,	variable	capacity,	and	the	ability	to
redirect	management	attention	to	core	capabilities.	Vendors	address	those	needs
by	developing	best	practices,	implementing	and	supporting	standardized
platforms,	and	developing	economies	of	scale.
Where	feasible,	vendors	also	build	unique	assets	or	expertise.	These	capabilities
allow	them	to	improve	service	and	lower	costs.	For	example,	eFunds	Corp.,
which	provides	a	range	of	outsourcing	services	to	financial	institutions,
telecommunications	companies,	and	retail	organizations,	has	built	a	large
database	of	credit	information	that	is	the	key	to	its	credit-checking	process.	This

--- PAGE 137 ---
distinctive	asset—which	clients	either	cannot	or	would	not	replicate—helps
protect	the	vendor’s	margins	while	providing	a	valued	service	to	clients.
Successful	transaction	relationships	have	low	management	overhead.
Customization,	protracted	contract	negotiations,	or	client	interference	with	how
the	vendor	performs	the	process	increases	cost	and	undermines	benefits	for	both
parties.	Conversely,	a	hands-off	transaction	relationship	can	deliver	hassle-free,
high-quality	services	to	clients	and	reasonable	margins	to	vendors.
As	long	as	a	process	can	be	isolated	from	other	company	activities,	companies
can	implement	transaction	outsourcing	relationships	at	any	architectural	stage.
For	example,	processes	like	personal	computer	configuration,	business	travel
arrangements,	and	employee	benefits	processing	are	good	candidates	for
outsourcing	in	early	architecture	maturity	stages.
Transaction	outsourcing	cannot	become	strategically	important	or	widely
adopted	until	the	Business	Modularity	stage.	It	is	in	this	stage	that	companies
have	developed	sufficient	business	process	expertise	to	be	able	to	extract	and
outsource	those	activities	to	which	they	can	and	should	apply	industry	standards
while	retaining	those	activities	that	are	necessarily	unique.	In	addition,
premature	adoption	of	transaction	outsourcing	involves	creating	new	interfaces
to	connect	to	each	new	vendor,	whereas	companies	with	mature	architectures
will	adopt	increasingly	standardized,	low-maintenance	interfaces	to	their	data
and	systems.	A	more	mature	architecture	will	also	enable	secure	access	to	data;
otherwise,	risks	will	multiply	as	the	number	of	interfaces	grows.
Transaction	outsourcing,	as	applied	in	stage	4,	allows	a	company	to	plug
external	processes	into	a	solid	foundation	for	execution.	Dow	Chemical	offers	an
example	of	a	company	designing	its	foundation	for	execution	to	readily
implement	transaction	outsourcing	relationships.
Case	study	of	transaction	relationships:
	
Dow	Chemical
In	
chapter	2
	
we	discussed	Dow	Chemical’s	highly	integrated	and	standardized
operating	model.
	
10
	
This	operating	model	gives	Dow	very	cost-effective	and
reliable	global	business	processes.	Dow	has	built	this	foundation	for	execution
with	extensive	help	from	vendors.	A	cosourcing	alliance	with	Accenture	has,

--- PAGE 138 ---
since	1996,	supplemented	Dow’s	own	capabilities	in	application	development
and	support.	Since	2000,	Dow	has	relied	on	a	strategic	partnership	to	manage
computer	operations.	Management	credits	IBM	with	providing	cost	benefits
through	its	economies	of	scale	and	with	giving	Dow	the	benefits	of	world-class
infrastructure	management	without	forcing	in-house	development	of	a	capability
that	would	prove	to	be	neither	rare	nor	distinctive.
Dow’s	foundation	for	execution	has	been	less	valuable,	however,	in	supporting
growth.	Dow	management	expects	that	much	of	the	company’s	future	growth
will	come	through	joint	ventures	(JVs).	President	and	CEO	Andrew	Liveris	cites
the	benefits	of	joint	ventures	as	“lower	capital	intensity,	access	to	regional
expertise	and	advantaged	feedstocks;	the	ability	to	leverage	our	technology	and
know-how;	and	accelerated	penetration	in	high-growth	markets.”
	
11
	
In	2004
Dow’s	approximately	one	hundred	JVs	accounted	for	25	percent	of	the
company’s	earnings.	But	JVs	cannot	rely	on	a	highly	integrated,	highly
standardized	IT	and	business	process	environment.	Dow	needs	modules	that	can
be	assembled	as-needed	while	protecting	the	boundaries	between	itself	and	the
JV.	Frank	Luijckx,	senior	director	of	information	systems	strategy	and
architecture,	explains:
Today’s	IT	architecture	[at	Dow],	which	is	a	monolithic	architecture,	is
sometimes	referred	to	as	the	castle.	Within	the	castle,	things	are	really
nice.	It’s	very	secure,	people	work	together	very	well,	there	is	plenty
of	food,	and	we	are	generating	a	lot	of	value.	But	if	there	is	somebody
that	we	want	to	work	with,	we	always	have	to	bring	them	in	the	castle,
right?	Because	the	perimeter	defense	is	on	the	outside	of	the	castle.	I
don’t	mean	just	the	security—it’s	reporting,	everything.	And	within	the
castle,	we	don’t	have	any	rooms	with	doors.	So,	if	we	bring	in	a	joint
venture	that	we	want	to	work	closely	with,	we	have	to	bring	them	in
the	castle	and	trust	them.	And	you	can’t	do	that.	It	is	only	a	question	of
time	before	you	are	going	to	bring	somebody	in	and	it	is	not	going	to
work,	or	where	somebody	else	will	say,	yes,	I	know	you	trust	them,
but	we	don’t,	we	don’t	think	this	is	a	good	relationship.
	
12
To	support	its	JVs	and	to	move	into	a	more	modular	environment,	Dow	is
gradually	implementing	a	concept	it	calls	the	“Federated	Broker	Model”	(FBM).
In	this	model	Dow	purchases	services	from	vendors	who	provide	commodity
business	processes	from	their	own	systems.	For	example,	Dow	is	planning	to
purchase	ERP	services	rather	than	maintain	ERP	systems.	These	services	will

--- PAGE 139 ---
offer	integration	across	companies	instead	of	solely	within	companies,	allowing
Dow	to	selectively	integrate	processes	with	its	JVs	and	other	partners	and
customers.	As	Michael	J.	Costa,	corporate	director	of	six	sigma	and	work
process	expertise	at	Dow,	explains:	“The	vision	of	the	Federated	Broker	Model
is	that	we	shift	workflow	into	the	BSP	[business	service	provider],	ASP
[application	service	provisioning],	BPO	[business	process	outsourcing]	area	that
is	emerging.	You	enjoy	a	much	more	competitive	pricing	environment	because
now	it	is	not	the	SAPs	and	the	PeopleSofts	and	the	Oracles	that	control	how
companies	work.	It	is	more	of	a	battle	among	providers	on	open	platforms.”
In	the	ideal	state	of	the	FBM	vision,	Dow	will	maintain	its	valuable	horizontal
and	vertical	integration,	but	it	will	no	longer	buy,	build,	or	run	applications.	Nor
will	Dow	buy	individual	components	from	individual	providers—a	scenario
entailing	significant	management	overhead.	Instead,	Dow	managers	envision
buying	application	functionality	from	a	strategic	alliance	that	will	bundle
hardware,	network,	desktop,	software,	and	process	capability	(combinations	of
ASP	and	BPO	providers)	into	an	integrated	service	model,	giving	Dow—and
any	other	company—a	single	point	of	contact	for	this	bundle.	This	alliance,	not
Dow,	will	choose	the	technology	and	make	IT	investments.	Dow	will	pay	for
process-enabling	functionality	as	needed.
Dow	management	recognizes	that	vendors	are	not	yet	able	to	meet	the	FBM’s
requirements.	According	to	Dave	Kepler,	Dow’s	corporate	vice	president	for
shared	services	and	CIO:
One	of	the	realities	is	to	recognize	the	marketplace	and	what	you	can
leverage	and	where	there	are	things	that	you’re	going	to	have	to	really
design	yourself	and	use.	We	have	to	be	very	practical	about	the	fact
that	the	service	providers	will	have	a	fair	amount	of	volatility.	So,	the
Federated	Broker	Model	isn’t	an	end	state	as	much	as	it	is	a
recognition	that,	boy,	we	can’t	develop	all	the	software	and	we	will	try
to	leverage	these	variable	services	that	we	need.	That	means	we’re
going	to	have	to	have	a	lot	of	interfaces	and	be	pretty	flexible	in	what
we’re	trying	to	do.
While	waiting	for	this	market	to	emerge,	Dow	has	implemented	a	few
capabilities	reflecting	the	promise	of	the	Federated	Broker	Model,	including
outsourcing	expense	reporting	to	Bank	of	America,	outsourcing	401(k)	and	stock
options	to	Fidelity	and	Smith	Barney,	and	outsourcing	functions	like	payroll	and

--- PAGE 140 ---
elements	of	transportation	logistics.	Dow	managers	believe	the	Federated	Broker
Model	will	win	converts	as	fast	as	vendors	can	produce	useful	and	affordable
process	modules.	Dow	is	transforming	from	stage	3	(Optimized	Core)	to	stage	4
(Business	Modularity),	and	outsourcing	is	a	big	part	of	that	transformation.
Few	companies	are	ready	to	embark	on	transaction-processing	relationships	on
the	scale	that	Dow	Chemical	is	currently	pursuing.	Dow’s	expertise	in	managing
global	process	integration	and	standardization—its	development	of	a	stage	3
foundation	for	execution—has	positioned	the	company	to	seize	business	process
services	as	they	become	available	in	the	marketplace.	Other	companies	will
outsource	the	small	set	of	processes	that	are	easily	extracted	from	the	business
core	(e.g.,	employee	benefits,	travel	services)	while	they	mature	their
architectures	and	build	their	foundations	for	execution.
Aligning	Outsourcing	Relationships
	
with	Architecture	Stages
Dow	Chemical	demonstrates	that	a	company	can	become	competent	in	all	three
types	of	outsourcing	relationships.	But	it	is	important	to	match	the	objectives
and	the	services	outsourced	with	the	appropriate	type	of	relationship.	Clients	and
vendors	in	strategic	partnerships	who	refuse	to	adapt	to	the	strategic	needs	of
their	partners	will	become	embroiled	in	bitter	contract	battles.	Companies
managing	transaction	relationships	like	strategic	partnerships	incur	expensive
and	unnecessary	overhead.	And	cosourcing	that	is	treated	like	anything	but	a
team	environment	is	sure	to	suboptimize	outcomes.
A	company’s	ability	to	capitalize	on	the	potential	benefits	of	outsourcing	to	build
a	foundation	for	execution	is,	at	least	in	part,	dependent	on	an	awareness	of	how
outsourcing	will	contribute	to,	or	leverage,	enterprise	architecture.	Each	of	the
three	types	of	outsourcing	relationships	can	help	companies	build	their
foundation	for	execution.	But	each	contributes	to	architecture	maturity	in	a
different	way.	Figure	7-3	identifies	how	outsourcing	contributes	to	architecture
maturity.
FIGURE	7-3

--- PAGE 141 ---
Outsourcing	for	Architecture	Maturity
While	outsourcing	can	facilitate	maturation	of	an	enterprise	architecture,	it
cannot	radically	transform	the	company	as	the	architecture	matures.	The
technical	challenges	of	architecture	can	be	transferred,	at	least	in	part,	to	a
vendor.	But	those	technical	challenges	will	be	replaced	with	relationship
management	challenges.	And	the	organizational	change	challenges	are	in	no	way
diminished.	The	bottom	line	is:	you	can	outsource	to	support	the	building	of
your	foundation	for	execution,	but	you	shouldn’t	out-source	your	architecture.
The	management	practices	listed	in	
chapter	5
	
remain	the	responsibility	of	every
company	looking	to	evolve	its	architecture.
We	noted	at	the	start	of	the	chapter	that	modular,	plug-and-play	companies	are
likely	to	become	the	norm.	However,	this	model	is	only	beginning	to	emerge
and,	thus,	will	not	become	the	norm	in	most	industries	for	quite	some	time.	This
is	good	news	because	it	means	that	companies	have	time	to	learn	how	to	change,
how	to	move	incrementally	through	the	architecture	stages,	and	how	to
implement	outsourcing	as	appropriate	vendor	services	become	available.
8


--- PAGE 142 ---
Now—Exploit	Your
	
Foundation	for
	
Profitable	Growth
IN	THE	AUTO	INDUSTRY
	
,	companies	could	once	succeed	by	developing	a	single
popular	car	model.	A	popular	car	like	the	Volkswagen	Beetle,	the	Dodge
Caravan,	or	the	Saab	900	would	keep	the	profits	rolling	in	for	years.	But	the
terms	of	competition	have	changed.	No	longer	is	it	enough	to	do	a	single	car
well;	to	succeed	a	car	company	has	to	develop	a	great	
platform
	
of	models.
Companies	now	have	to	develop	a	family	of	products	that	share	the	same
chassis,	engine,	and	drivetrain	but	appeal	to	different	market	segments.	Thus
when	Volkswagen	introduced	the	new	Beetle,	it	used	the	same	platform	as	the
VW	Golf,	Audi	TT	Coupe,	and	other	models.
	
1
Like	a	car	platform,	a	foundation	for	execution	must	serve	more	than	one
business	need.	Executives	must	look	to	leverage	their	foundation	in	new	and
innovative	ways.	In	a	business	environment	in	which	China	is	the	world’s
factory	and	India	is	the	world’s	service	provider,	and	where	the	market	sells
world-class	business	processes	for	anyone	to	use,	companies	must	continually
evolve	and	exploit	a	foundation	for	execution	to	support	new	business	activities.
Companies	that	fail	to	build,	or	continuously	augment,	a	foundation	for
execution	will	not	be	able	to	grow—or	more	accurately,	they	will	not	be	able	to
grow	profitably.
There	are	two	general	strategies	for	profitable	growth:	organic	growth	and
acquisition-driven	growth.	A	good	foundation	for	execution	helps	with	both.	For
organic	growth,	a	solid	foundation	helps	companies	leverage—rather	than	re-
create—technology	platforms	and	business	process	expertise.	Instead	of
inventing	capabilities	for	each	new	business	opportunity,	a	company	can	apply
existing	capabilities,	allowing	faster	response	and	greater	profitability.
Companies	pursuing	growth	through	mergers	and	acquisitions	can	also	leverage
their	foundations.	In	this	case,	companies	have	a	choice	of	two	strategies:	to	“rip
and	replace”	or	to	diversify.	Rip-and-replace	companies	use	their	foundation	to
drive	a	transformation	of	the	acquired	company,	leveraging	their	best	practices	in
the	combined	entity.	Companies	using	a	diversification	strategy	allow	their
acquisitions	to	use	their	existing	foundations.	They	gain	synergy	through

--- PAGE 143 ---
standardized	technology	and	shared	services.
This	chapter	uses	case	studies	to	show	how	companies	can	grow	profitably	by
building	and	leveraging	a	foundation	for	execution.	We	end	the	chapter	with	our
forecast	for	the	next	stage	of	architecture	maturity	and	the	benefits	it	will	offer
companies.
Leveraging	the	Foundation
	
for	Profitable	Growth
Companies	become	more	agile	as	they	move	their	foundations	through	the
different	stages	of	architecture	maturity.	A	company’s	operating	model	dictates
the	route	it	takes	to	architecture	maturity	and	the	benefits	it	achieves.	Three
companies	with	three	different	operating	models—UPS,	MetLife,	and	7-Eleven
Japan—show	the	different	types	of	agility	companies	develop	to	achieve
profitable	growth.
Profitable	Growth	in	a	Unification	Model
In	a	Unification	operating	model,	companies	leverage	standardized	IT
infrastructure,	standardized	business	processes,	and	shared	data.	As	a	company
matures	its	enterprise	architecture,	the	foundation	gets	thicker—more	of	its
repetitive	processes	are	digitized	end-to-end.	This	strong	base	facilitates
profitable	growth	when	line	managers	use	the	integrated	data	to	better	serve
customers	and	senior	managers	turn	their	attention	to	new	markets,	products,	or
process	innovations.
As	described	earlier,	UPS	has	been	leveraging	its	foundation	to	create	agility
around	its	core	package	delivery	business.
	
2
	
This	agility	allows	the	company	to
regularly	create	new	products	and	services.	During	the	1990s,	UPS	grew	its
revenues	from	$14	billion	to	$30	billion.	Revenues	in	2004	exceeded	$36	billion.
UPS	delivered	3.6	billion	packages	in	2004,	an	increase	of	4	percent	over	the
prior	year.	In	the	past	five	years,	UPS	has	consistently	outperformed	the	Dow
Jones	Industrial	Average,	the	Standard	&	Poor’s	500,	and	its	major	competitors.
One	reason	is	that	UPS’s	operating	margin	was	nearly	three	times	the	industry
average	and	50	percent	higher	than	Federal	Express’s.	In	2004	UPS	was	named
by	
Fortune
	
magazine	as	the	most	admired	company	in	its	industry	for	the	sixth
consecutive	year.

--- PAGE 144 ---
UPS’s	growth	has	stemmed	from	its	agility	to	leverage	economies	of	scale	and	to
innovate	to	extend	its	core.	For	example,	UPS	started	using	the	Internet	for
package	tracking	and	customer	communications	as	early	as	1995.	Next,	UPS
gave	customers	tracking	software	that	many	linked	to	their	homegrown
purchasing	and	distribution	systems.	But	as	customers	bought	ERP	systems	to
handle	their	purchasing	and	distribution	needs,	they	could	no	longer	use	UPS’s
tracking	software.	So,	the	company	established	alliances	with	key	vendors,	like
Oracle,	Peoplesoft,	Harbinger,	IBM,	and	SAP,	who	built	the	UPS	tracking
interface	into	their	enterprise	systems	software,	making	it	easier	for	customers	to
do	business—much	more	business—with	UPS.
Similarly,	UPS	has	gradually	implemented	processes	to	leverage	its	investment
in	its	delivery	information	acquisition	device	(DIAD).	Introduced	in	1991—and
upgraded	in	1993,	1999,	and	2005—this	device	captures	a	customer	signature
with	every	delivery	and	then	uploads	the	data	in	real	time	to	the	package
information	database.	The	device	was	initially	justified	on	the	basis	of	cost
savings:	each	driver	saved	about	thirty	minutes	per	day,	time	formerly	spent
summarizing	the	day’s	activities.	With	60,000	drivers,	the	cost	savings
represented	by	one	half	hour	per	person	were	significant,	but	the	real	value	of
the	DIAD	was	in	the	additional	information	collected	about	each	package	and
customer.	This	information	contributed	to	better	understanding	of	the
profitability	of	individual	customers	and	packages.	The	company	used	this
information	to	make	routing	and	pricing	decisions	and,	ultimately,	to	provide
UPS	customers	with	new	services	based	on	their	individual	shipping	habits.
UPS	has	continued	to	add	more	capabilities	to	its	foundation	for	execution,
increasing	the	company’s	efficiency	and	agility.	UPS’s	systems	now	dictate
where	packages	are	placed	on	the	truck,	the	order	in	which	packages	are
delivered,	and	how	drivers	record	a	delivery.	Because	its	delivery	processes	are
digitized,	drivers	have	little	discretion	in	these	tasks.	But	the	precision	of	the
company’s	delivery	practices	leads	to	greater	efficiency	and	predictability,	and
minimizes	the	time	managers	spend	on	operational	issues,	allowing	them	to	turn
their	attention	to	product	and	service	innovations,	as	described	in	
chapter	1
	
.
Digitization	limits	UPS’s	ability	to	change	its	core	delivery	process,	but	the
company	can	easily	take	on	new	customers—and	the	employees	who	serve	those
customers—knowing	that	its	own	new	employees	will	perform	to	the	same	high
standard	because	they	are	trained	to	use	the	same	systems.	UPS	has	further
leveraged	its	IT	infrastructure	and	business	process	foundation	by	expanding

--- PAGE 145 ---
globally.	UPS’s	international	business,	which	constituted	15	percent	of	revenues
in	1999,	has	grown	at	double-digit	rates	ever	since.
Profitable	Growth	in	a	Replication	Model
In	a	Replication	operating	model,	companies	leverage	standardized	IT-enabled
business	processes	to	grow	into	new	markets	and	increase	products	and	services.
As	a	company	matures	its	enterprise	architecture,	it	expands	the	number	of
processes	and	systems	in	its	foundation.	These	digitized	processes	readily
support	new	products	and	services.	When	Replication	companies	move	their
foundation	for	execution	into	a	new	market,	automation	reduces	start-up	costs,
so	the	revenue	base	can	expand	profitably.	Seven-Eleven	Japan	is	a	Replication
company	that	has	leveraged	its	foundation	to	grow	profitably.
Seven-Eleven	Japan	(SEJ)	has	built	its	Replication	foundation	for	execution
around	its	product-mix	capabilities.
	
3
	
Using	this	foundation,	SEJ	grew	from
6,000	to	10,000	stores	between	1997	and	2005	while	maintaining	its	position	as
the	most	profitable	retailer	in	Japan.
CEO	Toshifumi	Suzuki	describes	his	vision	of	SEJ’s	stores	as	follows:
“[They’re]	stores	where	you	can	find	a	solution	for	any	of	your	daily	life
problems.	We	always	try	to	plan	and	design	a	store	in	such	a	way	that	our	store
neighbors,	in	particular,	can	get	whatever	they	need	at	any	time	they	want.”
	
4
Suzuki	believes	that	one	of	the	most	serious	problems	in	retail	is	a	missed
opportunity	to	sell	an	item	because	it	is	out	of	stock.	Accordingly,	ever	since	he
opened	his	first	store	in	1974,	Suzuki	has	focused	on	maintaining	optimum
product	mix.	Since	the	late	seventies,	SEJ	has	built	and	exploited	IT-enabled
processes	supporting	item-level	control—meaning	that	the	items	on	the	shelf	in
any	given	store	have	been	precisely	selected	for	customers	of	that	store.	With	the
goal	of	better	customer	service,	SEJ	has,	over	the	past	thirty	years,	evolved	its
IT,	inventory	management,	and	distribution	capabilities.	The	lower	half	of	figure
8-1	describes	the	evolution	of	the	technologies	and	distribution	processes	that
cumulatively	built	SEJ’s	foundation	for	execution.
FIGURE	8-1

--- PAGE 146 ---
One	of	SEJ’s	earliest	distribution	management	initiatives	was	to	combine	similar
products	from	different	suppliers	at	a	delivery	center.	By	first	combining	dairy
products,	then	frozen	products,	then	refrigerated	products,	and	later	rice	and
fresh	food	products	and	nonfood	items,	SEJ	reduced	the	number	of	different
deliveries	a	store	received	each	day	from	seventy	to	nine	over	an	eighteen-year
period.	SEJ’s	manufacturers	now	deliver	to	one	of	four	“combined	delivery
centers,”	which,	in	turn,	ship	to	the	stores	in	four	types	of	vans	classified	by	the
temperature	of	the	goods:	frozen,	chilled,	room	temperature,	and	hot.
By	the	early	eighties	SEJ	was	introducing	technology	support	for	inventory	and
distribution	management,	including	its	first	point-of-sale	(POS)	systems.	The
POS	data	helped	SEJ	analyze	its	customers’	buying	habits	to	improve	the
product	ordering	process.	The	POS	data	became	even	more	valuable	in	the	early
nineties	when	SEJ	installed	high-speed	telecommunications	lines	and
subsequently	satellite	antennae.	High-speed	telecommunications	provide
instantaneous	sales	reports	to	SEJ’s	entire	supply	chain.
Today	SEJ’s	“total	information	system”	connects	70,000	computers	in	stores,	at
headquarters,	and	at	supplier	sites,	providing	transparency	across	the	entire	value

--- PAGE 147 ---
chain.
	
5
	
Vendors,	distributors,	and	manufacturers	share	a	common	infrastructure
consisting	of	1,800	terminals	at	1,100	locations.	The	standardized	systems
handle	raw	material	ordering,	inventory	management,	production	management,
and	automated	sorting.	SEJ’s	partners	are	delighted	with	the	information,	as	a
salesperson	for	one	supplier	commented:	“Their	information	system	is	so	good
that	we	can	now	instantly	find	out	which	goods	of	ours	are	selling	and	how
much.”
	
6
Meanwhile,	store	employees	can	access	recent	sales,	weather	conditions,	and
product	information,	all	presented	graphically,	to	support	store	orders.	SEJ	trains
store	owners	and	clerks,	including	part-time	workers,	in	inventory	management.
In	addition,	counselors	visit	stores	twice	a	week	to	provide	advice	on	store
operations	and	information	on	the	portfolio	of	available	items.	The	professional
development	of	even	part-time	employees	allows	stores	to	benefit	from	SEJ’s
practice	of	ordering	and	delivering	fresh	food	three	times	a	day.	The	result	is	that
on	hot	days	Tokyo’s	7-Eleven	stores	have	plenty	of	bento	boxes	while	on	cold
days	there	are	lots	of	hot	noodles	for	sale.
Seven-Eleven	Japan’s	digitized	distribution	and	inventory	management
capabilities	give	it	agility	with	product	mix.	The	result	is	an	industry-leading	70
percent	of	each	store’s	products	being	new	each	year.	Because	all	SEJ	employees
rigidly	follow	standardized	processes	for	identifying	and	ordering	the	products
their	store’s	customers	most	want,	SEJ	achieves	customer	loyalty	and	higher
sales.	SEJ’s	foundation	for	execution	helped	SEJ	stores	to	nearly	double	the
average	daily	sales	between	1977	and	1992.	Seven-Eleven	Japan’s	average	daily
sales	are	35	percent	higher	than	industry	average.
Profitable	Growth	in	a	Coordination	Model
In	a	Coordination	operating	model,	a	company	leverages	a	strong	IT
infrastructure	to	share	data	across	unique	businesses.	As	a	company	matures	its
architecture,	the	foundation	of	shared,	easily	accessible	data	becomes
increasingly	powerful.	Profitable	growth	comes	from	superior	customer	service,
better	knowledge	of	customer	buying	patterns	and	needs,	and	greater	ability	to
cross-sell	and	upsell	customers.	This	improved	understanding	of	customers	leads
to	better	business	decisions	and	better-targeted	new	products.	New	products	and
services	come	from	business	units	that	are	not	bound	by	standard	processes—
which	encourages	local	innovation.	MetLife	is	a	good	example	of	a	company
leveraging	its	foundation	to	provide	a	growing	set	of	products	to	a	growing	set	of

--- PAGE 148 ---
customers.
MetLife,	formed	in	1863,	is	the	United	States’	largest	life	insurer.
	
7
	
MetLife’s
chairman	and	CEO,	Robert	Benmosche,	defines	the	company’s	mission	as	“to
build	financial	freedom	for	everyone.”	To	achieve	that	vision,	MetLife	needs	to
create	an	ever-growing	portfolio	of	financial	products.	MetLife	is	working	to
provide	an	integrated	view	of	its	products	for	its	customers	and	a	single	view	of
the	customer	for	its	employees	to	enable	better	service.
Like	most	financial	services	companies,	MetLife’s	history	works	against
integration.	In	the	past	twenty	years,	MetLife	has	undergone	a	series	of	mergers,
so	its	systems	legacy	includes	systems	from	several	large,	formerly	independent
companies.	MetLife	has	been	structured	by	product	line,	where	systems	were
built	to	sell	one	product	to	many	customers	and	not	to	provide	an	integrated	view
of	customers.	Adding	to	the	complexity	of	MetLife’s	systems	and	processes,	the
company	sells	directly	to	individuals	as	well	as	through	employers	who	provide
MetLife	products	as	an	employee	benefit.
To	integrate	data,	Executive	Vice	President	and	CIO	Steven	Sheinheit	focuses	on
clarifying	what	data	is	needed	and	how	it	is	created.	While	some	Coordination
companies	look	to	packaged	customer	relationship	management	systems	to
provide	integration,	MetLife’s	large-scale	and	complex	relationships	cannot	be
easily	addressed	by	packaged	software.	Instead,	the	company	relies	on	world-
class	technical	talent	to	provide	the	integration	of	packaged	software	with	the
needed	infrastructure,	as	well	as	to	design	the	information	architecture	and
extract	the	needed	data.
Integrated	customer	data	enables	MetLife	employees	to	understand	their
customers,	follow	the	history	of	transactions,	and	provide	better	service.
MetLife’s	“One	MetLife”	initiative,	to	attack	the	inefficiencies	of	its	history	of
product	line	structures	and	growth	by	acquisition,	will	introduce	greater	business
process	standardization	throughout	the	company.	However,	the	thrust	of	its
enterprise	architecture	is	business	integration	enabled	by	shared	data	access.
Data	access	is	what	MetLife	people	need	to	meet	customer	needs	and	sell
company	products.	Because	employees	need	not	spend	time	tracking	down	data
to	answer	customer	questions	or	resolve	issues,	more	of	MetLife’s	resources	can
go	into	developing	new	products	that	help	customers	“build	financial	freedom.”
In	2004	MetLife	added	products	like	critical-illness	insurance,	a	suite	of
retirement	products	designed	to	provide	“income	for	life,”	and	an	innovative

--- PAGE 149 ---
survivor	income	benefit	for	its	universal	life	product.
Business	units	in	a	Coordination	model	have	considerable	autonomy	in
designing	products	and	serving	customers.	This	autonomy	encourages	product
innovation	and	allows	companies	to	expand	revenue	per	customer	while	also
appealing	to	a	broader	range	of	customers.	Building	and	leveraging	its
foundation	through	new	products,	MetLife	generated	record	net	income	in	2002,
2003,	and	2004.
Profitable	Growth	in	a	Diversification	Model
In	a	Diversification	operating	model,	there	may	be	no	integration	or
standardization	of	business	processes	across	business	units.	Companies	grow	by
giving	business	units	autonomy	to	pursue	local	growth,	or	they	create	or	acquire
new	businesses.	As	a	Diversification	company	matures	its	enterprise
architecture,	it	offers	shared	IT	infrastructure	to	reduce	costs	across	the
company.	Many	Diversification	companies	will	not	mature	their	architecture	past
stage	2,	wishing	only	to	generate	some	economies	of	scale	in	IT.	Those	that
move	to	stage	3	focus	on	introducing	shared	services	for	functions	like	finance,
HR,	and	purchasing.
Diversification	companies	choosing	not	to	mature	their	architecture	rely	on
management	capability	(e.g.,	risk	management,	merger	and	acquisition
capability,	etc.)	to	add	shareholder	value	from	headquarters.	This	model	of	a
diversified	company,	typified	by	GE	and	Johnson	&	Johnson	through	the	1980s,
has	largely	lost	favor	among	stockholders.	More	often,	companies	with	a
Diversification	model	choose	to	hold	a	portfolio	of	businesses	with	a	natural
synergy	and	thus	have	some	corporate	technical	standards	and	shared	services.
For	example,	Carlson	Companies	has	a	portfolio	of	brands	in	the	hospitality
industry.	While	hotels,	restaurants,	cruise	ships,	and	travel	agencies	don’t	share
many	business	processes,	they	do	have	natural	synergies.	So	Carlson	has	been
able	to	generate	economies	from	shared	infrastructure	and	shared	services,
particularly	finance.	The	company	also	anticipates	developing	a	data	store	to
leverage	multiple	relationships	with	customers.	Diversification	companies	don’t
need	an	extensive	foundation	for	execution	company-wide,	but	they	can	take	a
few	relatively	simple	actions	that	generate	cost	savings	and	cross-business-unit
synergies.

--- PAGE 150 ---
Managing	the	Architecture	Through
	
Mergers	and	Acquisitions
Acquisitions	are	easiest,	though	arguably	least	valuable,	in	companies	with	a
Diversification	model.	Diversification	demands	minimal	organizational	change.
In	the	other	three	models,	the	challenge	of	growing	by	acquisition	rather	than
organically	is	that	two	companies	have	to	try	to	merge	incompatible	foundations.
If	the	two	companies	involved	in	an	acquisition	have	not	achieved	the	same
stage	of	architecture	maturity,	the	change	can	be	highly	disruptive.	For	example,
if	a	company	with	a	stage	3	enterprise	architecture	acquires	a	company	with	a
stage	1	enterprise	architecture,	the	acquiring	company	can	install	its	foundation,
but	the	acquired	company	will	have	to	skip	stages.	As	we	noted	earlier	in	the
book,	skipping	stages	imposes	significant	learning	requirements	on	a	company.
During	the	learning	process,	the	acquiring	company	may	regress	to	stage	1	or
stage	2	by	virtue	of	its	acquisition.
Even	if	two	companies	are	at	the	same	architectural	stage,	a	merger	will	be
disruptive	as	management	sorts	out	which	of	the	two	foundations	for	execution
will	work	best.	Some	companies	try	to	pick	and	choose	from	the	two	companies’
best	capabilities.	But	if	the	companies	have	not	achieved	modularity	in	their
business	design,	such	selectivity	will	almost	certainly	cause	problems.
Nonetheless,	some	companies	outside	the	Diversification	quadrant	have	the
agility	to	grow	profitably	through	mergers	and	acquisitions.	We	have	observed
two	different	architectural	approaches	to	profitable	growth	through	acquisitions:
1
.	
The	company	leverages	a	mature	foundation	either	through	a	strategy	of
ripping	out	existing	processes	at	the	acquired	company	and	installing	the
digitized	processes	of	the	acquiring	company	(Unification	or	Replication),
or	through	a	strategy	of	moving	the	acquisition	onto	a	standard	portal	and
forcing	data	integration	(Coordination).
2
.	
The	company	makes	the	acquisition	for	purposes	of	market	synergies	and
does	not	attempt	to	integrate	or	standardize	the	new	business,	thus	moving
the	enterprise	as	a	whole	to	a	Diversification	operating	model.
CEMEX	provides	an	example	of	the	rip-and-replace	strategy.	UPS’s	recent
growth	illustrates	the	diversification	strategy.
The	Acquisition	Process	at	CEMEX:	Rip	and	Replace

--- PAGE 151 ---
CEMEX,	a	$7	billion	Mexican	cement	manufacturer,	has	long	been	admired	for
its	IT	capabilities	relative	to	its	competitors.
	
8
	
As	early	as	1987,	the	company
built	telecommunications	capabilities	to	coordinate	the	activities	of	its
production	facilities	and	later	to	support	dispatching	of	ready-made	concrete.	In
1990	CEMEX	developed	an	executive	information	system	that	focused	IT
capabilities	on	providing	access	to	operating	information—this	system	also
forced	business	managers	to	think	about	how	to	use	information	to	improve
operating	results.	In	1992	CEMEX	implemented	an	ERP	system,	applying	IT	to
standardize	processes	like	finance	and	distribution.	These	capabilities	have
helped	CEMEX	grow	from	Mexico’s	second-largest	cement	producer	in	1990
(tenth	in	the	world)	to	the	world’s	third-largest	cement	producer	in	2003.	Of	the
world’s	top	three	cement	companies,	CEMEX	has	the	highest	profit	margin	and
highest	net	sales	and	cash	flow	per	employee.
In	the	early	1990s,	Lorenzo	Zambrano,	CEMEX’s	CEO	and	grandson	of	its
founder,	recognized	that	CEMEX	could	not	escape	the	impacts	of	global
competition.	He	said,	“We	suddenly	found	ourselves	competing	with	very	large
international	companies	at	a	time	of	consolidation	in	the	global	cement	industry.
There	were	few	independent	producers	left.	Either	we	became	large	and
international,	or	we	would	end	up	being	purchased	by	a	bigger	player.”
	
9
Zambrano	responded	to	this	threat	by	purchasing	Spain’s	two	largest	cement
producers	in	1992.	Subsequently,	CEMEX	acquired	companies	in	thirty
countries,	including	the	United	States,	Japan,	France,	Panama,	the	Dominican
Republic,	Indonesia,	and	the	Philippines.	CEMEX	sent	postmerger	acquisition
teams	to	the	acquired	companies	to	facilitate	integration	and	knowledge	transfer.
In	early	acquisitions,	teams	spent	as	long	as	twenty-four	months	training
managers	on	CEMEX	practices.	Despite	initial	resistance	from	local	managers,
the	implementation	of	the	CEMEX	foundation	led	to	significant	improvements
in	the	operating	results	of	its	acquisitions.	Companies	acquired	between	1992
and	1996	increased	their	operating	margins	by	an	average	of	more	than	10
percent	in	the	three	years	after	acquisition.
Despite	Cemex’s	efforts	to	share	management	practices,	the	acquisitions	led	to	a
proliferation	of	systems	and	processes	and	climbing	IT	costs.	Zambrano	believed
the	solution	was	to	standardize	best	practices	globally:	“The	company	now	is
much	more	complex,	and	we	had	to	go	through	a	process	of	amalgamating	our
business	processes	throughout	the	world,	saying,	‘This	is	THE	CEMEX	WAY	of
doing	x,	y,	and	z’	.	.	.	and	it	became	a	way	of	growing	very	fast	and	leveraging

--- PAGE 152 ---
what	we	know.”
	
10
Building	on	earlier	efforts	to	increase	process	standardization,	Zambrano
launched	the	“CEMEX	Way”	in	2000.	This	initiative	standardized	eight	key
business	processes:	commercial	(customer	facing	and	cement	logistics),	ready-
mix	manufacturing,	accounting,	planning	and	budgeting,	operations,
procurement,	finance,	and	HR.	In	2004	he	created	the	IT	and	business	process
evolution	organization,	which	looked	for	additional	opportunities	to	leverage	IT
not	only	for	business	process	standardization	but	also	for	local	innovation	and
global	sharing	of	best	practices.
The	company’s	focus	on	IT-enabled	process	standardization	and	process
improvement	has	facilitated	assimilation	of	its	acquisitions.	For	example,	in
2000	CEMEX	acquired	Southland,	the	United	States’	second-largest	cement
manufacturer,	in	a	$2.8	billion	deal.	IT	and	process	teams	completed	assimilation
in	four	months.	Subsequent	acquisitions	have	been	assimilated	in	as	little	as	two
months.
	
11
CEMEX’s	biggest	challenge	in	acquisitions	is	to	bring	the	learning	of	a	stage	3
architecture	to	the	new	company.	CEMEX’s	former	head	of	information
technology	described	the	challenge	this	way:	“The	biggest	stumbling	block	lies
with	people.	When	you	make	a	foreign	acquisition	you	face	biases	and
reluctance	to	give	up	current	practices	and	corporate	cultures.	While	the
importance	of	platforms	is	undeniable,	technology	is	not	an	end	in	itself.
Management	must	figure	out	how	its	processes,	functions	and	systems	can
accommodate	the	different	needs	of	the	employees.”
	
12
CEMEX	rapidly	replaces	existing	technology	platforms	and	business	processes
in	the	companies	it	acquires.	Such	rip-and-replace	efforts,	however,	meet	with
resistance	from	the	acquired	company’s	employees.	CEMEX	invests	heavily	in
training—sending	in	teams	of	strong	managers	who	work	with	the	new
company’s	management	team.	With	strong	performance	results	and	appropriate
rewards,	the	resistance	subsides	and	enthusiasm	builds.	We	do	not	know	of	an
alternative	approach	that	allows	a	company	to	avoid	slipping	back	to	a	less
mature	architecture	following	an	acquisition.
The	Acquisition	Process	at	UPS:
	
Moving	to	a	Diversification	Model

--- PAGE 153 ---
UPS	has	created	opportunities	for	growth	by	adding	new	businesses	that,	while
becoming	profitable	in	their	own	right,	are	expected	to	add	value	by	feeding	the
core.	Much	like	Schneider	National’s	transition	to	a	Diversification	model	as	it
developed	a	logistics	business	(see	
chapter	2
	
),	UPS	builds	and	acquires
businesses	related	to	package	delivery.	These	new	businesses	cannot	use	the
existing	foundation	for	execution	for	new	business	operations	because	they
operate	differently.
With	its	package	delivery	business	at	its	core,	UPS	has	crafted	a	set	of	smaller,
growth-oriented	businesses	such	as	UPS	Supply	Chain	Solutions,	UPS	Capital
Corp.,	UPS	Consulting,	The	UPS	Store/Mail	Boxes	Etc.,	and	UPS	Professional
Services	(figure	8-2).	CEO	Mike	Eskew	explains	the	rationale	for	the	new
businesses:	“The	core	package	business	has	a	lot	of	growth	opportunities	and
capability	.	.	.	but	we	also	need	to	sow	new	areas	that	leverage	on	that	core.
Some	of	those	new	areas	will	fail	.	.	.	and	we	would	like	them	to	fail	fast.	And
some	of	them	will	work	.	.	.	As	much	as	we	can,	we	will	integrate	that	[new
business]	into	the	core.	We	are	seeing	terrific	opportunities	in	logistics	with
Capital	Corp.	.	.	.	and	our	service	parts	businesses.	We	are	going	to	find	new
ways	to	expand	this	core	business	by	trying	new	things	and	feed	that	core.”
	
13
Unlike	UPS’s	core	business	expansion	into	the	global	business	arena,	its	new
businesses	do	not	leverage	UPS’s	economies	of	scale	or	foundation	for
execution.	UPS	can	certainly	leverage	its	industrial-engineering	expertise	and
elements	of	its	core	IT	infrastructure	in	new	businesses.	But	the	invaluable
standard	package	delivery	processes	that	give	UPS	so	much	agility	in	its	core
business	don’t	provide	much	value	to	its	new	businesses.	Laurie	Johnson,	CIO	of
UPS	Supply	Chain	Solutions,	explains	the	boundaries	between	the	core	business
and	UPS’s	newer	subsidiaries:	“I’d	love	to	leverage	what’s	good	about	the	core,
but	the	subsidiaries	still	need	a	different	sense	of	urgency;	the	ability	to	take
higher	risks	with	products,	technologies,	and	customer	relationships;	flexibility
that	allows	us	to	serve	the	customer	faster,	better,	cheaper—and	rules	that	are
made	to	be	broken.”
	
14
These	new	businesses	don’t	leverage	UPS’s	foundation	for	execution,	but	they
feed	the	core	business	by	increasing	package	volumes,	which	creates	strong
market	synergies	and	a	very	profitable,	self-reinforcing	business	model.	UPS	is
developing	a	parallel	foundation	to	support	the	new	businesses.
FIGURE	8-2

--- PAGE 154 ---
The	Acquisition	Process	at	7-Eleven	Japan:
	
Moving	Toward	Modularity
7-Eleven	Japan	has	achieved	much	of	its	growth	through	a	rip-and-replace
approach	to	acquiring	new	stores.	Although	management	believes	the	company
still	has	many	opportunities	to	grow	in	Japan,	SEJ	is	looking	for	additional
growth	opportunities.	Like	UPS,	it	adopts	some	diversification	practices	to
extend	its	range	of	opportunities.
Recently,	SEJ	purchased	a	controlling	interest	in	7-Eleven	Inc.	Expanding	into
the	U.S.	market	creates	new	challenges.	The	market	share	of	convenience	stores
is	much	lower	in	the	United	States,	where	the	market	is	heterogeneous,	the
income	gap	is	bigger,	and	the	shopper	is	more	cost	sensitive	than	in	Japan.	In
addition,	unlike	the	Japanese	stores	that	became	franchisees	one	at	a	time,	the
United	States	already	has	almost	6,000	stores.	James	Keyes,	president	and	CEO
of	7-Eleven	Inc.,	believes	SEJ	will	succeed	in	bringing	value	to	the	U.S.	market:
“7-Eleven	of	the	United	States	will	have	a	strong	potential	for	success	if	we
learn	more	about	7-Eleven	Japan’s	item-by-item	control	and	effective	delivery
system.”
	
15

--- PAGE 155 ---
Facing	different	demographics	and	an	established	base	of	stores,	SEJ	may	not	be
able	to	simply	rip	and	replace	the	foundation	in	6,000	U.S.	stores.	Instead,	it	may
have	to	pick	and	choose	modules	that	will	work	in	the	United	States.	This	will
demand	increased	modularity—a	stage	4	level	of	architecture	maturity.
What’s	Next?	The	Fifth	Stage	of
	
Architecture	Maturity
As	companies	achieve	stage	4	architecture	maturity,	they	might	like	to	stop	and
rest.	But	we	doubt	that	Business	Modularity	is	the	last	stage.	Thomas	Jefferson
once	remarked,	“I	like	the	dreams	of	the	future	better	than	the	history	of	the
past.”
	
16
	
In	the	spirit	of	Jefferson,	we	will	now	set	aside	some	of	the	legacy	of	the
past	and	present	our	view	of	the	next	stage	of	maturity.
We	call	the	fifth	stage	of	architecture	maturity	“Dynamic	Venturing.”	Building
naturally	on	the	capabilities	developed	in	the	Business	Modularity	stage,	the	fifth
stage	extends	the	concept	of	reusable	modules	to	enable	companies	to	rapidly
reconfigure	their	portfolios	of	businesses.	Based	on	the	core	capabilities	of	the
company,	managers	will	look	for	opportunities	to	partner,	acquire,	joint-venture,
collaborate,	integrate,	and	connect	with	many	other	companies.	Business
strategies	will	focus	on	dynamically	coupling	with	many	other	businesses	to
quickly	exploit	market	opportunities	by	bringing	together	the	world’s	best
players	at	each	position	in	the	value	chain.
The	Dow	Chemical	Vision	of	Stage	5
Dow	Chemical’s	Federated	Broker	Model,	described	earlier	in	the	book,	offers
one	glimpse	of	the	fifth	stage.
	
17
	
Dave	Kepler,	corporate	vice	president	for	shared
services	and	CIO,	explains	Dow’s	vision:
Historically,	the	JVs	[joint	ventures]	we’ve	managed	stand	alone	or
Dow	had	a	responsibility	for	the	operational	management	and	the	other
partner	didn’t	put	a	lot	of	their	own	employees	in.	The	JVs	we’re
going	into	now—in	the	Middle	East	and	China—are	not	going	to	be	as
highly	leveraged	and	integrated	into	the	company’s	business	model,
but	have	a	mix	of	companies	and	employees	engaged.	So,	we	know
our	systems	need	to	be	more	flexible	to	support	this	model.	We	need	to
leverage	Dow’s	know-how	and	low	cost	structure,	and	we	have	to	put

--- PAGE 156 ---
some	[IT]	architecture	in	to	give	the	JV	the	capability	that	we’ve
negotiated,	but	not	at	the	expense	of	opening	up	our	entire	enterprise.
Kepler	is	already	facing	the	need	for	a	stage	5	architecture,	but	Dow	will	learn
how	to	build	stage	5	capabilities	as	it	works	its	way	through	stage	4.	In	stage	4
Dow	will	increasingly	plug	and	play	process	modules.	In	the	fifth	stage,	a
company	can	plug	and	play	new	businesses,	not	just	process	modules.
Characterizing	a	Stage	5	Company
In	stage	5,	business	components	will	be	both	self-contained	and	readily
connectable.	The	kinds	of	industry-standard	software	interfaces	and	intelligent
agents	emerging	now	will	be	critical	to	this	stage.	The	standard	interfaces	will
allow	components	from	virtually	any	company	to	dynamically	couple	with	any
other	company—of	course,	with	the	appropriate	informed	consent	and
protection!	Intelligent	agents	will	help	by	seeking	out	opportunities,	negotiating
prices,	and	brokering	deals	automatically	within	predetermined	limits.	Table	8-1
extends	table	4-1	to	show	the	key	characteristics	of	the	fifth	stage	as	compared	to
earlier	stages.
In	the	fifth	stage	companies	will	give	business	partners	selective	access	to	their
key	data	and	business	processes.	Early	forays	toward	this	goal	include	UPS’s
embedding	its	software	into	large	ERP	systems.	As	a	result	of	these	partnerships,
customers	of	the	major	ERP	vendors	have	a	direct	electronic	link	via	the
purchasing	module	of	their	ERP	system	into	UPS’s	Web	site,	providing	logistics
and	tracking	capabilities.	IBM—by	opening	up	more	of	its	research	capability	to
customers—is	moving	toward	the	goal	of	reconfigurable	businesses.	Amazon’s
Marketplace	for	hard-to-find	books	and	other	items	dynamically	links	thousands
of	third-party	sellers	with	millions	of	buyers.	Customers	prespecify	the	items,
condition,	and	price	they	are	willing	to	pay,	and	Amazon	Marketplace	makes
matches.	These	efforts	are	not	Dynamic	Venturing,	but	they	are	harbingers	of
business	capability	to	come.
In	the	fifth	stage	business	components	will	be	based	on	the	unique	intellectual
property	of	the	owner	and	have	at	least	the	following	elements:
Business	rules:
	
–how	to	conduct	the	business	of	the	component
Business	process:
	
–optimized	business	process	steps	exposed	to	potential
partners

--- PAGE 157 ---
Data:
	
–key	data	to	be	shared	and	data	to	be	kept	private	for	competitive	or
legal	reasons,	accessible	through	standard	modular	interfaces
Interfaces:
	
–standardized	ways	to	connect	to	the	components	of	many	other
partners,	including	customers,	governments,	joint	ventures,	vendors,
outsourcers,	service	providers,	and	regulators
Security:
	
–rules	for	connecting,	encryption,	self-diagnostics,	defense
against	attacks,	and	the	like
Rules	for	coupling:
	
–strategic,	negotiated,	and	legal	rules	embedded	into	the
component
Preparing	for	Stage	5
Few	companies	are	ready	to	think	specifically	about	how	they	will	adapt	to	the
fifth	stage.	But,	like	prior	stages,	the	fifth	stage	will	be	a	natural	evolution	from
the	modularity	of	the	fourth	stage.	Clearly,	there	are	many	strategic,	legal,
technical,	financial,	risk,	and	other	issues	to	be	addressed.	We	are	convinced,
however,	that	the	concept	of	a	portfolio	of	businesses	that	dynamically	couple—
based	on	their	unique	capabilities	captured	in	components—is	the	logical
extension	of	the	economic	and	business	conditions	we	face	today.
In	the	immediate	future,	we	recommend	that	your	company	focus	on	squeezing

--- PAGE 158 ---
all	the	value	you	can	out	of	your	current	stage	of	architecture	maturity.	In	doing
so,	you	will	position	your	company	for	the	next	stage—and	all	the	benefits
associated	with	it.	Just	as	we	argue	against	big-bang	implementations	of
enterprise	architecture	capabilities,	we	caution	you	not	to	expect	big-bang
benefits.	But	we	do	believe	that	as	you	build	your	foundation	for	execution,	you
will	build	a	much	stronger	performing	company,	one	that	regularly	discovers
happy	surprises.	Thinking	about	what	dynamic	coupling	means	in	your	company
will	help	set	your	long-term	architecture	goals	and	identify	the	business	modules
needed	in	stage	4.
9
Take	Charge!
	
The	Leadership	Agenda
Why	not	upset	the	apple	cart.
If	you	don’t,	the	apples	will	rot	anyway.
—Frank	A.	Clark
	
1
IN
	
CHAPTER	1
	
we	described	the	benefits	of	a	foundation	for	execution.	Now	we
ask—would	you	like	your	business	to	have:
Higher	profitability?
Faster	time	to	market?
More	value	from	your	IT	investments?
Twenty-five	percent	lower	IT	costs?
Better	access	to	shared	customer	data?
Lower	risk	of	mission-critical	systems	failures?
Eighty	percent	higher	senior	management	satisfaction	with	technology?
To	achieve	these	objectives	via	a	foundation	for	execution	there	is	one	more
question	to	answer:	what	is	the	leadership	agenda	for	creating	and	leveraging	a
foundation	for	execution?
Throughout	this	book	we	have	argued	for	upsetting	the	apple	cart—rethinking

--- PAGE 159 ---
how	your	company	builds	and	leverages	capabilities.	This	chapter	lays	out	a
leadership	agenda.	First,	we	consider	the	case	for	action	in	your	company.	We
look	at	nine	symptoms	of	an	ineffective	foundation	for	execution—the	more
symptoms	like	these	you	see,	the	more	urgent	the	need	for	senior	management
action.	Then	we	briefly	review	the	steps	to	designing	or	rethinking	your
foundation	for	execution	and	acquiring	key	organizational	learning.	Finally,	we
identify	the	top	ten	leadership	principles	for	building	and	exploiting	your
foundation.
Symptoms	of	an	Ineffective
	
Foundation	for	Execution
In	
chapter	1
	
we	provided	a	substantial	list	of	the	warning	signs	of	not	having	a
foundation	for	execution	to	support	strategy.	We	suggested	you	would	find	this
book	helpful	if	one	or	more	of	the	warning	signs	were	true	of	your	organization.
Now	we	will	explore	some	of	these	warning	signs	in	more	detail,	identifying
symptoms	of	problems	and	metrics	for	you	to	self-assess.	The	objective	is	to
help	you	calibrate	the	urgency	of	your	company’s	need	to	work	on	its	foundation
for	execution.
One	Customer	Question	Elicits	Different	Answers
When	customers	get	different	answers	to	the	same	question	from	different	parts
of	your	company,	two	bad	things	happen.	First,	the	customer	gets	annoyed	and
confused.	This	was	exactly	the	experience	Delta	Air	Lines	had	when	employees
could	not	accurately	answer	a	question	about	the	time	a	flight	was	expected.
Second,	people	in	your	organization	have	to	do	loads	of	rework	to	fix	the
problem.	At	Delta	the	result	was	that	employees	were	frustrated	because	they
didn’t	have	the	tools	to	do	their	job—the	confrontations	between	frustrated
customers	and	poorly	equipped	employees	were	neither	pleasant	nor	productive.
And	then	someone	would	have	to	follow	up	with	the	correct	information.	Before
Delta	invested	in	its	Delta	nervous	system	(see	
chapter	3
	
)	employees	were
looking	at	different	systems	that	used	different	and	sometimes	conflicting	data—
there	was	no	foundation	for	execution.	Actually,	there	were	
several
	
incompatible
functional	foundations!
Think	back	over	the	past	year	in	a	customer-facing	group	you	know	well	and	ask
yourself	what	percentage	of	employees’	total	time	was	spent	on	rework—that	is,

--- PAGE 160 ---
redoing	something	that	should	have	been	done	right	the	first	time.	Ideally,	the
answer	is	zero.	The	higher	the	percentage	in	your	company,	the	more	urgent	the
case	for	action.
New	Regulations	Require	Major	Effort
For	some	companies	listed	on	stock	exchanges	in	the	United	States,	Sarbanes-
Oxley	was	a	motivation	to	create	a	better	foundation	for	execution	that	also
included	meeting	the	government’s	new	reporting	requirements.	For	many	other
companies,	it	was	yet	another	mandatory	investment	diverting	resources	from
important	business	initiatives.	A	
CIO	Magazine
	
tech	poll	reports	that	nearly	half
of	the	large	companies	surveyed	will	divert	more	than	15	percent	of	their	2005
IT	budgets	to	Sarbanes-Oxley	compliance.
	
2
	
In	sharing	this	figure	with	an
audience	of	CIOs,	Gary	Beach,	publisher	of	
CIO	Magazine,
	
was	met	by	a	sea	of
heads	nodding	in	disgust.	Afterward,	a	CIO	said	to	him,	“I	make	a	lot	of	sales
calls	and	never	once	have	I	heard	a	sales	rep	tout	to	a	prospective	customer:	the
reason	you	should	do	business	with	us	is	because	we	are	more	compliant	than
our	competition.”
Regulatory	compliance	creates	overhead,	but	new	regulations	will	likely	appear
every	year.	A	foundation	for	execution	significantly	reduces	the	marginal	cost	of
meeting	the	next	regulation	by	creating	a	reusable	capability	to	access	data	and
metrics.	In	your	organization	what	percentage	of	the	IT	budget	is	allocated	to
meeting	regulatory	requirements	(often	called	“mandatory	investment”)?	If	that
percentage	doesn’t	decrease	over	time,	and	especially	if	it’s	anywhere	near	15
percent,	your	case	for	action	is	urgent.
	
3
Business	Agility	Is	Difficult	and
	
Growth	Initiatives	Aren’t	Profitable
It	takes	time	to	develop	new	capabilities.	Thus,	when	a	growth	initiative	forces	a
company	to	develop	new	capabilities,	the	initiative	is	usually	slow	to	yield	a
profit.	For	example,	mergers	and	acquisitions—such	as	Time	Warner–AOL	and
Chase	Manhattan–	JPMorgan—are	often	slow	to	deliver	expected	economies
because	they	fail	to	leverage	an	existing	foundation.	Similarly,	new	market
initiatives,	such	as	AT&T’s	early	foray	into	television	or	GM’s	pioneering	efforts
with	OnStar,	are	typically	better	at	generating	revenues	than	profits.

--- PAGE 161 ---
In	our	research,	companies	with	a	higher	percentage	of	their	core	business
processes	digitized	were	more	agile.
	
4
	
In	contrast,	companies	that	were	not
building	and	leveraging	digitized	capabilities	felt	as	if	they	were	starting	over	to
develop	new	capabilities	to	address	each	new	management	directive.	Do	your
new	strategic	initiatives	leverage	existing	capabilities?	One	useful	metric	for
agility	is	the	percentage	of	your	company’s	revenues	that	comes	from	new
products	introduced	in	the	past	three	years.
In	
chapter	1
	
we	reported	that	for	companies	in	our	research,	the	percentage	of
sales	from	new	products	introduced	in	the	past	three	years	was	24	percent.
	
5
	
This
type	of	agility	varied	greatly	by	company	even	in	the	same	industry.	For
example,	in	manufacturing	the	average	was	also	24	percent.	However,	a	third	of
manufacturing	companies	were	much	more	agile,	achieving	50	percent	of	sales
from	new	products	introduced	in	the	past	three	years.	The	least	agile	third	of
companies	only	achieved	5	percent	of	sales	from	new	products.	A	foundation	for
execution	makes	a	big	difference.
How	agile	is	your	firm?	What	percentage	of	last	year’s	sales	came	from	new
products	introduced	in	the	past	three	years?	How	profitable	are	your	new
initiatives?	How	urgent	is	the	case	for	action?
IT	Is	Consistently	a	Bottleneck
Companies	pursuing	IT	implementations	the	old-fashioned	way	(i.e.,	by
articulating	business	strategy	and	then	aligning	IT)	usually	find	that	IT	is	a
bottleneck	rather	than	a	strategic	asset.	In	many	companies	the	standard	answer
to	a	question	about	how	long	it	will	take	to	implement	a	new	system	to	support	a
new	strategic	initiative	is	one	to	two	years.	During	that	time	the	market	and	the
business	will	change.	In	contrast,	Citibank	Asia	starts	up	services	in	new	regions
faster	than	the	competition	using	a	preexisting	credit-card-processing	capability
tailored	for	local	needs.	And	UPS	regularly	introduces	new	customer	services
based	on	existing	customer	and	package	information.	Top	companies	are
increasingly	demanding	that	projects	deliver	added	value	every	ninety	days.
By	focusing	IT	investments	on	enabling	the	integration	and	standardization
required	of	the	company’s	operating	model,	a	company	prepares	itself	for	future
strategic	initiatives,	without	knowing	what	those	initiatives	might	be.	What	is
your	average	lead	time	for	new	initiatives?	If	your	large	projects	don’t
consistently	deliver	value	in	fewer	than	twelve	months,	the	case	for	action	is

--- PAGE 162 ---
urgent.
Different	Business	Processes	and	Systems
	
Complete	the	Same	Activity
One	large,	global	manufacturing	company	we	visited	had	twenty-nine	order-
entry	systems.	A	large	insurance	company	had	more	than	thirty	different	ways	to
pay	customer	benefits.	A	pharmaceutical	company	had	eighteen	inventory
management	systems.	And	another	insurance	company	had	more	than	twenty
underwriting	systems.	The	IT	departments	in	these	companies	operated	these
systems,	enhanced	functionality	when	requested,	and	maintained	the	technical
platform	supporting	each	individual	system.	Redundant	systems	are	expensive.
In	addition,	they	are	difficult	to	integrate	with	other	systems,	so	companies	run
the	risk	of	inaccurate	data	for	compliance	reporting,	customer	service,	and
management	decision	making.	Sometimes,	real	business	differences	justify	the
existence	of	different	systems	supporting	the	same	process;	the	expense	of
implementing	common	systems	and	processes	does	not	outweigh	the	benefits.
But	many	companies	are	paying	excessively	for	variation	that	doesn’t	add	value
—and	might	very	well	undermine	a	foundation	for	execution.
How	many	different	business	processes	and	associated	systems	exist	in	your
company	to	complete	the	same	activity?	Are	they	adding	value?	If	the	number	of
redundant	systems	in	your	company	isn’t	declining,	the	case	for	action	is	urgent.
Information	Necessary	for	Making	Decisions
	
Is	Not	Available
7-Eleven	Japan	stores	manage	thrice-daily	orders	for	same-day	delivery	based	on
current	sales,	weather,	and	inventory	levels	(see	
chapter	8
	
).	Marriott	prices
rooms	based	on	up-to-the-minute	demand	forecasting	information.
	
6
	
But	many
companies	still	rely	on	approximations	and	instinct	to	make	key	operating
decisions.	Companies	have	spent	enormous	sums	developing	data	warehouses,
implementing	customer	relationship	management	systems,	and	installing
middleware	to	provide	better	data	access.	But	these	investments	haven’t
necessarily	led	to	better	decisions—either	the	right	information	isn’t	available,	or
the	decision	maker	doesn’t	know	how	to	use	it	effectively.

--- PAGE 163 ---
A	strong	foundation	for	execution	has	the	data	decision	makers	need.	People
know	how	to	use	the	data	to	make	decisions,	often	by	enacting	standardized
processes.	Do	your	decision	makers	take	effective	action	on	the	same	set	of
useful	customer	and	product	data	every	day?	If	not,	your	case	for	action	is
urgent.
Employees	Move	Data	from
	
One	System	to	Another
When	people	key	in	data	from	one	system	to	another,	they	are	doing	work
computers	do	better.	Worse,	the	process	introduces	opportunity	for	errors,	and	a
company’s	scarcest	resource—attention—is	being	wasted.	Financial	services
companies	have	long	valued	straight-through	processing	of	key	business	proces
Straight-through	processing
	
refers	to	business	processes,	such	as	buying	or
selling	a	security,	that	are	being	completed	without	humans	processing	the	data.
The	concept	of	straight-through	processing	can	be	applied	to	any	industry—
many	retail	stores	and	service	providers	have	automated	replenishment	systems
to	reorder	everyday	items.	For	example,	HP	offers	auto-replenishment	where
printers	automatically	reorder	cartridges	when	toner	runs	low,	without	user
intervention	and	within	certain	preset	limits.
	
7
On	average,	companies	complete	19	percent	of	their	sales	and	23	percent	of	their
purchases	electronically	with	little	variation	across	industries.
	
8
	
However,	the
third	of	companies	with	the	most	digitized	processes	complete	50	percent	of
their	sales	and	55	percent	of	their	purchases	electronically.	How	do	you
compare?	What	percentage	of	your	key	transactional	processes	requires	people
to	take	data	from	one	system,	manipulate	it,	and	enter	it	into	another	system?	If
that	percentage	is	above	zero	and	isn’t	consistently	decreasing,	your	case	for
action	is	urgent.
Senior	Management	Dreads	Discussing
	
IT	Agenda	Items
A	key	mechanism	in	most	companies’	IT	governance	is	the	senior	executive
committee	that	deals	with	IT.	These	committees	are	critical	to	establishing	IT
principles	and	priorities	for	IT	investment.	Despite	this	important	role,	many
senior	executives	dread	IT	steering	committee	meetings—one	executive

--- PAGE 164 ---
described	them	to	us	as	“mind-numbingly	boring.”	In	some	companies,	it	is	not
uncommon	for	senior	executives	to	send	a	staffer	to	meetings	in	their	place.
When	senior	executives	are	not	engaged	in	IT	decision	making,	they	cannot
provide	direction	or	incentives	for	the	company	to	build	and	exploit	a	valuable
foundation	for	execution.	Without	senior	management	involvement	the	IT	unit
takes	on	too	much	risk—and	is	actually	best	off	spending	as	little	as	possible.
The	CIO	of	the	average	company	rates	the	success	of	his	or	her	most	senior
committee	as	3.5	(on	a	scale	of	1	to	5).	In	top-performing	companies	CIOs	rate
these	committees	at	4.1	(on	a	scale	of	1	to	5).
	
9
	
CIOs	of	these	effective
committees	set	agendas	that	focus	their	senior	management	colleagues	on
strategic	issues	and	choices.	The	project	reviews	and	detailed	technical	matters
are	handled	elsewhere.	How	effective	is	the	most	senior	committee	that	makes
your	IT	decisions?	If	that	score	is	less	than	3.5,	your	case	for	action	is	urgent.
Management	Doesn’t	Know	Whether
	
It	Gets	Good	Value	from	IT
If	senior	executives	don’t	know	whether	they	are	getting	good	value	from	IT,	it’s
a	sure	bet	they	aren’t.	As	companies	build	IT	capabilities,	either	they	exploit
those	capabilities	in	ways	that	are	both	visible	and	measurable,	or	they	are
wasting	money.	Recently,	as	the	CIO	of	a	large	financial	services	company	sat	in
a	meeting,	he	received	the	following	message	on	his	BlackBerry	from	his	CEO:
“How	does	the	[XYZ]	project	affect	our	enterprise	architecture?”	If	it’s	never
occurred	to	you	to	ponder	that	question,	you	are	part	of	the	problem,	not	part	of
the	solution.
As	noted	in	
chapter	5
	
,	companies	getting	strategic	value	from	IT	have	senior
managers	specifying	requirements	for	enterprise	architecture	and	overseeing	the
results	of	architecture	initiatives	(table	5-1).	These	senior	managers	are	also
more	likely	to	be	able	to	describe	the	company’s	high-level	enterprise
architecture.	What	percentage	of	senior	managers	at	your	company	can	describe,
at	a	high	level,	your	enterprise	architecture?	If	the	answer	is	less	than	a	third,
your	case	for	action	is	urgent.
Looking	back	over	your	answers	to	the	questions	about	symptoms,	how	urgent	is
the	case	for	action	in	your	company?	If	your	company	reaches	the	threshold

--- PAGE 165 ---
described	on	any	one	symptom	(e.g.,	less	than	a	third	of	senior	managers	can
describe	enterprise	architecture)	your	business	process	and	IT	capabilities	are
undermining,	rather	than	contributing	to,	your	competitiveness.	The	more
symptoms	observed	(relative	to	the	thresholds)	in	a	company,	the	sicker	the
foundation	and	the	more	urgent	the	need	for	management	attention.	The	next
section	presents	a	brief	summary	of	the	steps	to	attack	the	symptoms	by
designing	or	rethinking	your	foundation	for	execution	(the	chapter	in	parentheses
provides	details).
Key	Steps	in	Rethinking	Your
	
Foundation	for	Execution
We	advocate	six	steps	to	rethink	your	foundation	for	execution:
1
.	
Analyze	your	existing	foundation	for	execution	(
chapter	1
	
).
2
.	
Define	your	operating	model	(
chapter	2
	
)
3
.	
Design	your	enterprise	architecture	(
chapters	3
	
and	
4
	
).
4
.	
Set	priorities	(
chapters	4
	
and	
5
	
).
5
.	
Design	and	implement	an	IT	engagement	model	(
chapter	6
	
).
6
.	
Exploit	your	foundation	for	execution	for	growth	(
chapter	8
	
).
These	steps	should	be	a	group	exercise	for	members	of	the	senior	management
team.	To	be	valuable	the	first	four	steps	should	be	intense,	even	confrontational,
exercises	between	senior	executives.	If	everyone	quickly	agrees,	management
hasn’t	recognized	that	these	steps	set	the	direction	for	the	company—how	the
company	will	grow,	what	projects	you’ll	pursue,	how	IT	investment	dollars	will
be	spent.	If	you	don’t	force	a	shared	understanding	of	your	operating	model	and
enterprise	architecture,	you	will	fritter	away	your	company’s	resources	on
projects	that	don’t	matter,	and	you	will	watch	more-focused	companies	march
off	with	your	customers.
Step	1:	Analyze	Your	Existing	Foundation	for	Execution
Examine	figures	1-3	and	1-4.	These	are	abbreviated	analyses	of	the	foundations
for	execution	at	UPS	and	the	government	of	the	District	of	Columbia.	Using	the
generic	form	of	this	assessment	(figure	1-2),	consider	each	element	in	your
foundation	for	execution.	Questions	to	consider	include	the	following:

--- PAGE 166 ---
What	processes	are	digitized	end-to-end?	Are	these	mission-critical
transactions	in	your	company?
What	data	is	easily	accessible	to	your	employees	and	customers?	Is	this	the
data	they	most	need	to	make	decisions	leading	to	customer	and	shareholder
value?
What	elements	of	IT	infrastructure	are	world	class?
Does	the	infrastructure	provide	the	reach,	security,	data	access,	and
flexibility	you	need?
What	strengths	and	weaknesses	do	you	see	in	your	foundation?
Step	2:	Define	Your	Operating	Model
Your	operating	model	should	encapsulate	your	integration	and	standardization
requirements.	To	design	your	operating	model,	complete	the	following	exercises:
Identify	the	processes	that	distinguish	you	competitively.
	
–Determine	what
elements	of	those	processes	should	be	standardized	across	the	company.
Envision	your	customer’s	experience	as	it	ought	to	be.
	
–Determine	what
integration	of	data	and	end-to-end	connection	of	processes	is	necessary	to
make	that	real.
Decide	how	you	would	like	your	company	to	grow.
	
–Can	you	offer	current
customers	more	products	or	services?	Should	you	expand	globally?	Should
you	acquire	competitors?	Should	you	acquire	or	grow	adjacent	businesses?
Once	you	have	articulated	your	expectations,	examine	figures	2-1	and	
2-3
	
to
determine	which	operating	model	best	meets	your	requirements.	The	good	(and
bad)	news	is	that	you	only	have	four	options	to	choose	from.	Pick	one	dominant
model	at	each	level	in	your	company	to	provide	a	clear	vision	of	how	the
company	will	operate.
Step	3:	Design	Your	Enterprise	Architecture
Once	you	have	defined	how	you	want	to	operate	and	grow,	you	are	ready	to
rough	out	your	core	companywide	business	processes,	shared	data,	key
technologies,	and	critical	customer	interfaces.	Start	by	using	the	process	and
operating	model	templates	from	figure	3-2	identifies	three	elements	that	must	be
part	of	your	foundation	for	execution:	customer	interfaces,	processes,	and	data.
Apply	the	appropriate	template	(figure	3-2,	3-4,	3-6,	or	3-8)	for	your	operating
model.

--- PAGE 167 ---
If	you	find	you	have	too	many	elements	to	fit	onto	one	standardsized	piece	of
paper,	take	your	discussion	up	a	level.	You’re	not	trying	to	identify	every
important	process,	data	element,	or	technology.	The	key	is	to	recognize	which
particular	elements	compose	the	essence	of	your	business—your	foundation	for
execution.
Step	4:	Set	Priorities
Most	organizations	have	more	change	initiatives	than	they	can	reasonably
implement.	The	enterprise	architecture	core	diagram	reveals	a	company’s
priorities	because	it	highlights	the	base	on	which	future	capabilities	depend.
Building	out	the	foundation	for	execution	demands	management	focus,
particularly	at	budget	time.	A	company’s	project	portfolio	should	reflect	its
enterprise	architecture	priorities.
We	suggest	that	every	major	project	champion	in	the	company	should	address
the	following	question:	how	can	the	project	build	out	or	leverage	the	foundation
for	execution?
If	the	answer	is	that	the	project	can’t,	the	company	should	investigate	carefully
whether	the	project	has	strategic	value.	Urgent	business	needs	might	require	that
some	projects	not	help	push	the	architecture	forward.	But,	for	the	most	part,	the
company	should	leverage	project-related	expenditures	to	help	evolve	and
improve	the	foundation	for	execution.
Step	5:	Design	and	Implement	an
	
IT	Engagement	Model
To	sustain	focus	on	iteratively	building	and	leveraging	a	foundation	for
execution,	companies	need	a	formal	IT	engagement	model.	As	described	in
chapter	6
	
,	three	ingredients	are	critical:	(1)	IT	governance	at	the	senior	levels	of
the	company,	(2)	disciplined	project	management	across	all	major	projects,	and
(3)	linkages	to	ensure	that	IT	governance	and	project	management	mutually
reinforce	one	another.
All	three	of	these	ingredients	require	management	to	implement	mechanisms	for
articulating	company	goals,	setting	priorities,	managing	to	objectives,	and
measuring	results.	The	engagement	model	brings	continuous	reinforcement	of
company	goals	in	everyday	tasks,	making	it	a	critical	tool	for	building	and

--- PAGE 168 ---
leveraging	a	foundation	for	execution.
Step	6:	Exploit	Your	Foundation	for	Growth
Even	as	you	start	building	the	foundation	you	must	cash	in	on	the	benefits.	This
means	first	allocating	generous	funding	for	training	and	development.	If	the
company’s	people	don’t	know	how	to	use	the	foundation,	the	payback	won’t
happen.	Second,	align	incentives	so	that	people	are	motivated	to	exploit	the
foundation.	If	the	operating	model	demands	integration	and	standardization,
make	sure	reward	systems	encourage	integration	and	standardization,	not
individual	heroics.	Third,	encourage	and	reward	creativity.	Creativity	identifies
—both	from	the	outside	in	and	the	inside	out—opportunities	for	new	and
existing	products	and	markets.	Outside-in	creativity	looks	to	the	marketplace	to
identify	opportunities	that	leverage	or	add	to	the	foundation.	Inside-out	creativity
looks	to	the	foundation	to	see	what	is	possible	and	may	appeal	to	customers.	As
the	company	learns	how	to	effectively	deploy	the	foundation—particularly	via
testimonials	of	successful	initiatives—everyone	will	become	clearer	about	the
benefits	of	the	foundation.
Top	Ten	Leadership	Principles
From	studying	and	working	with	hundreds	of	companies,	we	have	distilled
lessons	from	many	outstanding	executives	into	ten	leadership	principles	for
creating	and	exploiting	a	foundation	for	execution.	We	intend	these	to	provide	a
succinct	summary	of	the	book	and	a	primer,	refresher,	or	checklist	for	all	leaders.
10
1.	Commit	to	the	Foundation
A	foundation	for	execution	should	have	fundamental	impacts	on	how	a	company
does	business.	Instead	of	strategies	based	on	reacting	to	customer	demands	and
competitor	initiatives,	a	company	with	a	foundation	will	primarily	base	its
strategies	on	identifying	opportunities	to	leverage	its	capabilities.	Management
literature	has	long	preached	that	companies	must	develop	and	apply	unique
capabilities	to	succeed	in	global	markets.
	
11
	
The	foundation-for-execution
framework	provides	an	orderly	view	of	how	to	plan,	implement,	and	leverage	a
coherent	set	of	capabilities.
Companies	must	exercise	strong	organizational	discipline	to	build	and	leverage	a

--- PAGE 169 ---
foundation.	First,	a	company	must	embrace	the	discipline	to	declare	an	operating
model	and	implement	the	required	standardization	of	processes,	data,	and
technology.	Second,	management	must	embrace	the	discipline	to	pursue	those
strategic	opportunities	that	leverage	its	foundation—without	forcing
opportunities	that	don’t	fit.	As	ING	DIRECT	(
chapter	3
	
)	follows	its	established
formula	for	success,	introducing	a	narrow	set	of	existing	products	into	new
banks	in	new	countries,	it	is	bucking	the	trend	toward	full-service	financial
institutions.	Its	success	reflects	discipline	in	both	its	business	processes	and	its
strategic	decisions.
2.	Initiate	Change	from	the	Top	and	Remove	Barriers
Building	a	foundation	for	execution	is	central	to	a	company’s	ability	to	execute
its	strategies	and	thus	needs	the	attention	and	dedication	of	senior	management.
Left	to	their	own	devices,	most	people	in	a	company	attempt	to	do	what	they
think	is	right.	But	without	clear	direction,	some	of	their	actions	will	do	as	much
harm	as	good.	Senior	management	needs	to	drive	the	choice	of	the	operating
model	and	be	involved	in	the	articulation	of	the	enterprise	architecture.	And
senior	managers	should	take	responsibility	for	converting	an	architecture	into	a
foundation	for	execution	both	directly	and	via	reinforcing	governance.
The	need	for	senior	management	leadership	and	funding	is	visible	in	the	leader-
follower	dilemma.	Building	out	the	foundation	for	execution	requires
investments	in	IT	infrastructure,	but	as	companies	build	out	their	foundations
one	project	at	a	time,	funding	mechanisms	often	limit	important	investments	in
infrastructure.	For	example,	the	securities	trading	business	unit	in	a	financial
services	company	with	multiple	business	units	was	the	first	to	identify	a	valuable
customer	service	using	wireless	technologies.	The	company’s	funding
mechanisms	required	the	innovating	business	unit	to	pay	for	the	entire	wireless
infrastructure,	even	though	other	parts	of	the	company	had	identified	wireless
technologies	as	important	to	their	future.	Faced	with	paying	the	full
infrastructure	cost,	the	business	unit	leader	was	motivated	to	create	a	silo	of
technology	because	an	enterprisewide	solution	would	cost	more	and	take	longer
to	integrate	into	the	foundation.	There	are	many	solutions	to	this	dilemma.	For
example,	corporate	can	underwrite	a	percentage	of	the	cost	of	the	infrastructure.
Alternatively,	or	in	addition,	the	business	leading	the	investment	can	receive	a
dividend	from	business	unit	followers	as	a	reward	for	taking	the	lead	and	the
risk.	In	any	case,	senior	management	cannot	simply	decide	how	the	company
will	operate—it	must	rectify	all	the	forces	working	against	its	vision.	Senior

--- PAGE 170 ---
management	must	create	the	climate	for	success.
3.	Feed	the	Core—Experiment
While	companies	are	pursuing	profitable	growth	by	building	and	leveraging	a
foundation	for	execution,	they	will	certainly	encounter	promising	strategic
opportunities	that	don’t	leverage	their	foundation.	When	market	synergies	argue
for	strategic	bets	that	cannot	leverage	an	existing	foundation,	companies	should
pursue	them	separately	from	the	core	business,	as	Schneider	National’s	logistics
business,	UPS’s	financial	services	business,	and	Manheim’s	online	auctions	all
did.	Such	ventures	allow	a	company	to	experiment	with	synergistic	businesses
that	might	feed	the	core.
A	strong	foundation	for	execution	prepares	the	company	for	unknown	future
customer	demands.	A	stream	of	small,	focused	experiments	apart	from	the	core
helps	a	company	learn	about	emerging	businesses	and	the	capabilities	of	new
technologies.	Because	these	ventures	do	not	leverage	the	company’s	foundation,
they	involve	higher	risk	and	slower	profitability.	By	acknowledging	that	they	are
experiments	and	not	part	of	the	core	business,	companies	can	establish	a	budget
for	experiments,	design	distinct	metrics	for	assessing	the	success	of	each
experiment,	and	allow	a	realistic	amount	of	time	for	the	most	promising
experiments	to	achieve	profitability.
4.	Use	Architecture	as	a	Compass	and
	
Communication	Tool
Jim	Crookes,	chief	architect	at	BT,	has	observed,	“Companies	get	the	systems
they	deserve.	A	company’s	systems	estate	is	a	result	of	its	culture,	organizational
history,	and	its	funding	structures.	Coherent,	well-integrated	systems	will	only
ever	exist	in	companies	that	value	coherence	and	integrated	service.”
	
12
Enterprise	architecture	should	guide	companies	to	greater	coherence.	A	one-page
core	diagram	of	the	enterprise	architecture	can	act	as	a	compass	accessed	by
managers	to	resolve	differences	of	opinion	about	next	steps	in	building
organizational	capabilities.	The	objective	of	the	enterprise	architecture	is	not	so
much	to	achieve	a	particular	end	state	as	it	is	to	serve	as	a	blueprint	for	the
company’s	direction.	It’s	easy	for	companies	to	become	enamored	with	the	next
big	project	or	new	strategic	opportunity.	But	that	kind	of	enthusiasm	creates	a

--- PAGE 171 ---
rush	to	the	next	project	without	ensuring	that	employees	are	driving	benefits
from	the	last	project.	Enterprise	architecture	maps	a	path	in	which	a	company
incrementally	builds	and	then	leverages	capabilities.	The	company	becomes
smarter—and	more	successful.
5.	Don’t	Skip	Stages
The	architecture	maturity	stages	identify	the	business	transformations	necessary
to	leverage	the	foundation	for	execution.	Skipping	stages	leads	to	either	failures
or	delayed	benefits	by	taking	on	more	organizational	change	than	a	company’s
people	can	handle.	Each	stage	has	very	different	learning	requirements.	(See
table	4-1).	Companies	yield	huge	benefits	by	driving	the	value	from	their	current
stage.	For	example,	Guardian	Life	Insurance	cut	IT	costs	30	percent	between
2000	and	2003	by	consolidating	servers,	renegotiating	contracts,	introducing
offshore	outsourcing,	and	enforcing	financial	discipline.
	
13
	
That	kind	of	benefit
has	an	immediate	impact	on	the	company’s	bottom	line	while	positioning	the
company	for	even	more-powerful	business	benefits.
6.	Implement	the	Foundation	One	Project	at	a	Time
Some	executives	are	tempted	to	solve	all	problems	with	a	single	huge	effort.
Unless	a	company	is	on	the	verge	of	bankruptcy,	however,	the	big-bang
approach	is	almost	never	a	good	idea.	Implementing	a	foundation,	one	project	at
a	time,	uses	the	momentum	of	current	business	needs	to	create	the	foundation.	In
the	process,	the	most	important	elements	of	the	architecture	get	implemented
first.
Every	business	has	critical	strategic	initiatives	to	execute.	These	initiatives	can
be	implemented	quickly	with	no	thought	to	their	long-term	impact	on	the
efficiency	and	flexibility	of	the	business,	or	they	can	help	implement	the
foundation	for	execution.	Implementing	a	foundation	one	project	at	a	time	gives
the	entire	company	time	to	absorb	new	capabilities	and	recalibrate	its	next	steps.
7.	Don’t	Do	It	Alone—Outsource
Defining	an	operating	model,	designing	an	enterprise	architecture,	and	building
the	foundation	for	execution	are	all	major	undertakings.	Every	company	needs	to
take	control	of	setting	the	direction,	but	it	makes	sense	to	get	help	with	the
implementation.	Over	time	many	of	the	processes	a	company	standardizes	will

--- PAGE 172 ---
be	candidates	for	outsourcing.	Certainly,	some	standardized	processes	will	be
unique	to	a	company.	But	whenever	world-class	providers	can	find	enough
customers	desiring	the	same	process,	companies	will	have	no	reason	to	retain
processes	internally.
Outsourcing	those	capabilities	that	don’t	distinguish	you	competitively	frees	up
management	attention	to	focus	on	activities	that	will	differentiate	your	company
and	help	you	grow	profitably.	Companies	will	have	to	postpone	some
outsourcing	while	waiting	for	an	external	market	to	develop,	but	ultimately,
outsourced	processes	will	constitute	part	of	most	companies’	foundation	for
execution.
8.	Invest	in	Your	People
Automating	core	activities	and	providing	useful	data	can	release	the	creativity	of
the	company’s	people.	A	foundation	for	execution	presents	both	an	opportunity
and	a	requirement	to	develop	and	capitalize	on	people’s	capabilities.	Most
companies	woefully	underinvest	in	IT	education	and	training,	allocating	on
average	about	2	percent	of	the	typical	IT	budget	to	employee	development.
	
14
Worse	still,	when	an	economic	downturn	occurs,	training	and	travel	are	the	first
areas	to	be	cut.
Many	companies	also	miss	out	on	the	important	opportunity	for	learning	that	a
project	postimplementation	review	offers.	Growing	numbers	of	companies	now
include	in	their	project	budgets	an	allocation	for	developing	people	that	includes
education,	training,	and	postimplementation	review.	Professional	development
helps	companies	generate	the	expected	benefits	of	new	systems—it	is	also
important	for	motivating	and	energizing	the	company’s	key	asset,	its	people.
Postimplementation	reviews	provide	critical	feedback	into	the	next	round	of
project	justification	with	data	on	risk,	performance,	and	resource	needs.	Leading
firms	are	linking	their	regular	postimplementation	reviews	to	individual
performance	assessments	and	incentives.
9.	Reward	Enterprisewide	Thinking
A	foundation	for	execution	can	be	foiled	by	unaligned	incentives.	If	people	are
instructed	to	build	and	leverage	a	foundation	for	execution	but	rewarded	for
maximizing	local	performance,	the	company’s	foundation	will	be	disregarded.	In
recent	years	State	Street	moved	from	a	relatively	autonomous	business	unit

--- PAGE 173 ---
model	to	“One	State	Street.”	A	critical	success	factor	was	increasing	the	sharing
and	reuse	across	different	business	units	while	still	maintaining	a	culture	of
innovation.
	
15
	
Several	factors	needed	to	change.	Consequently,	a	new	governance
model	was	implemented,	an	enterprisewide	IT	budget	was	instituted,	and	more
recently,	the	organization	was	restructured	so	that	both	operations	and	IT	now
report	to	Executive	Vice	President	and	CIO	Joe	Antonellis.
To	reinforce	the	new	approach	to	business,	the	basis	for	incentives	and	bonuses
was	also	changed.	Today	at	State	Street,	business	unit	executives	typically
receive	annual	incentives	based	50	percent	on	the	performance	of	the	business
unit	and	50	percent	on	enterprisewide	performance,	such	as	earnings	per	share.
All	IT	professionals—with	their	responsibility	to	focus	on	such	company-wide
issues	as	creating	a	common	foundation	for	execution—receive	incentives	based
100	percent	on	enterprisewide	performance.	This	type	of	bonus	structure	helps
clarify	individuals’	priorities.
10.	Empower	Employees	with	the
	
Foundation	for	Execution
A	foundation	for	execution	is	where	people,	systems,	and	processes	converge	to
make	companies	more	effective.	Some	companies,	including	Verizon	Wireless,
Lands’	End,	and	Nordstrom,	have	developed	reputations	for	effective	customer
interactions.	These	companies	empower	their	employees	to	make	decisions,
provide	clear	objectives	or	guidelines	for	their	behavior,	and	give	them	powerful
systems	to	guide	those	decisions.	At	the	end	of	the	workday,	employees	should
find	satisfaction	in	their	accomplishments,	whether	that	involves	helping
customers,	designing	strategic	partnerships,	introducing	new	products,	or
updating	the	accounting	books.	Instead,	many	employees	regularly	spend	their
day	reworking	tasks	that	have	already	been	completed,	fighting	bureaucracy	to
get	approvals	for	obvious	decisions,	or	manipulating	data	on	tasks	that	a
computer	could	do	faster,	better,	and	cheaper.	The	promise	of	the	foundation	for
execution	is	that	a	company’s	people	will	do	more	value-added	work—and	the
company	will	perform	far	better	as	a	result.
The	Journey	That	Lies	Ahead
Enterprise	architecture	in	many	companies	refers	to	a	detailed	blueprint	of
systems,	data,	and	technology.	It	is	now	clear	that	enterprise	architecture	is

--- PAGE 174 ---
instead	a	business	vision.	Enterprise	architecture	begins	at	the	top—with	a
statement	of	how	a	company	operates—and	results	in	a	foundation	of	IT	and
business	process	capabilities	on	which	a	company	builds	its	competitiveness.
Establishing	this	foundation	for	execution	is	a	joint	responsibility	of	business
and	IT	executives—it	shapes	the	strategic	opportunities	a	company	can	respond
to	in	the	future.	We	believe	that	a	number	of	pressures	will	make	a	foundation
for	execution	more	important	in	the	coming	years.
First,	companies	will	increasingly	face	customers	who	demand	high	service
levels	at	low	cost—and	competitors	will	give	those	customers	exactly	what	they
ask	for.	Market	conditions	change	rapidly—sometimes	shaped	by	customers,
sometimes	by	competitors,	but	in	all	cases,	requiring	a	rapid	response.
Companies	without	a	robust	foundation	for	execution	will	have	a	tough	time
battling	competitors	who	have	already	automated	their	process	capabilities.
Second,	companies	will	continue	to	encounter	greater	technology-related	risks
and	growing	regulation.	A	well-designed	foundation	simplifies	the	IT	and
business	environment,	thus	reducing	the	risks	of	systems	failures,	security	and
privacy	breaches,	and	loss	of	data	integrity.	A	simplified	IT	and	business	process
environment	is	critical	to	reducing	a	company’s	vulnerability	to	a	wide	range	of
risks.	Companies	do	not	have	a	choice	as	to	whether	they	want	to	manage	risk—
business	continuity,	security,	data	integrity,	and	regulatory	compliance	must	be
managed,	and	managed	well.
Third,	as	we	discussed	in	our	prognostications	on	the	fifth	stage	of	architecture
maturity,	companies	will	increasingly	partner	to	enter	new	markets	and	create
new	industries.	Many	of	the	most	exciting	strategic	opportunities	will	require
companies	to	quickly	join	forces—and	just	as	quickly	to	separate	again—
exploiting	their	distinctive	competences	by	linking	modular	business
capabilities.	These	dynamic	partnerships	are	already	becoming	important—even
though	few	companies	have	the	technology	or	business	process	infrastructure	to
support	them.	Companies	whose	foundation	for	execution	can	easily	reach
across	company	boundaries	and	plug	and	play	their	modular	business
capabilities	with	partners	will	win	in	this	fast-paced	world	of	global
opportunities.
Fourth,	vendors	will	increasingly	provide	industry-standard	business	processes
for	the	same	or	lower	cost	than	companies	can	provide	internally.	Increased
outsourcing	will	accelerate	the	architecture	maturity	process,	so	companies	will

--- PAGE 175 ---
develop	more-robust	foundations.	Companies	that	have	not	learned	how	to
implement	and	manage	standardized	and	integrated	processes	will	struggle	with
the	realities	of	the	marketplace.
A	foundation	for	execution	allows	a	company	to	automate	predictable	processes
so	management	can	focus	on	higher-value	tasks	like	innovating,	partnering,	and
identifying	new	opportunities.	The	foundation	empowers	employees	and
enriches	jobs	by	reducing	redundant	and	tedious	tasks	while	providing	the
information	needed	to	innovate	and	customize.	Few	companies	have	built	a
foundation	of	digitized	processes	facilitating	agility	throughout	the	organization.
Those	that	have	are	better	positioned	to	take	advantage	of	market	opportunities
and	grow	profitably.	These	leading	companies	are	evidence	that	the	enterprise
architecture	journey	is	one	worth	taking.
Notes
Chapter	1
1.
	
Pete	Engardio,	Dexter	Roberts,	and	Brian	Bremner,	“The	China	Price,”
Business	Week,
	
December	6,	2004,	Issue	3911.
2.
	
Partha	Iyengar,	“State	of	the	Information	and	Communication	Technology
Industry	in	India,”	research	report	G00126192,	Gartner,	Stamford,	CT,	March
28,	2005.
3.
	
To	substantiate	that	these	companies	were	more	profitable,	we	verified	that
respondents’	reported	profitability	was	statistically	significantly	correlated	with
the	firms’	reported	three-year	financial	performance.
4.
	
Our	research	includes	fifty	case	studies	on	enterprise	architecture	and	eighteen
case	studies	on	the	IT	engagement	model.	We	conducted	two	surveys	on
enterprise	architecture	that	reached	180	companies.	In	addition,	we	surveyed	256
companies	on	IT	governance	and	its	influence	on	architecture.
5.
	
Kei	Nagayama	and	Peter	Weill,	“7-Eleven	Japan	Co.,	Ltd.:	Reinventing	the
Retail	Business	Model,”	working	paper	338,	MIT	Sloan	Center	for	Information
Systems	Research,	Cambridge,	MA,	January	2004.

--- PAGE 176 ---
6.
	
The	concept	of	core	capabilities	as	a	source	of	competitive	advantage	was
developed	by	a	number	of	researchers.	See,	for	example,	Kenneth	R.	Andrews,
The	Concept	of	Corporate	Strategy,
	
3rd	ed.	(Homewood,	IL:	McGraw
Hill/Irwin,	1994)	and	C.	K.	Prahalad	and	Gary	Hamel,	“The	Core	Competence
of	the	Corporation,”	
Harvard	Business	Review,
	
May–June	1990,	79–91.
Kathleen	Eisenhardt	refined	the	concept	in	her	discussion	of	dynamic
capabilities;	see,	for	example,	Kathleen	M.	Eisenhardt	and	Jeffery	A.	Martin,
“Dynamic	Capabilities:	What	Are	They?”	
Strategic	Management	Journal
	
21,	no.
10/11	(2000):	1105–1121.	Jay	Barney	also	addressed	the	concept	of	core
capabilities;	see,	for	example,	Jay	Barney,	“The	Resource-Based	Theory	of	the
Firm,”	
Organization	Science
	
7,	no.	5	(1996):	469.	We	use	the	concept	somewhat
differently	than	these	authors:	the	firm’s	foundation	for	execution	digitizes	not
just	the	capabilities	that	“make	a	significant	contribution	to	the	perceived
customer	benefits	of	the	end	product”	(to	use	Prahalad	and	Hamel’s	view),	but
also	the	capabilities	that	provide	the	business	process	integration	and
standardization	necessary	for	delivering	goods	and	services	to	customers.	Such
capabilities	may	not	be	“core”	in	the	sense	of	competitively	distinctive,	but	they
are	necessary	and	digitizing	these	capabilities	allows	company	management	to
focus	on	higher-level	tasks.
7.
	
As	Michael	Jordan	has	shown,	however,	being	great	in	one	arena—basketball
—doesn’t	guarantee	success	in	others,	such	as	golf	or	baseball.	Similarly,	a
foundation	built	for	one	approach	to	delivering	goods	and	services	can	limit	the
ways	a	company	competes.
8.
	
For	a	discussion	of	the	risks	associated	with	organizational	change,	see	Cyrus
Gibson,	“IT-Enabled	Business	Change:	An	Approach	to	Understanding	and
Managing	Risk,”	
MIS	Quarterly	Executive
	
2,	no.	2	(September	2003):	105–115.
9.
	
For	more	details	see	(1)	Sinan	Aral	and	Peter	Weill,	“IT	Assets,
Organizational	Capabilities,	and	Firm	Performance:	Asset	and	Capability
Specific	Complementarities,”	working	paper	343,	MIT	Sloan	Center	for
Information	Systems	Research,	Cambridge,	MA,	August	2005	and	(2)	Peter
Weill	and	Sinan	Aral,	“Generating	Premium	Returns	on	Your	IT	Investments,”
MIT	Sloan	Management	Review
	
47	no.	2	(Winter	2006):	39–48
10.
	
The	Sarbanes-Oxley	Act
	
of	2002	creates	a	five-member	public-company
accounting	oversight	board,	which	has	the	authority	to	set	and	enforce	auditing,
attestation,	quality	control,	and	ethics	(including	independence)	standards	for

--- PAGE 177 ---
auditors	of	public	companies.	(From	AICPA,	“Landmark	Accounting	Reform
Legislation	Signed	into	Law,”
http://www.aicpa.org/pubs/cpaltr/Sept2002/landmark.htm
	
.)	
Basel	II
	
is	an	effort
by	international	banking	supervisors	to	update	the	original	international	bank
capital	accord	(Basel	I),	which	has	been	in	effect	since	1988.	Current	proposals
aim	to	improve	the	consistency	of	capital	regulations	internationally,	to	make
regulatory	capital	more	risk	sensitive,	and	to	promote	enhanced	risk
management	practices	among	large,	internationally	active	banking	organizations.
(From	The	Federal	Reserve	Board	“Basel	II	Capital	Accord,”	Federal	Reserve
Board,	
http://www.federalreserve.gov/generalinfo/basel2/default.htm
	
.)	
The
Health	Insurance
	
Portability	and	Accountability	Act
	
of	1996	(HIPAA)	had	as	a
goal	“to	improve	the	efficiency	and	effectiveness	of	the	US	health	care	system
by	encouraging	the	widespread	use	of	electronic	data	interchange	in	health	care.”
HIPAA	established	national	standards	for	electronic	health-care	transactions	and
addresses	the	security	and	privacy	of	health-care	data.	(From	Centers	for
Medicare	and	Medicaid	Services,	“HIPAA	General	Information,”
http://www.cms.hhs.gov/hipaa/
	
.)
11.
	
Enterprise	resource	planning	systems	are	among	the	biggest,	most	complex
systems	companies	can	buy.	They	have	multiple	modules,	encompassing
processes	such	as	financial	planning	and	accounting,	supply	chain	management,
and	human	resource	management.	These	systems	are	known	by	the	vendor’s
name:	SAP,	Oracle,	and	a	host	of	vendors	who	provide	systems	for	smaller
companies.
12.
	
Quotation	from	video	interview	with	Mike	Eskew,	chairman	and	CEO	of
UPS,	with	Jeanne	Ross	and	Peter	Weill	at	MIT	Sloan	School	Center	for
Information	Systems	Research,	Cambridge,	MA,	April	10,	2002.
13.
	
Both	this	quotation	and	the	subsequent	one	from	Suzanne	Peck	are	from	an
interview	with	Suzanne	Peck	conducted	by	Jeanne	Ross,	May	2005,	Washington,
DC.
14.
	
Nagayama	and	Weill,	“7-Eleven	Japan.”
15.
	
Francisco	Gonzalez-Meza	Hoffmann	and	Peter	Weill,	“Banknorth:	Designing
IT	Governance	for	a	Growth-Oriented	Business	Environment,”	working	paper
350,	MIT	Sloan	Center	for	Information	Systems	Research,	Cambridge,	MA,
November	2004.

--- PAGE 178 ---
Chapter	2
1.
	
ThinkExist.com	Quotations	Online,	“Norman	Schwarzkopf	Quotes,”
http://en.thinkexist.com/quotes/norman_schwarzkopf/
	
.
2.
	
The	measure	for	strategic	effectiveness	was	a	weighted	average	of	the
company’s	priorities	for	operational	efficiency,	customer	intimacy,	product
leadership,	and	strategic	agility	relative	to	its	success	in	meeting	those
objectives.
3.
	
These	statistics	are	based	on	a	survey	of	103	companies.	These	were
perceptual	measures	of	how	well	the	company’s	existing	IT-enabled	business
processes	were	addressing	each	of	these	strategic	needs.	The	first	three	strategic
impacts	refer	to	the	disciplines	described	in	Michael	Treacy	and	Fred	Wiersema,
The	Discipline	of	Market	Leaders:	Choose	Your	Customers,	Narrow	Your	Focus,
Dominate	Your	Market
	
(Reading,	MA:	Addison-Wesley,	1995).	We	have	added
strategic	agility
	
because	of	its	growing	importance	to	companies.
4.
	
The	description	of	JM	Family	Enterprises	is	from	(1)	Cynthia	M.	Beath	and
Jeanne	W.	Ross,	“JM	Family	Enterprises,	Inc.:	Selectively	Outsourcing	IT	for
Increased	Business	Value,”	MIT	Sloan	Center	for	Information	Systems
Research,	forthcoming	working	paper	and	(2)	Forbes.com,	“America’s	Largest
Private	Companies,”	2005,
http://www.forbes.com/finance/lists/21/2004/LIR.jhtml?
passListId=21&passYear=2004&
passListType=Company&uniqueId=PTGE&datatype=Company.
5.
	
The	description	of	Merrill	Lynch	is	from	(1)	Merrill	Lynch,	Annual	Report,
2004	and	(2)	V.	Kastori	Rangan	and	Marie	Bell,	“Merrill	Lynch:	Integrated
Choice,”	Case	9-500-090	(Boston:	Harvard	Business	School,	March	2001).
6.
	
Quoted	phrase	from	V.	Kastori	Rangan	and	Marie	Bell,	“Merrill	Lynch:
Integrated	Choice,”	Case	9-500-090	(Boston:	Harvard	Business	School,	March
2001).
7.
	
Merrill	Lynch,	Annual	Report,	2004.
8.
	
The	description	of	TD	Banknorth	is	extracted	from	Francisco	Gonzalez-Meza
Hoffmann	and	Peter	Weill,	“Banknorth:	Designing	IT	Governance	for	a	Growth-
Oriented	Business	Environment,”	working	paper	350,	MIT	Sloan	Center	for

--- PAGE 179 ---
Information	Systems	Research,	Cambridge,	MA,	November	2004.
9.
	
The	description	of	Dow	Chemical	is	extracted	from	Jeanne	W.	Ross	and
Cynthia	M.	Beath,	“The	Federated	Broker	Model	at	The	Dow	Chemical
Company:	Blending	World	Class	Internal	and	External	Capabilities,”	working
paper	355,	MIT	Sloan	Center	for	Information	Systems	Research,	Cambridge,
MA,	July	2005.
10.
	
See	Jeanne	W.	Ross,	“Johnson	&	Johnson:	Building	an	Infrastructure	to
Support	Global	Operations,”	working	paper	283,	MIT	Sloan	Center	for
Information	Systems	Research,	Cambridge,	MA,	September	1995.
11.
	
Clayton	M.	Christensen,	
The	Innovator’s	Dilemma:	When	New	Technologies
Cause	Great	Firms	to	Fail
	
(Boston:	Harvard	Business	School	Press,	1997).
12.
	
The	example	company’s	industry	has	been	disguised,	but	it	has	many
characteristics	of	the	packaging	industry.
13.
	
The	Schneider	National	vignette	is	drawn	from	Jeanne	W.	Ross,	“Schneider
National	Inc.:	Building	Networks	to	Add	Customer	Value,”	working	paper	285,
MIT	Sloan	Center	for	Information	Systems	Research,	Cambridge,	MA,
September	1995.
Chapter	3
1.
	
Troy	Taylor,	“The	Winchester	Mystery	House:	The	History	of	One	of
America’s	Most	Haunted	Houses,”	“Ghosts	of	the	Prairie,	America’s	Most
Haunted	Places,”	2001,	
http://www.prairieghosts.com/winchester.html
	
.
2.
	
Richard	Woodham	and	Peter	Weill,	“Manheim	Interactive:	Selling	Cars
Online,”	working	paper	314,	MIT	Sloan	Center	for	Information	Systems
Research,	Cambridge,	MA,	February	2001.
3.
	
Nils	O.	Fonstad	and	David	C.	Robertson,	“Realizing	IT-Enabled	Change:	The
IT	Engagement	Model,”	research	briefing	IV,	no.	3D,	MIT	Sloan	Center	for
Information	Systems	Research,	Cambridge,	MA,	October	2005.
4.
	
The	Delta	Air	Lines	vignette	is	drawn	from	Jeanne	W.	Ross,	“E-business	at
Delta	Air	Lines:	Extracting	Value	from	a	Multi-Faceted	Approach,”	working
paper	317,	MIT	Sloan	Center	for	Information	Systems	Research,	Cambridge,

--- PAGE 180 ---
MA,	August	2001.	See	also	“E-business	at	Delta	Air	Lines:	Extracting	Value
from	a	Multi-Faceted	Approach,”	Video	Case	317-V,	MIT	Sloan	Center	for
Information	Systems	Research,	August	2001.
5.
	
The	Carlson	vignette	is	drawn	from	Nils	O.	Fonstad	and	Jeanne	W.	Ross,
“Case	Vignette	of	Carlson,”	(Cambridge,	MA:	MIT	Sloan	School	of
Management	Center	for	Information	Systems	Research,	January	2003).
6.
	
Individual	business	units	in	diversification	companies	like	Carlson	often	have
separate	core	diagrams	reflecting	greater	standardization	and	integration	(and
thus	a	different	operating	model).
7.
	
This	case	is	derived	from	Peter	Weill	and	Jeanne	W.	Ross,	
IT	Governance:
How	Top	Performers	Manage	IT	Decision	Rights	for	Superior	Results
	
(Boston:
Harvard	Business	School	Press,	2004),	27–34.
8.
	
The	ING	DIRECT	vignette	is	drawn	from	David	C.	Robertson,	“ING	Direct:
The	IT	Challenge	(B),”	working	paper	IMD-3-1345,	IMD,	Lausanne,
Switzerland,	2003,	5.
9.
	
Martin	Vonk,	“ING	DIRECT:	ICT	and	Governance”	(presentation	at	IMD,
Lausanne,	Switzerland,	June	29,	2005).
Chapter	4
1.
	
See	project	information	on	the	Big	Dig	at	
http://www.massturn
pike.com/bigdig/background/index.html
	
.
2.
	
Associated	Press,	“Boston’s	Big	Dig	Opens	to	Public,”	MSNBC.com,
December	20,	2003,	
http://msnbc.msn.com/id/3769829/
	
.
3.
	
The	concept	of	architecture	stages	was	introduced	in	Jeanne	W.	Ross,
“Creating	a	Strategic	Architecture	Competency:	Learning	in	Stages,”	
MIS
Quarterly	Executive
	
2,	no.	1	(March	2003):	31–43.
4.
	
See	Jeanne	W.	Ross,	“Maturity	Matters:	How	Firms	Generate	Value	from
Enterprise	Architecture,”	research	briefing	IV,	no.	2B,	MIT	Sloan	Center	for
Information	Systems	Research,	Cambridge,	MA,	July	2004.
5.
	
For	a	description	of	the	potential	of	Web	services,	see	John	Hagel	and	John

--- PAGE 181 ---
Seely	Brown,	“Your	Next	IT	Strategy,”	
Harvard	Business	Review,
	
October	2001,
105–113.
6.
	
Jim	McGrane,	interview	by	Jeanne	W.	Ross,	September	2002.	See	Peter	Weill
and	Jeanne	W.	Ross,	
IT	Governance:	How	Top	Performers	Manage	IT	Decision
Rights	for	Superior	Results
	
(Boston:	Harvard	Business	School	Press,	2004).
7.
	
See	Wesley	M.	Cohen	and	Daniel	A.	Levinthal,	“Absorptive	Capacity:	A	New
Perspective	on	Learning	and	Innovation,”	
Administrative	Science	Quarterly
	
35,
no.1	(March	1990):	128–152.
8.
	
Geoffrey	E.	Bock,	“The	Guardian	Life	Insurance	Company	of	America:
Improving	Business	Responsiveness	with	an	Extensive	Enterprise
Infrastructure,”	IBM,	
http://www-
306.ibm.com/software/success/cssdb.nsf/CS/BEMY-5UH33J?
OpenDocument&Site=software
	
,	December	2003.
9.
	
Air	Products	and	Chemicals,	Annual	Report,	2004.
10.
	
Respondents	rated	their	profitability	relative	to	competitors	on	a	scale	of	1	to
5.	These	ratings	were	significantly	correlated	to	a	three-year	average	return	on
invested	capital.
Chapter	5
1.
	
Paul	A.	David,	“The	Dynamo	and	the	Computer:	An	Historical	Perspective	on
the	Modern	Productivity	Paradox,”	
American	Economic	Review
	
80,	no.	2	(May
1990).
2.
	
Andrew	Hagadorn,	
How	Breakthroughs	Happen
	
(Boston:	Harvard	Business
School	Press,	2003),	36–46.
3.
	
George	Westerman	and	Robert	Walpole,	“PFPC:	Building	an	IT	Risk
Management	Competency,”	working	paper	352,	MIT	Sloan	Center	for
Information	Systems	Research,	Cambridge,	MA,	April	2005.
4.
	
For	this	analysis	we	used	stage	1	budgets	as	a	baseline	for	IT	budgets	and
compared	it	to	the	IT	budgets	of	companies	in	other	stages,	controlling	for
industry	differences.

--- PAGE 182 ---
5.
	
Karl	Wachs,	interview	by	Peter	Weill,	George	Westerman,	and	Nils	O.
Fonstad,	videotape	recording,	Cambridge,	MA,	May	5,	2005.
6.
	
Charlie	Feld,	interview	by	Jeanne	W.	Ross,	videotape	recording,	Cambridge,
MA,	April	15,	2002.
7.
	
Westerman	and	Walpole,	“PFPC.”
8.
	
Jim	Barrington,	interview	by	Peter	Weill,	George	Westerman,	and	Nils	O.
Fonstad,	videotape	recording,	March	25,	2005.
9.
	
The	first	three	strategic	impacts	refer	to	the	disciplines	described	in	Michael
Treacy	and	Fred	Wiersema,	
The	Discipline	of	Market	Leaders:
	
Choose	Your
Customers,	Narrow	Your	Focus,	Dominate	Your	Market
	
(Reading,	MA:
Addison-Wesley,	1995).	We	have	added	
strategic	agility
	
because	of	its	growing
importance	to	companies.
10.
	
Jeanne	W.	Ross,	“Dow	Corning	Corporation:	Case	Studies	A,	B,	and	C,”
working	paper	305,	MIT	Sloan	Center	for	Information	Systems	Research,
Cambridge,	MA,	June	1999.
11.
	
Rebecca	Rhoads,	“RTN	on	Governance”	(presentation	at	the	MIT	Sloan
Center	for	Information	Systems	Research	Summer	Session,	June	2005).
12.
	
Ibid.
13.
	
Al-Noor	Ramji,	interview	by	George	Westerman	and	Nils	O.	Fonstad,
videotape	recording,	Cambridge,	MA,	May	19,	2005.
14.
	
Ibid.
15.
	
The	description	of	Schindler’s	stages,	and	the	corresponding	quotations,	are
from	Brent	Glendening,	interview	by	David	C.	Robertson,	Ebikon,	Switzerland,
May	2003.
Chapter	6
1.
	
Daniel	Robey,	Jeanne	W.	Ross,	and	Marie-Claude	Boudreau,	“Learning	to
Implement	Enterprise	Systems:	An	Exploratory	Study	of	the	Dialectics	of
Change,”	
Journal	of	Management	Information	Systems
	
19,	no.	1	(Summer

--- PAGE 183 ---
2002):	17–45.
2.
	
The	term	
IT	engagement	model
	
was	introduced	by	Nils	O.	Fonstad	and	David
C.	Robertson.	See	Fonstad	and	Robertson,	“Realizing	IT-Enabled	Change:	The
IT	Engagement	Model,”	research	briefing	IV,	no.	3D,	MIT	Sloan	Center	for
Information	Systems	Research,	Cambridge,	MA,	October	2005.	For	more	on	the
IT	engagement	model,	Fonstad	and	Robertson,	“Transforming	a	Company
Project	by	Project:	The	IT	Engagement	Model,”	
MIS	Quarterly	Executive
	
5,	no.
1	(March	2006).
3.
	
This	section	draws	on	Peter	Weill	and	Jeanne	W.	Ross,	“A	Matrixed	Approach
to	Designing	IT	Governance,”	
MIT	Sloan	Management	Review
	
46,	no.	2	(Winter
2005):	26–34.
4.
	
The	information	on	UNICEF	is	drawn	from	Peter	Weill	and	Jeanne	W.	Ross,
IT	Governance:	How	Top	Performers	Manage	IT	Decision	Rights	for	Superior
Results
	
(Boston:	Harvard	Business	School	Press,	2004),	pp.	206–210.
5.
	
Ibid.,	210.
6.
	
Ibid.
7.
	
Ibid.
8.
	
Information	systems	textbooks	provide	an	introductory	view	of	alternative
project	life	cycles.	For	example,	Steven	Alter	describes	four	phases;	E.
Wainwright	Martin	and	his	coauthors	list	three	phases	encompassing	eight	steps;
Efraim	Turban,	Ephraim	McLean,	and	James	Wetherbe	list	eight	stages;	Kenneth
C.	Laudon	and	Jane	P.	Laudon	describe	six	steps	with	fourteen	activities.	See
Alter,	
Information	Systems:	Foundation	of	E-business,
	
4th	ed.	(Upper	Saddle
River,	NJ:	Prentice	Hall,	2002);	Martin	et	al.,	
Managing	Information	Technology,
4th	ed.	(Upper	Saddle	River,	NJ:	Prentice	Hall,	2002);	Laudon	and	Laudon,
Management	Information	Systems:	Managing	the	Digital	Firm,
	
9th	ed.	(Upper
Saddle	River,	NJ:	Pearson	Prentice	Hall,	2006);	Turban,	McLean,	and	Wetherbe,
Information	Technology	for	Management:	Transforming	Organizations	in	the
Digital	Economy,
	
4th	ed.	(New	York:	Wiley,	2004).
9.
	
All	quoted	material	relating	to	Raytheon	drawn	from	Rebecca	Rhoads,	“RTN
on	Governance”	(presentation	at	the	MIT	Sloan	Center	for	Information	Systems
Research	Summer	Session,	June	2005).

--- PAGE 184 ---
10.
	
This	section	draws	from	Peter	Heinckiens	interview	by	David	C.	Robertson,
Lausanne,	Switzerland,	July	2005.
11.
	
Ludo	Vandervelden,	interview	by	Peter	M.	Heinckiens,	Brussels,	July	2005.
12.
	
In	the	Toyota	production	system	every	employee	has	the	right	and	duty	to
stop	the	line	if	a	quality	problem	occurs.
13.
	
Toyota	Motor	Marketing	Europe’s	architecture	and	how	it	is	measured	is
based	on	Peter	M.	Heinckiens,	“Meta-Level	Business	Integration	for	Supporting
New-Economy	Business	Models”	(PhD	diss.,	University	of	Ghent,	May	2004).
14.
	
This	example	has	been	disguised	at	the	company’s	request.	Dates	and	names
of	committees	have	been	changed,	but	the	structure	of	committees	and
performance	results	are	accurate.
15.
	
Jim	Crookes,	interview	by	Nils	O.	Fonstad	and	David	C.	Robertson,	London,
March	2004.
Chapter	7
1.
	
Dan	Ikenson,	“Ending	the	Chicken	War,”	trade	briefing	paper	17,	Cato
Institute,	Washington,	DC,	June	2003.
2.
	
See	www.forrester.com	and	www.gartner.com	for	reports	on	the	outcomes	of
outsourcing.
3.
	
For	an	example	of	an	HR	partnership,	see	Mary	C.	Lacity,	David	Feeny,	and
Leslie	P.	Willcocks,	“Transforming	a	Back-Office	Function:	Lessons	from	BAE
Systems’	Experience	with	an	Enterprise	Partnership,”	
MIS	Quarterly	Executive
2,	no.	2	(September	2003):	86–103.
4.
	
While	there	is	much	debate	as	to	what	constitutes	a	
core	competency,
	
the
belief	that	core	competencies	should	not	be	outsourced	has	gained	considerable
traction.	See,	for	example,	James	Bryant	Quinn,	“Strategic	Outsourcing:
Leveraging	Knowledge	Capabilities,”	
Sloan	Management	Review
	
40,	no.	4
(1999):	9–21.
5.
	
This	case	study	is	adapted	from	Cynthia	M.	Beath	and	Jeanne	W.	Ross,
“Campbell	Soup	Company:	Creating	Business	Value	Through	an	IT

--- PAGE 185 ---
Partnership,”	working	paper,	MIT	Sloan	Center	for	Information	Systems
Research,	forthcoming.	Additional	quotations	are	from	an	interview	with	Doreen
Wright	by	Cynthia	M.	Beath	and	Jeanne	W.	Ross,	February	9,	2005,	Camden,
New	Jersey.
6.
	
The	concept	of	IS	Lite	was	developed	by	Gartner.	See	Chuck	Tucker	and
Roger	Woolfe,	“The	Reality	of	IS	Lite,”	Gartner	EXP	Premier	Report,
September	2003.
7.
	
Katie	M.	Kaiser	and	Stephen	Hawk,	“Evolution	of	Offshore	Software
Development:	From	Outsourcing	to	Cosourcing,”	
MIS	Quarterly	Executive
	
3,
no.	2	(June	2004):	69–81.
8.
	
Third-party	expertise	was	identified	as	a	critical	success	factor	in	ERP
implementations	in	Carol	Brown	and	Iris	Vessey,	“Managing	the	Next	Wave	of
Enterprise	Systems:	Leveraging	Lessons	from	ERP,”	
MIS	Quarterly	Executive
	
2,
no.	1	(March	2003):	65–77.
9.
	
This	case	study	is	adapted	from	(1)	Henri	Bourgeois	and	David	C.	Robertson,
“Liverpool	City	Council	(A):	The	ICT	Outsourcing	Decision,”	Case	IMD-3-
1289	(Lausanne,	Switzerland:	IMD,	2004)	and	(2)	Henri	Bourgeois	and	David
C.	Robertson,	“Liverpool	City	Council	(B):	Co-sourcing	Public	Services
Through	a	Joint	Venture	with	BT,”	Case	IMD-3-1290	(Lausanne,	Switzerland:
IMD,	2004).
10.
	
This	case	study	is	adapted	from	Jeanne	W.	Ross	and	Cynthia	M.	Beath,	“The
Federated	Broker	Model	at	The	Dow	Chemical	Company:	Blending	World	Class
Internal	and	External	Capabilities,”	working	paper	355,	MIT	Sloan	Center	for
Information	Systems	Research,	Cambridge,	MA,	July	2005.
11.
	
Andrew	Liveris,	“Letter	to	the	Stockholders	of	The	Dow	Chemical
Company,”	February	9,	2005.
12.
	
Both	this	quotation	and	the	subsequent	two	are	from	Ross	and	Beath,
“Federated	Broker	Model.”
Chapter	8
1.
	
For	more	on	platform	development,	see	David	Robertson	and	Karl	Ulrich
“Planning	for	Product	Platforms,”	
Sloan	Management	Review
	
39,	no.	4,	Summer

--- PAGE 186 ---
1998:	19–31.
2.
	
Parts	of	this	case	are	drawn	from	(1)	Jeanne	W.	Ross	et	al.,	“United	Parcel
Service:	Business	Transformation	Through	Information	Technology,”	working
paper	331,	MIT	Sloan	Center	for	Information	Systems	Research,	Cambridge,
MA,	September	2002;	(2)	Jeanne	W.	Ross,	“United	Parcel	Service:	Delivering
Packages	and	E-Commerce	Solutions,”	working	paper	318,	MIT	Sloan	Center
for	Information	Systems	Research,	Cambridge,	MA,	August	2001;	(3)	Mike
Eskew,	interview	by	Peter	Weill	and	Jeanne	W.	Ross,	videotape	recording,
Cambridge,	MA,	April	10,	2002.
3.
	
Parts	of	this	case	are	drawn	from	(1)	Kei	Nagayama	and	Peter	Weill,	“7-
Eleven	Japan	Co.,	Ltd.:	Reinventing	the	Retail	Business	Model,”	working	paper
338,	MIT	Sloan	Center	for	Information	Systems	Research,	Cambridge,	MA,
January	2004;	(2)	Peter	Weill	and	Michael	R.	Vitale,	
Place	to	Space:	Migrating
to	eBusiness	Models
	
(Boston:	Harvard	Business	School	Press,	2001);	(3)	Ben	M.
Bensaou	“Seven-Eleven	Japan:	Managing	a	Networked	Organization,”	case
study	05/7-4690,	INSEAD	Euro-Asia	Centre,	May	1997;(4)	Seven-Eleven
Japan,	“Corporate	Outline	2004,”
http://www.sej.co.jp/english/investor/irtool/co2004_e.html
	
.
4.
	
Bensaou	“Seven-Eleven	Japan.”
5.
	
While	SEJ’s	standardized	systems	give	headquarters	a	great	deal	of
transparency	about	inventory	levels,	supply	chain	operations,	and	sales,	we	don’t
classify	the	company	as	a	Unification	operating	model	because	data	flows	to
corporate,	not	to	other	business	units.	In	other	words,	business	unit	activities	do
not	depend	on	receiving	data	from	other	business	units.
6.
	
Bensaou,	“Seven-Eleven	Japan.”
7.
	
This	case	is	derived	from	Steven	Sheinheit,	“Evolution	of	IT	Architecture	at
MetLife”	(presentation	at	the	MIT	Sloan	Center	for	Information	Systems
Research	Summer	Session,	June	2005)	and	from	MetLife,	Annual	Report,	2004
(available	at	
http://library.corporate-
ir.net/library/12/121/121171/items/142153/MET_2004AR.pdf
	
).
8.
	
This	case	is	drawn	from	(1)	Rebecca	Chung,	Donald	Marchand,	and	William
Kettinger,	“The	CEMEX	Way:	The	Right	Balance	Between	Local	Business
Flexibility	and	Global	Standardization,”	Case	IMD-3-1341	(Lausanne,

--- PAGE 187 ---
Switzerland:	IMD,	2005)	and	(2)	Rebecca	Chung,	Katarina	Paddack,	and	Donald
Marchand,	“CEMEX:	Global	Growth	Through	Superior	Information
Capabilities,”	Case	IMD-3-0953	(Lausanne,	Switzerland:	IMD,	2003).
9.
	
Chung,	Paddack,	and	Marchand,	“CEMEX:	Global	Growth,”	5.
10.
	
Chung,	Marchand,	and	Kettinger,	“CEMEX	Way,”	1.
11.
	
Normally,	executives	refer	to	the	process	of	developing	synergies	with	an
acquisition	as	“integration.”	However,	because	we	are	using	the	term	differently,
we	have	chosen	to	refer	to	CEMEX’s	approach	to	acquisitions	as
“assimilation”—bringing	the	companies	onto	standard	processes,	but	not
integrating	processes	across	business	units.
12.
	
Chung,	Paddack,	and	Marchand,	“CEMEX:	Global	Growth,”	7.
13.
	
Eskew,	interview	by	Weill	and	Ross.
14.
	
Ross	et	al.,	“United	Parcel	Service:	Business	Transformation.”
15.
	
Bensaou,	“Seven-Eleven	Japan.”
16.
	
“Brainy	Quote,”	2005,
http://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/quotes/t/thomasjeff129997.html
	
.
17.
	
The	section	on	Dow	Chemical,	including	the	accompanying	quotation	from
Dave	Kepler,	is	based	on	Jeanne	W.	Ross	and	Cynthia	M.	Beath,	“The	Federated
Broker	Model	at	The	Dow	Chemical	Company:	Blending	World	Class	Internal
and	External	Capabilities,”	working	paper	355,	MIT	Sloan	Center	for
Information	Systems	Research,	Cambridge,	MA,	July	2005.
Chapter	9
1.
	
“Brainy	Quote,”	2005,
http://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/authors/f/frank_a_clark.html
	
.
2.
	
Gary	Beach,	“Repeal	Sarbanes-Oxley,”	
CIO	Magazine,
	
April	1,	2005.
3.
	
A	survey	of	649	companies	by	Gartner	Worldwide	Benchmarking	Survey,
2005,	found	that	the	more	efficient	public	companies	spent	less	than	4%	of	their

--- PAGE 188 ---
overall	2005	IT	budget	on	regulatory	compliance.	Source:	Dr.	Howard	Rubin.
4.
	
Peter	Weill	and	Sinan	Aral,	“IT	Savvy	Pays	Off:	How	Top	Performers	Match
IT	Portfolios	and	Organizational	Practices,”	working	paper	353,	MIT	Sloan
Center	for	Information	Systems	Research,	Cambridge,	MA,	May	2005.
5.
	
This	information	comes	from	an	MIT	Sloan	Center	for	Information	Systems
Research	study	of	147	companies’	IT	investment	and	performance	from	1998	to
2002.	For	more	details	see	(1)	Sinan	Aral	and	Peter	Weill,	“IT	Assets,
Organizational	Capabilities,	and	Firm	Performance:	Asset	and	Capability
Specific	Complementarities,”	working	paper	343,	MIT	Sloan	Center	for
Information	Systems	Research,	Cambridge,	MA,	August	2005;	and	(2)	Peter
Weill	and	Sinan	Aral,	“Generating	Premium	Returns	on	Your	IT	Investments,”
MIT	
Sloan	Management	Review
	
47,	no.	2	(Winter	2006):	39–48.
6.
	
Stephanie	Overby,	“The	Price	Is	Always	Right,”	
CIO	Magazine,
	
February	15,
2005.
7.
	
See	Hewlett-Packard,	“Infrastructure	Management
2005,”
http://h41137.www4.hp.com/tpm/uk/en/ppuservices/infrastructure-
management.html
	
.
8.
	
See	note	5.
9.
	
Peter	Weill	and	Jeanne	W.	Ross,	
IT	Governance:	How	Top	Performers
Manage	IT	Decision	Rights	for	Superior	Results
	
(Boston:	Harvard	Business
School	Press,	2004).
10.
	
Many	of	the	examples	in	this	section	are	further	descriptions	or	summaries	of
examples	in	earlier	chapters	where	the	sources	are	identified.
11.
	
Kenneth	R.	Andrews,	
The	Concept	of	Corporate	Strategy,
	
3d	ed.
(Homewood,	IL:	McGraw	Hill/Irwin,	1994);	C.	K.	Prahalad	and	Gary	Hamel,
“The	Core	Competence	of	the	Corporation,”	
Harvard	Business	Review,
	
May–
June	1990,	79–91;	Kathleen	M.	Eisenhardt	and	Jeffery	A.	Martin,	“Dynamic
Capabilities:	What	Are	They?”	
Strategic	Management	Journal
	
21,	no.	10/11
(2000):	1105–1121;	and	Jay	Barney,	“The	Resource-Based	Theory	of	the	Firm,”
Organization	Science
	
7,	no.	5	(1996):	469.
12.
	
Jim	Crookes’s	e-mail	message	to	Jeanne	Ross,	November	2005.

--- PAGE 189 ---
13.
	
Dennis	Callahan	and	Rick	Omartian,	“A	New	Breed	of	IT	Exec,”
FinanceTech,
	
February	4,	2004,
http://www.financetech.com/featured/showArticle.jhtml?articleID=17602496
	
.
14.
	
Dr.	Howard	Rubin,	Gartner	Worldwide	Benchmarking	Survey,	2005.
15.
	
Peter	Weill	and	Richard	Woodham,	“State	Street	Corporation:	Evolving	IT
Governance,”	working	paper	327,	MIT	Sloan	Center	for	Information	Systems
Research,	Cambridge,	MA,	August	2002.
About	the	Authors
Jeanne	W.	Ross
	
is	Principal	Research	Scientist	at	the	MIT	Sloan	School’s
Center	for	Information	Systems	Research	(CISR).	CISR	undertakes	practical
empirical	research	on	how	firms	generate	business	value	from	IT	and	is	funded
by	corporate	patrons	and	sponsors.	The	center	disseminates	its	findings	through
briefings,	papers,	workshops,	and	executive	education.	At	MIT	Jeanne	lectures,
conducts	research,	and	teaches	public	and	customized	executive	courses	on	IT
management.	She	has	published	widely,	including	journal	articles,	book
chapters,	and	case	studies.	Her	prior	book,	
IT	Governance:	How	Top	Performers
Manage	IT	Decision	Rights	for	Superior	Results,
	
coauthored	with	Peter	Weill,
was	published	by	Harvard	Business	School	Press	in	2004.	Jeanne’s	research
focuses	on	how	businesses	generate	value	from	IT.	She	regularly	speaks	at	major
forums,	discussing	IT	management	and	value.	As	Editor	in	Chief	of	
MIS
Quarterly	Executive,
	
she	is	working	to	increase	collaboration	between	the
academic	and	professional	IT	communities.
Peter	Weill
	
is	Director	of	the	MIT	Sloan	School’s	Center	for	Information
Systems	Research	and	an	MIT	Senior	Research	Scientist.	His	research	and
advisory	work	centers	on	the	strategic	impact,	value,	and	governance	of	IT	in
enterprises.	He	has	presented	widely	at	industry	forums,	executive	education,
and	MBA	programs	on	the	business	value	of	IT	and	has	published	award-
winning	books,	journal	articles,	and	case	studies.	These	include	his	book	with
Jeanne	W.	Ross,	
IT	Governance
	
.	He	also	coauthored	the	bestselling	
Leveraging
the	New	Infrastructure:	How	Market	Leaders	Capitalize	on	Information
Technology
	
(Harvard	Business	School	Press,	1998)	and	
Place	to	Space:
Migrating	to	eBusiness	Models
	
(Harvard	Business	School	Press,	2001),	which
won	one	of	the	
Library	Journal	of	America
	
’s	best	business	book	of	the	year

--- PAGE 190 ---
awards.	Peter	is	currently	researching	business	agility	and	which	business
models	will	be	most	successful.
David	C.	Robertson
	
is	a	professor	at	IMD	in	Lausanne,	Switzerland,	where	he
teaches	innovation,	technology	management,	and	IT	in	the	school’s	executive
and	MBA	programs.	At	IMD,	David	is	currently	directing	executive	programs
for	Credit	Suisse,	EMC,	Skanska,	and	HSBC.	He	was	also	codirector	of	Making
Business	Sense	of	IT,	a	joint	program	between	IMD	and	MIT.	Prior	to	IMD,
David	was	a	postdoctoral	research	fellow	at	the	MIT	Computer	Science	and
Artificial	Intelligence	Laboratory,	a	consultant	at	McKinsey	&	Co.,	and	an
executive	at	four	enterprise	software	companies.	In	addition	to	his
responsibilities	at	IMD,	David	is	cofounder	of	a	product	design	firm	that	is
patenting	and	bringing	its	first	product	to	market,	and	he	serves	as	a	consultant
to	companies	on	such	issues	as	innovation,	enterprise	architecture,	and	overall
business	strategy.
*
	
This	chapter	was	coauthored	with	Nils	O.	Fonstad,	a	research	scientist	at	the
MIT	Sloan	Center	for	Information	Systems	Research.