--- PAGE 1 ---
ScienceDirect
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Procedia Computer Science 204 (2022) 362–369
1877-0509 © 2022 TheAuthors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the International Conference on Industry Sciences and Computer Sciences
Innovation
10.1016/j.procs.2022.08.044
© 2022 TheAuthors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the International Conference on Industry Sciences and Computer
Sciences Innovation
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
Procedia Computer Science 00 (2021) 000–000
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia
1877-0509 © 2022 The Authors. Published by ELSEVIER B.V.
International Conference on Industry Sciences and Computer Science Innovation
Assessment of organizational readiness for digital transformation in
SMEs
Rui P. Silvaa
*, Célia Saraivab
, Henrique S. Mamedec
a
Universidade de Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal
b
Universidade de Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal
c
INESC TEC, Universidade Aberta, Lisbon, Portugal
Abstract
Finding the right strategy enabled by a solid digital transformation is a key challenge that Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs)
face. With a high number of transformations that fail, there is a significant investment in research to identify critical factors that
ultimately drive a more successful journey, and at the same time, quite a few different models to assess the digital transformation
maturity. There is, however, a gap in assessing how ready a SME is to successfully embrace the transformation and an even more
significant gap in assessing it from an employee’s perspective. This work proposes a model to assess that readiness. The
organizational readiness assessment aims to enable SMEs to better understand the foundations that need to be set to successfully
deliver the transformation. From the employee's perspective, a user-friendly model assesses the non-technological aspects of an
organization, indicating the clear gaps that ultimately might negatively impact the organization’s future when digitally
transforming.
© 2022 The Authors. Published by ELSEVIER B.V.
Keywords: digital transformation; small and medium enterprises; organizational readiness; digital maturity; digital readiness; employee’s
perspective; user-friendly; organizational change;
1. Introduction
Whilethedigitalmarketisre-inventingtheglobaleconomicenvironment,drasticallydisruptingthewaycompanies
operate [1-3], small or medium enterprises (SMEs) shall work in the further development of digitally enabled business
strategies and processes [4].
The relevance of SMEs is tremendous, with research indicating that those constitute, in most countries, an essential
part of the economy [5]. With organizations planning for the possibility that new technologies will challenge their
existing business models [6], there´s still a significant portion (ranging between 66% to 86%) of organizations that
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: rp.107.silva@gmail.com
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
Procedia Computer Science 00 (2021) 000–000
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia
1877-0509 © 2022 The Authors. Published by ELSEVIER B.V.
International Conference on Industry Sciences and Computer Science Innovation
Assessment of organizational readiness for digital transformation in
SMEs
Rui P. Silvaa
*, Célia Saraivab
, Henrique S. Mamedec
a
Universidade de Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal
b
Universidade de Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal
c
INESC TEC, Universidade Aberta, Lisbon, Portugal
Abstract
Finding the right strategy enabled by a solid digital transformation is a key challenge that Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs)
face. With a high number of transformations that fail, there is a significant investment in research to identify critical factors that
ultimately drive a more successful journey, and at the same time, quite a few different models to assess the digital transformation
maturity. There is, however, a gap in assessing how ready a SME is to successfully embrace the transformation and an even more
significant gap in assessing it from an employee’s perspective. This work proposes a model to assess that readiness. The
organizational readiness assessment aims to enable SMEs to better understand the foundations that need to be set to successfully
deliver the transformation. From the employee's perspective, a user-friendly model assesses the non-technological aspects of an
organization, indicating the clear gaps that ultimately might negatively impact the organization’s future when digitally
transforming.
© 2022 The Authors. Published by ELSEVIER B.V.
Keywords: digital transformation; small and medium enterprises; organizational readiness; digital maturity; digital readiness; employee’s
perspective; user-friendly; organizational change;
1. Introduction
Whilethedigitalmarketisre-inventingtheglobaleconomicenvironment,drasticallydisruptingthewaycompanies
operate [1-3], small or medium enterprises (SMEs) shall work in the further development of digitally enabled business
strategies and processes [4].
The relevance of SMEs is tremendous, with research indicating that those constitute, in most countries, an essential
part of the economy [5]. With organizations planning for the possibility that new technologies will challenge their
existing business models [6], there´s still a significant portion (ranging between 66% to 86%) of organizations that
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: rp.107.silva@gmail.com
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
Procedia Computer Science 00 (2021) 000–000
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia
1877-0509 © 2022 The Authors. Published by ELSEVIER B.V.
International Conference on Industry Sciences and Computer Science Innovation
Assessment of organizational readiness for digital transformation in
SMEs
Rui P. Silvaa
*, Célia Saraivab
, Henrique S. Mamedec
a
Universidade de Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal
b
Universidade de Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal
c
INESC TEC, Universidade Aberta, Lisbon, Portugal
Abstract
Finding the right strategy enabled by a solid digital transformation is a key challenge that Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs)
face. With a high number of transformations that fail, there is a significant investment in research to identify critical factors that
ultimately drive a more successful journey, and at the same time, quite a few different models to assess the digital transformation
maturity. There is, however, a gap in assessing how ready a SME is to successfully embrace the transformation and an even more
significant gap in assessing it from an employee’s perspective. This work proposes a model to assess that readiness. The
organizational readiness assessment aims to enable SMEs to better understand the foundations that need to be set to successfully
deliver the transformation. From the employee's perspective, a user-friendly model assesses the non-technological aspects of an
organization, indicating the clear gaps that ultimately might negatively impact the organization’s future when digitally
transforming.
© 2022 The Authors. Published by ELSEVIER B.V.
Keywords: digital transformation; small and medium enterprises; organizational readiness; digital maturity; digital readiness; employee’s
perspective; user-friendly; organizational change;
1. Introduction
Whilethedigitalmarketisre-inventingtheglobaleconomicenvironment,drasticallydisruptingthewaycompanies
operate [1-3], small or medium enterprises (SMEs) shall work in the further development of digitally enabled business
strategies and processes [4].
The relevance of SMEs is tremendous, with research indicating that those constitute, in most countries, an essential
part of the economy [5]. With organizations planning for the possibility that new technologies will challenge their
existing business models [6], there´s still a significant portion (ranging between 66% to 86%) of organizations that
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: rp.107.silva@gmail.com

--- PAGE 2 ---
Rui P. Silva et al. / Procedia Computer Science 204 (2022) 362–369 363
2 Rui P. Silva / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000
fail to obtain the results they expected of a digital transformation due to lacking understanding of new competencies
and business models [7].
Digital Transformation programs play a critical role in implementing technology effectively and innovatively,
supporting the digitalization of SMEs. It’s essential to identify strategies to help SMEs manage crucial matters such
as leadership models, organizational strategy and structure, management style, technology, efficiently relating the
company’s way of working to its market needs and demands. [8]
There is no commonly accepted definition of the term “digital transformation” [9]. Gimpel et al. [10] define Digital
Transformation as “the managed adaptation of organizations as they capitalize on digital technologies to change
business models, improve existing work routines, explore new revenue streams, and ensure sustainable value
creation,” one possible definition that highlights the need of adaption and change.
Hanelt et al. [11] looked at the digital transformation literature through a systematic literature review to understand
it from an organizational change perspective. They diagnose that “DT can be best understood as continuous change
that can be triggered and shaped by episodic bursts, while the latter are inducing further continuous change.”
With organizations facing continuous change at all levels, many factors contribute to its success, and one of those
factors is the readiness for that change [12], with readiness referring to “a state of being fully prepared for or willing
to do something” according to the Oxford Dictionaries [13]. But how can organizations understand if they are ready
for that change and assess that readiness in the context of digital transformation? And is that assessed from the
perspective of business leaders or the employees?
This work aims to propose the creation of a model that can provide an answer to the following research questions:
(RQ1) Is it possible, in a user-friendly and from employees´ perspective, to assess the organizational readiness of a
small or medium enterprise, to successfully implement a digital transformation?
(RQ2) If yes, how can that model enable a small or medium enterprise to improve the success of their
implementation based on a fix the foundations plan?
2. Related Work
2.1. Digital Transformation in SMEs & Success Factors
A research work carried out in 2021 [14] looked at the literature definitions of Digital Transformation, aiming to
develop a unified definition, proposing digital transformation to be defined as “a fundamental change process,
enabled by the innovative use of digital technologies accompanied by the strategic leverage of key resources and
capabilities, aiming to radically improve an entity and redefine its value proposition for its stakeholders,” with an
entity being an organization, a business network, an industry, or society.
SMEs compete in a globalized market, facing the competition of companies preparing for the digital age at high
speed [15-17].
In the research work [18], the authors refer to a few relevant factors that support the need for solid foundations to
deliver a digital transformation:
• A clear digital strategy supported leaders fostering a culture that embraces change and innovation has a significant
impact on re-imagining the business.
• Another critical factor is the talent and skills development needed throughout the organization, focusing on well-
defined jobs, allocating the right resources to the required jobs, and adapting incentive programs, training, and
education.
• Leveraging digital technology to develop new business models and strategies.
2.2. Change & Readiness
An enterprise that decides to use the output of this work is likely digitally transforming or considering embracing
that transformation, which also means adopting a change process [11].

--- PAGE 3 ---
364 Rui P. Silva et al. / Procedia Computer Science 204 (2022) 362–369
Rui P. Silva / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000 3
Oakland et al. [19] mention that “Successful change requires leaders to continually negotiate all aspects of the
change approach. For example, they need to challenge the priorities, structure, and programme metrics to ensure
they are driving the desired behaviors and delivering the required benefits”.
In the context of change in the software engineering practice, Jayatilleke et al. [20] mention that “Accurate change
identification not only leads to a better understanding of the required change but also the impact it can cause on the
entire system and project”.
Weiner [21] treats organizational readiness as a shared team property, where team members feel committed to
implementing and confident in their collective abilities to execute. This perspective is best suited where “collective,
coordinated behavior change is necessary to effectively implement the change and, in some instances, for the change
to produce anticipated benefits”. In the same work, the author states that higher readiness for change influences the
organizational member to likely initiate change, exhibit greater resistance and be more cooperative, leading to a more
successful implementation.
2.3. Employee as a factor in a digital transformation
Trenerry et al. [22] highlight the issue of existing reviews and digital transformation studies mainly being focused
on the strategic or business level, with limited attention to employee-related factors at the individual, group, or
organizational levels. The same work mentions a priority for future research to study the attitudes and perceptions of
employees towards digital transformations, as there’s likely a difference to the one’s managers have.
Enabling the workforce to feel competent, connected, and autonomous leads to an increase of the employee’s
positive attitude towards transformational projects and a stronger willingness to actively support the changes [23].
2.4. Existing Frameworks
In the reviewed literature, were identified several digital readiness frameworks (Table 1 shows an overview
presented in the systematic literature review carried out by Voß et al. [24]), however primarily focused on the senior
and top management perspective, and none identified to be non-industry specific and focused on the SMEs.
In a work developed by Voß et al. [24], the authors reviewed the existing digital readiness assessment models,
including the potential for further research, identifying the models listed in Table 1.
Table 1. Reviewed Maturity & Readiness Models. Voß et al. [24]
Model Author
Digital Maturity Model Back et al. [25]
360° Omni Sales model Binniger et al. [26]
The transformation model Deloitte [27]
Digitalization requires mastering six action fields Gimpel et al. [10]
Concept Matrix Kahre et al. [28]
Key Decisions for a Digital Transformation Strategy Hess et al. [29]
Readiness Model Lichtblau [30]
Digital transformation framework Matt et al. [31]
Industry 4.0 readiness and maturity model Schumacher et al. [32]
They conclude that “despite the multitude of published Readiness Assessments on Digital Transformation [26, 27,
33-36], this topic seems not yet to have been assessed empirically from an employee’s perspective”. The authors also
identify a research gap in this field, “as mostly managers have been asked to assess their company’s state [10, 27, 37,
38], it would be interesting to see the other side of the coin and invite the employees to let us know about their
perspective on these developments”.

--- PAGE 4 ---
Rui P. Silva et al. / Procedia Computer Science 204 (2022) 362–369 365
4 Rui P. Silva / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000
3. Model Design
3.1. Design Science Research
This research applies Design Science Research (DSR) methodology to develop a user-friendly model that supports
SMEs to assess their foundations to transform towards digital, considering it from the employee´s perspective.
Peffers developed a widely consensual design science methodology for the production and presentation of DSR in
Information Systems [39].
Table 2 illustrates the goal of this research work regarding developing an organizational readiness assessment
model, from the perspective of the employees, as a mechanism to drive more successful digital transformation
implementation in SMEs, using the model developed by Peffers [39].
Table 2. Peffers framework applied to the proposed DSR work [39]
Activity Description
1. Problems Identification &
and motivation
1) Understand if the design of a model to assess the organizational readiness, from employees’ perspective,
to implement a digital transformation, is possible.
2) How to utilize the assessment to enable SMEs to build a “fix the foundations” plan
2. Define the objectives for a
solution
A model will be proposed for SMEs
3. Design & Implement
Title of the designed model “Digitalization Organizational Readiness Assessment Model (DORAM)”
The goal is that the model will
1) Calculate the readiness state of the organization via the “Readiness Calculation Framework
(RCF)”
2) Propose and trigger a “Fix the Foundations Action Plan (FFAP)”, a component that identifies
the risks at each state and possible actions that can be taken to move to the next state
The model will provide a document explaining the different readiness states, the basis behind the different
categories in each state and actions might be taken to mitigate the identified gaps.
4. Demonstration
This model will be applied in businesses that are the process of digital transformation or intending to start
one. 5 or more companies will be invited to use this model as part of their digital transformation process. The
model will be applied in companies with more than 50 and less than 500 employees, and preferably covering
different industries.
5. Evaluation
The success of DORAM will be measured through a questionnaire with a “closed” answer format. The
answers will be on a scale of 1 to 10, to be answered by business senior leaders. While measuring the results,
a target of success will be defined on a scale of 1 to 10:
• Result = 1: “The model did not provide valuable information, or the suggested actions did not
positively impact the organization”.
• Result = 5: “The model did provide valuable information, but the results were achieved partially.
It has proven to be helpful.”
• Result = 10: “The model did provide valuable information, and enabled a set of decisions that
converted to more successful outcomes out of the digital transformation journey”
6. Communication The work will be communicated to the scientific community through publication of different papers.

--- PAGE 5 ---
366 Rui P. Silva et al. / Procedia Computer Science 204 (2022) 362–369
Rui P. Silva / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000 5
3.2. About the “Digitalization Organizational Readiness Assessment Model (DORAM)”
With one of the main goals of this work being the development of a user-friendly model that enables SMEs to
assess their readiness states to successfully digitally transform, taking the employee´s perspective, the model consists
of two components (as illustrated in Figure 1): 1) Readiness Calculation Framework (RCF) - A proposed initial
assessment will be a done via the shortest possible questionnaire (15 to 20 questions maximum) written in a simple
language that any employee should be able to understand; 2) Fix the Foundations Action Plan (FFAP) - the output of
the assessment will lead the identification of the risk levels incurred in the calculated readiness state, and identify
possible actions to be taken as a step to move the company to higher readiness state.
Fig. 1. DORAM’s two components
The proposed model will: 1) collect input from the employees via a simple questionnaire; 2) ask the business
leaders torate the definedfoundations; 3) mapthe output of the employee’s assessment withthe rate givenbybusiness
leaders; 4) calculate the readiness state of the company; 5) identify the risks based in the assessment and propose
different actions to move the organization to the next states.
As a base for the overall assessment, the readiness state is considering 5 different foundational pillars, assessed
from the employee’s perspective as the main factor, who might have a different view of the leaders [21]. The pillars
are structural to the company, but they are impacting or get impacted by the employee’s performance, hence their
perspective is so relevant to be taken into consideration, as ultimately, they will likely define its successful
development:
1. Strategy – The assessment of the pillar strategy aims to answer the questions: How clear and understood is
the strategy across the company; How much employees do relate with the strategy; To what extent isdigitally
embeddedinthedefinedandsharedstrategy;Howwellaredifferentleadershiplevelsarticulatingthestrategy.
2. Market – The assessment of the pillar market aims to answer the questions: How clear is the market of the
company; How are competitive advantages perceived; What role digital plays in those competitive
advantages; How is the company scanning new types of competitors such as startups.
3. Business Model – The assessment of the pillar business model aims to answer the questions: How clear is
the company’s business model; How is the company addressing new digital business models.
4. Organization – The assessment of the pillar organization aims to answer the questions: How is the leadership
perceived; How committed and engaged are the employees; What is the level of understanding of the value
of technology; How are incentives and metrics being adapted for a digital organization; How is the company
investing in new digital skills.
5. Processes – The assessment of the pillar processes aims to answer the questions: How well documented are
the core processes; How are processes, value chain, and customer journeys mapped; How clear are the top 5
to 10 processes across the organization; How strong is the continuous improvement mindset.
Through the assessment of these 5 pillars, this work aims to assess the organization’s non-technological aspects
that might impact the external digitalization (Market and Business Models) and internal digitalization (Organization
and Processes), with the external and internal connected through the strategy.

--- PAGE 6 ---
Rui P. Silva et al. / Procedia Computer Science 204 (2022) 362–369 367
6 Rui P. Silva / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000
This readiness model goes through the 5 phases, with the first 4 phases being part of the Readiness Calculation
Framework (RCF) and the 5th
being the Fix the Foundations Action Plan (FFAP) (as illustrated in Figure 2):
1. Phase 1 – “Employee´s Organizational Assessment”: In this phase, selected groups of employees who should
represent the company, do receive a user-friendly questionnaire, with 15 to 20 questions. The questions are
simple and direct and aim to understand the employee’s perspective of the company. The 5 foundational
pillars will be decomposed into different questions, without directly asking employees about the pillars
themselves. Questions will be framed in a format such as “How regularly you hear about how competitors
are doing compared to us?” or “Do you recognize any startup that could potentially take some of our
business?”. The answers will be “closed” but not numeric. Depending on the question, answers shall be
framed in a format such as “No. I don’t think startups are relevant for our business” or “Yes, I do recognize
quite a few and I spend time regularly looking into it.”. The purpose of these types of questions is to provide
employees with an easier-to-understand format they can relate with. The results will be computed in a score
ranging from 1 to 5.
2. Phase 2 – “Leadership Organizational Assessment”: In this phase, a defined group of business leaders will
receive a 5-question questionnaire (one per foundational pillar) and should rate each one of the foundational
pillars on a scale of 1 to 5. Each question will have an explanation defining the meaning of that pillar, and
what is assessed.
3. Phase 3 – “Two-Side (Employees and Leaders) Map”: This phase is designed to compare the employee’s
perception of the organizational readiness versus what leaders have rated on the same 5 foundational pillars.
To connect business leaders and their teams, this work aims to take into consideration the gap between
leader’s rating and employee’s computed assessment, as an indicator that influences the readiness state.
4. Phase 4 – “Calculate the readiness state, assigning the color”: Taking the data from phase 1 to 3, a readiness
state will be calculated, and the gaps identified and listed.
The readiness state will be defined in 4 different states:
a) RedState(Overall score>=0&<2): Thelowest stateofreadiness. Significantlybehindinthereadiness
to deliver a digital transformation. Critical Risk.
b) Orange State (Overall score >=2 & < 3.5): The second bottom State. Meant to identify companies that
might have some basics in place but are still behind in the readiness of the majority of the foundational
pillars. High Risk.
c) Yellow State (Overall score >= 3.5 & < 4.5): Second State. Meant to indicate a State with existing risks
but significant progress in some of the foundational pillars. Medium Risk
d) Green State (Overall score >= 4.5): The highest State. The organization is assessed as having a high
score in most of the pillars and having a strong foundation. Low Risk.
5. Phase5–“IdentifytheRisksandPlantheActions”:Thefinalphaseistheidentificationoftherisksassociated
with the calculated readiness state, and planning of the proposed actions to move the company to the next
readiness states. This combined will build the Fix the Foundations Action Plan (FFAP), which should help
companies in acting towards some of the highlighted risks and gaps in the different foundational pillars. The
different actions proposed are mapped in different phases based on the readiness state in each one of the
pillars, enabling the organization to progressively (incrementally) change, rather than running many
disruptive changes in parallel. The output will have a small number of pages with simplified language to
make it clear to all different levels of the company’s leadership and employees.
Ultimately, this model is meant to be executed more than once if the company doesn’t reach the highest readiness
state. It should be used as a pulse control while running a digital transformation. It is not meant to assess how digital
is the organization, but rather to assess how embedded is the “digital-first” culture and mindset in the way of working
of the company, and how well structured is the company to deliver change, prioritize the right initiatives and keep up

--- PAGE 7 ---
368 Rui P. Silva et al. / Procedia Computer Science 204 (2022) 362–369
Rui P. Silva / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000 7
with the market changes. SMEs will have the chance to continuously assess the soft component of the transformation
and be able to act in resolving the gaps and risks or accepting it as a business risk.
Fig. 2. DORAM’s full structure
4. Future Research
After the full elaboration and validation of the DORAM, future research work can be done in integrating this model
with change management processes in the organizations, either in transformational change or even in incremental
changes [40].
It will be helpful to further research in integration with:
1. Frameworks to manage the implementation of a digital transformation in a small and medium enterprise.
2. Frameworks to efficiently give continuity to the digital transformation of an SME, after the DORAM
execution, providing answers to the questions: is it possible to transform a business from physical to a full (or
partial) remote work model? If yes, what framework can be used to lead and manage this transformation
program? [8].
3. Frameworks to design the SME’s digital transformation strategy [41].
Lastly,ascorecardcanbedevelopedtofurtherenhancehowtomeasurethesuccessoftheDORAMimplementation.
References
[1] Müller JM, Buliga O, and Voigt K-I. (2018) “Fortune favors the prepared: How SMEs approach business model innovations in Industry 4.0”
Technological Forecasting and Social Change 132: 2–17.
[2] Quinn L, Dibb S, Simkin L, Canhoto A, and Analogbei M. (2016) “Troubled waters: The transformation of marketing in a digital world.”
European Journal of Marketing 50 (12): 2103–2133.
[3] Santoro G, Vrontis D, Thrassou A, and Dezi L. (2018) “The Internet of Things: Building knowledge management system for open innovation
and knowledge management capacity” Technological Forecasting and Social Change 136: 347–354.
[4] Ferrari A. (2012) “Digital skills in practice: An analysis of frameworks” Publications Office of the European Union
[5] Muller P, Julius J, Herr D, Koch L, Peycheva V, and McKiernan S. (2017) “Annual Report on European SMEs 2016/2017” European
Commission, Directorate-General for Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs.
[6] Scheer AW. (2017) “Theses on Digitalization Management for Professionals”, in Ferri Abolhassan (eds) The Drivers of Digital Transformation:
33-43.
[7] Libert B, Beck M, and Wind Y. (2016) “7 Questions to ask before your next digital transformation.” Harvard Business Review
[8] Saraiva C, Mamede H, Silveira MC, Nunes M, (2021) “Transforming physical enterprise into a remote organization : Transformation impact:
digital tools, processes and people” Iberian Conference on Information Systems and Technologies (CISTI)
[9]Schallmo D,and WilliamsC.(2017)“DigitalTransformation ofBusinessModels – BestPractice,Enablersand Roadmap”InternationalJournal
of Innovation Management 21(8): 1740014.

--- PAGE 8 ---
Rui P. Silva et al. / Procedia Computer Science 204 (2022) 362–369 369
8 Rui P. Silva / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000
[10] Gimpel H, Hosseini S, Huber RXR, Probst L, Röglinger M, and Faisst U. (2018) “Structuring Digital Transformation: A Framework of Action
Fields and its Application at ZEISS”. 19(1): 24.
[11] Hanelt A, Bohnsack R, Marz D, and Marante AC. (2021) “A Systematic Review of the Literature on Digital Transformation: Insights and
Implications for Strategy and Organizational Change” J. Manage. Stud. 58(5): 1159–1197.
[12] Alfonsus S. (2008) “Organizational Readiness for Change: A Case Study on Change Readiness in a Manufacturing Company in Indonesia”
[13] Oxford Dictionaries: readiness | Definition of readiness in English by Oxford
Dictionaries.https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/readiness. Accessed 03 Jan 2022
[14] Gong C, and Ribiere V. (2021) “Developing a unified definition of digital transformation” Technovation 102: 102217.
[15] Schuh G, Anderl R, Gausemeier J, Hompel M, and Wahlster W. (2017) “Industry 4.0 Maturity Index: Managing the Digital Transformation
of Companies.” acatech STUDY, Munich: Herbert Utz.
[16] Urbach N, and Röglinger M. (2019) “Introduction to Digitalization Cases: How Organizations Rethink Their Business for the Digital Age,”
in Nils Urbach and Maximilian Röglinger (eds) Digitalization Cases: 1–12.
[17] Stich V, Zeller V, Hicking J, and Kraut A. (2020) “Measures for a successful digital transformation of SMEs” Procedia CIRP 93: 286–291.
[18] Avirutha A. (2019) “Factors enabling the digital change on digital transformation for small and medium businesses” The 14th
National and
International Sripatum University Conference
[19] Oakland JS, and Tanner S. (2007) “Successful Change Management” Total Quality Management & Business Excellence 18(1–2): 1–19.
[20] Jayatilleke S, and Lai R. (2018) “A systematic review of requirements change management” Information and Software Technology 93: 163–
185.
[21] Weiner BJ. (2009) “A theory of organizational readiness for change” Implementation Sci 4(1): 67.
[22] Trenerry B, Chang S, Wang Y, Suhaila Z, Lim S, Lu H, and Oh P. (2021). “Preparing Workplaces for Digital Transformation: An Integrative
Review and Framework of Multi-Level Factors.” Frontiers in Psychology 12.
[23] Meske C, and Junglas I. (2021) “Investigating the elicitation of employees support towards digital workplace transformation” Behaviour &
Information Technology 40(11): 1120–1136.
[24] Voß FLV, and Pawlowski JM. (2019) ‘Digital Readiness Frameworks: Current State of the Art and Research Opportunities’, in Lorna Uden,
I-Hsien Ting and Juan Manuel Corchado (eds) Knowledge Management in Organizations 1027: 503–514.
[25] Back A, and Berghaus S. (2016): “Digital Maturity & Transformation Report 2017. Über das Digital Maturity Model.” Institut für
Wirtschaftsinformatik, Universität St.Gallen und Crosswalk AG. Available from:
https://aback.iwi.unisg.ch/fileadmin/projects/aback/web/pdf/digitalmaturitymodel_download_v2.0.pdf. Accessed 17 Dec 2021
[26] Binninger, F-M, Fischer KP, Schöler A, and Steuernagel A. (2017) “Digitalisierung im Handel – das 360-Grad-Omnisales-Modell als
Lösungsansatz”, in Alexandra Hildebrandt and Werner Landhäußer W (eds) CSR und Digitalisierung: 483–510.
[27] Deloitte: Digital Future Readiness. (2017) “How do companies prepare for the opportunities and challenges of digitalisation?” Available from:
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/ch/Documents/consumer-business/ch-cip-en-swiss-transformation.pdf. Accessed 03 Jan 2022
[28] Kahre C, Hoffmann D, and Ahlemann F. (2017) “Beyond business-IT alignment - digital business strategies as a paradigmatic shift. a review
and research agenda” in Proceedings of the 50th
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), Honolulu, HI
[29] Hess T, Matt C, Benlian A, Wiesböck F. (2016) “Options for formulating a digital transformation strategy” MIS Q. Executive 15(2): 123-139.
[30] Lichtblau K. (2015) “Industrie 4.0-Readiness. Impuls-Stiftung für den Maschinenbau” Frankfurt
[31] Matt C, Hess T, and Benlian A. (2015) “Digital transformation strategies” Bus. Inf. Syst. Eng.
[32] Schumacher A, Erol S, and Sihn W. (2016) “A Maturity Model for Assessing Industry 4.0 Readiness and Maturity of Manufacturing
Enterprises” Procedia CIRP
[33] Buvat J, Solis B, Crummenerl C, Aboud C, Kar K, Aouf HE, and Sengupta A. (2018) “The Digital Culture Challenge. Closing the Employee-
Leadership Gap” Available from: https://www.capgemini.com/fi-en/wp-content/uploads/sites/27/2018/09/dti-digitalculture_report_v2.pdf.
Assessed 02/01/2022
[34] Gimpel H, and Röglinger M. (2018) “Digital Transformation. Changes and Chances. Insights based on an empirical study”.
[35] Kienbaum: Digital Readiness Check (2018) https://www.kienbaum.com/en/services/tools-platforms/digital-readiness-check/. Accessed 22
Dec 2021
[36] KPMG: Digital Readiness Assessment (2016) https://assets.kpmg/content/dam/kpmg/pdf/2016/04/ch-digital-readiness-assessment-en.pdf
Accessed 03 Jan 2022
[37] Hofert S. (2018) “Das agile Mindset. Mitarbeiter entwickeln, Zukunft der Arbeit gestalten.” Springer Gabler
[38] Steinhoff I. (2017) “Digital Maturity & Transformation Report 2017”
[39] Peffers K, Tuunanen T, Rothenberger A, and Chatterjee S. (2007) "A design science research methodology for information systems research,"
Journal of Management Information Systems
[40] Jalagat RC. (2015) "The Impact of Change and Change Management in Achieving Corporate Goals and Objectives: Organizational
Perspective," International Journal of Science and Research (IJSR)
[41] Trenkle J. (2019) “Survival in the digital age-A framework for formulating a Digital Transformation Strategy in SME”.