--- PAGE 1 ---
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Enterprise architecture management and its role
in corporate strategic management
Daniel Simon • Kai Fischbach • Detlef Schoder
Received: 5 October 2011/Revised: 30 December 2012/Accepted: 6 January 2013/
Published online: 8 March 2013
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013
Abstract A considerable number of organizations continually face difficulties
bringing strategy to execution, and suffer from a lack of structure and transparency
in corporate strategic management. Yet, enterprise architecture as a fundamental
exercise to achieve a structured description of the enterprise and its relationships
appears far from being adopted in the strategic management arena. To move the
adoption process along, this paper develops a comprehensive business architecture
framework that assimilates and extends prior research and applies the framework to
selected scenarios in corporate strategic management. This paper also presents the
approach in practice, based on a qualitative appraisal of interviews with strategic
directors across different industries. With its integrated conceptual guideline for
using enterprise architecture to facilitate corporate strategic management and the
insights gained from the interviews, this paper not only delves more deeply into the
research but also offers advice for both researchers and practitioners.
Keywords Enterprise architecture  Enterprise architecture management 
Business architecture  Corporate strategic management  Strategic planning 
Business model
D. Simon  D. Schoder
Department of Information Systems and Information Management,
University of Cologne, Pohligstr. 1, 50969 Cologne, Germany
e-mail: simon@wim.uni-koeln.de
URL: http://www.wim.uni-koeln.de/
D. Schoder
e-mail: schoder@wim.uni-koeln.de
URL: http://www.wim.uni-koeln.de/
K. Fischbach (&)
Chair in Information Systems and Social Networks,
University of Bamberg, An der Weberei 5, 96047 Bamberg, Germany
e-mail: kai.fischbach@uni-bamberg.de
URL: http://www.uni-bamberg.de/sna
123
Inf Syst E-Bus Manage (2014) 12:5–42
DOI 10.1007/s10257-013-0213-4

--- PAGE 2 ---
1 Introduction
Since the late 1980s, enterprise architecture (EA) and its fundamental logic have
garnered increasing attention from both the scientific and practitioner communities.
The benefits of reducing operating costs, improving project execution, and
increasing alignment of business and information technology (IT) (Buckl et al.
2010b) are only some of what has spurred awareness of EA. In general, EA can be
considered as a structured description of the enterprise and its relationships, which
may make it the fundamental ‘‘management information system’’ for the enterprise.
As such, it offers an integrated representation of different enterprise layers in
descriptive models of past, current, and future states (Niemann 2006). At the highest
level, these layers can be distinguished as business architecture and IT architecture.
EA can be employed in various scenarios. Most often, it is associated with IT
business alignment (Winter et al. 2010) and IT consolidation. Other scenarios
involve, for example, IT cost management, project portfolio planning, compliance
management, project initialization, and post-merger integration (Winter et al. 2007).
Unfortunately, the scenario of managing the corporate strategy—‘‘the pattern of
decisions in a company that determines and reveals its objectives, purposes, or
goals, produces the principal policies and plans for achieving those goals,’’ and thus
defines what business the company is to pursue and what kind of organization it
intends to be (Andrews 1987)—does not appear to be given much consideration in
the literature and in practice, despite that the original idea of EA involves elements
such as business goals, strategies, plans, products, and partners (Zachman 1987).
More important, lack of consideration exists despite promising experiences with
strategic business architecting (Aier et al. 2008a; Kurpjuweit and Winter 2009;
Winter 2002) and the general importance attached to EA in strategic planning and
business transformation (Aier et al. 2008b; Kappelman et al. 2008; Riege and Aier
2009; Schekkerman 2004; The Open Group 2009). A recent survey on the current
state of EA programs reveals that many IT professionals perceive that business
architecture is implemented only to a small extent of what they would really need
(Leganza 2010).
Although EA is considered to provide the blueprint of the enterprise and should
essentially be a business exercise, it seems its scope has been scaled down gradually
to information technology (Buckl et al. 2009). So, the aforementioned alignment
(Henderson and Venkatraman 1992; Goeken et al. 2008) with the business most
often takes place only on an operational level (Aier et al. 2008b), that is, with
respect to business processes and organizational units. Moreover, the business is
essentially reduced to a context variable rather than being treated as a design
variable. EA activities seem to be concerned most often solely with the
documentation of ‘‘operational’’ business elements for IT alignment purposes
rather than with real business engineering, that is, the method- and model-based
construction of enterprises (Winter 2003) up to a strategic level. As such, EA is
deemed to remain stuck in the IT environment.
At the same time, we find researchers in corporate strategic management, which
we consider ‘‘the art and science of formulating, implementing, and evaluating
cross-functional decisions that enable an organization to achieve its objectives’’
6 D. Simon et al.
123

--- PAGE 3 ---
(David 2011), calling for a greater cross-fertilization of the field with other
disciplines (Furrer et al. 2008). Specifically, systems thinking, which can be
considered a basic principle of EA, is recognized as a promising means to facilitate
the examination of the cause-and-effect-relationships between different strategic
measures (Wang and College 2006). This is in line with the suggestion to rank
strategies based not only on financial criteria but also on their prioritized
relationship with the firm’s mission (Hastings 1996), which is interesting given
that relationships are at the core of any EA model. Another notion put forward is
that of multiattribute value modeling, which essentially represents a procedure for
evaluating different strategies against a set of objectives using decomposition to a
level where relatively easy judgments can be made (Goodwin and Wright 2001). As
such, it also relates to methods, which are at the heart of EA activities (i.e.,
modeling, decomposition); likewise, they are considered practical in formal
planning of strategies (Goodwin and Wright 2001), which in previous studies has
most often been found to be related positively to higher performance (cf. Capon
et al. 1988).
Corporate strategic management, however, does not involve only the general
stage of strategy formulation addressed above, but also those of programming/
implementation and final evaluation/control (David 2011; Hax and Majluf 1984).
Strategy implementation (including ongoing execution) in particular suffers from
difficulties in achieving success in practice (Raps 2008; Cater and Pucko 2010).
Among the most critical obstacles to successful strategy implementation recently
identified are weaknesses in communicating strategy to lower organizational levels
(Cater and Pucko 2010); again, this is an interesting finding given that one of the
main functions associated with EA is to communicate organizational objectives
(Kappelman et al. 2008).
Against this background, this paper aims to provide a detailed description of EA
as a potential instrument for corporate strategic management. This is based on a
comprehensive business architecture framework as the methodological foundation
and the application of this conception to a number of aspects of corporate strategic
management—something that seems not to have yet been established by past
research and is this paper’s main contribution. In fact, little progress has been made
toward fully capturing business architecture, the ‘‘forgotten child’’ of EA. We
employ a mixed method approach that combines design science (Hevner et al. 2004)
with grounded theory (Glaser and Strauss 1967) to construct and apply the
framework and, in particular, obtain empirical grounding through a series of
interviews with strategic directors from different industries. Thereby, we not only
address the gap between ‘‘original’’ EA and what it has been reduced to most often
in practice (in that we enhance the understanding of EA’s application in corporate
strategic management), but also survey the requirements of strategic management
practitioners and deduce limits of EA as practiced today in terms of real business
engineering. In other words, we set out to answer two main questions. What support
can EA management, as the overall practice of developing and maintaining the EA,
provide within corporate strategic management, and on what conception of business
architecture is this based? In what areas does EA management need to develop to
permeate corporate strategic management more deeply?
Enterprise architecture management and its role 7
123

--- PAGE 4 ---
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. The next section surveys
research pertaining to the role of EA in corporate strategic management and
fundamental elements of EA that have been given little consideration to date. In
particular, this involves the concept of the business model. We then sketch out the
research methodology used for this paper. Next, we provide the conceptual
foundation and introduce the business architecture framework. The subsequent
section builds on the framework and details potential benefits of EA in corporate
strategic management. The penultimate section elaborates on this and presents the
results of our interviews with a number of strategic directors. The final section
briefly summarizes our findings and discusses potential future research.
2 Related work
Strategic, with strong business roots, EA may serve as an instrument for several
aspects of business management, from strategy to execution. However, there is little
research dealing with the relationship of EA management and corporate strategic
management. In a recent and the only study close to ours, Radeke (2011) illustrates
how to apply EA management to the process of strategic change. However, this
work does not ground its assertions in a thorough representation of what constitutes
business architecture, which we consider crucial for a proper substantiation of
relating EA with corporate strategic management. In addition, no insights from
practitioners of corporate strategic management are included.
Apart from that, Ross et al. (2006) is one of the very few and well-known
examples that aims to provide a bridge from EA to strategic management; the
authors define EA as ‘‘the organizing logic for business processes and IT
infrastructure reflecting the integration and standardization requirements of the
company’s operating model.’’ Thus, they link EA closely to the operating model,
which represents the enterprise’s level of business process standardization and
integration and can thus be considered as ‘‘a general vision of how a company will
enable and execute strategies.’’ They distinguish between four types of operating
models: diversification (low standardization, low integration), coordination (low
standardization, high integration), replication (high standardization, low integra-
tion), and unification (high standardization, high integration). Thereby, they clearly
stress that EA is a business issue rather than an IT issue. Unlike with a holistic
approach to EA, though, the business strategy and operating model are not
considered as integral elements of EA itself; rather, in their view EA only reflects
strategic choices—an approach basically shared by Whittle and Myrick (2004) as
well as Versteeg and Bouwman (2006), for example, who position business
architecture between business strategy and different architectural initiatives (e.g.,
organization architecture, IT architecture).
Both Bernard (2005) and Pereira and Sousa (2005) offer a different view, stating
that EA includes the current and future business objectives, goals, visions, and
strategies. This is also reflected in the work of Spewak and Hill (1993), who see
business modeling as an integral part of EA planning. Parker (2009) details the
strategic dimension of EA and explicates associations and links to the main
8 D. Simon et al.
123

--- PAGE 5 ---
constituents of strategic management: strategic analysis, strategy formulation,
strategic execution, and strategic governance. Likewise, Aitken (2009) contributes
to EA’s integration with strategic planning. This is based on his view that EA is
considerably more than simply describing current and future states of the enterprise.
In fact, the author emphasizes EA’s design capability, where he believes EA
distinguishes itself by assisting the enterprise to determine which road to take to
reach its target state and gain maximum competitive advantage. In particular, this is
because EA may be used as a tool to capture the strategic context of the enterprise,
both internal and external. Ganesan and Paturi (2009) also promote using EA for
strategic planning; they suggest integrating business architecture with the business
motivation model, as an acknowledged ‘‘scheme or structure for developing,
communicating, and managing business plans in an organized manner’’ (Object
Management Group 2010), and with the balanced scorecard approach, used to
monitor the achievement of business goals in the context of financial, customer,
internal business, and learning and growth performance measures (Kaplan and
Norton 2001).
Bernus et al. (2003) offer a comprehensive handbook on EA as the science of
enterprise engineering, including, for example, strategy formulation and business
model design. As part of this handbook, Molina (2003) proposes a framework for
defining the enterprise concept, with the business concept (mission, vision, and
culture), strategy (competitive strategy, value chain strategy, and production/service
strategy) and the action plan (core processes, core competencies, business plan) as
major components. According to Kalpic et al. (2003), a company needs to develop a
view of its strategy. To allow more than just instrumentalist annual planning, they
suggest establishing a strategic architecture that ‘‘provides a blueprint for building
competencies needed to dominate future markets.’’
All in all, however, business strategy and, particularly, the business model find
themselves underrepresented in the EA literature; this is evidenced in a recent, very
extensive analysis of EA research (Simon et al. 2013), in which the discourse on
EA, apart from its general focus on IT issues, is shown to concentrate far more on
business elements at the operational (e.g., business processes) than at the strategic
level. This is despite the findings of Burkhart et al. (2011), who in their recent
review of the business model literature identify an insufficient consideration of
relations and dependencies between different business model elements as well as an
absence of formalized means of graphical representations that allow structured and
comparable visualizations of business models—issues that one may expect to be
resolved by EA research.
According to Uppington and Bernus (2003), the business model represents the
system of relationships between the business entities involved. Detailed research on
the business model concept has been done by Hedman and Kalling (2002, 2003),
Osterwalder and Pigneur (2002, 2003), Osterwalder et al. (2005), Fritscher and
Pigneur (2010), zu Knyphausen-Aufseß and Meinhardt (2002), and most important,
Osterwalder and Pigneur (2010), who introduce the ‘‘Business Model Canvas.’’
In general, this canvas describes different building blocks that constitute the business
model, such as customer segments, business partners, and distribution channels.
This is mainly in line with Kaplan and Norton (2004), who use ‘‘strategy maps’’ to
Enterprise architecture management and its role 9
123

--- PAGE 6 ---
describe how the organization creates value and to visualize the cause-and-effect
relationships among the components of corporate strategy.
Returning to the EA literature, Keller (2009) accounts for the fact that business
capabilities have evolved to become one of the latest ‘‘hot topics’’ in EA
management. In fact, he demonstrates how capabilities can be used to facilitate
decision making. Close resemblance to this approach can be found in Brits et al.
(2007), who further distinguish between different types of capabilities (e.g.,
strategic capabilities) and suggest a method for business capability modeling.
Further, Barroero et al. (2010) recognize the crucial role of capabilities in EA,
offering a business capabilities-centric EA approach based on an extension of ‘‘The
Open Group Architecture Framework’’ (TOGAF) (The Open Group 2009).
In summary, EA may encompass a variety of business elements (Österle et al.
2007), including those of a strategic nature. The importance of business architecture
is supported by the findings of a survey among European practitioners conducted by
Riege and Aier (2009), indicating that more mature EA practices engage in this field
and are also involved in business strategy development. However, in this respect,
the related work has left significant room for further scientific contributions. First,
comprehensive discussions of EA management in light of corporate strategic
management are rare and those that do exist are not based on thoroughly specified
frameworks of business architecture content (e.g., Radeke 2011). Second, existing
frameworks of business architecture content show different emphases that could be
integrated into an overall picture. Third, insights and requirements from strategic
management practitioners have not yet been explored systematically in the EA
context. Fourth, formalized means of representation for certain strategic manage-
ment activities are missing (cf. Burkhart et al. 2011). So, to sum up, a systematic
assimilation of key business architecture entities in a comprehensive frame of
reference and, on this basis, an application of EA to major concerns in corporate
strategic management still seems to be lacking. This motivates the development of
our approach in this paper.
3 Research methodology
In line with guidelines from previous research (Adams and Courtney 2004; Beck
et al. 2012; Gregory 2010; Goldkuhl 2004; Holmström et al. 2009; Müller and
Olbrich 2011), our research approach represents a reasonable combination of the
design science paradigm (Baskerville 2008), which aims at extending ‘‘the
boundaries of human and organizational capabilities by creating new and innovative
artifacts’’ (Hevner et al. 2004), with the grounded theory concept (Glaser and
Strauss 1967), used to study primarily qualitative data to generate theories (in terms
of conceptual categories and the relationships between them) of both practical
relevance and scientific rigor. In particular, we drew upon the design science
research process proposed by Rossi and Sein (2003) (cf. Peffers et al. 2006), with
subsequent steps of (a) identifying a need, (b) building a methodology using good
design principles and best practices, (c) evaluating the methodology, and, finally,
(d) learning and theorizing.
10 D. Simon et al.
123

--- PAGE 7 ---
As a more general research approach, design science can be used in combination
with various research methods (Gregory 2010). So, inspired by the theory-generating
design science approach presented by Beck et al. (2012), which combines design
science and the grounded theory method, we complemented the above steps with
supportive techniques from grounded theory, such as theoretical sampling (see
below). We consider this complementary use reasonable: both design science and
grounded theory are inherently iterative in that data collection and analysis, on the
one hand, and artifact creation and evaluation, on the other hand, are closely
intertwined (cf. Beck et al. 2012; Glaser and Strauss 1967; Hevner et al. 2004).
Specifically, as suggested by Beck et al. (2012), we employed grounded theory
characteristics and techniques to benefit from additional data collection and analysis
following initial artifact creation, thereby generating additional theoretical insights
and increasing the understanding of the usage of the artifact [see also Weedman
(2008), another exemplary work that uses grounded theory techniques to support the
analysis and evaluation in a design science research project; while not mentioning
grounded theory, the author employs techniques resembling closely those of
grounded theory (e.g., theoretical sampling) (cf. Beck et al. 2012)]. In this respect,
we followed the guidelines of Offermann et al. (2009), who in their proposed design
science research process include the presentation of the problem and its solution to
practitioners in lectures or workshops, followed by a survey (including questions
such as ‘‘Do you think the presented artifact provides a viable solution to the
problem?’’) to evaluate perceived viability. Here, as proposed by Gregory (2010),
the relationship of the designed artifact with organizational tasks (in line with our
first research question)—something that can be considered an appropriate subject of
a grounded theory—was to form the basis for this evaluation [thereby accounting
for the findings that the grounded theory method may find particular applicability in
the evaluation phase of the design science research process (Gregory 2010; Gregory
and Muntermann 2011)].
So, while the first step of our research process (identification of need) was in
form of the literature review above, the second step (development/creation)
involved building on existing theories that were applied and extended (Hevner et al.
2004) to design a comprehensive business architecture framework and, using this as
the basis for our understanding, elaborate a descriptive (Hevner et al. 2004)
application of EA to corporate strategic management to develop theory further
around EA as an artifact. This went hand in hand with the subsequent step of
(qualitative) evaluation (i.e., the evidence of utility), where we (initially) mirrored
the above to practice through a series of semi-structured interviews [as a common
means used in grounded theory-based research (Müller and Olbrich 2011)] with
experienced practitioners, which, being at the core of our research, were for the
purpose of empirical grounding (Goldkuhl 2004) intended to ensure an adequate
level of research rigor (cf. Hevner 2007). We did this against the background of
various examples of design science work published in recognized IS journals
journals or conference proceedings (e.g., Bartenschlager and Goeken 2010; Bekkers
et al. 2010; Bradford et al. 2006; Felden and Buder 2012; Jansen et al. 2012;
Repschlaeger et al. 2012; Urbach and Würz 2012; van Steenbergen et al. 2010) that
employ expert interviews as the selected instrument (or at least a major instrument
Enterprise architecture management and its role 11
123

--- PAGE 8 ---
among others) for the (initial) evaluation/validation of the constructed artifact
(cf. Flick 2009, stating expert validation of findings as a main way of using such
interviews). The rationale behind this is the possible reconstruction of (exclusive)
specialist knowledge (particularly process and interpretive/explanatory knowl-
edge)—knowledge that has the chance to become (at least partly) asserted in a
specific organizational or functional context and can thus be considered of high
practical relevance, structuring ‘‘the practical conditions of other actors in their
professional field in a substantial way’’ (Flick 2009). In the design and evaluation of
reference conceptual models in particular (of which our framework can be
considered), the use of expert interviews with potential users is deemed advisable to
obtain a deeper understanding of the addressed problem situation and evaluate the
created artifact in terms of quality (vom Brocke and Buddendick 2006).
The interviews conducted also provided the bridge to the final step of learning
and theorizing. Although we began with a focused set of research questions on the
established business architecture framework and the associated role of EA
management within corporate strategic management, we remained open to new
insights that might emerge from the interview data rather than solely testing
associated hypotheses (Madill et al. 2000). This is in line with the grounded theory
nature as an iterative process of yielding new findings based on empirical data
(Glaser and Strauss 1967), and, if necessary, enriching these with insights from the
literature (despite myths that the grounded theory method involves sole reasoning
from empirical data and does not consider other knowledge sources, such as the
literature (Gregory 2010), there are several IS grounded theorists (e.g., Fernandez
2004; Levina and Vaast 2005) that make use of the literature alongside empirical
data to raise the conceptual level of their analyses).
We identified potential interviewees based on purposeful sampling (Morse et al.
2002; Sandberg 2000) of individuals holding positions as ‘‘strategic director,’’
‘‘head of corporate strategy,’’ or ‘‘managing director strategy.’’ We limited our
requests to these key positions because they were ‘‘golden sources’’ for the research
questions we were asking, with firsthand knowledge because they carry responsi-
bility for those aspects of strategic management relevant to our research (Morse
et al. 2002). Our aim was to have interviewees who would represent major
industries. We thus drew on the principles of theoretical sampling (i.e., cases are
chosen for theoretical, not statistical, reasons), which is at the core of grounded
theory and suggests the iterative analysis of a collection of independent slices of
empirical data representing a set of cases selected based on their potential to reveal
new insights, while a representative character has less priority (Glaser and Strauss
1967; Eisenhardt 1989; Gregory 2010; Müller and Olbrich 2011). In total, we
contacted and briefed eighteen individuals about the research project, and seven
agreed to participate. Although this is not a fully representative sample, key
industries were in fact represented and we could take advantage of a balanced
interview portfolio (see Table 1); of course, more extensive field research will be
required in the future to validate the findings further and extend them in terms of the
effective usage in practice.
Between April and October 2010, we conducted seven semi-structured,
guideline-based interviews (Gläser and Laudel 2004; Hopf 2005) of one- to two
12 D. Simon et al.
123

--- PAGE 9 ---
hours’ duration. Each began with a short introduction to our research and the
objectives and agenda of the interview, followed by a concise overview of the EA
discipline. We then introduced seven potential application scenarios of EA
management in light of corporate strategic management, using one or two
presentation slides per scenario. We then asked the interviewee’s view on each
scenario and, finally, the corresponding level of agreement (none, partial, full).
Open questions of this sort, asked in a way to exclude interviewer bias (Kvale
1989), initiated intense discussions and allowed us to explore the scenarios in
greater depth. To facilitate the approach outlined, we also drew on basic ideas of
appreciative interviewing (Schultze and Avital 2011), inviting the interviewees to
draw paths to ‘‘ideal’’ types of corporate strategic management by reflecting on their
personal experiences.
Since we expected little agreement to having the interviews recorded, we used a
documentation sheet to capture the interviewee’s narratives. We later created a
transcript from these notes and from memory, which we then verified with the
interviewees [in line with Dubé and Paré (2003), we will present several quotes later
in our study]. Armed with the interview data, we applied a form of qualitative
content analysis, iterating between the interdependent meaning of parts and the
whole they form (Klein and Myers 1999) and categorizing the interviewees’
statements (Flick 2008; Gläser and Laudel 2004; Kvale 2007; Schmidt 2005). We
then revisited each scenario based on the additional insights gained and charted the
territory for future EA research and practice.
4 Conceptual foundation: a business architecture framework
Generally speaking, EA management captures all those processes, methods, tools,
and responsibilities needed to build a holistic and integrated view of the enterprise
and allow for a continually aligned steering of business and IT (Matthes et al. 2008;
Niemann 2008). As such, EA management deals with different architectural layers,
one of which is business architecture—a structured description of the business
Table 1 Interviewees by position and industry
Position of interviewee Industry of interviewee
1 Managing director Western Europe Courier, express &
parcel
2 Director Strategy, business development & equity investments Post
3 Head of strategy/project coordination strategic business
unit full-range national
Retail
4 Director strategy & business development Car rental
5 Head of strategic architecture (on behalf of managing
director strategy & innovation)
Telecommunication
6 Director strategy/new business development Chemicals
7 Senior vice president corporate strategy and planning Automotive
Enterprise architecture management and its role 13
123

--- PAGE 10 ---
comprising a set of components and their interrelationships (as such, one significant
aspect area of EA alongside, e.g., IT architecture). Business architecture is,
however, subject to ambiguous use in the literature (cf. Glissman and Sanz 2009;
Versteeg and Bouwman 2006). To allow for a holistic approach to EA management
(e.g., its application to corporate strategic management), we suggest a three-layered
business architecture framework in the form of a comprehensive taxonomy (see
Fig. 1) that extends previous research (Bernard 2005; Graves 2010; Hoogervorst
2004; Osterwalder et al. 2005; Wirtz 2011; Zachman 1987) and encompasses the
concept as a whole, including different levels of abstraction (‘‘contextual,’’
‘‘conceptual,’’ ‘‘logical,’’ and ‘‘physical’’) (cf., e.g., Op’t Land et al. 2009). Given
this motivation, the decisions for the design of the framework’s structure and its
inherent elements were based on a careful literature synthesis; in addition, talks with
several EA practitioners about business architecture content and the first author’s
knowledge of different EA practices and their business architecture models
informed our design process. Within this process, we considered three criteria as
additional requirements beyond comprehensiveness and a variety of abstraction
levels: extensibility, on the one hand, and simplicity and understandability, on the
other hand (cf. Hirvonen et al. 2007; Österle et al. 2007).
At the top of our resulting framework is the business motivation (Ganesan and
Paturi 2009), which captures the strategic context of the business and explains why
it operates in a certain way. This is most often referred to as the strategy layer (cf.
Winter and Fischer 2007). Strategy is, however, only one of the elements. In line
with the Object Management Group (2010), we see three constituents of the
business motivation: business end, business means, and business influencers. The
Fig. 1 Business architecture framework
14 D. Simon et al.
123

--- PAGE 11 ---
business end includes essential elements of aspiration such as mission (the
fundamental purpose of an enterprise’s existence), values (ideals, customs, or
institutions an enterprise promotes or agrees with), vision (overall image of what the
enterprise wants to be or become), and goals and objectives (both of which represent
desired results: objectives quantify goals and may thus additionally be linked with
key performance indicators and/or critical success factors) (cf. David 2011; Kalpic
et al. 2003; Kantabutra and Avery 2010; Object Management Group 2010); business
means represent the instruments employed to achieve those ends. Business strategy,
as the general course of action, is at the core of the business means (it may be
detailed by tactics; like strategies, they channel efforts towards goals/objectives)
(Object Management Group 2010); it is complemented by business directives such
as policies, principles, and rules. The employment of business means and thus the
achievement of business ends are affected by business influencers, either internal or
external to the enterprise, with the external factors basically encompassing the
established PEST (political, economic, social, and technological) forces (Peng and
Nunes 2007). An assessment of these influencers may result in a classification into
strengths and weaknesses (both internal) as well as opportunities and threats (both
external) (Object Management Group 2010). As such, they represent drivers and
constraints of strategic choice.
This leads us to the bottom layer of our framework—business execution. Most
often referred to as the organization layer (cf. Winter and Fischer 2007), this
primarily includes business processes, information entities, organizational structures
(functional, geographical and legal), people, culture, resources, and their aggrega-
tion into ‘‘logical’’ business capabilities (cf. Barney et al. 2001; Brits et al. 2007;
Hoogervorst 2004; Kohlborn et al. 2009). A business capability is an enterprise’s
ability to execute a defined and repeatable pattern of activities and produce a desired
outcome (e.g., product, service) by deploying specific resources and expertise and
processing information in a defined organizational and cultural environment (cf.
Eisenhardt and Martin 2000; Helfat and Pereraf 2002; Kalpic et al. 2003;
Osterwalder and Pigneur 2003). In general, business capabilities abstract from their
realization through business processes, entities, organizations, people, culture, and
resources (cf. Klinkmüller et al. 2010), thus being the fundamental and stable
building blocks of the business (cf. Kohlborn et al. 2009) and potential influencers
of business means. With technology not being part of capability realization (as
opposed to, e.g., Brits et al. 2007) and thus treated as a separate aspect, business
capabilities are also clearly delineated from information system capabilities—a
differentiation that seems crucial both for IT architecture planning based on real
business requirements and for a proper evaluation of the business value of
information systems. The adequate application of the organization’s capabilities is
assured by a governance system of incentives and control (Albers 2010; Raps 2008),
which round out the building blocks of the business execution layer. All in all, this
includes those components of the business necessary to execute the middle layer of
our framework—the business model.
The business model expresses the fundamental business logic and therefore
represents the entire system of creating and delivering value to customers, capturing
this value by earning profits from these activities and sustaining this value capture
Enterprise architecture management and its role 15
123

--- PAGE 12 ---
(cf. Osterwalder and Pigneur 2002, 2010; Shafer et al. 2005). As such, it can be
considered a conceptual blueprint of the business strategy (cf. Osterwalder and
Pigneur 2003, 2010), which given its Greek origin strategia (i.e., the art of war) is
typically defined at a high level of abstraction. The business model offers several
perspectives (cf., e.g., Al-Debei and Avison 2010; Feurer and Chaharbaghi 1994;
Fritscher and Pigneur 2010; Hedman and Kalling 2003; Kaplan and Norton 2004;
Shafer et al. 2005; Winter 2002; Wirtz 2011; Zott and Amit 2009) that facilitate
translating strategy into execution models [and associating these with adequate
performance measures (cf. Kaplan and Norton 2004)]. We suggest six business
model perspectives: the offering perspective (value proposition, products/services);
customer perspective (customer segments, customer relationships, customer chan-
nels); supplier perspective (supplier segments, supplier relationships, supplier
channels); activity perspective (value chain configuration, coordination and
cooperation (cf. Zellner 2008), core assets (e.g., core competencies (as those
capabilities being of strategic nature) or intellectual assets like reputation),
operating model); financial perspective (cost/revenue model); and sustainability
perspective (design themes) (as opposed to, e.g., Hedman and Kalling (2003), we do
not consider competition as part of the business model, since competitors cannot
necessarily be chosen).
Together, the supplier, activity, and customer perspectives describe the entire
architecture of value creation (cf. zu Knyphausen-Aufseß and Meinhardt 2002),
which provides the basis for a certain offering. With customer co-creation and open
innovation (Reichwald and Piller 2009; Schlagwein et al. 2010), this could also
mean that customers themselves carry out key value chain activities. This aspect is
related closely to other parts of the business model, such as the available set of core
assets (Amit and Schoemaker 1993; Hafeez et al. 2002), the choice of key
coordination mechanisms such as postponement and speculation (Pagh and Cooper
1998; Pfohl 2004), and cooperation throughout the value chain by establishing
strategic partnerships (Dussauge and Garette 1999). The architecture of value
creation is also reflected within the financial model, as regards both revenues and
costs. To sustain competitive advantage achieved by design and implementation of
the business model, the enterprise may eventually consider design themes (Zott and
Amit 2009) such as branding (Winter 2002), the use of patents, and customer lock-
in through standardization.
With these elements, the business model becomes an important part of a business
plan when establishing a new business (cf. Osterwalder and Pigneur 2010). Figure 1
illustrates the three-layered business architecture framework outlined. As indicated,
the elements of business motivation, model, and execution possess various
interrelationships. These can be captured in a meta model, that is, the conceptual
scheme of the EA including its content elements and their relationships and
attributes (cf. Kurpjuweit and Winter 2007). Populated with concrete instances (e.g.,
the business capability to ‘‘meet regulatory requirements’’ and business processes
such as ‘‘financial reporting’’ and ‘‘recruitment’’), this provides the basis for the
practical use of EA in corporate strategic management and the application of
architectural thinking—with its focus on the structure of components and their inter-
relationships with each other and the environment (The Open Group 2009)—to the
16 D. Simon et al.
123

--- PAGE 13 ---
evolution of the business. In particular, this involves using specific views of this
model (e.g., a capability realization map) that can assist in certain aspects of
strategic management, as detailed in the following subsection. Views are
representations of the architecture in terms meaningful to stakeholders. A view,
in turn, is defined by an associated viewpoint, that is, a schema that specifies the
information that should appear in the view and that proposes a way to present that
information (Buckl et al. 2007; The Open Group 2009).
5 The use of enterprise architecture in corporate strategic management
Research to date identifies different stages of strategic management, basically
ranging from strategy formation [‘‘whereby goals and objectives are identified,
policies are formulated, and strategies are selected in order to achieve the overall
purposes or mission of an organization’’ (Steiss 1985) (thus including visioning as a
step that precedes actual strategy identification)] to programming/implementation
and evaluation/control (David 2011; Ganesan and Paturi 2009; Hax and Majluf
1984). According to Schäffer and Willauer (2003), the intensity of strategic
planning is related positively to its effectiveness. To shed light on the role of EA
therein, we distinguish between seven EA application scenarios (cf. Winter et al.
2007) in light of corporate strategic management (cf. Kalpic et al. 2003; Parker
2009; Raps 2008): strategic analyses, strategic choice, design of future business
execution, business transformation readiness assessment, strategy implementation
planning, strategy review, and strategic governance (see Table 2). These scenarios
represent distinct tasks of strategic management as found in the literature, which we
use to theorize regarding the use of EA in a more specific way than at the level of
the stages above. We ground the descriptions of the scenarios (which relate either to
one specific stage or link two stages) in the conception of EA in terms of what
constitutes business architecture (which has been established in the previous section
with our framework), stretching from business motivation to business execution,
both linked by the business model layer. By doing this, we derive research
propositions for the seven scenarios; we believe that with their substantiation by our
Table 2 Strategic management stages and related EA application scenarios
Stage of strategic management EA application scenario
Strategy formation Strategic analyses
Strategic choice
Business execution
design
Business transformation
readiness assessment Strategy programming/implementation
Strategy implementation planning
Strategy evaluation/control Strategy review
Strategic governance
Enterprise architecture management and its role 17
123

--- PAGE 14 ---
empirical data set later in this paper we contribute to reducing the gap between EA
and corporate strategic management.
5.1 Strategic analyses
Strategy formulation is typically preceded by thorough strategic analyses that
capture factors both external and internal to the enterprise and determine the set of
available strategic options. While the external perspective is at the heart of the
market-based view (Porter 1980), the internal perspective is related closely to the
resource-based view (Barney 1991, 1996; Barney et al. 2001), suggesting that
unique resources provide the fundamental basis for strategic choice and achieving
competitive advantage. With the progress achieved through research on the
resource-based view, it has become clear that the notion of resources needs to go
beyond its original meaning to include capabilities (Eisenhardt and Martin 2000;
Grant 1991; Helfat and Pereraf 2002).
With the business architecture framework outlined being translated into a meta
model (see, e.g., Malik 2009; Österle et al. 2007; Smith 2011), EA allows for
modeling both the external and internal drivers and constraints of strategic choice
and setting them in relation to specific strategic options. Based on a classification of
these factors, a SWOT (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, threats) matrix
(Bernard 2009) may be created as a specific view that provides immediate input for
strategy formulation. Similarly, entire hierarchies of (and/or causal relationships
among) goals and objectives can be depicted (Buckl et al. 2010b; Österle et al.
2007; Samavi et al. 2009) and related to strategies, for example, using goal
realization/contribution views as described in The Open Group (2012) and depicted
in Fig. 2 [in which the top three icons represent goals, while the three others can be
understood as representations of strategies (The Open Group (2012) uses the
concept ‘‘requirement’’ to denote means to realize goals); the dotted arrows
Fig. 2 Exemplary goal realization view [adapted from The Open Group (2012) and Kaplan and Norton
(2004)]
18 D. Simon et al.
123

--- PAGE 15 ---
represent realization relationships, and the relationships between goals are
aggregations]. Such a complete picture not only allows for transparency of the
strategic context and requirements (Aitken 2009), but also offers the possibility of a
model-based validation of strategy (e.g., strategy can be checked for overall
consistency and alignment with business goals) and even of the underlying strategic
identity (Kalpic et al. 2003) as captured in the business ends.
As for the internal drivers and constraints of strategic choice, that is, the business
capabilities, the role of EA may go even further, since EA may actually provide the
methodological basis for capability identification. Given the heterogeneity of
business capabilities across different firms (Amit and Schoemaker 1993) and that
they represent a multi-dimensional construct realized by various elements (e.g.,
business processes) and typically embedded deeply within the organization, this has
been found to be a significant challenge (Day 1994). Based on integrated models of
capability-realizing components such as business processes, information entities,
and organizational units captured within the EA (represented in, e.g., information
flow diagrams), the enterprise’s current business capabilities can be identified in a
bottom-up way (cf. Brits et al. 2007; Day 1994; Hafeez et al. 2002) and visualized in
capability maps (Klinkmüller et al. 2010) at different levels of granularity
(Beimborn et al. 2005; Kohlborn et al. 2009) (which may take the form of nested
box diagrams representing functional groupings). For example, a mergers &
acquisitions capability may be derived by composition of (among others): the
business processes ‘‘market analysis,’’ ‘‘due diligence checking’’ and ‘‘contract
management’’; the information entities ‘‘partner’’ and ‘‘contract’’; and the ‘‘business
insight,’’ ‘‘corporate development,’’ and ‘‘legal’’ units. This approach puts business
capabilities into the context of the overall enterprise model.
Capability heat maps (in which capabilities are color coded as per certain attribute
values) (Keller 2009) can be used to detail capability types such as strategic and basic
capabilities (Brits et al. 2007), or visualize hot spots within the capability landscape
(e.g., capabilities with disproportionally high costs). Strategic capabilities are of
particular relevance, since they constitute the core competencies (Prahalad and
Hamel 1990) of the enterprise (Brits et al. 2007; Hafeez et al. 2002; Kalpic et al.
2003) and are thus among the enterprise’s core assets captured in the business model
[other assets include brands, patents, and institutional capital (Reihlen et al. 2010),
for example (Amit and Schoemaker 1993; Hafeez et al. 2002)]. All in all, EA may
inform corporate strategic management about the current business situation (Parker
2009), and thus provides a methodological basis for developing adequate strategies
according to both internal and external preconditions.
Proposition 1 EA facilitates the analysis of the internal and external business
context and the development of different strategic options.
5.2 Strategic choice
Based on the set of alternative strategies developed, strategic choice constitutes the
next step within the strategic planning process (Kalpic et al. 2003). Such a choice
may have significant impacts on procedures, routines, and structures within the
Enterprise architecture management and its role 19
123

--- PAGE 16 ---
enterprise. With a consistent EA model from business motivation to business
execution (cf. Aitken 2009; Ganesan and Paturi 2009) and the underlying IT
architecture, there is a profound basis for systematic impact analyses (cf. Micklich
2005) and weighing alternative strategies against one another. In this way, EA can
be used as the ‘‘feasibility sounding board’’ (Parker 2009) within strategy evaluation
(Kalpic et al. 2003), which facilitates gaining an early idea of whether a considered
strategy can really be executed, thus mitigating the risk of the ‘‘bogus strategy
syndrome’’ of strategies that are not feasible or relevant (Parker 2009). A strategic
option such as the launch of an online product offering can thus be evaluated in
terms of, for example, the affected stages of the value chain, the underlying business
processes as well as the supporting application systems and infrastructure that may
need to be changed at certain costs and/or risks (e.g., to meet new availability
requirements). For strategies of a more complex nature and that actually represent a
set of strategic choices, the structured description of the business model may be of
particular value for analysis. Through their reflection in the business model, these
strategic choices can be tested for whether they are mutually supportive and
internally consistent (Shafer et al. 2005), followed by an evaluation against
alternative strategies as depicted above.
Consider, for example, a value proposition of customized, high-quality product
bundles. This may conflict with an operating model of diversification (low
standardization and integration of business processes), which may impede cross-
selling and product bundling across different businesses. It may also contradict
mechanismsofspeculationforcoordinatingactivitiesalongthevaluechain,sincethis
approach may not allow the envisioned production of customized end products. Once
the business model has been analyzed in terms of consistency, one can also assess the
impactsoftherepresentedsetofstrategicchoicesontheITarchitecture.Foraninsurer
that aims to provide third-party administration services (e.g., claims settlement), it
may be necessary to equip the involved application systems, as visualized in process
support maps (Buckl et al. 2008), with multi-tenancy capability, for example. That
being said, EA may provide a methodological frame of reference for corporate
strategic management (Aitken 2009) in the process of strategy evaluation.
Proposition 2 EA facilitates strategic choice with model-based analysis options.
5.3 Business execution design
The implementation of a defined strategy, which follows strategy formation (Kalpic
et al. 2003), requires translation into a corresponding business execution layer.
Again, this is where the business model as the conceptual blueprint of the business
strategy, that is, the representation of a set of strategic choices (Shafer et al. 2005),
can provide the necessary bridge from strategy to execution (cf. Osterwalder et al.
2005). Based on a structured description of the business model related to both
overarching business motivation and underlying business execution (as introduced
above), EA may represent a powerful instrument for closing the chasm between
formulations of business strategy and execution. This is due to the structure offered
in the design of the future business model, based on the strategic direction (cf.
20 D. Simon et al.
123

--- PAGE 17 ---
Osterwalder et al. 2005) (i.e., the translation of strategic choice into the fundamental
(grouped) elements of a promising business logic, including their relationships (e.g.,
‘‘value chain configuration enables value proposition’’) (cf. Fritscher and Pigneur
(2010), as visualized in graph-layout maps (Matthes et al. 2008) or simple matrices),
and the derivation of future business capabilities required to execute this business
model, thereby shaping the strategic architecture of the future (Prahalad and Hamel
1990). A strategy of expanding business operations from the original home market
to neighbouring countries to serve customers more directly than previously via the
Internet results in a value proposition that involves an improved customer service,
for example. To offer this service in equal quality than in the home market, a certain
degree of standardization in business processes, as captured in the operating model,
would be reasonable. The overall value chain, however, might still be configured in
a way that does not require the establishment of own sites in the new market but
builds on partners that provide the services on behalf of the organization. A required
capability that results from this business model is, for example, ‘‘manage partners.’’
On that basis, business capabilities are to be broken down into the components
that make such capabilities realizable. Eventually, this leads in particular to the
design of the future organizational structures and business processes (ideally based
on re-usable architectural standards documented). Being less stable than abstract
business capabilities (Kohlborn et al. 2009), they are likely to be much more
difficult to anticipate. Strategy deduction by use of the business model and its
translation into future business capabilities may, however, facilitate the specification
of individual elements of capability realization and the specification of their
relationships, for example, the mapping of the decision authority to the organiza-
tional structure (Bernus 2003). This is because the ‘‘organizational fit’’ (Bernus
2003) depends significantly on the business model established, for example, on
factors such as being part of a partner network and the associated level of trust with
partners. EA thus provides a conceptual bridge to achieve an adequate fit within
business execution based on its structured description of the business model.
Proposition 3 EA facilitates business execution design aligned with business
motivation.
5.4 Business transformation readiness assessment
Having determined future business execution, an understanding of the organiza-
tion’s readiness to accept change is a key to successful business transformation.
There are many dimensions to change, with the human element likely the most
important (The Open Group 2009). The degree of transformation that is
immediately realizable may depend significantly on the complexity of current
business execution and the underlying IT landscape (Mocker 2009; Simon et al.
2010). Such complexity may hinder architectural transformations to keep up with
new business needs (Simon et al. 2010), especially in cases where considerable gaps
exist between the current and future architectures.
EA makes this complexity visible and manageable (Schekkerman 2004; Simon
et al. 2010), which allows for transparency as regards transformation readiness and
Enterprise architecture management and its role 21
123

--- PAGE 18 ---
the measures necessary to enable transformation. Business activities that are highly
interlinked with one another, but at the same time operate on different information
entity implementations and are subject to specific incentives that promote function
rather than process orientation, might give rise to difficulties in an outsourcing of
whole (non-core) processes to a shared service center, for example. To extend
further beyond enterprise boundaries, other, IT-related aspects typically docu-
mented in the EA are also relevant: the extent to which standardized, ‘‘plain-
vanilla’’ interfaces are used; the length of transactions in automated business
processes [as loosely coupled application systems (across enterprise boundaries)
should not have a common transaction context (Engels et al. 2008)], and the number
of dependencies of application systems affected by a planned transformation (e.g.,
system to be outsourced) as visualized in graph-layout maps. While certain aspects
of the business transformation readiness assessment may have already been
addressed within strategy evaluation to gauge feasibility (Uppington and Bernus
2003), this is also a major issue at the initiation of implementation planning (cf. The
Open Group 2009).
Proposition 4 EA facilitates the business transformation readiness assessment by
providing transparency regarding the current business and IT landscape.
5.5 Strategy implementation planning
To implement strategic choice and modify business execution accordingly,
initiatives and projects are planned and established (Op’t Land et al. 2009). These
may differ in terms of their significance, and may be subject to budget and resource
constraints. Therefore, they must be reasonably prioritized. With the chain of
relationships from business strategy to capabilities captured in the EA (based on
which the capabilities’ strategic value can be determined) and the project proposals
assigned systematically to the business capabilities affected (i.e., project candidates
mapped onto business capabilities, visualized using cross reference tables and/or
project context diagrams), there is a conceptual basis for assessing the strategic
importance of each potential project (Aier et al. 2008a) and visualizing this in
portfolio matrices (Buckl et al. 2008). In the case of the example above of an
outsourcing strategy, the capability ‘‘manage supplier’’ is likely to become
particularly important; projects that are related to this capability thus turn out to
be important alike. Knowing the affected business capabilities, inter-dependencies
between different projects can also be revealed (e.g., ‘‘manage supplier’’ may be in
scope of two different projects) and used to refine project planning and
synchronization.
From there, a final transition program (Aitken 2009) and implementation order
can be developed that focuses on strategic and monetary (cf. Hafeez et al. 2002)
business outcomes (rather than ‘‘technical deliverables’’) (The Open Group 2009).
This, in turn, can be broken down into individual project increments (cf.
Osterwalder et al. 2005). All in all, that allows for identifying strategic capabilities
not being sufficiently covered by the transition program, which can then be re-
22 D. Simon et al.
123

--- PAGE 19 ---
addressed prior to any implementation activities. At its heart, this capability-based
planning thus represents a systematic approach to implementing strategy.
Proposition 5 EA facilitates informed decision making with respect to strategy
implementation.
5.6 Strategy review
Following the completion of strategy implementation, planned and carried out
according to the capability-based paradigm outlined, strategy is reviewed in terms
of the results achieved and potential needs for re-design (Kalpic et al. 2003). In this
post-implementation review, the insights gained during strategy implementation are
consolidated and fed back to strategic choice (cf. Feurer and Chaharbaghi 1995a).
With a consistent picture from strategy down to execution and the underlying IT
architecture (e.g., which business processes (and IT components) have been
transformed according to which strategic choice and which changes in the business
model), EA allows for tracing the implemented business execution and, more
generally, the solutions back to the strategic choices (Op’t Land et al. 2009), e.g.,
the business process ‘‘procurement,’’ transformed into an e-procurement solution, to
an envisioned cost leadership (as the basic strategy) with its associated supplier
channels and relationships (as part of the business model) that focus primarily on the
Internet. Along with adequate performance indicators (Aitken 2009) attached to
elements of business execution [such as, e.g., in a balanced scorecard, which
(among others) suggests the definition of internal process measures and their
connection to value proposition elements (cf. Kaplan and Norton 2004)], this may
provide a solid basis for measuring and visualizing the degree of strategy and goal
fulfillment (Buckl et al. 2008), showing the added value achieved by the strategic
choices implemented and thus indicating necessary strategy modifications. All in
all, this supports a sustainable benefits management.
Proposition 6 EA facilitates strategy re-design due to the traceability provided
from execution back to strategy.
5.7 Strategic governance
To ensure the execution of the strategic choices and thus achieve sustainable
strategy conformity, there is a need for ongoing strategic governance (cf. Raps
2008). First and foremost, this requires proper strategy definition that allows for
communicating strategy in an unambiguous and straightforward way (Op’t Land
et al. 2009)—a challenge with which many companies apparently have struggled in
the past (Kaplan and Norton 2001; Osterwalder et al. 2005; Raps 2008). The
structured representation and decomposition of strategy into the business model
provided by EA does, however, represent a powerful way to communicate strategic
choices (Kappelman et al. 2008; Shafer et al. 2005) and create visibility and a
shared understanding of the strategic direction and the business logic (Osterwalder
et al. 2005; Parker 2009).
Enterprise architecture management and its role 23
123

--- PAGE 20 ---
Beyond that, EA can be leveraged to evaluate change requests from a strategic
point of view. Potential changes within business execution can be evaluated in terms
of how this conforms to the overall business model (Op’t Land et al. 2009). Likewise,
modifications of the business model can be assessed in terms of resulting impacts
(Osterwalder et al. 2005). If, for example, the activity split between the enterprise
and the customer, or specific business units and an internal service organization, is
supposed to change, a structured description of the business model provides
systematic means to identify and analyze possible effects on the financial model.
Based on the relationships around strategic choices captured within the EA and a
breakdown of strategy into operating terms (i.e., with measures and metrics
deconstructed to various business process levels) (cf. Ganesan and Paturi 2009),
eventually there is also a basis for regular conformity checks (cf. Parker 2009). Core
elements of business execution, such as business processes and organizational units,
can thus be reviewed in terms of their strategy compliance, potentially revealing
strategic hot spots within the business landscape. This also goes for business
capabilities, which, as already outlined above, can be visualized in heat maps of
their strategic fit (Keller 2009). Additionally, capability radars as suggested by The
Open Group (2009), which visualize the (current or planned) status of capability-
realizing components at certain times, may be used to govern the evolution of
business capabilities as defined within strategy implementation. More specifically,
such radars can be understood as kiviat diagrams, in which the lines radiating from
the center represent the realizing components (e.g., business process, information
entity); against each line, evolution points may be determined and joined up into a
closed loop for specific transformation states (The Open Group 2009). This can be
checked against the actual progress as part of strategic governance.
Proposition 7 EA facilitates sustainable strategy execution.
All in all, the consistent and structured representation of business motivation,
business model, and business execution in one model, which can be visualized,
analyzed, and tracked using dedicated viewpoints (Buckl et al. 2008) that expose
specific relationships, dependencies, impacts, and conflicts (Parker 2009), may
make EA a frame of reference for corporate strategic management (Aitken 2009). In
particular, it can make strategy explicit down to the execution level and thus
strengthen management and decision-making competence. Figure 3 (as a simplified
illustration) summarizes the connections between our framework and the applica-
tion scenarios we introduced. It shows which parts of the framework (including their
links, both ‘‘internal’’ and ‘‘external’’ ones to other architecture layers/elements) are
of primary relevance in which application scenarios. In other words, it shows which
application scenarios may operate on which main components of the framework—
or may use corresponding views of the components—with which temporal state,
whether ‘‘as is’’ (which applies to all components not explicitly labeled otherwise)
or ‘‘to be.’’ In the scenario strategic choice, for example (as illustrated above), one
might benefit from a structured representation of the strategic options at hand,
including any parts/sub-options, and the possible translation into the resulting future
business model. For instance, in the example that outlined the option to increase the
24 D. Simon et al.
123

--- PAGE 21 ---
offering of customized product bundles, the future business model may show a high
integration of business processes, as captured in the operating model, along with
postponement as a main coordination mechanism. Based on the changes this likely
entails with respect to current ways of business execution and the associated IT
architecture (e.g., the degree of data sharing/centralization), one may then evaluate
Fig. 3 Connections between business architecture framework and application scenarios
Table 3 EA application scenarios in corporate strategic management and associated benefits
Application scenario Benefits
Strategic analyses Business capability identification; business context understanding;
strategy documentation & validation/confirmation
Strategic choice Intra-strategy evaluation; inter-strategy evaluation
Business execution design Strategy decomposition (business model representation); strategy
deduction (capability design)
Business transformation
readiness assessment
Business complexity/dependency analysis; IT complexity/dependency
analysis
Strategy implementation
planning
Prioritization of transition initiatives/projects; project dependency
analysis; strategic validation of project portfolio
Strategy review Strategy traceability
Strategic governance Strategy communication; evaluation of change requests/new
requirements; strategic alignment check; business capability
monitoring
Enterprise architecture management and its role 25
123

--- PAGE 22 ---
the strategic option in terms of criteria such as costs and risks. The illustrations of
the other application scenarios in Figure 3—that is, the framework components and
their interrelationships on which the scenarios operate, including, in particular, the
cause-and-effect-relationships in the components’ design and the interdependencies
of change—explain themselves accordingly, as is evident in the description of the
scenarios given above. On that basis, Table 3 summarizes the benefits to be gained
by using EA within corporate strategic management.
6 Enterprise architecture as a facilitator of corporate strategic management:
practitioner interviews
Having depicted the potential use of EA in corporate strategic management, we now
present and discuss the results of our practitioner interviews to elaborate on the
application scenarios outlined and further analyze the research propositions derived
from applying our framework. First, we describe the interview results step by step
along the seven application scenarios, using quotes from our interviewees and some
comparisons to findings in the existing literature. Second, we present a cross-case
synthesis of the findings, in which we summarize the extent of interviewee
agreement with the propositions, consolidate the benefits and limitations of EA
(including the business architecture framework) within corporate strategic manage-
ment and provide lessons learned with suggestions for how to solve certain
identified issues.
6.1 A step-by-step description of the interview findings
6.1.1 Strategic analyses
The interviews revealed no disagreement that there are different factors that should
have an impact in strategy formation. According to the strategy director of an
international car rental service, it is ‘‘a mixture of market, future prospects,
competitors, capabilities and, of course, the overall business vision.’’
What became particularly salient, however, was the precedence taken by the
market-based view therein. Consider the following statement by the strategy
director of a chemical company: ‘‘Within the past years, there has been a clear
tendency towards the market-based view. … No, the resource-based view is not left
unconsidered, but it’s primarily the market that determines what we are going to
do.’’
Trends are of particular importance within an appraisal of the external
environment. This comes through in several interviewee statements. For example:
‘‘It is very important not to put too much emphasis on historical data. From my point
of view, you should instead draw on industry trends—also beyond your own ‘home’
industry—and also mega trends within the entire society. This might give you a
much broader view of potentially new product/market combinations than looking
backwards or in your own silo.’’
26 D. Simon et al.
123

--- PAGE 23 ---
In fact, nearly every interviewee pointed out that anticipation is key to successful
strategic analyses, and that market trends need to be captured as early as possible.
As outlined above, capturing the business context can be done in a structured form
within the EA—a benefit that was largely valued by our interviewees.
While internal capabilities should not be left unconsidered, there was consensus
among the interviewees not to constrain strategic choices to an inappropriate extent.
As one of our interviewees insisted, ‘‘First you define a strategy. Then you ask
yourself whether you have the required capabilities and, if not, how they can be
acquired.’’
The senior vice president for corporate strategy and planning of a leading
automotive company provided a more colorful description: ‘‘At the beginning, there
is no ‘right’ or ‘wrong.’ From my point of view, you should start by spanning the
whole corridor instead of limiting yourself with any restrictions. Consider the roots
of Lego as some sort of carpenter’s shop or those of Nokia as a manufacturer of
boots, for example. Both would not have evolved to what they are today if they had
made themselves subject to too many constraints and had not thought innovatively.
The more important questions you need to answer are: ‘What do I want to be?’ and
‘What am I really capable of?’’’
In simple terms, the first question corresponds to the statement made by another
interviewee: ‘‘Do we pursue being the ‘Aldi’ or ‘Porsche’ of our industry?’’ As for
the second question, most of the interviewees saw the value of EA, as the following
statement indicates: ‘‘I agree with you. It is not easy to define capabilities.
Enterprise architecture may, indeed, facilitate this definition.’’
As the interview findings suggest, another important aspect is the differentiation
between capabilities and core competencies. As a constituent of business
capabilities, resources represent a particular determinant of strategy formation.
One interviewee stressed that this especially requires investigating the available
monetary resources. Emphasis was also placed on the corporate culture (cf. Raps
2008), illustrated by the following statement: ‘‘One of the biggest mistakes in
strategy development you can make is to design a new strategy that does not fit into
the cultural footprint—the DNA—of the company.’’ This is, however, where many
of our interviewees saw difficulties in applying EA.
One interviewee explained: ‘‘With enterprise architecture, you don’t get the soft
facts like corporate culture or abilities of individual teams. It’s only about hard
facts.’’ Translated to McKinsey’s 7S-framework for strategy implementation and
organizational development (cf. Raps 2008), EA was thus described as a more
powerful tool for describing the hard (strategy, structure, systems) than the soft
elements (shared values, skills, style, staff).
6.1.2 Strategic choice
During the discussion of the role of EA in strategic choice, it became apparent that a
more detailed definition of strategy is needed. This is in line with Feurer and
Chaharbaghi (1997), who identify several dimensions that may be associated with
this term, for example, scope (market selection, activities, etc.), content (diversi-
fication, growth, etc.), and timeframe. To allow a more differentiated use of the
Enterprise architecture management and its role 27
123

--- PAGE 24 ---
term, one may distinguish between corporate strategy (specialized into growth
strategy, stability strategy, retrenchment strategy) for general market definition,
competitive strategy (including alliance strategy) for specific market navigation and
leapfrogging respective competitors, and functional strategy (e.g., IT strategy,
marketing strategy) (cf. Raps 2008; Hax and Majluf 1984), all of which are reflected
in the business model.
While interviewees largely acknowledged the role of EA as a facilitator of
strategic choice, we were confronted with the question of why a detailed feasibility
study is needed. According to one interviewee, ‘‘Strategies are always feasible if
management has done its strategy development process properly. … Culture is the
only thing you cannot work against; it has to be adapted slowly. Specific
capabilities, for example, can be acquired or improved.’’ Elaborating, the
interviewee added: ‘‘Sometimes, it’s simply best to say ‘that’s what I want; please
work out how I will get there’.’’
6.1.3 Business execution design
Following the discussion of strategic choice, we discussed the breakdown into the
business model as the basis for shaping the future business execution, which met
with equal appreciation by our interviewees, as evidenced by this exemplary
statement: ‘‘Using such a structured description to translate strategy into the future
business organization sounds very promising.’’
Based on capturing the different business model perspectives in the EA model,
specific business model viewpoints (both intra- and inter-perspective) may help
create adequate representations, as our interview findings indicate. Inspired by
architectural viewpoints such as the business support matrix that displays the
support of business processes in organizational units by application systems (cf.
Buckl et al. 2008), interviewees found similar matrices of interest with respect to the
business model. In particular, this involved a customer channel matrix (two-
dimensional matrix of products and markets, populated by the customer channels
used for specific combinations) and a business collaboration matrix (two-dimen-
sional matrix of value chain stages and markets/products, displaying the internal and
external actors present on these stages for a particular market or product).
It was noted, however, that translation into the future business execution does not
follow a fully deterministic logic and may work only up to a certain level of
granularity. ‘‘While the high-level organizational structure can be derived from the
strategy and the corresponding business model, detailed organizational design is
subject to constraints, especially company politics,’’ said one interviewee.
Whether there need to be any changes at all was also questioned: ‘‘Strategy
changes do not necessarily result in a transformation of the business organization.
You don’t change the organization that quickly.’’
The aforementioned automotive industry representative went even further: ‘‘Such
a structured description of the business model may help, but it is not critical. There
are other criteria that have a greater impact on the future business organization.
Whether the organization is structured along functions or business divisions—this is
not something the business model determines, but is a general question of the
28 D. Simon et al.
123

--- PAGE 25 ---
governance vision. The same business model may lead to absolutely different
business organizations. An example would be the business model of mobility
services. If, for whatever reason, a credit card becomes part of the offering, it is
instead a philosophical question that determines what the business organization will
look like. Is the credit card considered as a complementary service or is it expected
to become a considerable source of revenue generation? This is what you need to
answer in that context, for example.’’
6.1.4 Business transformation readiness assessment
It was with respect to the assessment of business transformation readiness where the
interviewees showed the highest level of agreement regarding the facilitating role of
EA. A managing director of a leading player in the express delivery market made a
notable remark: ‘‘I definitely see the value of enterprise architecture. But there are
manyfactorsthatmayaffecttransformation readiness.Wehavealready discussedthe
role of corporate culture, for example. But that’s only one part. Employment
protection,theshopcommittee,theseareotheraspectsthatmayplayarolehere.…In
general, you need a thorough and very convincing storyline to make the organization
ready for transformation. And sometimes you may only achieve this if you manage to
increase the level of suffering before you start the transformation process.’’
Notably, this brought us back again to EA, since this may be an appropriate
instrumentwithwhichtoestablishacolorfulstorylineandthusaddresswhatmaybethe
most important dimension to change—the human element (The Open Group 2009).
6.1.5 Strategy implementation planning
Strategy implementation planning as another scenario to be facilitated by EA
generally garnered at least partial agreement. The use of business capabilities was
appreciated, but only seen as one facet of implementation planning, as one of our
interviewees put it in a nutshell: ‘‘I agree with you that capabilities may help here.
Honestly though, they are not sufficient. We employ a whole set of strategic
assessment criteria.’’
Furthermore, in one interview we had to clarify the difference between EA and
traditional decision tree techniques. After some discussion and a review of the
business architecture framework, the interviewee himself concluded that such
techniques may still be well applied, but EA can provide an information base from
which such trees may be generated on an ad hoc basis and stored for historical
traceability.
6.1.6 Strategy review
The weakest agreement was on EA’s role in strategy reviews. This is due to the
variety of aspects other than the strategy itself that may have led to poor
performance, as expressed in the following statement: ‘‘In general, I see your point.
However, what you need to find out is whether unsatisfactory results are due to
strategic or implementation problems.’’
Enterprise architecture management and its role 29
123

--- PAGE 26 ---
Similarly, the strategy director of a postal service explained (cf. Feurer and
Chaharbaghi 1995b): ‘‘Once you have implemented the defined business strategy,
you should make an honest assessment of the targets set and the results achieved. In
searching for reasons for any deviations, however, you should not forget to consider
soft facts such as the employee’s resistance to change. So, results such as insufficient
performance or high costs cannot be attributed automatically to the business strategy
itself and do not necessarily mean that the defined strategy was the wrong choice.’’
Consequently,oneshouldgiveequalconcerntostrategyanditsimplementationand
subsequentexecutioninthesearchforexplanationsoffailures,asfurthersupportedby
the following point made by an interviewee: ‘‘Once strategy has been implemented,
whatyoubasicallydofrommypointofviewisacomparisonofthedefinedto-bewith
the achieved as-is. I mean, you should have defined qualitative and quantitative goals
at the beginning of the process, which should serve as the basis for this. … Are you
aware of the EFQM management model (EFQM 2011)? If you look into this model,
you will find several criteria that all have their impact on the achievement of certain
outcomes. These are called the ‘Enablers.’ The business processes play a central role
here. Maybe this is where something does not work well. In that case, it’s the strategy
execution that is the deficient aspect, not the strategy itself.’’
6.1.7 Strategic governance
Eventually, our interviews involved very diverse discussions around EA’s position
in strategic governance. While some of our interviewees saw EA’s greatest value as
providing this ‘‘sanity check’’ to ensure sustainable strategy execution, others were
less convinced: ‘‘Based on my experiences, you need to develop shared views of the
strategic direction. This can be achieved only by thorough discussions.’’
6.2 Discussion and synthesis of the interview findings
All in all, the interviews provided fair support for EA’s facilitating role in strategic
management, while pointing to specific issues to be addressed in future EA research
and practice with respect to its strategic management facet. Table 4 summarizes the
application scenarios as judged by our interviewees, pointing out that each of our
propositions led to at least partial agreement from the interviewees [based on a scale
Table 4 Evaluation of EA application scenarios
Application scenario Mean score SD
Strategic analyses 1.43 0.98
Strategic choice 1.57 0.79
Business execution design 1.57 0.79
Business transformation readiness assessment 1.71 0.49
Strategy implementation planning 1.14 0.9
Strategy review 0.86 0.69
Strategic governance 1 1
30 D. Simon et al.
123

--- PAGE 27 ---
from 0 to 2, where 0 represents ‘‘no agreement,’’ 1 represents ‘‘partial agreement,’’
and 2 represents ‘‘full agreement,’’ as captured in the interviews (see research
methodology section)]. Inter-rater reliability among the interviewees, which we
calculated in SPSS 17.0.2 as an intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) with two-
way mixed effects (Shrout and Fleiss 1979), was, however, rather low (0.088 with a
95 % confidence interval from -0.6 to 0.515), and the ratings’ variance largely
differed across the scenarios observed, ranging from 0.238 to 1. This reflects the
widely acknowledged need for an enterprise-specific and-situated approach to EA
management (Buckl et al. 2010a). While EA in one organization might be
considered particularly valuable for the purpose of strategic analyses, a different
organization might not see these benefits or not see a certain need for EA in that
context. Among others, this may depend on the schools of strategic management
(Mintzberg et al. 1998) prevalent in the enterprise’s strategic management activities.
The value of EA in strategic analyses was, on the one hand, attributed to the
possible structured capturing of the business context (as part of the business
motivation layer of our framework) by our interviewees. In fact, given that drivers
and constraints can also be assigned with concrete timestamps (Saat 2010), EA may
become even more beneficial for strategic analyses, addressing the temporal aspect
of the context factors, which was also raised as a major concern during the
interviews (see the above discussion around trends). On the other hand, it was EA’s
support in defining business capabilities (as per the business execution layer of our
framework) that was appreciated by our interviewees. This may apply in particular
to ‘‘hidden’’ capabilities, which may be identified based on the various perspectives
integrated within the EA. In cases where capability types (e.g., strategic capabilities)
are made subject of the EA meta model, also the mentioned differentiation between
capabilities and core competencies can be thoroughly modeled and made available
for strategic analyses. In contrast, limitations may exist in capturing the soft
elements of the enterprise. While the hard elements may indeed reflect the roots of
EA, we believe that this may, however, not necessarily imply that the soft elements,
for example, corporate culture (cf. Raps 2008), cannot be represented architecturally
at all, so long as they can be made identifiable and tangible.
Similarly, the interviewees recognized a facilitating role of EA models within
strategic choice. Following the discussions around different strategy levels, EA
management may, however, be well-advised to distinguish between those levels and
incorporate this in its meta model (see Fig. 4) to actually provide effective
assistance in corporate strategic management.
Questions around the necessity of detailed analyses of strategy feasibility that we
faced in some interviews seem to mirror a certain philosophy of strategic
management (Feurer and Chaharbaghi 1997), in which planning is primarily driven
by a certain vision, without great concerns about available capabilities, and which
thus relates back to the ‘‘school of thought’’ (Mintzberg et al. 1998) mentioned
earlier. However, even in an approach of ‘‘that’s what I want; please work out how I
will get there,’’ we can conclude that EA still represents a reasonable tool that can
be drawn upon to identify those capabilities that are to be acquired or improved.
The possible breakdown of strategy into the business model as the basis for
designing the future business execution was one of the main benefits associated with
Enterprise architecture management and its role 31
123

--- PAGE 28 ---
EA (and our underlying business architecture framework) in corporate strategic
management, which provides fundamental support for the three established
framework layers. As per the additional strategy levels identified (see Fig. 4), the
corporate strategy is likely to determine the main customer segments and the
offering perspective of the business model and drives the business model’s overall
evolution. While the remaining parts of the business model are the subject mainly of
the competitive strategy (which may differ across the product/market combinations
selected), the functional strategies are not left unconsidered and may be reflected
quite specifically (e.g., the procurement strategy in the business model’s supplier
perspective). As our interviewees concluded, specific business model viewpoints for
the purpose of visualization are likely to increase the understanding and facilitate
the process of business execution design.
Definitely, limitations exist when we come to detailed organizational design,
which is affected significantly by company politics. While the factor of power
games taking place in the organization should not be underestimated, the
supportability of statements that the business model does not determine organiza-
tional structures at all (see the above quote from the automotive representative),
however, more likely depends on the perception of what constitutes a business
model. Contrary to our concept introduced above, such a statement reflects a rather
narrow view. In this case, translation into the future business execution apparently
becomes much more limited.
The business transformation readiness assessment is the scenario, in which EA is
considered most significant, as it makes complex relationships (at the business
execution layer and the underlying IT architecture) transparent. By doing this, EA
also serves as an instrument for exposing the need for transformation and thus
facilitating change management, as our interview findings suggest.
The application scenario of strategy implementation planning is, again, where the
possible use of business capabilities (as captured in the business execution layer of
our framework) was appreciated, although criteria other than impacts on business
capabilities should be taken into consideration as well for strategic assessments and
informed decision-making with respect to strategy implementation.
As indicated, the weakest agreement was on the proposition that EA facilitates
strategy re-design, since the business processes in their current state of execution,
for example, and not necessarily strategic choices, may have led to poor
performance. Even then, however, we can conclude that the benefit offered by
Fig. 4 Strategy levels meta model fragment
32 D. Simon et al.
123

--- PAGE 29 ---
EA remains the possible navigation of the paths from strategy to execution and vice
versa, and thus may indicate what requires review in further detail.
Eventually, EA was also valued in terms of its role in strategic governance
[although we found the most varying opinions here (see Table 4)], because it
supports monitoring and evaluating conformance with strategy and the correspond-
ing business model. Particular comments that shared views of the strategic direction
are most crucial and that these can be achieved only by thorough discussions do not
reject, but rather support, our thesis of sustainable strategy execution facilitated by
EA, since we found broad agreement with the assertion that strategy communication
is among EA’s major benefits.
The immediate core implications of the interviews on the framework and its
application (i.e., in terms of modifications and/or amendments), as captured in the
depicted scenarios, can thus be summarized as follows:
• Framework:
• Business motivation:
As strategies may exist at different levels, the element ‘‘strategy’’ is
specialized to distinguish between corporate strategy, competitive strategy,
and functional strategy.
• Business execution:
As capabilities may be of different types, the element ‘‘capability’’ is
specialized to distinguish between basic and strategic capabilities. Integra-
tive capabilities represent an optional element to be used to bind together
several capabilities of another type (cf. Brits et al. 2007).
• Application scenarios:
• Business execution design:
• Based on the introduced strategy levels, the business model is derived
from strategic choices as follows. While the main customer segments and
the offering perspective are determined by the corporate strategy, the
remaining business model parts are the subject primarily of the
competitive strategy (with potential differences across the product/
market combinations selected). Some parts of the business model may be
designed based on additional input from specific functional strategies
(e.g., supplier channels and relationships based on the procurement
strategy).
• Organizational structures are derived not only from the business model
and its translation into corresponding capabilities, but also from other
factors such as company politics.
• Strategy implementation planning:
Criteria other than impacts on business capabilities should be taken into
consideration as well for the strategic assessment of project candidates.
• Strategy review:
In the review of implemented strategic choices, one must be aware that the
business processes in their current state of execution, for example, and not
Enterprise architecture management and its role 33
123

--- PAGE 30 ---
necessarily strategic choices, may have led to poor performance. In this
respect, the transparency of which elements of business execution are related
to which strategic choices helps in identifying what requires review in
further detail.
Beyond these insights gained through the discussion of the seven application
scenarios, there is another lesson we can learn from the interviews. As one
interviewee said, ‘‘Most managers are hands-on people.’’ This is something other
interviewees also emphasized, suggesting that the process and instruments of
strategic management should not be overformalized but that they should be tailored
to the enterprise’s management style. Corporate strategic management facilitated by
EA may thus follow the design school rather than the planning school of strategic
management (cf. Mintzberg et al. 1998), taking advantage of an approach to strategy
development and execution that is both analytical and straightforward, and avoiding
endless strategy formulation that may jeopardize the achievement of strategy
execution (Op’t Land et al. 2009). This means that while the designed framework
may act as a reference that provides a structure of relevant content and helps guide
strategists through essential tasks of strategic management, not necessarily all of its
elements and/or their relationships may actually be explicitly instantiated and thus
formally modeled in the scenarios in which they have been found to be relevant.
Strategy implementation planning, for example, may be done without a detailed
assignment of project candidates to the affected business capabilities that finds its
way into the EA model; rather, the project candidates’ strategic value may be
assessed in an informal way using a capability map as a reference, if that better fits
into the management style of a given enterprise in a certain situation.
This lesson was reflected in a comment by another interviewee: ‘‘I think what
you have to keep in mind is the cost-benefit relationship of doing this. I can imagine
that this requires a lot of effort.’’ It thus seems essential to find a satisfactory middle
ground that avoids becoming paralyzed by disproportionally great efforts. In
general, this lesson connects to aspects that, apart from any methodical deficits and/
or gaps, may have impeded the adoption of EA in corporate strategic management
to date (despite the explored benefits): different world views/cultures of strategists
and architects (van Gils 2009); a lack of experienced architects (Lucke et al. 2010)
capable of making strategists understand and use EA; and the lagging acceptance of
EA by strategic managers due to its affiliation to the IT department. So, such issues
should be taken into additional consideration and, to the extent possible, resolved in
EA practice; it is then that EA (including the suggested business architecture
framework) can apparently prove its greatest value.
7 Conclusion
Having examined EA in light of corporate strategic management from both a
theoretical and, through practitioner interviews, a practical point of view, we now
draw some final conclusions and outline the implications for both research and
practice. To answer our first research question (‘‘What support can EA management
34 D. Simon et al.
123

--- PAGE 31 ---
provide within corporate strategic management, and on what conception of business
architecture is this based?’’), we have designed a comprehensive business
architecture framework where one that embraces the concept as a whole had been
lacking. This framework proposes three interrelated layers: business motivation,
business model, and business execution. On this basis, EA has been applied to key
tasks of corporate strategic management: strategic analyses, strategic choice,
business execution design, business transformation readiness assessment, strategy
implementation planning, strategy review, and strategic governance. This applica-
tion argues for the use of EA as the frame of reference for corporate strategic
management, which allows modeling of the business from strategy to execution and
may thus yield several benefits within the aforementioned scenarios.
Our empirical findings obtained through the interviews revealed further
interesting insights. In general, our interviewees appreciated the role EA may take
in corporate strategic management and thus bolstered the research propositions
developed regarding this facilitating role of EA. This is particularly true for the
business transformation readiness assessment. Also, the scenarios of strategic
analyses, strategic choice, and business execution design found considerable
agreement, mainly due to the support EA offers in business capability identification,
business context understanding, and strategy decomposition into the business
model. EA’s limits within strategic management come from the difficulties of
modeling the soft elements of the business comprehensively; from company politics
that affect, for example, organizational design; and from diverse aspects from
strategy to execution that may influence results.
All in all, we believe this approach of using design science to develop and apply
a consistent business architecture framework, combined with ideas of grounded
theory to allow for a qualitative examination through a series of interviews with
strategic managers, is a way to move more deeply into the research area and offers
ideas and advice for academics and practitioners alike. Aside from the academic
value that lies in its analysis and understanding, the framework (and our theorizing
about its application) may for practitioners serve as a conceptual guideline for
implementing and applying comprehensive business architecture management,
which facilitates establishing EA within the strategic management arena and paves
the way for it to become an accepted tool in the business. In fact, our research may
contribute to a greater understanding among strategic business managers of how EA
models can support their work, and may illustrate to architects how EA can be used
way beyond the management of the IT landscape.
For both EA practitioners and academics, our research also provides a qualitative
foundation on which to draw in the future and points to areas in which the EA
discipline still needs to develop further or to which it is well-advised to turn greater
attention to meet specific requirements imposed by corporate strategic management.
Accordingly, as the answer to our second research question (‘‘In what areas does EA
management need to develop to permeate corporate strategic management more
deeply?’’), this involves in particular the differentiation and alignment of defined
strategy levels, in line with the research agenda charted in the Furrer et al. (2008)
state-of-the-art review of strategic management suggesting a greater focus on the
alignment between corporate and competitive strategies, and the explicit
Enterprise architecture management and its role 35
123

--- PAGE 32 ---
consideration of corporate culture as a central element of strategy execution (cf.
Raps 2008). Business capability modeling and business model architecting have
been shown to be crucial and should thus be investigated further. For the latter, this
requires in particular the consideration and visualization of dedicated business
model viewpoints [for example, using the modeling language ArchiMate (The Open
Group 2012)], in line with the research gaps identified by Burkhart et al. (2011)
stated earlier. This may aid practitioners in actually applying business architecture
at the strategic level.
Having said this, the research design allowed us to capture a fairly large part of
reality (because key industries were represented in the interviews) without
foregoing the benefits offered by qualitative methods. This is despite the relatively
small sample of interviewees and limited time in the interviews to achieve a full
understanding of EA and its practical application, which also explains the few
interview statements that reveal difficulties in grasping the concept of EA or initial
perceptions of an architectural approach to corporate strategic management being
too model-based. As indicated, further research and empirical evidence is thus
required to make EA a significant part of the vocabulary of each and every strategic
manager (potentially including further interviews with a more limited scope—e.g.,
focus on fewer application scenarios—in favor of an increased level of detail). Our
framework as set out, applied, and examined in this paper represents an essential
step on this journey toward strategic business management based on EA.
Acknowledgments The authors would like to gratefully acknowledge the valuable comments and help
provided by Scott M. Cooper, Michael J. Shaw, and the anonymous reviewers.
References
Adams LA, Courtney JF (2004) Achieving relevance in is research via the DAGS framework. In:
Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii international conference on system sciences
Aier S, Maletta F, Riege C, Stucki K, Frank A (2008a) Aufbau und Einsatz der Geschäftsarchitektur bei
der AXA Winterthur—Ein minimal invasiver Ansatz. In: Proceedings der DW2008: Synergien
durch Integration und Informationslogistik
Aier S, Riege C, Winter R (2008b) Unternehmensarchitektur—Literaturüberblick und Stand der Praxis.
Wirtschaftsinformatik 50(4):292–304
Aitken C (2009) Enterprise architecture, strategic management, and information management. In: Doucet
G, Gotze J, Saha P, Bernard S (eds) Coherency management—architecting the enterprise for
alignment, agility and assurance. AuthorHouse, Bloomington, pp 121–155
Albers S (2010) Configurations of alliance governance systems. Schmalenbach Bus Rev 62:204–233
Al-Debei MM, Avison D (2010) Developing a unified framework of the business model concept. Eur J Inf
Syst 19:359–376
Amit R, Schoemaker PJH (1993) Strategic assets and organizational rent. Strateg Manag J 14:33–46
Andrews KR (1987) The concept of corporate strategy. Richard D Irwin, Homewood Illinois
Barney JB (1991) Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage. J Manag 17(1):99–120
Barney JB (1996) The resource-based theory of the firm. Org Sci 7(5):469
Barney JB, Wright M, Ketchen DJ (2001) The resource-based view of the firm: ten years after 1991.
J Manag 17:625–641
Barroero T, Motta G, Pignatelli G (2010) Business capabilities centric enterprise architecture. In: Bernus
P, Doumeingts G, Fox M (eds) Enterprise architecture, integration and interoperability, pp 32–43
Bartenschlager J, Goeken M (2010) IT strategy implementation framework—bridging enterprise
architecture and IT governance. In: Proceedings of 16th Americas conference on information
systems
36 D. Simon et al.
123

--- PAGE 33 ---
Baskerville R (2008) What design science is not. Eur J Inf Syst 17:441–443
Beck R, Weber S, Gregory RW (2012) Theory-generating design science research. Inf Syst Front. doi:
10.1007/s10796-012-9342-4
Beimborn D, Marting SF, Homann U (2005) Capability-oriented modeling of the firm. In: Proceedings of
the IPSI 2005 conference
Bekkers W, Spruit M, van de Weerd I, van Vliet R, Mahieu A (2010) A situational assessment method for
software product management. In: Proceedings of the 18th European conference on information
systems (ECIS)
Bernard S (2005) An introduction to enterprise architecture. AuthorHouse, Bloomington
Bernard S (2009) The importance of formal documentation in enterprise architectures. J Enterp Archit
5(3):29–58
Bernus P (2003) Organisational design. In: Bernus P, Nemes L, Schmidt GJ (eds) Handbook on enterprise
architecture. Springer, Berlin, pp 575–594
Bernus P, Nemes L, Schmidt GJ (2003) Handbook on enterprise architecture. Springer, Berlin
Bradford L, Rosemann M, Seidel S, ter Hofstede A (2006) Developing a business process reference
model for the screen business—a design science research case study. In: Proceedings of the 17th
Australasian conference on information systems
Brits J, Botha GHK, Herselman ME (2007) Conceptual framework for modeling business capabilities. In:
Proceedings of the 2007 informing science and IT education joint conference
Buckl S, Ernst AM, Lankes J, Schneider K, Schweda CM (2007) A pattern based approach for
constructing enterprise architecture management information models. In: Proceedings of the 8th
international conference on Wirtschaftsinformatik 2007, pp 145–162
Buckl S, Ernst AM, Lankes J, Matthes F (2008) Enterprise architecture management pattern catalogue.
TU Munich, Chair for Informatics 19 (sebis), Germany
Buckl S, Ernst AM, Lankes J, Matthes F, Schweda CM (2009) State of the art in enterprise architecture
management 2009. TU Munich, Chair for Informatics 19 (sebis), Germany
Buckl S, Schweda CM, Matthes F (2010a) A design theory nexus for situational enterprise architecture.
In: Proceedings of the 14th IEEE international enterprise distributed object computing conference
workshops, pp 3–8
Buckl S, Matthes F, Schewda CM (2010b) Conceptual models for cross-cutting aspects in enterprise
architecture modeling. In: Proceedings of the 14th IEEE international enterprise distributed object
computing conference workshops, pp 245–252
Burkhart T, Krumeich J, Werth D, Loos P (2011) Analyzing the business model concept—a
comprehensive classification of literature. In: 32nd international conference on information systems
Capon N, Farley JU, Hulbert JM (1988) Corporate strategic planning. Columbia University Press, New
York
Cater T, Pucko D (2010) Factors of effective strategy implementation: empirical evidence from Slovenian
business practice. J East Eur Manag Stud 15(3):207–236
David FR (2011) Strategic management—concepts & cases, 13th edn. Prentice Hall, New Jersey
Day GS (1994) The capabilities of market-driven organizations. J Mark 58(4):37–52
Dubé L, Paré G (2003) Rigor in information systems positivist case research: current practices, trends,
and recommendations. MIS Q 27(4):597–636
Dussauge P, Garette B (1999) Cooperative strategy: competing successfully through strategic alliances.
Wiley, New York
EFQM (2011) The EFQM excellence model. http://www.efqm.org/
Eisenhardt KM (1989) Building theories from case study research. Acad Manag Rev 14(4):532–550
Eisenhardt KM, Martin JA (2000) Dynamic capabilities: what are they? Strateg Manag J 21:1105–1121
Engels G, Hess A, Humm B, Juwig O, Lohmann M, Richter JP, Voss M, Willkomm J (2008) Quasar
enterprise. dpunkt, Heidelberg
Felden C, Buder JJ (2012) Integrated information supply for decision support in grid companies. Bus Inf
Syst Eng 4(1):15–29
Fernandez WD (2004) The grounded theory method and case study data in IS research: issues and design.
In: Proceedings of 2004 information systems foundations workshop: constructing and criticising
Feurer R, Chaharbaghi K (1994) Defining competitiveness: a holistic approach. Manag Decis 32(2):49–58
Feurer R, Chaharbaghi K (1995a) Strategy formulation: a learning methodology. Benchmark Qual Manag
Technol 2(1):38–55
Feurer R, Chaharbaghi K (1995b) Performance measurement in strategic change. Benchmark Qual
Manag Technol 2(2):64–83
Enterprise architecture management and its role 37
123

--- PAGE 34 ---
Feurer R, Chaharbaghi K (1997) Strategy development: past, present and future. Train Qual 5(2):58–70
Flick U (2008) Designing qualitative research. SAGE, London
Flick U (2009) An introduction to qualitative research. SAGE, London
Fritscher B, Pigneur Y (2010) Supporting business model modelling: a compromise between creativity
and constraints. In: Proceedings of the 8th international workshop on task models and diagrams,
pp 28–43
Furrer O, Thomas H, Goussevskaia A (2008) The structure and evolution of the strategic management
field: a content analysis of 26 years of strategic management research. Int J Manag Rev 10(1):1–23
Ganesan E, Paturi R (2009) Key performance indicators framework—a method to track business
objectives, link business strategy to processes and detail importance of key performance indicators
in enterprise business architecture. In: Proceedings of 15th Americas conference on information
systems (AMCIS)
Gläser J, Laudel G (2004) Experteninterviews und qualitative Inhaltsanalyse. VS Verlag für
Sozialwissenschaften, Wiesbaden
Glaser BG, Strauss AL (1967) The discovery of grounded theory: strategies for qualitative research.
Aldine, Chicago
Glissman S, Sanz J (2009) A comparative view of business architecture. IBM Research Report
Goeken M, Johannsen W, Pfeiffer JC (2008) Motivation einer IT-Governance-Geschäftsarchitektur zur
Unterstützung des Business/IT-alignments. In: Proceedings of the Multikonferenz Wirtschaftsin-
formatik (MKWI) 2008
Goldkuhl G (2004) Design theories in information systems—a need for multi-grounding. J Inf Technol
Theory Appl 6(2):59–72
Goodwin P, Wright G (2001) Enhancing strategy evaluation in scenario planning: a role for decision
analysis. J Manag Stud 38(1):1–16
Grant RM (1991) The resource-based theory of competitive advantage: implications for strategy
formulation. Calif Manag Rev 33(3):114–135
Graves T (2010) Mapping the enterprise: modelling the enterprise as services with the enterprise canvas.
Tetradian Books, England
Gregory RW (2010) Design science research and the grounded theory method: characteristics,
differences, and complementary uses. In: Proceedings of the 18th European conference on
information systems
Gregory RW, Muntermann J (2011) Theorizing in design science research: inductive versus deductive
approaches. In: Proceedings of the 32nd international conference on information systems (ICIS)
Hafeez K, Zhang Y, Malak N (2002) Determining key capabilities of a firm using analytical hierarchy
process. Int J Prod Econ 76(1):39–51
Hastings S (1996) A strategy evaluation model for management. Manag Dec 34(1):25–34
Hax AC, Majluf NC (1984) The corporate strategic planning process. Interfaces 14(1):47–60
Hedman J, Kalling T (2002) The business model: a means to comprehend the management and business
context of information and communication technology. In: Proceedings of the 10th European
conference on information systems
Hedman J, Kalling T (2003) The business model concept: theoretical underpinnings and empirical
illustrations. Eur J Inf Syst 12:49–59
Helfat CE, Pereraf MA (2002) The dynamic resource-based view: capability lifecycles. Strateg Manag J
24:997–1010
Henderson J, Venkatraman N (1992) Strategic alignment: a model for organizational transformation
through information technology. In: Kochan T, Unseem M (eds) Transforming organizations.
Oxford University Press, New York
Hevner AR (2007) A three cycle view of design science research. Scand J Inf Syst 19(2):87–92
Hevner AR, March ST, Park J, Ram S (2004) Design science in information systems research. MIS Q
28(1):75–105
Hirvonen A, Pulkkinen M, Valtonen K (2007) Selection criteria for enterprise architecture methods. In:
Proceedings of the 2007 European conference on information management and evaluation
Holmström J, Ketokivi M, Hameri AP (2009) Bridging practice and theory: a design science approach.
Decis Sci 40(1):65–87
Hoogervorst JAP (2004) Enterprise architecture: enabling integration, agility and change. Int J Cooper Inf
Syst 13(3):213–233
Hopf C (2005) Qualitative interviews—Ein Überblick. In: Flick U, von Kardorff E, Steinke I (eds)
Qualitative Forschung: Ein Handbuch. Rowohlt, Germany
38 D. Simon et al.
123

--- PAGE 35 ---
Jansen S, Brinkkemper S, Souer J, Luinenburg L (2012) Shades of gray: opening up a software producing
organization with the open software enterprise model. J Syst Soft 85(7):1495–1510
Kalpic B, Pandza K, Bernus P (2003) Strategy as a creation of corporate future. In: Bernus P, Nemes L,
Schmidt GJ (eds) Handbook on enterprise architecture. Springer, Berlin, pp 213–254
Kantabutra S, Avery GC (2010) The power of vision: statements that reasonate. J Bus Strategy
31(1):37–45
Kaplan RS, Norton DP (2001) The strategy-focused organization: how balanced scorecard companies
thrive in the new business environment. Harvard School Business Press, Boston
Kaplan RS, Norton DP (2004) Strategy maps: converting intangible assets into tangible outcomes.
Harvard School Business Press, Boston
Kappelman L, McGinnis T, Pettite A, Salmans B, Sidorova A (2008) Enterprise architecture: charting the
territory for academic research. In: Proceedings of 14th Americas conference on information
systems (AMCIS)
Keller W (2009) Using capabilities in enterprise architecture management. object architects, whitepaper
Klein HK, Myers MD (1999) A set of principles for conducting and evaluating interpretive field studies in
information systems. MIS Q 23(1):67–94
Klinkmüller C, Ludwig A, Franczyk B, Kluge R (2010) Visualising business capabilities in the context of
business analysis. In: Proceedings of business information systems 2010, Berlin
Kohlborn T, Korthaus A, Chan T, Rosemann M (2009) Identification and analysis of business and
software services—a consolidated approach. IEEE Trans Serv Comput 2(1):50–64
Kurpjuweit S, Winter R (2007) Viewpoint-based meta model engineering. In: Proceedings of 2nd
international workshop on enterprise modelling and information systems architectures, pp 143–161
Kurpjuweit S, Winter R (2009) Concern-oriented business architecture engineering. In: Proceedings of
SAC 2009
Kvale S (1989) To validate is to question. In: Kvale S (ed) Issues of validity in qualitative research.
Studentlitteratur, Lund
Kvale S (2007) Doing interviews. SAGE, London
Leganza G (2010) Topic overview: information architecture. Forrester Research Report 55951
Levina N, Vaast E (2005) The emergence of boundary spanning competence in practice: implications for
implementation and use of information systems. MIS Q 29(2):335–363
Lucke C, Krell S, Lechner U (2010) Critical issues in enterprise architecting—a literature review. In:
Proceedings of the 16th Americas conference on information systems
Madill A, Jordan A, Shirley C (2000) Objectivity and reliability in qualitative analysis: realist,
contextualist and radical constructionist epistemologies. Br J Psychol 91(1):1–20
Malik N (2009) Toward an enterprise business motivation model. Architect J 19:10–16
Matthes F, Buckl S, Leitel J, Schweda CM (2008) Enterprise architecture management tool survey 2008.
TU Munich, Chair for Informatics 19 (sebis), Germany
Micklich DL (2005) Strategic implications of causal mapping in strategy analysis and formulation. In:
Narayanan VK, Armstrong DJ (eds) Causual mapping for research in information technology. IGI
Global, pp 284–311
Mintzberg H, Ahlstrand B, Lampel J (1998) Strategy safari—a guided tour through the wilds of strategic
management. Free Press, New York
Mocker M (2009) What is complex about 273 applications? Untangling application architecture
complexity in a case of European investment banking. In: Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii
international conference on system sciences
Molina A (2003) Developing the enterprise concept—the business plan. In: Bernus P, Nemes L, Schmidt
GJ (eds) Handbook on enterprise architecture. Springer, Berlin, pp 333–372
Morse JM, Barrett M, Mayan M, Olson K, Spiers J (2002) Verification Strategies for Establishing
Reliability and Validity in Qualitative Research. Int J Qual Methods 1(2):13–22
Müller B, Olbrich S (2011) The artifact’s theory—a grounded theory perspective on design science
research. In: Proceedings of the 10th international conference on Wirtschaftsinformatik (2011),
pp 1176–1186
Niemann KD (2006) From enterprise architecture to IT governance—elements of effective IT
management. Vieweg ? Teubner, Wiesbaden
Niemann KD (2008) Enterprise architecture management and its role in IT governance and IT investment
planning. In: Saha P (ed) Advances in government enterprise architecture. Information Science
Reference, New York, pp 208–228
Enterprise architecture management and its role 39
123

--- PAGE 36 ---
Object Management Group (2010) The business motivation model, version 1.1. OMG document number:
formal/2010-05-01
Offermann P, Levina O, Schönherr M, Bub U (2009) Outline of a design science research process. In:
Proceedings of the 2009 conference on design science research in information systems and
technology
Op’t Land M, Proper E, Waage M, Cloo J, Steghuis C (2009) Enterprise architecture—creating value by
informed governance. Springer, Berlin
Österle H, Winter R, Höning F, Kurpjuweit S, Osl P (2007) Business Engineering: Core-Business-
Metamodell. WISU—Das Wirtschaftsstudium 2/07:191–194
Osterwalder A, Pigneur Y (2002) Business models and their elements. In: Proceedings of the international
workshop on business models 2002
Osterwalder A, Pigneur Y (2003) An ontology for e-business models. In: Currie W (ed) Value creation
from e-business models. Butterworth-Heinemann
Osterwalder A, Pigneur Y (2010) Business model generation—a handbook for visionaries, game
changers, and challengers. Wiley, New Jersey
Osterwalder A, Pigneur Y, Tucci CL (2005) Clarifying business models: origins, present, and future of
the concept. Commun Assoc Inf Syst 16(1):1–25
Pagh JD, Cooper MC (1998) Supply chain postponement and speculation strategies: how to choose the
right strategy. J Bus Logist 19(2):13–33
Parker T (2009) The strategic dimension of enterprise architecture. In: Doucet G, Gotze J, Saha P,
Bernard S (eds) Coherency management—architecting the enterprise for alignment, agility and
assurance. AuthorHouse, Bloomington, pp 157–178
Peffers K, Tuunanen T, Gengler CE, Rossi M, Hui W, Virtanen V, Bragge J (2006) The design science
research process: a model for producing an presenting information systems research. In: Proceedings
of the 1st International conference on design science research in information systems and
technology, pp 83–106
Peng GCA, Nunes MB (2007) Using PEST analysis as a tool for refining and focusing contexts for
information systems research. In: Proceedings of the 6th European conference on research
methodology for business and management studies, Lisbon, Portugal, pp 229–236
Pereira CM, Sousa P (2005) Enterprise architecture: business and it alignment. In: Proceedings of SAC
2005
Pfohl HC (2004) Logistikmanagement: Konzeption und Funktionen. Springer, Berlin
Porter ME (1980) Competitive strategy: techniques for analysing industries and competitors. Free Press,
New York
Prahalad CK, Hamel G (1990) The core competence of the corporation. Harvard Bus Rev 68(3):79–91
Radeke F (2011) Toward understanding enterprise architecture management’s role in strategic change:
antecedents, processes, outcomes. In: Proceedings of the 10th international conference on
Wirtschaftsinformatik (2011), pp 497–507
Raps A (2008) Erfolgsfaktoren der Strategieimplementierung: Konzeption und Instrumente. Deutscher
Universitäts-Verlag, Wiesbaden
Reichwald R, Piller F (2009) Interaktive Wertschöpfung: Open Innovation, Individualisierung und neue
Formen der Arbeitsteilung. Gabler-Verlag, Wiesbaden
Reihlen M, Smets M, Veit A (2010) Management consultancies as institutional agents: strategies for
creating and sustaining institutional capital. Schmalenbach Bus Rev 62:317–339
Repschlaeger J, Wind S, Zarnekow R, Turowski K (2012) Selection criteria for software as a service: an
explorative analysis of provider requirements. In: Proceedings of 18th Americas conference on
information systems (AMCIS)
Riege C, Aier S (2009) A contingency approach to enterprise architecture method engineering. J Enterp
Architect 5(1):36–48
Ross JW, Weill P, Robertson DC (2006) Enterprise architecture as strategy. Harvard Business School
Press, Boston
Rossi M, Sein MK (2003) Design research workshop: a proactive research approach. In: 26th Information
systems research seminar in Scandinavia, IRIS Association, Finland
Saat J (2010) Zeitbezogene Abhängigkeitsanalysen der Unternehmensarchitektur. In: Proceedings of the
Multikonferenz Wirtschaftsinformatik (MKWI) 2010, pp 119–130
Samavi R, Yu E, Topaloglou T (2009) Strategic reasoning about business models: a conceptual modeling
approach. Inf Syst E-Bus Manag 7:171–198
40 D. Simon et al.
123

--- PAGE 37 ---
Sandberg J (2000) Understanding human competence at work: an interpretive approach. Acad Manag J
43(1):9–25
Schäffer U, Willauer B (2003) Strategic planning as a learning process. Schmalenbach Bus Rev
55:86–107
Schekkerman J (2004) Trends in enterprise architecture: how are organizations progressing? Institute for
Enterprise Architecture Developments
Schlagwein D, Fischbach K, Schoder D, Bartsch S (2010) Open value creation: a framework for open and
collaborative value creation concepts. In: Proceedings of the Multikonferenz Wirtschaftsinformatik
(MKWI) 2010
Schmidt C (2005) Analyse von Leitfadeninterviews. In: Flick U, von Kardorff E, Steinke I (eds)
Qualitative Forschung: Ein Handbuch. rororo, Germany
Schultze U, Avital M (2011) Designing interviews to generate rich data for information systems research.
Inf Org 21:1–16
Shafer SM, Smith HJ, Linder JC (2005) The power of business models. Bus Horizons 48:199–207
Shrout PE, Fleiss JL (1979) Intraclass correlations: uses in assessing rater reliability. Psychol Bull
86(2):420–428
Simon D, Fischbach K, Schoder D (2010) Application portfolio management—an integrated framework
and a software tool evaluation approach. Commun Assoc Inf Syst 26(1):35–56
Simon D, Fischbach K, Schoder D (2013) An exploration of enterprise architecture research. Commun
Assoc Inf Syst 32(1):1–72
Smith KL (2011) An introduction to PEAF–pragmatic enterprise architecture framework. Pragmatic EA,
England
Spewak SH, Hill SC (1993) Enterprise architecture planning: developing a blueprint for data,
Applications and Technology. Wiley, New Jersey
Steiss A (1985) Strategic management and organizational decision making. D.C. Heath, Lexington
The Open Group (2009) TOGAF version 9 enterprise edition. Van Haren Publishing, The Netherlands
The Open Group (2012) ArchiMate 2.0 specification. Van Haren Publishing, The Netherlands
Uppington G, Bernus P (2003) Analysing the present situation and refining strategy. In: Bernus P, Nemes
L, Schmidt GJ (eds) Handbook on enterprise architecture. Springer, Berlin, pp 309–332
Urbach N, Würz T (2012) How to steer the IT outsourcing provider: development and validation of a
reference framework of IT outsourcing steering processes. Bus Inf Syst Eng 4(5):247–259
van Gils B (2009) Strategy and architecture—reconciling worldviews. In: Advances in enterprise
engineering II, first NAF academy working conference on practice-driven research on enterprise
transformation (PRET 2009), pp 181–196
van Steenbergen M, Bos R, Brinkkemper S, van de Weerd I, Bekkers W (2010) The design of focus area
maturity models. In: Proceedings of the 5th international conference on design science research in
information systems and technology (DESRIST), pp 317–332
Versteeg G, Bouwman H (2006) Business architecture: a new paradigm to relate business strategy to ICT.
Inf Syst Front 8:91–102
vom Brocke J, Buddendick C (2006) Reusable conceptual models—requirements based on the design
science research paradigm. In: Proceedings of the 1st international conference on design science
research in information systems and technology (DESRIST)
Wang JC, College HW (2006) Corporate strategic management and business re-engineering effort
analyzed by the balanced scorecard model. J Am Acad Bus 10(1):102–109
Weedman J (2008) Client as designer in collaborative design science research projects: what does social
science design theory tell us? Eur J Inf Syst 17(5):476–488
Whittle R, Myrick CB (2004) Enterprise business architecture: the formal link between strategy and
results. Auerbach Publications, USA
Winter R (2002) Business strategy modelling in the information age. In: Proceedings of the 3rd
international web conference, Perth
Winter R (2003) Modelle, Techniken und Werkzeuge im Business Engineering. In: Österle H, Winter R
(eds) Business engineering—Auf dem Weg zum Unternehmen des Informationszeitalters. Springer,
Berlin, pp 87–118
Winter R, Fischer R (2007) Essential layers, artifacts, and dependencies of enterprise architecture.
J Enterp Architect 3(2):1–12
Winter R, Bucher T, Fischer R, Kurpjuweit S (2007) Analysis and application scenarios of enterprise
architecture: an exploratory study. J Enterp Architecture 3
Enterprise architecture management and its role 41
123

--- PAGE 38 ---
Winter K, Buckl S, Matthes F, Schweda CM (2010) Investigating the state-of-the-art in enterprise
architecture management methods in literature and practice. In: Proceedings of the 5th
mediterranean conference on information systems (MCIS) 2010, Tel Aviv
Wirtz B (2011) Business model management: design—instruments—success factors. Gabler Verlag,
Wiesbaden
Zachman J (1987) A framework for information systems architecture. IBM Syst J 26(3):276–292
Zellner G (2008) Gestaltung hybrider Wertschöpfung mittels Architekturen—Analyse am Beispiel des
Business Engineering. Wirtschaftsinformatik 50(3):187–195
Zott C, Amit R (2009) Designing your future business model: an activity system perspective. IESE
Business School—University of Navarra, Working Paper 781
zu Knyphausen-Aufseß D, Meinhardt Y (2002) Revisiting strategy: Ein Ansatz zur Systematisierung von
Geschäftsmodellen. In: Bieger T, Bickhoff N, Caspers D, zu Knyphausen-Aufseß D, Reding K (eds)
Zukünftige Geschäftsmodelle: Konzept und Anwendung in der Netzökonomie. Springer, Berlin
42 D. Simon et al.
123