--- PAGE 1 ---
ISSN (print):2182-7796, ISSN (online):2182-7788, ISSN (cd-rom):2182-780X
Available online at www.sciencesphere.org/ijispm
International Journal of Information Systems and Project Management, Vol. 7, No. 2, 2019, 37-58
◄ 37 ►
Evaluation of the usability of a new ITG instrument to
measure hard and soft governance maturity
Daniel Smits
Faculty of behavioral, management and social sciences
University of Twente
Drienerlolaan 5, 7522 NB Enschede
The Netherlands
www.shortbio.org/d.smits@utwente.nl
Jos van Hillegersberg
Faculty of behavioral, management and social sciences
University of Twente
Drienerlolaan 5, 7522 NB Enschede
The Netherlands
www.shortbio.org/j.vanhillegersberg@utwente.nl
Abstract:
IT governance (ITG) has stayed a challenging matter for years. Research suggests the existence of a gap between
theoretical frameworks and practice. Although current ITG research is largely focused on hard governance (structure,
processes), soft governance (behavior, collaboration) is equally important and might be crucial to close the gap. The
goal of this study is to evaluate the usability of a new ITG maturity instrument that covers hard and soft ITG in detail.
We conducted ten case studies and evaluated the instrument positively on usability; but feedback also revealed that the
assessment questions needed improvements. We demonstrate that combining the instrument with structured interviews
results in an enhanced and usable instrument to determine an organization’s current level of hard and soft ITG. We
conclude that this new instrument demonstrates a way to reduce the mismatch between ITG maturity theory and
practice.
Keywords:
IT governance; IT governance maturity; soft governance; hard governance; design science.
DOI: 10.12821/ijispm070203
Manuscript received: 23 March 2019
Manuscript accepted: 25 May 2019
Copyright © 2019, SciKA. General permission to republish in print or electronic forms, but not for profit, all or part of this material is granted, provided that the
International Journal of Information Systems and Project Management copyright notice is given and that reference made to the publication, to its date of issue, and to
the fact that reprinting privileges were granted by permission of SciKA - Association for Promotion and Dissemination of Scientific Knowledge.

--- PAGE 2 ---
Evaluation of the usability of a new ITG instrument to measure hard and soft governance maturity
International Journal of Information Systems and Project Management, Vol. 7, No. 2, 2019, 37-58
◄ 38 ►
1. Introduction
When IT governance (ITG) or corporate governance go awry, “the results can be devastating” [1]. The bankruptcy of
Enron in 2001 and other scandals at Tyco, Global Crossing, WorldCom and Xerox resulting in the enactment in the
United States of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act are just a few examples. Employees, customers, suppliers and local societies
suffered severe losses owing to managers driven by the possibilities of creating personal wealth through dramatic
increases in the market prices of their shares [2].
The impact of ITG on firm performance have been well-established in previous studies, yet there remains a gap
explaining exactly how ITG influences firm performance [1]. ITG is positively related to business performance through
IT and business process relatedness [3], [4]. Weill and Ross [5] present another excellent example of the linkage
between ITG and corporate governance with corporate and IT decision-making. A third example comprises the
relationship between corporate governance and ITG of Borth and Bradley [6], in which ITG is presented as one of the
key assets to govern.
Improving ITG is difficult because it is a challenging, complex topic. ITG is complex because it is not only about
organizational processes and structures but about human behavior too. We look at ITG from two perspectives: an
organizational perspective referred to as “hard governance” and a social perspective referred to as “soft governance”. In
traditional ITG research and frameworks the main focus was hard governance, sometimes defined as “structures and
processes”. Social elements were not completely out of focus but many researchers favored generalizations like “social
integration” [7] or “relational mechanisms” [8]. The social or human interactions in organizations are much more
complex than organizational structures and processes and need at least the same amount of consideration in models or
frameworks. This rarely happens in ITG research. This however is the focus of our research and the distinction between
hard and soft governance is becoming more common in ITG research [9]-[14].
The purpose of this study is to demonstrate and evaluate the usability of a new ITG instrument to measure ITG maturity
in an organization. This is an assessment instrument that can be used to measure hard and soft ITG maturity in detail.
Our approach is grounded in the assumption that improving “ITG maturity” results in improving ITG and thus firm
performance.
This paper is organized as follows. This section introduces the purpose of this study. The next section introduces the
topics of hard and soft ITG and ITG maturity. Section 3 presents the research methodology. The results of the case
studies are described in Section 4. Section 5 covers the discussion. The conclusion, limitations and implications for
future research are included in Section 6.
2. IT governance
In this section we introduce hard and soft ITG and ITG maturity.
2.1 Hard and soft IT governance
ITG is a relatively new topic [8], with the first publications appearing in the late 1990s. Although a considerable body
of literature on ITG exists, definitions of ITG in the literature vary considerably [15], [16]. There simply does not seem
to be a common body of ITG knowledge or a widely used ITG framework. An analysis of the ITG literature reveals that
six streams of thought can be distinguished [17]. Four ITG streams differ in scope: “IT Audit”, “Decision making”,
“Part of corporate governance, conformance perspective”, and “Part of corporate governance, performance
perspective”. The last two streams differ in the direction in which ITG works: “Top down” and “Bottom up”.
In practice, organizations use all kinds of frameworks or methods for ITG. Frameworks are the most important enablers
for effective ITG [18]. A variety of frameworks devised for improving ITG exists [19]. The list of frameworks
frequently used for ITG vary considerably, as can be seen in several global surveys from the ITGI addressed to 749
CEO-/CIO-level executives in 23 countries [18], [20]. Best practice frameworks are the most important enablers for

--- PAGE 3 ---
Evaluation of the usability of a new ITG instrument to measure hard and soft governance maturity
International Journal of Information Systems and Project Management, Vol. 7, No. 2, 2019, 37-58
◄ 39 ►
effective ITG. Other enablers include toolkits, benchmarking, certifications, networking, white papers and ITG-related
research. Some of the frequently cited frameworks comprise COBIT, ITIL, ISO/IEC 17799, ISO/IEC 27001, ISO/IEC
38500 and BS 7799 [21].
Except for COBIT and ISO/IEC 38500, these frameworks are not ITG-specific. The ISO/IEC 38500 standard comprises
a set of six principles for directors and top management: responsibility, strategy, acquisition, performance, conformance
and human behavior [22]. However, there is “no specific and well defined exemplar framework and standard for IT”
[23]. That makes it insufficient for implementation in practice. Although COBIT’s scope has increased over the years,
accounting and information systems are the predominant domains related to COBIT [24].
A well-known classification comprises the three layers of Peterson et al. [7]:
 Structural integration;
 Functional integration;
 Social integration.
In 2004 this became better known (and somewhat simplified) as the trichotomy of structure, processes and relational
mechanisms [8]. This classification may be concise and practical, but as among others Willson and Pollard [25] have
shown, ITG is not limited to structure, processes and mechanisms; it also relies on complex relationships, between
history and present operations. Furthermore, cultural and human aspects are some of the factors that had the greatest
influence on the implementation of ITG by 50% of the participants of a large global survey conducted by ITGI [18].
Thus, in this study, we look at ITG from two perspectives: a “hard governance” perspective and a “soft governance”
perspective.
Hard governance
Hard governance is related to structural integration and functional integration:
 Structural integration: formal structural mechanisms with increasing complexity and capability, ranging from
direct supervision, liaison roles, task forces and temporary teams to full-time integrating roles and cross-
functional units and committees for IT [7], [26], [27]. Informal structural integration comprises unplanned
cooperative activities. Under complex and dynamic conditions, informal structural mechanisms support formal
structural integration [27].
 Functional integration: the system of IT decision-making and communication processes [28]. The decision-
making processes and decision-making arrangements [29] are redefined in a later stage as “decision rights and
accountability framework” [5]. The communication processes describe the formal communication and mutual
adjustments among stakeholders [26], [27].
We define hard governance as the organizational aspects of governance, linking it to functional aspects like structure,
process and the formal side of decision-making. These aspects are also defined as elements of organizational design.
Structural integration mechanisms for ITG describe formal integration structures and staff-skill professionalization.
Soft governance
The third element Social integration is highly related to soft governance and related to people. People represent the
most important assets of an organization. People do not work or think in terms of process and structure only; human
behavior and organizational culture are equally important aspects of governance. Improvements are needed less in terms
of structure and process and more in terms of the human or social aspects of governance [30]. Mettler and Rohner argue
that an organization can be seen as a consciously coordinated social entity in which contextual factors describe the
situativity in organizational design [31]. An understanding of the organizational culture is critical in a maturity model
for ITG [32].
A survey by the IT Governance Institute showed that the culture of an organization was deemed by 50% of the
participants as one of the factors that most influenced the implementation of ITG, surpassed only by “business

--- PAGE 4 ---
Evaluation of the usability of a new ITG instrument to measure hard and soft governance maturity
International Journal of Information Systems and Project Management, Vol. 7, No. 2, 2019, 37-58
◄ 40 ►
objectives or strategy”, which scored 57% [18]. Thus, governance is about people too, which intimates that human
behavior and social aspects are just as important. Soft governance requires greater attention.
2.2 ITG maturity
Most maturity models used for ITG are related to the existing frameworks previously mentioned, which are largely
focused on processes and structure [32]. Thus in practice, processes and organizational structures are needed, but ITG
has social elements, too. To be able to grow in maturity, organizations should pay attention to the hard and soft aspects
of governance. Relational mechanisms can be seen as the social dimension [17] but are too limited to cover the broad
range of topics from the social sciences which are relevant for ITG.
A systematic literature review searching ITG literature for maturity models that include the soft side resulted in five
(relatively) new ITG maturity models [33]. Only two frameworks were found covering hard and soft ITG: COBIT 5.0
in a holistic way and the MIG model in a more practical way. The MIG model was developed using design science to
measure hard and soft ITG [34] because an ITG maturity model covering both parts of governance did not exist [14],
[18], [35]. In this study, we applied the MIG model and the corresponding MIG assessment instrument [14], [36].
The MIG model is a focus area maturity model (FAMM) designed to measure the hard and soft ITG of an organization.
The MIG assessment instrument is an instrument designed to be used in practice to measure ITG maturity using the
MIG model. The goal of this study is to evaluate the usability of the MIG assessment instrument, and in the process, to
answer the following research question:
How usable is the MIG assessment instrument for measuring hard and soft ITG maturity in an organization?
FAMMs differ from previous approaches by defining a specific number of maturity levels for a set of focus areas,
which embrace concrete capabilities to be developed, to achieve maturity in a targeted domain [37]. Table 1
summarizes the MIG model.
Table 1. The MIG model
Governance Domain Focus area Maturity model used
Soft governance Behavior Continuous improvement Bessant et al. [38]
Behavior Leadership Collins [39]
Collaboration Participation Magdaleno et al. [40]
Collaboration Understanding and trust Reich and Benbasat [41]
Hard governance Structure Functions and roles CMM [42]
Structure Formal networks CMM [42]
Process IT decision-making CMM [42]
Process Planning CMM [42]
Process Monitoring CMM [42]
Context Internal Culture Quinn and Rohrbaugh [43]
Internal Informal organization Using the nine focus areas of soft and hard governance.
External Sector Sections of NACE Rev. 2 [44]
The MIG model follows the theoretical proposition that improving ITG focus areas will result in more mature ITG,
which will result in improved firm performance. The context is important because research has shown that IT
governance is situational and essential for delivering information about the situational part of ITG [18], [31], [32], [45].

--- PAGE 5 ---
Evaluation of the usability of a new ITG instrument to measure hard and soft governance maturity
International Journal of Information Systems and Project Management, Vol. 7, No. 2, 2019, 37-58
◄ 41 ►
We introduced two perspectives in the third version of the MIG assessment instrument: a departmental and a corporate
perspective. To complement the instrument with a corporate perspective, we have been careful not to make significant
alterations to the validated instrument [46].
Corporate governance is IT- and business-related. In practice there are almost no IT-specific projects: with the
exception of some very particular technical projects, all projects are business-related. In the assessment, the participants
were asked to fill out the questionnaire from both a departmental and corporate perspective. We explained that for “the
entire organization”, the focus area “IT decision-making” may be seen as “Decision-making”. The statements were kept
the same as in the previous version. The only change to the instrument was to double the questionnaires by adding a
second column to the instrument for the corporate governance perspective.
The adjusted instrument consisted of three questionnaires:
 Questionnaire 1: containing 70 statements using a six-point Likert scale for the department and for the corporate
perspective (the entire organization).
 Questionnaire 2: containing nine groups of two statements for the Informal organization. Respondents had to
divide 100 points between each pair. Twice, again for the department and for the entire organization.
 Questionnaire 3: the third questionnaire on culture was based on an existing questionnaire, the Organizational
Cultural Assessment Instrument (OCAI). The respondents filled out the questionnaire twice, once for each
perspective.
During the interviews, we evaluated the results sheet for both perspectives. When processing the results, we created two
results sheets rather than one. Each sheet displayed the maturity level reached for each of the nine focus areas, a table
and a graph with percentages for “informal organization”, and the positioning within the Competing Values Framework
for one of the perspectives (see Figure 1).
Results MIG assessment MIG v.0.95
Participant James Noble
Assessment data 21-04-17 Interview 28-04-17 Add level
Results for My department Change Change
No check on former levels
Focus area A B C D E F A B C D E F
Continuous improvement 2 2 0 0 0 2 2 Change 0 0 We are at level B, short motivation.
Leadership 2 2 2 2 2 1 2 2 2 2 Change 1 We are at level C, short motivation.
Participation 2 1 2 0 2 Change 2 0 We are at level B, short motivation.
Understanding and trust 2 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 Agree, short motivation.
Functions and roles 2 0 0 0 0 2 Change 0 0 0 We are at level B, short motivation.
Formal Networks 2 1 1 0 1 2 1 0 0 0 Agree, short motivation.
IT decision-making 2 0 1 2 1 2 0 0 0 0 Agree, short motivation.
Planning 2 1 0 0 2 2 Change Change 0 0 We are at level C, short motivation.
Monitoring 2 1 1 2 2 2 1 0 0 0 Agree, short motivation.
Culture Average
Clan 29,2
Adhocracy 16,7 I agree / I do not agree.
Market 28,3 Short motivation. Informal Formal
Hierarchy 25,8 3 97
Total 100,0 90 10
10 90
30 70
Functions and roles 20 80
Formal Networks 10 90
IT decision-making 40 60
Planning 10 90
Monitoring 20 80
Average soft governance 33% 67%
20% 80%
26% 74%
Informal Formal
I agree / I do not agree.
Short motivation.
Feedback
1. Do you miss relevant focus areas? Answer to the question.
2. What is your opinion on the relevance of our research for hard & soft governance? Answer to the question.
Do you have anything you would like to add to your feedback? Answer to the question.
Additional questions during the interview
Remove
level
Assessment & interview
Assessment & interview
Assessment & interview
Assessment & interview
Level Level
Monitoring
Functions and roles
Including check former levels
Focus area
Continuous improvement
Leadership
Participation
Understanding and trust
Formal Networks
IT decision-making
Planning
Informal organization
Average hard governance
Average hard and soft governance
Focus area
Continuous improvement
Leadership
Participation
Understanding and trust
-
5,0
10,0
15,0
20,0
25,0
30,0
Clan
Adhocracy
Market
Hierarchy
CVF
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
Continuous improvement
Leadership
Participation
Understanding and trust
Functions and roles
Formal Networks
IT decision-making
Planning
Monitoring
Average soft governance
Average hard governance
Average hard and soft governance
Informal organization
Figure 1. Example result sheet IG assessment instrument (department view)

--- PAGE 6 ---
Evaluation of the usability of a new ITG instrument to measure hard and soft governance maturity
International Journal of Information Systems and Project Management, Vol. 7, No. 2, 2019, 37-58
◄ 42 ►
The results sheet might appear more complex than the reality:
 The two upper tables show the results of the maturity part of the MIG model following the survey (left) and the
interview (right). The tables show the maturity level reached for each focus area of the MIG model
(questionnaire 1). Column A is the starting point. A colored box means that a level has been reached. The text
“Change” means that the level was changed at the request of the interviewee.
 The graph and table on the lower right show the results of the points assigned to the “informal organization” for
each focus area in the form of a graph and the associated data (questionnaire 2).
 The graph and table on the lower left show the results of the OCAI (questionnaire 3), consisting of the
Competing Values Framework in the form of a graph and the associated data.
A description of the changes applied to the instrument during the third cycle are included in the results section. A full
description of the MIG assessment instrument version 3 is included in Appendix C of the PhD dissertation “Hard and
soft IT governance maturity” [47].
3. Research method
The research presented in this paper is based on design science. The MIG model and the MIG assessment instrument
are also artefacts resulting from design-science.
Our research process was as follows:
a. Design the third version of the MIG assessment instrument based on an analysis of the evaluations of the
previous version;
b. Conduct case studies using the third version of the MIG assessment instrument to test the usability for different
types of users;
c. Evaluate the results of the study.
3.1 Design science
The scientific view of design originates from the concepts found in Simon’s [48] seminal book The Sciences of the
Artificial. Charles and Ray Eames [49] define design as “a plan for arranging elements in such a way as to best
accomplish a particular purpose”. Design science is “a body of intellectually tough, analytic, partly formalizable, partly
empirical, teachable doctrine about the design process” [50]. At its root it is a problem-solving paradigm. Design
science is a science of the artificial that involves searching for the means by which artefacts help achieve goals in an
environment [51]. The environment in this research is the organization. The goal of this study is to evaluate a designed
artefact that can help the ITG of an organization to grow in maturity to become more effective.
There is no widely accepted definition of design-science research [52]. The design-science paradigm embraces
seemingly contradictory principles [53]. Design and science share the same subject – in this study people and
organizations – and produce artefacts, but their aims, methods and criteria are quite different [54]. Indeed, design is
concerned with synthesis, whereas science is concerned with analysis [48]. This has resulted in a rich discussion around
the process of design-science research, its artefacts and the role of theory.
In order to create a useful artefact to solve a practical problem, the design of the MIG model and instrument followed
the guidelines of Hevner et al. [55] and Peffers et al.’s [56] design-science research methodology process model. In
addition, we applied the guidelines and three cycles of Hevner: the Relevance cycle, the Design cycle and the Rigor
cycle [57]. In the research, each cycle was covered:
1. The use of Delphi panels with practitioners to design the artefacts relevant for practice [58]. To be relevant in
practice, the artefacts must be easy to use and understood in practice.
2. The design of the first version of the MIG assessment instrument was already published [34]. This paper
describes the evaluation of the second and third version of the instrument. Evaluation is a key activity in design-

--- PAGE 7 ---
Evaluation of the usability of a new ITG instrument to measure hard and soft governance maturity
International Journal of Information Systems and Project Management, Vol. 7, No. 2, 2019, 37-58
◄ 43 ►
science research [59]. We collect information from the participants in the case studies to validate and evaluate
the artefacts. “The actual success of a maturity model is proved if it brings about a discussion on improvement
among the targeted audience” [60].
3. The studies are based on previous research and scientific methods when adding, combining or improving
components of the artefacts.
Hevner et al. [55] note that the design-science paradigm seeks to extend the boundaries of human and organizational
capabilities by creating new and innovative artefacts. Design science is a commonly used approach in IS research as
well in the social sciences [61]. Our goal is to design an ITG maturity model that can be used to help organizations to
grow in maturity and thereby become more effective. This affects organizational processes, structures and the
collaboration between people (the employees). Thus, we need to combine IS research and the social sciences.
Tarhan et al. [62] propose a distinction between the maturity model and assessment instrument because:
1. The model describes an improvement path while the instrument determines the status quo;
2. The instrument is not necessarily unique: there could be more assessment instruments based on the same
maturity model e.g. an instrument for self-assessment and an instrument for use by (specialized) assessors;
3. The absence of a clear distinction may lead to flawed designs [63] and confusion [64].
In addition to the model, an assessment instrument was developed to determine the current status of an organization’s
ITG. The model was named the MIG model (Maturity IT Governance) and the instrument was named the MIG
assessment instrument. The research approach combines knowledge from literature and experts from practice to achieve
both “problem relevance” and “research rigor” [55]. The instrument is “necessary to determine how maturity
measurement can occur” using the MIG model by “inclusion of appropriate questions and measures within this
instrument” [65].
Empirically founded maturity models are rare [66]. Design science is well-suited to designing maturity models. The
development of a maturity artefact should follow a design science approach as it gives a “methodological frame for
creating and evaluating innovative IT artefacts” [55]. It is important to involve stakeholders throughout the process of
design and thereafter [60], [65].
A maturity assessment instrument can be used to measure the current maturity level of a certain aspect of an
organization in a meaningful way [67]. Maturity assessments are highly complex specialized tasks performed by
competent assessors, rendering it an expensive and burdensome activity for organizations [67]. There is room for
improvement by the provision of easy-to-use assessment guidelines [63]. It is important to test both the model and
instrument [65].
Experts agree that design research involves designs that are clearly driven by underlying theories [51], in which theory
and experience are engaged in generating new artefacts intended to change social and/or physical reality in purposeful
ways. The goodness and efficacy of an artefact can be rigorously demonstrated via well-selected evaluation methods
[55], [68]-[70].
3.2 Case studies and the case study protocol
The purpose of evaluation in design science is to determine if an instantiation of a designed artefact can “establish its
utility and efficacy (or lack thereof) for achieving its stated purpose” [71]. As long as the instrument is in a development
stage we combine the use of the instrument with semi-structured interviews. Interviews are often deemed an essential
component of case study research [72]. Interviews seek to validate and evaluate [55] whether the results of the
instrument correspond with the opinion of the participant and to gather information regarding the reasons why the
participant does or does not agree with the resulting maturity level.
The assessment instrument was used in case studies conducted by students and by the researchers. The reasons for
choosing this combination are threefold.

--- PAGE 8 ---
Evaluation of the usability of a new ITG instrument to measure hard and soft governance maturity
International Journal of Information Systems and Project Management, Vol. 7, No. 2, 2019, 37-58
◄ 44 ►
First, we incorporated triangulation by using different methods to collect data: participants were asked to fill out the
assessment instrument, participants were interviewed using the results sheet, and the case studies were conducted by
both Dutch and international full-time student-groups and researchers. By cross-validating the instrument when used by
students and more experienced researchers, we expect to acquire a better understanding of the usability of the MIG
assessment instrument in practice. The case study allowed students to bring topics together and support students to link
and apply theory to practice [73], as well as develop useful insights regarding the complex workings and functional
interactions of an organization [74], [75]. We adopted Willcocksen’s unusual two-way flow of activity and research-
based teaching to improve learning outcomes for students and research outcomes for academic staff [76].
Second, improving the research and education of Master’s degree students registered for the IT management course at
our university. This was a two-way process that “may be adapted to any discipline” and will lead to “both improved
learning outcomes for students and improved research outcomes for academic staff” [76]. Studies on the nexus between
teaching and research reveals that the variables used for teaching/learning quality or output and their operationalization
are both diverse and limited [77]. Recent empirical evidence tends however to indicate a positive correlation between
research performance and teaching [78]. Students were enabled – but not required – to use the MIG assessment
instrument to assess a medium- or large-size organization (1000 FTE or more) in a practical group assignment. By
summer 2018, none of the student groups had decided to use a different approach. If they chose to use the instrument,
the students were required to follow the case study protocol. By engaging Master’s degree students registered for the IT
management course in ITG research, we complete an unusual two-way relationship, in which research underpins
teaching and learning, and the teaching and learning activity underpins research.
Third, the designed artefact was intended for use in practice. The assumption was that if students are able to use the
instrument, it can be expected that practitioners — who in general have much more practical experience — will also be
able to use it.
For the application of the MIG assessment instrument, we used a case study protocol. The protocol is shown in Figure
2.
Participant selection
1.
Fill out
MIG assessment
2.
Create result sheet
3.
Interview participant
4.
Validate results by
participant
5.
Present and discuss
end-report
6.
Fill out
evaluation questionnaire
7.
Figure 2. Case study protocol for the MIG assessment

--- PAGE 9 ---
Evaluation of the usability of a new ITG instrument to measure hard and soft governance maturity
International Journal of Information Systems and Project Management, Vol. 7, No. 2, 2019, 37-58
◄ 45 ►
The protocol used for the application of the instrument was as follows:
1. A group of participants in a strategic role from business and IT were selected and invited to participate in the
study.
2. Each participant was asked to fill out the MIG instrument before the interview.
3. The researcher created the results sheet using the instrument and brought it as a handout to the interview.
4. During the semi-structured interview, the results for each focus area were discussed. Where relevant, the results
were changed based on the opinion of the interviewee. The interviews lasted an average of one hour and were
recorded.
5. Following the interviews, the results were summarized and sent to every participant for validation.
6. A report summarizing the results of the study were written, presented and discussed with the client and the
participants.
7. The participants (for case studies conducted by the researchers) or students were invited to fill out a short
evaluation questionnaire.
Having completed the interviews, the results were combined and analyzed. The results of the analysis, conclusions and
recommendations were anonymized, summarized in a report and presented to the sponsor of the case study within the
organization. The results of the case studies conducted by the students (cases 3–10) were also presented to the
researchers. The student groups were obligated to share the completed customer versions of the MIG assessment
instrument with the researchers. The evaluation form used was created based on an evaluation template for expert
reviews of maturity models [79]. The participants were invited to fill out the evaluation questionnaire after the
interview, while the students were invited following the presentation of the end results to the researchers.
3.3 Evaluation strategy
After each cycle the design of the MIG assessment instrument was evaluated and improved. During the design cycles a
balance must be found in constructing and evaluating the evolving design artefact. Both activities must be convincingly
based on relevance and rigor [80].
The first cycle started with the design of the first version of the MIG assessment instrument. Gregor and Jones’ [81]
anatomy of a design theory was used to evaluate the design of the MIG model and the MIG assessment instrument.
Each year the instrument was changed only minimally. They state that a design theory that includes the first six
components is sufficient to create a model of an artefact. Two additional components are needed to be able to
implement the artefact in a practical instrument: principles of implementation; and an expository instantiation (= a
physical implementation of the artefact). In Table 2 we describe how the design process complies with Gregor and
Jones’ eight components for the design of the MIG model and the MIG assessment instrument.
Table 2. Evaluation of the MIG model and the MIG assessment instrument based on Gregor and Jones [81]
Component The way we complied with the component
1. Purpose and scope The MIG model and the MIG assessment instrument intended to increase the effectiveness of
the ITG of an organization by improving the maturity of the ITG focus areas.
2. Constructs In the MIG model, ITG is represented by a set of relevant focus areas.
3. Principles of form and function The MIG assessment instrument was created to assess an organization based on the MIG
model. A case study protocol was described as a guideline for conducting case studies using
the MIG assessment instrument.
4. Artefact mutability The research was conducted in three cycles and demonstrated the mutability of the MIG
model and the MIG assessment instrument.
5. Testable propositions An element of the case study protocol was that the results of the MIG assessment instrument

--- PAGE 10 ---
Evaluation of the usability of a new ITG instrument to measure hard and soft governance maturity
International Journal of Information Systems and Project Management, Vol. 7, No. 2, 2019, 37-58
◄ 46 ►
Component The way we complied with the component
were discussed with a participant in an interview. The interviews intended to test if the results
of the instrument corresponded with the opinion of the participant and to gather information
regarding why the participant did or did not agree with the resulting maturity level.
6. Justificatory knowledge The MIG model was designed using existing maturity models from the literature for each of
the focus areas. The MIG assessment instrument was based on the MIG model and existing
definitions of the maturity levels of each focus area.
Additional components
7. Principles of implementation The MIG model is a Focus Area Maturity Model (FAMM). An element of an FAMM is the
definition of improvement actions for each focus area and each maturity level. These
improvement actions are yet to be described but form part of the “Future research” section of
this paper.
8. Expository instantiation In several cycles case studies were conducted using the MIG model and the MIG assessment
instrument.
The changes applied were the results of obvious inadequacies or improvements suggested by a substantial proportion of
the participants. The intention is that the developed instrument will be used in case studies combined with semi-
structured interviews. For the design cycle, the MIG model, the MIG instrument and the interviews of the case study are
relevant.
In order to determine the validity of an instrument, “content validity”, “construct validity”, “reliability” and “internal
validity” were to be evaluated (Straub, 1989). Given the qualitative nature of the research, we did not test for the
relationship between variables (“statistical conclusion validity”). The purpose of evaluation in design science is to
determine if an instantiation of a designed artefact can “establish its utility and efficacy (or lack thereof) for achieving
its stated purpose” [71]. The semi-structured interviews were intended to validate and evaluate [55] whether the results
of the instrument matched the opinions of the participants and to gather information regarding the reasons why they did
or did not agree with the resulting maturity level. By using diverse data-gathering methods and comparing results, it
became possible to determine the extent to which instrumentation affects the findings, as well as their robustness.
The results section covers:
a. The results of the evaluation and changes after the second cycle of the design process of the MIG assessment
instrument (4.1);
b. The results of the case studies conducted with the third version of the MIG assessment instrument (4.2).
Thus, the focus of this study is the design and evaluation of the third version of the MIG assessment instrument. A full
description of the MIG assessment instrument versions can be found in the PhD dissertation “Hard and soft IT
governance maturity” [47].
4. Results
This section summarizes the changes to the MIG instrument after the second cycle and the results of the use of the third
version of the MIG instrument. As explained in the previous section, during the third cycle the instrument was only
changed minimally for obvious inadequacies or improvements suggested by a substantial part of the participants.

--- PAGE 11 ---
Evaluation of the usability of a new ITG instrument to measure hard and soft governance maturity
International Journal of Information Systems and Project Management, Vol. 7, No. 2, 2019, 37-58
◄ 47 ►
4.1 Evaluation of the second cycle
The changes in the third version of the MIG assessment instrument were based on the evaluation after the second cycle.
The selected changes for the third version of the MIG assessment instrument are summarized in Table 3.
Table 3. Selected changes for the MIG assessment instrument after the second cycle
Top 5 suggested improvements Change? Motivation
1. Most of the questions are difficult to answer using just a
“Yes”/”No” answer.
Yes We introduced a six-point Likert scale representing 0, 20, 40,
60, 80 or 100% agree.
2. It is not clear to which organizational entity the question
refers. An option would be to define two views, e.g. a single
department and an entire organization.
Yes We introduced two views as suggested: a view for a single
department and a view for the entire organization.
3. The questions are too general. No We will not change the questions but improve the
documentation of the instrument.
4. Some questions are too complex or unclear. Yes Improve the documentation of the instrument.
5. The results of the assessment and the interview are
different. The interview should be leading.
No We know this, hence we combined the assessments with the
interviews.
For the third cycle in 2017 we introduced the following changes to the assessment instrument:
a. Participants using the previous versions delivered numerous comments about there being “too limited choice”
where “Yes” and “No” are the only possible responses. The participants sought the ability to add some nuance to
their answers. In 2017 the possible answers to the statements were changed from “Yes” and “No” into a six-
point Likert scale using the following percentages: 0, 20%, 40%, 60%, 80% and 100%.
b. A second perspective was added, resulting in a departmental and organizational view (corporate governance
view). Thus, in each of the three assessments, the participant was asked to answer the question from a
departmental and an organizational perspective. A definition of both perspectives was handed to the participant
to be used when filling out the assessment. As a result of this change, the assessment instrument created two
results sheets, one for each view. This change was introduced because participants deemed it easier to answer
the questions when they had the ability to compare their own department with other departments of the
organization. In the case studies, the second view was always used as corporate perspective. An additional
benefit of this second view was that it delivered data from a corporate (governance) perspective.
An examples of the first three assessment statements for Questionnaire 2 The informal organization are
displayed in Figure 3.
Assessment 2 - The informal organization
Focus
Area INFORMAL Points Points Points Points FORMAL Remarks (optional)
Example Our projects are nearly always successful. 70 30 60 40 Our projects have rarely been successful.
I think our department is more successful with projects.
(This is only an example and not part of the assessment)
IT decision making is informally organized. IT decision making is formally organized.
We use informal planning. We use formal planning.
Monitoring is an informal process. Monitoring is a formal process.
Please divide 100 points between columns D and F for each set of two statements (as shown in the example).
My department
The complete
organization
Informal organization
Figure 3. Example of the statements for informal organization (simplified version)

--- PAGE 12 ---
Evaluation of the usability of a new ITG instrument to measure hard and soft governance maturity
International Journal of Information Systems and Project Management, Vol. 7, No. 2, 2019, 37-58
◄ 48 ►
c. Some questions are too complex or unclear. We improved the documentation of the instrument by adding an
extensive list of definitions.
4.2 Results of the case studies during the third cycle
This section discusses the use and evaluation of the third version of the MIG assessment instrument. This third cycle of
case studies is based on data collected in 10 case studies. All case studies were conducted in 2017 (see Table 4).
Table 4. Overview of the case studies
# Sector #P Inf. (avg; ) Culture (1st) Culture (2nd) Size (x1000)
1 O; Public administration and defense; compulsory
social security
10 58%; 11% Hierarchy Clan 57
2 O; Public administration and defense; compulsory
social security
7 38%; 14% Hierarchy Clan 110
3 N; Administrative and support service activities 4 48%; 9% Market Hierarchy 5.5
4 P; Education 5 53%; 9% Hierarchy Clan 2.9
5 K; Financial and insurance activities 4 51%; 14% Market Hierarchy 54
6 M; Professional, scientific and technical activities 8 60%; 13% Clan Adhocracy 15
7 D; Electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning
supply
5 46%; 10% Clan Hierarchy 64
8 I; Accommodation and food service activities 5 61%; 13% Clan Adhocracy 0.8
9 J; Information and communication 5 61%; 11% Clan Adhocracy 24
10 N; Administrative and support service activities 7 63%; 14% Clan Market 13
# is the number of the case study in 2017.
Sector is the sector of the organization, according to NACE v. 2 (section; description).
#P is the number of participants in the case study.
Inf. represents the average and standard deviation of the percentage informal governance between the answers of the participants.
Culture shows the most dominant cultural perspective (1st = highest value) and second most dominant (2nd).
Size is the number of employees in full-time equivalents (FTE).
All studies were conducted in organizations with more than 1000 employees. Eight were conducted by groups of four or
five full-time students, and two case studies were conducted by the researchers (the cases #1 and #2). As an example,
the first case study will be described in detail in this section.
During the preparation of the third cycle we used an evaluation form based on an evaluation template for expert reviews
of maturity models [79]. The participants were invited to fill out the evaluation questionnaire following the interview,
while the students were invited to complete it after presenting the end results to the researchers.
Detailed description of case #1: National government
This case study was conducted at a large independent administrative party of the Dutch government. A selection of 10
participants from business and IT were invited to participate in the case study. The participants were chosen in close
collaboration with the responsible manager of one value chain of the organization. All participants had a management
position (nine) or a key role (one) in the value chain, and were involved in strategic business and IT discussions with
respect to the value chain.

--- PAGE 13 ---
Evaluation of the usability of a new ITG instrument to measure hard and soft governance maturity
International Journal of Information Systems and Project Management, Vol. 7, No. 2, 2019, 37-58
◄ 49 ►
Table 5 shows the results before and after the interviews for both views.
Table 5. Results of the hard and soft governance (before; after)
Governance/focus area
Department view The entire organization
A B C D E F A B C D E F
Soft governance
Continuous improvement 10; 7 0; 2 0; 1 10; 7 0; 1 0; 1
Leadership 6; 2 2; 4 2; 2 0; 2 8; 5 2; 3 0; 1 0; 1
Participation 10; 2 0; 5 0; 3 10; 3 0; 6 0; 1
Understanding and trust 10; 6 0; 4 10; 8 0; 2
Hard governance
Functions and roles 7; 4 1; 1 2; 5 6; 3 1; 2 3; 5
Formal networks 8; 6 1; 3 0; 1 8; 6 2; 4
IT decision-making 9; 8 0; 1 1; 1 8; 8 1; 1 1; 1
Planning 7; 4 1; 2 1; 3 0; 1 7; 5 2; 4 1; 1
Monitoring 7; 3 0; 3 1; 3 2; 1 7; 5 0; 1 1; 3 2; 1
In general, there were considerable differences in the results, as demonstrated by the assessment and opinion of the
participant regarding the soft governance part and relatively low number of changes to the hard governance part. Where
participants suggested changes, they were always towards a higher maturity level in this case study. The participants
thus always desired a change to a higher and never to a lower maturity level, compared to the maturity level displayed
on the results sheet.
The rationale behind the changes provides some idea of the ways in which participants interpreted the focus areas.
Some participants changed their opinion after an additional explanation of the focus areas, partly accounting for the
changes.
Table 6 shows the results after the interviews for the focus areas of the context.
Table 6. Results of the context, view: value chain, after the interview
Governance/focus area
Department view The entire organization
Min. Max. Avg.  Agree Not
agree
Min. Max. Avg.  Agree Not
agree
Culture
Clan 25.0 48.0 35.8 7.3 9 1 16.7 43.3 28.2 9.1 10 0
Adhocracy 0.0 25.0 13.5 9.2 10 0 0.0 24.2 12.9 8.3 10 0
Market 0.0 24.2 13.4 8.9 10 0 0.0 28.3 15.1 9.7 10 0
Hierarchy 18.3 68.3 37.3 17.1 8 2 24.2 83.3 43.8 21.9 9 1
Informal organization
Hard and soft
governance
31% 57% 46% 9% 10 0 18% 58% 41% 11% 10 0

--- PAGE 14 ---
Evaluation of the usability of a new ITG instrument to measure hard and soft governance maturity
International Journal of Information Systems and Project Management, Vol. 7, No. 2, 2019, 37-58
◄ 50 ►
In the table, Min, Max, Avg. and  are the minimum, maximum, average and standard deviation of the
values/percentages between the participants’ answers, respectively. “Agree” and “Not agree” highlight whether the
participants agreed with the results of the assessment.
The participants mostly agreed with the results. There were two exceptions: a participant who responded that his score
in the department view for “Hierarchy” was too high (31.7) and “Clan” too low (26.7) and a participant who responded
that his scores for “Hierarchy” were too low (18.3; 24.2) in both views.
5. Discussion
5.1 Evaluation of the instrument
The case studies conducted by the researchers were in organizations one of the researchers knows very well. Thus,
besides the results of the assessment and the interviews we already knew a lot about the strong and weak points of the
organization. This was very useful for the evaluation of the instrument, when interpreting the results, deciding on the
topics to go in depth during the interviews, and when assessing differences between the results of the assessments and
the interviews.
In general, the comments regarding the use of the MIG instrument were positive: “The way of visualizing the results is
very clear”; “The tool delivers very quickly an indicative impression of the maturity of several ITG processes”.
However, the comments on the statements and documentation were more critical: “Without the interview, the
participant might misinterpret questions”; “To get reliable results, it is necessary to interview the participants”.
Table 7. Overview of the suggested improvements during the case studies
# Sector #Participants #Students Improvements suggested:
1 O Public administration and defense; compulsory social security 10 0 (researchers) 2, 3, 5
2 O Public administration and defense; compulsory social security 7 0 (researchers) 2, 3, 5
3 N Administrative and support service activities 4 5 3, 4
4 P Education 5 4 1, 2, 5
5 K Financial and insurance activities 4 4 3, 4
6 M Professional, scientific and technical activities 8 5 3, 4
7 D Electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supply 5 5 1, 2
8 I Accommodation and food service activities 5 5 1, 2
9 J Information and communication 5 4 2
10 N Administrative and support service activities 7 5 1, 2
# is the number of the case study in 2017.
Sector of the organization, according to NACE v. 2.
#Participants is the number of participants in the case study.
#Students is the number of students conducting the case study.
Improvements are the top 5 suggested improvements for the MIG assessment:
1. The number of assessments is too low.
2. Equivocal, unclear or excessively black and white statements/questions.
3. Participants need further or better explanations of the semantics/terms used in the assessment.
4. Students would welcome a more detailed or standardized interview plan.
5. Basing the results simply on whether a participant agrees 80-100% is insufficient.

--- PAGE 15 ---
Evaluation of the usability of a new ITG instrument to measure hard and soft governance maturity
International Journal of Information Systems and Project Management, Vol. 7, No. 2, 2019, 37-58
◄ 51 ►
The case studies resulted in a long list of proposed improvements for the instrument, some important, some minor.
These suggested improvements were analyzed and categorized. The top five most suggested improvements are included
in Table 7.
5.2 Evaluation of the changes in the third cycle
The case studies of 2017 resulted in a list of suggested improvements (see the section 5.3). However, first we discuss
the results of the changes applied in 2017.
During the third cycle we used the same criteria as in the previous cycle. Based on the feedback of the participants and
the users of the instrument, we concluded that each change may be considered an improvement. Given that the
evaluation of each amendment was positive (column Keep in Table 8), there was no reason to reverse any of the
changes. Based on the feedback of the participants and the users of the instrument (the students), we can conclude that
each change may be deemed an improvement.
Table 8. Evaluation of the changes in the third cycle
Changed during the third cycle Discussion of the change Improved? Critique Keep
1. Most of the questions are
difficult to answer using just a
“Yes”/”No” answer.
After changing the Yes/No scale into a six-point Likert, we
did not receive any further comments. The only remark was
that it would be preferable to have an option such as “Don’t
know”. We did not add this option given the possibility of
skipping questions and adding remarks.
Yes, fully
resolved.
We received no
critique regarding
the change.
Yes
2. It is not clear to which
organizational entity the question
refers. An option would be to
discern two views, e.g. a single
department and the entire
organization.
We added a definition of the views in the documentation. In
some of the case studies, participants did not consider this
sufficient. The description in the documentation might be
retained but additional communication is required to clarify
the part of the organization emphasized for the departmental
view and corporate view.
Yes, fully
resolved.
We received no
critique regarding
the change.
Yes
4. Some questions are too
complex or unclear.
We supplemented the documentation but received the same
comments on the questionnaire as in the second cycle. Some
questions continued to be considered too unclear or general.
Additional improvements to the documentation are thus
required.
An alternative option might be to alter the process by
organizing a kickoff meeting with the participants of the
study to explain the research and terminology used. In
practice, organizing a meeting attended by all participants is
very difficult and time-consuming.
Partly
resolved.
We received no
critique regarding
the documentation
(the change) but
some questions
remain. We need to
further improve the
documentation of the
instrument.
Yes
Improved? Related comments decrease or stop completely.
Critique Critique regarding the change?
Keep Keep the change?
5.3 Evaluation of the results and preparation of the next cycle
Having completed the case study, the participants of case studies #1 and #2 as well as the students were invited to fill
out a short evaluation questionnaire. The questionnaire used a six-point Likert scale ranging from “Disagree
completely” (valued as one point) to “Agree completely” (valued as six points). The questionnaire was returned by
eight participants in case #1 (80%) and six participants in case #2 (86%), as well as 20 students (56%).

--- PAGE 16 ---
Evaluation of the usability of a new ITG instrument to measure hard and soft governance maturity
International Journal of Information Systems and Project Management, Vol. 7, No. 2, 2019, 37-58
◄ 52 ►
Table 9. Summary of the evaluation
# Statement Case 1 Case 2 Students
10 The MIG instrument is useful for conducting assessments 4.3 (0.8) 4.7 (0.8) 4.4 (1.1)
11 The MIG instrument is useful for practice in my organization 4.3 (1.0) 4.5 (0.8) 3.9 (1.0)
12 The MIG instrument combined with interviews is useful for practice in my
organization
4.9 (0.9) 5.2 (1.0) 5.1 (0.9)
17 The results of the MIG instrument can be used in practice in my organization 3.9 (1.1) 4.5 (1.0) 4.0 (1.1)
22 The results of the MIG instrument combined with interviews can be used in
practice in my organization
4.6 (0.5) 5.2 (1.0) 5.0 (0.9)
33 Would you suggest any updates or improvements related to the MIG instrument? N(7); Y(1) N(6); Y(0) N(2); Y(18)
37 Would you suggest any other updates or improvements related to the MIG model? N(7); Y(1) N(6); Y(0) N(15); Y(6)
# is the number of the statement on the evaluation form
The results for Case 1 and Case 2 in Table 9 are based on evaluations by the participants. The final column shows the
results of the evaluation by the students. The comments for each case study have already been summarized in Table 7.
The number in parentheses is the standard deviation. The participants and the students were generally rather positive
about the usefulness and usability of the results of the instrument (in most cases being between 4 and 5 on a scale out of
6). Furthermore, the evaluation scores indicate that combining the instrument with interviews consistently results in
higher scores. In general, the responses from the students during the practical examinations were positive, such as it was
a “great learning experience for our team” (case #3).
6. Conclusion
This section summarizes the answers to the research question:
How usable is the MIG instrument for measuring current hard and soft ITG maturity in an organization?
The results sheets of the MIG assessment instrument are helpful during the structured interviews in discussing the focus
areas. We received many positive comments on the usability of the tool in general: “The way of visualizing the results
is very clear” and it “delivers very quickly an indicative impression of the maturity of several ITG processes”. The case
studies additionally resulted in a long list of proposed improvements to the instrument. Only two of the 10 case studies
stimulated comments regarding the representation of the opinions of the participants in the results. Based on all
comments concerning univocal statements, a higher percentage might be expected.
An evaluation survey among participants and students yielded positive results regarding the usefulness and usability of
the results of the instrument (in most cases being between 4 and 5 on a scale of 6, see Table). Furthermore, the
evaluation scores demonstrated that combining the instrument with interviews resulted in even higher scores (around 5).
The results of the evaluation when asked to evaluate “the usability of the results of the MIG instrument in practice in
my organization combined with interviews” resulted in scores between 4.6 and 5.2 on a scale out of 6. This accorded
with the comments registered during the interviews with participants in the case studies conducted in the previous
cycles. We thus conclude that the instrument is usable in practice for measuring hard and soft ITG. The interviews
delivered valuable information regarding the reasons why the participants agreed or not with the resulting maturity
levels, the graph of the Competing Values Framework, and the percentage for “Informal organization”. This
information can be used to improve the instrument. Substantial improvements to the instrument were applied during the
design cycles. After the third cycle the top five most important improvements required were: (1) the number of
assessments is too low, (2) equivocal, unclear or excessively black and white statements/questions, (3) participants need
further or better explanations of the semantics/terms used in the assessment, (4) students would welcome a more

--- PAGE 17 ---
Evaluation of the usability of a new ITG instrument to measure hard and soft governance maturity
International Journal of Information Systems and Project Management, Vol. 7, No. 2, 2019, 37-58
◄ 53 ►
detailed or standardized interview plan, and (5) basing the results simply on whether a participant agrees 80-100% is
insufficient.
The third version of the MIG assessment instrument is usable in practice, but further improvements are required to
reduce the deviation between the results of the instrument and the opinions of the participants, as well as to fix certain
deficiencies. We conclude that a combination of the MIG assessment instrument and structured interviews is useful for
measuring current hard and soft ITG.
6.1 Limitations
The case studies described in this paper are conducted in the Netherlands and the in-depth case studies were in
government organizations. The case studies show that it is possible to use the intrument to map the current ITG of an
organization into the MIG model. The investigated organizations differ in terms of size and industrial sector. However,
the evaluation was limited to organizations based in the Netherlands and large multinationals, which vary in size and
industrial sector. Case studies in other countries or regions with different cultures might deliver different results.
6.2 Future research
The evaluation in this study indicate that the MIG instrument continues to require improvements, and this will require
several cycles. We conducted case studies with relatively few participants (between three and 10). All cases studies
described in this paper were conducted in the Netherlands. It would be interesting to conduct case studies with a larger
number of participants or use and validate the model in other countries.
The MIG instrument was created in Excel. An online version of the instrument would be easier to use and represent a
good way of creating a case study database that might be usable to create benchmarks. Further improvements to the
questionnaire might help achieve the ultimate goal: to create an instrument that can be used by the members of an
organization without requiring interviews to correct the results and render the instrument available to the public.
References
[1] S.P.-J. Wu, D.W. Straub, and T.-P. Liang, "How information technology governance mechanisms and strategic
alignment influence organizational performance: Insights from a matched survey of business and IT managers," MIS
Quarterly, vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 497-518, June, 2015.
[2] T.A. Kochan, "Restoring trust in American corporations: Addressing the root cause," Journal of Management and
Governance, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 223-231, September, 2003.
[3] H. Tanriverdi, "Performance effects of information technology synergies in multibusiness firms," MIS Quarterly:
Management Information Systems, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 57-77, March, 2006.
[4] M. Lazic, C. Schillinger, M. Groth, and A. Heinzl, "The impact of IT governance on business performance, " in 17th
Americas Conference on Information Systems, AMCIS, Detroit, MI, 2011, pp. 1681-1690.
[5] P. Weill, and J.W. Ross, "IT governance: How top performers manage IT decision rights for superior results,"
Boston, MA: Harvard Business Press, 2004.
[6] M.A. Borth, and R.V. Bradley, "Unexplored linkages between corporate governance and IT governance: An
evaluation and call to research," in Information Technology Governance and Service Management: Frameworks and
Adaptations, IGI Global, 2009, XI, pp. 202-220.
[7] R.R. Peterson, R. O'Callaghan, and P. Ribbers, "Information technology governance by design: investigating hybrid
configurations and integration mechanisms, " in 21st International Conference on Information Systems, 2000, pp. 435-
452.
[8] W. Van Grembergen, "Strategies for information technology governance," Hershey, PA: IGI Global, 2004.

--- PAGE 18 ---
Evaluation of the usability of a new ITG instrument to measure hard and soft governance maturity
International Journal of Information Systems and Project Management, Vol. 7, No. 2, 2019, 37-58
◄ 54 ►
[9] C.M. Tucker, "The Lisbon strategy and the open method of coordination: a new vision and the revolutionary
potential of soft governance in the European Union, " in Annual Meeting of the American Political Science Association,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 2003, pp. 28-31.
[10] L. Moos, "Hard and soft governance: The journey from transnational agencies to school leadership," European
Educational Research Journal, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 397-406, September, 2009.
[11] D.M. Cook, "Mitigating cyber-threats through public-private partnerships: Low cost governance with high-impact
returns, " in International Cyber Resilience Conference, Perth, Western Australia 2010, pp. 22-30.
[12] K. Uehara, "Soft IT governance," ISACA Journal Online, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1-6, 2010.
[13] M. Tarmidi, A. Abdul Rashid, and R. Abdul Roni, "Exploring the approaches for COBIT process in Malaysian 100
top corporate governance companies," in 3rd International Conference on Business and Economic Research (ICBER),
Bandung, Indonesia, 2012, pp. 3081-3106.
[14] D. Smits, and J. van Hillegersberg, "The development of an IT governance maturity model for hard and soft
governance," in 8th European Conference on IS Management and Evaluation (ECIME), Brussels, Belgium, 2014, pp.
347-355.
[15] P. Webb, C. Pollard, and G. Ridley, "Attempting to define IT governance: Wisdom or folly?," in 39th Annual
Hawaii International Conference on Information Systems (HICCS), 2006, pp. 194a-194a.
[16] J. Lee, and C. Lee, "IT governance-based IT strategy and management: Literature review and future research
directions," in Information Technology Governance and Service Management: Frameworks and Adaptations, IGI
Global, 2009, Hershey, PA, USA, pp. 44-62.
[17] D. Smits, and J. van Hillegersberg, "The continuing mismatch between IT governance theory and practice: Results
from a Delphi study with CIO’s," in 19th Americas Conference on Information Systems (AMCIS), Chicago, IL, 2013,
pp. 3278-3286.
[18] ITGI, "Global Status Report on the Governance of Enterprise IT (GEIT)," IT Governance Institute, Meadows, IL,
2011.
[19] A. Novotny, E. Bernroider, and S. Koch, "Dimensions and operationalisations of IT governance: a literature review
and meta-case study," in Proceedings from the International Conference on Information Resource Management, Vienna,
Austria, 2012, pp. 1-13.
[20] ITGI, "Governance Global Status Report," IT Governance Institute, Meadows, IL, 2008.
[21] D. Musson, "IT Governance: A critical review of the literature," in A. Cater-Steel (Ed.) in Information technology
governance and service management: Frameworks and adaptations, New York, Hershey, 2009, 3, pp. 63-81.
[22] ISO/IEC 38500, "International Standard for Corporate Governance of IT," International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) and the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), 2008.
[23] M. Ayat, M. Masrom, S. Sahibuddin, and M. Sharifi, "Issues in implementing IT governance in Small and Medium
Enterprises, " in 2nd International Conference on Intelligent Systems, Modelling and Simulation (ISMS), Phnom Penh,
Cambodja, 2011, pp. 197-201.
[24] G. Mangalaraj, A. Singh, and A. Taneja, "IT governance frameworks and COBIT-a literature review," in Twentieth
Americas Conference on Information Systems, Savannah, Georgia, 2014, pp. 1-10.
[25] P. Willson, and C. Pollard, "Exploring IT governance in theory and practice in a large multi-national organisation
in Australia," Information Systems Management, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 98-109, April, 2009.
[26] J.R. Galbraith, "Organization design: An information processing view," Interfaces, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 28-36, May,
1974.

--- PAGE 19 ---
Evaluation of the usability of a new ITG instrument to measure hard and soft governance maturity
International Journal of Information Systems and Project Management, Vol. 7, No. 2, 2019, 37-58
◄ 55 ►
[27] H. Mintzberg, "The structuring of organizations: A synthesis of the research," University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign's Academy for Entrepreneurial Leadership Historical Research Reference in Entrepreneurship, 1979.
[28] J. Luftman, and T. Brier, "Achieving and sustaining business-IT alignment," California management review, vol.
42, no. 1, pp. 109-122, October, 1999.
[29] V. Sambamurthy, and R.W. Zmud, "Arrangements for information technology governance: A theory of multiple
contingencies," MIS Quarterly: Management Information Systems, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 261-290, June, 1999.
[30] M.A. Davies, "Best practice in corporate governance: Building reputation and sustainable success," Aldershot, UK:
Gower Publishing, Ltd., 2012.
[31] T. Mettler, and P. Rohner, "Situational maturity models as instrumental artifacts for organizational design," in
Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Design Science Research in Information Systems and Technology,
2009, pp. 22-30.
[32] G.P. Rogers, "The role of maturity models in IT governance: A comparison of the major models and their potential
benefits to the enterprise," in Information Technology Governance and Service Management: Frameworks and
Adaptations, IGI Global, 2009, pp. 254-265.
[33] D. Smits, and J. van Hillegersberg, "The continuing mismatch between IT governance maturity theory and
practice: a new approach, " in International Conference on ENTERprise Information Systems (CENTERIS), Lisbon,
Portugal, 2018, pp. 549-560.
[34] D. Smits, and J. van Hillegersberg, "The development of a hard and soft IT governance assessment instrument, " in
International Conference on ENTERprise Information Systems (CENTERIS), Barcelona, Spain, 2017, pp. 47-54.
[35] J. Pöppelbuß, B. Niehaves, A. Simons, and J. Becker, "Maturity models in information systems research: Literature
search and analysis," Communications of the Association for Information Systems, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 1-15, November
2011.
[36] D. Smits, and J. van Hillegersberg, "IT governance maturity: Developing a maturity model using the Delphi
method," in 48th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), Kauai, Hawaii, 2015, pp. 4534-4543.
[37] F. Sanchez-Puchol, and J.A. Pastor-Collado, "Focus Area Maturity Models: A Comparative Review," in European,
Mediterranean, and Middle Eastern Conference on Information Systems, Coimbra, Portugal, 2017, pp. 531-544.
[38] J. Bessant, S. Caffyn, and M. Gallagher, "An evolutionary model of continuous improvement behaviour,"
Technovation, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 67-77, September, 2001.
[39] J. Collins, "Level 5 leadership: The triumph of humility and fierce resolve," Harvard Business Review, vol. 79, no.
1, pp. 66-76, January-February, 2001.
[40] A.M. Magdaleno, R.M. de Araujo, and C.M.L. Werner, "A roadmap to the Collaboration Maturity Model
(CollabMM) evolution," in 15th International Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work in Design
(CSCWD), 2011, pp. 105-112.
[41] B.H. Reich, and I. Benbasat, "Measuring the linkage between business and information technology objectives,"
MIS Quarterly, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 55-81, March, 1996.
[42] M.C. Paulk, B. Curtis, M.B. Chrissis, E.L. Averill, J. Bamberger, T.C. Kasse, M.D. Konrad, J.R. Perdue, C.V.
Weber, and J.V. Withey, "Capability maturity model for software, version 1.0," Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh
USA, 1991.
[43] R.E. Quinn, and J. Rohrbaugh, "A spatial model of effectiveness criteria: Towards a competing values approach to
organizational analysis," Management Science, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 363-377, March, 1983.

--- PAGE 20 ---
Evaluation of the usability of a new ITG instrument to measure hard and soft governance maturity
International Journal of Information Systems and Project Management, Vol. 7, No. 2, 2019, 37-58
◄ 56 ►
[44] Eurostat, "NACE Rev. 2 Statistical classification of economic activities in the European Community," Eurostat
European Commission, 2008.
[45] T. Sethibe, J. Campbell, and C. McDonald, "IT governance in public and private sector organizations: Examining
the differences and defining future research directions," in Australasian Proceedings (ACIS), Toowoomba, QLD, 2007,
pp. 833-843.
[46] D.W. Straub, "Validating instruments in MIS research," MIS Quarterly, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 147-169, June, 1989.
[47] D. Smits, "Hard and soft governance IT governance maturity," PhD dissertation, Faculty of behavioral,
management and social sciences, University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands, 2019.
[48] H.A. Simon, "The sciences of the artificial," Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT press, 1996.
[49] C. Eames, and R. Eames, "Design Q & A," Color film, 1972.
[50] H.A. Simon, "The science of design: Creating the artificial," Design Issues, vol. 4, no. 1/2, pp. 67-82, 1988.
[51] J. Pries-Heje, and R. Baskerville, "The design theory nexus," MIS Quarterly, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 731-755,
December, 2008.
[52] J. Iivari, and J. Venable, "Action research and design science research–seemingly similar but decisively dissimilar,
" in 17th European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS), Guimarães, Portugal, 2009, pp. 1-13.
[53] R.L. Baskerville, M. Kaul, and V.C. Storey, "Genres of Inquiry in design-science research: Justification and
evaluation of knowledge production," MIS Quarterly, vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 541-564, September, 2015.
[54] P. Galle, and P. Kroes, "Science and design: Identical twins?," Design Studies, vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 201-231, May,
2014.
[55] A.R. Hevner, S.T. March, J. Park, and S. Ram, "Design science in information systems research," MIS quarterly,
vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 75-105, March, 2004.
[56] K. Peffers, T. Tuunanen, M.A. Rothenberger, and S. Chatterjee, "A design science research methodology for
information systems research," Journal of management information systems, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 45-77, December, 2007.
[57] A.R. Hevner, "A three cycle view of design science research," Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems, vol.
19, no. 2, pp. 4, 2007.
[58] H.A. Linstone, and M. Turoff, "The Delphi method: Techniques and applications," Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley
Publishing Company, 1975.
[59] J. Venable, J. Pries-Heje, and R. Baskerville, "FEDS: A framework for evaluation in design science research,"
European Journal of Information Systems, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 77-89, December, 2016.
[60] L. Lasrado, R. Vatrapu, H.B. Karsgaard, and J.F. Kjaer, "Towards sustainable design for maturity measurement
marketplace," in Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on Semantic Ambient Media Experiences (SAME), Perth, Western
Australia, 2017, pp. 25-33.
[61] T. Mettler, "A design science research perspective on maturity models in Information Systems," Universität St.
Gallen St. Gallen, Switzerland, 2009.
[62] A. Tarhan, O. Turetken, and H.A. Reijers, "Business process maturity models: A systematic literature review,"
Information and Software Technology, vol. 75, no. 1, pp. 122-134, July, 2016.
[63] M. Röglinger, J. Pöppelbuß, and J. Becker, "Maturity models in business process management," Business Process
Management Journal, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 328-346, April, 2012.
[64] A. Van Looy, "Business process maturity: A comparative study on a sample of business process maturity models,"
Heidelberg, Germany: Springer Science & Business Media, 2014.

--- PAGE 21 ---
Evaluation of the usability of a new ITG instrument to measure hard and soft governance maturity
International Journal of Information Systems and Project Management, Vol. 7, No. 2, 2019, 37-58
◄ 57 ►
[65] T. De Bruin, R. Freeze, U. Kaulkarni, and M. Rosemann, "Understanding the main phases of developing a maturity
assessment model," in Australasian Conference on Information Systems (ACIS), Sydney, Australia, 2005, pp. 8-19.
[66] L.A. Lasrado, R. Vatrapu, and K.N. Andersen, "Maturity models development in IS research," in Selected Papers
of the IRIS, Oulu, Finland, 2015, pp. 1-65.
[67] D. Proença, and J. Borbinha, "Maturity models for information systems-A state of the art," in International
Conference on ENTERprise Information Systems (CENTERIS), Porto, Portugal, 2016, pp. 1042-1049.
[68] V.R. Basili, "The role of experimentation in software engineering: Past, current, and future," in Proceedings of the
18th International Conference on Software Engineering, 1996, pp. 442-449.
[69] G.B. Kleindorfer, L. O'Neill, and R. Ganeshan, "Validation in simulation: Various positions in the philosophy of
science," Management Science, vol. 44, no. 8, pp. 1087-1099, August, 1998.
[70] M.V. Zelkowitz, and D.R. Wallace, "Experimental models for validating technology," Computer, vol. 31, no. 5, pp.
23-31, May, 1998.
[71] J. Venable, J. Pries-Heje, and R. Baskerville, "A comprehensive framework for evaluation in design science
research," in International Conference on Design Science Research in Information Systems, Las Vegas, NV, 2012, pp.
423-438.
[72] R.B. Burns, "Introduction to research methods," 3rd edn, Melbourne, Australia: Addison Wesley Longman, 1997.
[73] P. Race, S. Brown, and B. Smith, "500 tips on assessment," New York, USA: RoutledgeFalmer, 2004.
[74] S. Brown, and P. Knight, "Assessing learners in higher education," Abingdon, UK: Routledge, 2012.
[75] D. Jennings, "Strategic management and the case method," Journal of Management Development, vol. 15, no. 9,
pp. 4-12, January, 1996.
[76] L. Willcoxson, M.L. Manning, N. Johnston, and K. Gething, "Enhancing the research-teaching nexus: Building
teaching-based research from research-based teaching," International Journal of Teaching and Learning in Higher
Education, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 1-10, 2011.
[77] A. Verburgh, J. Elen, and S. Lindblom-Ylänne, "Investigating the myth of the relationship between teaching and
research in higher education: A review of empirical research," Studies in Philosophy and Education, vol. 26, no. 5, pp.
449-465, September, 2007.
[78] J. Artés, F. Pedraja-Chaparro, and M. del Mar Salinas-JiméneZ, "Research performance and teaching quality in the
Spanish higher education system: Evidence from a medium-sized university," Research Policy, vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 19-
29, February, 2017.
[79] D. Salah, R. Paige, and P. Cairns, "An evaluation template for expert review of maturity models," in International
Conference on Product-Focused Software Process Improvement (PROFES), Helsinki, Finland, 2014, pp. 318-321.
[80] A. Hevner, and S. Chatterjee, "Design Science Research in Information Systems," in A. Hevner, and S. Chatterjee
(Eds.) in Design Research in Information Systems, New York, NY, Springer, 2010, 2, pp. 9-22.
[81] S. Gregor, and D. Jones, "The anatomy of a design theory," Journal of the Association for Information systems,
vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 312, May, 2007.

--- PAGE 22 ---
Evaluation of the usability of a new ITG instrument to measure hard and soft governance maturity
International Journal of Information Systems and Project Management, Vol. 7, No. 2, 2019, 37-58
◄ 58 ►
Biographical notes
Daniel Smits
Daniel Smits, PhD, is an independent management consultant for private companies and public
institutions. Alongside this, he works as a part-time lecturer and researcher at the faculty Behavioral,
Management and Social sciences of the University of Twente.
As a practitioner, he has over 20 years’ experience in organizational change and IT projects and his
work focuses on IT governance, IT management and enterprise architecture. He is co-founder and
chairman of the Governance department of the Dutch KNVI (the Dutch association of ICT-
professionals).
www.shortbio.org/d.smits@utwente.nl
Jos van Hillegersberg
Jos van Hillegersberg is a full Professor in Business Information systems. He is head of the
Department of Industrial Engineering and Business Information Systems at the University of Twente.
His research deals with innovation of supply chains and business networks using ICT. He is
contributing to several national and international projects on design of collaborative businesses and
industrial networks applying ICT such as data analytics, architecture transformation, agent
technology and sensor data. He is chairman of the program committee of the Dutch research institute
for advanced logistics. Before joining the University of Twente, he was on the faculty of the
Rotterdam School of Management at the Erasmus University, working on component based software
systems, IT management, global outsourcing and agent systems for supply chains. He also worked for
several years in business. At AEGON he was component manager for the setup of an Internet Bank
and at IBM he worked on artiﬁcial intelligence and expert systems.
www.shortbio.org/j.vanhillegersberg@utwente.nl