--- PAGE 1 ---
Sandeep Soni, et al: Digital transformation of …… Archives for Technical Sciences 2025, 34(3), 372-380
Technical Institute Bijeljina, Archives for Technical Sciences. Year XVII – N 0
34 372
ISSN 1840-4855
e-ISSN 2233-0046
Original scientific article
http://dx.doi.org/10.70102/afts.2025.1834.372
DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION OF PROJECT AND
OPERATIONS MANAGEMENT IN SMART
INFRASTRUCTURE AND ENGINEERING ENTERPRISES
Dr. Sandeep Soni1*
, Dr. Rajvir Saini2
1*
Assistant Professor, Kalinga University, Naya Raipur, Chhattisgarh, India.
e-mail: ku.sandeepsoni@kalingauniversity.ac.in,
orcid: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-3692-6874
2
Assistant Professor, Kalinga University, Naya Raipur, Chhattisgarh, India.
e-mail: ku.rajvirsaini@kalingauniversity.ac.in,
orcid: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-6644-0795
Received: August 30, 2025; Revised: October 14, 2025; Accepted: November 21, 2025; Published: December 30, 2025
SUMMARY
The fast development of Industry 4.0 has forced a shift in paradigm in the management of complex
infrastructure projects in engineering enterprises. The presented study will examine the concept of the
digital transformation(DT) ofproject andoperations management with the emphasison theincorporation
of smart technologies into the conventional engineering structures. Through the study of several aspects
of smartization, the researchers find out the way in which digital tools can help make better decisions,
allocate resources more efficiently, and make infrastructure assets more sustainable. The study highlights
the shift of manual and siloed operations towards integrated, data-driven ecosystems, which apply
Enterprise Architecture (EA) and Artificial Intelligence (AI) to reduce risks. According to the statistical
data based on the latest industry standards, companies that resort to the unified digital infrastructure have
their operational expenses decreased by 25%, and the precision of the project schedules increased by
40%. In addition, the study explores the issue of particular challenges that can be encountered by sectors
like energy, water utilities, and transportation in embracing these digital changes. The essence here is to
come up with an inclusive framework to harmonize strategic project management with operational
excellence in intelligent environments. The study shows through a systematic review of the modern
models that digital maturity is not always associated with the adoption of technologies but with the
necessity of an overall restructuring of organizational processes. The results indicate that intelligent
infrastructural initiatives are greatly supported by cloud transformation and real-time analytics, which
result in higher levels of performance. This article brings a distinct understanding of the symbiotic
relationship in the aspect of digital governance and service delivery among contemporary engineering
companies. Finally, the study offers a guide to the stakeholders to overcome the challenges of digital
integration, where smart infrastructure would be resilient, cost-effective, and able to address the needs of
the future city.
Key words: digital transformation, smart infrastructure, engineering management, industry 4.0,
enterprise architecture, project optimization, operational efficiency.

--- PAGE 2 ---
Sandeep Soni, et al: Digital transformation of …… Archives for Technical Sciences 2025, 34(3), 372-380
Technical Institute Bijeljina, Archives for Technical Sciences. Year XVII – N 0
34 373
INTRODUCTION
The current state of the global engineering environment has become radically changing as the demands
of smart infrastructure and the intricacies of contemporary engineering businesses forced the industry to
transform. Insuch asetting,withvolumes of massivedataandlonglifecycle of assets,traditional project
and operations management methods have hit their limit. These old approaches usually operate within
isolated systems, whereby the information is unravelled in the transfer between the project construction
process andtheoperationalmaintenance process.Thisdivision creates majorinefficiency, cost overload,
and the absence of real-time visibility of asset health. With smarter infrastructure, where sensors and
cyber-physical systems are built into the infrastructure, the management logic needs to shift away to a
more reactive position and into a more integrated paradigm [1].
The main tool of the struggle against such complexity is the digital transformation (DT), but there is a
significant gap in the research: most organizations payattention to the isolated implementation of digital
tools, like BIM or IoT, without a coherent management logic that links the project implementation with
the operational performance. This study fills this gap by suggesting a techno-managerial model that
balances the digital strategies with organizational objectives.
Key Contributions:
• Proposes an integrated digital transformation framework that bridges the gap between project-
phase data and long-term operational management.
• Identifies key digital drivers such as AI-enabled decision support and cloud scalability that
directly enhance the performance of smart infrastructure.
• Evaluates the impact of digital maturity across diverse engineering sectors, including energy,
water utilities, and transportation logistics.
• Provides a strategic guide for engineering leaders to transition from tool-centric digitization to
enterprise-wide digital transformation.
This research study is well organized and systematically presented in seven sections to give an in-depth
analysis of digital transformation. After the introduction, Section 2 discusses the industry 4.0
development and infrastructure study gaps, and Section 3 presents the smart engineering background.
Section 4 presents technical practices and digital efficacy rationale. Section 5 and 6 assess systemic
integration platforms and give comparative performance outcomes based on standard measures. It’s also
containing strategic summaries and the future direction of research.
LITERATURE REVIEW
According to recent investigations, Industry 4.0 can be viewed as an intrinsic basis of a smart
infrastructure, and it goes beyond mere automation to a point of cyber-physical integration. This 4.0
paradigm of construction makes use of cloud computing and digital twins to promote real-time visibility
and streamline the production processes within the contemporary engineering setting [5]. The
digitalization is now considered a crucial factor toward organizational resilience and long-term
sustainability within the industrial environment. The combination of Building Information Modeling
(BIM) and Artificial Intelligence (AI) has transformed the process of project planning by allowing
project managers to predict timing and identify clashes automatically. The 4D and 5D BIM offer
advanced capabilities to simulate time and cost variables, and it is much safer to mitigate risks in the
implementation stage. These tools streamline a single source of truth, whereby all the stakeholders work
on the same high-fidelity data. The application of the Internet of Things (IoT) sensors and predictive
maintenance algorithms has shifted operations management to a proactive model [3]. These systems
embrace real-time diagnostics to identify abnormalities in the performance of assets and thus enhance
the lifespan of important infrastructure like energy grids and water facilities [2] [12]. Corrective
maintenance is the only option that can be conducted with the help of AI-powered Enterprise Asset
Management (EAM) platforms when the necessity arises, which diminishes the number of unexpected
downtimes significantly.

--- PAGE 3 ---
Sandeep Soni, et al: Digital transformation of …… Archives for Technical Sciences 2025, 34(3), 372-380
Technical Institute Bijeljina, Archives for Technical Sciences. Year XVII – N 0
34 374
Avery large gap is still appreciated in the shape of siloed digital adoption, in which project information
hardly ever enters operational stages, despitetechnological developments.The interoperability of design
software and asset management systems is a challenge to many enterprises, leading to the loss of
information during handover.According to the current literature, there is a gap in such a unified techno-
managerial framework that would bridge the gap between this lifecycle to provide the continuity of data
[15].
The overall evidence in the literature is that as the specific technologies, such as BIM, AI, and IoT, are
maturing,thereis no unified approachintheengineering industryto connectinsights attheproject phase
with the outcomes in the operational phase.This study handles thissilos in lifecycle issues by suggesting
a comprehensive digital infrastructure that maintains information taken during design and construction
as an actionable body in the entire operational life of intelligent infrastructure.
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK FOR DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION
The suggested model of the digital transformation of smart infrastructure is concentrated on the
alignment of technological opportunities with the core management operations. It is a contrast to the
traditionalmodelsthat seesoftwareasanexternalsupportsincetheintegratedtechno-managerialsystem
incorporates digital intelligence into the basic decision-making cycle of the enterprise. The framework
provides this through the creation of a Digital Thread, where data created through the design stage and
the construction stage will be the operating intelligence in the maintenance stage.
Mapping Digital Technologies to Management Functions
To make sure that digital tools are used objectively, they are directly mapped to the four pillars of
engineering management:
Planning: Simulation of project results and optimization of resource distribution with the help of AI-
based forecasting and 4D BIM [9].
Implementation: Use of team cloud applications and mobile Internet of Things applications to monitor
real-time on-site progress.
Monitoring: Implementation of sensor networks and digital twins to deliver a real-time flow of data
about the health of assets and the environment [11].
Control: With AI-enabled decision support systems, automatically raise an alert and take corrective
measures when performance does not conform to the baseline [10].
Figure 1. Integrated techno-managerial framework for smart infrastructure lifecycle management
Project Phase Operations Phase
Design & Planning
Construction & Execution
Construction & Executing
Asset Monitoring & Control
Predictive Maintenance
Performance Optimization
Digital Handover
Digital Twin
Platform
•
AI/ML
Analytics
IoT Data
Hub
Common Data Environment
(CDE)
Real-Time
Data Flow
Feedback Loop Data Feed

--- PAGE 4 ---
Sandeep Soni, et al: Digital transformation of …… Archives for Technical Sciences 2025, 34(3), 372-380
Technical Institute Bijeljina, Archives for Technical Sciences. Year XVII – N 0
34 375
Figure 1 shows the flow of continuous data between the operations and the project stages. The
framework will guarantee a smooth digital handover through a Common Data Environment (CDE) and
Digital Twin platform. The structure will remove information silos, and real-time asset tracking will be
possible, enabling predictive maintenance to optimize the performance of engineering services in the
long term.
Lifecycle Integration Logic
The fundamental aspect of the framework is the correlation between the Project Lifecycle (Design,
Procurement, Construction) and the Operational Lifecycle (Commissioning, Maintenance,
Decommissioning). The framework ensures that there is no handover gap in which key engineering
information is normally lost by employing Enterprise Architecture (EA). By doing so, operations
managers are in the position to view the as-built digital twin instantly, meaning that predictive
maintenance schedulesareinformedby realconstruction dataand not byartificiallyestimated ones [16].
The four domains that the implementation of this integrated model is to provide are critical areas that
should be seen to improve in a measurable way. To begin with, Cost Efficiency is realized with the
decrease in rework,as wellas energy consumption optimization[6]. Second, Schedule Reliability is also
increased through the real-time tracking, which reduces delays. Third, Predictive analytics based on IoT
are used to optimize Asset Utilization by avoiding equipment failure. Lastly, there is the Decision
Accuracy, which enhances managers with integrated business analytics by incorporating both financial
and engineering data. Having placed the conceptual limits of the digital framework, there is a need to
look at the technical procedures and mathematical reasoning that are involved in these enhancements.
The next section describes the research methodology, as well as the quantitative models applied to test
the efficiency of smart infrastructure functioning.
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
The given research uses a Hybrid Methodology, a synthesis of a systematic conceptual framework and
a case-based validation to ensure that the theoretical and practical relevance are both developed. The
methodology starts with the design of an integrated architecture and then uses a mathematical efficiency
model to confirm the effect of digital transformation (DT) on smart infrastructure projects.
System Architecture and Digital Integration
The multi-layered architecture is used to construct the methodology that supports the flow of data
between the physical assets and the managerial decision-making. Physical sensor layers (IoT), data
processing layers (Cloud/Edge), and application layers (BIM/ERP) are integrated to create the system
as shown in the architecture diagram below. The structure guarantees that data during the project phase
is smoothly transferred to the operations phase and a digital thread is upheld throughout the lifecycle of
the asset [14].
The multi-layered data flow necessary to support smart infrastructure, including IoT acquisition andAI-
driven analytics in a Cloud Data Lake, is determined in Figure 2. It focuses on the Common Data
Environment (CDE) as the focal point to facilitate predictive maintenance and real-time optimization in
the course of the operational stage.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Sandeep Soni, et al: Digital transformation of …… Archives for Technical Sciences 2025, 34(3), 372-380
Technical Institute Bijeljina, Archives for Technical Sciences. Year XVII – N 0
34 376
Figure 2. Smart city infrastructure data architecture and layered technical stack
Mathematical Model for Operational Efficiency
In an attempt to measure the performance of the proposed framework, take into consideration a Digital
TransformationImpact Model (DTIM). Sucha mathematical methodassessesthevalue of riskreduction
and the cost of operation, offset by the integration of data quality and the speed of the analytical process.
The effectiveness (E) of the smart infrastructure system is shown as in equation (1):
𝐸 = ∑
(𝑄𝑖 ⋅ 𝛼𝑖) − 𝑅𝑖
𝐶𝑖
→ (1)
𝑛
𝑖=1
Where:
• Qi represents the Data Quality Index (accuracy and completeness of project data).
• αi is theAnalytical Velocity (speed of processing data viaAI algorithms).
• Ri denotes the Risk Factor (probability of delays or equipment failure).
• Ci represents the Operational Cost (expenditure in terms of workforce and energy).
The equation demonstrates that the high upgrade the Data and Speed using digital tools, the higher the
project productivity, but can have high Risks and Costs.
Algorithmic Logic for Decision Support
The framework uses a Predictive Maintenance and resource optimization (PMRO) Algorithm. The
rationale is applied to calculate the best time to perform maintenance interventions, which do not have
a fixed schedule but are triggered by data.
Algorithm: PMRO Logic
Plaintext
BEGIN
Input: Real-time sensor data (S), Historical failure patterns (H)
Layer 1: DataAcquisition
IOT Sensors BIM/CAD Data Citizen Services Portal
Legacy
Systems/ERP
Layer 2: Data Processing &
Integration
Predictive
Maintenance
Cloud Data Lake
Data Ingestion
AI/ML
Analytics
Harmonization
Common Data Environment (CDE)
Project Management
Dashboards
Traffic & Energy
Optimization Portal
Digital Twin PLATFORM
Layer 3: DataApplications &
Services
Feedback Loop
Operations Phase Project Phase

--- PAGE 6 ---
Sandeep Soni, et al: Digital transformation of …… Archives for Technical Sciences 2025, 34(3), 372-380
Technical Institute Bijeljina, Archives for Technical Sciences. Year XVII – N 0
34 377
Calculate: Probability of Failure P(f) =Analyze (S, H)
IF P(f) > Threshold_Level THEN
Trigger: Automated Maintenance Request
Optimize:Allocate the nearest available resource using Dijkstra's Logic
ELSE
Continue: Real-time monitoring
END IF
Output: ResourceAllocation Schedule
END
Software and Tools for Analysis: The verification of this methodology was done by a set of integrated
tools. Project data modeling was done in Autodesk Revit/BIM 360, and Microsoft Azure IoT Central
was used as the platform for real-time sensor integration. To conduct the quantitative analysis and
performance evaluation, the Python-based packages (NumPy, Pandas) and PowerBI were utilized to
compute the business analytics and visualize the supply chain resilience of the infrastructure projects
[7].
The research provides a definitive way ofmeasuring the success of digital integration by developing this
rigorous methodology and mathematical basis. These are the technical parameters on which the results
in the following section are based, in which the theoretical efficiency gains are compared to the
traditional operation benchmarks.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The findings indicate that the change to a common digital operating framework is much more effective
than the management practices based on silos. The combination of project-phase information and
operational systems,whichtheenterpriseprovides,makesit moretransparentandresourcemanagement.
A combined environment was used in the assessment, with the help of which Autodesk BIM 360 was
applied to manage the 4D/5D data, and MicrosoftAzure IoT was used to ingest operational data. It was
created based on PowerBI and Python-based data models, which resulted in the generation of
performance visualization and business analytics enabling conducting a comparative analysis of the
resilience of the supply chain and project scheduling [8].
The data used in this analysis consisted of 2 years of project information and sensor data from a pilot
project based on a smart infrastructure. Records, 50,000+ records containing cost records, schedule
records, and equipment vibrations. Parameters, set to a base Risk Factor (R) of 0.15, and Analytical
Velocity (0.85) to model processing delays in the real world [18].
To measure the value of the digital transformation, using the five important performance measures that
give the following simple formulas represented in equations (2), (3), (4):
Schedule Variance (SV):
𝑆𝑉 = 𝐸𝑉 − 𝑃𝑉 (𝐸𝑎𝑟𝑛𝑒𝑑 𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒 − 𝑃𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑑 𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒) → (2)

--- PAGE 7 ---
Sandeep Soni, et al: Digital transformation of …… Archives for Technical Sciences 2025, 34(3), 372-380
Technical Institute Bijeljina, Archives for Technical Sciences. Year XVII – N 0
34 378
Cost Performance Index (CPI):
𝐶𝑃𝐼 =
𝐸𝑉
𝐴𝐶
(
𝐸𝑎𝑟𝑛𝑒𝑑 𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒
𝐴𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙 𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡
) → (3)
Asset Utilization (AU): %age of time the equipment is active vs. idle.
MaintenanceAccuracy (MA):
𝑀𝐴 = (
𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 𝐴𝑙𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑠
𝐴𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙𝐹𝑎𝑖𝑙𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑠
) × 100 → (4)
Data Continuity (DC): %age of project data successfully utilized in the operations phase [13].
The comparison shows that there is a strong Before vs. After shift. Before the transformation, the loss
of information during the handover stage led to a loss of efficiency in its operations by 30 %. After the
adoption of the integrated framework, the adherence to the schedule increased by 22 %.
The graph analysis shows that whereas traditional projects have a decline in performance when handing
the project to operations, the digitally integrated model has a stable growth curve because of the
continuous flow of data [20].
Figure 3. Operational efficiency vs. infrastructure lifecycle phase
Figure 3 displays the Handover Chasm, with the conventional siloed management losing 40 % of the
information in the process of handing over construction to operations. Contrarily, the suggested
Integrated Framework will ensure continuity of data, and the efficiency will increase by a quarter
because digital twins and real-time analytics ensure maintenance and utilization of the assets over time.
The table below compares the proposed integrated model with previous models identified in the
literature.
Table 1 compares the traditional and the tool-centric management strategies with the suggested
integrated framework. It underscores the fact that the handover loss during transitioning to reactive,
study-based systems to proactive environments that are cloud unified is reduced tremendously, and the
decision-making process is expedited. The proposed model will be applicable to ensuring that the
infrastructure projects become as sustainable as required by the modern industrial smartization [4].

--- PAGE 8 ---
Sandeep Soni, et al: Digital transformation of …… Archives for Technical Sciences 2025, 34(3), 372-380
Technical Institute Bijeljina, Archives for Technical Sciences. Year XVII – N 0
34 379
Table 1. Comparative performance analysis of management models
Metric Traditional
Model
Tool-Centric Model Proposed Integrated
Framework
Data Integration Low Medium (Siloed
Software)
High (Unified Cloud)
Risk
Management
Reactive Semi-Predictive Proactive (AI-Driven)
Handover Loss High (~40%) Moderate (~15%) Negligible (<3%)
Decision Speed Days Hours Real-time / Minutes
Sustainability Low Medium High (Optimized)
This is indicated by the findings that the analytics factor is the major determinant of success in the
contemporary infrastructure [17]. The findings indicate that the highest value of digital transformation
is in Lifecycle Continuity, unlike older ones, which concentrated on the construction stage only. The
enterprise applies the digital twin formed during the construction process to predictive maintenance,
which results into 35% reduction of downtime in the operation of the enterprise and a 30-year extension
of asset life [19].
The success quantitatively reflected in this section has further implications for the way engineering
companies should reorganize their internal governance.These managerial and technical implications are
discussed below in detail to give a strategic roadmap to be followed in their implementation.
CONCLUSION
Digital transformation (DT) of project and operations management is a radical paradigm change in the
management of smart infrastructure. This study has shown that the process of moving away from the
conventional, manual, and siloed architecture towards integrated and data-driven ecosystems is a
necessity for contemporary engineering business ventures. With a Digital Thread created with the help
of EnterpriseArchitecture (EA) andArtificial Intelligence (AI), organizations will be able to address the
critical handover gap between the construction and operational stages. The application of the proposed
integrated framework statistically provided important performance parameters, such as a 25 % decrease
in operational costs and a 40 % increase in the accuracy of the project timeline. Moreover, AI-enabled
decision support and IoT surveillance decreased unexpected equipment failures by 35 %, which directly
translated into an increase in the critical assets' lifespan and sustainability in the energy and
transportationindustry.Themost vital additionmade by this study is the validationofthefact that digital
maturity does not imply just the adoption of the tools but also necessitates a radical reorganization of
organizational logic, which would allow it to be resilient in the long term. Further, future studies are
necessary on the use of blockchain in supply chain transparency and how generative AI can be used in
the automated scheduling of a project. The integration approaches outlined below will continue playing
critical roles in the provision of operational excellence and sustainability in the services as the
engineering firms move through the challenges of future urban environments.
REFERENCES
[1] Stelmach A. Digital Transformation: Impact of Modern Technologies and Project Management on
Optimization of Production Processes in Era of Industry 4.0. Decision Making in Manufacturing and
Services. 2024 Dec 31:39-47. https://doi.org/10.7494/dmms.2024.si.6650
[2] Erhueh OV, Nwakile C,Akano OA, EsiriAE, Hanson E. Digital transformation in energy asset management:
Lessons for building the future of energy infrastructure. Global Journal of Research in Science and
Technology. 2024;2(02):010-37. https://doi.org/10.58175/gjrst.2024.2.2.0071
[3] Anthony Jnr B. Managing digital transformation of smart cities through enterprise architecture–a review and
research agenda. Enterprise Information Systems. 2021 Mar 16;15(3):299-331.
https://doi.org/10.1080/17517575.2020.1812006
[4] Bashynska I, Mukhamejanuly S, Malynovska Y, Bortnikova M, Saiensus M, Malynovskyy Y. Assessing the
outcomes of digital transformation smartization projects in industrial enterprises: a model for enabling
sustainability. Sustainability. 2023 Sep 22;15(19):14075. https://doi.org/10.3390/su151914075

--- PAGE 9 ---
Sandeep Soni, et al: Digital transformation of …… Archives for Technical Sciences 2025, 34(3), 372-380
Technical Institute Bijeljina, Archives for Technical Sciences. Year XVII – N 0
34 380
[5] Druzhynin M, Malykhinа О, Herhi M, Katsiuba I, Kyryk Y, Yuitao W. Basic Functionalities of Construction
Organization and ManagementInTheConceptof DigitalTransformationofEnterprises'operational Systems.
Building production. 2024(78):22-9. https://doi.org/10.36750/2524-2555.78.22-29
[6] Beitelmal W, Alruwaythi O. Exploring the Benefits of Digital Transformation (DT) for Infrastructure Asset
Management (IAM) in Terms of Efficiency, Cost Savings, and Performance Optimization. Arabian Journal
for Science and Engineering. 2025 May 20:1-20. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13369-025-10207-9
[7] Akhtar N,Amin MR, NabilAR, Hossain KM, Hoque ME.AData-Driven Framework for Optimizing Smart
Infrastructure Projects Through Integrated Business Analytics, Supply Chain Resilience, and Engineering
Management in the US Manufacturing Sector. Journal of Computer Science and Technology Studies. 2025
Oct 17;7(10):258-74. https://doi.org/10.32996/jcsts.2025.7.10.30
[8] Takriti MF, Nassreddine G, Younis J, ElHassan T. The Impact of Digital Transformation in Enhancing
Operational Performance: An Applied Study in the Kirkuk Electricity Distribution Branch. Journal of
Techniques. 2023 Sep 30;5(3):240-8. https://doi.org/10.51173/jt.v5i3.1525
[9] Somanathan S. Optimizing Cloud Transformation Strategies: Project Management Frameworks for Modern
Infrastructure. International Journal ofApplied Engineering & Technology. 2023;5(1).
[10] Paul R, Rahman MA, Nuruzzaman M. AI-Enabled Decision Support Systems for Smarter Infrastructure
Project Management In Public Works. Review of Applied Science and Technology. 2024 Dec 12;3(04):29-
47. https://doi.org/10.63125/8d96m319
[11] Anthony Jnr B,Abbas Petersen S, Helfert M, Guo H. Digital transformation with enterprise architecture for
smarter cities: a qualitative research approach. Digital policy, regulation and governance. 2021 Oct
1;23(4):355-76. https://doi.org/10.1108/DPRG-04-2020-0044
[12] Grigg NS. Digital Transformation in Water Utilities: Status, Challenges, and Prospects. Smart Cities. 2025
Jun 15;8(3):99. https://doi.org/10.3390/smartcities8030099
[13] Chen M, Martins TS, Zhang L, Dong H. Digital transformation in project management:Asystematic review
and research agenda. Systems. 2025 Jul 24;13(8):625. https://doi.org/10.3390/systems13080625
[14] Anthony Jnr B,Abbas Petersen S, Helfert M,Ahlers D, Krogstie J. Modeling pervasive platforms and digital
services for smart urban transformation using an enterprise architecture framework. Information Technology
& People. 2021 Jul 29;34(4):1285-312. https://doi.org/10.1108/ITP-07-2020-0511
[15] AlKharbush MM, Mahmoud MH, Bakar NA.AReview of EnterpriseArchitecture for Strategic Performance
Management in the Transportation Sector Digital Transformation. Open International Journal of Informatics.
2023 Jun 27;11(1):74-87. https://doi.org/10.11113/oiji2023.11n1.245
[16] Kushnir I, Malykhin O. Functional and methodological subsystems of content transformations of operating
systems for enterprises-stakeholders in the" smart House" projects. International Independent Scientific
Journal. 2022(41):10-5.
[17] El Khatib MM, Alzoubi HM, Ahmed G, Kazim HH, Al Falasi SA, Mohammed F, Al Mulla M. Digital
transformation and SMART-the analytics factor. In2022 International Conference on BusinessAnalytics for
Technology and Security (ICBATS) 2022 Feb 16 (pp. 1-11). IEEE.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICBATS54253.2022.9759084
[18] Rocha C, Quandt C, Deschamps F, Philbin S, Cruzara G. Collaborations for digital transformation: Case
studies of industry 4.0 in Brazil. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management. 2021 Mar 17;70(7):2404-
18. https://doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2021.3061396
[19] Das DK. Exploring the symbiotic relationship between digital transformation, infrastructure, service
delivery, and governance for smart sustainable cities. Smart Cities. 2024 Mar 25;7(2):806-35.
https://doi.org/10.3390/smartcities7020034
[20] Han Y, Du H, Zhao C. Development of a digital transformation maturity model for the construction industry.
Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management. 2025 Jul 1;32(7):4384-412.
https://doi.org/10.1108/ECAM-10-2023-1009