--- PAGE 1 ---
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
https://doi.org/10.1007/s41471-023-00154-2
Schmalenbachs Zeitschrift für betriebswirtschaftliche Forschung (2023) 75:303–343
Data or Business First?—Manufacturers’
Transformation Toward Data-driven Business Models
Bastian Stahl · Björn Häckel · Daniel Leuthe · Christian Ritter
Received: 16 May 2022 / Accepted: 20 January 2023 / Published online: 15 February 2023
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract Driven by digital technologies, manufacturers aim to tap into data-driven
business models, in which value is generated from data as a complement to physical
products. However, this transformation can be complex, as different archetypes of
data-driven business models require substantially different business and technical
capabilities. While there are manifold contributions to research on technical ca-
pability development, an integrated and aligned perspective on both business and
technology capabilities for distinct data-driven business model archetypes is needed.
This perspective promisesto enhance research’s understanding of this transformation
and offers guidance for practitioners. As maturity models have proven to be valu-
able tools in capability development, we follow a design science approach to develop
a maturity model for the transformation toward archetypal data-driven business mod-
els. To provide an integrated perspective on business and technology capabilities,
the maturity model leverages a layered enterprise architecture model. By applying
and evaluating in use at two manufacturers, we find two different transformation
approaches, namely ‘data first’ and ‘business first’. The resulting insights highlight
Consent for publication This manuscript does not contain personal data. It is therefore not possible
to draw conclusions about individuals or organizations. All recordings in the context of the data
collection were made with the consent of the parties involved.
Availability of data and material The authors confirm that the data supporting the findings of this
study are available within the article.
Bastian Stahl · Björn Häckel · Daniel Leuthe · Christian Ritter
Research Center Finance & Information Management, Augsburg, Germany
Bastian Stahl · Björn Häckel · Daniel Leuthe
University of Applied Sciences Augsburg, Augsburg, Germany
 Bastian Stahl · Björn Häckel · Daniel Leuthe · Christian Ritter
Branch Business & Information Systems Engineering of the Fraunhofer FIT, Alter
Postweg 101, 86159 Augsburg, Germany
E-Mail: bastian.stahl@fim-rc.de
K

--- PAGE 2 ---
304 Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343
the model’s integrative perspective’s value for research to improve the understand-
ing of this transformation. For practitioners, the maturity model allows a status quo
assessment and derives fields of action to develop the capabilities required for the
aspired data-driven business model.
Keywords Data-driven business models · Data-driven services · Data analytics ·
Manufacturing · Enterprise architecture.
JEL L60 · O14 · O32
1 Introduction
In today’s digitally connected world, data has become a valuable asset and has
been dubbed ‘the new oil’ (Bhageshpur 2019). Digital technologies continuously
produce increasing amounts of structured and unstructured data driving the trend
toward big data. Data can be collected, processed, and analyzed to derive valuable
information, insights, and recommendations (LaValle, et al. 2011; Herden 2020).
Especially for manufacturers, whose complex physical machines continuously gen-
erate valuable data while operated, this bears great economic potential (Müller and
Buliga 2019). For those companies, data-driven business models (DDBMs) are an
emerging strategic option that can tackle dwindling margins in pure product sales,
strengthen customer loyalty, help garner competitive advantages, or even tap new
markets (Voigt et al. 2021; Kowalkowski et al. 2017). In DDBMs, data-driven ser-
vices make a significant contribution to value creation, delivery, and capture (Kühne
and Böhmann 2020; Hunke et al. 2019). However, there are very different options
for configuring data-driven services and physical products in a DDBM to deliver
enhanced customer value (Hunke, et al. 2021). Research has therefore examined sys-
tematization approaches for this field, such as taxonomies or archetypes (Davenport
and Bean 2018; Hartmann et al. 2016). Especially in practice, archetypal DDBMs
offer a concrete strategic orientation for the transformation towards DDBMs as they
systematically characterize configurations of business models (Müller and Buliga
2019). In this context, archetypes depict an aligned set of business model com-
ponents that help decision-makers to develop a clearer understanding of how an
aspired DDBM creates, delivers, and captures value (Pieroni et al. 2020; Bergman
et al. 2022).
For instance, some manufacturers strive to become a ‘data provider’ by mak-
ing data (e.g., production data to track performance) accessible and useful to their
customers. While the manufacturer solely provides the data via defined interfaces,
customers can then leverage this data to create benchmarks or dashboards. In con-
trast, others seek to position themselves as a ‘recommendation provider’. In this
DDBM archetype, manufacturers perform sophisticated data processing and analyt-
ics to derive actionable recommendations (Zonta et al. 2020; Hunke et al. 2021).
Hence, DDBMs can vary greatly regarding their technical requirements and value
proposition for customers. This poses a challenge to manufacturers, as they must de-
velop capabilities appropriately and aligned to the DDBM archetype to address both
K

--- PAGE 3 ---
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343 305
business and technical demands (Hunke et al. 2019; Azkan et al. 2021; Rashed and
Drews 2021). For instance, manufacturers must develop business capabilities for the
successful monetization and marketing of their data-driven offering (Baltuttis et al.
2022; Häckel et al. 2021). New, complementary technological capabilities are also
needed for data processing and delivery based on proper tooling and infrastructure
(Frank et al. 2019; Weber et al. 2017). Consequently, especially for incumbent and
product-centric manufacturers, this implies a tremendous shift in the organizational
rationale and requires the structured development of new capabilities that are both
of a business and technological nature (Comuzzi and Patel 2016).
To guide transformative endeavors and structure capability development, matu-
rity models (MMs) are valuable artifacts offering guidance for research and practice
(Mettler 2011; Becker et al. 2009). From a research perspective, MMs represent
theories of how organizational capabilities develop progressively along an expected,
desired, or logical maturation path (Pöppelbuß and Röglinger 2011). As such, MMs
strive to disentangle required capabilities and offer descriptive knowledge (Gregor
and Hevner 2013). In practice, MMs are useful for assessing an organization’s status
quo, determining a desired target state, and identifying fields of action (Pöppelbuß
and Röglinger 2011). Indeed, existing MMs offer valuable contributions to lever-
age data in the manufacturing sector. Literature reviews of existing MMs in the
manufacturing context indicate that existing research has extensively investigated
technological capabilities (Hein-Pensel et al. 2023). Hence, many existing works
focus on technological topics, such as big data analytics (Comuzzi and Patel 2016)
or data science (Gökalp et al. 2021). Thus, these models provide tangible capabilities
needed to leveragedata for value creation, for example, by extractingequipment con-
dition information (Comuzzi and Patel 2016). In contrast, another research stream
focuses more on how to capture value from DDBM and therefore sheds light on
business capabilities (Parvinen et al. 2020; Woroch and Strobel 2021). For instance,
Woroch and Strobel (2021) point out that DDBMs require dedicated capabilities to
formulate new value propositions and enable customer co-creation.
However, research indicates that an integrated, organization-spanning perspective
on business and technology is needed for successful mastery of DDBM transfor-
mation, just as demonstrated by Hausladen and Schosser (2020) for the aviation
sector. Hence, for the manufacturing industry, the understanding of the technical
and business capabilities for DDBMs is limited (Favoretto et al. 2022; Hein-Pensel
et al. 2023). While archetypal DDBMs, such as those of Hunke et al. (2021), repre-
sent desirable digital transformation outcomes for manufacturers and give strategic
orientation, it remains unclear what technology and business capabilities are needed
to master them. This shortcoming leaves practitioners without tangible guidance on
what technical and business capabilities archetypal DDBMs require (Hunke et al.
2021). Against this background, this paper seeks to address this research need by
answering the following research question (RQ):
RQ What capabilities do manufacturers require to transform toward distinct
archetypal data-driven business models?
Having proven their worth as artifacts for capability development in the context
of manufacturing (e.g., Chen et al. (2022), Gökalp et al. (2021) and Sjödin et al.
K

--- PAGE 4 ---
306 Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343
(2018)), this paper develops an integrated DDBM MM (DDBM3). We use the pro-
cedure model by Becker et al. (2009) to develop a MM closely aligned with three
practice-grounded key requirements based on the Design Science Research (DSR)
paradigm (Hevner et al. 2004; Peffers et al. 2007). To evaluate our model, we use the
criteria developed by Sonnenberg and vom Brocke (2012). We assess the model’s
real-world applicability and usefulness by applying the DDBM3 to two incumbent
manufacturers. We involve focus groups comprised of industry experts to assess
the manufacturers’ status quo and the target state of their DDBM. We also conduct
semi-structured interviews to identify actions that led to the assessed status quo and
investigate the approaches taken by the two manufacturers.
This paper’s contributions to the discourse on DDBM in the manufacturing sec-
tor are twofold. Firstly, this work’s central artifact, the developed and evaluated
DDBM3, provides descriptive knowledge on capabilities required to offer specific
archetypal DDBMs (Gregor and Hevner 2013). This artifact builds on established
DDBM archetypes and enterprise architecture models to provide a hitherto untaken
integrated and aligned perspective on DDBM capabilities. In practice, the DDBM3
offers guidance when transforming toward a defined DDBM and serves as a diag-
nostic tool. Secondly, as evident in our application of the DDBM3 for evaluation
purposes, the DDBM3 provides an integrated lens for examining the DDBM trans-
formation. In our evaluation, we find that the two manufacturers transform toward
DDBM differently—by either being more mature in business (‘business first’) or
in technology capabilities (‘data first’). These initial findings may stimulate fur-
ther research to leverage the DDBM3 as an investigative lens to examine patterns
of DDBM transformations and shed light on how manufactures transform toward
DDBM.
2 Theoretical Background
2.1 Data-Driven Business Models and Archetypes in Manufacturing
In the manufacturing sector, cyber-physical systems and the industrial internet of
things have led more and more companies to get involved in data collection, anal-
ysis, and utilization (Häckel et al. 2019; Cui et al. 2020). Manufacturers use data
internally to improve decision-making and enhance efficiency (Hess et al. 2016;
LaValle et al. 2011; Sjödin et al. 2018). Furthermore, manufacturers can leverage
data analytics to create new, data-driven service offerings for their customers by in-
cluding data as the key resource (Azkan et al. 2021; Hunke et al. 2021). For instance,
data-based alert systems and predictive maintenance services provide the customer
with maintenance cost reduction, optimized machine operation, or increased ma-
chine availability (Hartmann et al. 2016; Bertolini et al. 2021). As a result of these
new technical opportunities, DDBMs are gaining importance for manufacturers as
a strategic option for differentiation (Voigt et al. 2021). Nevertheless, the concept
of the ‘business model’ is not uniformly defined, and literature provides a wide
range of definitions (e.g., Chesbrough (2002), Johnson et al. (2008), Osterwalder
and Pigneur (2013)). Osterwalder and Pigneur (2013) highlight the business model
K

--- PAGE 5 ---
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343 307
canvas (BMC), which they cite as a popular approach in practice thanks to its con-
ciseness (Müller and Pfleger 2014). They conceptualize business models using nine
building blocks (i.e., customer segments and relationships, key partners, resources
and activities, value propositions and channels, revenue streams and cost structure)
that are assigned to four overarching categories (i.e., clients, organization, sales,
and financials) (Kotarba 2018). This conceptualization mainly addresses the out-
ward-facing elements of a business model and describes external mechanisms such
as customer offerings and interactions (Jonker and Faber 2021). When evaluated
through the lens of Porter’s (1985) value chain, it becomes clear that internally-
directed capabilities are only superficially addressed in the BMC (Joyce and Paquin
2016). An organization’s inward-facing value creation activities are multi-layered
and can be subdivided into primary, strategically relevant, and supporting activities
(Porter 2014). Hence, we follow Teece’s definition of business models as the “design
or architecture of the value creation, delivery, and capture mechanisms of a firm”
as it covers both internal and external views (Teece 2010, p. 172). Consequently,
DDBMs can be defined as business models in which data-driven services contribute
significantly to value creation, delivery, and capture (Kühne and Böhmann 2020;
Hunke et al. 2019).
For the manufacturing industry, the development of DDBMs builds on the ex-
ploitation of data to deliver additional customer value and enhance the utility of the
physical product (Lehrer et al. 2018; Burström et al. 2021). However, as there are
multiple options to enfold business models with data-driven services, Hunke et al.
(2021) conceptualize four archetypal DDBMs, characterized by their data-driven
service (i.e., data provider, insight provider, recommendation provider, and digital
solution provider). These archetypes enable the identification of strategies for real-
izing DDBMs with distinct value offerings for the customer (Hunke et al. 2021). In
the first archetype, manufacturers provide customers with (product) data beyond the
physical product (data provider). The data is only moderately processed, provided
in a standardized form, and subject to descriptive analytics (Hartmann et al. 2016).
Offerings include, for example, aggregated reports or dashboards on machine uti-
lization. The second DDBM archetype is based on delivering data-based insights,
which are supportive and actionable for the customer (Hunke et al. 2021). In these
cases, the provider processes the data to meet specific objectives associated with
a customer’s needs (Hunke et al. 2019). This is achieved by applying diagnostic
analytics—i.e., highlighting whether or not something has happened and delivering
insights into why this is the case (Hunke et al. 2021). Examples of use-cases include
digital alarms triggered when machines or processes malfunction. As a third option,
manufacturers can offer data-based recommendations. This business model aims to
provide tailored decision support for customers. Here, the interaction between sup-
plier and customer increases significantly, and integration into the customer’s value
creation is facilitated. Predictive maintenance services are an example of this type
of offering. Finally, manufacturers can act as digital solution providers, opening up
novel ways of doing business, e.g., by turning into a smart data platform provider
(Beverungen et al. 2019, 2021). In this context, value is created through unique dig-
ital information, and the physical product recedes into the background (Beverungen
et al. 2021). Manufacturers, in order not to end up in an unreflective, technology-
K

--- PAGE 6 ---
308 Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343
driven ‘catch-all’ approach, must identify and develop capabilities required to master
their aspired DDBM (Bertolini et al. 2021; Hunke et al. 2021).
2.2 Structuring the Data-Driven Business Model Transformation
Many manufacturers are incumbents whose organizational logic is tightly bound
to the physical product. Consequently, striving toward a specific DDBM archetype
requires manufacturers to embark on a transformation to develop business and tech-
nologycapabilities to create, deliver, and capturevalue based on data (Foss and Saebi
2017; Kotarba 2018). For instance, in the case of a DDBM providing data-based
insights, manufacturers need capabilities to plan, roll out, and maintain connected
machinery that collects data and creates a proper use profile (value creation). Next,
the manufacturer must be capable of storing and processing the obtained data to de-
rive descriptive, diagnostic, or prescriptive insights about the machinery’s operation.
These insights must be tailored to the customer’s requirements (value offer) (Sarker
2021). Finally, the manufacturers need capabilities to make the insights available to
the customer, for instance, via digital channels, and define a suitable monetization
strategy to enable a viable business, e.g., pay-per-use (value capture) (Häckel et al.
2021).
Consequently, both the outward-facing and primarily business-related capabilities
of the business model (e.g., customer connections or value proposition) and the tech-
nology-associated inward-facing capabilities and structures of an organization (e.g.,
processes or infrastructure) are required to enable DDBMs (Hausladen and Schosser
2020). Thus, to master any type of DDBM, manufacturers need to transform toward
an aligned organizational structure that provides the necessary capabilities (Rashed
and Drews 2021). In this context, enterprise architecture (EA) models are a valuable
tool for obtaining an integrated view of an organization and for outlining reference
architectures (Gampfer et al. 2018; Gong and Janssen 2021). The commonly-used
frameworks for EA—e.g., TOGAF (The Open Group 2018) or RAMI4.0 (Hernández
et al. 2020)—all involve a hierarchical, multilevel layered structure to comprehen-
sively cover the organization’s elements (Winter and Fischer 2006). Within this
layered structure, the outward-facing ‘business model’ represents the top layer, with
‘(technical) infrastructure’ providing the basis of these models. The existing mod-
els include various intermediary layers connecting these two edges (Gampfer et al.
2018)—for example, ‘business processes’ (Šaša and Krisper 2011), ‘people and ap-
plication systems’ (Pereira and Sousa 2005; Urbach and Röglinger 2019), and ‘data
and information’ (Gong and Janssen 2021). Their ability to provide a socio-techni-
cal perspective on organizations (Appelbaum 1997; Baxter and Sommerville 2011)
means that EA models are suited to outlining referential, aligned architectures that
enable DDBMs at different organizational levels (Rashed and Drews 2020). In this
work, we use the EA model according to Urbach and Röglinger (2019) (Fig. 1
Layered Enterprise Architecture Model (Urbach and Röglinger 2019; Urbach et al.
2021)), as it combines both technology and business layers. The socio-technical ori-
entation of this model is particularly suitable for transformative processes associated
with digitalization (Cleven et al. 2014).
K

--- PAGE 7 ---
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343 309
Fig. 1 Layered enterprise architecture model (Urbach and Röglinger 2019; Urbach et al. 2021)
Within this five-layered EA model, the top ‘business model’ layer includes out-
ward-facing aspects of DDBMs—for instance, value offer and customer interaction
(Vanauer et al. 2015; Rashed and Drews 2021). The subsequent intermediate layer
‘business processes’ relates to processual activities to operationalize the business
model (Pathak et al. 2021). For example, a DDBM requires the restructuring of
existing business and IT processes to ensure better internal and external data as-
similation. The EA layer of ‘people and applications’ depicts human resources,
associated competencies, and application systems that employees work with (e.g.,
data scientists, data engineers, or product owners) (Pathak et al. 2021). The ‘dataand
information’ layer refers to information and data from the organization that is being
collected, processed, and stored, and refers to how this data is managed (e.g., data
quality management) (Rashed and Drews 2021). The bottom layer, ‘infrastructure’,
consists of IT systems, sensory-equipped machinery, and other hardware resources
based on cyber-physical systems and the industrial internet of things (Pathak et al.
2021). EA models have proven to be particularly valuable in the implementation of
DDBMs as the models can be used as reference architectures to highlight organiza-
tional configurations aligned with certain DDBMs (Rashed and Drews 2020). Yet,
while EA models provide an integrated perspective on a target state, they are limited
in their ability to provide insight as to how organizations might move toward such
a state and what capabilities need to be developed.
K

--- PAGE 8 ---
310 Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343
2.3 Capability Development and Maturity Models
MMs have become established managerial tools used to structure the development
of organizational capabilities (Mettler 2011). MMs map maturity paths by logically
grading maturity (maturity levels) and describing the distinctive capabilities or at-
tributes (e.g., in capability dimensions) of each level (Pöppelbuß and Röglinger
2011). MMs can be used for descriptive (determination of the status quo), pre-
scriptive (identification of target states), or comparative (e.g., by comparing several
companies based on a model) purposes (Becker et al. 2009). In practice, MMs are
instrumental in identifying deficiencies that may hinder the achievement of a ma-
ture, desired state (Olszak and Mach-Krol 2018). The number of MMs indicates
a promising approach for structuring capability development, including the DDBM
domain. Among the many extant MMs are technical frameworks and process models
for developing data analytics systems. The target groups for these MMs are organi-
zational units close to technology, such as IT, that focus on capability development
in technical domains—i.e., the lower EA layers (e.g., Olszak and Mach-Krol (2018),
Sjödin, et al. (2018)).For example, the Industrial Analytics Maturity Model (IAMM)
by O’Donovan et al. (2016) provides a clear focus on analytics and technology capa-
bilities in manufacturing. Other, more comprehensive MMs exist, combining tech-
nological, organizational, and, to some extent, business perspectives. These models
are managerial tools for organization-wide transformations. For instance, the big
data maturity model (BDMM) by Comuzzi and Patel (2016) broadens perspectives
on organizational issues such as ‘culture’, ‘strategic alignment’, or ‘processes’. This
approach has also been taken up by Gökalp et al. (2021), for example, and expanded
to include capability dimensions such as ‘vision and strategy’ and ‘knowledge man-
agement’. Nevertheless, existing research finds that the development of business-
related capabilities, such as interaction with the customer or monetization, are a par-
ticular challenge for established manufacturers (Baltuttis et al. 2022; Schroderus
et al. 2022; Kotarba 2018). However, providing an integrated perspective on which
business and technology capabilities are required to offer DDBMs in manufacturing
remains a gap in existing research (Hunke et al. 2021). Examples from other do-
mains indicate that integrated business and technology models can be effective tools
to structure the transformation toward DDBMs, as Hausladen and Schosser (2020)
demonstrate for the air transport sector. Therefore, this paper seeks to develop an
integrated MM that guides manufacturers in developing the required capabilities to
offer an archetypal DDBM.
3 Research Methodology
This paper follows the methodological DSR paradigm (Hevner et al. 2004; Gregor
and Hevner 2013), which aims to design solutions using various artifact forms
(e.g., constructs, models, or methods) to solve problems grounded in practice (vom
Brocke et al. 2020). Following Peffers et al. (2007), DSR is implemented as an
iterative, six-step process that starts with problem definition, defines goals, develops
and refines a solution, demonstrates or applies this solution, and evaluates whether
K

--- PAGE 9 ---
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343 311
the requirements have been met and the problem solved. Finally, the insights gained
are communicated.
While this procedure is designed to be applicable in developing various artifact
types, MMs represent a particular artifact type for which dedicated procedure mod-
els of the DSR paradigm exist (Mettler 2011). In particular, the procedure model
of Becker et al. (2009) represents an established methodological approach that pro-
poses specified DSR activities for the iterative development of MMs (Pöppelbuß
and Röglinger 2011; Stelzl et al. 2020). For instance, the procedure model includes
a comparison with existing modelsand the formulation of a developmentstrategy be-
fore the development of the artifact. In addition, the demonstration phase is enriched
with a transfer phase, wherein the developed model is prepared for the appropriate
application in business (e.g., by translating the MM into a software tool). While
Peffers et al. (2007) and Becker et al. (2009) focus on activities involved in the
Fig. 2 Research approach
K

--- PAGE 10 ---
312 Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343
DSR process, other works provide valuable insights into the evaluation of artifacts
(vom Brocke et al. 2020). Sonnenberg and vom Brocke (2012), for example, provide
four patterns and associated criteria for evaluating DSR activities (i.e., Eval 1–4)
and distinguish between ex-ante and ex-post evaluation. Ex-ante evaluation patterns
aim to justify the problem statement (e.g., the extent of the research need) and the
validity of design decisions (e.g., the internal consistency of design objectives). By
contrast, ex-post evaluation challenges the artifact in artificial (e.g., challenging the
model’s robustness) and naturalistic settings (e.g., the model’s usefulness in a real-
world demonstration) (Sonnenberg and vom Brocke 2012; vom Brocke et al. 2020).
In structuring our research, we follow the procedure model by Becker, et al. (2009)
and use the evaluation patterns developed by Sonnenberg and vom Brocke (2012)
to ensure the rigorous development of our MM. This paper comprises four main
phases, each comprising activities and a subsequent evaluation (Fig. 2).
The first phase in our approach is problem justification and the definition of re-
quirements. The second phase is comparing existing MMs and selecting a suitable
development strategy. The third phase comprises iterative model development and
artificial evaluation. The fourth phase is the application of the model and the accom-
panying naturalistic evaluation. In the four phases of our research approach, we used
various research techniques to ground data and, finally, to complete the evaluation
of the phase (Hausladen and Schosser 2020) (Fig. 3).
3.1 Phase 1: Problem Justification and Requirement Definition
In the first phase, we used the existing literature to substantiate the research needs
and justify the problem statement. Based on the research needs, we developed re-
quirements tailored to the needs of practitioners from manufacturing companies. We
conducted semi-structured interviews (Myers and Newman 2007) with eight experts
from two manufacturers to verify practical relevance from an ex-ante perspective.
Table 1 presents an overview of the manufacturers and industry experts interviewed.
The two manufacturers were chosen as a stratified sample (Robinson 2014). Both
are in the middle of the transformation to a DDBM, with the sales of physical
machinery being enhanced with data-driven services. Thus, the two companies are
Table 1 Overview of involved manufacturers and affiliated experts
Manufacturer 1 – Alpha Manufacturer 2 – Beta
Industry Machines for the automotive sector Industrial kitchen machines
Revenue C380M (2020) C844M (2020)
Employees 1,800 (2020) 2,300 (2019)
Practitioners
involved in the
research process
(ID & position)
A1 Director Digital Platformsa,b.c
A2 Product Manager Digital Solutionsa,b.c
A3 Data Analytics Specialistb
A4 Cloud Operations Architectb
A5 Head of Global Distributiona,c
B1 Service Director Data and
Analyticsa,b.c
B2 IT Managera,b.c
B3 Business Managera,b.c
B4 Service Director Global
Accountsa,b.c
a
Interview for problem and requirement definition
b
Participant in demonstration focus group
c
Interview for transformation paths
K

--- PAGE 11 ---
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343 313
Fig. 3 Application of the research approach
K

--- PAGE 12 ---
314 Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343
comparable in this respect and correspond to the defined user group of DDBMs. Im-
portantly, however, these two companies used different strategies to approach their
DDBM, and thus enabled us to familiarize ourselves with different ways of trans-
forming from a traditional manufacturer business model to a DDBM. In selecting
the interviewees, we aimed to capture independent expert opinions from business
and technical areas, as well as the intersection of the two, to ensure broad under-
standability and real-world relevance. The interviewees have significant knowledge
of their respective manufacturing companies and play a key role in the transition
to a DDBM. All interviews in our research approach lasted between 44 to 93min
and were conducted digitally and transcribed. For our research phase 1, we then
examined the transcripts in accordance with the criteria established by Sonnenberg
and vom Brocke (2012) to clarify the problem to be addressed by this paper and
to determine three reasonable requirements for the development of our artifact (see
Sect. 4).
3.2 Phase 2: Comparison of Existing Maturity Models
The second phase involved identifying existing MMs and examining whether these
already fulfilled the requirements. To this end, we identified existing works via
a structured literature review (Webster and Watson 2002; vom Brocke et al. 2015)
using the Web of Science, known for its high-quality citation data and for cover-
ing a broad range of disciplines (Zupic and Čater 2015). We used a two-part search
string for related research publications(Huang et al. 2015). The first part of the string
addressed the issue of data-related business (“data analytics” OR “data driven*”
OR “data-driven*” OR “machine learning” OR “big data” OR “artificial intelli-
gence”). The second part sought articles providing insights on relevant capabilities
of success factors (“maturity model” OR “capability framework” OR “actionable
practice*” OR “success factor*”). The initial search yielded 166 papers, which we
subsequently screened for title, abstract, and full text. We excluded papers that made
no substantive reference to success factors or capabilities of DDBMs and focused
on domains or research areas other than business or management (e.g., medicine
or educational sciences). Thus, we excluded 101 papers based on title screening,
11 based on abstract screening, and 13 after our analysis of the full paper. The
search resulted in 41 papers that addressed issues directly relating to our research
(e.g., papers identifying success factors or key challenges for DDBMs). These pa-
pers included ten related maturity models. Using forward and backward searches,
another five models were identified, leading to a final set of 15 related models. We
used a comparison table to decide whether these works fulfilled the requirements
derived from Phase 1 (Cuylen et al. 2016). The resulting ten models included in this
table fulfill at least one of our requirements. Based on this comparison, a develop-
ment strategy for the MM was selected. This could involve the complete redesign
of a model, the extension of an existing model, the combination of several models
to form a new model, or the transfer of structures or content from existing models
to new areas of application (Becker et al. 2009; Gregor and Hevner 2013). To create
an integrated model that would cover business and technology aspects not addressed
in existing models, we decided to develop a new model drawing on valuable struc-
K

--- PAGE 13 ---
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343 315
tures from existing models and existing research, such as EA models and DDBM
archetypes.
3.3 Phase 3: Model Development and Artificial Evaluation
In the third phase, the model was iteratively developed. In keeping with Becker
et al. (2009), we started designing the model’s architecture (i.e., maturity levels and
capability dimensions) before working on the matrix content. Following the require-
ments identified in Phase 1, the maturity levels were designed following archetypes
of business models to cover the rising sophistication of data-driven services and data
analytics with increasing maturity. For this purpose, we designed five maturity levels
corresponding with the analytics-based services archetypes of Hunke et al. (2021).
Subsequently, we developed the capability dimensions of the DDBM. To provide an
integrated perspective, including business and technology capabilities for DDBMs,
we drew guidance from the EA model of Urbach and Röglinger (2019) outlined
in Sect. 2. To identify the capability dimensions of the DDBM3, we deconstructed
existing models and assigned their capability dimensions to the levels of the EA
model. Based on this structure, it became clear that existing models comprehen-
sively covered the technological levels of the EA (i.e., ‘data and information’ and
‘infrastructure’).
Hence, we investigated other works which provided a business perspective on
DDBM. From these models, we extracted further capability dimensions (e.g., ‘value
proposition’ from Payne et al. (2017) and ‘sales and channel management’ from
Leiting et al. (2020)). We then developed the matrix content (i.e., the capabilities
per maturity level). Herein, we used descriptions from existing works or developed
new descriptions based on guidance from the literature. Overall, the development
of our model took place over three iterations. In the first iteration, we developed
the basic structure, which we then compared with existing models. In the second
iteration, we specified the initial matrix content. In the third iteration, we aligned
the capabilities horizontally (i.e., to the capability dimensions) and vertically (i.e.,
to the maturity levels). We completed this third phase of our research approach
by hosting an academic focus group involving eleven researchers in the field of
digital transformation. The workshop led us to make final changes—for example, we
adjusted descriptions to meet evaluation criteria such as completeness and internal
consistency (Sonnenberg and vom Brocke 2012).
3.4 Phase 4: Naturalistic Evaluation by Demonstration
A subsequent fourth phase involved a naturalistic evaluation by applying the model
to two real-world organizations (Sonnenberg and vom Brocke 2012). We applied
the model in two focus groups consisting of experts from the two selected man-
ufacturers (see Table 1) to assess the status quo and target state. As a qualitative
research method, focus groups are particularly suitable for this purpose as they allow
mutual inspiration and facilitate discussion among the participants (Tremblay et al.
2010; Stewart and Shamdasani 2014). A digital whiteboard was employed as a user-
friendly transfer medium to facilitate an assessment of the company’s status within
K

--- PAGE 14 ---
316 Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343
the focus group (Becker et al. 2009). The MM was displayed on the whiteboard
and the focus group participants could give their assessment independently of one
another in successive rounds (i.e., per capability dimension). To enable sensitivity
and specificity in their assessments, the participants were allowed to assess the status
as ‘in-between’ two capabilities. After each capability dimension, the individual as-
sessments were revealed to all participants. Based on the current state assessment in
all capability dimensions, particularly weak dimensions were identified, and options
for improvements were discussed. Finally, the participants reflected on the applica-
tion of the model to verify whether the model met the practical requirements. This
evaluation indicated high applicability and utility, as the integrated perspective of
business and technology supported the identification of shortcomings. The practi-
tioners thus concluded that the model was highly useful and effective for capturing
DDBM transformation.
Based on this, we use our model as an analytical lens to better understand what
actions (e.g., digitalization projects) the companies had implemented to reach the
current status quo. We performed semi-structured interviews (Miles and Huberman
2009)to outline actions taken within the last ten to fifteen yearsto achieve the current
status quo of DDBMs in each focus area of the MM. Firstly, we asked the interview
partners to explain their company’s overall DDBM approach. Secondly, we asked
them to describe initiatives and actions across all organizational layers. Thirdly,
we pinpointed challenges associated with DDBM development. All interviews were
digitally recorded and transcribed. In our analysis, we coded the interviews along
the structure of our MM. This enabled us to identify in each case a company’s
approach, the actions taken, and the challenges encountered.
4 Results
In this section, we present the results of our research, following the guidelines de-
veloped by Becker et al. (2009). Firstly, we describe the requirements we identified
as necessary to enable a possible solution. We then present the result of our compar-
ison between the requirements identified and existing MMs. Next, we present the
DDBM3 and its artificial evaluation. Finally, we offer insights on the naturalistic
evaluation of our model and on the transformation of manufacturers toward DDBM.
4.1 Phase 1: Design Requirements
As outlined in Sect. 3, we identified requirements for our model using eight in-
terviews with manufacturing practitioners. Below, we present three key require-
ments (R) for a MM supporting capability development among manufacturers in the
transition to DDBMs.
4.1.1 [R-1] Representation of Business Model Archetypes
Firstly, as interview partner B1 stated, “[...] a major challenge is to identify a clear
business modelwithinourtransformation activities.” The guidance offeredby the so-
K

--- PAGE 15 ---
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343 317
lution should refer to practice-oriented, clearly defined archetypes of DDBMs. This
will enable practitioners to identify a target state clearly. As A1 attested, “[...] for
us, having a clear business model vision is essential.” Moreover, the practitioners
demanded a continuum from providers of traditional products to providers of digital
solutions. This range was chosen to fully cover the manufacturing transformation
of the focus groups’ organizations: While both organizations are currently under-
going their DDBM transformation, all began as providers of physical products, i.e.,
machinery. The representation of DDBM archetypes was, thus, identified as strate-
gically important in that it may help to provide a long-term perspective on how
the business model could be further developed if competitive pressure continues to
increase at the product level.
4.1.2 [R-2] Completeness of EA Coverage
Secondly, the model should outline capabilities relevant to DDBM, including a busi-
ness and technology perspective. As outlined by interviewee B3, “[...] to structure
this [DDBM] transformation, it is essential to have a comprehensive perspective on
the organization that includesbusiness andtechnology.” Thus, the model should pro-
vide a comprehensive view of the organization, including the business (e.g., value
proposition, monetization strategies) and technical (e.g., infrastructure) capabilities.
This urgency was underpinned by A2 stating that “[...] in previous projects, we of-
ten looked at either technology or business principles. However, it is becoming clear
that these perspectives need to be considered jointly so that the entire organization
remains focused on one objective.”
4.1.3 [R-3] Completeness of Capability Descriptions
Thirdly, the MM should clearly describe the capabilities of specific business model
archetypes. Interview partner A2 stated that “[...] for us it is essential to have a de-
scription of the capabilities rather than just some keywords.” Clear descriptions en-
able both the classification of one’s own organization (descriptive) and the identifi-
cation of future steps for building more mature capabilities in the transition to the
target state (prescriptive).
4.2 Phase 2: Feature Comparison
In keeping with our DSR approach, both our problem statement and design require-
ments are grounded in practice. Based on the requirements, existing models can be
identified. Thus, we could determine whether existing research met our requirements
and, if not, we could derive a development strategy for a MM (Becker et al. 2009).
Our structured literature review, presented in Sect. 3, initially identified 15 re-
lated works. We evaluated existing models against the three requirements. For this
purpose, comparison tables provide a useful means to conduct a feature comparison
and evaluate whether the requirements have been sufficiently fulfilled by existing
works (Cuylen et al. 2016; Stelzl et al. 2020). During the screening process, ten
models were identified that at least partially fulfilled the requirements (Table 2).
K

--- PAGE 16 ---
318 Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343
Table 2 Comparison with related MMs
Requirements
Related work R-1 Representation of
business model archetypes
R-2 Completeness
of EA coverage
R-3 Completeness of
capability descriptions
Chen et al. (2022) – (✔) ✔
Comuzzi and Patel
(2016)
– (✔) ✔
Ge et al. (2020) – (✔) (✔)
Gökalp et al.
(2021)
– (✔) ✔
Hausladen and
Schosser (2020)
(✔) ✔ ✔
O’Donovan et al.
(2016)
– (✔) ✔
Olszak and Mach-
Krol (2018)
– (✔) ✔
Retrialisca and
Chotijah (2020)
– (✔) ✔
Sjödin et al.
(2018)
– (✔) ✔
Weber et al. (2017) – (✔) (✔)
– not fulfilled; (✔) partly fulfilled; ✔ fulfilled
We excluded five models during the screening process as these either could not be
classified as MMs (i.e., Grossman (2018), Chen et al. (2017), Frank et al. (2019)),
did not describe any capabilities related to DDBMs (e.g., Farah (2017)), or focused
solely on technology rather than providing an integrated perspective on the company
(e.g., the MLOps MM of John et al. (2021)).
We found that the remaining ten MMs provided descriptions of their model’s
capabilities (R-3). Only Ge et al. (2020) and Weber et al. (2017) offered notably
limited insights on the outlined capabilities (e.g., in the form of a capability index).
Except for the model of Hausladen and Schosser (2020), the MMs only partially
fulfilled the requirement for comprehensiveness, i.e., R-2. We examined whether the
models covered the entire EA (i.e., technical, organizational, and business aspects).
We found that coverage of business aspects was broadly lacking in the models
studied. Many papers examined the technical and organizational capabilities for
value creationrather thanvalue deliveryandcapture.Therefore,the needforbusiness
model archetypes specified in R-1 was not fully addressed by any model. The model
by Hausladen and Schosser (2020) offers business model references for airlines, yet
the potential for generalization is limited, especially for manufacturers.
Existing models provide valuable descriptions of DDBM capabilities, particularly
in the technical and organizational domains. However, the business domain remains
mainly unaddressed and poses a considerable challenge for manufacturers. Against
this background, it seems reasonable to draw on and combine insights from existing
models and related models (e.g., EA models and business model archetypes) to
form a new model, which can be supplemented by elements from business models
(Becker et al. 2009).
K

--- PAGE 17 ---
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343 319
4.3 Phase 3: Description of the Data-Driven Business Model Maturity Model
In developing our DDBM3, we followed a top-down approach, initially defining
maturity levels and capability dimensions (Becker et al. 2009). The model was
developed as a continuous MM, implying that it spans a matrix between capability
dimensions and increasing maturity levels, the content of which is fully specified
(Stelzl et al. 2020; van Steenbergen et al. 2010). The matrix content of the DDBM3
thus describes the minimal archetypical capabilities required by a manufacturer if
they are to offer a specific DDBM archetype. In the following, the basic structure
of the DDBM3 is presented (Fig. 4), the maturity levels are defined (Table 3), and
the capability dimensions are described (Table 4).
To fulfill R-2, the DDBM3 does not draw on abstract maturity levels. Instead,
it builds on the DDBM archetypes by Hunke et al. (2021). These archetypes are
empirically grounded and provide discrete characteristics that increase with maturity
levels (Table 3). Firstly, the relevance of data-driven services to the overall business
model increases with maturity. Secondly, the depth of data processing and analytics
increases with maturity levels. Thirdly, customization of the digital component of
the value proposition increases. Moreover,we extended the archetypes with an initial
maturity level—‘product provider’—based on requirement R-2. The DDBM3 thus
comprises five maturity levels that cover the continuum from ‘product provider’ to
‘digital solution provider’.
Next, we defined the capability dimensions of the DDBM3. To provide an inte-
grated perspective, including business and technology capabilities, we drew on the
EA model by Urbach and Röglinger (2019) as focus areas. Capability dimensions
extracted from existing literature were clustered and assigned to these focus areas.
Overall, the DDBM3 consists of 22 capability dimensions (Table 4).
In the DDBM3, the focus area ‘business model’ includes capabilities that refer
to the organization’s market interface. Hence, this focus area includes those com-
Fig. 4 Structure of the DDBM3
K

--- PAGE 18 ---
320 Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343
Table 3 Maturity levels of the DDBM3
Maturity
Level
Definition
Product
provider
There is no DDBM and thus no revenue is generated from data (e.g., sales of machinery
and maintenance activities) (Hunke et al. 2021). Customization is performed at the
physical product level (Wang et al. 2017)
Data
provider
The DDBM enhances the product by providing processed data to the customer (e.g.,
data delivery via programming interfaces or simple visualization via dashboards)
(Hunke et al. 2021; Sarker 2021; Chen et al. 2011). Customization is performed via
the preparation and aggregation of data through descriptive analytics (Kohtamäki et al.
2019)
Insight
provider
The DDBM includes the delivery of diagnostic, supportive insights (e.g., alerts, target
benchmarking) (Hunke et al. 2021; Sarker 2021). Customer-specific, primarily diag-
nostic insights are provided by leveraging domain knowledge and diagnostic analytics
(Lehrer et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2019)
Recommenda-
tion
provider
The DDBM is created by providing recommendations based on predictive analytics
(e.g., data-driven root cause analysis, automatic situational recommendations) (Hunke
et al. 2021; Sarker 2021). Customer-tailored decision support based on comprehensive
customer integration (Lehrer et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2019)
Digital
solution
provider
Data-driven services are key elements of the value proposition and value creation of the
business model (Hunke et al. 2021). New customers and markets beyond the scope of
manufacturing can be tapped (e.g., consulting services). Customization is an inherent
aspect of prescriptive services (Lehrer et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2019)
ponents of the business model that are outward-facing and concern the company’s
interaction with customers. A key element is the ‘value proposition’, i.e., the capa-
bility to provide a consistent offering, comprising digital and physical components,
that generates value for the customer (Payne et al. 2017). The value proposition is
closely related to the DDBM archetypes according to Hunke et al. (2021)—e.g.,
value generation through customer-specific insights. The ‘customer relations’ refers
to the degree of (digital) interaction between supplier and customer in the value cre-
ation process. This capability enables the supplier to tailor the data-driven services
to the customer’s needs and, hence, enables co-creation (Hunke et al. 2021; Zhang
et al. 2019). ‘Monetization and pricing’ capabilities enable manufacturers to price
and successfully monetize the value of data-driven services, e.g., via pay-per-use
models (Baltuttis et al. 2022; Schüritz et al. 2017). ‘Sales and channel management’
is an essential capability for the effective distribution of the company’s digital offer-
ings. It includes the digitalization and adoption of new distribution channels, such
as digital platforms, that are highly suited for offering DDBMs (Leiting et al. 2020).
The focus area of ‘business processes’ covers specific processual capabilities
that enable the creation, delivery, and capture of data-driven services and break
down the business model into internal activities (Porter 2014). Business processes
also direct the flow of information and enable alignment between business and IT
(Harmon 2015; Comuzzi and Patel 2016). The capability to provide ‘strategy and
vision for data-based business’ refers to management providing a clear strategic
vision for the transformation toward DDBM. It thus provides strategic alignment
and includes the management’s provision of dedicated resources (financial, human,
etc.) for DDBM (Gökalp et al. 2021; Hausladen and Schosser 2020). ‘Data-centric
process management’ is an organization’s capability to manage processes in such
K

--- PAGE 19 ---
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343 321
Table 4 Capability dimensions of the DDBM3
Focus
area
Capability dimension Reference
Business
model
Value proposition Payne et al. (2017)
Customer relations Hunke et al. (2021), Zhang et al. (2019)
Monetization & pricing Baltuttis et al. (2022), Schüritz et al. (2017)
Digital channel management Leiting et al. (2020)
Business
processes
Strategy & vision for data-based
business
Gökalp et al. (2021), Hausladen and Schosser
(2020)
Data-centric process management Comuzzi and Patel (2016), Malta and Sousa
(2016), Trčka (2010)
Knowledge sharing & management Gökalp et al. (2021)
Product life cycle management Schroderus et al. (2022)
People &
applica-
tions
Recognition & mindset Comuzzi and Patel (2016), Hausladen and
Schosser (2020)
Methods Gökalp et al. (2021), Tsoy and Staples (2021)
Roles & responsibilities Förster et al. (2022)
Data analytics competencies Comuzzi and Patel (2016), LaValle et al. (2011)
Data analytics tooling Comuzzi and Patel (2016), Hausladen and
Schosser (2020)
Data &
informa-
tion
Applied forms of analytics Comuzzi and Patel (2016), Gökalp et al. (2021)
Data management Comuzzi and Patel (2016), Gökalp et al. (2021)
Data governance & quality Gökalp et al. (2021)
Horizontal & vertical data integra-
tion
Comuzzi and Patel (2016), Gökalp et al. (2021),
Weber et al. (2017)
Infrastructure Data analytics software manage-
ment & operations
Gökalp et al. (2021), John et al. (2021)
Data-driven service integration &
deployment
Gökalp et al. (2021), John et al. (2021)
Data architecture & scaling Chen et al. (2022), Hausladen and Schosser
(2020)
Cybersecurity & -privacy Chen et al. (2022), Ullah and Ali Babar (2019)
Cyber-physical systems & connec-
tivity
Weber et al. (2017)
a way that they contribute to the DDBM strategy, are measured and traced based
on data, and are enhanced through data-driven improvements (Comuzzi and Patel
2016; Malta and Sousa 2016). Moreover, to enable DDBMs, it is essential to share
and actively manage domain and IT knowledge within the organization to promote
inter-organizational exchange (‘knowledge sharing and management’) (Gökalp et al.
2021). This capability is relevant, as data-driven services require that knowledge
from the domain is bundled with digital capabilities to provide, for example, data-
driven recommendations that increase the utility of the physical product (Hausladen
and Schosser 2020). In addition, manufacturers need to transform their ‘product
life cycle management’. This capability refers to the planning and management of
the product’s life cycle, including collecting, storing, and processing data for data-
driven services (Schroderus et al. 2022).
K

--- PAGE 20 ---
322 Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343
The focus area ‘people and applications’ comprises cultural aspects, soft and
hard skills, responsibilities, and analytics tooling for data-driven business models
at the employee level. This focus area ensures that the organization’s employees
are empowered to implement DDBMs. ‘Recognition & mindset’ is an essential ca-
pability referring to a collective understanding among all organizational members
of the potential and value of data (Hausladen and Schosser 2020; Davenport and
Bean 2018). This corporate culture ensures that the organizational members embrace
DDBMs as the desired objective and align their actions accordingly (Comuzzi and
Patel 2016). In this context, ‘methods’ also have a vital function. This capability
encompasses leveraging customer-centric, experimental, iterative approaches to re-
duce uncertainty and enable learning in order to develop data-driven solutions (Tsoy
and Staples 2021). It also involves rapid prototyping to evaluate the applicability
and feasibility of a data-driven service (Gökalp et al. 2021). Manufacturers must
create new ‘roles and responsibilities’ for DDBMs. Intra- and inter-organizational
professional roles and responsibilities enable the company’s data-driven value cre-
ation, delivery, and capture (Förster et al. 2022). In addition, it must be ensured
that the organization is capable of externally acquiring and internally developing
‘data analytics competencies’ to enable data-driven services (Comuzzi and Patel
2016; LaValle et al. 2011). Consequently, employees need to be equipped with the
‘data analytics tooling’ applications. This describes an organization’s capability to
effectively provide data analytics tooling (i.e., visualization, processing, and mining
tools) (Hausladen and Schosser 2020; Comuzzi and Patel 2016).
The focus area ‘data and information’ covers data management, the integra-
tion of data sources (horizontal and vertical), the establishment of governance and
quality mechanisms, and the analytics applied to data. One capability dimension is
the ‘applied forms of analytics’, which deals with methods and models such as de-
scriptive, diagnostic, or prescriptive analytics, depending on the associated DDBM
archetype(Gökalpet al. 2021;Schroderuset al. 2022).‘Datamanagement’addresses
the capability to manage the data analytics life-cycle (i.e., collecting, storing, trans-
forming, and analyzing data for information extraction). This capability also covers
levels of access to data at different stages of this life cycle, across the organization
(Comuzzi and Patel 2016; Hausladen and Schosser 2020). Another vital capability
in this focus area is the assurance of ‘data governance & quality’. This capability
includes rights and access management, metadata management, and data cartogra-
phy (Gökalp et al. 2021). For mature DDBMs, a high level of quality among the
available data is essential. ‘Horizontal and vertical data integration’, referring to the
identification and integration of internal and external data types and sources, is also
an important capability dimension (Comuzzi and Patel 2016). Vertical integration
refers to the integration of internal data from business units, while horizontal in-
tegration involves external data sources and domains (e.g., customer data) (Weber
et al. 2017).
The focus area ‘infrastructure’ comprises mostly technological enablers that or-
ganizations need to provide DDBMs. The associated capabilities include the secure
and scalable operation of software and hardware. The ‘data analytics software man-
agement & operations’ capability refers to an organization’s capability to adopt and
integrate data analytics software tools to provide data-driven services. It covers the
K

--- PAGE 21 ---
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343 323
installation, operation, and monitoring of software and associated infrastructure. The
aim is to optimize software availability, speed, and reliability (Gökalp et al. 2021;
John et al. 2021). Another relevant capability is ‘data-driven service integration
& deployment’. This relates to the software-based configuration, deployment, and
maintenance of data-driven services, and their integration into existing infrastructure
(Gökalp et al. 2021; John et al. 2021). Manufacturers must also be able to adapt their
data architecture design to handle the volume, velocity, and actuality of existing and
new data sources (‘data architecture & scaling’) (Hausladen and Schosser 2020;
Muller and Hart 2016). This includes, for instance, storage capacity, computational
capacity, as well as sufficient interconnectivity to enable the transfer of data from
cyber-physical systems to local servers or the cloud. It also includes the capacity
to feed insights drawn from the cloud/server to machines and onward, to customers
(Chen et al. 2022). Another relevant capability in the infrastructure area is ‘cyber-
security & privacy’. This involves applying technical and managerial measures to
ensure confidentiality, integrity, and availability when processing large volumes of
data (Ullah and Ali Babar 2019; Chen et al. 2022; Guggenmos et al. 2022). Fi-
nally, ’cyber-physical systems & connectivity’ is an infrastructure-related capability
that covers capturing and collecting data via cyber-physical systems. For manufac-
turers, this involves establishing an accessible machine base—e.g., equipping the
physical product with sensors, actuators, and connectivity. This capability lays the
ground for data collection and processing and enables cyber-physical interaction
with equipment (Weber et al. 2017).
Based on the structure of the DDBM3, the individual capability manifestations
were fully defined for each maturity level (see Appendix 1).
4.4 Phase 4: Insights On Manufacturers’ Transformations to DDBMs
A particular focus in the DDBM development process is evaluating a model’s prac-
tical value. For this purpose, the DDBM3 was applied with two manufacturers
(Table 1). For each of these manufacturers, an interdisciplinary focus group of prac-
titioners used the model to analyze their company’s status quo and define a target
state for DDBM development(Fig. 5). The focus group was initially consulted on the
target state of the current DDBM transformation. The DDBM archetypes presented
by Hunke et al. (2021) were used for this purpose. Both organizations unanimously
classified the target state as a ‘recommendation provider’ within the next five years.
The application of the DDBM3 revealed that both manufacturers’ capabilities
are among ‘data provider’ and ‘insight provider’ (average values 2.7 and 2.4). In
addition, we could identify that Alpha held mature capabilities, particularly in the
upper levels of the model, which are closer to the target state (i.e., strategy, process
management, knowledge sharing, mindset, and methods). However, the application
also revealed that some of this manufacturer’s other capabilities—mainly techni-
cal and data-related—were significantly less developed. These included capabilities
associated with data quality, analytics tooling, and software management.
In contrast, Beta’s assessment was less scattered and indicated that most of this
manufacturer’s capabilities were at the maturity level of an ‘insight provider’. How-
ever, we observed that Beta did possess some more mature capabilities, mostly
K

--- PAGE 22 ---
324 Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343
Fig. 5 Application of the DDBM3 at two manufacturers (Alpha and Beta)
among those on the lower EAs, (e.g., in the area of infrastructure). Consequently, the
potential for transformation in the manufacturer’s business capabilities was identi-
fied, including the potential to formulate a suitable value proposition, manage digital
channels, and share knowledge across the organization. Overall, users in the focus
groups considered the model to be particularly helpful due to its comprehensiveness,
enabling the practitioners to identify relevant fields of action within their DDBM
transformation. It was also confirmed that the DDBM3 meets the identified relevant
requirements.
4.5 Findings On Approaches for DDBM Transformation
In addition to the focus groups on the application of DDBM3, interviews were
conducted with practitioners to gain insight into the transformation to DDBMs and
develop an understanding of the reasons for the companies’ status quo. Although
both companies held roughly similar capability averages across the model, Alpha
held more substantial business capabilities, whereas Beta held more mature technol-
K

--- PAGE 23 ---
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343 325
ogy capabilities. Both Alpha and Beta started their transformation to DDBMs around
ten years ago and had been implementing variousactions in terms of projects and ini-
tiatives. To better understand how both companies had reached their status quo, they
were asked about their overall approach and goals, their actions, and the challenges
they faced.
4.6 Alpha—A ‘Business First’ Approach
In line with observations drawn from the application of the DDBM3, a ‘business
first’ approach was identified at Alpha. Here, it was mainly the business side, i.e.,
customers, who initiated the transformation actions, as they demanded data delivery.
These actions were followed by some measures that developed the maturity of the
upper levels of the EA (e.g., strategic initiatives and new roles). However, weak-
nesses remained in the lower EA—e.g., in the data analysis capability or the scaling
of networked machines.
Insights On Action Taken for DDBM Transformation “[...] actually, our [busi-
ness] customers triggered us to provide data-driven services. They clearly demanded
access to machinery data.This triggered the process of thinking aboutall relevant re-
quirements to realize this business opportunityandto create more services [...]” (A1).
Starting from the ‘business model’ area, Alpha’s DDBM transformation began with
increasing customer demand for access to machine data. The service department ini-
tiated the provision of data that had, until that point, only been used internally. Next,
Alpha’s management established a customer-oriented strategic initiative to explore
DDBM, starting with a clear business perspective and employing associated tools
and methods (e.g., business model canvas, value proposition design, etc.). Alpha
then launched new external applications (e.g., digital service portals, end-user apps)
which were developed to create digital channels for data-driven service provision.
Alpha subsequently defined new ‘processes’ for developing and operating data-
driven services and associated roles on the ‘people and applications’ layer. These
included digital product managers as bridgeheads between technology development
and business management (A2). However, the acquisition of data analytics compe-
tencies to match these roles and the provision of appropriate tooling remain a key
challenge for Alpha, resulting in lower maturity of these capability areas. On the
‘data and information’ layer, the company did not purposefully gather data to be
exploited for DDBMs. Yet, the company worked, primarily, with established ‘in-
frastructure’ not targeted at extensive data practices (e.g., ERP systems) (A5). Thus,
the company recently started implementing a data lake to provide a single source
of truth for the different kinds of data and data sources (A1, A2). One primary
data source is the latest machines equipped with many sensors. In this case, data
collection is mainly driven by reporting, diagnosis, and maintenance. Even though
the company now provides every new machine with connectivity, only about 15%
are fully accessible via connectivity services (A1).
In sum, the driving force for Alpha was the customer and business model per-
spective: “[...] the development of digital end customer solutions, in particular, was
driven by the promising business model[...]” (A2). In turn, Alpha follows a ‘business
K

--- PAGE 24 ---
326 Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343
first’ approach, with case-by-case project budgeting and clear financial targets (e.g.,
cost reduction, margin enhancement, and return on investment). Technological ad-
vances and investments have thus always been aligned with clear business-oriented
goals.
Challenges Alpha’s approach was associated with some challenges. The company
gathered data more as a by-product rather than with a clear intention in data man-
agement. Existing data sources (e.g., ERP systems) remain untapped due to missing
analytics tools and a lack of internal data domain knowledge (A5). Another criti-
cal issue remains the rollout of connected machinery and long lifecycles. With an
average seven-year period of use, Alpha’s machinery is remarkably reliable and
durable (A1, A2). However, this results in a slow turnover of the installed base and
massively hinders the rollout of digital solutions over many sites, hence, limiting
access to data. Another challenge is that the development of data-driven services is
mainly undertaken by external partners. This is due to limited internal capabilities
and resources to implement and deploy the DDBM. The overarching challenge of
the ‘business first’ approach is that, while solutions can be purposefully designed
and offered on the business side, a lack of technology-related capabilities slows
down the transformation.
4.7 Beta—A ‘Data First’ Approach
From the assessment of Beta in the DDBM3, we observed that Beta possessed
more mature capabilities in the technological and data areas of the model. However,
weaknesses were apparent in the upper EA regarding, for instance, monetization and
pricing capabilities and knowledge sharing within the organization.
Insights On Action Taken for DDBM Transformation Starting mainly on the
‘infrastructure’ layer,Beta was early in enablingmachine connectivitythroughwired
or wireless communication (MQTT)—one of the first technical initiatives to enable
DDBMs around the core product. This approach enables machines up to around ten
years old to be connected digitally, resulting in a potential installed base of around
80%, if connected by the customer (B1, B4). Moreover, the company initiated the
build-up of the first data warehouse in 2004 and has since been continuously en-
hancing its technical capabilities in the ‘data and information’ layer. Additionally,
Beta profits from the fact that many of its product’s electric components enable
the measuring of various parameters without additional sensory equipment (B2).
Regarding the ‘people and applications’ layer, Beta developed a service platform
and leveraged the know-how of the service partner to identify use cases providing
efficiency gains. Furthermore, an integrated cloud-based solution has recently been
introduced to enable the continuous integration and deployment of data-driven ser-
vices. Building on mature technology capabilities, Beta realized use cases to enable
digital status and health reports for a service partner maintaining their machines
(B3). The development of capabilities at the ‘process’ layer was use-case-driven and
not strategically pushed early on, as was the case with Alpha. After establishing
a solution for their service partner, the data-driven services expanded toward an end
K

--- PAGE 25 ---
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343 327
customer base. “[...] we started withlow-hangingdigital services to enhancethe pro-
ductivity of our customers and partners. We see such potential in the service domain,
in particular, andhave the required dataat hand[...]” (B1). Regardingthe ‘business’
layer, Beta’s customers were less actively demanding data-driven services than Al-
pha’s customers, and Beta mainly used trials to evaluate digital services—e.g., with
key accounts. Thanks to market conditions and the fact that they held fewer capabil-
ities to actively place DDBMs, only about 5% of customers use data-driven services
(B1).
Beta’s transformation toward DDBMs has been driven mainly by technical affor-
dances and a dominant market position, rather than active pressure from the demand
side or a business-driven initiative.
Challenges Along the data-driven service development process, Beta’s main chal-
lenge in data management lies in increasing the market penetration of the connected
products. While the technical preconditions are mainly mature and the internal sys-
tems are available, customers need to be persuaded to connect their machines with
the standard interfaces and use the necessary data-driven services (B4). Dedicated
value propositions for different customer groups and associated channels and mon-
etization strategies must be established at the business level (B1). In summary, the
overarching challenge of the data-first approach is that the market-side realization
of DDBMs is fraught with uncertainty. While the technological requirements and
necessary investments for the realization of DDBM have been made, there is much
uncertainty about the monetization potential of DDBMs. Hence, the key issue here
is this strategy has not yet been widely validated in business contexts, and techno-
logical development may occur without the necessary, simultaneous development of
the business model.
5 Discussion
5.1 Theoretical Contribution and Implications
Many manufacturers strive to leverage the opportunities of digitalization to offer
data-driven services and transform toward DDBM (Müller and Buliga 2019; Voigt
et al. 2021). However, this transformation, especially for incumbents, often implies
the developmentof new capabilities across the organization(Gongand Janssen 2021;
Comuzzi and Patel 2016). Existing research has already examined this transforma-
tion, systematizing DDBM, for example, and developing archetypes that differ in
their logic of value creation and value delivery (Weking et al. 2020). At the same
time, existing research shows that both technology and business capabilities are
needed to enable DDBM (Rashed and Drews 2021; Favoretto et al. 2022). However,
the inquiry as to which capabilities manufacturers need across the organization to
offer distinct DDBM archetypes remains unanswered (Hunke et al. 2021).
To fill this research gap and provide practical help for manufacturers, this paper
follows a DSR approach to develop and evaluate the DDBM3 as a central artifact
that identifies 22 business and technology capability dimensions in five focus areas
K

--- PAGE 26 ---
328 Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343
(i.e., business model, business processes, people and applications, data and infor-
mation, and infrastructure) for archetypal DDBMs. By developing the DDBM3 as
a continuous MM (van Steenbergen et al. 2010), the relevant business and technol-
ogy capabilities within each capability dimension are identified for each archetypal
DDBM of Hunke et al. (2021) (i.e., data provider, insight provider, recommendation
provider, and digital solution provider). As such, the MM is embedded in both prac-
tice (i.e., the problem context, requirements, and evaluation context) and research
(i.e., the knowledge base and the contributions of this study) (Hevner et al. 2004;
vom Brocke et al. 2020). To design a solution, we build on three strands of research.
First, we build on the developed DDBM archetypes of Hunke et al. (2021) as focal
points of our model that allow determining aligned target states of the DDBM trans-
formation. Second, we use layered EA models to offer an integrated, organization-
spanning perspective from business to technology capabilities (i.e., business model,
business processes, people & applications, data & information, and infrastructure)
(Rashed and Drews 2021). Using the layered EA model of Urbach and Röglinger
(2019) to structure these capabilities along different enterprise levels, we identify
the 22 literature-based capability dimensions that are relevant for transforming to
archetypal DDBM. Third, we identify and analyze existing MMs in the field to
develop the 110 capabilities of the DDBM3 (Comuzzi and Patel 2016; Gökalp et al.
2021; Hausladen and Schosser 2020). On the one hand, the model was challenged
for completeness and internal consistency in artificial evaluation settings. On the
other hand, through an application at two manufacturers, the model was naturalisti-
cally evaluated regarding its applicability and effectiveness to understand better the
DDBM transformation (Sonnenberg and vom Brocke 2012).
As the DDBM3 strives to enhance the understanding of the required capabilities
to offer distinct DDBM archetypes, it can be classified as an ‘improvement’ arti-
fact (Gregor and Hevner 2013). While existing models focus on either business or
technology capabilities, the DDBM3 offers an integrated and aligned perspective
on the capabilities of different organizational layers, allowing the model to be more
suited to address the complex real-world phenomenon of DDBM transformations
(Baskerville et al. 2018). The model’s continuous design creates a high level of
descriptive knowledge, as qualitatively described capabilities can be related to the
DDBM archetypes and EA levels. By this design, the DDBM3 moves beyond the
conception that follows a ‘more mature capabilities are better’-logic (Hunke et al.
2021) that was adopted in some MMs (for instance Gökalp et al. (2021)). Rather,
by providing distinct DDBM archetypes as focal points of the transformation, the
model creates an awareness that the alignment and matching of these capabilities is
essential.
The model and its application offer several implications for research. As demon-
strated in the model’s application at two manufacturers, the model can serve as an
‘analytical lens’ that allows an investigation of the progress of the DDBM trans-
formation across different organizational layers (Pöppelbuß and Röglinger 2011).
With this tool, research can identify maturation paths and patterns that emerge from
its application. This may unravel success factors or impediments associated with
distinct paths of maturation, as demonstrated in the study of Mugge et al. (2020)
for digital transformation endeavors. This potential becomes initially evident from
K

--- PAGE 27 ---
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343 329
the two case study demonstrations of this paper: We find that the two manufacturers
followed different approaches to tackle DDBMs: While Alpha took a ‘business first’
approach—i.e., in which business capabilities are more mature than technological
ones—we observed a ‘data first’ approach at Beta, revealing a greater maturity in
technological and data-related capabilities. Our findings give rise to existing theories
that transformations toward DDBM are not accomplished in a uniform and aligned
manner, which results in different challenges. For instance, Vanauer et al. (2015)
theorized about how big data projects are initiated. They assume that these projects
can, on the one hand, be driven from a business perspective (‘business first’), based
on a business vision and requirements. On the other hand, these projects can be ini-
tiated by a resource or affordance perspective that builds on existing data and assets
(‘data first’). Our results suggest that both approaches can occur when a manufac-
turing company transforms toward DDBM. However, from our initial investigation,
these approaches were indebted to the prevailing context and history of a company
rather than a strategic choice.
5.2 Practical Contribution and Implications
Aside from its merits for research, the developed DDBM3 also offers value for prac-
tice. To ensure the model’s practical relevance, a crucial demand of DSR research, it
was developed in close alignment with practical requirements (Hevner et al. 2004).
Moreover, with a naturalistic evaluation at two manufacturers, the model’s impact,
effectiveness, and efficiency were evaluated (Sonnenberg and vom Brocke 2012).
In the course of our evaluation, we outline the model’s ‘diagnostic’ purposes that
may assist the management of manufacturers to better understand and structure
their transformation toward DDBM. On the one hand, the DDBM3 may capture
the current ‘status quo’ of DDBM transformation and thus gain insights into an
organization’s strengths and weaknesses from a capability perspective. This allows
management to understand how mature the company’s capabilities are across the
22 capability dimensions. On the other hand, a ‘target state’ can be defined based on
the model’s alignment with DDBM archetypes. In contrast to models using generic
maturity levels (e.g., Gökalp et al. (2021) use five generic levels from 1= ‘initiated’
to 5=‘innovating’), the model allows us to characterize target states qualitatively.
This may stimulate a reflection on which DDBM archetype is to be aimed for and
to derive which capabilities are typically required for this purpose.
Moreover, applying the model at two manufacturers allowed us to gain insights
into the transformation at these two companies and brought along some practical
implications. As discussed in the research implications section, both companies
took very different transformation approaches that brought along challenges. The
challenges of the two companies arose particularly from a misalignment of ca-
pabilities so that the full potential of DDBM could not be realized at either. We
draw the implication from this that management should attempt to keep capabil-
ity divergence to a minimum, as small building blocks of missing capabilities can
slow down the transformation. An implication of this could be that manufacturers
should try to adopt both approaches. On the one hand, management may leverage
‘business first’ perspective to identify valuable, customer-oriented use cases (e.g.,
K

--- PAGE 28 ---
330 Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343
predictive maintenance or automated supply) (Müller and Buliga 2019; Hunke et al.
2021). In this context, it is necessary to consider possible monetization models and
channels for DDBMs at an early stage (Baltuttis et al. 2022). Leadership is called
upon to develop a clear vision of DDBMs to mobilize the organization and create
a DDBM culture (Davenport and Bean 2018). Hence, management must establish
data-driven ‘processes’ early on, yet must still ensure flexibility (Malta and Sousa
2016). Furthermore, our results indicate that the roles of ‘people and application’
need to be defined (Förster et al. 2022). However, the challenge of bringing these
roles to life involves the time-consuming development or acquisition of related com-
petencies and the provision of associated tooling.
On the other hand, management may use the ‘data first’ perspective associated
with technological affordances (Lehrer et al. 2018; Zammuto et al. 2007)—for in-
stance, by addressing the layer of ‘data and information’ with dedicated investments
in hardware (e.g., sensors and connectivity) and software (e.g., data warehouse)
(Pathak et al. 2021). A dedicated strategy and roadmap help identify levers that
optimize data quality and availability in the long term (Kehrer et al. 2016). Manu-
facturers can also leverage success factors at the ‘infrastructure’ level by proactively
equippingtheir machineswith connectivityand sensors and consideringscalable sys-
tems (Gökalp et al. 2021). This perspective is particularly in line with existing work
that advises companies not to build up technical debt (Tom et al. 2013).
5.3 Limitations and Further Research
Our research has limitations regarding the DDBM3 itself and its evaluation and
associated findings. We present these limitations in line with Becker et al. (2009)
procedure model for MM development.
First, the DDBM3’s generalizability is limited due to its dedicated focus on man-
ufacturers in the mechanical engineering and machinery sector. We follow the ar-
gumentation that such machines especially provide promising potentials for DDBM
due to their technical sophistication and the possibility to continuously deliver data
while they are being operated (Voigt and M. Müller 2021; Beverungen et al. 2021).
However, the DDBM archetypes of Hunke et al. (2021) that we build on in this paper
are of a general nature that may apply to other industries (e.g., the food industry). In
these contexts, the DDBM archetypes may differ in their configuration and associ-
ated capabilities, as the technical possibilities of data collection and processing and
the customer requirements differ. For instance, the focus for data deliveries in the
food sector may lay on production and supply chain data to enhance transparency
regarding environmental impact (Astill et al. 2019). This indicates that the gener-
alizability of the DDBM3 is limited and is particularly tailored to the use cases of
manufacturers for equipment and machinery.
Second, a limitation concerning the structure of the DDBM3 is inherent to the
design decisions and especially to the three key requirements made during the MM
development. By aligning the DDBM3 with existing data-driven business model
archetypes and an EA model, the DDBM3 was developed to focus on internal con-
sistency and comprehensiveness. Therefore, the development logic of the model
follows a predominantly deductive perspective, such as established focus areas due
K

--- PAGE 29 ---
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343 331
to the EA model. In contrast, such models can also be developed from an induc-
tive perspective, e.g., when ‘actionable practices’ are extracted from empirical data
(Stelzl et al. 2020). This could encourage future works to provide tools that are less
of a ‘diagnostic’ character and instead assist in operationalizing the transformation,
e.g., by offering ‘lessons learned’.
Third, this paper faces a limitation regarding the generalizability of the impli-
cations drawn from the naturalistic evaluation of the DDBM3. This demonstration
aims to exemplify the application of the model to examine the transformation of
two manufacturers and therefore evaluate the model’s design. In this context, the
artifact proved to be a helpful tool for the two cases studied to better understand
and diagnose their transformation status. However, this work is limited regarding the
generalizability of the two identified transformation paths, i.e., ‘business first’ and
‘data first’, which have already been outlined conceptually in other work (Vanauer
et al. 2015). While this reflects the exploratory nature of our work, the evaluation
decision potentially limits the ability to generally underlying the two transformation
approaches or even identify new approaches. As a result, the theoretical implications
regarding the two transformation approaches outline the model’s usefulness as an
investigative lens but fall short of providing generalizable theories on transforma-
tion paths. While this limits our work’s merits to the core artifact of DDBM3, it is
intended to stimulate further research. Further, larger-scale studies can leverage the
model as an investigative tool to identify patterns in transformation. In this way, the
identified transformation approaches and theory, i.e., ‘business first’ and ‘data first,
and the associated actions and challenges could be further empirically substantiated
and generalized.
Finally, our work and its limitations lead us to make a call for action. As business,
environmental, and technical conditions are subject to change (Becker et al. 2009)
the content of the DDBM3 should be regularly evaluated to ensure its real-world
fidelity and actuality. To identify such adjustments, new interviews with additional
manufacturers should be conducted and upcoming publications should be consid-
ered to keep the DDBM3 up to date. For instance, if future research changes the
understanding of archetypal business models, the DDBM3’s architectural logic and
capability descriptions should be scrutinized. Furthermore, due to the alignment with
existing frameworks, i.e., the EA model, the DDBM3 could be expanded to include
additional focus areas and capabilities, such as more social-focused capabilities.
6 Conclusion
In line with their ongoing digital transformation, many manufacturers strive to of-
fer DDBM, where data-driven services are essential to the value offering. These
business models are geared toward creating high customer value and thus represent
a promising option for creating competitive advantages in hitherto hardware-centric
business areas. However, especially for incumbent firms, this implies a tremendous
shift in their organizational logic and the development of new capabilities. Based on
a DSR approach, this study strives to guide in this transformative endeavor through
a MM that structures the required capabilities for archetypal DDBM. The model was
K

--- PAGE 30 ---
332 Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343
built based on existing literature and provides an integrated perspective. The model
links business and technical capabilities along five organizational levels and presents
them in 22 capability dimensions. The real-world application of the MM with two
manufacturers shows its practical value in allowing companies to grasp their current
capabilities on the different organizationallayers and define their DDBM target state.
Thus, practitioners better understand their company’s individual transformation path
and recognize missing capabilities on the way to their archetypal DDBM target.
While the artifact thus developed provides clear practical added value, it also
contributes to the scientific discourse. This study answers the research gap of an
integrated perspective on necessary capabilities at different organizational layers for
the DDBM transformation of manufacturing companies. The potential of leveraging
the resulting model as an integrated lens on the transformation path of manufactur-
ing companies becomes exemplified in the initial application at two manufacturers.
Thus, the resulting artifact may stimulate future research to better and more com-
prehensively understand the transformation of manufacturers toward DDBM.
K

--- PAGE 31 ---
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343 333
7 Appendix
Tab. 5 The DDBM3
Capability
dimension
Product provider Data provider Insight provider Recommendation provider Digital solution provider
Business
model
Value proposi-
tion
The product generates
the customer value
Customer value is gen-
erated by the product
and complementary data
delivery
Customer value is gener-
ated by the product and
derived from customer-
specific insights
Customer value is gener-
ated by the product and
linked to customer-specific
recommendations
Customer value is generated
by data-driven service(s)
Customer
relations
Product sales and
machine-related after-
sales services (e.g.,
maintenance) are
the links between
customer and supplier
Data deliveries enable
a continuous connection
from the supplier to the
customer
Customer needs are iden-
tified systematically to
provide target-oriented in-
sights; reciprocal customer
interaction
High understanding of the
customer’s value creation
integration; data-driven
customization
Co-creation within an ecosys-
tem with customers; cus-
tomized digital solutions
Monetization
& pricing
Pricing and mon-
etization logic are
highly dependent on
the product and direct
competition
Pricing and monetization
logic are primarily based
on product; revenue
models are based on data
delivery
Monetization for digital
insights follows value
logic; revenue models
based on insight delivery
Monetization of individ-
ual recommendations;
revenue models based on
recommendation value
Monetization strategy is
based entirely on customer
value and can be independent
of physical products
Digital chan-
nel manage-
ment
No distribution of
digital offers
Purpose-specific selection
of channels for data
delivery
Multiple digital channels
allow the delivery of
data insights (e.g., web
services, APIs, messaging
alerts)
Permanent integration
into customer systems;
consultative sales based on
digital portfolio offer
Multiple and interoperable
digital channels to offer
digital solutions (e.g., via
platforms)
K

--- PAGE 32 ---
334 Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343
Tab. 5 (Continued)
Capability
dimension
Product provider Data provider Insight provider Recommendation provider Digital solution provider
Business
pro-
cesses
Strategy &
vision for data-
based business
Product-centric strategy
with associated resource
allocation
Offering data to customers
as an initiative to enhance
product-centric strategy;
low planned use of re-
sources
Data as a relevant, high-
value element in product-
driven strategy; resource
allocation must be accounted
for
Explicit data strategy and
dedicated resources for cre-
ating customer individual
data-driven recommenda-
tions
Digital-first strategy and re-
sources for offering compre-
hensive data-driven solutions
Data-centric
process man-
agement
Process management
can only be improved
based on internal data,
low data footprint; prod-
uct-centric alignment of
processes
Initial processes to generate
and capture data for data-
driven services
Processes provide multiple
data points that allow the ex-
traction of key information
and improve processes in
a data-driven way
End-to-end data traces and
active process manage-
ment to enable data-driven
optimizations
Data-driven business process
management capabilities can be
offered in digital services
Knowledge
sharing &
management
Knowledge is anchored
in product-specific
domains (e.g., R&D,
sales)
Project-based knowledge
exchange between domain
and data-analytics experts
Anchoring knowledge man-
agement between domain
and data analytics in prod-
uct-related business units
(e.g., service, product man-
agement)
Continuous domain and
data-centric knowledge
exchange between domain
and data analytics
Embedded knowledge pools
and information are shared
across the organization
Product life
cycle manage-
ment
Planning and manage-
ment of the life cycle
of the pure physical
product
Data access and software
planning is based on the
physical product life cycle
of the latest product genera-
tion; low interoperability of
machines in the field
Digital integration layers
increase the interoperabil-
ity of different machine
generations (e.g., software-
based)
Data-driven product engi-
neering; physical product
lifecycle is aligned with
digital services
Software dominates the logic
of lifecycle management; con-
tinuous product development
and shipment of data-driven
services
K

--- PAGE 33 ---
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343 335
Tab. 5 (Continued)
Capability
dimension
Product provider Data provider Insight provider Recommendation provider Digital solution provider
People
&
appli-
cations
Recognition &
mindset
Product and quality
are the focus of action;
the product shapes the
cultural identity
The value of data is subor-
dinate to that of the product;
providing data to customers
is optional
Data is recognized as
a strategic asset and comple-
ments product value
Data is regarded as a com-
petitive differentiator of
the product, which, only in
combination, unfolds the
total value
The corporate culture is
focused purely on customer
value and is decoupled from
physical products; data is re-
garded as a product
Methods Agile methods are not
applied; engineering-
driven development
approaches
Agile methods are only
locally applied in the IT
department (e.g., Scrum)
Agile practices are applied
at the project level to de-
velop data-driven insights
(e.g., Lean Startup)
Division-wide adoption of
agile practices; adapting
the organizational structure
to roll out agile practices
widely (e.g., SAFe)
Holistic adoption of agile
practices; development cycles
follow agile methodologies
(e.g., build-measure-learn)
Roles & re-
sponsibilities
Product-centric role and
task assignment
Product-centric roles are
expanded to include data-
centric responsibilities (e.g.,
in product management)
Role structures and division
of labor for the development
of data-driven services
emerge (e.g., Data Manager
and Data Scientist)
Company-wide role struc-
tures evolve based on the
company’s experience (e.g.,
Chief Data Officer, AI Oper-
ations Manager); Anchoring
digital role profiles and
dedicated ownership
Roles are fully geared to cus-
tomer value and data-driven
services; clear organization-
wide definition of roles and
ownership, CDOs, and their
business units are based on
profit-loss responsibilities
Data analytics
competencies
Product-related, tech-
nical competencies are
available and represent
a key asset
Analytics skills are needed
infrequently; external
acquisition of qualified
employees
Increasing demand for
analytics skills throughout
the organization; external
acquisition of talent and
internal development of
skills for selected employees
Analytics skills as a key
competence with dedicated
organizational units; Pro-
viding staff with extensive
training and development
The company is attractive for
employees with excellent data
analytics skills and enables
continuous employee develop-
ment
Data analytics
tooling
Isolated analytics tool-
ing based on individual,
product-related appli-
cation areas (e.g., in
R&D)
Analytics tooling (e.g.,
visualization tools) is
available to few employees
and is not provided in
a standardized way
Analytics tooling is used
in some teams on a project
basis to generate insights
(e.g., processing and mining
tools)
A selection of analytics
tooling is offered on a large
scale and in a standardized
way
Continuous further develop-
ment of the analytics tooling
portfolio and in-house devel-
opments; Location and device
independence
K

--- PAGE 34 ---
336 Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343
Tab. 5 (Continued)
Capability
dimension
Product provider Data provider Insight provider Recommendation provider Digital solution provider
Data &
infor-
mation
Applied forms
of analytics
Data analysis is used for
internal purposes only;
If necessary, customers
build their analysis tools
Descriptive analytics is used
for the value creation
Diagnostic analytics for
delivering actionable and
supportive insights
Predictive analytics to pro-
vide recommendations and
tailored decision-support
Predictive analytics enable new
ways to conduct business and
derive unique insights
Data manage-
ment
No structured data col-
lection and processing;
Analysis is performed
in the context of product
research and develop-
ment; Data is mostly
stored locally
Focus on building
a database in a repository;
the majority of data is still
siloed; No organization-
wide access
Data is collected and stored
systematically; All data
is centrally stored and
accessible across many
business units
Complete coverage of the
data analytics life cycle;
All data is centrally stored
and accessible across the
organization
Data lifecycle with high
flexibility by leveraging any
database type; Complete vir-
tual data organization (digital
twin); Integrated with external
stakeholders
Data gov-
ernance &
quality
No transparency on
available gathered data
by the product and
other business units; No
data requirements and
metadata set
Data quality is mainly de-
termined by the quality
of the sensor technology;
Often raw data with aggre-
gation stage of the machine;
Data requirement set but no
data cartography
Data quality policies, meta-
data-management, and
naming standards (ubiq-
uitous language) are set
across many business units
leading to first manual data
cartography
Organization-wide data
cartography with defined
data requirements and data
quality policies; Establish-
ing usage permissions and
access roles for external
stakeholders
Automated data cartography;
Data quality as a differenti-
ating factor; Defined usage
permissions and access roles
for external stakeholders
Horizontal &
vertical data
integration
Internal data around
the pure product spo-
radically used within
each business unit and
domain
Only internal product data
used from single business
unites without horizontal
and external data gathering
Data is integrated horizon-
tally across many business
units; External data sources
are used on an ad-hoc basis
Well-established and regular
use of external data sources
from different domains
Broad selection of internal and
external data sources obtain-
able; Continuous identification
of data sources to satisfy all
information needs
K

--- PAGE 35 ---
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343 337
Tab. 5 (Continued)
Capability
dimension
Product provider Data provider Insight provider Recommendation provider Digital solution provider
Infra-
structure
Data analyt-
ics software
management &
operations
Software management
exists for product-rele-
vant software; Analytics
tooling is not managed
centrally
Decentralized applications
whose interoperability
is strictly limited; Low
productivity due to lack of
scale
The installation and opera-
tion of analytics software are
standardized; Optimization
focuses on the availability of
data-driven services
Standardized provision
of resources for the use
of analytics tooling; High
automation and optimization
of speed and reliability
Highly scalable and flexible
provision of analytics tools;
Optimized operation (e.g., with
dedicated SLA)
Data-driven
service in-
tegration &
deployment
No need to integrate
and deploy data-driven
services
Creation of few, dedicated
resources to deploy solu-
tions (e.g., cloud provider);
Usage of versions control
Continuous integration,
deployment, and testing
(DevOps); Establishment
of a platform (cloud/on-
premise/hybrid) across
different domains
Unification of development
and operation of advanced
analytics (MLOps); Addi-
tional testing procedures
such as data and model
validation
End-to-end MLOps platform;
Automated deployment, testing,
and monitoring workflows (e.g.,
monitoring by alert)
Data architec-
ture & scaling
Legacy systems and IT
architecture are designed
for the operation of the
product-centric business
mode
Data analytics systems are
built up in isolated cases
(e.g., Department data
marts); initial processes for
data pipelines are running
(e.g., ETL or ELT)
Development of an over-
arching IT architecture
that allows data analysis
and standardization with
low latency (e.g., Hadoop
cluster)
Integrated IT architecture is
established and allows high
scalability (up and down);
Introduction of streaming
technologies for low latency
Scalable infrastructure that
can also be integrated into
other platforms and offers
high interoperability; Real-
time streaming pipelines are
established
Cybersecurity
& -privacy
IT Security for internal
systems
Securing the data-delivery
system; Focus on integrity
and confidentiality of data
(e.g., through encryption)
Data processing and delivery
must be secured regarding
integrity and confidentiality;
Improvement of availabil-
ity (e.g., through backup
procedures and disaster
recovery)
Confidentiality, availabil-
ity, and integrity must be
fulfilled in both internal IT
and machine operational
technology
Security by design as a standard
in the development of data-
driven services; Continuous
formulation and modification of
technical and nontechnical data
security provisions
Cyber-physical
systems &
connectivity
Connectivity of the
delivered machines is
not a requirement
Simple, e.g., basic-param-
eter connectivity allowing
access to machine modules;
Accessibility is restricted to
a limited share of machines
operated in the field
Connectivity to all machine
modules with access to op-
erating relevant parameters
(e.g., in near time); Techni-
cal integration layer allows
uniform access to machines
in the field
Highly performant connec-
tivity to all machines in the
market (e.g., in real-time
with write-access); Integra-
tion of data in the machine
periphery in the field (e.g.,
logistics)
Fully connected machine base
can be continuously supplied
with software updates and new
services; integration into digital
platforms is possible
K

--- PAGE 36 ---
338 Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343
Funding This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, or
not-for-profit sectors.
Open access funding provided by Schmalenbach-Gesellschaft.
Declarations
Conflict of interest B. Stahl, B. Häckel, D. Leuthe and C. Ritter declare that they have no competing
interests.
Ethical standards For this article no studies with human participants or animals were performed by any
of the authors. All studies mentioned were in accordance with the ethical standards indicated in each case.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.
0/.
References
Appelbaum, Steven H. 1997. Socio-technical systems theory: an intervention strategy for organizational
development. Management Decision 35(6):452–463. https://doi.org/10.1108/00251749710173823.
Astill, Jake, Rozita A. Dara, Malcolm Campbell, Jeffrey M. Farber, Evan D. Fraser, Shayan Sharif, and
Rickey Y. Yada. 2019. Transparency in food supply chains: A review of enabling technology solu-
tions. Trends in Food Science & Technology 91:240–247. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2019.07.024.
Azkan, Can, Lennart Iggena, Frederik Möller, and Boris Otto. 2021. Towards design principles for data-
driven services in industrial environments. In Proceedings of the 54th Hawaii International Confer-
ence on System Sciences, ed. Tung Bui
Baltuttis, Dennik, Björn Häckel, Claudius M. Jonas, Anna M. Oberländer, Maximilian Röglinger, and
Johannes Seyfried. 2022. Conceptualizing and assessing the value of Internet of things solutions.
Journal of Business Research 140:245–263. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2021.10.063.
Baskerville, Richard, Abayomi Baiyere, Shirley Gregor, Alan Hevner, and Matti Rossi. 2018. Design sci-
ence research contributions: Finding a balance between artifact and theory. Journal of the Association
for Information Systems 19(5):358–376. https://doi.org/10.17705/1jais.00495.
Baxter, Gordon, and Ian Sommerville. 2011. Socio-technical systems: From design methods to systems
engineering. Interacting with Computers 23(1):4–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intcom.2010.07.003.
Becker, Jörg, Ralf Knackstedt, and Jens Pöppelbuß. 2009. Developing maturity models for IT manage-
ment. Business & Information Systems Engineering 1(3):213–222. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12599-
009-0044-5.
Bergman, Rômy, Antragama E. Abbas, Sven Jung, Claudia Werker, and Mark de Reuver. 2022. Busi-
ness model archetypes for data marketplaces in the automotive industry. Electronic Markets
32(2):747–765. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12525-022-00547-x.
Bertolini, Massimo, Davide Mezzogori, Mattia Neroni, and Francesco Zammori. 2021. Machine learn-
ing for industrial applications: A comprehensive literature review. Expert Systems with Applications
175:114820. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2021.114820.
Beverungen, Daniel, Oliver Müller, Martin Matzner, Jan Mendling, and Jan vom Brocke. 2019. Concep-
tualizing smart service systems. Electronic Markets 29(1):7–18. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12525-017-
0270-5.
Beverungen, Daniel, Dennis Kundisch, and Nancy Wünderlich. 2021. Transforming into a platform
provider: strategic options for industrial smart service providers. Journal of Service Management
32(4):507–532. https://doi.org/10.1108/JOSM-03-2020-0066.
K

--- PAGE 37 ---
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343 339
Bhageshpur, Kiran. 2019. Data is the new oil - and that’s a good thing. https://www.forbes.com/sites/
forbestechcouncil/2019/11/15/data-is-the-new-oil-and-thats-a-good-thing/. Accessed 9 Feb. 2022
vom Brocke, Jan, Alexander Simons, Kai Riemer, Björn Niehaves, Ralf Plattfaut, and Anne Cleven. 2015.
Standing on the shoulders of giants: Challenges and recommendations of literature search in infor-
mation systems research. Communications of the Association for Information Systems https://doi.org/
10.17705/1CAIS.03709.
vom Brocke, Jan, Alan Hevner, and Alexander Maedche (eds.). 2020. Design science research. Cases,
1st edn., Cham: Springer.
Burström, Thommie, Vinit Parida, Tom Lahti, and Joakim Wincent. 2021. AI-enabled business-model
innovation and transformation in industrial ecosystems: A framework, model and outline for further
research. Journal of Business Research 127:85–95. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2021.01.016.
Chen, Hong-Mei, Roland Schuetz, Rick Kazman, and Florian Matthes. 2017. How Lufthansa capitalized
on big data for business model renovation. MIS Quarterly Executive 16(1):19–34.
Chen, Wenting, Caihua Liu, Fei Xing, Guochao Peng, and Xi Yang. 2022. Establishment of a maturity
model to assess the development of industrial AI in smart manufacturing. Journal of Enterprise In-
formation Management 35(3):701–728. https://doi.org/10.1108/JEIM-10-2020-0397.
Chen, Ying, Jeffrey Kreulen, Murray Campbell, and Carl Abrams. 2011. Analytics ecosystem transforma-
tion: A force for business model innovation. In 2011 annual SRII global conference (SRII 2011): San
Jose, California, USA, 29 March–2 April 2011, 11–20. Piscataway: IEEE.
Chesbrough, H. 2002. The role of the business model in capturing value from innovation: evidence
from Xerox Corporation’s technology spin-off companies. Industrial and Corporate Change
11(3):529–555. https://doi.org/10.1093/icc/11.3.529.
Cleven, Anne K., Robert Winter, Felix Wortmann, and Tobias Mettler. 2014. Process management in hos-
pitals: an empirically grounded maturity model. Business Research 7(2):191–216. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s40685-014-0012-x.
Comuzzi, Marco, and Anit Patel. 2016. How organisations leverage Big Data: a maturity model. Industrial
Management & Data Systems 116(8):1468–1492. https://doi.org/10.1108/IMDS-12-2015-0495.
Cui, Yesheng, Sami Kara, and Ka C. Chan. 2020. Manufacturing big data ecosystem: A systematic litera-
ture review. Robotics and Computer-Integrated Manufacturing 62:101861. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
rcim.2019.101861.
Cuylen, Angelica, Lubov Kosch, and Michael H. Breitner. 2016. Development of a maturity model for
electronic invoice processes. Electronic Markets 26(2):115–127. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12525-
015-0206-x.
Davenport, Thomas H., and Randy Bean. 2018. Big companies are embracing analytics, but most still don’t
have a data-driven culture. Harvard Business Review 6:1–4.
Farah, Badie. 2017. A value based big data maturity model. Journal of Management Policy and Practice
18(1):11–18.
Favoretto, Camila, Glauco H.S. Mendes, Moacir G. Filho, Maicon Gouvea de Oliveira, and Gilberto
M.D. Ganga. 2022. Digital transformation of business model in manufacturing companies: challenges
and research agenda. Journal of Business & Industrial Marketing 37(4):748–767. https://doi.org/10.
1108/JBIM-10-2020-0477.
Förster, Matthias, Bastian Bansemir, and Angela Roth. 2022. Employee perspectives on value realization
from data within data-driven business models. Electronic Markets https://doi.org/10.1007/s12525-
021-00504-0.
Foss, Nicolai J., and Tina Saebi. 2017. Fifteen years of research on business model innovation. Journal of
Management 43(1):200–227. https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206316675927.
Frank, Alejandro G., Lucas S. Dalenogare, and Néstor F. Ayala. 2019. Industry 4.0 technologies: Im-
plementation patterns in manufacturing companies. International Journal of Production Economics
210:15–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2019.01.004.
Gampfer, Fabian, Andreas Jürgens, Markus Müller, and Rüdiger Buchkremer. 2018. Past, current and fu-
ture trends in enterprise architecture—A view beyond the horizon. Computers in Industry 100:70–84.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2018.03.006.
Ge, Jing, Feng Wang, Hongxia Sun, Liuliu Fu, and Mingwei Sun. 2020. Research on the maturity of big
data management capability of intelligent manufacturing enterprise. Systems Research and Behav-
ioral Science 37(4):646–662. https://doi.org/10.1002/sres.2707.
Gökalp, Mert O., Ebru Gökalp, Kerem Kayabay, Altan Koçyiğit, and P.E. Eren. 2021. Data-driven man-
ufacturing: An assessment model for data science maturity. Journal of Manufacturing Systems
60:527–546. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmsy.2021.07.011.
K

--- PAGE 38 ---
340 Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343
Gong, Yiwei, and Marijn Janssen. 2021. Roles and capabilities of enterprise architecture in big data analyt-
ics technology adoption and implementation. Journal of theoretical and applied electronic commerce
research 16(1):37–51. https://doi.org/10.4067/S0718-18762021000100104.
Gregor, Shirley, and Alan R. Hevner. 2013. Positioning and presenting design science research for maxi-
mum impact. MIS Quarterly 37(2):337–355. https://doi.org/10.25300/misq/2013/37.2.01.
Grossman, Robert L. 2018. A framework for evaluating the analytic maturity of an organization. Interna-
tional Journal of Information Management 38(1):45–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2017.08.
005.
Guggenmos, Florian, Björn Häckel, Philipp Ollig, and Bastian Stahl. 2022. Security first, security by de-
sign, or security pragmatism – strategic roles of IT security in digitalization projects. Computers &
Security 118:102747. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2022.102747.
Häckel, Björn, Florian Hänsch, Michael Hertel, and Jochen Übelhör. 2019. Assessing IT availability risks
in smart factory networks. Business Research 12(2):523–558. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40685-018-
0071-5.
Häckel, Björn, Philip Karnebogen, and Christian Ritter. 2021. AI-based industrial full-service offerings:
A model for payment structure selection considering predictive power. Decision Support Systems
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2021.113653.
Harmon, Paul. 2015. The scope and evolution of business process management. In Handbook on business
process management, Vol. 1, ed. Jan vom Brocke, Michael Rosemann, 37–80. Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer.
Hartmann, Philipp M., Mohamed Zaki, Niels Feldmann, and Andy Neely. 2016. Capturing value from
big data – a taxonomy of data-driven business models used by start-up firms. International Journal of
Operations & Production Management 36(10):1382–1406. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJOPM-02-2014-
0098.
Hausladen, Iris, and Maximilian Schosser. 2020. Towards a maturity model for big data analytics in airline
network planning. Journal of Air Transport Management https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jairtraman.2019.
101721.
Hein-Pensel, Franziska, Heiner Winkler, Anja Brückner, Mandy Wölke, Iren Jabs, Ines J. Mayan, Amit
Kirschenbaum, Julia Friedrich, and Christian Zinke-Wehlmann. 2023. Maturity assessment for In-
dustry 5.0: A review of existing maturity models. Journal of Manufacturing Systems 66:200–210.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmsy.2022.12.009.
Herden, Tino T. 2020. Explaining the competitive advantage generated from analytics with the know-
ledge-based view: the example of logistics and supply chain management. Business Research
13(1):163–214. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40685-019-00104-x.
Hernández, Elder, Pedro Senna, Daniela Silva, Rui Rebelo, Ana C. Barros, and César Toscano. 2020.
Implementing RAMI4.0 in production—A multi-case study. In Progress in digital and physical man-
ufacturing, ed. Henrique A. Almeida, Joel C. Vasco, 49–56. Cham: Springer.
Hess, Thomas, Christian Matt, Alexander Benlian, and Florian Wiesböck. 2016. Options for formulating a
digital transformation strategy. MIS Quarterly Executive 15:123–139.
Hevner, A.R., S.T. March, J. Park, and S. Ram. 2004. Design science in information systems research. MIS
Quarterly 28(1):75. https://doi.org/10.2307/25148625.
Huang, Ying, Jannik Schuehle, Alan L. Porter, and Jan Youtie. 2015. A systematic method to create search
strategies for emerging technologies based on the Web of Science: illustrated for ‘Big Data’. Scien-
tometrics 105(3):2005–2022. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-015-1638-y.
Hunke, Fabian, Christian Engel, Ronny Schüritz, and Philipp Ebel. 2019. Understanding the anatomy of
analytics-based services—A taxonomy to conceptualize the use of data and analytics in services. In
Proceedings of the 27th European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS).
Hunke, Fabian, Daniel Heinz, and Gerhard Satzger. 2021. Creating customer value from data: foundations
and archetypes of analytics-based services. Electronic Markets https://doi.org/10.1007/s12525-021-
00506-y.
John, Meenu M., Helena H. Olsson, and Jan Bosch. 2021. Towards MLOps: a framework and maturity
model. In 2021 47th Euromicro Conference, 1–8.
Johnson, Mark W., Clayton M. Christensen, and Henning Kagermann. 2008. Reinventing your business
model. Harvard business review 86(12):57–68.
Jonker, Jan, and Niels Faber. 2021. Business modelling. In Organizing for sustainability, ed. Jan Jonker,
Niels Faber, 19–33. Cham: Springer.
Joyce, Alexandre, and Raymond L. Paquin. 2016. The triple layered business model canvas: A tool to
design more sustainable business models. Journal of Cleaner Production 135:1474–1486. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.06.067.
K

--- PAGE 39 ---
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343 341
Kehrer, Stefan, Dierk Jugel, and Alfred Zimmermann. 2016. Categorizing requirements for enterprise ar-
chitecture management in big data literature. In 2016 IEEE 20th International Enterprise Distributed
Object Computing Workshop (EDOCW). Vienna, Austria, 05.09.2016–09.09.2016, 1–8.
Kohtamäki, Marko, Vinit Parida, Pejvak Oghazi, Heiko Gebauer, and Tim Baines. 2019. Digital servitiza-
tion business models in ecosystems: A theory of the firm. Journal of Business Research 104:380–392.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2019.06.027.
Kotarba, Marcin. 2018. Digital transformation of business models. Foundations of Management 10(1):
123–142. https://doi.org/10.2478/fman-2018-0011.
Kowalkowski, Christian, Heiko Gebauer, and Rogelio Oliva. 2017. Service growth in product firms:
Past, present, and future. Industrial Marketing Management 60:82–88. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
indmarman.2016.10.015.
Kühne, Babett, and Tilo Böhmann. 2020. Formative evaluation of data-driven business models—The data
insight generator. In Proceedings of the 53rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences,
ed. Tung Bui
LaValle, Steve, Eric Lesser, Rebecca Shockley, Michael S. Hopkins, and Nina Kruschwitz. 2011. Big data,
analytics and the path from insights to value. MIT sloan management review 52(2):21–32.
Lehrer, Christiane, Alexander Wieneke, Jan vom Brocke, Reinhard Jung, and Stefan Seidel. 2018. How
big data Analytics enables service innovation: materiality, affordance, and theindividualization ofser-
vice. Journal ofManagement Information Systems 35(2):424–460. https://doi.org/10.1080/07421222.
2018.1451953.
Leiting, Tobias, Maximilian Schacht, and Jana Frank. 2020. Market launch of smart services. In Smart
service management: design guidelines and best practices, ed. Maria Maleshkova, Niklas Kühl, and
Philipp Jussen, 89–105. Cham: Springer.
Malta, Pedro, and Rui D. Sousa. 2016. Process oriented approaches in enterprise architecture for business-
IT alignment. Procedia Computer Science 100:888–893. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2016.09.239.
Mettler, Tobias. 2011. Maturity assessment models: a design science research approach. International
Journal of Society Systems Science 3(1/2):81. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJSSS.2011.038934.
Miles, Matthew B., and A. Michael Huberman. 2009. Qualitative data analysis: An expanded sourcebook,
2nd edn., Thousand Oaks: SAGE.
Mugge, Paul, Haroon Abbu, Timothy L. Michaelis, Alexander Kwiatkowski, and Gerhard Gudergan.
2020. Patterns of digitization. Research-Technology Management 63(2):27–35. https://doi.org/10.
1080/08956308.2020.1707003.
Müller, Anna-Luisa, and Regina Pfleger. 2014. Business transformation towards sustainability. Business
Research 7(2):313–350. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40685-014-0011-y.
Müller, Julian, and Oana Buliga. 2019. Archetypes for data-driven business models for manufacturing
companies in Industry 4.0. In International Conference on Information Systems 2019 Special Interest
Group on Big Data Proceedings, Vol. 2
Muller, Louis, and Mike Hart. 2016. Updating business intelligence and analytics maturity models for new
developments. In Decision support systems VI—addressing sustainability and societal challenges:
2nd International Conference, ICDSST 2016, Plymouth, UK, May 23–25, 2016 Proceedings, Vol.
250, ed. Shaofeng Liu, Boris Delibašić, and Festus In Oluseyi Oderanti, 137–151. Cham: Springer.
Myers, Michael D., and Michael Newman. 2007. The qualitative interview in IS research: Examining the
craft. Information and Organization 17(1):2–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infoandorg.2006.11.001.
O’Donovan, Peter, Ken Bruton, and Dominic T.J. O’Sullivan. 2016. IAMM: a maturity model for measur-
ing industrial analytics capabilities in large-scale manufacturing facilities. International Journal of
Prognostics and Health Management https://doi.org/10.36001/ijphm.2016.v7i4.2466.
Olszak, Celina M., and Maria Mach-Krol. 2018. A conceptual framework for assessing an organization’s
readiness to adopt big data. Sustainability 10(10):3734. https://doi.org/10.3390/su10103734.
Osterwalder, Alexander, and Yves Pigneur. 2013. Business model generation: A handbook for visionaries,
game changers, and challengers. New York: Wiley & Sons.
Parvinen, Petri, Essi Pöyry, Robin Gustafsson, Miikka Laitila, and Matti Rossi. 2020. Advancing data
monetization and the creation of data-based business models. Communications of the Association for
Information Systems 47(1):25–49. https://doi.org/10.17705/1CAIS.04702.
Pathak, Sunil, Venkataraghavan Krishnaswamy, and Mayank Sharma. 2021. Big data analytics capabilities:
a novel integrated fitness framework based on a tool-based content analysis. Enterprise Information
Systems https://doi.org/10.1080/17517575.2021.1939427.
Payne, Adrian, Pennie Frow, and Andreas Eggert. 2017. The customer value proposition: evolution, devel-
opment, and application in marketing. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 45(4):467–489.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11747-017-0523-z.
K

--- PAGE 40 ---
342 Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343
Peffers, Ken, Tuure Tuunanen, Marcus A. Rothenberger, and Samir Chatterjee. 2007. A design science
research methodology for information systemsresearch. Journal ofManagement Information Systems
24(3):45–77. https://doi.org/10.2753/MIS0742-1222240302.
Pereira, Carla M., and Pedro Sousa. 2005. Enterprise architecture: business and IT alignment. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2005 ACM symposium on Applied computing—SAC ‘05. Santa Fe, New Mexico,
13.03.2005–17.03.2005, ed. Hisham M. Haddad, Andrea Omicini, Roger L. Wainwright, and Lorie
M. Leibrock, 1344. New York: ACM Press.
Pieroni, Marina P., Tim C. McAloone, and Daniela C. Pigosso. 2020. From theory to practice: system-
atising and testing business model archetypes for circular economy. Resources, Conservation and
Recycling 162:105029. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2020.105029.
Pöppelbuß, Jens, and Maximilian Röglinger. 2011. What makes a useful maturity model? A framework of
general design principles for maturity models and its demonstration in business process management.
In Proceedings of the 19th European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS 2011), 28.
Porter, Michael E. 1985. Competitive strategy: Techniques for analyzing industries and competitors. New
York: Free Press.
Porter, Michael E. 2014. Competitive advantage ofnations: Creating and sustaining superior performance.
New York: Free Press.
Rashed, Faisal, and Paul Drews. 2020. Supporting the development and realization of data-driven business
models with enterprise architecture modeling and management. In Business information systems, Vol.
389, ed. Witold Abramowicz, Gary Klein, 264–276. Cham: Springer.
Rashed, Faisal, and Paul Drews. 2021. How does enterprise architecture support the design and realization
of data-driven business models? An empirical study. In Innovation through information systems, Vol.
48, ed. Frederik Ahlemann, Reinhard Schütte, and Stefan Stieglitz, 662–677. Cham: Springer.
Retrialisca, Fitri, and Umi Chotijah. 2020. The maturity measurement of big data adoption in manufac-
turing companies using the TDWI maturity model. Journal of Information Systems Engineering and
Business Intelligence 6(1):70. https://doi.org/10.20473/jisebi.6.1.70-78.
Robinson, Oliver C. 2014. Sampling in Interview-Based Qualitative Research: A Theoretical and Practi-
cal Guide. Qualitative Research in Psychology 11(1):25–41. https://doi.org/10.1080/14780887.2013.
801543.
Sarker, Iqbal H. 2021. Data science and analytics: an overview from data-driven smart computing, deci-
sion-making and applications perspective. SN Computer Science 2(5):377. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s42979-021-00765-8.
Šaša, Ana, and Marjan Krisper. 2011. Enterprise architecture patterns forbusiness process support analysis.
Journal of Systems and Software 84(9):1480–1506. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2011.02.043.
Schroderus, Joonas, Lester A. Lasrado, Karan Menon, and Hannu Kärkkäinen. 2022. Towards a pay-per-X
maturity model for equipment manufacturing companies. Procedia Computer Science 196:226–234.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2021.12.009.
Schüritz, Ronny, Stefan Seebacher, and Rebecca Dorner. 2017. Capturing value from data: revenue mod-
els for data-driven services. In Proceedings of the 50th Hawaii International Conference on System
Sciences.
Sjödin, David R., Vinit Parida, Markus Leksell, and Aleksandar Petrovic. 2018. Smart factory implemen-
tation and process innovation a preliminary maturity model for leveraging digitalization in manu-
facturing. Research-Technology Management 61(5):22–31. https://doi.org/10.1080/08956308.2018.
1471277.
Sonnenberg, Christian, and Jan vom Brocke. 2012. Evaluations in the science of the artificial—Recon-
sidering the build-evaluate pattern in design science research. In International conference on design
science research in information systems, Vol. 7286, 381–397. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.
van Steenbergen, Marlies, Rik Bos, Sjaak Brinkkemper, Inge van de Weerd, and Willem Bekkers. 2010.
The design of focus area maturity models. In Global perspectives on design science research, Vol.
6105, ed. David Hutchison, Takeo Kanade, Josef Kittler, Jon M. Kleinberg, Friedemann Mattern,
John C. Mitchell, Moni Naor, Oscar Nierstrasz, C. Pandu Rangan, Bernhard Steffen, Madhu Sudan,
Demetri Terzopoulos, Doug Tygar, Moshe Y. Vardi, Gerhard Weikum, Robert Winter, J. Leon Zhao,
and Stephan Aier, 317–332. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.
Stelzl, Katharina, Maximilian Röglinger, and Katrin Wyrtki. 2020. Building an ambidextrous organization:
a maturity model for organizational ambidexterity. Business Research 13(3):1203–1230. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s40685-020-00117-x.
Stewart, David W., and Prem N. Shamdasani. 2014. Focus groups: Theory and practice. Thousand Oaks:
SAGE.
K

--- PAGE 41 ---
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2023) 75:303–343 343
Teece, David J. 2010. Business models, business strategy and innovation. Long Range Planning
43(2–3):172–194. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lrp.2009.07.003.
The Open Group. The TOGAF® Standard, Version 9.2. Van Haren Publishing, 2018.
Tom, Edith, Aybüke Aurum, and Richard Vidgen. 2013. An exploration of technical debt. Journal of Sys-
tems and Software 86(6):1498–1516. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2012.12.052.
Trčka, Nikola. 2010. Workflow data footprints. In Business information systems, Vol. 47, ed. Will van der
Aalst, John Mylopoulos, Norman M. Sadeh, Michael J. Shaw, Clemens Szyperski, Witold Abramow-
icz, and Robert Tolksdorf, 218–229. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.
Tremblay, Monica C., Alan R. Hevner, and Donald J. Berndt. 2010. Focus groups for artifact refinement
and evaluation indesign research. Communications ofthe Association forInformation Systems https://
doi.org/10.17705/1CAIS.02627.
Tsoy, Mikhail, and D.S. Staples. 2021. What are the critical success factors for agile analytics projects?
Information Systems Management 38(4):324–341. https://doi.org/10.1080/10580530.2020.1818899.
Ullah, Faheem, and Muhammad Ali Babar. 2019. Architectural tactics for big data cybersecurity analytics
systems: a review. Journal of Systems and Software 151:81–118. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2019.
01.051.
Urbach, Nils, and Maximilian Röglinger. 2019. Digitalization cases. Cham: Springer.
Urbach, Nils, Maximilian Röglinger, Karlheinz Kautz, Rose Alinda Alias, Carol Saunders, and Martin
Wiener (eds.). 2021. Mastering digital transformation for global business, 1st edn., Digitalization
cases, Vol. 2. Cham: Springer.
Vanauer, Martin, Carsten Bohle, and Bernd Hellingrath. 2015. Guiding the introduction of big data in or-
ganizations: a methodology with business- and data-driven ideation and enterprise architecture man-
agement-based implementation. In 2015 48th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences
(HICSS). HI, USA, 05.01.2015–08.01.2015, 908–917.
Voigt, Kai-Ingo, and Julian M. Müller (eds.). 2021. Digital business models in industrial ecosystems.
Cham: Springer.
Voigt, Kai-Ingo, Fabian Brechtel, Marie-Christin Schmidt, and Johannes Veile. 2021. Industrial data-driven
business models: towards a goods-service-data continuum. In Digital business models in industrial
ecosystems, ed. Kai-Ingo Voigt, Julian M. Müller, 137–153. Cham: Springer.
Wang, Yi, Hai-Shu Ma, Jing-Hui Yang, and Ke -Sheng Wang. 2017. Industry 4.0: a way from mass cus-
tomization to masspersonalization production. Advances in Manufacturing 5(4):311–320. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s40436-017-0204-7.
Weber, Christian, Jan Königsberger, Laura Kassner, and Bernhard Mitschang. 2017. M2DDM—Amaturity
model for data-driven manufacturing. Procedia CIRP 63:173–178. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.
2017.03.309.
Webster, Jane, and Richard T. Watson. 2002. Analyzing the past to prepare for the future: writing a litera-
ture review. MIS Quarterly 26(2):xiii–xxiii.
Weking, Jörg, Maria Stöcker, Marek Kowalkiewicz, Markus Böhm, and Helmut Krcmar. 2020. Leveraging
industry 4.0—A business model pattern framework. International Journal of Production Economics
225:107588. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2019.107588.
Winter, Robert, and Ronny Fischer. 2006. Essential Layers, Artifacts, and Dependencies of Enterprise
Architecture. In 2006 10th IEEE International Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Conference
Workshops (EDOCW’06). Hong Kong, China, 16.10.2006–20.10.2006, 30.
Woroch, Robert, and Gero Strobel. 2021. Understanding value creation in digital companies—A taxonomy
of IoT-enabled business models. ECIS 2021 Research Papers, Vol. 11
Zammuto, Raymond F., Terri L. Griffith, Ann Majchrzak, Deborah J. Dougherty, and Samer Faraj.
2007. Information technology and the changing fabric of organization. Organization Science
18(5):749–762. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1070.0307.
Zhang, Cheng, Chen Daindi, Fei Tao, and Ang Liu. 2019. Data driven smart customization. Procedia CIRP
81:564–569. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2019.03.156.
Zonta, Tiago, Cristiano A. da Costa, Rodrigo da Rosa Righi, Miromar J. de Lima, Eduardo S. da Trindade,
and Guann P. Li. 2020. Predictive maintenance in the Industry 4.0: A systematic literature review.
Computers & Industrial Engineering 150:106889. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2020.106889.
Zupic, Ivan, and Tomaž Čater. 2015. Bibliometric methods in management and organization. Organiza-
tional Research Methods 18(3):429–472. https://doi.org/10.1177/1094428114562629.
K