--- PAGE 1 ---
© Санкт-Петербургский государственный университет, 2020
Вестник СПбГУ. Экономика. 2020. Т. 36. Вып. 2
https://doi.org/10.21638/spbu05.2020.204 243
UDC: 65.011.56
JEL: O33
The framework for assessing company’s digital
transformation readiness
O.V.Stoianova, T.A.Lezina, V.V.Ivanova
St. Petersburg State University,
7–9, Universitetskaya nab., St. Petersburg, 199034, Russian Federation
For citation: Stoianova O.V., Lezina T.A., Ivanоva V.V. (2020). The framework for assessing company’s
digital transformation readiness. St Petersburg University Journal of Economic Studies, vol.36, iss.2,
pp.243–265. https://doi.org/10.21638/spbu05.2020.204
At present, the focus of discussions on digital transformation has shifted from issues of its
necessitytoproblemsofassessingacompany’sreadinessfordigitaltransformation.Thespeci-
ficity of digital transformation in Russia requires new criteria of readiness and prioritization
ofexistingcriteria.Thisstudyexploresacombinationoffactors(prerequisites)thatdetermine
the readiness of Russian companies for digital transformation. Our hypothesis is that it is pos-
sible to systematize and formalize these prerequisites, which can be presented as a framework
for assessing readiness. The purpose of the study is to design such a framework that takes
into account not only the current state of the company, but also its previous development.
The paper formulates the requirements for the readiness assessment system in the form of a
framework. It also proposes a method of desing a framework with these requirements. The
method combines analysis of practical cases and theoretical study of modern concepts and
best management practices. As a result of applying the proposed method a framework for
a company’s readiness for digital transformation assessment (DTRA) is created. The DTRA
framework includes criteria and characteristics of readiness grouped into domains. It is in-
tended for a qualitative evaluation of readiness and for understanding obstacles to success of
the digital transformation.
Keywords: digital transformation, the company’s readiness, framework, criteria of readiness,
readiness assessment.
Introduction
The digital transformation of the economy is connected with high expectations (new
quality of services, increasing competitiveness and productivity, unique experiences, etc.)
and concerns (new professions, job loses, threats to information security, high-cost risks)
[Sebastian et al., 2017]. Digital transformation is a complex phenomenon that affects all
areas in company organization and management and in the internal and external envi-
ronment [Khan, 2016]. Misunderstanding the essence of this transformation, mistakes
in determining initial projects, and too high expectations become severe obstacles to a
company’s success.
According to international cross-sectoral research on the impact of the digital trans-
formation on company activity, conducted by analytical agency Arthur D.Little [Opitz et
al., 2015], only 15% of companies understand digital transformation strategies and allo-
cate resources for analyses of the implementation of strategies and improvements.

--- PAGE 2 ---
244 Вестник СПбГУ. Экономика. 2020. Т. 36. Вып. 2
Choosing a strategy for digital transformation has crucial importance for Russian
companies. The Institute of Statistical Studies and the Knowledge Economy identified the
digitalization index of Russian businesses as 28 points (Finladn is ranked highest, at 50)
[Abdrakhmanova et al., 2019]. However, this indicator characterizes the level of technol-
ogy used in business, rather than a transition to new business models. Moreover, as stated
by A.Kudrin on August 19, 2019, the following problem has emerged: about 37% of the
national project’s “Digital Economy” funds are blocked because they have not been re-
quested [Minak, 2019].
According to the analytic report of the Digital Transformation in Russia [KMDA,
2018], only 25% of companies are in the process of implementing digital transformation,
and only 9% have a strategy. These are mainly in the banking sector, IT companies, and
telecommunications. 53.2% of the 700 respondents from different industries noted that
the main obstacle to digital transformation is the lack of a clear strategy.
One of the reasons for this failure is the incomplete methodological base of company
management in the digital economy, including in the field of digital transformation man-
agement. Existing models of IT management cannot be used as the basement for manag-
ing digital transformation, because they do not take into account features of the process,
which involves changing all aspects, including company management, business models,
and business processes, and not just information systems and technologies.
Recommendations about digital transformation management, offered by the schol-
arly community and by analytical and consulting companies, are usually general. They
lack formal methods and models of solving many management problems, particularly the
problem of choosing a digital transformation strategy. Successful practices of the digital
transformation of Russian companies are still few and not consolidated to universal ap-
proaches.
Critical parameters for choosing a digital transformation strategy result from assess-
ments of the current state of the company, or rather an assessment of the company’s readi-
ness for digital transformation. The analysis of published research in this area revealed a
problem in choosing measurable readiness criteria. Most existing approaches for evaluat-
ing companies and digital transformations consider the level of digital maturity, and not
readiness (in the sense of being prepared for implementing concrete activities). Another
circumstancethatexacerbatesthisproblemistheinsufficientconsiderationofthefeatures
of the digital transformation of Russian companies.
The results of numerous studies confirm the specificity of digital transformation in
Russia. For example, according to the PWC survey, representatives of Russian companies
identify “inflexible and slow processes” (70% of respondents versus 42% in other coun-
tries) and “lack of integration of new and existing technologies and data” (73% versus
59%) as the main obstacles to digital transformation [PWC, 2018]. These data confirm
that for Russian companies, it is necessary to use specific prioritization of criteria for as-
sessingreadinessfordigitaltransformation.Thisrequiresdevelopinganintegratedassess-
ment system that includes interrelated indicators (metrics) of expectations and strategic
goals of the company, the quality of business processes, competencies and motivation of
employees, the maturity of technological environment of the company, manageability of
information support, and a number of other characteristics.
For companies that are just starting this transformation, key questions are: how to
start and what barriers are hindering the digital transformation. These questions relate to

--- PAGE 3 ---
Вестник СПбГУ. Экономика. 2020. Т. 36. Вып. 2 245
the company’s readiness for digital transformation. In this study, we consider the concept
of readiness through the prism of the company’s capabilities and internal barriers to digi-
tal transformation. The field covered by this study relates to a combination of factors (pre-
requisites)thatdeterminetheavailabilityofRussiancompaniesfordigitaltransformation.
The hypothesis of research can be formulated as follows: “There is the possibility to sys-
tematize and present in a formalized form (in the form of a framework) the prerequisites
that determine the company’s readiness for digital transformation”. The purpose of the
study is to design a framework that allows evaluating readiness and identifying barriers to
digital transformation, taking into account not only the current state of the company but
also the previous development.
Related work
Digital business transformation is widely discussed both in business and academic
literature. The results of numerous studies represent that only the synergy of business
and digital management strategies lead to success. For example, MIT Sloan Management
and Capgemini Consulting conclude that digitally mature organizations are 26% more
profitable than their average industry competitors due to their ability to combine digital
and transformational management intensity [Westerman et al., 2017]. The need for busi-
ness and IT consistency is based on the idea that new technologies introduced into an
organization should comply with its business strategy and goals [Nissen, Termer, 2015].
Moreover, some authors [Stucki, Wochner, 2019] consider the complementarity of tech-
nological and organizational capital as the key to the success of the digital transformation.
Typicalbarrierscompaniesfaceinthetransformationcanbedividedintotwogroups:
leadershipandinstitutional [Ismail, Khater, Zaki,2017].Amongproblemsofleadershipis
the absence or uncertainty of a digital strategy, which turns out to be the most significant
barrier, especially in the early stages of transformation [Kane et al., 2015]. Institutional
barriers include insufficient organizational structure, lack of technical skills and invest-
ments, regulatory restrictions, the cultural gap between managers and employees, and
even psychological aspects, such as indifference to the need for transformation and fear of
change [EY, 2013; Von Leipzig et al., 2017]. These problems are not only in the scale of the
novelty of digitalization, but rather in the company’s inability to function outside of the
familiar operating environment [Von Leipzig et al., 2017]. All these restrictions require
the company to deeply analyze its internal relations and operations, to understand the
company’s readiness for digital transformation.
Leading consulting companies Forrester, BCG, IDC, PWC, and KPMG began devel-
oping methods and models that allow assessing a company’s ability to implement digital
projects in the first half of the current decade. As far back as 2008 Forrester [Gill, Van-
Boskirk, 2017] proposed a methodology for evaluating e-business and digital marketing.
The modern version of the Forrester model is a two-level model of digital maturity fo-
cusedonassessingeffectivenessofimplementingdigitaltechnologyforrealizingcompeti-
tive strategies. The readiness of companies for digital transformation as one indicator of
digitalmaturityisassessedintheareasofVisionandstrategy,Talent,Culture,Technology,
and Structure (team organization). The model [BCG, 2016] allows one to evaluate a com-
pany’s orientation to changes, and to a lesser extent its current state, using such measure-
ments as digitally driven business strategies, creating new businesses and development

--- PAGE 4 ---
246 Вестник СПбГУ. Экономика. 2020. Т. 36. Вып. 2
directions, digitalizing customer relations, implementing digital capabilities, and trans-
formingtechnologies.Themodel[IDC,2015]measuresmaturitybyareasofManagement
(leadership), Omni practice, labor force, operational model, and information. This model
allows companies to get a perception of the maturity level, to form a map of processes to
be optimized, and to recommend technologies. A similar approach is used by the com-
pany [PWC, 2016] to determine the level of digital maturity along six dimensions, such as
businessmodel,processes,digitalculture,compliancewithlawsandrisks,ITarchitecture,
andrelationswithcustomers.Thecompany[KPMG,2016]evaluatestheabilitytousenew
(digital) business, considering digital strategies, talents, flexible models of infrastructure,
management, and digitalization of business processes. Notice, that all of the considered
models do not contain a comrehensive assessment of the management system: they place
emphasis on the automation/digitalization of business processes, but do not consider the
level of their connectivity and regulaition, the company’s digital culture is analyzed only
from the point of view of competencies, etc.
Not only consulting companies, but also IT industry leaders (for example, IBM), IT
communities (for example, the Open Group) and the academic community develop man-
agement and IT standarts. IT companies [Jan van Groningen, 2017] assess readiness for
transformation through the prism of technological readiness as a determining factor in
possible directions of changes (rethinking) of a business: developing competencies, using
technologies in standard activities, introducing new working methods (new quality of
customer service, flexible customization to customer needs, integration with customers
based on open standards), and introducing new business models.
Using the methodology of enterprise architecture framework TOGAF, the Business
Transformation Readiness Assessment framework [The Open Group, 2018] offers a list
of readiness factors, which can be specified for any particular enterprise. A significant
drawback of this framework is that it requires its inclusion in the general project of the
company architecture development, which is not always possible at the start of transfor-
mation projects.
The academic community, including that in Russia, also conducts active research
in assessing readiness for transformation and determining a company’s digital maturity.
Many authors emphasize the fact that existing standards provide recommendations for
changes, and are not focused on the digital nature of transformation; reference models,
including consulting models, are often generalized [Wulf, Mettler, Brenner, 2017].
Proposedbytheacademiccommunity,evaluationmodelsareusuallyorientedtospe-
cificsectorsoractivitiesandcontainonlypartlyoverlappingareasofreadinessassessment.
However, their evaluation criteria are different. Thus, [Wulf, Mettler, Brenner, 2017] offers
to evaluate digital readiness according to seventeen criteria clustered into seven groups
(strategy, consumers, services/products, processes, management, information, technolo-
gies, and infrastructure). In turn, the DREAMY model (Digital Readiness Assessment
Maturity model) [De Carolis et al., 2017] evaluates company processes grouped in five
areas (Design and Engineering, Production Management, Quality Management, Main-
tenance Management, Logistic, Management). Another framework [Sánchez, Zuntini,
2018], unlike others, evaluates not only internal but also external factors that determine
readinessfordigitaltransformation:theseincludeecosystemcollaboration,asdetermined
by the level of partnerships with stakeholders; the power of consumers, the force of sup-
pliers, digital products and services, industry boundaries that are changing due to new

--- PAGE 5 ---
Вестник СПбГУ. Экономика. 2020. Т. 36. Вып. 2 247
digital capabilities, competitors (according Five Forces concept). Framework based on
Industry 4.0 concept [Schumacher, Erol, Sihn, 2016] was designed to assess the maturity
of an industrial company and contains nine dimensions: strategy, leadership, customers,
products, operations, culture, people, governance, technology.
In any case, diagnosing the state of a company to identify internal and external [Sán-
chez,Zuntini,2018]constraints,aswellaspossiblerisks,shouldbeakeystartingpointfor
digitaltransformation.Atthesametime,ascompaniesriskapproachingtransformationas
an IT project, a concept is needed to integrate business and IT strategy. This risk could be
overcome within the framework of the architectural approach [Dolganova, Deeva, 2019]
to building the current and target architecture of the company, defining a transformation
scenario, and ensuring smart management. Digital transformation is not recommended
to be implemented as a single project [Issa et al., 2018], so as not to lead the company to
a big failure, but to fulfill it gradually, based on capability maturity, that is, alignment and
integration of business and technology.
As it is easy to see, the considered frameworks are oriented to a different level of
generalization. They differ both in the object of evaluation — the effectiveness of digital
technologies in the company, readiness to change, readiness to create a new business, etc.,
and measurement/evaluation domains. Moreover, there is no consistent terminology in
the discussions on company readiness. Conducted analysis of existing solutions shows
that there are several concepts concerning company readiness for digital transformation
suchas“readinessfordigitaltransformation”,“digitalreadiness”,“digitalmaturity”,“digital
business aptitude”, and others. At the same time, the methodologies of the framework
development used by different authors have much in common.
The analysis and synthesis of methodologies for the development of models/frame-
works made it possible to distinguish the following stages (steps).
1. Setting objectives for the model/framework. Characteristics and limitations. On this
stage,consultingcompaniesmonitorsuccessfulprojects[KPMG,2016]toconfirm
the need to design a framework or develop previously existing evaluation models
Forrester [Gill, VanBoskirk, 2017]. In the research of the academic community,
the objective of developing a framework is formed based on a constant study of
transformation problems [Schumacher, Erol, Sihn, 2016], identifying the need for
a model by the business community [Dolganova, Deeva, 2019].
2. The study of related materials. Consulting companies rely, as a rule, on their own
projects [PWC, 2016; KPMG, 2016; Gill, VanBoskirk, 2017], interviews of part-
ners [BCG, 2016]. The academic researchers [Schumacher, Erol, Sihn, 2016;
Dolganova,Deeva,2019;Sánchez,Zuntini,2018;Issaetal.,2018]provideanalysis
of articles, analytical reports of consulting companies and IT companies. Criteria
for selecting sources corresponding to a given goal are defined, general concepts
of a future model are marked.
3. Generalization of desired concepts: levels of models/frameworks, measurements. On
thisstage,throughtheusedmethodologies,thegeneralframeworkofthemodelis
determined [Schumacher, Erol, Sihn, 2016; Dolganova, Deeva, 2019; Bibby, Dehe,
2018; De Carolis et al., 2017].
4. Consistency assessment. This stage involves verification of the model with
government programs, adopted methodologies, and standards: TOGAF
[Dolganova, Deeva, 2019], CMMI, COBIT, CBOK [Isaev, Korovkina, Tabakova,

--- PAGE 6 ---
248 Вестник СПбГУ. Экономика. 2020. Т. 36. Вып. 2
2016; Issa et al., 2018]; with scientific articles and analytical reports, official
recommendationsfortheimplementationofIndustry4.0[Schumacher,Erol,Sihn,
2016; Bibby, Dehe, 2018]; scientific works and experience of briefing seminars
[PWC, 2016; KPMG, 2016; BCG, 2016; IDC, 2015; Gill, VanBoskirk 2017].
5. Testing (verification) on companies. On this stage, a combination of methods is
used to test the models, including analysis of cases of successful companies
[Schumacher, Erol, Sihn, 2016; Sánchez, Zuntini, 2018; Dolganova, Deeva, 2019;
Wulf, Mettler, Brenner, 2017], semi-structured interview [De Carolis et al., 2017;
Bibby, Dehe, 2018; Gill, VanBoskirk 2017; BCG, 2016; IDC, 2015; Wulf, Mettler,
Brenner, 2017], questionnaires [KPMG, 2016; PWC, 2016; Isaev, Korovkina,
Tabakova, 2016], seminars and assessment of assumptions that are built into the
logic of the case study, testing on real projects [Schumacher, Erol, Sihn, 2016;
Wulf, Mettler, Brenner, 2017].
6. Updating the model/framework and presenting results. This stage is described in all
studies of the academic community and reports of consulting agencies. Changes
are presented and justified, evaluation algorithms are specified, recommendations
for application are offered. In some cases, new versions of the Forrester models
[Gill, VanBoskirk 2017] are formed.
The identified similarity of the approaches used to the development of frameworks
does not ensure the generality of the obtained results, including the different purposes of
the frameworks. On the whole set of proposed solutions for assessing the company’s abil-
ity to implement digital transformation projects, in terms of the evaluation results, two
approaches can be distinguished. The first approach (Approach A) allows defining the
company’s level of digital readiness/maturity; the second approach (Approach B) allows
assessing specific aspects of the company’s readiness for digital transformation.
As examples of Approach A we can note models/frameworks from Forrester [Gill,
VanBoskirk, 2017], BCG [BCG, 2016], IDC [IDC, 2015], Maturity Model for Assessing
Industry 4.0 Readiness [Schumacher, Erol, Sihn, 2016]. Forrester identified three levels of
digital maturity: digital beginner, digital intermediate, digital advanced. The BCG frame-
work describes four stages of digital transformation (levels of digital maturity): digital
passive, digital literate, digital performer, digital leader. IDC identifies five stages of digital
transformation:digital skeptic, digital experimenter,digitalcompetitor,digitalleader,and
digital disruptor. Despite the usefulness of these models/frameworks (as well as others are
implementing the same approach) for assessing the level of a company’s digital readiness/
maturity, they are not suitable for answering the questions:
• how to start, and does the company have the required capability to move to the
next level of digital transformation;
• what are internal transition barriers?
Partially, this drawback is eliminated by the models implementing Approach B, for
example, The Digital Business Aptitude mode [KPMG, 2016] etc., which helps compa-
nies to understand how prepared they are for adopting new digital technologies, as they
propose the specific characteristics, which correspond to the key success factors of digital
transformation.
The bottleneck of the models which implement approach B is the ambiguity of evalu-
ation criteria, characteristics, and metrics. Some of the above-mentioned models, as well

--- PAGE 7 ---
Вестник СПбГУ. Экономика. 2020. Т. 36. Вып. 2 249
as other models/frameworks for assessing readiness, contain several universal character-
istics: the availability of company’s strategy, support for changes by the company’s man-
agement, digitalization of interaction with the client, the level of automation of the com-
pany’s processes, the level of IT infrastructure, staff development, digital culture, etc. But
the meaning of these characteristics varies in different models. Such characteristics as
calibrated risk management [KPMG, 2016], risky, innovative solutions (tolerance of in-
novative risk) [Gill, VanBoskirk, 2017], etc. are presented only in particular frameworks/
models. Moreover, in the mentioned above models/frameworks, there is no justification
for choosing the characteristics of readiness and principle for grouping them.
The analysis confirms the relevance of developing a framework that includes crite-
ria and characteristics of companies’ readiness for digital transformation and allows to
identify opportunities and obstacles based on which the choice of digital transformation
strategy can be justified.
Analysis of applicability of existing solutions for
readiness assessment by Russian companies
To understand whether the Russian specifics impose additional restrictions on the
usage of existing frameworks for assessing readiness for digital transformation in domes-
tic companies, a survey of representatives of Russian companies holding senior and mid-
dle-levelmanagerswasconducted.ApproximatelyhalfoftherespondentswereITmanag-
ers and specialists with managerial authority. The purpose of the survey was to identify
conformity between the respondents’ assessment of the company’s readiness for transfor-
mation in terms of various aspects (business processes, personnel, etc.), and evaluations
of characteristics of these aspects, according to the same respondents. A questionnaire
includedquestionsthatcorrelatedwithreadinesscriteriaconsideredinthemajorityofex-
isting frameworks. Questions were grouped into sections in accordance with the assessed
aspect.Ineachsection,therewasaddeddirectquestionabouttherespondent’sassessment
of the level of preparedness of the relevant aspect [Lezina et al., 2019]. As a result, exciting
findingswereobtained.Forexample,amongthosewhoratedthecompany’sdatamanage-
ment level as high, about 50% noted the absence of data architecture in the company.
Moreover, within the survey, the task was to find out how the current level of use of
digital technologies in companies is linked with digital transformation by company rep-
resentatives. The survey results showed that among companies with a high demand for
digital transformation and a high current level of digital technology usage, only 33.33%
consider the level of readiness for digital transformation as high, 50% as a medium, and
11.11% as low. 6% of respondents could not answer the question.
The results of the survey allowed us to formulate the following conclusions.
The existing frameworks use many concepts and terms that are different and not al-
ways unambiguously interpreted by representatives of Russian companies. This signifi-
cantly complicates the use of these frameworks and reduces the reliability of readiness
estimates obtained with their help.
Theleastunderstandablecriteriaandreadinesscharacteristicsareintheareaofenter-
prise architecture and data management. The main reason is the differences in the devel-
opment of company management systems in Russia and the countries — digital leaders.

--- PAGE 8 ---
250 Вестник СПбГУ. Экономика. 2020. Т. 36. Вып. 2
Theindicatedlimitationsoftheframeworksforassessingdigitalreadiness,alongwith
previously mentioned factors, such as a large number of different criteria and characteris-
ticsofreadiness,aswellasthelackofjustificationofchoosingthesecriteriaandcharacter-
istics,determinetherelevanceofdevelopinganewframework.Thebusinessrequirements
for such a framework are:
• taking into account the characteristics of Russian companies as objects of digital
transformation;
• understandability and reasonableness of the criteria and characteristics of
readiness;
• transparency of the framework structure.
Implementing these requirements will make the framework a convenient tool for in-
dependent (without the involvement of consultants) assessment of readiness for digital
transformation by Russian companies.
General description of the framework
The basis of any assessment system is evaluation criteria. Moreover, for assessment to
bereliable,criteriamustsatisfytherequirementofcompleteness,i.e.,takeintoaccountall
aspects of the object, process, or phenomenon under consideration. Moreover, the more
complicated the concept, being the objects of assessment, the more difficult it is to ensure
completeness of the criteria. This is the case for readiness assessment, since the concept of
readness is vague.
To simplify the task of ensuring criteria completeness, one should resort to grouping
criteria according to some features (the basement of the grouping). The concept of a do-
main can be used to denote the idea of a group. In different areas of knowledge, the term
Domain is considered an area, a set, group of objects, entities, characteristics, actions,
similar in some sense. In frameworks and models, domains are used to define the struc-
ture, ordering characteristics, or variables to make the framework/model more comfort-
ableforanalysis.Inawell-organizedframework,thedomainstructureshouldbebalanced
in terms of the number of criteria for each Domain.
Another important requirement, in addition to the completeness of the criteria and
the balance of their distribution across domains, is the relevance of criteria. In the case of
a high rate of change of the object of assessment and external conditions, ensuring the rel-
evance of criteria becomes the key requirement. Relevance can be maintained in various
ways, the most obvious being the modification of the system by eliminating some criteria
andaddingnewones.Themaindisadvantageofthismethodisthedifficultyofcomparing
evaluation results in a time perspective. A gentler option is to set criteria significance lev-
els and modify them in accordance with changing conditions. The main disadvantage of
this option is the difficulty of objectively assessing significance levels. An alternative is to
use different readiness characteristics within each parameter. Changing the set of charac-
teristics makes it possible to ensure the relevance of criteria system without changing the
structure. The second method is preferable since, in the framework under development, it
is planned to use readiness criteria evaluations as indicators of problems or barries.
To assess characteristics, we propose using so-called metrics — objective quantitative
estimates. For example, for the characteristic “personnel qualifications”, such metrics as

--- PAGE 9 ---
Вестник СПбГУ. Экономика. 2020. Т. 36. Вып. 2 251
“averagescorebasedoncertificationresults”,“numberoferrorsduetothefaultofemploy-
ees”, etc. can be used. However, obtaining metrics for a number of characteristics is not
always possible, due to the lack of initial data, poor data quality, etc. In such a situation,
evidence can be used — facts confirming a particular value of a given characteristic. For
example, for the same characteristic “personnel qualifications”, evidence in favor of the
values “high” or “above average” is the certificate “the presence of training and develop-
ment programs for personnel in the company”.
The alignment of evidence and metrics in accordance with the characteristics that
underlie criteria grouped into domains determines the structure of the framework for
assessing company’s readiness for digital transformation (further, the Digital Transforma-
tion Readiness Assessment (DTRA) framework), which is shown in Figure 1.
It is important to emphasize that the structure of the framework does not imply a
unified integral indicator of a company’s readiness for digital transformation. Its purpose
isaqualitativeassessmentofreadinessaccordingtothemostsignificantuniversalcriteria.
Such evaluation aims to help managers understand what might prevent the success of that
transformation.
Theuniversalityofthecriterionisautonomyfromthetypeandscopeofthecompany,
size, organizational form, and other factors.
Fig 1. The structure of the DTRA framework

--- PAGE 10 ---
252 Вестник СПбГУ. Экономика. 2020. Т. 36. Вып. 2
Design of the study
The framework development methodology should provide compliance with the fol-
lowing system requirements discussed above:
requirement 1. Completeness of the criteria system;
requirement 2. A balanced distribution of criteria across domains;
requirement 3. The relevance of the criteria.
The requirement of relevance can be confirmed only by analysis of practical cases of
companies that successfully implement digital transformation projects. Because there are
not a large number of successful cases among Russian companies, the case research meth-
odology does not guarantee the completeness of criteria. To confirm it, the study should
also include a theoretical analysis of modern concepts and best management practices.
Based on these prerequisites, the authors’ research method was developed; those steps are
described in Table 1.
Table 1. Research stages
Stage 1 Formulating hypotheses about framework domains
Research method Case study
Goal
To identify general trends of changes in companies before implementing the digital
transformation projects, and to formulate hypotheses about the domains of the
framework for assessing companies’ readiness for digital transformation
The subject of
research
Changes of the previous periods in the companies which implement successful
complex large-scale digital transformation projects
Information base
Official websites of companies, press releases, publications in professional journals
and open reporting
Tasks
1. To analyze the activity in companies for the last 5–10 years.
2. To identify key areas of change for each company.
3. To identify common areas of change for all the companies and formulate
hypotheses about the framework domains.
Stage 2 Clarification of framework domains
Research method Analysis of management standards, bodies of knowledge, best practices
Goal To clarify and create rationale of the domains of the DTRA framework
The subject of
research
The content of management methodologies corresponding to each area of change
distinguished on stage 1
Information base Management standards, bodies of knowledge, etc.
Tasks
1. To analyze management methodologies corresponding to each area of change.
2. To match the changes with management tools, which can be used to guide them.
3. To create a final list of key domains of the framework for assessing companies’
readiness for digital transformation.
Stage 3 Identification of criteria and characteristics of readiness
Research method Systematic analysis of management standards and practices
Goal
To identify characteristics of the company’s readiness for digital transformation
corresponding to each domain
The subject of
research
Features of transformation management discussed in the standards corresponding
to each domain

--- PAGE 11 ---
Вестник СПбГУ. Экономика. 2020. Т. 36. Вып. 2 253
Stage 3 Identification of criteria and characteristics of readiness
Information base Management standards, bodies of knowledge, etc.
Tasks
1. To analyze management standards, bodies of knowledge to distinguish best
management practices on the basis of domains
2. To create a list of typical features of transformation management by matching
them with changes of previous periods in companies identified in stage 1 and to
formulate hypotheses about characteristics of readiness
Stage 4 Verification of readiness criteria and characteristics
Research method Case study
Goal To verify characteristics obtained on the previous stage
The subject of
research
Changes of previous periods in engineering companies implementing successful
digital transformation projects (a set of companies differs from the set of
companies used on stage 1)
Information base
Official company websites, press releases, publications in professional journals, and
open reporting
Tasks
1. To match distinguished on previous stage characteristics of readiness with
changes in the companies over the last 5–10 years.
2. To identify typical characteristics presented in most cases and create a verified
list of readiness characteristics.
Stages 1 and 4 use case studies of successful companies that are implementing com-
plex,large-scaleprojectsofdigitaltransformation.Companiesembarkingonsimilarproj-
ects have demonstrated their readiness for digital transformation and have gone through
digital reinvention.
The study was conducted under the following limitations:
• digital leaders (banks) and IT companies were excluded from consideration, as
their high readiness for digital transformation can be explained by the specifics of
their activities;
• the research doesn’t regard the aspect of readiness concerning the company’s
hardware and software assets, because the experience of Russian companies shows
that this kind of gap is not a barrier to digital transformation.
Several examples explain the last limitation. In 2015, the company Russian Post had
the following problems [Russian Post, 2019]: old technologies, a “patchwork” automa-
tion of business processes, absence of systems for planning and optimizing logistics flows,
sales support systems, customer databases, etc. In 2017, Russian Post received the CNEW
AWARDSinthedigitaltransformationcategory.Thecompanyimplementedthefollowing
projects of digital transformation: deploying a unified automated system of post offices,
launching centralized accounting systems based on Data lake methodology, and imple-
menting a computerized information system in more than 1050 regional sorting units.
Several successful digital transformation projects in industries with intense technological
weakness (e.g., mechanical engineering) confirm that the low quality of hardware and
software assets is not a key barrier for digital transformation. It is important to note that
the purchase of hardware and software does not guarantee digital transformation success:
there are examples of failures of digital transformation, despite significant investments in
technology.

--- PAGE 12 ---
254 Вестник СПбГУ. Экономика. 2020. Т. 36. Вып. 2
Results
Results of stage 1. Formation of a hypothesis about the framework domains
Case study 1 was conducted to formulate a hypothesis about the DTRA framework
domains. The objects of research in Case study 1 are industrial companies — digital lead-
ers:
• NPO Energomash JSO (mechanical engineering);
• Cherkizovo Group PJSC (food industry);
• Gazpromneft PJSC (fuel and energy);
• Sportmaster LLC (textile&retail);
• Russian helicopters (mechanical engineering);
• FSUE Russian Post.
The companies belong to different industries, and some of them, such as Russian
Post, had a strong technological backlog at the beginning of the digital transformation.
The subject of study is the changes in companies that preceded successful digital
transformation projects.
The results of the analysis allow identifying common areas of changes, preceding the
implementation of the digital transformation projects such as management system, busi-
ness processes, human resources, and technologies. To illustrate the results, Table 2 pro-
vides a comparison of the presented cases. It contains the practices (projects) of digital
transformation and key changes preceding the digital transformation in each company
grouped according to the distinguished areas.
The distribution of changes by distinguished areas (as a percentage of the total num-
ber of changes), calculated on case-study data, is shown in Figure 2.
23,4
18,8
15,6
40,3
1,9
Management system
Business processes
Human resources
Technologies
Other
A percentage of changes by areas in the total number of changes, %
Fig. 2. Distribution of changes by areas
Note the asymmetry of the obtained structure, in which the technology field includes
a significantly higher number of changes compared to all the others. This circumstance,

--- PAGE 13 ---
Вестник СПбГУ. Экономика. 2020. Т. 36. Вып. 2 255
Table 2. Key changes preceding digital transformation
Management system Business processes Human resources Technologies
NPO Energomash JSO [NPO Energomash JSO, 2019]. Project: “Ensuring digitalization of complex
multi-stage production of the enterprise”
— The research and
technical council has
been established;
— a unified risk
management policy
has been introduced;
— to coordinate
production load,
cooperation
between the holding
companies has been
organized;
— a quality assurance
policy has been
documented.
— Business processes
have been organized
according to common
standards at all
enterprises of the
holding;
— more than
700 business
processes at one of
the enterprises have
been automated.
— Support programs for
young professionals
have been
implemented;
— “School Personnel
reserve”, the
“Schoolmaster”, etc.,
have been established;
— the Centre of Dual
Education started
functioning.
— ERP for management
integration is being
implemented;
— the system of
navigation control of
the equipment has
been developed;
— the corporate portal
has been created;
— digitization of
design and technical
documentation has
begun;
— PLM system
modules have been
implemented.
Cherkizovo Group PJSC [Cherkizovo Group PJSC, 2019]. Projects: robotic plant for producing smoked
sausages, data processing center
— A vertically
integrated system
of four business
segments has been
implemented;
— the company follows
the approach of
cascading strategic
(measurable) goals.
— Business processes
in all companies of
the group have been
unified;
— all lifecycle processes
have been automated;
— the sales network,
supervisors and
merchandisers have
been automated.
— A study of employee
engagement has been
conducted;
— the model
of corporate
management
competencies has
been created;
— a social platform
based on SFA
exchange between
employees of all levels
has been launched.
— Unified corporate
service helpdesk has
been implemented;
— a robotic plant for
producing smoked
sausage (Industry 4.0)
has been launched;
— a geographically
distributed data stor-
age system has been
implemented.
Gazprom Neft PJSC [Gazprom Neft PJSC, 2019]. Projects: software and hardware complex
“Digital substation”, data management system
— A vertically
integrated company
management system
has been formed;
— the Directorate
for digital
transformation has
been created;
— digital technology
centers have been
created.
— Process chain
management system
based on real-
time data has been
implemented;
— business processes of
branches have been
automated;
— coordination of
business processes
using cloud
technologies has been
implemented.
— “Corporate
University” is
functioning
— competence centers
have been created;
— the system of training
of students of leading
universities is
functioning;
— a system of
scholarships for
students has been
implemented.
— A data management
system based on
the Lake data
methodology is being
formed;
— ERP system has been
implemented;
— digital tools for col-
lective process de-
velopment and data
analysis are being
implemented.

--- PAGE 14 ---
256 Вестник СПбГУ. Экономика. 2020. Т. 36. Вып. 2
namely the violation of the systemic requirement of a balanced distribution of criteria by
domains(requirement2),indicatestheneedforadditionalresearchtoclarifythepossibil-
ity of using these areas as domains of the readiness assessment framework.
Sportmaster LLC [Sportmaster LLC, 2019]. Projects: “Cross-docking at entry points”; “Strategic Omni-
channel Communications Planning”
— The company’s
management system
based on strategic
goals has been
implemented;
— functional analysis
and formation
of electronic
sales channel
management
system has been
implemented.
— Optimization and
automation of
business processes of
return logistics has
been carried out;
— business processes in
the budgeting system
has been optimized;
— the system for
complex automation
and control of
business processes’
efficiency has been
implemented.
— The company’s
“Distance Education”
project was
mentioned among
the top 3 in the
nomination of “Best
e-learning project in
the company”;
— the transformation
of the “Distance
education” system
into a knowledge
management system;
— an online tool for
planning training has
been implemented.
— The Oracle data
backup complex
(Zero data
loss recovery
appliance) has been
implemented;
— the project “Return
logistics” on the
automation of return
logistics processes in
the retail chains of the
group was started;
— the data center
certified by
international
standards has been
launched.
Russian helicopters [Russian helicopters, 2019]. Project: a unified information platform for all enterprises
of the holding, a concept for the development of “digital production”
— A policy to improve
business efficiency
has been developed;
— the product life
cycle management
system has been
implemented;
— production planning
and monitoring
systems have been
deployed.
— Automation of
paperless production
processes has been
launched.
— automation of
design processes,
technological
preparation of
production,
manufacturing of
products have been
implemented.
— The corporate
university began
functioning;
— the system of training
of students of leading
universities is
functioning.
— The ERP system has
been implemented;
— end-to-end use of
“digital” data in the
entire process chain
(from develop-
ing a 3D model to
controlling finished
products) has been
introduced.
Russian post [Russian Post, 2019]. Projects: unified automated system of post offices, centralized
accounting systems, integrated data processing center
— The centralization
of accounting and
management work
took place;
— a new organizational
structure has been
implemented;
— a unified IT service
management system
has been created.
— Internal business
processes have been
transformed;
— subscription online
agency serving
1000 publishing
houses without
intermediaries has
been launched.
— The human resource
management
system has been
implemented;
— professional skill
competitions are
held.
— Two projects for the
integrated automa-
tization of financial
and business activi-
ties have been imple-
mented;
— a unified corporate
data transmission
network has been
created.

--- PAGE 15 ---
Вестник СПбГУ. Экономика. 2020. Т. 36. Вып. 2 257
Results of stage 2. Clarification of the framework domains
To characterize the areas of change and create rationale of the framework domains,
analysis of management standards, bodies of knowledge, best practice, etc. (further, stan-
dards & practices), corresponding to each distinguished area of change, was carried out.
The procedure of analysis included the following four steps.
1. Choosing standards & practices corresponding to areas of change.
2. Analysis of standards & practices and choice of recommendations to manage
changes in each area.
3. Identification of standards & practices to be included in the analysis, in case there
are groups of changes that do not correspond to any item from the set, created in
the first step. Analysis of these standards & practices.
4. Creation of the list of domains by clarification, narrowing, splitting areas of
changes based on the results of analysis of standards & practices.
The procedure and results of clarifying the framework domains are illustrated in Fig-
ure 3.
Fig. 3. Transition from the areas of changes to the domains of the DTRA framework
The area “Management System” was narrowed to the “Systematic management” do-
main, as the systematic factor was dominant in all the observed changes.
The changes in business processes that cover standardization, unification, and opti-
mization were grouped into the “Business processes” area, while changes related to im-
plementing complex automation progects associated with the field “Technologies” (see
Table 2). Such allocation is ambiguous becouse these progects often aim to the optimiza-
tion of businessprocesses through automation. In the readiness assessment framework, a
domain “ Maturity of business processes” is allocated to avoid such ambiguity. It includes,
among others, the “automation of business processes” criteerion. This solution is proved
by management standards & practices [BPM CBOK, 2013; SEI, 2010], which consider
automation as one of the aspects of business processes maturity.
The area “Human Resources” was transformed into the “Corporate culture” domain,
as the analysis of standards and best practices in the sphere of human resource manage-
ment [TMI-ETMS, 2017; Deloitte, 2019] allowed classifying significant changes as ele-
ments of the corporate culture.

--- PAGE 16 ---
258 Вестник СПбГУ. Экономика. 2020. Т. 36. Вып. 2
23,8
24,5
15,9
14,6
21,2
Management
system
Business
processes
Human resources
Using of data
Enterprise
architecture
A percentage of changes by domains in the total number of changes, %
Fig.4. Distribution of changes by domains
The “Technologies” area turned out to be heterogeneous: it includes changes related
to both purely technological innovations and IT management fields.
Analysis of management standards related to these fields (standards and bodies of
knowledge of IT management [TSO, 2011; ISACA, 2012; The Open Group, 2016], enter-
prise architecture management [The Open Group, 2018], and data management [Earley,
2017; Gwen, 2006] allowed distinguishing the domains “Using of data” and “Enterprise
architecture” from the “Technologies” area. The distribution of changes (analyzed in the
case-study) by these domains is shown in Figure 4.
The results presented in Figure 4 allow to conclude that the proposed domain sys-
tem ensures the fulfillment of requirement 2: a balanced distribution of criteria across
domains.
Results of stage 3. Identification of criteria and characteristics of readiness
The goal of research on this stage is to identify the criteria and characteristics of the
company’s readiness for digital transformation related to each domain.
The study is based on the assumption that changes implemented in companies in
the period preceding digital transformation are the prerequisites for the success of digital
transformation, as they have led to improvements in the quality of management in differ-
ent areas, so “characteristics of management quality in the context of each domain can be
considered as characteristics of companies’ readiness for digital transformation”.
The results obtained on this stage are key criteria and characteristics of “high-quality
management” through the prism of domains, and a list of criteria and characteristics nar-
rowed by the generalized typical changes identified in the case study 1.
For example, an analysis of BPM, CBOK and ITIL as standards & practices related to
the “Maturity of business processes” domain, in particular the subject of Business Process
EfficiencyManagement,ProcessDesign,ProcessTransformation,BuildingaProcess-Ori-
ented Organization, BPMS use, allows identifying the following key criteria and charac-
teristics of “high quality management”:
• BPMS is implemented; a significant part of the activity is carried out in the BPM
operating environment using BPMS;

--- PAGE 17 ---
Вестник СПбГУ. Экономика. 2020. Т. 36. Вып. 2 259
• inherited and acquired/leased information systems are integrated with BPMS;
• IT can create a flexible performance measurement system;
• process efficiency is measured: 1) close to real-time for operational management;
and 2) for the needs of business intelligence;
• a system of metrics is described: what to measure, how to measure, whether it is
normative and responsible;
• the coverage of measurement segments is defined: Operational efficiency, Finance,
Legislation, Problem identification, and Consumer experience;
• the processes are decomposed into sub-processes and divided into actions and
workflows concerning the company’s divisions;
• organizational rules are established; processes are planned; process descriptions
are approved;
• formal cross-functional process models are used;
• a system of indicators of cross-functional processes is built.
All listed aspects can be integrated into the following proposed readiness criteria:
• business processes standardization;
• business processes integration;
• automation of business processes;
• control of business processes.
The results of standards & practices analysis allow the DTRA framework to provide
the requirement “The completeness of the criteria system” (requirement 1).
Results of stage 4. Verification of readiness criteria and characteristics
The objects of the research in case study 2 are engineering companies (C1–C9) that
are currently implementing successful digital transformation projects. As it was men-
tioned above, mechanical engineering companies confirm the possibility of successful
digital transformation in spite of strong technological gap.
С1. KAMAZ PJSC: one single production base incorporates the overall truck manu-
facturing cycle, beginning from design, manufacture, vehicle and component assembly,
and ending up with the sales of finished products and service backup (https://kamaz.ru/).
С2. UEC-Saturn PJSC: engine-building company, specialized in research and devel-
opment, production, marketing and sales, after-sale services of gas-turbine engines (and
power plants/units) for aviation, power-generating and gas-pumping plants, ships, on-
shore, and off-shore industrial facilities (http://www.npo-saturn.ru).
С3.NovocherkasskElectricLocomotivePlant:thelargestRussianmanufacturerelec-
tric locomotives (https://www.nevz.com/).
С4. United shipbuilding Corporation: the largest shipbuilding company in Russia
(https://www.aoosk.ru/).
С5. Moscow Machine-Building Plant “Vpered”: production of tail rotor blades and
rotor blades for helicopters of Mi series (http://mmz-vpered.ru/).
С6. Machine-Building Factory of Podolsk JSC: designs, engineers and fabricates
steam and hot-water boilers of various types for thermal power plants (http://www.po-
dolskmash.ru/).

--- PAGE 18 ---
260 Вестник СПбГУ. Экономика. 2020. Т. 36. Вып. 2
С7. PSJC “Sukhoi Company”: development, production, training of flight personnel,
after-sales service for combat and civil aircrafts (https://www.sukhoi.org).
С8.Shvabe:developmentandserialproductionofopticalandlasersystemsandcom-
plexes, modern optical materials and technologies, high technology medical equipment,
aerospace monitoring and remote sensing systems of the Earth, scientific research instru-
ments, energy-saving lighting equipment, nanomechanics (http://shvabe.com).
С9. KEMP JSC: production of machines and equipment for civil application: multi-
functional frontal loaders, trailed and truck-mounted lifters, hydrostatic transmissions,
and hydraulic platforms (http://www.kemz.org/).
The subject of research is the changes implemented in companies in the period
preceding digital transformation. The aim of the analysis is to determine whether these
changes confirm the selected at the previous stage criteria and characteristics.
The final list of criteria of a company’s digital transformation readiness as the result
of the verification and aggregation of initial list of readiness criteria obtained on the stage
3 (for each domain) is presented in Table 3. Example of characteristic of Systematic man-
agement domain is shown in Table 4.
Table 3. Criteria of the company’s readiness for digital transformation
Domain Criteria
Systematic management
Management coherence
High quality feedback in management system
Change management effectiveness
Enterprise architecture
Involvement of CIOs, CDOs in strategic management
Efficiency of IT within the company
Using of data
Understanding the value of data
Implementation of the data management system
Maturity of business processes
Business processes standardization
Business processes integration
Automation of business processes
Control of business processes
Corporate culture
Personnel motivation for changes
Support for initiatives and development of employees
Employees’ ability to learn
Table 4. Characteristics of the company’s readiness for digital transformation
Criteria Characteristic
Management coherence
— Vertical consistency of goals, objectives, plans, and actions
(from strategic to operational level)
— Horizontal consistency of goals, objectives, plans, and
actions (between functional areas, departments)
High-quality feedback in the
management system
— Quality of feedback within the company
— Quality of feedback with partners and customers
Change management effectiveness
— Speed of implementation of various (not only digital)
changes in the company
— Completeness of changes

--- PAGE 19 ---
Вестник СПбГУ. Экономика. 2020. Т. 36. Вып. 2 261
1,50
14,00
3,00
9,00
7,50
4,00
4,00
11,00
7,00
8,50
11,25
12,25
7,00
Business process standartization
Automation of business processes
Business process integration
Implementation of data management system
Understanding the value of data
Management coherence
Change management effectiveness
High quality feedback in management system
Involvment of CIO, CDO in strategic management
Efficiency of IT within the company
Personall motivation for changes
Support for the initiative and development of
employees
Employee ability to learn
Maturity of
business processess
Using of
data
Systematic
management
Enterprise
Ărchitecture Corporate culture
A percentage of pieces of evidence by criterion, %
Fig. 5. The distribution of evidence by criterion
Figure 5 presents the distribution of pieces of evidence from the cases C1–C9 exam-
ined for all proposed readiness criteria. These results confirm the relevance of the selected
criteriaforassessingreadiness.Inallthecasesexamined,thereisevidenceoftheproposed
criteria. Therefore, the framework satisfies the system requirement “The relevance of the
criteria” (requirement 3).
It should be noted that changes implemented in the company can lead to improving
the characteristics related to different domains. This significantly complicates the struc-
ture of the framework for assessing companies’ digital transformation readiness.
Conclusion
The key questions for companies that have only started transformations are how
to start and what barriers prevent digital transformation. These questions concern the
company’s readiness for digital transformation, focusing on its capabilities and internal
barriers.
The analysis of existing solutions for assessing readiness for digital transformation,
proposed by consulting companies and the academic community, revealed an absence of
consensusoncriteriaandcharacteristicsofreadiness,aswellasjustificationsforproposed
criteria and characteristics in most reviewed works. The lack of clarity creates a problem

--- PAGE 20 ---
262 Вестник СПбГУ. Экономика. 2020. Т. 36. Вып. 2
in choosing a readiness assessment tool that most closely matches needs. As a result, this
slows down or prevents the formation of a digital transformation strategy. Moreover, as
demonstrated by the survey, some considered criteria in existing frameworks are not al-
ways definitely interpreted by representatives of Russian companies. This complicates the
use of these frameworks and reduces confidence in the results of an assessment.
Thesereasonshaveresultedinthedevelopmentofanewreadinessassessmentframe-
work that meets the following business requirements:
• taking into account characteristics of Russian companies as objects of digital
transformation;
• understandability and validity of criteria and characteristics of readiness;
• transparency of the framework structure.
Implementation of these requirements permits positioning the framework as a con-
venient and understandable tool for digital transformation readiness self-assessment by
Russian companies.
In addition to business requirements during the research process, the following sys-
tem requirements were formulated for the framework as a tool that ensures the reliability
of the obtained estimates:
• completeness of criteria;
• a balanced distribution of criteria by domains;
• the relevance of the criteria.
In support of compliance with these requirements, an author’s method of designing a
framework was proposed. The method combines the analysis of practical cases of compa-
nies that successfully implement digital transformation projects and theoretical study of
modern concepts and best management practices.
As a result of this method, the DTRA framework for assessing company readiness for
digital transformation was developed, which includes criteria and characteristics grouped
into the domains “Systematic management”, “Enterprise architecture”, “Using data”, “Ma-
turity of business processes”, and “Corporate culture”. The criteria are universal, they do
not depend on the type and scope of the company, its size, etc. However, industry pecu-
liarities can be taken into account. For each enterprise, there are critical resources and
success factors, which relate to specific domains. Such domains need to be investigated
more deeply, by specifying, and decomposing characteristics.
The framework is intended for a qualitative assessment of readiness and the develop-
ment of the company’s management understanding of what may hinder the success of the
digital transformation.
To enhance the validity of the findings, further research could include a broader case
sample. To improve the applicability and practical contributions of this study, new re-
search will focus on selecting metrics for readiness characteristics and developing evalu-
ation algorithms. Another question that requires additional research is whether the pro-
posed framework can be applied to companies in advanced economies — the leaders of
digital transformation.
This paper is an initial step towards creating a sophisticated model for assessing a
company’s digital transformation readiness, which includes criteria, characteristics, met-
rics, and evaluating algorithms.

--- PAGE 21 ---
Вестник СПбГУ. Экономика. 2020. Т. 36. Вып. 2 263
References
Abdrakhmanova G., Vishnevskiy K., Gokhberg L. et al. (2019) Digital Economy Indicators in the Russian
Federation: 2019: Data Book. National Research University Higher School of Economics. Moscow, HSE
Publ. 248 p. (In Russian)
BCG (2016) Digital Acceleration Index. URL: https://www.bcg.com/ru-ru/capabilities/technology-digital/
digital-acceleration-index.aspx (accessed: 29.11.2019).
Bibby L., Dehe B. (2018) Defining and assessing industry 4.0 maturity levels–case of the defence sector.
Production Planning and Control. The Management of Operations, vol.29, no.12, pp.1030–1043.
BPM CBOK® (2013) Guide to the Business Process Management Body of Knowledge. URL: http://www.
academia.edu/12129515/Guide_to_the_Business_Process_Management_Common_Body_of_
Knowledge_BPM-CBOK (accessed: 29.11.2019).
De Carolis A., Macchi M., Negri E., Terzi S. (2017) Guiding Manufacturing Companies Towards Digitaliza-
tion A methodology for supporting manufacturing companies in defining their digitalization road-
map. International Conference on Engineering, Technology and Innovation (ICE/ITMC), pp.487–495.
Cherkizovo Group PJSC (2019). URL: http://cherkizovo.com/en/ (accessed: 29.11.2019).
Deloitte (2019) Deloitte Global Human Capital Trends: Leading the social enterprise. URL: https://www2.
deloitte.com/us/en/insights/focus/human-capital-trends.html (accessed: 29.11.2019).
DolganovaO.I.,DeevaE.A.(2019)Companyreadinessfordigitaltransformations:problemsanddiagnosis.
Business Informatics, vol.13, no.2, pp.59–72. (In Russian)
Earley S. (2017), DAMA-DMBOK: Data Management Body of Knowledge. New Jersey, Technics Publica-
tions. 621 p.
EY (2013) Insurance in a digital world: The time is now. EY Global Insurance Digital Survey 2013. URL:
https://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/EY_Insurance_in_a_digital_world:_The_time_is_
now/%24FILE/EY-Digital-Survey-1-October.pdf (accessed: 29.11.2019).
Gazprom Neft PJSC (2019). URL: https://www.gazprom-neft.com/ (accessed: 29.11.2019).
Gill M., VanBoskirk S. (2017) The Digital Maturity Model 5.0. URL: https://www.forrester.com/report/
The+Digital+Maturity+Model+50/-/E-RES136841 (accessed: 29.11.2019).
Gwen T. (2006) The DGI Data governance Framework. The Data Governance Institute, Orlando, FL (USA).
URL: http://www.datagovernance.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/11/dgi_framework.pdf (accessed:
29.11.2019).
IDC (2015) IDC MaturityScape: Leadership Digital Transformation. URL: https://www.idc.com/downloads/
DX_UBER.pdf (accessed: 29.11.2019).
ISACA (2012), COBIT 5: The Framework. USA, IT Governance Institute.
Isaev E.A., Korovkina N.L., Tabakova M.S. (2018) Evaluation of the readiness of a company’s IT depart-
ment for digital business transformation. Business Informatics, no.2 (44), pp.55–64.
Ismail M., Khater M., Zaki M. (2017) Digital Business Transformation and Strategy: What Do We Know
So Far? Cambridge Service Alliance. URL: https://cambridgeservicealliance.eng.cam.ac.uk/resources/
Downloads/Monthly%20Papers/2017NovPaper_Mariam.pdf (accessed: 29.11.2019).
Issa A., Hatiboglu B., Bildstein A., Bauernhansl T. (2018) Industrie 4.0 roadmap: Framework for digital
transformation based on the concepts of capability maturity and alignment. 51st CIRP Conference on
Manufacturing Systems. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2212827118303081
(accessed: 29.11.2019).
Jan van Groningen (ed.) (2017) Digital readiness and Digital reinvention, the two sides of the digital dol-
lar. URL: https://www.ibm.com/blogs/think/be-en/2017/03/15/two-sides-of-the-digital-dollar/ (ac-
cessed: 29.11.2019).
Kane G., Palmer D., Phillips A., Kiron D., Buckley N. (2015) Strategy, not Technology, Drives Digital Trans-
formation: Becoming a Digitally Mature Enterprise. MIT Sloan Management Review. URL: http://
sloanreview.mit.edu/projects/strategy-drives-digital-transformation/ (accessed: 29.11.2019).
Khan S. (2016) Leadership in the Digital Age: a Study on the Effects of Digitalization on Top Management
Leadership. Digitala Vetenskapliga Arkivet. September, 16. URL: https://su.diva-portal.org/smash/get/
diva2:971518/FULLTEXT02.pdf (accessed: 29.11.2019).
KMDA(2018)AnalystReport:DigitalTransformationinRussia.URL:https://komanda-a.pro/blog/dtr_2018
(accessed: 29.11.2019). (In Russian)
KPMG (2016) Are you ready for digital transformation? Measuring your digital business aptitude. URL: htt-
ps://assets.kpmg.com/content/dam/kpmg/pdf/2016/04/measuring-digital-business-aptitude.pdf (ac-
cessed: 29.11.2019).

--- PAGE 22 ---
264 Вестник СПбГУ. Экономика. 2020. Т. 36. Вып. 2
Lezina T., Stoianova O., Ivanova V., Gadasina L. (2019) Assessment the Company’s Readiness for Digital
Transformation: Clarifying the Issue. Digital Economy. Emerging Technologies and Business
Innovation. R.Jallouli et al. (Eds.): ICDEc 2019. Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing,
vol.358, pp.3–14. Springer, Cham.
Minak C. (2019) The lowest level since 2012: Kudrin praised the execution of budget expenditures. URL:
https://www.forbes.ru/finansy-i-investicii/382101-samyy-nizkiy-uroven-s-2012-goda-kudrin-ocenil-
ispolnenie-rashodov (accessed: 29.11.2019).
NissenV.andTermerF.(2015)AnEmpiricalStudyontheRoleandTasksofITTopManagersinGermany.The
St Petersburg University Journal of Economic Studies, iss.3, pp.65–80. URL: https://economicsjournal.
spbu.ru/article/view/1606 (accessed: 29.11.2019).
NPO Energomash JSO (2019). URL: http://engine.space/eng/ (accessed: 29.11.2019).
Opitz M., Schreiber B., Pfirsching V., González A., Gnirs T., Mohr G., Peintner S., Krause O. (2015) Digital
Transformation—HowtoBecomeDigitalLeader.ArthurD.Little.URL:https://www.adlittle.com/en/
insights/viewpoints/digital-transformation (accessed: 29.11.2019).
PWC (2016) Industry 4.0 — Enabling Digital Operations Self Assessment. URL: https://i40-self-assessment.
pwc.de/i40/landing/ (accessed: 29.11.2019).
PWC (2018) Global Digital IQ Survey 2018: It’s time to stop being a digital poser. 11th anniversary
edition. URL: https://www.digitalpulse.pwc.com.au/report-global-digital-iq-survey-2018/ (accessed:
29.11.2019).
Russian helicopters (2019) URL: http://www.russianhelicopters.aero/en/ (accessed: 29.11.2019).
Russian Post (2019) URL: https://www.pochta.ru (accessed: 29.11.2019).
Sánchez M., Zuntini J. (2018) Organizational readiness for the digital transformation: a case study research.
Revista Gestão & Tecnologia, vol.18, no.2, pp.70–99.
SchumacherA.,ErolS.,SihnW.(2016)AMaturityModelforAssessingIndustry4.0ReadinessandMaturity
of Manufacturing Enterprises. Procedia CIRP, vol.52, pp.161–166.
Sebastian I., Ross J.W., Beath C., Mocker M., Moloney K.G., Fonstad N.O. (2017) How Big Old Companies
Navigate Digital Transformation. MIS Quarterly Executive, vol.16, no.3, pp.197–213.
SEI (2010) CMMI for Development, Version 1.3. URL: https://resources.sei.cmu.edu/asset_files/TechnicalR
eport/2010_005_001_15287.pdf (accessed: 29.11.2019).
Sportmaster LLC (2019). URL: http://sportmastercorp.com/ (accessed: 29.11.2019).
Stucki T., Wochner D. (2019) Technological and organizational capital: Where complementarities exist.
Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, vol.28, iss.3, pp.458–487.
The Open Group (2016), IT4IT Reference Architecture, Version 2.1. URL: https://publications.opengroup.
org/standards/it4it/c171 (accessed: 29.11.2019).
The Open Group (2018) TOGAF Version 9.2. Business Transformation Readiness Assessment. URL: http://
pubs.opengroup.org/architecture/togaf9-doc/arch/ (accessed: 29.11.2019).
TMI-ETMS (2017), TMI System for Assurance of Talent Management Excellence in Enterprises. URL:
https://www.tmi.org/enterprise-certifications/credentialing-model (accessed: 29.11.2019).
TSO(2011),ITILServiceStrategy.URL:https://www.axelos.com/store/book/itil-service-strategy(accessed:
29.11.2019).
Von Leipzig T., Gamp M., Manz D., Schottle K., Ohlhausen P., Oosthuizen G., Palm D., Von Leipzig K.
(2017) Initialising customer-orientated digital transformation in enterprises. Procedia Manuf., vol.8,
pp.517–524.
Westerman G., Tannou M., Bonnet D., Ferraris P., McAfee A. (2017) The Digital Advantage: How digital
leaders outperform their peers in every industry. MIT Sloan School of Management. Available: https://
www.capgemini.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/The_Digital_Advantage__How_Digital_Lead-
ers_Outperform_their_Peers_in_Every_Industry.pdf (accessed: 29.11.2019).
Wulf J., Mettler T., Brenner W. Using a Digital Services Capability Model to Assess Readiness for the Digital
Consumer. MIS Quarterly Executive, September 2017 (16:3).
Received: 01.12.2019
Accepted: 20.02.2020
Authors’ information:
Olga V.Stoianova — Dr. Sci. in Technics, Associate Professor; o.stoyanova@spbu.ru
Tatiana A.Lezina — PhD in Physics and Mathematics, Associate Professor; t.lezina@spbu.ru
Victoriia V.Ivanova — PhD in Economics, Associate Professor; v.ivanova@spbu.ru

--- PAGE 23 ---
Вестник СПбГУ. Экономика. 2020. Т. 36. Вып. 2 265
Фреймворк для оценки готовности компании к цифровой трансформации
О.В.Стоянова, Т.А.Лёзина, В.В.Иванова
Санкт-Петербургский государственный университет,
Российская Федерация, 199034, Санкт-Петербург, Университетская наб., 7–9
Для цитирования: Stoianova O.V., Lezina T.A., Ivanоva V.V. (2020). The framework for assessing
company’s digital transformation readiness. Вестник Санкт-Петербургского университета. Экономи-
ка.Т.36.Вып.2.С.243–265. https://doi.org/10.21638/spbu05.2020.204
В настоящее время акцент в дискуссиях о цифровой трансформации сместился с об-
суждения ее необходимости на проблемы оценки готовности компаний к цифровым
преобразованиям. Для российских компаний, ввиду специфики цифровой трансфор-
мации в России, необходима разработка новых и приоритезация существующих кри-
териев готовности. Это требует создания комплексной системы оценивания, включа-
ющей множество взаимосвязанных показателей, характеризующих ожидания и стра-
тегические цели компании, качество бизнес-процессов, компетенции и мотивацию
сотрудников, зрелость технологической среды компании, управление информацион-
нымобеспечениемидр.Область,охватываемаяданнымисследованием,касаетсясово-
купности факторов (предпосылок), определяющих готовность российских компаний
к цифровой трансформации. Согласно гипотезе исследования, эти предпосылки могут
быть систематизированы в виде фреймворка для оценки готовности компании к циф-
ровой трансформации. Цель исследования — спроектировать фреймворк, позволяю-
щий оценить готовность компании, учитывая не только текущее состояние компании,
но и ее предыдущее развитие. В работе сформулированы требования к системе оцен-
ке готовности, представленной в виде фреймворка, и предложен авторский метод его
проектирования в соответствии с требованиями, сочетающий анализ практических
кейсов компаний и теоретический анализ современных концепций и лучших прак-
тик менеджмента. В результате применения предложенного метода создан фреймворк
Digital Transformation Readiness Assessment для оценки готовности компании к цифро-
вой трансформации. Он включает критерии и характеристики готовности, сгруппи-
рованные в домены. Фреймворк предназначен для качественной оценки готовности
иформированияуменеджментакомпаниипониманиятого,чтоможетпрепятствовать
успеху цифровой трансформации.
Ключевые слова: цифровая трансформация, готовность компании, фреймворк, крите-
рии готовности, оценка готовности.
Статья поступила в редакцию: 01.12.2019
Статья рекомендована в печать: 20.02.2020
Контактная информация:
Стоянова Ольга Владимировна — д-р техн. наук, доц.; o.stoyanova@spbu.ru
Лёзина Татьяна Андреевна — канд. физ.-мат. наук, доц.; t.lezina@spbu.ru
Иванова Виктория Валерьевна — канд. экон. наук, доц.; v.ivanova@spbu.ru