--- PAGE 1 ---
ScienceDirect
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Procedia Computer Science 192 (2021) 1831–1838
1877-0509 © 2021 TheAuthors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of KES International.
10.1016/j.procs.2021.08.188
© 2021 TheAuthors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of KES International.
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
Procedia Computer Science 00 (2021) 000–000
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia
1877-0509 © 2021 The Authors. Published by ELSEVIER B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of KES International
25th International Conference on Knowledge-Based and Intelligent Information & Engineering
Systems
An EA Application Approach using Business Modularization for
Management to Understand DX
Yuko Taharaª*,Shuichiro Yamamotob

The Graduate School of Information & Communication, 1-25-30 Takadanobaba, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 169-8518, Japan
Nagoya University, Furo-cho,Chigusa-ku, Nagoya, Aichi Prefecture, 464-8601, Japan
Abstract
For the success of Digital Transformation (DX), corporate management must understand the relationship between DX
and their corporate business. However, in many companies, business divisions and IT departments are siloed, so
executives cannot discuss DX based on an overall picture of business and IT. Although dynamic capability is also
used to explain the iterative DX process, the details of the feedback process of dynamic capability are still unclear.
In this paper, we propose a method to promote understanding of DX using the Frame & Work Module (F&WM)
method and Enterprise Architecture (EA) in order to make it easier for executives to get an overall picture of business
and DX. The F&WM method is used to show the detailed steps of the feedback process of dynamic capability. The
proposed method is applied to the case of a Japanese house building company and evaluated.
Keywords: Dynamic Capability, Frame & Work Module, DX, EA, Modularization
1. Introduction
In 2018, the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI) published the Report on Digital Transformation [1]
and has been promoting digital transformation (hereinafter “DX”). In July 2019, METI released evaluation indicators
for digital management reform (“DX promotion indices”) [2] and, in view of the great importance of the role that
should be played by directors and the Board of Directors responsible for management supervision, formulated the
“Items for Assessing the Effectiveness of a Board of Directors in Advancing DX Promotion.” [3]
* Yuko Tahara. Tel.: +81-3-3207-0005; Fax: +81-3-3207-0015
E-mail address: tahara@basic7.com
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
Procedia Computer Science 00 (2021) 000–000
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia
1877-0509 © 2021 The Authors. Published by ELSEVIER B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of KES International
25th International Conference on Knowledge-Based and Intelligent Information & Engineering
Systems
An EA Application Approach using Business Modularization for
Management to Understand DX
Yuko Taharaª*,Shuichiro Yamamotob

The Graduate School of Information & Communication, 1-25-30 Takadanobaba, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 169-8518, Japan
Nagoya University, Furo-cho,Chigusa-ku, Nagoya, Aichi Prefecture, 464-8601, Japan
Abstract
For the success of Digital Transformation (DX), corporate management must understand the relationship between DX
and their corporate business. However, in many companies, business divisions and IT departments are siloed, so
executives cannot discuss DX based on an overall picture of business and IT. Although dynamic capability is also
used to explain the iterative DX process, the details of the feedback process of dynamic capability are still unclear.
In this paper, we propose a method to promote understanding of DX using the Frame & Work Module (F&WM)
method and Enterprise Architecture (EA) in order to make it easier for executives to get an overall picture of business
and DX. The F&WM method is used to show the detailed steps of the feedback process of dynamic capability. The
proposed method is applied to the case of a Japanese house building company and evaluated.
Keywords: Dynamic Capability, Frame & Work Module, DX, EA, Modularization
1. Introduction
In 2018, the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI) published the Report on Digital Transformation [1]
and has been promoting digital transformation (hereinafter “DX”). In July 2019, METI released evaluation indicators
for digital management reform (“DX promotion indices”) [2] and, in view of the great importance of the role that
should be played by directors and the Board of Directors responsible for management supervision, formulated the
“Items for Assessing the Effectiveness of a Board of Directors in Advancing DX Promotion.” [3]
* Yuko Tahara. Tel.: +81-3-3207-0005; Fax: +81-3-3207-0015
E-mail address: tahara@basic7.com

--- PAGE 2 ---
1832 Yuko Tahara et al. / Procedia Computer Science 192 (2021) 1831–1838
2 Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2021) 000–000
The issue here is that the management class generally consists of older people mainly of the generation who do not
have sufficient experience of the digital age and, since Japan lags behind the rest of the world in the utilization of IT
and DX in the workplace, many of these people lack digital knowledge. However, they do possess outstanding
management skills and, since they become CEO at a point when there are more fields where they have no experience
than fields where they have experience, they have to demonstrate these skills. In other words, since they understand
the overall architecture of the business and have a clear grasp of the business elements and structure, once they
understand the process of promoting DX and the resulting changes in the business architecture, they can apply their
skills in business operations in an age of accelerating DX.
In this paper, in order to get a clearer overall picture of business and DX conducted by management, Tahara
proposes methods of promoting understanding of DX applying the frame &work module method (“F&WM method”)
[4-6] and enterprise architecture (“EA”) that have been used to improve business and convert practical knowledge
into explicit knowledge at many companies.
The core architecture parts of EA are baseline, target, and transition architecture. The relationship between dynamic
capability and EA is as follows.
The baseline architecture is developed by sensing the current business process.
The target architecture is clarified by seizing opportunities of enterprise structure, procedures, and designs.
The transition architecture is planned by managing threats and transforming assets.
From that point of view, we concentrate on the Business Architecture (BA) of EA. BA can define the “What” as
business products, the “Who” as business actors, and the “How” as business processes.
The rest of this paper is constructed as follows. Section 2 describes the research questions. Section 3 describes
related work. Section 4 proposes an integrated method using the F&WM method and Dynamic Capability (DC).
Section 5 outlines the application ofthe proposed method to a case ofnew businesscreation. Discussionsare described
in Section 6. Section 7 outlines our conclusion and future challenges.
2. Research Questions
The following research questions are evaluated using the case of a Japanese house building company. The F&WM
method consists of three viewpoints: What, Who, and How. Dynamic capability consists of three steps: sensing,
seizing, and transforming. The F&WM method is used to design the iterative steps of DC.

RQ1: How can the F&WM method be applied with the iterative steps defined in DC?
RQ2: Can the method explain new business creation processes?
3. Related Work
3.1. Method of applying TOGAF to DX challenges
According to Yamamoto [7], the EA framework TOGAF can be applied to DX challenges (Table 1).
Table 1. Outline of method of applying TOGAF to DX challenges
DX challenge Response measures EA method used
Explanation of architecture challenges
that executives can understand
In order to explain alignment of business and IT, define
a DX strategy map as a method of matching business
goals, digital business models, and digital business
processes with DX requirements.
Business goals
Viewpoints
Business processes
Motivation model
Assessment
Digitalization and definition of
business priorities
Define business to be digitalized to create value
business value based on digital capability map.
Capability map
Business processes
CBP (Capability Based Planning)
CI (Capability Increment)
Definition of DX strategy
Define DX vision and DX road map through analysis
of gap between future architecture and current
architecture.
Architecture vision
Reference architecture
Gap analysis

--- PAGE 3 ---
Yuko Tahara et al. / Procedia Computer Science 192 (2021) 1831–1838 1833 Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2021) 000–000 3
Transformation roadmap
• Building collaboration between
business divisions and IT division
Define a digital business ecosystem that aligns
business with digital technology and carry out DX
governance that controls business processes and digital
technologies through DX principles and DX
committee.
EA hierarchy
Motivation model
EA principles, EA committee
EA governance
3.2. Method of applying EA to DX challenges
According to Tahara and Yamamoto [7], the opportunities for applying EA to the DX challenges listed in Table 1
above are as follows.
• Explaining alignment of business with IT through EA to executives conducting business so that senior executives
can participate in the discussion.
• 80% of advanced DX companies transform business processes using capability maps in order to clarify priorities.
• Advanced DX companies spend time on the formulation of future plans. EA teams need to ensure compatibility
between long-term plans and everyday requirements.
• By providing training to business divisions in EA skills such as communication, coaching, and problem resolution,
strong collaboration between business divisions and IT division is realized.
3.3. Method of adapting the F&WM method using ArchiMate
Using the F&WM method,workcan bedivided into modulesand integrated asa work frame. TaharaandYamamoto
[8], based on the premise of DX, propose a method of integrating the F&WM method and ArchiMate [9], a graphic
language of EA, as a means of linking work clarified by the F&WM method with the introduction of IT.
3.4. Digital transformation
Digital transformation (DX) is attracting attention [1] as a means of transforming existing companies into digital
companies. In DX, collaboration among management, business divisions and IT division is essential. The DX
promotion indices are based on 35 questions assessing DX maturity from the viewpoints of management and IT.
However, the DX promotion indices lack a strategy for responding to these questions and the knowledge needed to
build business processes utilizing digital technologies.
For this reason, Yamamoto’s Digital Balanced Scorecard (DBSC) [10] proposes a method of linking management
goals, customer and employee goals, business processes, and DX requirements using a digital strategy map.
3.5. Business process re-engineering
The F&WM method proposed by Tahara [5-6] is a practical method that can be easily understood intuitively by
people in the workplace. However, there is a problem that, since it contains ambiguity, it cannot be immediately
adapted to digitalization, which requires strict definition as an algorithm.
Anotherproblemisthat, while a very strictschematic language such asbusinessprocessmodeling notation (BPMN)
is suitable for software developers, it has not spread widely because of the high level of difficulty for people in the
workplace, who are not good at logical reasoning. Unless a clear overall picture of business can be obtained, it is not
possible to understand what aspect of work should be changed. People cannot take responsibility for change because
they do not know what will happen if changes are made and if business processes cannot be visualized, business
process re-engineering is impossible.
3.6. Dynamic Capability
Teece [11] explains the process that makes up dynamic capabilities in order to combine resources, including
knowledge, to create new value and transform an organization. This process consists of two types of capability:
ordinary capability for the efficient use of management resources and DC for creating new value in response to

--- PAGE 4 ---
1834 Yuko Tahara et al. / Procedia Computer Science 192 (2021) 1831–1838
4 Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2021) 000–000
changesin the businessenvironment. DC requiresco-specialization consisting ofsensing threats, seizing opportunities
and transforming organizations in order to create value that complementarily combines different resources. Co-
specialization is also attracting attention as “DX monodzukuri.” [12]
By deploying Teece’s product co-specialization to IT, Quieroz [13] defines the concept of co-specialization of
business process and IT as follows: “the state of complementarity between business process and IT, based on the
extent to which IT supports the business process and the extent to which that business process exploits available IT.”
Moreover, Teece [14] indicates the necessity of the iterative cycle of sensing, seizing, and managing
threats/transforming, but does not provide a specific model. Kikuzawa [15]states that, “Dynamic capability is a high-
order meta-ability consisting of the existing routines, capabilities, resources, knowledge, and assets that have brought
about a competitive advantage when responding to changes in the business environment. It is also the orchestration
ability to reconstruct or reallocate not just the assets or knowledge of one’s own company but also to incorporate, if
necessary, the assets or knowledge of other companies.” However, this is not demonstrated using a specific model
that can be reproduced.
3.7. Knowledge Creation
The digital strategy of the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) [16] consists of the following two
“pathways”:
• Using digital technologies to improve partner experience and solve development challenges;
• Using digital technologies to improve the quality, relevance and impact of UNDP’swork, while also improving the
efficiency of UNDP’s operational systems and internal processes.
From this it is clear that DX is not merely a problem of digital technology but also requires the integration of digital
knowledge for organizational transformation with knowledge relating to the organization that uses it.
The SECI model [17, 18] explains the process ofknowledgecreation based on the interaction of explicit knowledge
and tacit knowledge. The connections of the SECI model provide a means of systematizing practical knowledge that
strategically and analytically integrates and combines explicit knowledge derived from tacit knowledge within an
organization.
4. Proposal for unrolling the DC iteration cycle using the F&WM method
This section describes how to unroll the DC iterative cycle using the F&WM method consisting of the What, Who,
and How dimensions. The What dimension includes modularization, KPIs (Key Performance Indicators), and
strengths of the company’s business. Table 2 shows the framework of the DC cycle unrolling framework.
Table 2. DC cycle unrolling framework.
F&WM Steps
Dynamic Capability
Sensing Seizing Transforming
What
Step 1: Modularization Decomposing elements
(of business architecture)
Discovering other elements that
can be diverted (seizing
opportunities)
Transforming elements
Step 2: KPIs Decomposingelements Decomposing elements to be
diverted
Decomposing after
transformation
Step 3: Strengths Discovering weaknesses
of elements
Discovering elements that can be
diverted into strengths
Confirming strengths of elements
after transformation
Who Reviewing customers Discovering new customers and
demand
Transformation of target
customers
How Reviewing business
model
Discovering and developing new
business model
Transformation of business model


--- PAGE 5 ---
Yuko Tahara et al. / Procedia Computer Science 192 (2021) 1831–1838 1835
Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2021) 000–000 5
5. Application of the DC cycle unrolling framework
The following describes the creation of new business creation using the above-mentioned DC cycle unrolling
framework in terms of F&WM steps. The F&WM steps are defined as follows.
Step I Modularization of corporate business processes is achieved through the sensing, seizing, and transforming
of business capabilities.
Step II KPIs are identified and transformed through DC for the business modules clarified in Step I.
Step III The strengths of business modules are identified based on the KPIs identified in Step II.
Step IV The most valuable customer segment is clarified based on the strengths of the business modules identified
in Step III.
Step V A new business is developed by sensing, seizing, and transforming business capabilities for targeting the
customer segment identified in Step IV.
5.1. Steps I through V
To explain the unrolling of the DC iteration cycle, the case of a Japanese company is used. The company A is a
medium-sized builder of prefabricated steel-framed houses. Over the past year, the number of orders received by the
company has decreased. As a result, the utilization rate of the factory that manufactures house parts has decreased
considerably.
First, in Step I (What modules), the sales, design, and production divisions were modularized. For example, the
production division was divided into modules such as technical capability, production system, and the factory to
produce the systems designed through technical capability.
In Step II (WhatKPIs), through this modularization, each module was identified and these could then be quantified.
From this it became clear that when the number of orders for houses decreased, the utilization rate of the production
system and factory declined, but there was no impact on technical capability.
In Step III (What strengths), the strengths of the company were clarified through quantitative analysis. The strength
of the company was discovered to be the technical capability of the production division, but the company was not
fully aware of this strength.
In Step IV (Who), while until now it had only utilized this technical capability to produce parts for the company, it
became clear that it could utilize it for new customers in the construction of low-rise apartment buildings, low-rise
hotels, and stores.
In Step V (How), the strength to provide new products identified in Step III was proposed not only within the
company but to customers outside the company. After trials over one year, a new company based on this technical
capability was established independent from the production division. The establishment of the new company created
new business for the building company.
5.2. DC cycle unrolling using the F&WM method
The example of the businesscreation process outlined in 5.1 abovecould notbe achieved by the simple combination
of the business model and customers. The opportunity for creating business is the existence of a problem and threats
such as competition and changes in the business environment. The co-specialization advocated by Teece in the
research paper [12] mentioned in 3.6 above is discussed from the three viewpoints of sensing, seizing, and managing
threats/transformation. Table 3 summarizes the above-mentioned case ofunrolling the DC cycle forthe house building
company in terms of the three processes of DC.
Table 3. New business creation case using DC cycle unrolling framework.
F&WM steps
Dynamic Capability
Sensing Seizing Transforming

--- PAGE 6 ---
1836 Yuko Tahara et al. / Procedia Computer Science 192 (2021) 1831–1838
6 Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2021) 000–000
Step I
Three elements: Technical capability,
production system, and factory are
identified
Supply only within company
since establishment
Executives understand dynamic
capability and merits of business
modularization
Step II Technical capability: No change
Production system and factory: Decrease
in utilization rate
Production for company: 100%
Production for external users: 0%
Managers analyze KPIs
Step III Strength is technical capability Existence of external demand for
products utilizing technical
capability
Managers discover new business
model utilizing strength
Step IV
Technical capability used outside the
company
Development and proposal of
products for external users
Managers instruct division heads to
implement new product development
and business model change
Step V Due to new business model, utilization
rate of production system and factory
increases
Construction of stores, low-rise
apartments buildings, and low-rise
hotels
After a one-year trial, a new company
is established

6. Discussions
This section describesthe answersto research questions, and the effectiveness, novelty, andlimitationsofthisstudy.
6.1. Answers to research questions
Table 2 shows the unrolled iterative steps of DC, leading to the answer to RQ1. The work modules that make up a
business were identified using the F&WM method. To unroll the iterative DC, we then described in detail the process
from Step I, work modularization, to Step V, the creation of new business. In addition, by applying these iterative
steps to an actual case, we confirmed the method’s effectiveness.
The Table also describes the process of new business creation that can lead to the answer to RQ2.
Although these answers are derived by only one case as described below, research questions have positively
supported.
6.2. Effectiveness
This paper has described how, utilizing the F&WM method, existing business processes can be modularized and
future processes designed as new businesses. In the case ofEA, (1) existing and future business processes are defined,
then (2) the gaps between existing and future business processes are analyzed, (3) changes are planned to eliminate
these gaps, and (4) the transformation plan is carried out. Therefore, the F&WM method enables us to clarify the
future business processes in EA, making it possible to create new business. Furthermore, since senior officers can
appreciate IT which is aligned with new business that creates value, this can promote dialogue about DX investment
between senior management and executives.
Regarding the items of the “explanation of architecture challenges that executives can understand” in Table 1 of
Yamamoto’s previous work, “Application of TOGAF to DX Challenges” [8] described in 3.1 and 3.2 above, namely,
business processes, motivation model, assessment, and actors, these are expressed in EA as modules, strengths, KPIs,
and customers, respectively, using the F&WM method. The specific steps and case described in Section 5 are also
viewed asBA developmentstepsin EA. Furthermore, unlessBA ismodularized, a company cannotfreely setbusiness
goals in accordance with its purpose and executives’ business strategy.
6.3. Novelty
As described in 4.1 above, the modularization of work makes it possible to visualize business changes and trends

--- PAGE 7 ---
Yuko Tahara et al. / Procedia Computer Science 192 (2021) 1831–1838 1837
Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2021) 000–000 7
(expansion, contraction, increase, decrease) by visualizing one’s own business and determining the KPIs. The digital
twinsformed fromthe data visualized by thismethod quantify the problems ofthe business, organization and products,
making visible the modules that should be revised. Furthermore, with the ongoing evolution of HR Tech, which uses
text mining technology to visualize and quantify sales persons’ qualities such as skills, competencies and motivation,
we can anticipate the development of strategic DX such as management strategies and personnel strategies that
incorporate the digitalization ofhuman resources. The visualized data themselvesconstitute new productsand services,
or may be developed into platforms.
6.4. Limitations
This paper only evaluates the proposed method in the case of one company. It also does not attempt to analyze and
assess changes in executives’ understanding of DX before and after its introduction. It will be necessary in future to
conduct an objective assessment using this method.
7. Conclusion and Future Challenges
This paper proposes a method of unrolling the DC cycle using the F&WM method. In particular, the three
elementary processes of dynamic capability are applied in the three dimensions of the F&WM method, i.e., What,
Who, and How. The research questions have been answered by the case study.
Answer to RQ1: The iteration of dynamic capability can be decomposed through five steps based on the F&WM
method.
Answer to RQ2: The DC iteration cycle unrolling framework is used to design a new business for the company.
EA is widely used to help executives understand enterprise business transformation. As EA is based on business
building blocks, it is necessary to clarify modules based on business capability. The proposed method can identify
business modules using the modularization of the F&WM method. Conversely, EA provides digitally automated
component designs to realize the business modules clarified by this method. Therefore, the proposed method can be
applied to EA, which is a useful in helping executives to understand DX, and thus also helps to promote DX.
Future work includes the following.
(1) To demonstrate the usefulness of the proposed framework for other company cases.
(2) To clarify an integrated method of combining EA and F&WM.
(3) To evaluate quantitatively the effectiveness of the proposed method.
References
[1] METI (September 7, 2018) “Report on Digital Transformation: Overcoming of ‘2025 Digital Cliff’ Involving IT Systems and Full-fledged
Development of Efforts for Digital Transformation” (in Japanese).
[2] METI (July 31, 2019) “DX Promotion Indices and Guidance Therefor” (in Japanese).
https://www.meti.go.jp/press/2019/07/20190731003/20190731003-1.pdf (in Japanese).
[3] METI (July 31, 2019) “Items for Assessing the Effectiveness of a Board of Directors in Advancing DX Promotion” (in Japanese).
[4] Tahara, Yuko (2008) The 70-times Automated Business Model, Chukei Publishing (in Japanese).
[5] Tahara, Yuko & Nagahira, Akio (2018) “Research on the Effectiveness of the Frame & Work Module in Business Transformation in the
Workplace: A New Approach for Performance Improvement, Time Reduction, Human Resource Development, and Knowledge Sharing,”
Journal of Japan Association for Management Systems, Vol. 35, No.1, pp. 59-68 (in Japanese).
[6] Tahara, Yuko (2018) “Improvement of Intellectual Productivity utilizing Frame & Work Module Methodology, Problems, and Action Plan
for their Resolution: Specific Steps for Improving Problem Resolution Ability and Creativity based on Introduction of RPA, AI,” 70th
Annual Meeting of All Japan Federation of Management Organizations (in Japanese).
[7] Yamamoto, Shuichiro (2020) “Fundamental Knowledge of DX: Digital Transformation Cases and Methods,” Kindai Kagakusha Digital
(in Japanese).
[8] Tahara, Yuko & Yamamoto, Shuichiro (2020) “Method of Applying ArchiMate to the Frame & Work Module Method,” 27th Japanese
Society for Artificial Intelligence Knowledge Distribution Network Research Association, SIG-KSN-027-06 (in Japanese).
[9] The Open Group (2019) ArchiMate® 3.1. Specification, C197.
[10] Yamamoto, Shuichiro (2020) “A Proposal on the Digital Balanced Scorecard toward Digital Transformation,” SIG-KBSE, 2019-41 pp. 19-
24 (in Japanese).

--- PAGE 8 ---
1838 Yuko Tahara et al. / Procedia Computer Science 192 (2021) 1831–1838
8 Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2021) 000–000
[11] Teece, David J. (1986) "Profiting from Technological Innovation: Implications for Integration, Collaboration, Licensing and Public
Policy," Research Policy (15:6), pp. 285-305.
[12] METI, MHLW, MEXT (May 29, 2020) “2020 White Paper on Monodzukuri” (in Japanese).
[13] Queiroz, M. (2017) “Business Process and IT Cospecialization: Conceptualization and Suggestions for Future Research,” 23rd Americas
Conference on Information Systems, pp. 1-10.
[14] Teece, David J. (2007) "Explicating Dynamic Capabilities: The Nature and Microfoundations of (Sustainable) Enterprise Performance,”
Strategic Management Journal (28:13), pp. 1319-1350
[15] Kikuzawa, Kenshu (2015) “Two Problems concerning Dynamic Capability Theory,” Harvard Business Review (in Japanese).
[16] UNDP Digital Strategy (2019) https://digitalstrategy.undp.org/strategy.html
[17] Nonaka, Ikujiro & Takeuchi, Hirotaka (1995) The Knowledge-creating Company: How Japanese Companies Create the Dynamics of
Innovation, Oxford University Press, New York.
[18] Nonaka, Ikujiro & Konno, Noboru (2003) Methodology of Knowledge Creation, Toyo Keizai (in Japanese).