--- PAGE 1 ---
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
FutureGenerationComputerSystems
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/fgcs
Enterprisearchitecture-basedmetamodelformachinelearningprojectsand
itsmanagement
Hironori Takeuchia,∗
, Jati H. Husenb,c
, Hnin Thandar Tunb
, Hironori Washizakib
,
Nobukazu Yoshiokab
a
Musashi University, Toyotama-kami 1-26-1, Nerima-ku, Tokyo, 176-8534, Japan
b Waseda University, Okubo 3-4-1, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, 169-8555, Japan
c Telkom University, Kabupaten Bandung, Jawa Barat, 40257, Indonesia
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Business–IT alignment
Enterprise architecture
Machine learning project
Metamodel
A B S T R A C T
In this study, we consider projects for developing service systems using machine learning (ML) techniques.
These projects involve collaboration between various stakeholders. Several types of models representing system
architectures are introduced so that stakeholders can develop a common understanding of these projects. In
addition, metamodels are constructed by combining ML service systems models to provide project practitioners
with a holistic view of the projects. In certain cases, these metamodels need to be extended to incorporate
other business models for the business–IT alignment used in enterprises. For such situations, an enterprise
architecture-based metamodel and method for managing the metamodel are proposed in this study, which
provide a holistic view of business–IT alignment for ML projects. We confirm the effectiveness of the proposed
metamodel and management method through real examples.
1. Introduction
Currently, numerous machine learning (ML) techniques are avail-
able as application programming interfaces (APIs) on certain devel-
opment platforms. As a result, it is possible to utilize ML techniques
for practical business applications. Thus, enterprises have started im-
plementing ML-based service systems in their business functions. In
this study, we consider projects aimed at developing ML-based service
systems in enterprises (ML projects). Many of these projects are planned
across various domains where reliability and trustworthiness are cru-
cial. Despite receiving significant attention and funding, it has been
reported that many of these projects fail in the early stages or do not
progress beyond the prototype stage to reach production [1,2].
When ML techniques are applied to business functions in enter-
prises, data on the target business domain are required for training
the ML model. This means that sufficient knowledge of the target
business domain or prior experience is essential. Therefore, it is nec-
essary that representatives of the IT division and those of relevant
business divisions participate in the project, which requires a common
understanding of the project. For an example, in an insurance company,
the reduction of labor costs was the top business goal. From this
goal, automatic assessment of insurance payments from medical reports
was derived as a business task conducted by the ML-based service
system through the goal analysis by the business division [3]. However,
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: h.takeuchi@cc.musashi.ac.jp (H. Takeuchi).
there are technical challenges for collaboration in the requirement
acquisition and analysis phases of ML projects [4,5].
One of the solutions to the collaboration challenges encountered
in the requirement acquisition or design phase of ML projects consists
of representing the system or the project as a proper model. To this
end, some model representations have been introduced [6,7]. In project
practices, because various levels of models exist, such as business or
system level, practitioners need to select a suitable model or combine
models for their own purpose. Therefore, metamodels for combining
models related to ML projects have been introduced [8,9]. In such
ML project metamodels, project elements, such as business goals, sys-
tem requirements, and system components, are represented, and the
relations between such elements are defined so that practitioners can
obtain a holistic view of their ML projects. However, various types of
models are used for representing a project, especially from the business
perspective. Thus, the metamodel needs to be enhanced so that ML
projects can incorporate other business models.
In this study, a method is proposed for extending the metamodel
in ML projects to acquire a better understanding of the relationships
between the elements in a business–IT alignment model [10]. The
mapping between the model elements is identified using the enterprise
architecture (EA) approach, and the extended metamodel is represented
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2024.06.062
Received 13 February 2024; Received in revised form 13 June 2024; Accepted 30 June 2024
Future Generation Computer Systems 161 (2024) 135–145
Available online 4 July 2024
0167-739X/© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

--- PAGE 2 ---
H. Takeuchi et al.
by ArchiMate, which is an EA-modeling language [11]. In addition,
we define a procedure to integrate elements in other business models.
Through an example analysis, it was confirmed that the extended
metamodel can be effectively utilized in the project design phase and
we can integrate elements in other business models into the metamodel.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Related work
is described in Section 2. In Section 3, we introduce canvas models
and a metamodel for projects developing ML-based service systems,
and further define the research question of the study. In Section 4,
the method proposed for extending the metamodel for ML projects is
described. Section 5 presents an evaluation of the proposed method
through a real project example. Finally, the results are discussed in
Section 6, and key points and future work are outlined in Section 7.
2. Related work
In this study, we consider projects developing ML-based service
systems. To conduct such projects effectively, it is necessary to have a
common knowledge to develop the system involving the stakeholders.
A software design pattern is a type of such knowledge. In software de-
sign patterns, best practices are formalized such that engineers can use
them to solve typical problems that occur when designing an applica-
tion or system. For ML-based service systems, best practices have been
collected through literature reviews [12] and project practices [13],
and signs in codes or data known as ‘‘bad smells’’, which cause serious
issues in ML project execution, have been collected through literature
reviews [14,15]. In addition, some design patterns for ML-based service
systems have been compiled and published based on development
experience within a company [16] and through a systematic literature
review, some key design patterns for ML-based service systems have
been identified [17,18].
Another type of knowledge is the representation of ML-based ser-
vice systems or ML projects so that stakeholders can have common
understandings on the developed systems or the projects. In practical
projects, an architecture is required to represent an entire system
in which big data analytics or ML techniques are applied [19]. To
this end, for development teams, several architectures have been pro-
posed [20,21]. Although some architectures contain related business
elements [22], they do not include business goals for each stakeholder.
As a result, it is difficult to use them in discussions between businesses
and IT organizations. Moreover, few studies have been conducted
on the assessment of ML-based service system development projects.
In [23], it is reported that there are evaluation issues for systems using
prediction algorithms such as ML techniques when we use them as
practical social systems. Thus, in evaluating a project, it is important
to combine the business goal and business process with the developed
application, and represent them in a single model. However, such multi-
viewpoint evaluation methods have not yet been introduced for ML
system development projects.
Business–IT alignment, which defines the relationships among the
business goal, business process, and IT system, has been introduced into
enterprise system management. Business–IT alignment is used to dis-
cuss the IT system between businesses and IT organizations to decrease
organization uncertainty and improve the enterprise agility [24]. Sev-
eral methods were introduced in [25,26] for constructing a business–IT
alignment model using an EA modeling approach. It is important to
prepare generic models for each application domain or industry to
promote the business–IT alignment approach in practice. For example,
generic models for business–IT alignment using EA have been pro-
posed in IT system operation [27] and IT system risk management
domains [28]. In the health insurance industry, a business–IT alignment
model developed for an insurance system was used to discuss the digital
transformation of the insurance system [29]. However, these models do
not include information on the business goal or stakeholders and it is
difficult to discuss an IT system from the higher business management
perspective.
Some models represent the relationships among the goals of the
stakeholders, services, and business objects from the business perspec-
tive, and a comparative study was conducted in [30]. In this study,
these models are represented using ArchiMate, whereby canvas-style
modes are used by project stakeholders for discussions during the
project design phase. A business model canvas was introduced in [31]
and has been used in various business domains. Furthermore, several
project canvas models have been developed based on this business
model canvas for ML-based service system development projects [6,32]
[33].
Because both business and technology are impacted by digital trans-
formation, the appropriate alignment of business models and digital
technologies for new digital strategies is required [34]. Therefore,
the need for reference models that include business perspectives for
introducing digitized service systems has been pointed out [35]. In this
context, a reference architecture for intelligent systems was presented
in [7]. In this model, both digital strategies and AI architectures [36]
are considered. Stakeholders can easily assess the business value of the
developed system with the architecture represented from both business
and technology perspectives.
In response to the existing studies, in this study we consider a
reference model as a metamodel to provide a holistic business–IT
alignment view on ML projects.
3. Research subjects and research question
3.1. ML and AI canvas models
A discussion on the application of ML techniques in the business
domain requires representing the project from various business view-
points using these techniques. In this way, the idea of the application
can be shared between stakeholders. For this purpose, inspired by the
business model canvas proposed in [31], canvas models have been
proposed for projects developing ML-based service systems. Fig. 1
illustrates the ML canvas [32,37] and AI canvas [33].
The ML canvas defines the requirements on the ML-based service
system and primarily describes the desired functionality, performance,
and strategy as follows:
• Prediction task describes the type of task, the entity on which
predictions are made, and possible outcomes.
• Decision describes how predictions are turned into value for the
end-user.
• Value proposition describes the end-users, their objectives, their
workflow, and the benefit they will obtain from the system.
• Data collection describes the situation or the strategy for collect-
ing training data, such as continuous updates.
• Impact simulation describes the value for the end-users when
correct decisions are made based on the prediction results.
• Making prediction describes constraints, such as real-time or
batch prediction computation time.
• Building models describes the constraints for ML models, such
as training time or model update intervals.
• Live monitoring describes the metrics for measuring the system’s
impact on businesses.
In the business model canvas [31], the elements that make up
the business model are arranged as cells on the canvas, allowing the
entire business model to be comprehended easily. Specifically, the
value proposition is placed at the center of the canvas. Elements related
to customers are positioned on the right-hand side, while elements
concerning new services or products are placed on the left-hand side.
Additionally, elements associated with costs or revenue are located
at the bottom. In the ML canvas, the value proposition is similarly
positioned at the center of the canvas. On the right-hand side, elements
Future Generation Computer Systems 161 (2024) 135–145
136

--- PAGE 3 ---
H. Takeuchi et al.
Fig. 1. Machine learning (ML) canvas and artificial intelligence (AI) canvas.
Fig. 2. Analysis workflows for ML canvas and AI canvas.
related to data or the ML model are placed. Elements related to predic-
tions are also positioned on the left-hand side, and an element related
to operations is placed at the bottom.
When populating the AI canvas model, the project elements specific
to the development of ML-based service systems are identified through
business analysis. In addition to the basic project elements such as
the customer, stakeholders, skills required from the development team,
cost of the project, and data required for the ML service system, the
following requirements on the ML-based service system are considered
in the AI canvas.
• Output describes the key metric for the business system.
• Value proposition describes the business situation that would
enable the users to benefit from the system.
In the AI canvas, similar to the business model canvas, the value propo-
sition is placed at the center of the canvas, and elements associated
with costs or revenue are located at the bottom. On the right-hand
side, elements related to marketing are placed, while elements related
to development are positioned on the left-hand side.
Through the discussion in the project planning stage, project mem-
bers fill each cell and construct canvas models. For these two canvas
models, typical analysis workflows [32,33] are defined as shown in
Fig. 2.
After planning ML projects from various business’ viewpoints, de-
velopment teams initiate the design of the ML-based service systems.
For example, in the case of mission critical applications, a safety case
will be developed as part of the requirements analysis described for the
canvas models.
3.2. Metamodel for ML projects
In project practices, where various levels of models exist, such as
business or system level, practitioners need to select a suitable model
for their own purpose. When some elements in a model need to be mod-
ified, the other models may need to be updated for consistency. When
the traceability between models is maintained manually, there is a risk
of losing consistency. Therefore, metamodels were proposed in [8,9] to
combine some ML-related models. In these metamodels (EMMM in [8]
and M3S metamodel in [9]), the project elements, including the busi-
ness goals, system requirements, and system components represented
in different models as well as the relations between such elements, are
defined so that the ML project practitioners can obtain a holistic view
of their projects. Fig. 3 illustrates the M3S metamodel defined in [9].
This M3S metamodel is integrated with models such as AI canvas,
ML canvas, knowledge acquisition in automated specification (KAOS),
system-theoretic accident model and processes (STAMP), and safety
case.
These existing metamodels for ML projects [8,9] are constructed
in three phases. First, by looking at the concepts in each model, the
experts construct metamodels based on their own modeling knowl-
edge. Second, the team evaluates the correctness of each metamodel.
In [8], the metamodels were reviewed through weekly meetings of all
experts and they were iteratively improved until all experts approved
them. Third, each metamodel is integrated into a unified metamodel
where similar concepts are either merged into a single concept or con-
nected with notations that represent relationships defined in the unified
modeling language (UML). For example, concepts in a whole-part
relationship are connected by the ‘‘composition’’ notation, concepts in
a relationship where one concept is based on another are linked by the
‘‘generalization’’ notation, and similar concepts are connected by the
‘‘association’’ notation.
Based on this metamodel, a platform supporting consistent require-
ments and systems analysis methods is developed in [9]. For the
metamodel, this platform provides some views selected based on the
identification part ISO/IEC Guide 51 [38], which specifies analysis
steps of the safety aspects for standards. For example, we can see
related model elements defined in AI canvas and in ML canvas through
the value view and the task view, respectively. Through this platform,
we can make the ML-based service development process an ‘engineer-
ing’ process. That is means that we can understand what purpose the
ML model serves in the first place, how far we are aiming for impact in
terms of project value, what kind of data characteristics it deals with,
and what the expected performance and accuracy should ideally be. For
instance, when we develop a model representing safety case through
systems analysis on this platform for a solution argumentation, we can
check the consistency between the safety case and the model repre-
senting safety requirements derived by STAMP/STPA [39] through the
metamodel.
Future Generation Computer Systems 161 (2024) 135–145
137

--- PAGE 4 ---
H. Takeuchi et al.
Fig. 3. Metamodel for ML projects.
3.3. Research question
By introducing a metamodel on ML projects, an ML-based service
system can be designed from multiple viewpoints, and the consistency
between models can be retained when specifying the designed system.
However, various types of models are used to represent IT systems,
especially from the business viewpoint in the context of business–IT
alignment. If ML projects are planned through a discussion among
business stakeholders and these business models are used to assess the
ML-based service system from the business–IT alignment perspective,
such elements need to be considered in the system design phase. In
addition, to support various viewpoints, we need to integrate other
models on certain occasions as needed. In modifying the metamodel,
the actual modification activities and the method for assessing the
adequacy of the proposed modifications are not clearly defined. This
means that the specific metamodel extension requires the modeling
skills of practitioners.
In this study, we consider the following research question (RQ):
 
RQ: How can we manage an ML project metamodel to support a
business–IT alignment viewpoint?
 
For this RQ, we propose a method for extending the metamodel to
better understand the relationships between the elements in a business–
IT alignment model as well as those in existing ML project meta-
models. The mapping between model elements is identified using the
EA-based approach and the extended metamodel is represented by
ArchiMate [11]. Through a real project example, it is confirmed that
the extended metamodel can be effectively utilized in the project design
phase and it is one of the solutions to the RQ. In addition, we propose
a method for managing the EA-based metamodel and confirm that we
can integrate the elements in other models into the metamodel through
an example analysis.
4. Proposal
4.1. Business–IT alignment model for ML-based service systems
In enterprise system management, business–IT alignment is intro-
duced to define the relationships between business goals, business
processes, and the IT system. Business–IT alignment is used to discuss IT
systems between business and IT organizations, decrease organization
Fig. 4. Generic business–ML alignment model.
uncertainty, and improve enterprise agility [24]. Therefore, business–
IT alignment models consider project elements such as applications,
business processes, and goals, as well as the relationships among them.
A generic business–IT alignment model for ML-based service sys-
tems described by ArchiMate that is an EA modeling language was
proposed in [40]. It is referred to as the generic business–ML alignment
model (BMLA model) and is presented in Fig. 4.
Using ArchiMate, a business and IT system can be represented as
an EA with three layers, namely, the business layer, application layer,
and technology layer. Business goals, an organization’s missions, and
observed situations can be also represented elements of the motivation
extension in ArchiMate. In this study, we use the model elements in the
business layer, the application layer, and the motivation extension in
ArchiMate as shown in Table 1 Between these model elements, various
relations are defined in ArchiMate. Table 2 lists the relations used in
this study.
In a practical ML project, members from both the business and
IT divisions are involved in developing a new business or ML-based
services. The new services are performed through a new business
process. An ML business process is part of a new business process to
achieve a business goal, and a practitioner in the business division
is assigned to the process. Before executing the ML business process,
another process is required for the preparation of an ML model, which
in turn requires training data (ML resource).
The ML business process is realized through an ML application ser-
vice. The application service, which has an ML function, includes an ML
runtime prediction engine as a component; to execute the ML runtime
Future Generation Computer Systems 161 (2024) 135–145
138

--- PAGE 5 ---
H. Takeuchi et al.
Fig. 5. Extended Architecture (EA)-based metamodel for ML projects.
Table 1
Model elements in ArchiMate used in this study.
engine, an ML model is required. A training service is used in the ML
model preparation process. As project objectives, the mission of the
business division and a business goal are defined. The business goal is
divided into ML goals, and each ML goal is divided into ML model goals.
These goals are realized by the new business service, ML service, and
ML runtime prediction engine. The business goal is monitored using a
Table 2
Relations in ArchiMate used in this study.
business performance metric such as a key performance indicator (KPI);
the ML goal is monitored through an application performance metric,
and the ML model goal is monitored via model performance. Here, the
application performance depends on the target business process and
must be defined for each application. Precision and recall are used as
performance metrics to assess the ML model.
The model described in Fig. 4 is a generic model. Therefore, when
starting a project, we need to substantiate this model by developing an
ML-based service system in the business domain.
4.2. Enterprise architecture (EA)-based metamodel for ML projects
Studies representing business model canvas based on an EA mod-
eling approach such as ArchiMate [30,41] are available. These ap-
proaches assign ArchiMate elements to each canvas element in the
metamodel.
In the ML canvas model, in the definition of the canvas cell, the
value proposition consists of the end users, their objectives, and their
Future Generation Computer Systems 161 (2024) 135–145
139

--- PAGE 6 ---
H. Takeuchi et al.
Table 3
Mapping element.
Fig. 6. Metamodel extension process for ML projects [42].
workflow, which are represented by ‘‘Actor’’, ‘‘Goal’’, and ‘‘Business
process’’, respectively. As business layer elements, ‘‘Business process’’
is assigned to ‘‘Decision’’; whereas, ‘‘Building model’’ and ‘‘Business
object’’ are assigned to ‘‘Data sources’’. Among the elements of appli-
cation layer, ‘‘Application component’’ is assigned to ‘‘Prediction task’’.
As motivation extension elements, ‘‘Assessment’’ is assigned to ‘‘Live
monitoring’’; ‘‘Data collection’’ and ‘‘Goal’’ to ‘‘Impact simulation’’;
‘‘Meaning’’ to ‘‘Features’’; and ‘‘Requirement’’ to ‘‘Making prediction’’.
In the AI canvas model, ‘‘Assessment’’ is assigned to ‘‘Output’’, and
‘‘Value’’ is assigned to ‘‘Cost’’ and ‘‘Revenue’’ as motivation extension
elements. As business layers elements, ‘‘Actor’’ is assigned to ‘‘Cus-
tomers’’ and ‘‘Stakeholders’’; ‘‘Business object’’ to ‘‘Data’’; and ‘‘Busi-
ness process’’ to ‘‘Value proposition’’. Finally, as strategy elements,
‘‘Capability’’ is assigned to ‘‘Skills’’.
After assigning the semantics defined in ArchiMate to model ele-
ments, the elements corresponding to those in the business–ML align-
ment model are identified. Here, an expert propose the corresponding
element for each canvas model and such elements are reviewed by
other experts. The corresponding elements are summarized in Table 3.
In Table 3, each row represents the equivalent elements through
the three models. The corresponding elements can be represented
by connecting these elements through association relationships. As a
result, we introduce an EA-based metamodel for ML projects as shown
in Fig. 5. For this modeling, we use Archi1
that is an open source,
cross-platform ArchiMate modeling tool.
The metamodel in Fig. 5 represents the elements in the business–ML
alignment model and business model canvases as well as the relation-
ships between these elements, thereby providing a holistic business
viewpoint on ML projects for practitioners. In Section 5, the effective-
ness of the proposed metamodel is confirmed through a real-world
case.
4.3. Method for enhancing the EA-based metamodel
Although integrating multiple models using a metamodel allows the
analysis and modeling of target new businesses or systems from multi-
ple perspectives, any changes or modifications made to the constituent
models require extending the metamodel while ensuring overall consis-
tency. For this purpose, an extension of the metamodel was proposed
for ML projects in [42] based on the software maintenance process
defined in ISO/IEC/IEEE14764:2022 [43], as represented in Fig. 6.
In this research [42], the need for metamodel extension is analyzed
both at the system and ML levels. As a result, the affected model
elements for each analysis process are identified: on the ISO/IEC/IEEE
15288:2015 [44] for the system level, and the ML workflow [45] for
the ML level.
However, this process does not define the actual modification ac-
tivities and the method for assessing the adequacy of the proposed
modifications. Here, we propose a method for enhancing the EA-based
metamodel based on this process. We consider a business model for
representing the ML project and attempt to integrate some parts of
the model into the EA-based metamodel. For each model element, we
conduct the following steps:
1
https://www.archimatetool.com/
Future Generation Computer Systems 161 (2024) 135–145
140

--- PAGE 7 ---
H. Takeuchi et al.
Fig. 7. Business flow for determining the destination of an overseas remittance.
1. Assign an ArchiMate element to the model element.
2. Identify the relationship between the model element and the
element in the metamodel, and propose a modification.
3. Review whether the identified relationships are valid and deter-
mine whether we should accept the modification.
5. Examples
In this section, the proposed EA-based metamodel is applied to a
real ML project, whereby the effectiveness of the proposed model is
confirmed. In addition, we apply the proposed method for enhancing
the EA-based metamodel for another canvas model for ML projects.
5.1. Example of ML project model using EA-based metamodel
Here, we consider a service system development project where the
ML technique is applied to the overseas transmittance business of a
bank. In a major Japanese bank, more than 10,000 transactions are
executed in the overseas remittance (OR) business each month. For
each transaction, practitioners need to understand the recipient from
the natural-language text in the application document and determine
the destination information on the basis of the bank’s own business
rules. Fig. 7 shows the flow for determining the destination of an OR.
In the foreign exchange business division, reducing the business cost is
a business goal. In achieving this goal, one of the sub-goals can be to
reduce the time for the destination determination in each transaction.
Through the discussion with the OR business division, the data
scientist in the IT division found that a machine learning-based named-
entity extraction (NE Ext) technology can be applied to extract the
recipient information from the text fields in application documents.
Therefore, it was expected that a new destination determination process
using the ML-based NE Ext application could partially realize the goal
of reducing the cost in the OR business. In this process, key elements for
the business–IT alignment such as business goals, business processes,
and applications, as well as the relationships between these elements,
are derived by applying the business analysis method proposed in [40].
In this analysis method, the model elements are identified through
the following steps:
• By analyzing the business under consideration, identify concerns,
problematic situations, cause analysis, the target system to be
developed, and solutions.
• By analyzing the solution derived in the previous step, identify
the actor, service, information, goal, and metrics for evaluation.
Based on the results, the business–ML alignment model can be specified
for this project from the generic business–ML alignment model in Fig. 4.
The specified business–AI alignment model is displayed in Fig. 8.
By referring to the proposed EA-based metamodel represented in
Fig. 5, an ML canvas model with some of the canvas cells already filled
with the content described in the business–ML alignment model can be
obtained, as in Fig. 9.
In the discussion with project members from the business divisions,
the development team explained that descriptions where the recipient
information is annotated are required as training data. After that the
following questionnaires were presented to the members from the
business divisions:
Fig. 8. Business–ML alignment model for the new service system in overseas remittance
derived by the business analysis method [40].
• Are there descriptions with recipient information available?
• How many descriptions can be used for the project?
• Who can annotate the recipient information in the descriptions?
As results, we obtained the following insights regarding the availability
of training data from the business division team.
 
10,000 descriptions were available for training data.
 
The data collection cell in the ML canvas was filled with this
insight as the strategy for data collection. By referring to the EA-based
metamodel, the business–ML alignment model was enhanced based on
the updated ML canvas. It was found that data collection is related
to the data source in the ML canvas, and data source is equivalent
to ML resource in the business–ML alignment model. As a result, the
enhanced business–ML alignment model represented in Fig. 10 was
obtained. It was confirmed that the ML canvas and the business–ML
alignment model can be updated by referring to the proposed extended
metamodel.
5.2. Example of EA-based metamodel enhancement
To discuss the application of ML techniques in the business domain,
other canvas models in addition to the ML and AI canvas models
described in Section 3 have been proposed. For example, another
canvas model for ML projects, called ‘‘ML Project Canvas’’, is shown
in Fig. 11 [46].
This canvas model is introduced to share the idea of the ML applica-
tion between stakeholders. Here, we integrated some elements of this
canvas model and enhanced the EA-based ML project metamodel based
on the proposed method.
As the first and second steps in the proposed method described in
Section 4.3, for each element in the canvas, we assigned an ArchiMate
element and identified the equivalent element in the metamodel.
Table 4 presents the results of this analysis.
From this results, as the third step in the proposed method, we
selected ‘‘Purpose/Goal’’, ‘‘Metrics of success’’, ‘‘User segment’’, ‘‘Ac-
tion based on prediction’’, ‘‘New business process’’, ‘‘Business data’’,
and ‘‘Algorithm’’ and integrated them with the metamodel. Fig. 12
represents the integrated part of the metamodel.
6. Discussion
In our proposal, we constructed an EA-based metamodel for ML
projects by extending the existing metamodel (M3S metamodel) [9]
and business–ML alignment model (BMLA model) [40]. Table 5 shows
the comparison between the proposed model and existing metamodels
Future Generation Computer Systems 161 (2024) 135–145
141

--- PAGE 8 ---
H. Takeuchi et al.
Fig. 9. ML canvas model with some of the canvas cells already filled with the content described in the business–AI alignment model in Fig. 8 through the proposed metamodel.
Fig. 10. Business–ML alignment model enhanced based on the updated ML canvas (the
insights on the collected training data in the canvas model were added as an assessment
element connected to the training data.).
Fig. 11. ML project canvas.
or architecture. M3S metamodel includes the elements in ML canvas
and AI canvas. Therefore, the proposed EA-based metamodel cov-
ers elements across business, user, and ML service systems, and is
comprehensive compared to other models in Table 5.
Through the analysis examples, we have confirmed that the pro-
posed EA-based metamodel provides a holistic view of an ML project
and based on it, the stakeholders can plan the ML-based service ef-
fectively. In addition, it was confirmed that we can integrate other
business models into the metamodel based on the proposed model mod-
ification method. These results indicate that the proposed metamodel
could be one of the solutions to the research question. These results
show that the proposed metamodel can be one of the solutions to
the RQ. However, EA-based approaches may occasionally depend on
the application domain, and in practice, it is common to modify such
approaches for each project. Therefore, in order to validate whether
Table 4
ML project canvas element.
the proposed metamodel can solve the RQ, it is necessary to conduct
a questionnaire to practitioners after several ML projects in various
industries or application domains. For example, we should confirm
whether the corresponding model elements defined in Table 3 are
reasonable from practitioners’ perspectives. In addition, there are some
service systems containing multiple ML components. For such systems,
we need to assess the feasibility of the metamodel and the analysis
method using the model. These are our future work.
In addition to the business model canvas, other business value
modeling approaches are available such as e3-value and customer value
chain analysis (CVCA). Some business goal modeling approaches, such
as the i∗ framework and balanced score card (BSC), are available,
and [30] showed that these models can be represented using the EA
modeling notation and compared them from different EA perspectives.
In ML projects, business value and business goal models can be con-
structed based on these existing approaches. Through the examples, it is
expected that they can be incorporated into the ML project metamodel
using the proposed method. In our future work, we will extend the
metamodels to other types of business models.
In the proposed method, we assign semantics related to businesses,
applications, and motivations to each model element so that practition-
ers can easily compare the elements in the different models. However,
no explicit steps have been defined for identifying the equivalent
elements through multiple models. Connecting the elements of the
different models allows practitioners to understand the meanings of
these models and assess the relationships between them based on their
knowledge. Therefore, some methods for assessing model elements are
required; this is also an area of opportunity for future work.
Future Generation Computer Systems 161 (2024) 135–145
142

--- PAGE 9 ---
H. Takeuchi et al.
Table 5
Comparison between the proposed model and existing metamodels or architecture.
Fig. 12. Extended EA-based metamodel (partial).
7. Conclusion
In this study, we discussed projects for developing service systems
using ML techniques. These projects involve collaboration between dif-
ferent stakeholders, and various challenges exist. One of the solutions to
the collaboration challenges in the early stages of ML projects involves
representing the system or the project as a proper model, and various
types of models are used in project practices. When different models
are used in a project, it is required that the consistency between these
models be retained during the project. To this end, metamodels com-
bining both the business level model and system architecture model are
introduced for ML-based service systems. However, because different
types of business model notations have been used in business domains,
it is difficult to use such models independently in planning ML projects.
Therefore, a holistic view of business–IT alignment is required for ML
projects when using these models.
For this purpose, we proposed an EA-based metamodel for ML
projects by extending an existing metamodel and generic model for
business–ML alignment. We identified the project elements, including
business goals, system requirements, and system components, repre-
sented in this metamodel and the generic model, as well as the relations
between such elements. After deriving the mapping between the model
elements, a metamodel was constructed using ArchiMate. In addition,
we defined a procedure to manage the metamodel so that we can
integrate elements in another business model with the metamodel.
Through a real project example, it was confirmed that the ML canvas
and the business–ML alignment model could be updated by referring
to the proposed metamodel. It was also confirmed that the metamodel
can be enhanced by adding elements in other business models based on
the proposed method.
For our future work, we plan to conduct practice-based validation
of the proposed metamodel through new case studies or surveys with
practitioners across various project domains, enhance the metamodel
for complex ML-based service systems, and develop an assessment of
model elements when updating the metamodel.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Hironori Takeuchi: Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investi-
gation. Jati H. Husen: Writing – review & editing, Validation, Method-
ology. Hnin Thandar Tun: Writing – review & editing. Hironori
Washizaki: Writing – review & editing, Methodology. Nobukazu Yosh-
ioka: Writing – review & editing, Methodology.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal rela-
tionships which may be considered as potential competing interests:
Hironori Washizaki reports financial support and travel were provided
by Japan Science and Technology Agency. If there are other authors,
they declare that they have no known competing financial interests or
personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work
reported in this paper.
Data availability
The data that has been used is confidential.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the JST-Mirai Project (Engineerable
AI Techniques for Practical Applications of High-Quality Machine
Learning-based Systems), Japan, Grant No. JPMJMI20B8.
References
[1] VentureBeat, Why do 87% of data science projects never make it into pro-
duction?, 2019, https://venturebeat.com/ai/why-do-87-of-data-science-projects-
never-make-it-into-production/.
[2] Gartner, Gartner identifies the top strategic technology trends for 2021, 2020,
https://www.gartner.com/en/newsroom/press-releases/2020-10-19-gartner-
identifies-the-top-strategic-technology-trends-for-2021.
[3] artificial., AI for commercial underwriting: how it’s already making a differ-
ence, 2020, https://artificial.io/company/blog/ai-for-commercial-underwriting-
how-its-already-making-a-difference.
Future Generation Computer Systems 161 (2024) 135–145
143

--- PAGE 10 ---
H. Takeuchi et al.
[4] F. Dalpiaz, N. Niu, Requirements engineering in the days of artificial intelligence,
IEEE Softw. 37 (4) (2020) 7–10.
[5] N. Nahar, S. Zhou, G. Lewis, C. Kästner, Collaboration challenges in building
ML-enabled systems: Communication, documentation, engineering, and process,
in: Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 44th International Conference on Software
Engineeering, ICSE, 2022, pp. 413–425.
[6] A. Agrawal, J. Gans, A. Goldfarb, A simple tool to start making decision with
the help of AI, in: Harvard Business Review Online, 2018, https://hbr.org/2018/
04/a-simple-tool-to-start-making-decisions-with-the-help-of-ai.
[7] A. Zimmermann, R. Schmidt, D. Jugel, M. Möhring, Evolution of enterprise ar-
chitecture for intelligent digital systems, in: Proceedings of the 14th International
Conference on Research Challenges on Information Science, 2020, pp. 145–153.
[8] S. Idowu, D. Strüer, T. Berger, EMMM: A unified meta-model for tracking
machine learning experiments, in: Proceedings of the 48th Euromicro Conference
on Software Engineering and Advanced Applications, SEAA, 2022, pp. 48–55.
[9] J. Husen, H. Washizaki, N. Yoshioka, H. Tun, Y. Fukazawa, H. Takeuchi,
Metamodel-based multi-view modeling framework for machine learning systems,
in: Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Model-Based Software
and Systems Engineering, MODELSWARD 2023, 2023, pp. 194–201.
[10] H. Takeuchi, J.H. Hussen, H.T. Tun, H. Washizaki, N. Yoshioka, Enterprise
architecture-based metamodel for a holistic business—IT alignment view on
machine learning projects, in: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference
on E-Business Engineering, ICEBE, 2023, pp. 8–15.
[11] The Open Group, ArchiMate 3.1 – A Pocket Guide, Van Hares Publishing, 2019.
[12] A. Serban, K. van der Blom, H. Hoos, J. Visser, Adoption and effects of
software engineering best practices in machine learning, in: Proceedings of the
ACM / IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and
Measurement, 2020, pp. 3:1 – 3:12.
[13] H. Takeuchi, K. Imazaki, N. Kuno, T. Doi, Y. Motohashi, Constructing reusable
knowledge for machine learning projects based on project practices, Intell. Decis.
Technol. 16 (4) (2022) 725–735.
[14] H. Foidl, M. Felderer, R. Ramler, Data smells: Categories, causes and conse-
quences, and detection of suspicious data in AI-based systems, in: Proceedings
of the IEEE/ACM 1st International Conference on AI Engineering - Software
Engineering, CAIN, 2022, pp. 229–239.
[15] H. Zhang, L. Cruz, A. van Deursen, Code smells for machine learning applications,
in: Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 1st International Conference on AI Engineering
- Software Engineering, CAIN, 2022, pp. 217–228.
[16] V. Lakshmanan, S. Robinson, M. Mann, Machine Learning Design Patterns:
Solutions to Common Challenges in Data Preparation, Model Building, and
MLOps, O’Reilly, 2020.
[17] H. Yokoyama, Machine learning system architectural pattern for improving op-
erational stability, in: Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Software
Architecture Companion, 2019, pp. 267–274.
[18] H. Washizaki, F. Khomh, Y.-G. Guéhéneuc, H. Takeuchi, N. Natori, T. Doi, S.
Okuda, Software-engineering design patterns for machine learning applications,
IEEE Comput. 55 (3) (2022) 30–39.
[19] S. Earley, Analytics, machine learning, and the internet of things, IEEE ITPro 17
(1) (2015) 10–13.
[20] Y. Demchenko, C. de Last, P. Membrey, Defining architecture components of
the big data ecosystem, in: Proceedings of the International Conference on
Collaboration Technologies and Systems, CTS, 2014, pp. 104–112.
[21] J. Heit, J. Liu, M. Shah, An architecture for the deployment of statistical models
for the big data era, in: Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Big
Data, 2016, pp. 1377–1384.
[22] B. Geerdink, A reference architecture for big data solutions: Introducing a model
to perform predictive analytics using big data technology, in: Proceedings of IEEE
8th International Conference for Internet Technology and Secured Transactions,
ICITST, 2013, pp. 71–76.
[23] J.M. Hofman, A. Sharma, D.J. Watts, Prediction and explanation in social science,
Science 355 (6324) (2017) 486–488.
[24] M. Zhang, H. Chen, A. Luo, A systematic review of business-IT alignment research
with enterprise architecture, IEEE Access 6 (2018) 18934–18944.
[25] K. Hinkelmann, A. Gerber, D. Karagiannis, B. Thoenssen, A. van der Merwe,
R. Woitsch, A new paradigm for the continuous alignment of business and IT:
Combining enterprise architecture modeling and enterprise ontology, Comput.
Ind. 79 (2016) 77–86.
[26] J. Saat, U. Franke, R. Lagerström, M. Ekstedt, Enterprise architecture meta
models for IT/Business alignment situations, in: Proceedings of the 14th IEEE
International Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Conference, 2010, pp.
14–23.
[27] M. Vicente, N. Game, M.M. da Silva, A design theory nexus for situational
enterprise architecture management, in: Proceedings of the 4th International
Conference on Exploring Service Science, 2013, pp. 86–99.
[28] N. Mayer, J. Aubert, E. Grandry, C. Feltus, E. Goettelmann, R. Wieringa, An
integrated conceptual model for information system security risk management
supported by enterprise architecture management, Softw. Syst. Model. (2018)
1–28.
[29] J. Degele, J. Hain, V. Kinitzki, S. Krauß, P. Kühfß, N. Sigle, Data architecture for
digital health insurances, in: Proceedings of Digital Enterprise Computing, DEC,
2017, pp. 107–116.
[30] S. Yamamoto, A comparative analysis of business model notations, J. Bus. Theory
Pract. 7 (3) (2019) 111–123.
[31] A. Osterwalder, Y. Pigneur, Business Model Generation, Wiley, 2010.
[32] L. Dorard, From data to AI with the machine learning canvas, 2016,
https://medium.com/louis-dorard/from-data-to-ai-with-the-machine-learning-
canvas-part-i-d171b867b047.
[33] J. Zawadzki, Introducing the AI project canvas, 2019, https://
towardsdatascience.com/introducing-the-ai-project-canvas-e88e29eb7024.
[34] R. Schmidt, A. Zimmermann, M. Möhring, S. Nurcan, B. Keller, F. Bär, Digi-
tization – Perspectives for conceptualization, in: Proceedings of the European
Conference on Service-Oriented and Cloud Computing, 2015, pp. 263–275.
[35] A. Zimmermann, R. Schmidt, J. Bogner, D. Jugel, M. Möhring, Software evolution
for digital transformation, in: Proceedings of the 13th International Conference
on Novel Approaches To Software Engineering, 2018, pp. 205–212.
[36] A. Zimmermann, R. Schmidt, K. Sandkuhl, D. Jugel, J. Bogner, M. Möhring,
Evolution of enterprise architecture for digital transformation, in: Proceedings of
the IEEE 22nd International Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Workshop,
2018, pp. 87–96.
[37] L. Dorard, Machine learning canvas v1.1: change log, 2021, https://www.ownml.
co/blog/machine-learning-canvas-v11-change-log.
[38] Safety aspects — Guidelines for their inclusion in standards, International
Organization for Standardization, 2014, ISO/IEC Guide 51:2014.
[39] N.G. Leveson, Engineering a Safer World: Systems Thinking Applied to Safety
(Engineering Systems), The MIT Press, 2012.
[40] H. Takeuchi, S. Yamamoto, Business analysis method for constructing business–
AI alignment model, in: Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on
Knowledge-Based and Intelligent Information & Engineering Systems (Procedia
Computer Science Vol. 176), 2020, pp. 1312–1321.
[41] L.O. Meertens, M.E. Jacob, L.J.M. Nieuwenhuis, M.J.V. Sinderen, H. Jonkers, D.
Quartel, Mapping the business model canvas to ArchiMate, in: Proceedings of the
27th Annual ACM Symposium Applied Computing, SAC, 2012, pp. 1694–1702.
[42] J. Husen, H. Washizaki, H.T. Tun, N. Yoshioka, Y. Fukazawa, H. Takeuchi,
H. Tanaka, K. Munakata, Extensible modeling framework for reliable machine
learning system analysis, in: Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on
AI Engineering – Software Engineering for AI, CAIN 2023, 2023.
[43] Software engineering – Software life cycle processes – Maintenance, International
Organization for Standardization, 2022, ISO/IEC/IEEE 14764:2022.
[44] Systems and software engineering – System life cycle processes, International
Organization for Standardization, 2015, ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288:2015.
[45] S. Amershi, A. Begel, C. Bird, R. Deliner, H. Gall, E. Kamar, N.N.B. Nushi,
T. Zimmermann, Software engineering for machine learning: A case study, in:
Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Software Engineering, 2019,
pp. 291–300.
[46] Mitsubishi Chemical Holdings Corporation, Machine learning project canvas,
2019, https://www.mitsubishichem-hd.co.jp/news_release/pdf/190718.pdf.
Hironori Takeuchi is a professor at Musashi University.
He received M.S. degree in mathematical engineering from
University of Tokyo in 2000. From 2000 to 2018, he was
with IBM Reseach – Tokyo. He received his Ph.D degree
from Keio University in 2012. His research interests include
enterprise modeling, requirements engineering, and text
analytics in software engineering.
Jati H. Husen is a student in a Ph.D. course at Waseda
University. He received his M.Eng. degree in Computer
Science and Communication Engineering from Waseda Uni-
versity, Tokyo, Japan, in 2018. Previously, he received a
B.Eng. degree in computer science from Telkom University,
Bandung, Indonesia, in 2014. He is also currently on leave
as a lecturer in the Bachelor of Software Engineering study
program at the School of Computing, Telkom University.
He was an awardee of the Indonesia Endowment Fund for
Education for his master’s education granted in 2016. His
research interest lies in the software engineering domain, es-
pecially requirement engineering and software engineering
for AI systems. Previously, he worked in the game develop-
ment industry at Batavian Studio as a game programmer in
2015.
Future Generation Computer Systems 161 (2024) 135–145
144

--- PAGE 11 ---
H. Takeuchi et al.
Hnin Thandar Tun is a Ph.D. course student at Waseda
University. She received her M.Eng degree in Computer
Science and Engineering from the University of Miyazaki,
Japan, in 2016. Additionally, she earned a Double Master’s
Degree from the University of Computer Studies, Yan-
gon, Myanmar, and the University of Miyazaki in 2016.
Currently, she is conducting research in Software Engineer-
ing and Machine Learning Systems at Waseda University.
Her research interests include Business Strategies within
Software Engineering, Artificial Intelligence, and Machine
Learning requirements and systems. Previously, she focused
on the Capability Maturity Model for Business Industries in
Software Engineering.
Hironori Washizaki is a professor in the Department of
Computer Science and Engineering at Waseda University
and a visiting professor at the National Institute of Infor-
matics. He also works in industry as outside director of
eXmotion. He is an advisor of SYSTEM INFORMATION and
University of Human Environments. His research interests
include software design, reuse, quality assurance, machine
learning engineering, project and business management, and
ICT education. He received a Doctoral degree in information
and computer science from Waseda University. He has
served as the IEEE Computer Society President-Elect 2024
and the President 2025. He has also served as a Convener
of ISO/IEC/JTC1 SC7/WG20, the Chair of IPSJ SIGSE, and
the Chair of JUSE SQiP. He is an Associate Editor of IEEE
Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing, Steering
Committee Member of CSEE&T and APSEC, and an Advisory
Committee Member of COMPSAC. He is a Professional
Member of IEEE-Eta Kappa Nu. He spearheads the evolution
project of the Guide to the Software Engineering Body of
Knowledge (SWEBOK).
Nobukazu Yoshioka is the CEO of QAML Inc. and a
Guest Professor of the Research Institute for Science and
Engineering at Waseda University, Japan. Dr. Nobukazu
Yoshioka received his B.E. degree in Electronic and Infor-
mation Engineering from Toyama University in 1993. He
received his M.E. and Ph.D. degrees from the School of In-
formation Science from Japan Advanced Institute of Science
and Technology in 1995 and 1998, respectively. From 1998
to 2002, he was with Toshiba Corporation, Japan. From
2002 to 2004, he was a researcher, and from 2004 to 2021,
he had been an associate professor at National Institute of
Informatics, Japan. From 2021 to 2024, he was a Professor
of Waseda Research Institute for Science and Engineering,
Waseda University, Japan. His research interests include
Security and Privacy Software Engineering and Software
Engineering for Machine Learning-based Systems.
Future Generation Computer Systems 161 (2024) 135–145
145