--- PAGE 1 ---
123
LNBIP 326
9thScandinavianConference
onInformationSystems,SCIS2018
Odder,Denmark,August5–8,2018
Proceedings
NordicContributions
inISResearch
Sune Dueholm Müller
Jeppe Agger Nielsen (Eds.)

--- PAGE 2 ---
Lecture Notes
in Business Information Processing 326
Series Editors
Wil M. P. van der Aalst
RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany
John Mylopoulos
University of Trento, Trento, Italy
Michael Rosemann
Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, QLD, Australia
Michael J. Shaw
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA
Clemens Szyperski
Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA, USA

--- PAGE 3 ---
More information about this series at http://www.springer.com/series/7911

--- PAGE 4 ---
Sune Dueholm Müller • Jeppe Agger Nielsen (Eds.)
Nordic Contributions
in IS Research
9th Scandinavian Conference
on Information Systems, SCIS 2018
Odder, Denmark, August 5–8, 2018
Proceedings
123

--- PAGE 5 ---
Editors
Sune Dueholm Müller
Aarhus University
Aarhus
Denmark
Jeppe Agger Nielsen
Department of Political Science
Aalborg University
Aalborg
Denmark
ISSN 1865-1348 ISSN 1865-1356 (electronic)
Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing
ISBN 978-3-319-96366-2 ISBN 978-3-319-96367-9 (eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-96367-9
Library of Congress Control Number: 2018948222
© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of the
material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation,
broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information
storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now
known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication
does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book are
believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or the editors
give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any errors or
omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Printed on acid-free paper
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer International Publishing AG
part of Springer Nature
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

--- PAGE 6 ---
Preface
The 9th Scandinavian Conference on Information Systems (SCIS9), 2018, was held in
Odder, Denmark, and was organized by the Department of Management at Aarhus
University.
SCIS9 emphasized digital adaptation, disruption, and survival as overall themes.
Digital innovation impacts all aspects of society, and organizations are forced to use
and adapt digital technology in their ﬁght for survival in the face of digital disruption.
Digital innovation and transformation is no longer reserved for the most daring busi-
nesses. Those who fail to innovate and embrace digital technology may be left behind
and go out of business. According to The World Economic Forum, we are at the
beginning of the Fourth Industrial Revolution. As a consequence of digital disruption,
“just over half of the names of companies on the Fortune 500 have disappeared since
the year 2000.”1
Organizations are looking for ways to keep up with fast-paced changes
in customer demands, apply new technology in novel ways, and transform their
businesses. However, as organizations strive to transform themselves, they often face
signiﬁcant challenges, obstacles, and unintended consequences that require an under-
standing of the role of digital technologies. By selecting “Digital Adaptation, Dis-
ruption, and Survival” as the conference theme, we wanted to encourage researchers to
address questions such as: What do the concepts of “digital innovation,” “digital dis-
ruption,” and “digital transformation” actually mean? Which industries and organiza-
tions—private or public—are affected and how? How does digital technology impact
business models and support new forms of consumption, such as those made possible
by the sharing economy? What are the downsides and critical aspects of current
developments?
A total of 18 papers were submitted to the conference. The evaluation was a
double-blind review process with two reviewers for each manuscript. Finally, ﬁve
papers were accepted for presentation at the conference and published in these pro-
ceedings (acceptance rate of 28%).
SCIS9 proudly presented three keynote speakers: Richard L. Baskerville from
Georgia State University (USA), Nils Fonstad from the MIT Center for Information
System Research (USA), and Tina Blegind Jensen from Copenhagen Business School
(Denmark). As in previous years, the SCIS conference was organized in conjunction
with the Information Systems Research Conference in Scandinavia (IRIS) with its 41th
annual meeting.
1
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/01/digital-disruption-has-only-just-begun/.

--- PAGE 7 ---
We are thankful to all those people who contributed to this conference as organizers,
Program Committee members, and reviewers. We would also like to thank Springer for
the very fruitful and easy collaboration. Finally, we would like to say thanks to all the
volunteers who contributed to making this conference a memorable event.
May 2018 Jeppe Agger Nielsen
Sune Dueholm Müller
VI Preface

--- PAGE 8 ---
Organization
Conference Chairs
Bjarne Rerup Schlichter Aarhus University, Denmark
Lise Tordrup Heeager Aarhus University, Denmark
Program Chairs
Sune Dueholm Müller Aarhus University, Denmark
Jeppe Agger Nielsen Aalborg University, Denmark
Proceedings Chairs
Sune Dueholm Müller Aarhus University, Denmark
Jeppe Agger Nielsen Aalborg University, Denmark
Web Chair
Merete Elmann Aarhus University, Denmark
Keynotes and Symposium Chair
Andrea Carugati Aarhus University, Denmark
Program Committee
Per Svejvig Aarhus University, Denmark
Karin Hørup Aarhus University, Denmark

--- PAGE 9 ---
Contents
Experiencing Expectations: Extending the Concept of UX Anticipation . . . . . 1
Thomas Lindgren, Magnus Bergquist, Sarah Pink,
Martin Berg, and Vaike Fors
Recognizing and Mitigating the Negative Effects of Information
Technology Use: A Systematic Review of Persuasive
Characteristics in Information Systems. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Liisa Kuonanoja and Harri Oinas-Kukkonen
Combining Open and Closed Forms of Innovation: An Investigation
of Emerging Tensions and Management Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
Emilie Ruiz and Michela Beretta
Business Process Management, Continuous Improvement
and Enterprise Architecture: In the Jungle of Governance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Torben Tambo and Nikolaj Dybdal Clausen
Mobile Applications as Carriers of Institutional Pressures:
A Case of the Finnish Taxi Industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
Karin Väyrynen, Arto Lanamäki, and Juho Lindman
Author Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69

--- PAGE 10 ---
Experiencing Expectations: Extending
the Concept of UX Anticipation
Thomas Lindgren1,2(&)
, Magnus Bergquist1
, Sarah Pink3
,
Martin Berg4
, and Vaike Fors1
1
Halmstad University, Box 823, 301 18 Halmstad, Sweden
thomas.lindgren@volvocars.com,
{magnus.bergquist,vaike.fors}@hh.se
2
Volvo Car Corporation, 405 31 Göteborg, Sweden
3
School of Media and Communication, RMIT University,
GPO Box 2476, Melbourne, VIC 3001, Australia
sarah.pink@rmit.edu.au
4
Department of Computer Science and Media Technology,
Malmö University, 205 06 Malmö, Sweden
martin.berg@mah.se
Abstract. This paper demonstrates the role of pre-product user experience
(UX) in product design. For automotive companies, questions concerning how
users will experience not yet available products is pressing - due to an increase
in UX design for products, combined with a decrease in time-to-market for new
products. Conventional UX research provides insights through investigating
speciﬁc situated moments during use, or users’ reflections after use, yet cannot
provide knowledge about how users will engage with not yet existing products.
To understand pre-product UX we undertook a netnographic study of three
people’s experiences of expecting and owning a Tesla car. We identiﬁed how
modes of anticipation evolve before using the actual car, through online social
interaction, creating a pre-product experience. The study offers a foundation for
theorizing pre-product UX as socially generated anticipated UX, as well as
insights for UX design in industry.
Keywords: User experience  Expectations  Automotive  Anticipation
1 Introduction
The pervasive spread of digitalization and automation changes the conditions in which
cars can be experienced, used and become part of everyday life [1]. This paper
responds to the growing demand for broadening existing deﬁnitions of user experience
within the automotive industry by outlining how pre-product user experiences can
inform User Experience (UX) design. It proposes a new mode of what Yogasara et al.
[2] has called anticipated user experience (AUX). Whereas in previous accounts of UX
expectations are assumed to take place before an actual experience (anticipated UX)
[3–5], we argue that perceived expectations can be redeﬁned as pre-product experi-
ences. To develop this argument and discussion we report on a study of pre-product
© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018
S. D. Müller and J. A. Nielsen (Eds.): SCIS 2018, LNBIP 326, pp. 1–13, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-96367-9_1

--- PAGE 11 ---
experience amongst expectant users of Tesla cars, which demonstrates how anticipation
is an important element of user experience itself, rather than being prior to it.
UX design is an increasingly important factor for competitive product development
in the automotive industry. Research shows that implementation of features and
usability testing is not sufﬁcient to attract future customers who are increasingly faced
with different and competing offers [6, 7]. Although UX is often deﬁned as holistic in
the sense that it aims at understanding how people relate to and experience products in
various contexts [6], research [8] and industry trends [1, 9] have indicated that the UX
communities and consequentially the automotive industry need to reﬁne their current
understandings of how pre-product experiences are shaped and how they affect peo-
ple’s expectations of anticipated products. UX often engages with questions of emotion
and affect as well as the situatedness and temporality of experiences [6, 8], yet often
with an emphasis on how people relate to and experience a product in the present.
Despite the widely spread acknowledgement that user experiences often change over
time [6, 10], UX has largely focused on situated experiences during or after use of a
particular product. However, this perspective limits the extent to which we can
understand how emerging and not yet experienced products will be engaged with by
customers [11, 12]. There is moreover a lack of HCI research into how the connected
car is experienced and becomes integrated into people’s everyday lives [13].
In a contemporary context of digital materiality, where the digital and material
worlds and experiences can no longer be considered to be separate from each other
[14], pre-product experiences are already emerging as people generate ways of sharing
and coordinating their anticipatory modes of engagement with products online. Our
research examined this through the research question: How do users pre-product
experiences shape product anticipation? To develop our analysis we took a generative
ethnographic approach [15] based on a netnographic study [16] of how pre-product
user experience develops in an online Tesla owners forum. This enabled us to follow in
detail how three Tesla owners’ expectations and experiences developed through their
forum interactions. We demonstrate how this focus on Anticipated User Experience
(AUX) extends current research on user experience to involve users’ digital experi-
ences and expectations of products at a very early stage. Our research suggests that
consumer product companies, like the automotive industry should begin to treat
anticipation as part of the UX design process and design for user’s pre-product
expectations as well as for the experience of use.
The paper is organized as follows. First, we review relevant work on UX frame-
works and anticipated UX. We contextualize the social nature of anticipation through a
sociological approach to AUX, followed by the research design and results. We con-
clude by discussing the implications of anticipation for future research and UX design.
2 Literature Review
2.1 Changing Conditions for Experiencing the Car
Digitalization and automation of the car, and the emerging vision of car as a service-
provider as much as a means of transportation, has changed how people use, experience
2 T. Lindgren et al.

--- PAGE 12 ---
and expect the car to become part of their everyday lives. Three core aspects of these
changes that impact on how the car is perceived, used and experienced are identiﬁed in
existing literature. These changes demand new ways of understanding how pre-product
user experience is created and developed in order to attract customers and provide
positive user experience [8, 17].
First, there is a shift from the physical product as involving a standalone product
experience towards a more service-dominated experience which is integrated with the
user’s everyday life [18]. Subscription based models, in combination with digital
services, generate innovative solutions for new forms of car-on-demand accessed as
flexible services through apps. From the user perspective this means more options
become available and there is a shorter time for anticipation and expectations to
develop before making a selection [19].
Second, automotive trends in online product stores, instead of traditional dealer-
ships, and in-app add-on functionality integrated with other services extend the
physical experience of the car into a digital platform. This changes the user’s ﬁrst
expectations and experiences of what would conventionally have been a material
technology purchased in a face-to-face context into a digital experience. How this
affects the overall experience and development of expectations has not been fully
explored [20]. The effect of digitalization is also increased through use of social media
and a shift in how a user’s future car can be experienced. This creates new social
interactions between users of the same type of products or services, which enhances
and extends the pre-product experience before its actual use.
Third, software updates during the car’s life-time [21] based on AI technologies
enable the car to adapt to individual needs and behaviours. This provides UX designers
with new possibilities to continually enhance users’ expectations and experiences
[21, 22].
2.2 Anticipation and User Experience
UX is deﬁned by the ISO standard as “[a] person’s perceptions and responses that
result from the use and/or anticipated use of a product, system or service” [23]. This
deﬁnition is widely shared within the industry and in UX research [3]. The phase before
actual use, and how this phase relates to later experiences, has often been difﬁcult to
deﬁne and has not been acknowledged as part of the actual experience. Subsequently,
this phase has not been investigated little [24]. However, the ISO deﬁnition introduces
the concept of anticipated use, and it is visualized in some UX frameworks [4], as in
Fig. 1 below.
Fig. 1. Phases of UX, adapted after Roto et al. [5]
Experiencing Expectations 3

--- PAGE 13 ---
Research that engages with anticipated use [2, 24] understands anticipated UX
(AUX) as people’s anticipation of the future product or service and how it is influenced
by people’s imaginations, desires, expectations and already existing experiences.
Yogasara et al. [2] deﬁnes four factors that influence AUX: the users intended use, the
user proﬁle, the user’s experiential knowledge and the user’s anticipated emotions.
Recent research on AUX [24] takes a cause and effect perspective in isolation from the
dynamics of the social context. UX research also tends to make a distinction between
experiencing momentary UX (the physical product) or AUX (the imaginary product).
However, when product experiences extend and appear both in physical and digital
forms, the idea of boundaries between the physical and imaginary become unclear and
lead to implications both for UX design and for how designers conceptualize AUX.
Not only do digitalization and the possibilities of sharing the experiences through social
media shift the focus and importance of UX to the phase of AUX, social aspects will
also play a more important role [25]. We therefore suggest that anticipated user
experiences should not be studied as an individual user-product relationship, but as a
shared social activity involving multiple and changing relationships. In the next section
we propose a theoretical framework to approach shared anticipation and UX.
2.3 Theorizing Anticipation
In this paper, we draw on a sociological theory of anticipation to understand the early
phases of users’ expectations and experiences of a product and how it relates to cultural
and social aspects of what users do and experience when coordinating their futures.
Tavory and Eliasoph [26] have deﬁned the concept of human anticipation through three
categories or modes:
• Protentions – Which deﬁnes our actions or next move. This is the anticipation we
take for granted and use when we experience the present. E.g. when we aim to hit a
tennis ball with the racket.
• Trajectories – Where people in search of meaning make narratives or projects that
have a beginning, middle and end. Our actions become a part of the process to
advance the trajectory.
• Plans and temporal landscapes – How we coordinate according to less intentional
plans or things treated as inevitably already deﬁned and natural e.g. calendar time,
cosmic, eternal, religious related events.
Tavory and Eliasoph argue that rather than these different modes being mutually
interdependent and co-constituting, they can instead coexist and are sometimes shared
between people. To anticipate the future, several trajectories and plans become active,
and people manage to quickly switch between these different modes. This theory
expands the view of anticipation in three ways. First, it shows that some actions are
based on our “feeling” in the moment, which might not be fully reflected on and is
constantly calibrated in our interactions according to the speciﬁc situation. Thus, we
might not always act predictably or according to a model. Second, by revealing the
importance of our plans, with a beginning and an end, we make sense of each of our
actions (protentions). Without a trajectory or a plan our actions will not make sense to
us, which means that our interactions with a product are part of a plan. Third, the
4 T. Lindgren et al.

--- PAGE 14 ---
complex and simultaneous ways these trajectories and plans are managed makes it
obvious how difﬁcult it is to model UX in cause and effect frameworks. There are many
things going on in a user’s mind, and the interaction with a product is just one of
several trajectories and plans happening simultaneously.
This understanding of anticipation enables us to understand the user’s relationship
to a product or service through a focus on how the user’s interactions with the product
become meaningful as elements in the user’s own plan or trajectory. While the tem-
poralities of UX have been identiﬁed [10, 12], most existing research investigates the
phases where users are actually interacting with physical products or later reflecting on
these interactions. This existing work tends to focus on user’s emotions and product
attributes in the use of the product [27] or on how the user’s motivation participates in
UX [28], rather than describing the evolution of experiences and expectations.
To summarize the advances made in UX research towards understanding pre-
product experiences and expectations, existing research has sought to deﬁne the
characteristics of the concept of AUX but has not situated anticipation and expectations
as elements in the total user experience, whether the product is experienced in physical
or digital forms. This raises two points that inform our work:
First, a social science perspective offers us a way to advance UX research towards a
renewed AUX approach, which analyses how user anticipation affects the choice of a
product or service. Here, we show how this can be mobilized through the example of
how users experience the anticipation of a complex product - a Tesla car.
Second, if we take anticipation seriously then we need to consider not only how
products are imagined before use, but also the experience of engaging with a product
before it is used. This goes beyond seeing anticipation as prior to the user’s experience
of a product to instead see it as part of the user experience. This led us to investigate
how an anticipatory online product experience might be analysed as an experience in
itself for individual users and co-users, through an analysis of how aspiration and
anticipation of a new product/service constituted user experience.
3 Research Design
To identify pre-product experience, we took an exploratory inductive approach through
a netnographic study [16] in a Swedish Tesla owners forum during 10 months in
2017–18. We selected Tesla, because the brand provides one of the most progressive
cars with advanced automotive technologies and moreover has a model for marketing
and sales that differs from the traditional automotive industry [29]. The forum [http://
teslaclubsweden.se] was selected so we could follow how Tesla owner’s expectations
and experiences evolved through the ownership process, through interactions with
other forum participants. Similar to other netnographic studies of interactions in online
communities (for instance [30, 31]), this study engaged both with participants’ ongoing
activity in the community and their previous conversations. The method allowed us to
discover how user expectations and user experience gradually unfolded over time
through the conversations without having to interfere in social interactions and antic-
ipatory conversations.
Experiencing Expectations 5

--- PAGE 15 ---
Data collection and analysis was undertaken in two steps. First we were immersed
in the community to gain a basic overview of the forum (around 4000 members at the
time of study), the forum structure, member activities and the general atmosphere. We
analysed 28 recently updated member presentations and 25 popular discussions.
Identiﬁed themes were e.g. reasons for becoming Tesla owners, how Tesla owners like
to drive, debates on fully autonomous driving, and access to beta software. The most
signiﬁcant quotations were transcribed for the second step in the analysis, which
focused on how Tesla ownership developed over time. Based on the themes identiﬁed
in step one, three active and long-term (over 2 years) forum members were selected.
A selection criteria was that the user had actually bought a Tesla while being active in
the community. We analysed how their anticipation evolved over time, from when they
entered the forum until becoming Tesla owners. Their personal presentation threads
and additional threads were collected and their expectations and experiences through
the ownership phases and transitions were analysed. Informed consent was gathered
from the participants through private messages in the forum. We used Atlas.ti for
coding based on thematic analysis [32] to group emerging themes, including imagining
the future, ordering process, sharing expectations, picking up the car and the new Tesla
life.
4 Results
The Tesla forum is an open and active online forum that attracts one third of Swedish
Tesla car owners as members, as well as people with a general interest in the company,
the car itself, and people interested in new energy solutions and electric vehicles
(EV’s). The atmosphere in the forum is very social and inviting to new curious
members and the community quickly replies and encourages them to become Tesla
owners.
Our ﬁndings indicate that the experience of becoming a Tesla owner is a three-
phase process: (a) imagining the future, (b) sharing experiences and expectations,
(c) living the new life. These different modes of anticipation become experiences that
can develop over time.
Based on the initial analysis we chose three active Tesla forum participants to
deepen the analysis of how individual Tesla expectations and experiences develops
over time. The results show that this was a highly interactive process based on sharing
information and attuning with other members. The following sections describe each
phase more in detail.
4.1 Imagining the Future
The ﬁrst phase of the emergent identity as a Tesla owner often starts with becoming
part of a cult of the future, organized around writings about the inventor and leader of
Tesla, Elon Musk. Their stories range through being part of a social movement, seeing
the Tesla as the ultimate driving experience, and the Tesla car being the materialization
of this anticipated future. A current Tesla owner describes how his expectations from
the beginning were not of the car itself: “Tesla is not a car but a “concept” that I
6 T. Lindgren et al.

--- PAGE 16 ---
wanted to experience before I get too old”. The imagination of the future visions leads
to a search for more information to learn about how a Tesla car could ﬁt into this
imagined future.
The Tesla owner Carl’s story exempliﬁes how anticipating participation in a
transformation towards a future vision shapes into a more concrete vision of owning a
Tesla car. His interest in computers and space led him to imagine himself as a Tesla
owner. As such, he would be part of Elon Musk’s visions and plans for the SpaceX
project and his vision about colonizing Mars. He joined the Tesla forum almost
secretly: “Got deep down into Tesla and began in secret to read this excellent forum
(which, incidentally, has a really good atmosphere)”. Eventually the idea of buying a
Tesla came as a materialization of his imagination of a future culture which aimed to
transform the world with technology for the beneﬁt of the environment.
The Tesla owner Dennis described his experiences of his ﬁrst test drive of a Tesla
Model S in the forum. Since that day, he decided to get one, no matter what it would
take. His anticipation was fuelled with real experience of the car and a conviction that
the new technologies of EV-cars is the ultimate solution for future mobility, and that
Tesla is the materialization of this vision. “Getting new gadgets is the best. A Tesla is
frankly speaking the ultimate gadget.” Tesla owner John exempliﬁes anticipation of the
car as a radical reconceptualization of what a car is about: “I have always had a HUGE
interest in cars … However, it has been more like “the bigger engine and the more
noise they make the better” … and it will be difﬁcult to change mindset, I think!” Since
his ﬁrst test drive of a Tesla, he was convinced that the car was amazing, but planned to
keep his “V8 muscle car” while ﬁguring out how the Tesla Model S would ﬁt into his
lifestyle.
All these stories of anticipation are concrete experiences of real and imagined cars,
and thus building blocks in socially constructed stories, supported by digital tools on
the Tesla website to envision and design what participants saw as the ultimate car.
Together with the social interactions in the online community they enhance the pos-
sibilities for anticipation of the future, even if the actual car is not experienced in real
life.
4.2 Sharing Experiences and Expectations
Visioning is about deﬁning goals and shaping a repertoire of needs and wants. But, to
become tools for action, needs must be organized into series of actions that form
trajectories, which lead the forum user towards realizing the anticipated goal when
pressing the button to order a new car. Creating and sharing logics of argumentation
was important for how users co-constructed and shaped the trajectories that emerged in
the forum.
An illustrating example is Carl’s emergent narrative of how he could ﬁt a Tesla into
his everyday life, which was jointly developed with other forum members. The tra-
jectory formed around arguments that were initially disparate, but in discussions
became aligned and mutually supporting. They discussed the value of money, what an
electric car could save in terms of cost for fuel, the future of charging stations, and
technology development in general. Eventually, this created both a logical sequence of
arguments supporting the choice of a Tesla, and the timing for action to maximize the
Experiencing Expectations 7

--- PAGE 17 ---
experience: “The Swedish krona is falling against the dollar, approaching a price
increase tomorrow, and the end of free SuC (Super Charging stations) made me buy
now. I ordered a 60D in Midnight Silver Metallic and Autopilot, now I just hope the
“old” textile seats run out so I get the premium seats as bonus.” Sharing his ideas in
the forum had two consequences. First, it clariﬁed and enabled him to reflect on his
vague thoughts and ideas; second it made ideas available for other users and served to
influence and adapt their expectations. Eventually it seemed inevitable both for him and
his peers that he would purchase a car that entirely overshadowed his originally
anticipated rational car choice.
Sharing not only introduces new activities that emerge and create new experiences,
it also organizes the experiences onto a path. Forum members compare delivery dates,
share ownership tips and invite each other to meet and offer charging possibilities in
their homes. Dennis made detailed ﬁnancing worksheets that he gladly shared with
others at the same stage. Although he found the waiting process “unbearably” long it
created an exciting and pleasurable experience since he could access digital content
online and share experiences with others: “Thankfully, the Model S is a car with a lot of
enthusiasts, so it is certainly not short on information and videos to dig into online”.
To know every step in the production and delivery process, Dennis created “a script
that checks the status every 30 min and sends a mess to my phone if it is changed, so I
know it for sure”. This script was shared and appreciated by other members. Sharing
the waiting process creates joyful competition between members waiting for the same
model, as Dennis put it: “It looks like you are winning who owns a Tesla ﬁrst”. Sharing
time to delivery together with digital representations of the built car builds up the
expectations of the actual materialization of the artefact. Dennis was instantly obliged
to share photos on receiving his car, “Pics or it didn’t happen.” The pre-product
experience culminates in this performative ritual of taking and sharing photos of the
car’s delivery, through which it is celebrated by the online community.
4.3 Living the New Life
Actual owners of Tesla cars are respected and very important to the forum members’
ability to anticipate and experience, as they provide the community with hands on
experiences. Real use of the car after the pick-up is often referred to as the life changing
“new Tesla life”. Dennis was very satisﬁed with the car and how it met his expectations
of the ultimate gadget. “I already love the car. Madly in love. It is incredibly good.
I can’t understand how they could get that much coolness in one package. A couple of
small details, however, stuck out. I felt some vibration at low speeds, most around 30–
50, so that the head like bobbing against the headrest… Should it be like that?” By
sharing the part of the experience that did not meet his expectations, he instantly got
feedback from other Tesla owners who shared their experience and tips to solve or
reduce his worries and recalibrate his anticipations. A year after the delivery, John
showed his love for his new Tesla and posted a long story of the ﬁrst year’s experi-
ences, where he intended “to make a small tribute thread with pictures of her and our
relationship here!” It is narrated as a family photo album, very personal with a sense of
humour in the description of his relation to the car, and provides other members with a
digest of experiences over time.
8 T. Lindgren et al.

--- PAGE 18 ---
Simultaneously, the Tesla is positively described as an expanding technology that is
updated and provided with new functionality long after the customer receives the car.
John posts after a software update: “It’s exciting with new updates during the car’s life.
Both functionality and visually”. Through continuous software updates experiences of
anticipation evolve over time. In the forum there is continuous discussion about future
releases and indulgence of software glitches in current versions that nevertheless results
in trust in the company as a premium brand even though some functionality is delayed.
As such, the three owners discussed here developed a relationship to the car, the other
community members and to the brand itself as a “total Tesla ownership experience.”
5 Discussion
This paper has outlined how pre-product user experiences can inform UX design and
has proposed a new mode of AUX. In a context of digital materiality the conditions for
experiencing cars are changing, and there is a need to reﬁne current understandings of
UX for the automotive industry and UX communities. We propose treating anticipation
as part of the UX design process in order to design for user’s pre-product expectations.
The Tesla owners’ narratives demonstrated that the anticipated UX of their ordered car
and the initiation of the relation with it, social interaction in the community, and digital
aspects of the car, all participate in shaping anticipation. Tavory and Eliasoph’s [26]
framework of anticipation, enabled us to generate new insights concerning the social
and temporal aspects and complexity of AUX.
5.1 Importance of Trajectories and Plans
The starting point for these owners’ journeys to becoming Tesla owners begins in their
anticipation of overarching trajectories or plans of the future ranging from getting into
the Elon Musk culture, a full EV future or the multipurpose tool for driving experi-
ences. The AUX expressed here is described in different imaginative descriptions and
getting the car is a key protention forward on their trajectory or plan. For each indi-
vidual this could involve several ongoing or emerging uncoupled trajectories, like
being able to ﬁnance the cost of ownership, solve everyday transportation needs,
having a unique driving experience or ﬁtting the users image and beliefs. By making
protentions in posting and sharing their anticipation with others the multiple ongoing
trajectories change and converge into an almost inevitable plan where the action of
pushing the order button makes total sense even if the rational arguments sometimes
say something different.
5.2 Feel in the Moment
The digitalization of the car and use of the community as platform enhance sharing the
experience and create many new experiences and trajectories based on users’ own
creativity around the anticipated car, e.g. ﬁnancing formulas, software scripts for
instant delivery updates or delivery competitions. These protentions are not always
possible to predict or refer to a well prepared trajectory or plan that could be explained
Experiencing Expectations 9

--- PAGE 19 ---
in a model, but rather emerge based on the persons “feel” in the moment. The digital
platform encourages sharing spontaneous protentions in the emerging discussions. The
possibilities with digitalization and subscription based ownership models of the car that
encourage feel in the moment protentions, will be more important to understand in
relation to UX.
5.3 Managing Trajectories and Plans Simultaneously
There are many simultaneously ongoing trajectories and plans for the owners, which
highlight the difﬁculties in viewing the UX of the car solely through a cause and effect
model for user-car relations in a speciﬁc context. The fast sharing of the members’
experiences and expectations through the community evolve, converge or emerge the
trajectories and plans for each individual in unpredictable ways, which creates and adds
new experiences and expectations to the overall user experience. Continuous evolution
of the products’ functionality during use, through software updates, also encourages
anticipation of new trajectories to be created and provides possibilities for positive
experiences.
5.4 Advancing UX Research
To sum up, the concept of AUX [2], has not fully accounted for anticipation and
expectation in relation to the user’s management of multiple ongoing trajectories, plans
or instant protentions shared in the social interactions within the forum or for whether
the product is experienced in physical or digital forms. A social and temporal per-
spective provides a new approach that advances UX research beyond the current more
static user-product perspective. Figure 2 shows a user trajectory towards Tesla own-
ership developed in the forum. During the process the digital Tesla transformed into a
materialized reality, which fed experiences of anticipation to new members and enabled
their imaginations of future Tesla ownership.
Fig. 2. The trajectory of evolving ownership anticipation.
10 T. Lindgren et al.

--- PAGE 20 ---
As Fig. 2 shows, the ﬁrst phase of anticipation in the process of buying a Tesla car
grew from the owner’s urge to be a part of, or to experience, something more than just
the car itself. Here the experience within the community became shared anticipation
and expectation of an imagined car. This created multiple member activities and
generated tangible positive experiences for the users. Based on the empirical study, we
argue that there is a need to expand the view of UX concepts. Cause and effect models,
such as CUE or similar models used in recent UX research claim to be holistic [11], but
do not really explain the social effects of anticipation in pre-product experience. More
research on AUX is needed to strengthen the understanding of a holistic view of UX.
To achieve this requires expanding the understanding of how users’ social activities in
pre-product experiences shape UX. When we re-conceptualise the experience of a
product, from being only physical towards including both digital and social experience,
the boundaries between the physical and the non-physical UX change for both the user
and the product industry. We used netnography as an approach through which to learn
about lead-users’ social activities and product anticipations, but further investigation is
needed to advance our understandings of how to better involve users in the develop-
ment of UX. Better awareness of pre-product user anticipation is likely to increase
possibilities to design holistic UX solutions to meet the automotive transformation
from product to services, increased digitalisation, and intelligent evolving functionality.
6 Conclusions
This paper has examined how users pre-product experiences shape product anticipa-
tion. We used Tavory and Eliasoph’s theory of social anticipation [26] to identify user
trajectories towards their decision to order a Tesla car. The results show that digital-
ization of the user experience enable experiences to emerge in the process of antici-
pation in two ways: ﬁrst, the online forum affords sharing, commenting and interaction
through which anticipation is co-operatively shaped in multiple situations; second, the
high digitalization of the Tesla car blurs the line between physical and virtual expe-
riences. These experiences can have shorter (protention) or longer (plans) perspectives.
Users multiple and evolving trajectories of anticipation can align over time and
strengthen the experience of the product, and thus enhance expectations. Aligned
anticipation can bring users closer to implementing the anticipated future. Finally, the
study adds to the theorizing of anticipation of UX in HCI research. While existing
approaches to AUX are based on theories of cause and effect relationships, this study
shows the value of social theories for understanding the dynamics of user’s contexts
and ongoing social activities of sharing physical and virtual experiences, involving
multiple and changing relationships. The results have implications for product devel-
opment. The study identiﬁed no clear boundaries between people’s imaginaries,
expectations and desires of future products, and the ongoing socially shaped and
emergent experiences of the product, in its physical or digital form. Instead, such
experiences seem important for how goals are formed and decisions are made, and are
ongoing in the pre-product phase, thus making anticipation important for product UX
design.
Experiencing Expectations 11

--- PAGE 21 ---
References
1. Gao, P., Kaas, H.-W., Mohr, D., Wee, D.: Automotive revolution: perspective towards 2030:
how the convergence of disruptive technology-driven trends could transform the auto
industry. Advanced Industries. McKinsey and Company, Advanced Industries (2016)
2. Yogasara, T., Popovic, V., Kraal, B.J., Chamorro-Koc, M.: General characteristics of
anticipated user experience (AUX) with interactive products. In: Proceedings of
IASDR2011: The 4th World Conference on Design Research: Diversity and Unity, IASDR,
pp. 1–11 (2011)
3. Law, E.L.-C., Roto, V., Hassenzahl, M., Vermeeren, A.P.O.S., Kort, J.: Understanding,
scoping and deﬁning user experience: a survey approach. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Boston, MA, USA, pp. 719–728.
ACM (2009)
4. Pohlmeyer, A.E., Hecht, M., Blessing, L.: User experience lifecycle model ContinUE
[Continuous user experience]. In: Der Mensch im Mittepunkt technischer Systeme.
Fortschritt-Berichte VDI Reihe, vol. 22, pp. 314–317 (2009)
5. Roto, V., Law, E., Vermeeren, A., Hoonhout, J.: User experience white paper–bringing
clarity to the concept of user experience (2011)
6. Hassenzahl, M., Tractinsky, N.: User experience - a research agenda. Behav. Inf. Technol.
25, 91–97 (2006)
7. Väänänen-Vainio-Mattila, K., Roto, V., Hassenzahl, M.: Now let’s do it in practice: user
experience evaluation methods in product development. In: CHI 2008 Extended Abstracts on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, Florence, Italy, pp. 3961–3964. ACM (2008)
8. Allam, A., Dahlan, H.M.: User experience: challenges and opportunities. J. Inf. Syst. Res.
Innov. 3, 28–36 (2013)
9. State of UX in 2018. https://uxdesign.cc/on-why-we-write-the-words-we-write-the-way-we-
write-them-8423f4734e77
10. Karapanos, E., Zimmerman, J., Forlizzi, J., Martens, J.-B.: User experience over time: an
initial framework. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, Boston, MA, USA, pp. 729–738. ACM (2009)
11. Minge, M., Thüring, M.: Hedonic and pragmatic halo effects at early stages of user
experience. Int. J. Hum. Comput. Stud. 109, 13–25 (2018)
12. Pettersson, I.: The temporality of in-vehicle user experience. Division Design & Human
Factors Department of Product and Production Development. Chalmers University of
Technology (2016)
13. Svangren, M.K., Skov, M.B., Kjeldskov, J.: The connected car: an empirical study of electric
cars as mobile digital devices. In: Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on
Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services, Vienna, Austria, pp. 1–12.
ACM (2017)
14. Pink, S., Ardèvol, E., Lanzeni, D.: Digital materiality. In: Pink, S., Ardevol, E., Lanzeni, D.
(eds.) Digital Materialities: Design and Anthropology, Bloomsbury, London, pp. 1–26
(2016)
15. Dourish, P.: Responsibilities and implications: further thoughts on ethnography and design.
In: Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on Designing for User eXperiences, Chicago,
Illinois, pp. 2–16. ACM (2007)
16. Kozinets, R.V.: Netnography. In: The International Encyclopedia of Digital Communication
and Society. Wiley (2015)
17. Bødker, S.: When second wave HCI meets third wave challenges. In: Proceedings of the 4th
Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Interaction: Changing Roles, pp. 1–8. ACM (2006)
12 T. Lindgren et al.

--- PAGE 22 ---
18. Lusch, R.F., Vargo, S.L.: Service-dominant logic: reactions, reflections and reﬁnements.
Mark. Theory 6, 281–288 (2006)
19. Garbarino, E., Johnson, M.S.: The different roles of satisfaction, trust, and commitment in
customer relationships. J. Mark. 63, 70–87 (1999)
20. Immonen, M., Sintonen, S., Koivuniemi, J.: The value of human interaction in service
channels. Comput. Hum. Behav. 78, 316–325 (2018)
21. Lyyra, A.K., Koskinen, K.M.: The ambivalent characteristics of connected, digitised
products: case Tesla Model S. In: Lundh Snis, U. (ed.) SCIS 2016. LNBIP, vol. 259, pp. 57–
69. Springer, Cham (2016). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-43597-8_5
22. Gomes, C.C., Preto, S.: Artiﬁcial intelligence and interaction design for a positive emotional
user experience. In: Karwowski, W., Ahram, T. (eds.) IHSI 2018. AISC, vol. 722, pp. 62–
68. Springer, Cham (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-73888-8_11
23. Ergonomics of human system interaction - Part 210: human-centred design for interactive
systems. International Organization for Standardization (ISO), vol. ISO 9241-210 (2010)
24. Eilu, E.: Using cognitive psychology to understand anticipated user experience in computing
products. In: Mobile Platforms, Design, and Apps for Social Commerce, pp. 175–196. IGI
Global (2017)
25. Goh, K.-Y., Heng, C.-S., Lin, Z.: Social media brand community and consumer behavior:
quantifying the relative impact of user- and marketer-generated content. Inf. Syst. Res. 24,
88–107 (2013)
26. Tavory, I., Eliasoph, N.: Coordinating futures: toward a theory of anticipation. Am. J. Sociol.
118(4), 908–942 (2013)
27. Hassenzahl, M.: The thing and I: understanding the relationship between user and product.
In: Blythe, M.A., Overbeeke, K., Monk, A.F., Wright, P.C. (eds.) Funology: From Usability
to Enjoyment. HCIS, vol. 3, pp. 31–42. Springer, Dordrecht (2005). https://doi.org/10.1007/
1-4020-2967-5_4
28. Hassenzahl, M., Schöbel, M., Trautmann, T.: How motivational orientation influences the
evaluation and choice of hedonic and pragmatic interactive products: the role of regulatory
focus. Interact. Comput. 20, 473–479 (2008)
29. Zucchi, K.: What Makes Tesla’s Business Model Different? Investopedia (2018)
30. Hewer, P., Brownlie, D.: Cultures of consumption of car aﬁcionados: aesthetics and
consumption communities. Int. J. Sociol. Soc. Policy 27, 106–119 (2007)
31. Schembri, S., Latimer, L.: Online brand communities: constructing and co-constructing
brand culture. J. Mark. Manag. 32, 628–651 (2016)
32. Braun, V., Clarke, V.: Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual. Res. Psychol. 3, 77–101
(2006)
Experiencing Expectations 13

--- PAGE 23 ---
Recognizing and Mitigating the Negative
Effects of Information Technology Use:
A Systematic Review of Persuasive
Characteristics in Information Systems
Liisa Kuonanoja(&)
and Harri Oinas-Kukkonen
Faculty of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering, OASIS,
University of Oulu, Pentti Kaiteran katu 1, 90570 Oulu, Finland
{liisa.kuonanoja,harri.oinas-kukkonen}@oulu.fi
Abstract. Although information systems and technology have brought many
beneﬁts into people’s everyday lives, not to mention society as a whole, they are
also accompanied by negative consequences. For example, technostress, anxi-
ety, and even different kinds of addictions are among the side effects of infor-
mation technology use. Clearly, such negative consequences cannot be fully
avoided, but at least some of them may be mitigated via good system design. In
this study, we addressed the dark side of information technology use in everyday
life and in a leisure context, reviewing contributions from the basket of eight
information systems journals published between 2004 and early 2018. In our
analysis, we utilized the Persuasive Systems Design model in order to recognize
and analyze information system characteristics that may mitigate the negative
consequences of information technology use.
Keywords: Dark side  Negative consequences  Persuasive technology
Persuasive system design model
1 Introduction
In recent decades, the way we live and work has been revolutionized. Information
systems (IS) have brought transformational beneﬁts to individuals, organizations, and
even society as a whole [1, p. 58]. However, these beneﬁts have not come without a
cost, which is the dark side of IS. With the increased use of information technology
(IT), undesirable side effects are also increasing. Recognizing such negative conse-
quences and making improvements to system design could help researchers to identify
new ways to reduce the potential harm caused by IS. As yet, there is a lack of literature
on this topic; however, some of the harmful and even damaging consequences of IS use
have already been identiﬁed [2, 3]. It is hoped that these consequences can be miti-
gated, if not prevented.
The negative effects of IS may be apparent at both individual and organizational
levels, leading to negative societal effects on a large scale. For example, decreased job
satisfaction as well as organizational and continuance commitment [4], anxiety [5], and
problemswitheverydaylifeandsocialrelations[6] areamongthenegative consequences
© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018
S. D. Müller and J. A. Nielsen (Eds.): SCIS 2018, LNBIP 326, pp. 14–25, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-96367-9_2

--- PAGE 24 ---
of IT use. This paper focuses solely on negative effects at the individual level. Another
group of negative consequences of IT usage may arise from users behaving maliciously
toward others via IT [1, p. 178]. Examples of this include cyberbullying and the hacking
of systems belongingtoindividualsor organizations. Such maliciousactions,inwhich an
individual comes to harm as a result of another person’s conduct rather than from their
use of IT per se, are beyond the scope of this paper.
In this study, we have focused on voluntary IT use for non-organizational purposes.
The speciﬁc aim of this paper was to identify software features and qualities that may
mitigate the negative consequences of IS that have been identiﬁed in the literature. We
achieved this by analyzing published articles from major scientiﬁc journals in the IS
ﬁeld.1
The Persuasive Systems Design (PSD) model [7] has described a means for
influencing IS users in a positive manner. We have argued that this model is a useful
tool for determining which software features and qualities identiﬁed in earlier studies
can be used in our research context. Thus, in this analysis, we utilized the PSD model
as a lens through which to look at ways of mitigating the dark side of IT use.
2 Background
2.1 The Dark Side of Information Systems
The use of IT carries consequences for individuals and, eventually, for the whole of
society. Although the beneﬁts of technology are often emphasized, there are also many
negative effects. The dark side of IT use has been deﬁned by Tarafdar et al. [2] as “a
broad collection of ‘negative’ phenomena that are associated with the use of IT, and
that have the potential to infringe the well-being of individuals, organizations and
societies.” The ﬁrst studies on these negative effects were conducted over 30 years ago,
and they mostly focused on workplace and organizational contexts [2]. The scope of
research has since broadened to include leisure IT use [3].
Naturally, new negative consequences will continue to arise as IT evolves. In a
study by Pirkkalainen and Salo [3], the majority of negative consequences of IT use fell
under four categories: technostress, IT addiction, IT anxiety, and information overload.
Technostress is stress experienced by an end user of IT [4]. End users may experience
technostress in organizational contexts as a result of using work-related information
and communication technology (see, for example, [4]) or in leisure contexts as a result
of using, for instance, social networking sites (see, for example, [8]). Information
overload occurs when IT provides too much information in comparison to a user’s
needs, thus overwhelming the user [3, 9].
Addiction may be associated with different types of IS, such as games (for example,
[10]), social networking sites (for example, [11, 12]), online auction sites, or, more
broadly, mobile phones and the internet. According to one deﬁnition of IT addiction, itis
“a psychological dependency on IT that involves excessive and compulsive use despite
signiﬁcant negative consequences” [14]. In contrast, IT anxiety concerns an individual’s
willingness and ability to use IT [15]. People suffering from IT anxiety may avoid using
1
http://aisnet.org/?SeniorScholarBasket
Recognizing and Mitigating the Negative Effects of Information Technology Use 15

--- PAGE 25 ---
IT and may have difﬁculties understanding new technology. They may also feel
apprehension when using IT [3]. There are also other kinds of negative consequences,
such as loss of privacy and injuries related to poor ergonomics [2].
These consequences may impact individuals in many ways. Users may experience
stress and their productivity may decrease [16], or they may become addicted to or
obsessed with some element of IT, which could lead to obesity, decreased happiness,
social isolation, and in the worst cases, even death [11]. It is evident that there is a need
to ﬁnd methods that mitigate the negative consequences of IT use.
2.2 Persuasive Systems Design
People often have a need to change aspects of their behavior or their attitudes, such as
exercising more or using less plastic. Software design strategies used by persuasive
technology can help people to change their attitudes or behavior [7]. According to the
deﬁnition of persuasive technology, coercion and deception should not be used [7],
rather the use of such systems should be voluntary in nature [17, 18]. Persuasive
systems are often used in health-related systems, such as those that aid smoking ces-
sation, or help individuals change their lifestyle in order to incorporate healthier habits
[18, 19]. Persuasive systems have also been utilized in other domains, such as
e-commerce and energy conservation.
The PSD model by Oinas-Kukkonen and Harjumaa is a tool for designing and
evaluating persuasive systems [7]. The model consists of three phases that guide the
designer through the system design process:
– The ﬁrst phase, known as persuasion postulates, explains the main issues behind
persuasive systems that relate to behavior change and IT, which the designer should
understand before creating a new system. First, there is an understanding that IT is
never neutral but that it always affects users in one way or another. Second, a user’s
commitment and cognitive consistency are needed for the change. Third, persuasion
may happen through direct or indirect routes, and the route that is more effective
depends on users’ personal characteristics and the persuasion situation. Fourth,
incremental steps toward the target behavior should be supported, since change is
usually easier to achieve by taking small steps. Fifth, persuasion should be open and
transparent, and designer bias should be revealed. Sixth, it is important for the system
to be unobtrusive, because disturbing a user at an inopportune moment may result in
unwanted outcomes.Finally, seventh, thesystem shouldbe usefuland easy to use[7].
– The second phase of the PSD model [7] focuses on examining the persuasion context
to gain a comprehensive understanding of the situation in which the persuasion event
will take place. The intent of the persuader and the type of change the system is
supporting (whether this is a user’s behavior or attitude) should be analyzed. The
use, user, and technology context shouldbe given attention to form a rigorous picture
of the persuasion event. In addition, the strategy incorporating the main message and
the route of persuasion should be designed. A system designed with such under-
standing will be more persuasive and ﬁtting for the targeted users [7].
– The third phase consists of determining which software features will support users
in approaching their behavior change objective. In the PSD model, such features are
16 L. Kuonanoja and H. Oinas-Kukkonen

--- PAGE 26 ---
divided into four categories, namely, primary task support, dialogue support,
credibility support, and social influence. A new system does not need to incorporate
all of these categories nor all of the features they contain, but their use will make it
more persuasive [7]. The effects of software features have been investigated in
numerous studies, such as [19, 20].
The factors mentioned in the PSD model are presented on a relatively abstract level,
which leaves room for designers to interpret them. This means that the postulates can
be taken into account and the chosen software system features can be implemented in a
manner preferred by the design team.
3 Methods
As the basis for our research, we utilized a study previously carried out by Pirkkalainen
and Salo [3], which was a literature review of the current state of dark side phenomena
in IS that provided future directions for research. They concentrated their search on the
basket of eight journals in IS research, because their objective was to focus on the main
contributions to the IS ﬁeld, which were likely to be in the ﬁeld’s leading journals [3].2
The focus of their review was the negative effects of IT use on individuals in both
leisure and organizational contexts. Searched material included all issues of the
abovementioned journals from 1995 to 2015. Pirkkalainen and Salo [3] went through
all journal issues without using a keyword search. Articles meeting the set criteria
(studies addressing negative effect(s) of IT use on an individual) were included in their
review.
In order to build on Pirkkalainen and Salo’s [3] literature search, we used the same
criteria in our study. We conducted a descriptive review [21] with a narrow scope in
order to study our research objectives. We searched for articles issued between 2016
and early 2018, as these were published after the original research had been carried out.
Contrary to Pirkkalainen and Salo [3], we concentrated only on articles investigating
dark side effects in leisure contexts and excluded those in organizational contexts. As
Pirkkalainen and Salo [3], we followed the main guidelines for literature review by
Webster and Watson [22].
In the ﬁrst round of our search, which was based on article titles, we found 39 new
articles. We did not want to miss any relevant articles, so at this stage, we included
articles about negative effects in organizational contexts. If an article was about the
negative effects of IT use on individuals, then it was included, regardless of the context.
After reviewing the abstracts and, if needed, the introductions, we included nine arti-
cles. To these, we added the 11 articles found by Pirkkalainen and Salo [3] relating to
leisure/everyday contexts, bringing our data set to a total of 20 dark side articles.
2
We utilized the basket of eight IS journals, which included the following top journals in the IS ﬁeld:
MIS Quarterly, Information Systems Research, Journal of Management Information Systems,
Journal of the Association for Information Systems, European Journal of Information Systems,
Information Systems Journal, Journal of Information Technology, and Journal of Strategic
Information Systems. See: https://aisnet.org/?SeniorScholarBasket
Recognizing and Mitigating the Negative Effects of Information Technology Use 17

--- PAGE 27 ---
We extracted effective software system features and qualities from analyzed articles
and categorized them according to the PSD model. We exploited all three phases of the
PSD model, which we used as main categories. The ﬁrst category was persuasion
postulates, the second was the persuasion context (the intent, event, and strategy), and
the third was persuasive system features (primary task support, computer–human
dialogue, perceived credibility, and social support).
Our objective was to identify software features and qualities that mitigated the
negative consequences of IS use. We included features that provoked negative con-
sequences in order to raise awareness of their need for mitigation. Of the 20 articles in
our data set, 14 contained features that had some effect on the consequences of IS use.
At this stage, we excluded six articles, as they did not discuss the three abovementioned
phases but investigated, for example, users’ feelings and qualiﬁcations (for example,
[23]), or measured users’ technostress reactions [24]. These six articles were not within
the scope of our review.
4 Results
Our analysis of the dark side of IT use revealed meaningful ﬁndings. A summary of
these ﬁndings has been presented in Table 1. Some of the postulates indicating the
main issues behind persuasion systems had important mitigating effects on the negative
consequences of IT use. The next biggest category with an effect was social support. In
this category, features had negative consequences on IT users, although in one paper,
social features were found to have a mitigating effect.
Of the 14 studies included in this review, nine described mitigation related to
postulates in the PSD model [7]. The postulate stating that systems should be both
useful and easy to use (including lack of errors and high quality information), was the
most common mitigating quality. For example, Saunders et al. [25] mentioned that
older users of mobile phones felt more easily overwhelmed by phones with a multitude
offeatures compared to younger users. This ﬁnding is in line with suggestions made by
the PSD model that systems should be easy to use and that designers should analyze the
persuasion event to understand the user context.
In addition to system features, Vagheﬁ et al. [14] found characteristics of users
themselves that made them more prone to IT addiction. In their study, a system’s ease
of use and its usefulness, among other features, were antecedents for IT addiction
among users with certain characteristics. This postulate related to the impact of
information scent and time constraints on users’ stress, performance, and attitude [26].
Information scent is the collection of audio, visual, and semantic cues that guides users
to the information they are seeking, making a system easy to use and positively
influencing its performance.
The postulate stating that a system should be unobtrusive and should not disturb a
user when s/he is performing a primary task arose in two of the studies, namely those
by Cenfetelli and Schwarz [9] and Jenkins et al. [27]. The former [9] concerned six
inhibitors that may prevent people from using a website. Among the inhibitors that had
a negative consequence was intrusiveness, which was a quality of systems that inter-
rupted users with unrequested tasks. Jenkins et al. [27] studied how interrupting a user
18 L. Kuonanoja and H. Oinas-Kukkonen

--- PAGE 28 ---
Table 1. Summary of effective system features and qualities categorized according to the PSD
model [cf. 7]
PSD model Negative effects Mitigation effects
1. Persuasion
postulates
Unobtrusiveness – System should not interrupt the
user [9]
Alert messages should not interrupt
a user’s primary task [27]
Usefulness and
ease of use
Usefulness and ease of use,
among other related factors,
were antecedents for
addiction [14]
Systems that are complex and
change often cause stress [8]
Systems should not require too
much effort or be deceptive [9]
When a user feels the system will
be useful and easy to use, their
attitude toward it is positive [15]
Systems should have the
appropriate number of features for
each type of user [25]
Systems should guide a user to help
them ﬁnd relevant information [26]
Performance failures should be
avoided [28]
2. Persuasion
context
Intent – –
Event Systems should ﬁt into users’ lives
[8]
A user’s skills should be taken into
account during system design [25]
New technology should be well
understood, before implementing in
order to avoid failures [28]
Systems should work as promised
[31]
Strategy – –
3. Persuasive
system
features
Primary task
support
– Parental monitoring may prevent
addiction [10]
Self-monitoring may decrease
addiction [14]
Computer–
human dialogue
If systems are visually
attractive, then they may be
more addictive [14]
Education and suggestions may
prevent addiction [10]
Reminders and feedback may
prevent addiction [14]
Perceived
credibility
– –
Social support Social features may make
systems more addictive [11,
10, 14, 29]
Social facilitation may
increase feelings of loneliness
[30]
Subjective norms regarding
social networking site usage
increase users’ feelings of
guilt and discontinuance
intentions [32]
Recognition by others may
decrease users’ feelings of
loneliness [30]
Recognizing and Mitigating the Negative Effects of Information Technology Use 19

--- PAGE 29 ---
with security messages affected their secondary task. They found that if a user was
performing a primary task when they were interrupted by the security message, then
they often disregarded the message. Thus, the message not only interrupted users’
primary tasks but also their secondary task (the security issue to which the message
referred), which may be neglected.
Some studies in this review, namely [8, 9, 25, 27, 28], identiﬁed features that
designers should avoid if they wish to increase the likelihood of system use. Maier
et al. [8] identiﬁed and examined features that created social networking stress, which
had a signiﬁcant effect on individuals’ intention to discontinue use of the system. Of the
six features that created stress [8], some could be categorized using the PSD model,
because they discussed the same issues as the postulate regarding ease of use and
usefulness. For example, system features that created stress included the complexity
and constant changes of social networking systems. The work of Cenfetelli and Sch-
warz [9] followed the same line. Tan, Benbasat, and Cenfetelli [28] found that e-service
failures had a negative effect on customer expectations.
Another category that stood out from the results was social support. The features in
this category often had negative consequences for IT users, for instance, they increased
the addictive influence of IS (see, for instance, [10, 11, 29]) and increased feelings of
loneliness [30]. Social features had a negative impact on users in all four studies that
explored IT addiction from different perspectives. Social enhancement (the value of
online social networks to users based on their perception of other members’ acceptance
and approval of them), envy (the emotion social network users feel when they desire
the possessions or life experiences of other users), and a feeling of missing out on
social events and announcements, also known as FOMO, which arises if users do not
frequently monitor social networking systems) had signiﬁcant effects on the addictive
use of social networking sites [11].
In their study on addiction to mobile social applications, Kwon et al. [29] suggested
that social applications are designed to increase social liquidity, which they deﬁned as
“the ease with which one can establish interpersonal relationships” but also as “the
number of users available with whom social relationships can be cultivated.” They
concluded that when a person is more sensitive to social liquidity, s/he is more vul-
nerable to mobile social application addiction. Vagheﬁ et al. [14] found that some
social support features affected an individual’s tendency toward IT addiction, namely
connectivity and access to all communication channels. In online gaming addiction, Xu
et al. [10] recognized several social factors that increased addictive behavior, which
were a need for relationships and system features that supported socializing.
Matook et al. [30] discovered that the type of social system feature could determine
whether it had positive or negative influences on users’ feelings of loneliness. Passive
features, whereby users passively consume the content of other users, such as photos or
status updates, increased their feelings of loneliness. In contrast, active social system
features, whereby users broadcast their own content to friends and followers, decreased
their feelings of loneliness.
We identiﬁed system features effective in mitigating the negative consequences of
IT use also from other categories of the PSD model [7], namely event, primary task
support, and dialogue support features. Event features were mainly concerned with
knowing and understanding the use, user, and technology contexts. For example,
20 L. Kuonanoja and H. Oinas-Kukkonen

--- PAGE 30 ---
Saunders et al. [25] showed that systems designed to take different kinds of users into
account, like those that provided a choice of basic or expert proﬁles, were less likely to
cause stress. Vagheﬁ et al. [14] suggested that system features like usage reports
(primary task support) and reminders (dialogue support) could help users to understand
that their use of a system may not be totally under their control, which could mitigate
its addictiveness.
In a case described by Salo and Frank [31], effects were more complicated. They
studied the relationship between situational context and users’ behavior after positive
and negative critical incidents occurred with a mobile application. When a negative
incident took place indoors, it led to negative word-of-mouth, which was not the case
when it happened outdoors. When a negative incident occurred with a mobile appli-
cation that had a physical aspect (that is, it required concrete interaction between the
user and his/her mobile phone), users discontinued their system use more easily than
after negative incidents relating to other kinds of systems. They concluded that systems
should work as promised to prevent users from discontinuing their use. This ﬁts with
the PSD model’s idea of understanding the technology context, especially as new
technologies may not work as intended, which makes users more likely to stop using
them.
5 Discussion
As the ﬁrst postulate of the PSD model [7] states, IT is never neutral, as it will always
influence users’ behavior and attitudes in one way or another. This was evident in the
ﬁndings of articles included in this review. Naturally, as we focused on articles about
the dark side of IT use, effects on users were often negative. However, articles also
revealed ways to mitigate negative consequences, although further studies are needed
to investigate e.g. how changing context affects.
As a category, social features were clearly the most important in terms of causing
negative consequences. They may cause, for example, stress, envy, addiction, feelings
of loneliness, and other issues. In only one study were social features found to have a
mitigating effect on a negative issue, which was users’ feelings of loneliness. In gen-
eral, social features can have many positive effects, for example, during health behavior
change [33], but as this review shows, they also have a dark side. Social features should
still be used in IT, but system designers should ﬁnd ways to mitigate and prevent their
negative effects. For example, it may be useful to remind users that one cannot see the
whole picture of others’ lives through IT.
The need for social features and how they are utilized should be considered
carefully by software designers. In some systems, social features may be highly ben-
eﬁcial from a user’s point of view, but this is not so in all cases. For example, a
persuasive system supporting a user to become more active should be careful in
sending repeated requests for the user to share their activities with others. It may well
be that they do not wish to do so.
Multiple mitigating characteristics were found in our review. Most of them can be
categorized within the postulates of the PSD model [7]. The postulate concerning a
system’s usefulness and ease of use came up most often among the studies we
Recognizing and Mitigating the Negative Effects of Information Technology Use 21

--- PAGE 31 ---
reviewed. This postulate is rather broad and covers many qualities of a good infor-
mation system, so this ﬁnding was not very surprising. However, it was somewhat
surprising that ideas relating to a system’s ease of use and usefulness were still so
dominant in the analyzed literature. In the IS ﬁeld, these two concepts have been under
investigation for decades, and their importance is clear. However, in practice, it still
seems to be rather difﬁcult to prevent systems from causing unnecessary negative
consequences to users.
As mentioned above, ﬁve studies investigated negative qualities of systems that
should be avoided in order to mitigate the negative consequences of IT use. If a system
has errors, does not function as promised, or if it requires too much effort from users,
their feelings toward the system are likely to be negative. In the modern era, with ever-
increasing work and life demands on individuals and numerous information systems
and applications available, there is no place for poorly functioning or excessively
demanding systems in a leisure context.
If a system keeps changing its user interface without giving users enough time to
adapt to the changes, they may stop using the system [8]. This ﬁnding is interesting, as
it conflicts with the current trend of constantly modifying information systems. The
frequency at which systems change, especially in relation to their user interfaces,
should be carefully considered, as too many changes in a short period of time may
cause users to leave rather than keeping them interested. Constant changes may cause
stress, which may outweigh the beneﬁts a system can deliver to users. This topic
requires more research, especially in relation to different user groups.
Simplicity could be a good term to describe a system with few negative conse-
quences for users. Systems should be easy for different kinds of users to learn and use.
Depending on the system, there could be an option for users to choose different
interfaces based on their skills; experienced users could use an advanced version
offering a large number of features. Testing systems throughout the design and
implementation phases and gathering feedback and use data from released systems
could help to reﬁne them to enhance the way they ﬁt with users’ lives.
Negative consequences of IT use can range from loss of productivity and stress [2,
3, 16] to depression and loneliness [14]. Minor negative consequences might constitute
short-term negative feelings, such as annoyance or irritation, which may disappear by
themselves over time. Although undesirable, it may be too costly to mitigate these
kinds of minor negative consequences completely. Individuals are all different, so there
is no way to create a system that would avoid causing negative emotions to every user.
However, majornegative consequences that cause harm not just ontheindividuallevel
butalsoonthesocietallevelneedspecialattention.AddictiontoITisoneofthemostsevere
negative consequences of IS use. In this analysis, features that mitigated IT addiction were
usage monitoring and giving feedback. These featureswere suggested by authors and were
not tested for effectiveness. The effectiveness of usage monitoring, whether by a parent, as
in the case of adolescent gaming addictions [10], or in the form of self-monitoring, is an
open issue that needs to be investigated in different settings. In any case, if users notice and
think about their negative behavior early enough by self-monitoring and comparing their
own use with that of others, then they could avoid addiction.
The analysis we have presented in this paper has some limitations. First, because
our literature review included only studies from the basket of eight journals in the IS
22 L. Kuonanoja and H. Oinas-Kukkonen

--- PAGE 32 ---
ﬁeld, studies of the negative consequences of IT use outside of these journals were not
analyzed. The number of articles we analyzed was therefore relatively low. However,
the studies published in the journals we searched can be argued to represent the best
research in the IS ﬁeld. In addition, our review did not consider organizational contexts,
which could be included in future studies to present a more complete picture of current
research into features of IT use that mitigate its negative consequences. In spite of the
limitations of this analysis, we were able to identify numerous gaps in knowledge in the
studied area.
6 Conclusion
Information systems, regardless of their numerous beneﬁts, also have negative effects
on users and society. In this study, we analyzed previous research literature using the
PSD model to identify system characteristics that could mitigate the negative effects of
IT use. Most of the mitigating effects we identiﬁed in this review related to a system’s
usefulness and ease of use. In addition, systems that were unobtrusive and free from
errors mitigated the negative consequences of IT use. Systems may cause negative
feelings and consequences if they have many errors or if they are intrusive and disrupt
users’ primary tasks. Negative consequences of IT use can also be avoided or mitigated
by understanding users and the context in which systems are used.
The features in the social support category were the primary cause of negative
consequences in the studies we analyzed in this review. In some cases, they were found
to cause, among other negative consequences, envy, loneliness, and addiction. How-
ever, in one dark side study, social features (that is, broadcasting to friends and fol-
lowers) had a positive effect, as they reduced users’ feelings of loneliness. Further
research of social features in more speciﬁc contexts is needed to determine the further
positive effects they might have on users and how they might mitigate the negative
consequences of IT use. In one study in this review, reminders and self-monitoring
were suggested as ways for users to avoid addiction to social networking applications.
The dark side of IT use is an issue that needs our attention. To ﬁnd ways to mitigate
the negative consequences of IT use, we ﬁrst need to identify them. In this review, we
compiled system characteristics from eight top IS journals that could mitigate the
negative consequences of IT use. A system’s ease of use and usefulness were valuable
assets in this context. More research is needed to ﬁnd other ways to mitigate the
negative consequences of everyday IT use.
References
1. Oinas-Kukkonen, H., Oinas-Kukkonen, H.: Humanizing the Web: Change and Social
Innovation. Palgrave Macmillan, Basingstoke (2013). https://doi.org/10.1057/978113730
5701
2. Tarafdar, M., Gupta, A., Turel, O.: Special issue on ‘dark side of information technology
use’: an introduction and a framework for research. Inf. Syst. J. 25(3), 161–170 (2015).
https://doi.org/10.1111/isj.12070
Recognizing and Mitigating the Negative Effects of Information Technology Use 23

--- PAGE 33 ---
3. Pirkkalainen H., Salo, M.: Two Decades of the Dark Side in the Information Systems
Basket: Suggesting Five Areas for Future Research. In: Proceedings of the European
Conference on Information Systems (ECIS) (2016)
4. Ragu-Nathan, T.S., Tarafdar, M., Ragu-Nathan, B.S., Tu, Q.: The consequences of
technostress for end users in organizations: conceptual development and empirical
validation. Inf. Syst. Res. 19(4), 417–433 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.1070.0165
5. Sapacz, M., Rockman, G., Clark, J.: Are we addicted to our cell phones? Comput. Hum.
Behav. 57, 153–159 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2015.12.004
6. Seo, H.A., Chun, H.Y., Jwa, S.H., Choi, M.H.: Relationship between young children’s
habitual computer use and influencing variables on socio-emotional development. Early
Child. Dev. Care 181(2), 245–265 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1080/03004430.2011.536644
7. Oinas-Kukkonen, H., Harjumaa, M.: Persuasive systems design: key issues, process model,
and system features. Commun. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 24(1), 485–500 (2009)
8. Maier, C., Laumer, S., Weinert, C., Weitzel, T.: The effects of technostress and switching
stress on discontinued use of social networking services: a study of Facebook use. Inf. Syst. J.
25(3), 275–308 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1111/isj.12068
9. Cenfetelli, R.T., Schwarz, A.: Identifying and testing the inhibitors of technology usage
intentions. Inf. Syst. Res. 22(4), 808–823 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.1100.0295
10. Xu, Z., Turel, O., Yuan, Y.: Online game addiction among adolescents: motivation and
prevention factors. Eur. J. Inf. Syst. 21(3), 321–340 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1057/ejis.
2011.56
11. James, T.L., Lowry, P.B., Wallace, L., Warkentin, M.: The effect of belongingness on
obsessive-compulsive disorder in the use of online social networks. J. Manage. Inf. Syst.
34(2), 560–596 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1080/07421222.2017.1334496
12. Turel, O., Qahri-Saremi, H.: Problematic use of social networking sites: antecedents and
consequence from a dual-system theory perspective. J. Manage. Inf. Syst. 33(4), 1087–1116
(2016). https://doi.org/10.1080/07421222.2016.1267529
13. Turel, O., Serenko, A., Giles, P.: Integrating technology addiction and use: an empirical
investigation of online auction users. MIS Q. 35(4), 1043–1061 (2011). https://doi.org/10.
2307/41409972
14. Vagheﬁ, I., Lapointe, L., Boudreau-Pinsonneault, C.: A typology of user liability to IT
addiction. Inf. Syst. J. 27(2), 125–169 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1111/isj.12098
15. Pramatari, K., Theotokis, A.: Consumer acceptance of RFID-enabled services: a model of
multiple attitudes, perceived system characteristics and individual traits. Eur. J. Inf. Syst.
18(6), 541–552 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1057/ejis.2009.40
16. Tarafdar, M., D’Arcy, J., Turel, O., Gupta, A.: The dark side of information technology.
MIT Sloan Manage. Rev. 56(2), 60–70 (2015)
17. Karppinen, P., Oinas-Kukkonen, H.: Three approaches to ethical considerations in the design
of behavior change support systems. In: Berkovsky, S., Freyne, J. (eds.) PERSUASIVE
2013. LNCS, vol. 7822, pp. 87–98. Springer, Heidelberg (2013). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-642-37157-8_12
18. Torning, K., Hall, C., Oinas-Kukkonen, H.: Persuasive system design: state of the art and
future directions. In: Chatterjee, S., Parvati, D. (eds.) Fourth International Conference on
Persuasive Technology, ACM International Conference, vol. 350, Article no. 30. ACM,
New York
19. Karppinen, P., Oinas-Kukkonen, H., Alahäivälä, T., Jokelainen, T., Keränen, A.-M.,
Salonurmi, T., Savolainen, M.: Persuasive user experiences of a health behavior change
support system: a 12-month study for prevention of metabolic syndrome. Int. J. Med. Inform.
96, 51–61 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2016.02.005
24 L. Kuonanoja and H. Oinas-Kukkonen

--- PAGE 34 ---
20. Lehto, T., Oinas-Kukkonen, H.: Explaining and predicting perceived effectiveness and use
continuance intention of a behaviour change support system for weight loss. Behav. Inf.
Technol. 34(2), 176–189 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1080/0144929X.2013.866162
21. Paré, G., Trudel, M.C., Jaana, M., Kitsiou, S.: Synthesizing information systems knowledge:
a typology of literature reviews. Inf. Manage. 52(2), 183–199 (2015). https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.im.2014.08.008
22. Webster, J., Watson, R.T.: Analyzing the past to prepare for the future: writing a literature
review. MIS Q. 26(2), xiii–xxiii (2002)
23. Turel, O.: Quitting the use of a habituated hedonic information system: a theoretical model
and empirical examination of Facebook users. Eur. J. Inf. Syst. 24, 431–446 (2015). https://
doi.org/10.1057/ejis.2014.19
24. Tams, S., Hill, K., Thatcher, J.: NeuroIS — alternative or complement to existing methods?
Illustrating the holistic effects of neuroscience and self-reported data in the context of
technostress research. J. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 15(10), 723–753 (2014)
25. Saunders, C., Wiener, M., Klett, S., Sprenger, S.: The impact of mental representations on
ICT-related overload in the use of mobile phones. J. Manage. Inf. Syst. 34(3), 803–825
(2017). https://doi.org/10.1080/07421222.2017.1373010
26. Moody, G.D., Galletta, D.F.: Lost in cyberspace: the impact of information scent and time
constraints on stress, performance, and attitudes online. J. Manage. Inf. Syst. 32(1), 192–224
(2015). https://doi.org/10.1080/07421222.2015.1029391
27. Jenkins, J., Anderson, B., Vance, A., Kirwan, B., Eargle, D.: More harm than good? How
messages that interrupt can make us vulnerable. Inf. Syst. Res. 27(4), 880–896 (2016).
https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.2016.0644
28. Tan, C.-W., Benbasat, I., Cenfetelli, R.T.: An exploratory study of the formation and impact
of electronic service failures. MIS Q. 40(1), 1–29 (2016). https://doi.org/10.25300/MISQ/
2016/40.1.01
29. Kwon, H.E., So, H., Han, S.P., Oh, W.: Excessive dependence on mobile social apps: a
rational addiction perspective. Inf. Syst. Res. 27(4), 919–939 (2016). https://doi.org/10.
1287/isre.2016.0658
30. Matook, S., Cummings, J., Bala, H.: Are you feeling lonely? the impact of relationship
characteristics and online social network features on loneliness. J. Manage. Inf. Syst. 31(4),
278–310 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1080/07421222.2014.1001282
31. Salo, M., Frank, L.: User behaviours after critical mobile application incidents: the
relationship with situational context. Inf. Syst. J. 27(1), 5–30 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1111/
isj.12081
32. Turel, O.: Untangling the complex role of guilt in rational decisions to discontinue the use of
a hedonic information system. Eur. J. Inf. Syst. 25(5), 432–447 (2016). https://doi.org/10.
1057/s41303-016-0002-5
33. Laranjo, L., Arguel, A., Neves, A.L., Gallagher, A.M., Kaplan, R., Mortimer, N., Mendes,
G.A., Lau, A.Y.S.: The influence of social networking sites on health behavior change: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc. 22(1), 243–256 (2014).
https://doi.org/10.1136/amiajnl-2014-002841
Recognizing and Mitigating the Negative Effects of Information Technology Use 25

--- PAGE 35 ---
Combining Open and Closed Forms
of Innovation: An Investigation of Emerging
Tensions and Management Approaches
Emilie Ruiz1
and Michela Beretta2(&)
1
Université Savoie-Mont-Blanc, 27 Rue Marcoz, 73000 Chambéry, France
2
Aarhus University, Fuglesans Alle 4, 8000 Aarhus, Denmark
micbe@mgmt.au.dk
Abstract. It is increasingly common for ﬁrms to engage in both external and
internal crowdsourcing to access ideas and solutions coming from external
customers and internal employees. These IT platforms can be seen as forms of
open and closed innovation search, where the ﬁrst aims to perform distant search
beyond the organizational boundaries, while the second is used to conduct local
search within the ﬁrm. Nevertheless, limited attention has been placed on
investigating which tensions emerge when ﬁrms combine these conflicting
innovation search strategies and related management approaches to address
them. By drawing on a qualitative, inductive case study of a large organization
headquartered in France, our study identiﬁes and discusses three key paradoxes
emerging from pursuing both innovation forms: (1) paradox of identity;
(2) paradox of organizing the innovation process; and (3) paradox of boundary
management. Moreover, we discuss different management approaches imple-
mented by managers to address the identiﬁed paradoxes.
Keywords: Crowdsourcing platforms  Paradoxes  Open innovation
1 Introduction
Open innovation has attracted the attention of both researchers and practitioners. The
innovation management literature has focused on highlighting the beneﬁts and costs of
conducting open innovation activities, usually investigated in opposition to more
closed innovation forms [1]. However, more recent studies point to the importance of
going beyond the distinction between open vs. closed innovation to consider the notion
of complex organizational boundaries [2]. That is, ﬁrms can combine both open and
closed innovation search strategies to organize and support their innovation activities
and access diverse inputs [2]. In fact, together with the reliance on external innovation
sources, it is common for ﬁrms to engage in internal search practices for innovation to
build on their existing domain knowledge [3].
A typical example is represented by the increasing implementation of external and
internal crowdsourcing within the same ﬁrm to expand innovation search both within
and beyond its organizational boundaries, spurred by the diffusion of new digital
technologies [4]. Arguably, external and internal crowdsourcing can be regarded as,
© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018
S. D. Müller and J. A. Nielsen (Eds.): SCIS 2018, LNBIP 326, pp. 26–40, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-96367-9_3

--- PAGE 36 ---
respectively, forms of open and closed innovation search. On the one hand, external
crowdsourcing enables ﬁrms to perform a broader, distant search for ideas and solu-
tions from a wider crowd of distributed actors outside the organizational boundaries
[5]. On the other hand, internal crowdsourcing constitutes an internal search practice
that enables ﬁrms to perform local search within the organizational boundaries by
involving distributed employees in the innovation process [6].
However, engaging in open innovation activities is likely to create tensions with
other internal search practices implemented within the organization for innovation
purposes [7]. This is especially due to the fact that open and closed innovation forms
are depicted by existing literature as being driven by inconsistent logics in terms of
agency, control, motivation and locus of innovation [2]. These contrasting logics are
likely to create substantial managerial and organizational challenges, making it more
difﬁcult for ﬁrms to combine them [8]. Relatedly, external and internal crowdsourcing
initiatives are depicted by existing research as distinct innovation search forms - being
characterized by a different locus of innovation, design requirements and type of tar-
geted crowd [6]. As such, their combination may potentially create inherent tensions
with respect to how to organize and manage the innovation process. This raises the
question of how ﬁrms can simultaneously manage closed and open search activities and
thus attend to both types of innovation logics [2]. Nevertheless, limited attention has
been placed by current research on unfolding this important question.
Our study aims to contribute to this discussion by investigating which tensions
emerge when ﬁrms combine open and closed innovation forms and corresponding
management approaches to address them. In our study, this is exempliﬁed by the
simultaneous pursue of local and distant search activities through the combination of
external and internal crowdsourcing. To this end, we draw on the paradox theory as a
theoretical lens to shed more light on this aspect. This theory constitutes a relevant lens
through which understand how ﬁrms manage contradictions [9] and has been used by
various studies to explore complex tensions related to different organizational aspects,
such as ambidexterity [10] and creativity [11].
In order to address our research question, we conducted an inductive, qualitative
case study of a large French ﬁrm, which has attempted to combine open and closed
innovation search through the implementation of both external and internal crowd-
sourcing, resulting in different challenges. By drawing on the paradox literature, we
unfold the tensions that emerged when the ﬁrm pursued both innovation modes and the
approaches managers implemented in the attempt to address them. More speciﬁcally,
we identify and discuss paradoxes related to identity, the organization of innovation
processes and boundary management, and ﬁnd evidence of different management
approaches based on integration, differentiation and acceptance strategies.
Our study contributes to current innovation literature in a number of ways. First, we
extend recent calls on advancing a theory of the innovative ﬁrm that takes into account
complex organizational boundaries where ﬁrms govern through a mix of contrasting
innovation forms [2, 12]. Our ﬁndings offer an alternative framework for how ﬁrms
manage open-closed innovation tensions, in this case related to the implementation of
both external and internal crowdsourcing. By doing so, our study brings attention to the
contradictory elements inherent in pursuing both distant and local innovation search
strategies. Second, we integrate insights from the paradox literature as a way to reframe
Combining Open and Closed Forms of Innovation 27

--- PAGE 37 ---
current discussion about open and closed innovation forms. We show how integrating
the paradox lens enables to blend seemingly conflicting search strategies, thus high-
lighting the importance of seeing them as complementary rather than as polarized
contradictions. Finally, our ﬁndings also have important implications for the infor-
mation systems literature, where both internal and external crowdsourcing platforms
have attracted the attention of various IS scholars over the last years [13, 14]. We
provide more insights into the implementation of these online platforms in order to
enable a better management.
2 Theoretical Background
2.1 Open and Closed Innovation Forms
Previous innovation studies have focused on contrasting open innovation with tradi-
tional ‘proprietary’ forms where internal employees generate ideas for new products,
processes or services [1]. Increasing focus has been placed on addressing governance-
related questions in the attempt to shed light on the beneﬁts and costs of open and
closed innovation forms. However, the open innovation literature often tends to
examine open and closed innovation forms as strategic dilemmas or trade-offs – i.e. as
choices that ﬁrms make between the two poles in order to organize for innovation [1].
Open and closed (internal) innovation are, in fact, often depicted as competing orga-
nizational modes for generating new knowledge and innovation. Different insights have
been generated on the contingencies of these forms – i.e. when and under what con-
ditions ﬁrms would beneﬁt from conducting open innovation compared to closed
(internal) innovation practices and vice versa [1, 5]. However, it is also recognized that
such comparisons represent an idealized approach to facilitate theorization. In fact,
ﬁrms are likely to organize and manage innovation through a more complex combi-
nation of internal and external search mechanisms [1, 2]. This is based on the insight
that different types of sources of knowledge and ideas for innovation should be
exploited, both within and outside the organizational boundaries.
In our study, we particularly zoom in on two forms of organizing for innovation:
internal and external crowdsourcing. These platforms are enabled by information
systems which provide the software and infrastructure to share ideas online [13]. While
current research has shed light on the beneﬁts and challenges of crowdsourcing, in this
study we argue that combining these two search approaches is likely to generate
tensions for the ﬁrm, arising from speciﬁc elements of these search strategies and
underlying goals. We show how these tensions can be regarded as paradoxes, due to
contradictory elements that need to be simultaneously managed by organization [15].
There are several reasons for the emergence of paradoxes when combining external and
internal crowdsourcing, as highlighted below.
2.1.1 Locus of Innovation
Internal and external crowdsourcing enable ﬁrms to simultaneously involve two dif-
ferent types of crowds in the innovation process [16]. On the one hand, it is claimed that
involving a large and diverse crowd of external contributors through crowdsourcing
28 E. Ruiz and M. Beretta

--- PAGE 38 ---
may be beneﬁcial for the ﬁrm, due to the possibility to access both need-based and
solution-based information [17]. On the other hand, many companies still tend to rely on
internal expertise and knowledge bases to generate innovations [3]. Internal employees
are often associated with domain-speciﬁc knowledge, accumulated through training and
localized expertise that may be relevant for the generation of new ideas [18]. Moreover,
they possess rich tacit knowledge about customers’ needs and ﬁrms’ products and
processes as well as an in-depth understanding of the organizational context [19].
2.1.2 Type of Innovation Search
Relatedly, external and internal crowdsourcing can be regarded as having different
starting points in the search for ideas and solutions. External crowdsourcing is
implemented by ﬁrms with the aim to perform a distant search for ideas and solutions –
i.e. going further away from the ﬁrm’s current knowledge base [5]. However, it is also
found that distant search creates challenges for ﬁrms in terms of absorptive capacity –
i.e. of integrating and assimilating the inputs provided [20]. Moreover, this type of
search bears the risk of loss of control for the ﬁrm, as it becomes more difﬁcult to align
contributors’ ideation efforts with the organization’s needs and strategies [6]. On the
other hand, internal crowdsourcing enables ﬁrms to perform a broader local search
spanning diverse boundaries within the organization, although still in the vicinity of the
ﬁrm’s current knowledge bases. Although local search decreases the probability of
ﬁnding novel solutions, it increases the chances of identifying and integrating more
feasible solutions [21].
2.1.3 Design Requirements
Current research highlights how in-bound open innovation tools like external crowd-
sourcing require ﬁrms to develop new practices and capabilities to favor the partici-
pation of external contributors and the integration of their inputs into the innovation
processes [13]. One set of practices relates to the design of incentive mechanisms to
support the involvement of external contributors and employees in innovation. These
two types of crowds are likely to be driven by different motivations to participate in
innovation activities, opening up the question of how ﬁrms can develop incentive
systems that would align to the motivations of these crowds [16]. A second set of
practices relates to the development of receiving mechanisms that enable the efﬁcient
processing, selection, transfer and integration of external and internal inputs. Consid-
ering the limited attentional capabilities of ﬁrms, a key question relates to how ﬁrms
pay attention to and value the diverse knowledge generated through these different
search processes [22]. In fact, it is found that managers are likely to value external and
internal knowledge differently [22], an aspect that can have implications for how
generated inputs may be ﬁltered and processed. Moreover, current studies highlight the
need for ﬁrms to establish new roles within the organization to enable the transfer and
integration of externally generated ideas [23]. Involving internal and external crowds
also require a different approach when it comes to managing intellectual property
(IP) rights to the ideas and solutions generated [4].
Combining Open and Closed Forms of Innovation 29

--- PAGE 39 ---
2.2 A Paradox Lens
In this study, we draw on the paradox theory. Paradoxes are usually depicted as
“contradictory yet interrelated elements that exist simultaneously and persist over time”
[15, p. 382]. It is highlighted that managing paradoxes does not entail the elimination
of emerging tensions, but rather it means to ﬁnd ways to handle contradictory elements
simultaneously [24]. Innovation literature highlights the existence of different para-
doxes when it comes to the management of innovation processes. These paradoxes
relate, for instance, to multiple identity demands for employees when engaging in
creative activities [11, 25], the organization of innovation [10], learning [15], and the
management of boundaries [26]. Research highlights that the act of organizing itself
involves inherent contradictions due to the emergence of distinct roles and responsi-
bilities as well as competing demands with respect to rules, structures and processes
[15]. Building on this, paradox studies have discussed three main approaches to the
management of tensions: (1) integration approaches which focus on embracing and
leveraging the synergies between the opposing poles [10]; (2) differentiation approa-
ches (spatial or temporal) which focus on splitting the two poles to leverage their
distinct beneﬁts [27, 28]; and (3) opposition approaches which entail the acceptance of
the paradox [27]. We build on these insights to investigate which tensions emerge
when ﬁrms combine both crowdsourcing models and related management approaches
implemented to address them.
3 Method and Data
Our exploratory research entails a qualitative single case study based on data collected
from a large French ﬁrm (labeled ‘Gamma’ for conﬁdentiality reasons). Despite single
case studies raise issues about the generalizability of the ﬁndings, they nevertheless are
important to provide a more in-depth understanding and exploration of a phenomenon
[29], in this case related to the emergence of tensions.
3.1 Research Setting
Gamma is a large French ﬁrm employing more than 30000 employees worldwide and
leader in the small electric appliance market. In 2012, Gamma launched an internal
collaborative platform in order to involve employees in innovation by encouraging the
submission of unsolicited ideas and solutions to solve relevant technological problems.
However, in 2016 the company decided to close this initiative due to a reorganization
of the entire group. Over the years, the platform was not able to support the innovation
process as initially intended. Yet, convinced by the value of internal collaborative
innovation, Gamma decided to launch a new internal crowdsourcing platform in 2016
with the aim of collecting new ideas from the diverse crowd of distributed employees.
Differently from the ﬁrst internal crowdsourcing initiative, Gamma decided to organize
the platform as being challenge-driven to support the innovation objective and increase
employees’ involvement. The new initiative was implemented with a speciﬁc process
to support innovation: every year, based on an internal idea contest, the company
30 E. Ruiz and M. Beretta

--- PAGE 40 ---
planned to select ﬁve ideas on which to allocate funds to allow employees to further
develop prototypes of selected ideas, ending with the selection of one ﬁnal winner.
In 2014, Gamma also decided to create an external crowdsourcing platform on the
impulsion of its Innovation Process Director, who believed in the importance of
adopting open innovation practices. The objective of this platform was to enable the
generation of new ideas and solutions by broadcasting complex problems that the ﬁrm
was not able to solve to the crowd of external customers.
Hence, we selected Gamma for this exploratory, qualitative study because it con-
stitutes a theoretically relevant context [30] to investigate emerging tensions and
management approaches related to the combination of open (external) and closed
(internal) innovation forms. In fact, the selected case represents a unique setting con-
sidering the aim of the ﬁrm to support and manage innovation through the use of two
crowdsourcing platforms, thus shifting toward a dual innovation focus.
3.2 Data Collection
We collected our data through multiple sources. We conducted 18 semi-structured
interviews with a number of different employees who were involved in the internal
and/or external crowdsourcing platform. For instance, we interviewed managers
involved in the management of both platforms and R&D teams in different business
units, which were supposed to use both initiatives. We followed the suggestions pro-
vided by Andriopoulos and Lewis [10]: we did not use the terms paradoxes, contra-
dictions or tensions during the interviews in order to not bias the interviewees and
provide sufﬁcient freedom in their answers. The interviews lasted between 20 and
186 min. All the interviews were recorded and fully transcribed in order to increase
reliability [30].
In addition, we collected different secondary data sources. For instance, we col-
lected various internal documents such as internal communication documents, reports,
and presentations in order to fully understand the aim of each platform, the way both
initiatives were implemented and managed, their performance and related challenges.
We also organized two meetings in 2016 with various managers within Gamma. The
aim of these meetings was to present preliminary ﬁndings to managers and gather their
feedback and views on them as well as to generate further interpretations. These
secondary data sources enabled to further augment and complement the insights
emerging from the interview material.
3.3 Data Analysis
Our data analysis was conducted in an iterative manner and proceeded in different
stages [31]. We conducted three rounds of coding using the Atlas.ti software. In the
ﬁrst stage, we read through the interview transcripts to identify relevant ﬁrst-order
concepts. We focused on categorizing underlying tensions as they were described by
the interviewees. In the second stage, we aggregated the identiﬁed ﬁrst-order concepts
into second-order dimensions [31]. In the ﬁnal stage, the identiﬁed dimensions were
compared to detect patterns and relationships [31]. The resulting aggregated dimen-
sions constituted the basis to develop our theoretical framework.
Combining Open and Closed Forms of Innovation 31

--- PAGE 41 ---
In particular, in order to label and reﬁne the identiﬁed dimensions, we built on
previous studies on paradoxes in innovation management [15]. This is because it was
particularly evident from the interview material that interviewees were aware that
combining both forms of innovation would determine the emergence of tensions.
However, we noticed that such tensions were described by the interviewees not as
either/or dilemmas or trade-offs but rather as paradoxes, being seen as complementary
and valuable elements of innovation. Building on this, during the coding process we
also focused on identifying which approaches managers implemented to address such
tensions, by drawing on paradox studies. Table 1 provides an overview of the identiﬁed
tensions and representative quotes.
4 Findings
4.1 Paradox of Identity: Conflicting Employee Roles
“On the one hand, you have to be open to innovate with external stakeholders…but on the other
hand, you have to do it internally. This is quite confusing…” (Project leader)
Table 1. Representative quotes
Paradox Underlying
tensions
Representative quotes
Identity Open vs closed
values
“We tried the external platform, but it was not
relevant. This idea of creating an internal
community was because we have everything we
need within the ﬁrm.” (Research Manager)
Specialization
vs
differentiation
“From a legal perspective, an employee who is out
of his mission - who innovates on something that is
not clearly depending on his business unit - is
sanctioned on his salary. I know it can be a barrier
for the internal challenge, where we encourage
submission of ideas without business unit
frontiers…but maybe it can help someone who
wants to be open.” (Lab employee, internal
challenge manager)
Organizing the
innovation
process
Collaboration vs
competition
Control vs
flexibility
“A challenge with competition mode is gratifying,
stimulating. Challengers will outperform. (…) It is
individual-based because we want all employees,
even from purchasing or accountability, to
participate. Teams would have encouraged R&D
focus.” (Lab employee, internal challenge
manager)
Boundary
management
Internal vs
external
knowledge
“Between the KPIs that pressure us to use external
knowledge and all actions supporting valuation of
our own knowledge, we don’t know where to go.”
(Project leader)
32 E. Ruiz and M. Beretta

--- PAGE 42 ---
Underlying Tensions. Combining both external and internal crowdsourcing initiatives
created tensions of multiple identity demands [11] for employees, as they were required
to be open (externally-focused) and closed (internally-focused) at the same time. On the
one hand, by opening the organizational boundaries to the external crowd, the ﬁrm
aimed to encourage employees to be open and innovate with external unidentiﬁed
stakeholders [2]. In this case, R&D employees were required to shift their identity from
problem solvers to solution seekers [25], broadcasting challenges to the external crowd.
On the other hand, by focusing on internal crowdsourcing, employees were encouraged
by the ﬁrm to innovate internally and to contribute to the organization as idea creators
and problem-solvers. This emphasis on both open and closed values contributed to
create ambiguity in identity work for employees. Potentially conflicting identities may
especially emerge when employees need to internalize different role expectations [11].
In our case, conflicting identities emanated from employees’ need to assume opposing
but coexisting roles and memberships (related to both platforms) creating ambiguity
and confusion about what they were supposed to do. Our interviewees highlighted that
such ambiguity lead to a lack of interest and involvement in using both platforms over
time, as they were trying to satisfy both competing demands.
Another aspect emerging from our analysis related to the underlying tension faced
by employees in terms of adhering to the competing demands of specialization and
differentiation. The company has particularly supported over the years the specializa-
tion of its employees when it comes to the conduction of work activities. Working
contracts typically specify the activities and tasks employees are supposed to conduct,
an aspect that limits their autonomy and freedom to engage in extra-role behaviors. In
the context of the external crowdsourcing platform, this employee’s specialization was
valued and supported by the ﬁrm. When the innovation manager received an idea
through the external platform, great attention was provided in identifying the right
internal organizational members for its further development: “We have to identify
carefully who will be involved with the external user to be sure that the idea has all the
chances to be integrated” (Innovation Process Director). In this case, employees were
required to focus on their area of expertise when collaborating with external actors to
further develop their ideas.
However, this focus on specialization was in contrast with the way the internal
crowdsourcing platform aimed to involve employees. In this case, it was considered
important that employees would go beyond their expected roles and responsibilities
when engaging in innovation, thus seeking ideas and solutions in new knowledge
areas. This somehow required a shift in the professional identity of employees to
embrace new roles directed at applying their knowledge and skills in less familiar areas
as well as at engaging in creative efforts outside their particular knowledge comfort
zone.
Management Approaches. We found that, in order to address the identiﬁed tensions
related to identity, managers resorted to a mixed approach. On the one hand, they
resorted to an acceptance approach, with the aim to appreciate tensions’ differences and
use them constructively [27]. It is important to point out that managers did not simply
ignore this paradox. However, as reported by the Research Director, it seemed difﬁcult
to conciliate both open and closed values as well as specialization and differentiation
Combining Open and Closed Forms of Innovation 33

--- PAGE 43 ---
roles for employees when innovating. As such, acceptance led somehow to a view of
the paradox as unsolvable and persistent [15]. We noticed that the organization par-
ticularly aimed to develop over time an organizational culture based on this rich
identity that would embrace both types of roles and values. At the same time, the ﬁrm
considered it important to not rush in changing the culture in order to ﬁnd the right
balance to juxtapose the identity tensions. This entailed being clear and transparent
with its employees in the attempt to reduce confusions and frustrations related to the
identiﬁed competing demands. For instance, communication tactics aimed to empha-
size organizational values that linked both types of identities to improve ﬁt with
organizational expectations, in the attempt to drive a cultural change. Moreover, when
the second internal crowdsourcing initiative was introduced subsequently to the failure
of the previous one, the ﬁrm decided to adopt a differentiation (spatial) approach [28] in
order to separate the management of such platform from the external one. While the
two platforms were initially managed within the Innovation Process Team at the cor-
porate building, Gamma decided to separate the management of the new internal
platform from the external one by assigning it to the internal Fab Lab unit, which was
located in a separate building. This spatial separation was considered important to
support and enable a better understanding of the distinct employees’ roles.
4.2 Paradox of Organizing the Innovation Process
“It is disturbing to be so structured when using the external crowdsourcing platform and so
flexible when using the internal crowdsourcing platform. It is just like doing the splits, the
innovation splits.” (Research project manager)
Underlying Tensions. Our interviewees highlighted that the implementation of both
initiatives created contrasting demands for employees in terms of collaborating and
competing among each other. On the one hand, one of the key aspects supporting the
implementation of the external crowdsourcing platform related to fostering the
involvement of and collaboration between cross-functional teams. Employees were
thus strongly encouraged by the ﬁrm to work together and collaborate to support the
development and integration of external ideas. On the other hand, the ﬁrst internal
crowdsourcing platform was designed to foster competition among employees. Dif-
ferently from the external platform, the second internal initiative required employees to
work individually while not supporting team-based collaboration. Implementing both
initiatives also determined different ways of organizing – i.e. competing demands
between control and flexibility. On the one hand, the external crowdsourcing platform
was implemented with a structured process, where the ﬁrm aimed to exercise a high
level of control on how employees could use the platform to support innovation and
integrate external knowledge with internal innovation processes and activities. These
processes and control were considered important to encourage employees to use the
platform in the intended way.
On the contrary, when implementing the internal crowdsourcing platform, the ﬁrm
regarded it as crucial to provide employees with the flexibility and freedom necessary
to innovate in order to engage them in such initiative. This flexibility entailed, for
instance, free access to the Lab, flexible time during working hours to dedicate to
34 E. Ruiz and M. Beretta

--- PAGE 44 ---
innovation and creativity and lack of a process to follow when doing so. As explained
by the manager in charge of the challenge, “If we want the challenge to work, we need
to let them [participants] be free, to manage them differently. We stay open on this
aspect.”
Negative Consequences. We found that these contrasting demands created an
uncomfortable, even hostile environment for employees. While employees were
encouraged to be collaborative when using both the ﬁrst internal crowdsourcing plat-
form and the external one, the use of competition-driven challenges for the newer
internal initiative led to confusion. As these platforms were meant to be complemen-
tary, employees could face situations in which they had to collaborate with other
colleagues when using the external crowdsourcing platform to integrate external ideas,
while having to compete with the same colleagues during the internal challenge.
Moreover, the encouragement of using both platforms led to feelings of overload and
confusion for employees, as these initiatives were driven by different rules, structures
and workflows which required employees to exert more efforts to engage in them. The
discomfort and confusion of the situation led employees to lose interest in both ini-
tiatives: “I don’t want to use these platforms anymore, this is too complicated: I just
want to do my job.” (Project leader).
Management Approaches. We found that, in order to manage these organizing
tensions, the ﬁrm resorted to both spatial and temporal differentiation [28]. In relation
to spatial separation, the ﬁrm decided that the two initiatives would be managed
separately and assigned to different units as a way to reduce employee confusion. The
aim was to communicate more clearly to employees that the internal crowdsourcing
platform was managed by a different entity, by a different manager and in a different
place - while at the same time maintaining some level of integration: “When the new
headquarter was built, it has been a real question: did we have to be integrated or stay
aside? Being integrated seemed to be the better solution to attract people. However, as
you can see, despite our integration, we have a dedicated building, separate from
corporate.” (Internal challenge manager). In addition to this, managers resorted to
temporal differentiation as a way to ease the underlying tensions. This means that
employee participation to these initiatives was seen as a sequence of events [27],
meaning that employees could dedicate speciﬁc times to each platform, thus switching
between them.
4.3 Paradox of Boundary Management: Valuing Internal vs. External
Knowledge
This boundary paradox relates to the combination of external and internal knowledge
flows to feed the innovation process [26].
Underlying Tensions. Our interviewees highlighted that the use of both initiatives
created confusion for managers with regards to the evaluation of internal and external
knowledge. The external platform was implemented with the clear goal of accessing
valuable, external knowledge residing outside the ﬁrm. R&D employees were then
assigned the responsibility to identify, absorb and exploit such knowledge. The fact
Combining Open and Closed Forms of Innovation 35

--- PAGE 45 ---
that external, distant knowledge was highly valued can also be seen in the imple-
mentation of KPIs from top management to measure the performance of the external
platform and its contribution to the innovation process. Employees were thus
encouraged to value external knowledge. The external crowdsourcing platform, how-
ever, conflicted with employees’ expectations that their own ideas generated through
the internal platform would be considered by the ﬁrm. In this case, the internal initiative
was implemented with the ultimate goal to exploit internal knowledge residing across
the whole organization to innovate. As such, this initiative encouraged employees to
support and value internal knowledge, somehow reinforcing the NIH (Not-Invented-
Here) mindset that still many employees had. Hence, the pressure from top manage-
ment to value external knowledge while at the same time having to exploit internal
knowledge in the innovation process created confusion for employees in terms of how
to allocate attention to both types of knowledge and how to capture value from both.
“Between the KPIs that pressure us to use external knowledge and all actions supporting
valuation of our own knowledge, we don’t know where to go.” (Project leader)
Besides, when focusing on the external platform, managers faced a challenge
related to the integration of external knowledge with the ﬁrm’s internal knowledge
bases. In contrast, internal knowledge generation, building on existing knowledge
bases, was seen as easier to integrate and assimilate into current practices and activities.
In fact, our interviewees highlighted that the ideas submitted to the internal crowd-
sourcing platforms were more likely to be implemented compared to the ideas iden-
tiﬁed through the external platform. Such preference for internal knowledge was also
evident in the belief of many R&D employees that challenges did not necessarily have
to be broadcasted outside the organizational boundaries, as internal employees pos-
sessed the right knowledge and expertise to address them: “Why would I ask the
crowd? My colleagues and I know our job; we don’t need to ask people who don’t
know anything about our job”. (Research Director).
Negative Consequences. We found that this unbalance between the use of internal
and external knowledge led to various negative consequences, not only for R&D
employees but also for managers and higher-level management. For instance, top
managers strongly supported the use of the external crowdsourcing platform, which
was instead somehow avoided by employees. Moreover, while top management
strongly encouraged employees to use the external platform, actions were not taken in
case employees did not use it. This led top managers to lose credibility in the eyes of
employees. This also affected the manager in charge of the external crowdsourcing
platform, who lost the motivation to manage the platform and dedicate efforts in
engaging people.
Management Approaches. In the attempt to manage such tension, the ﬁrm decided to
reorganize knowledge flows to conciliate both internal and external knowledge creation
activities and reduce ambiguities. In order to do so, they resorted to an integration
approach [28] directed at leveraging synergies between the two search strategies. For
instance, when developing the new version of the internal platform, the ﬁrm decided to
implement a new IT tool for internal communication. This system allowed the ﬁrm to
integrate the external and internal platform by using the same IT system. By doing so, it
36 E. Ruiz and M. Beretta

--- PAGE 46 ---
was possible to link and more easily integrate innovation-related news, shared projects,
data about generated ideas and other types of information coming from both platforms.
This was seen as a way to create synergy between all the generated knowledge, whether
internal or external: “It is much simpler to use [the IT tool]. We can communicate,
access data extracted from both crowdsourcing platforms and I think they want to
support us to use all this knowledge.” (Research manager).
However, conciliating both types of knowledge is still considered challenging by
the ﬁrm, which aims to implement new practices and processes in the future in the
attempt to combine both approaches.
5 Discussion
In this study, we aimed to shed more light on the tensions emerging when combining
external and internal crowdsourcing and management approaches to address them. Our
study provides a number of contributions to the innovation management literature.
First, our study addresses recent calls related to the need to go beyond the distinction
between open and closed innovation processes to investigate complex organizational
boundaries [2, 7]. It is claimed that theories of innovation should be enriched by an
exploration of the tensions emerging when dealing with contrasting innovation modes,
especially considering that the ﬁrm-centered (internal) innovation logic differs from the
open innovation one [2]. We extend these studies by providing a better understanding
of the tensions and challenges emerging when ﬁrms attempt to combine external and
internal crowdsourcing initiatives.
By integrating insights from the paradox theory, a second contribution of our study
to current literature is to reframe the discussion about open and closed innovation. We
show how the integration of this theory enables to develop a richer understanding of
seemingly contradictory innovation search strategies, highlighting the importance of
seeing them as complementary rather than as either/or dilemmas. In fact, when
studying how to organize for innovation in the context of open vs. closed innovation
forms, a typical approach used by previous research is represented by the contingency
perspective [1, 12]. However, it is claimed that a key issue with such an approach is
that it limits the focus on a limited number of variables, while oversimplifying contexts
that are often more complex and dynamic [15]. Our study adopts a different approach
and builds on the paradox literature to investigate how ﬁrms can engage in and attend
to different types of external and internal innovation forms. We thus shift the focus of
attention from choosing between different, contrasting innovation search modes to
embracing their contradictions. We provide a complementary view on open and closed
forms of innovation that extends current innovation research.
Relatedly, our study contributes to the paradox literature by extending its appli-
cation to open and closed innovation forms. While the paradox theory has been used as
a theoretical lens by various studies to shed light on tensions emerging when orga-
nizing for innovation [10, 15] as well as when fostering creativity in organizations [11],
this lens seldom is employed to understand aspects related to innovation search and
management within and across organizational boundaries.
Combining Open and Closed Forms of Innovation 37

--- PAGE 47 ---
A third contribution of our study to innovation literature relates to the role of
identity in innovation, an aspect that has been understudied when it comes to inno-
vation processes [25, 32]. Our ﬁndings show how combining both innovation modes
can led to the emergence of identity threats, as R&D employees working at the
boundary of the organization face the challenge of having to cope with multiple roles
(being both solution seekers and problem solvers) and innovation values (promoting
both open and closeness). We shed light on which management approaches managers
implemented in the attempt to address such identity threats. In this respect, studies on
creativity tensions highlight the creation of a meta-identity [11] as a potential inte-
gration approach to embrace multiple identity demands and mitigate ambiguity. It
focuses on reconciling identity tensions by leveraging their interdependencies. In our
case, the aim of the ﬁrm to build an organizational culture which embraces both values
and multiple roles may be seen as a way contribute to the development of such
superordinate identity over time, potentially leading employees to appreciate both
internal and external knowledge.
Our ﬁndings also contribute to crowdsourcing research, by shedding more light on
paradoxes related to the organization of innovation processes and boundary manage-
ment. In relation to the organization of innovation processes, the study provides more
insights into the competing demands of collaboration and competition as well as of
flexibility and control, which emerge when designing these crowdsourcing platforms.
These aspects related to the design have been, however, not thoroughly investigated
[13]. In relation to the paradox of boundary management, previous research highlights
that, when managers face the task of valuing internal and external knowledge, they tend
to have a preference for outsiders [22]. Our ﬁndings seem to show a different picture
which more closely aligns with the NIH syndrome highlighted by various studies [33],
which leads organizational members to value the knowledge generated internally as
superior to knowledge that lies outside the organizational boundaries.
Finally, our ﬁndings have important implications for IS research, which has
recently started to investigate the design of internal and external crowdsourcing plat-
forms for innovation [4, 14]. We shed light on the challenges and tensions emerging
when ﬁrms attempt to combine both crowdsourcing models.
6 Conclusions
By drawing on the paradox theory, this study focused on investigating the tensions
emerging when ﬁrms combine internal and external crowdsourcing and related man-
agement approaches. Future research could investigate whether the identiﬁed tensions
and management approaches extend to other settings. Moreover, our analysis focused
on internal and external crowdsourcing as two innovation search strategies that are
open (external) and closed (internal). It could be interesting to extend the investigation
of tensions and management approaches to other innovation forms employed by ﬁrms
to exploit both internal and external knowledge.
38 E. Ruiz and M. Beretta

--- PAGE 48 ---
References
1. Felin, T., Zenger, T.R.: Closed or open innovation? Problem solving and the governance
choice. Res. Policy 43(5), 914–925 (2014)
2. Lakhani, K.R., Lifshitz-Assaf, H., Tushman, M.: Open innovation and organizational
boundaries: task decomposition, knowledge distribution and the locus of innovation. In:
Handbook of Economic Organization: Integrating Economic and Organizational Theory,
pp. 355–382 (2013)
3. Laursen, K.: Keep searching and you’ll ﬁnd: what do we know about variety creation
through ﬁrms’ search activities for innovation? Ind. Corp. Change 21(5), 1181–1220 (2012)
4. Birkinshaw, J., Bouquet, C., Barsoux, J.L.: The 5 myths of innovation. MIT Sloan Manage.
Rev. 52(2), 43–50 (2011)
5. Afuah, A., Tucci, C.L.: Crowdsourcing as a solution to distant search. Acad. Manage. Rev.
37(3), 355–375 (2012)
6. Zuchowski, O., et al.: Internal crowdsourcing: conceptual framework, structured review, and
research agenda. J. Inf. Technol. 31(2), 166–184 (2016)
7. Dahlander, L., Gann, D.M.: How open is innovation? Res. Policy 39(6), 699–709 (2010)
8. Tushman, M., Lakhani, K.R., Lifshitz-Assaf, H.: Open innovation and organization design
(2012)
9. Smith, W.K., Tushman, M.L.: Managing strategic contradictions: a top management model
for managing innovation streams. Organ. Sci. 16(5), 522–536 (2005)
10. Andriopoulos, C., Lewis, M.W.: Exploitation-exploration tensions and organizational
ambidexterity: managing paradoxes of innovation. Organ. Sci. 20(4), 696–717 (2009)
11. Gotsi, M., et al.: Managing creatives: paradoxical approaches to identity regulation. Hum.
Relat. 63(6), 781–805 (2010)
12. Nickerson, J.A., Zenger, T.R.: A knowledge-based theory of the ﬁrm—the problem-solving
perspective. Organ. Sci. 15(6), 617–632 (2004)
13. Majchrzak, A., Malhotra, A.: Towards an information systems perspective and research
agenda on crowdsourcing for innovation. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 22(4), 257–268 (2013)
14. Malhotra, A., et al.: Developing innovative solutions through internal crowdsourcing. MIT
Sloan Manage. Rev. 58(4), 73 (2017)
15. Smith, W.K., Lewis, M.W.: Toward a theory of paradox: a dynamic equilibrium model of
organizing. Acad. Manage. Rev. 36(2), 381–403 (2011)
16. Erickson, L., Petrick, I., Trauth, E.: Hanging with the right crowd: matching crowdsourcing
need to crowd characteristics (2012)
17. Piller, F.T., Walcher, D.: Toolkits for idea competitions: a novel method to integrate users in
new product development. R&D Manage. 36(3), 307–318 (2006)
18. Unsworth, K.L., Parker, S.: Proactivity and innovation: promoting a new workforce for the
new workplace. In: Holman, D.A.W., Toby, D., Clegg, C.W., Sparrow, P., Howard, A.
(eds.) The New Workplace: A Guide to the Human Impact of Modern Working Practices,
pp. 175–196. Wiley, Chichester (2003)
19. Simula, H., Ahola, T.: A network perspective on idea and innovation crowdsourcing in
industrial ﬁrms. Ind. Mark. Manage. 43(3), 400–408 (2014)
20. Cohen, W.M., Levinthal, D.A.: Absorptive-capacity - a new perspective on learning and
innovation. Adm. Sci. Q. 35(1), 128–152 (1990)
21. Poetz, M.K., Schreier, M.: The value of crowdsourcing: can users really compete with
professionals in generating new product ideas? J. Prod. Innov. Manage 29(2), 245–256
(2012)
Combining Open and Closed Forms of Innovation 39

--- PAGE 49 ---
22. Menon, T., Pfeffer, J.: Valuing internal vs. external knowledge: explaining the preference for
outsiders. Manage. Sci. 49(4), 497–513 (2003)
23. Whelan, E., et al.: Creating employee networks that deliver open innovation. MIT Sloan
Manage. Rev. 53(1), 37–44 (2011)
24. Oinonen, M., et al.: In search of paradox management capability in supplier–customer co-
development. Industrial Marketing Management (2017)
25. Lifshitz-Assaf, H.: Dismantling knowledge boundaries at NASA: from problem solvers to
solution seekers (2016)
26. Gebert, D., Boerner, S., Kearney, E.: Fostering team innovation: why is it important to
combine opposing action strategies? Organ. Sci. 21(3), 593–608 (2010)
27. Poole, M.S., Van de Ven, A.H.: Using paradox to build management and organization
theories. Acad. Manage. Rev. 14(4), 562–578 (1989)
28. Lewis, M.W.: Exploring paradox: toward a more comprehensive guide. Acad. Manage. Rev.
25(4), 760–776 (2000)
29. Yin, R.K.: Case Study Research: Design and Methods. SAGE Publications, Beverly Hills
(2009)
30. Eisenhardt, K.M.: Building theories from case-study research. Acad. Manage. Rev. 14(4),
532–550 (1989)
31. Miles, M.B., Huberman, A.M.: Qualitative Data Analysis: An Expanded Sourcebook. SAGE
Publications, Thousand Oaks (1994)
32. Bogers, M., et al.: The open innovation research landscape: established perspectives and
emerging themes across different levels of analysis. Ind. Innov. 24(1), 8–40 (2017)
33. Katz, R., Allen, T.J.: Investigating the Not Invented Here (NIH) syndrome: a look at the
performance, tenure, and communication patterns of 50 R & D project groups. R&D
Manage. 12(1), 7–20 (1982)
40 E. Ruiz and M. Beretta

--- PAGE 50 ---
Business Process Management, Continuous
Improvement and Enterprise Architecture:
In the Jungle of Governance
Torben Tambo1(&)
and Nikolaj Dybdal Clausen2
1
Aarhus University, Birk Centerpark 15, 7400 Herning, Denmark
torbento@btech.au.dk
2
7400 Herning, Denmark
Abstract. Business Process Management (BPM) is fundamental in IT/IS sys-
tems requirement speciﬁcations and is also well positioned in Enterprise
Architecture (EA) frameworks and practices. Continuous Improvement (CI) re-
lates to agendas of lean, six sigma, and incessant push for increased effective-
ness of the organization. This paper is developing a position of EA-driven BPM
as being long-term, strategic and “slow”, whereas CI is short-term, operational
and “fast”. A case study is presented, where CI is furthermore locally based and
BPM is centrally based in a larger organization. This leads to conflicts between
BPM and CI where the corporate value of both is eroded as IS initiatives on ERP
implementation are prolonged and CI initiatives fail to match to-be scenarios.
This paper discuss EA as a mediator, where EA is communicating business
opportunities to “positive” CI initiatives and aiming at stopping “negative” CI
initiatives. An EA-based process tracing mechanism is suggested and demon-
strated connecting business processes, ERP, and silo-based elements for CI
initiatives. Furthermore, a CI project management tool is discussed to outline
screening opportunities for EA-based CI reviews. An agenda is developed to
ensure that CI projects are developed according to the Enterprise Architecture
and developed along the organizational architecture and not as silo projects.
Furthermore Enterprise Architecture is in such case not alone to induce changes
and EA must develop methods to synchronise and coordinate with other change
processes.
Keywords: Enterprise Architecture  Business Process Management
Continuous Improvement
1 Introduction
Business Process Management (BPM) is a commonplace regime for structuration of
work processes in information systems (IS) [1]. BPM is widely accepted for use in
requirements engineering, formalization of work process narratives and human-
computer interface descriptions. Enterprise Architecture (EA) describes the relationship
N. D. Clausen—Business Architect.
© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018
S. D. Müller and J. A. Nielsen (Eds.): SCIS 2018, LNBIP 326, pp. 41–54, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-96367-9_4

--- PAGE 51 ---
between business strategy and technology; BPM is one of several artefacts of EA [2–5].
EA and BPM forms the corporate trajectory from as-is to to-be states; as this is often
requiring larger scale systems engineering and change management its time dimension
is extensive. Continuous Improvement (CI) is likewise commonly accepted in corpo-
rate governance in order to adapt to rapid changes, and create short-term transitional
initiatives overcoming here-and-now deﬁciencies related to operational efﬁciency,
market requirements, manufacturing circumstances or legislative issues [6–8]. This is
not overlooking that CI is often and foremost a management philosophy linking to
especially lean thinking.
Looking at CI as the fast track of decision-making and implementation of change
this paper is analyzing and discussing the relationship between EA, BPM and CI as
contradictory and sometimes counter-productive. The lens of the paper is that EA most
obvious as a potential mediating factor. We claim that changes affecting any form of
architecture – also from other management systems - must be governed within EA to
maintain the best possible (digital) representation of the link between business strategy
and the operating model. The research question is stated as: Can EA embrace CI to a
level where beneﬁts of CI in terms of value and speed is integrated into the BPM, or
will CI run disjointly with BPM and blur the EA with reduced value as a consequence?
This paper is based on a case study from the company Delight Inc. Delight operates
both an EA and a CI program. The associated with the EA program resides a BPM
program that is managed centrally for ensuring alignment between business process
and the ERP system. The CI programme is mostly managed decentrally. The CI pro-
gramme is largely assumed to impact the BPM program negatively, and a more explicit
EA implementation effort is review to ensure value creation.
2 Methodology
The methodology for the paper is twofold; a systematic literature review (SLR) from
Kitchenham and Charters [9] and a qualitative, interpretive case study from Saunders
[10] and Walsham [11]. The case study was performed during 2016–17 through
interviews, action research and observations in Delight. The case study provided an
understanding of the literature in context to a case in order to acquire practical
knowledge within the paper topics [10]. The literature review is based on the SLR
framework [9]; Planning, execution and analysis. This method is chosen to have a
clearly deﬁne methodology for the literature review and SLR is a well-deﬁned
methodology as a framework for a literature review [9].
The literature review has been conducted from different sources in the reviewing
process to identify relevant literature for the research. A broad range of general sci-
entiﬁc search databases has been used, a.o. IEEE, ScienceDirect, SpringerLink and
Google Scholar.
Predeﬁned keywords have been identiﬁed based on the research questions. The
keywords relevant to search in these sources to identify relevant knowledge for the
research questions. The keywords have been used to identify relevant articles by
searching the keywords in the paper’s metadata. EA, CI and BPM easily yields relevant
results, however the intersection between the concepts is less easy especially when it
42 T. Tambo and N. D. Clausen

--- PAGE 52 ---
comes to a critical analysis of the interrelations. A number of papers are included where
a general critical posture to the concepts of EA and CI is presented. This position is
introduced to understand the theoretical motivation for a gap between EA and CI.
The action research took place by posting a BPM/EA specialist (co-author) from
the global headquarter in the largest European sales ofﬁces for 3 months. The research
is a part of an overall longitudinal study in the company initiated in 2014 and remains
ongoing. The specialist reviewed recent (local) CI initiatives, and added these to a
database of local initiatives. Also was made open presentations of the (central) BPM
program as organizational interventions. Mock-ups and basic training were made to
elicit further knowledge on motives and drivers, and incite user responses on viability
of CI initiatives in the light of the BPM program. With a ﬁnal aim of deﬁning solutions
to improve governance, improve IS project success, and elevate awareness in the
organization, the study furthermore has elements of pragmatism [12] and design
science [13].
3 Theory and Background
EA is the “analysis and documentation of an enterprise in its current and future states
from an integrated strategy, business, and technology perspective” [14]. Its quintes-
sence lies in building an organizing meta-context for an alignment of technology
planning, and business planning to its strategic planning as its primary driver [5, 14].
EA deﬁnes the policies and standards for design of technologies, databases and
application to the business. The role of Enterprise Architect is to strategically organise
and design the technology components to aim for strategic alignment [14]. Lankhorst
[5] deﬁnes EA as instrumental for the integration of business and technology across the
organization consisting of four fundamental elements; “organizational structure, busi-
ness processes, information systems and infrastructure” [5].
EA is about “planning, design, and integration activities related to a company’s
business processes, information and technology infrastructure” [15] holistic but related
to: System information, applications, technical and business units; EA needs to con-
sidered as a framework that help to control direction and effort [1].
EA is about relationships and elements of the business and the tool to integrate,
govern and analyze the organizational elements [16]. Bernus [2] describes these ele-
ments as a complex system that EA should be designed for organizational performance.
EA is instrumental in analyzing grap between the current state and future state archi-
tecture [4]. Shuja [17] describes EA’s role to identify the gap between as-is and to-be
architecture and EA to ensure proper linkages. Pontacoloni [18] has deﬁned the roles of
an Enterprise Architect as to have understanding and overview of the entire enterprise,
both internal and external.
The goals for EA is to be able to identify the above incompatible systems, e.g. Feral
Information Systems [27], and integrate them in the organizational architecture. EA
should be able to identify changes in the business and identify the challenges that will
affect the business [13]. Rouhani [28] focuses on effective communication across the
teams with process maps as enablers to communicate, coordinate and cooperate.
Business Process Management, Continuous Improvement and Enterprise Architecture 43

--- PAGE 53 ---
von Rosing et al. [29] describes BPM as a management process entailing work
practices, life-cycle of actions, and structuration of services. von Rosing ﬁnds EA as
the technology discipline that sets the framework for the business design. Witts sep-
arates BPM and EA stating that BPM is to capture and improve the business processes
to achieve efﬁciency [30].
Bernus [2] do not see the beneﬁts acquired in EA, if the documentation of the
business processes does not meet quality standards. BPM provides the methods and
tools in order for the organization to manage and optimize the processes [31]. BPM is
to achieve process efﬁciency, process compliance, process standardization, process
agility and process visibility [31]. The Process Architecture of EA can apply value and
create the holistic overview of the processes [32]. As Schooff [32] describes leads BPM
to Business Architecture which lead to Enterprise Architecture. The value created with
EA is reflected by how the organization manage the business processes of the EA
architecture layer, the business architecture and ﬁt into the architecture [29]. von
Rosing [29] add visual modelling of EA to Lankhorsts perspective [5]. Bernus [2]
correlates EA standards with ISO9001, which requires that the business processes are
modelled and shared across the enterprise.
Aligning BPM and EA can be a helpful tool in order to deﬁne the interoperability in
services, e.g. applications in the organization [33]. Aligning the business processes
with the Application and Technology architecture will create added value in the
organization [29]. According to von Rosing et al. [29] can neither BPM nor EA stand
alone as the people of EA focuses on IT alignment and the people of BPM focuses on
business optimization, efﬁciency, effectiveness through CI.
With a focus on CI, the EA elements need to be integrated into the projects. In a
project, the focus shall not only be on improving the process, but also take into
consideration the data, technologies and services [14]. Rouhani [28] supports the
project view with 8-step model for running projects: Identiﬁcation; Conceptualization;
Requirements deﬁnition; Design; Implementation description; Construction; Operation;
Decommission.
EA management plans must be seen as improvement projects from a holistic view
[3]. Achieving the alignment between BPM and EA will create transparency across the
organization [29]. EA will ensure that BPM have data to perform performance measure
and additionally have the agility to change business processes [29]. Finally, both BPM
and EA covers the Enterprise Landscape and the combination will provide a better
outcome and achieve strategic alignment across the organization [4].
In order to achieve agility, BPM must support CI in the organization [29]. Lan-
khorst [5] indicates that CI must address the EA and not the BPM. CI programs are
based on process lifecycles, where BPM will set the desired changes and EA will align
with the future state by changing the enterprise architecture accordingly [29, 33]. It is
the responsibility for the Enterprise Architect to be able to achieve sufﬁcient adapt-
ability of all the EA layers [1] and achieve more flexibility that complexity [29].
As governance frameworks, EA and CI are forming a mainstream within their
respective ﬁelds, however EA and CI are also subject to criticism. EA is stated as a
(relatively) young discipline, with van Steenbergen et al. [19] proposing a multi-criteria
maturity model where companies and architects can be low on maturity leading to
44 T. Tambo and N. D. Clausen

--- PAGE 54 ---
failure as well as high on a sufﬁcient range of criteria leading to successful transfor-
mation. EA – read as Enterprise Engineering – is criticized by Dietz et al. [20] for being
based on the principles from scientiﬁc management and overlooking complexity and
human dimensions. Congruent ﬁndings are obtained by Hope et al. [21] in pinpointing
EA implementation as (risk of) failing to capture practice, routines and improvisations.
Seppannen [22] presents a set of critical success factors for EA to balance between the
pressure for (digital) enterprise transformations and the organisations capability,
readiness and receptiveness to an architectural mindset.
CI is criticized for its short term goal-race insufﬁciently creating sustained result
[23]. McCann et al. [24] has researched lean management and CI and found signiﬁcant
problems in having CI produce lasting impacts; over time impact erodes. The
explanatory framework is related to CI claiming impact is areas where other gover-
nance regimes set minimum standards, or where employees feel stronger commitment
to professional practices than to “management fads” [25].
The dual strands of governance outlined by CI and EA is presented in Fig. 1. The
mutual influence is illustrated in the ﬁgure as counting aspects ranging from business
strategy to influence on the operating model of the company. A critical gap is repre-
sented by the uncoordinated change of business processes [26, 27]. The gap is con-
stituted by factors like (1) EA involves technology, CI is not necessarily involving
technology, (2) architecture can be a purpose of its own in EA, CI is to deliver
immediate business results, (3) EA is founded in long-term orientation, CI is funda-
mentally short-term oriented. The latter gap factor is especially complex as processes of
the operating model are susceptible to contradicting changes. The subsequent part of
this paper aims at understanding the impact and the mitigation related to the gap and
design requirements for improvement solutions [13].
Fig. 1. Mapping of corporate processes
Business Process Management, Continuous Improvement and Enterprise Architecture 45

--- PAGE 55 ---
The subsequent part of this paper aims at understanding the impact and the miti-
gation related to the gap and design requirements for improvement solutions [13]. The
theoretical research lens in the case study below is addressing a paradoxical nature
suggested in Fig. 1 of business processes and – partly – information systems under
change from differing management systems.
4 Case Study
In this section, a case study is presented. The purpose of the case study is to illustrate an
organization, where CI and BPM – as two highly important and costly initiatives –
have started to diverge and incite suboptimization. The purpose of the case, as
including elements of actionable design, is furthermore to consider solutions to the
conundrum of concurrent, competing or contradicting management systems as a pre-
sumption for productive IS research.
Delight Inc. is a building component producer in the European market with sales
units in across Northern Europe and production in Eastern Europe. Delight is formed
out of a number of “predecessor” companies merged in an acquisitive process.
Administration, manufacturing and IT are cross-organisational where as sales, service
and marketing is still connected to the “predecessor” companies as individual brands.
Delight introduced Business Process Management ﬁve years ago to prepare for an
ERP system implementation (SAP) to consolidate ERP systems of the “predecessor”
companies. Processes are deﬁned as standardized processes based both on work
practice, best practice and the process conduct stipulated by SAP. The business pro-
cesses have been documented in the software iGrafx as the documentation has been
focused on the to-be stage of the organization in relation to SAP. Delight sees also the
business process model as a tool for training, process improvement and cross-national
harmonisation.
In order for the organization to react to the changes in the market and as a general
principle of lean process governance, Delight introduced alongside BPM a cross-
organisational CI program, see Fig. 2. Business units were inspired to grow a culture of
CI in line with the philosophy of Lean Manufacturing. The CI program is rooted locally
in the organization by e.g. adding CI targets to low level and middle managers con-
tracts, and local level monetary rewards for rapid improvement initiatives. Cross-
organisational CI initiatives are rare and assumed difﬁcult due geographic diversity and
history of local corporate cultures related to the brands (or “predecessor” companies).
Fig. 2. Delight’s setup to identify changes to architecture
46 T. Tambo and N. D. Clausen

--- PAGE 56 ---
The CI program is largely disconnected from the BPM. Some business units and
managers have development and implementation of CI initiatives as a KPI. The BPM
organization and the SAP implementation effort is challenged due to ongoing CI
changes eroding agreed processes and de-harmonising work practices. This is partly
contributing to a prolonged SAP implementation process, but is also created from
“organizational impatience” with the extended duration of the SAP implementation.
Some initiatives have been started in order to align the CI program with the BPM
by creating a project registration tool, were the managers and specialists deﬁne the
target projects and outline implications.
Architecture is used as an overarching activity to align BPM and IS. Projects must
draw on the architectural conceptualizations, while apparent behavior is that CI ini-
tiatives overstate emphasis on local processes instead of aligning with architectural
considerations. Two examples were identiﬁed under the case study that shown the lack
of architectural alignment in these projects, with two different problems.
Minicase 1: The purpose of this project was to automate the process of producing
AutoCad ﬁles from engineering to manufacturing. The project was runned by the
Technical Department in X Country, and the solution should be able to draw AutoCad
ﬁles based on exported data from the as-is ERP system, BaaN. EA was not taken into
consideration before beginning the development raising these issues:
• The software was developed to BaaN and not developed to the new ERP system,
SAP, that was to be implemented
• The architecture in Delight do not have the data structure to handle the requests
from the software, so the data needed is to be extracted and input manually in the
software
• The system is developed without no consideration for how to ﬁt into the architecture
of the company, not of bad will, but due to lack of insight and “architectural
thinking”
A new product conﬁgurator was built into the software even though the conﬁgurator
is built in BaaN. The organization do then have to spend resources for systems
maintenance, operations and IT service costs.
Minicase 2: A strategic goal was communicated to the organization to focus on having
a better overview of the projects and project status in the subsidiaries. As a response to
this call, four different ofﬁces in a large subsidiary started development of project
management tools. The tools were seen as being at an ofﬁce level, and no coordination
or demand for central solutions were demanded by the subsidiary management. The
ﬁrst project was developed as a manual entry Excel sheet, the second project was
developed in SharePoint as a project tool, the third was developed in Excel where the
Excel sheet extracted data from systems, and the fourth project was yet another, but
different, manual entry Excel sheet. Four different solutions to the same problem with
data structured in four different ways. With no architectural overview following
problems occurred in this example:
• Four different non-compliant data structures
• Development costs for four project
Business Process Management, Continuous Improvement and Enterprise Architecture 47

--- PAGE 57 ---
• Four different data inputs and outputs
• No usages of the standardised business processes across the organization
All projects were implemented in the respectively departments as the architectural
standards and policies are non-existing in the CI program, and therefore were both
projects accepted in the local organizations (silos).
The case study reveal a close, but not always productive, relationship between the
initiatives. Many CI initiatives require IT changes, and IT changes require BPM
changes. Characteristically, the initiatives are enacted as small projects with emphasis
on short delivery cycles. Furthermore local decision-makers exhibit unawareness of
consequences of local level change to the overall beneﬁt of harmonization of processes,
“communication in the same language”, and reflections to the lack of an adequate
services architecture communicated. More than 100 smaller projects were found
addressing CI, but not addressing implications for the overall BPM model.
5 Analysis and Solutions
The business processes in Delight need to be aligned with the information technologies
in order to make enterprise architecture efforts meaningful in the organization [5].
Delight needs stable and/or controlled business processes in order to reach a successful
implementation of SAP [29] and ensure a generally credible governance in respect to
e.g. ﬁnancial reporting and quality assurance. Above is described how EA and CI
affects business processes within the gap described in Fig. 1. Subsequently, the
development of a methodology for bridging this gap is described.
Business processes were coded with a unique identiﬁer in the set verbal business
process documentation. Business processes where then deﬁned through a qualitative
elicitation and identiﬁcation process, and were assigned with a code and a semi-formal
deﬁnition in the representation tool iGraphx, see Fig. 3. The same code was subse-
quently used in SAP implementation framework. A tool was created to analyse the
alignment of managed business processes in iGraphx and work practices by comparing
to transaction codes from SAP. The management analysts can now see, what processes
that were executed non-compliant according to the stated deﬁnitions, e.g. a salesman
issuing a purchase order, or a customer invoice send from a warehouse rather than the
account receivables.
Having aligned the systems deﬁned by the EA, and business processes thus enabled
measuring of the user behaviour in the organization by matching the permissions from
the IT systems, the documented permissions in BPM and the actual IT system usages.
With a cross-organisational representation of the IT system and Business Processes, the
organization can measure on the level of (mis-) alignment between the elements of
business processes, systems and people [34], cf Fig. 4.
Visualizing the technologies and applications that support the activities in the
business processes [1] will help the organization to achieve an overview over the EA
elements; systems, people and processes [15]. Delight needs to visualize what activities
are related to what systems. When this is achieved the focus on getting the holistic
overview over the information and data can be identiﬁed. Getting the data overview
48 T. Tambo and N. D. Clausen

--- PAGE 58 ---
will then allow Delight to use the data for process performance and then identify
process improvements [4].
As identiﬁed and presented in the case study Delight is challenged with its CI
program running as “silo projects” and without controlled to ﬁt into the architecture,
and furthermore not optimized across the different departments. Implementing Enter-
prise Architecture in Delight will beneﬁt the projects, as the role for EA will then be to
identify the changes in the business [13] and to handle the IT development to the
overall business strategy [1]. EA will enable identiﬁcation of cross-project and cross-
process capabilities and identify coherence between departments for executive future
projects [15].
To include CI in the EA – BPM effort, a process was created, where new projects
should be reviewed by an introduced project management ofﬁce (PMO). The PMO
created a form in Microsoft Sharepoint to deﬁne the project outline, see Fig. 3. The
projects should state if they had implications or requirements for IT or BPM. If they
Fig. 3. Diagram of BPM-based process monitoring
Fig. 4. Overview of how alignment is achieved between System, Business Processes and
Authorizations
Business Process Management, Continuous Improvement and Enterprise Architecture 49

--- PAGE 59 ---
had no implications or requirements for IT or BPM, and budgetary convincing, the
project proposal were classiﬁed “just do it”. If projects had IT or BPM implications, an
architectural review was introduced to assess architectural and process implications. If
implications were unimportant, projects were likewise passed on to resource allocation.
If projects from CI, or any other governance function, had architectural implications,
the proposals would go into the EA function like any other request within corporate IT.
EA is setting the guidelines for, how the projects should be develop [14] and deﬁne
the policies and standards for, how the projects should be designed [14]. Delight
deﬁnes a long term development plan of EA goals and principles [29] and commu-
nicate, how to run an IT project to align with the architecture.
The corporate wide business process coding creates a potential for stopping the gap
between EA and CI as a common ontology is established. The organization has an
overview of all the transactions a department does, and what permissions each job role
needs in the IT system. By aligning BPM and IS an exact overview of the business job
roles is deﬁned, and what activities roles have permissions to perform, and what they
actually do perform [34]. In addition Integrating IS and BPM will increase Delight’s
ability to integrate and align IT, processes and people in the EA [34].
Delight has only documented the business processes for the future state. Absence of
current state processes is unfortunate in lengthy implementation projects. Customers
can’t clearly identify scope and focal transformation requirements. The next step for
Delight is start deﬁning the ever-present current state of the EA by deﬁning the indi-
vidual EA layers; business processes, information, data, applications and technologies
[15]. This will allow Delight to get a holistic overview of the current architecture in the
organization [1].
6 Discussion
BPM and CI are both highly ranked on the agendas of transformation in companies [6–
8]. In this discussion these concepts are highlighted against EA to add to our under-
standing of EA as mean for balancing short-term and long-term transformation. In a
tradition of information systems studies the concepts of BPM and CI must be brought
to work in synergy in order to overcome barriers for transformation and implementa-
tion. The presented conflicting positions between BPM and CI must be switched into
mutual support and avoid a zero-sum game process. In the BPM-CI intersection we see
EA as an explanatory frame of reference. EA embody strategy and the translation of
business strategy into the operating model and technology.
In Fig. 1, the interrelation between EA, CI and BPM is stated, but realizing that in
scenarios like Delight, contradictions to “single line” of corporate governance is giving
problems. The business processes are dynamic and the dynamics originate from dif-
ferent parallel governance regimes. BPM can’t be established as only being “owned”
by the EA practice. CI practice is just as well affected business processes. The thin lines
out of CI in Fig. 1 indicate rapid changes on local levels, whereas the bold lines from
EA indicate a less agile and a more resource consuming transformation agenda. EA
coordinates technology in relation to strategy. CI do not necessarily have any
responsibility to the technological dimension of the organization. Traditionally,
50 T. Tambo and N. D. Clausen

--- PAGE 60 ---
business processes are embodied in the EA stack. The study pinpoint other stakeholders
than EA. Ironically this calls for a framework for governance of frameworks for cor-
porate governance.
Figure 1 underscore that the operating model of the company will need to navigate
in both stable and unstable business processes. The risk of counterproductivity increase
as changes are anchored in uncoordinated organizational entities pursuing governance
opportunistically e.g. fueled by individual contracts and performance measures. Syn-
chronisation between change becomes critical.
A key theoretical contribution of this paper is the necessity to understand organi-
zation dynamics at a process level from the influencing governance regimes. A theo-
retical contribution is furthermore that there will probably be a signiﬁcant level of
unstable processes imposing challenges to precision in any BPM-founded IS require-
ments speciﬁcation. Having centralized process monitoring technologies is signiﬁ-
cantly helping EA processes following the fundamentals of Ross [14] but observing
dynamics in uniﬁed as well as diversiﬁed operating models. The described imple-
mentation of identiﬁcation, monitoring and screening models suggests that more stable
and controllable environments can be realized over time.
The architectural knowledge needs to be achieved through a holistic overview of
the current state of the technologies, databases, applications and processes across the
organization [14, 15] potentially contradicting local innovativeness. Architectural
policies and standards for how to design technologies, databases and application need
to be deﬁned [14] and to create a team to develop and maintain IT to deliver solutions
to the organization in order to support the changing business objectives [1].
Learning outcomes of the case is that without an organizational architectural
awareness and without architectural control, the CI program will run as individual
projects at a decentralised level, where the departmental processes are optimized and
not the process across departments. This is in line with the theory of Feral Information
Systems [27] that are developed to satisfy user needs without alignment with other
systems or overall process flow in the organization.
The case and discussion highlight the issue of concurrent or competent corporate
governance frameworks in this case CI and EA. It contradicts EA as a top level
strategic framework, but is more leading to an understanding of EA one out more, and
an importance in EA to include non-EA initiatives into the management plan or
transformation agenda. Likewise stable business processes are a problematic perception
of working practices. In this sense, CI contradicts BPM by constantly seek change
whereas EA-driven BPM seeks stability. Gartners outline of the bimodal (or two-speed)
IT organization might solve the matter [35] but doesn’t address the risk of losing
BPM’s bid for harmonized processes. Solutions lie in coordination, synchronization,
training, mutual awareness of central and decentral change processes, and a more and
more embracing EA.
Business Process Management, Continuous Improvement and Enterprise Architecture 51

--- PAGE 61 ---
7 Conclusions
This paper has focused on EA, BPM and CI and the complex and partly contradictory
relationship between these elements. A qualitative case study has identiﬁed several
elements in this area for achieving alignment of the EA with business processes, and
how EA can question the challenges in organizations with CI programs.
This paper has demonstrated that running CI programs without an overall control of
the Enterprise Architecture will end up with extra costs, silo projects and non-
integrated solutions. A gap between EA and CI has been derived from the literature
review. The gap is affected process stability in the operating model. Conflicting gov-
ernance regimes are detrimental to corporate performance at the level of business
process and operating model. The paper is describing how the case company developed
tools for company wide business process coding and identiﬁcation connected to the
systems of SAP and iGraphx together with supporting systems (“dashboard”) for
following up on non-compliance. Additionally a project governance model were
introduced with any project proposal being screened for architectural implications.
Organizations need to support the CI projects with technical knowledge and
implement EA policies and standards in order to control projects not be become silo
projects. Integrating a process focus in the improvement projects can identify, what
processes that will change in the future stage and create an overview of what systems
need changing. By adding this the CI program will then add value to the Enterprise
Architectural overview.
As suggestions for further work it will be interesting to investigate, what the effect
of implementing information and data into the business model will reflect in the holistic
overview for the architecture. If the organizations know what data is generated where
and how the data flow is through the business processes will allow the organization to
achieve higher data quality and ensure cross sharing of information. It will also be
interesting to identify if information and data implementation can add controllability to
the CI program and be part of identifying processes to improve by running simulations
based on the data.
References
1. Khayami, R.: Qualitative characteristics of enterprise architecture. Procedia Comput. Sci. 3,
1277–1282 (2011)
2. Bernus, P.: Enterprise models for enterprise architecture and ISO9000:2000. Annu. Rev.
Control 27, 211–220 (2003)
3. Holm, H., Buschle, M., Ekstedt, M., Lagerström, R.: Automatic data collection for enterprise
architecture models. Softw. Syst. Model. 13, 825–841 (2014)
4. Jensen, C.T.: Integrating EA and BPM synergisticaly. In: IEEE Conference on Commerce
and Enterprise Computing, pp. 279–285 (2011)
5. Lankhorst, M.M.: Enterprise architecture modelling - the issue of integration. Adv. Eng.
Inform. 18, 205–2016 (2005)
6. Eaidgah, Y., et al.: Visual management, performance management and continuous
improvement: a lean manufacturing approach. Int. J. Lean Six Sigma 7(2), 187–210 (2016)
52 T. Tambo and N. D. Clausen

--- PAGE 62 ---
7. Singh, J., Singh, H.: Continuous improvement philosophy–literature review and directions.
Benchmarking Int. J. 22(1), 75–119 (2015)
8. Yang, Y., Lee, P., Cheng, T.: Continuous improvement competence, employee creativity,
and new service development performance: a frontline employee perspective. Int. J. Prod.
Econ. 171, 275–288 (2016)
9. Kitchenham, B., Charters, S.: Guidelines for performing Systematic Literature Reviews in
Software Engineering. Software Engineering Group (2007)
10. Saunders, M., Lewis, P., Thornhill, A.: Research Methods for Business Students, 5th edn.
Pearson Education, London. (2009)
11. Walsham, G.: Doing interpretive research. Eur. J. Inf. Syst. 15(3), 320–330 (2006)
12. Goldkuhl, G.: Pragmatism vs interpretivism in qualitative information systems research. Eur.
J. Inf. Syst. 21(2), 135–146 (2012)
13. Peffers, K., Tuunanen, T., Rothenberger, M.A., Chatterjee, S.: A design science research
methodology for information systems research. J. Manag. Inf. Syst. 24(3), 45–77 (2007)
14. Ross, J.W.: Creating a Strategic IT Architecture Competency: Learning in Stages. MIT CISR
(2003)
15. Cram, A., Brohman, K., Gallupe, B.: Addressing the control challenges of the enterprise
architecture process. J. Inf. Syst. 29(2), 161–182 (2015)
16. Rajabi, Z., Abade, M.N.: Data-centric enterprise architecture. Inf. Eng. Electron. Bus. 4(4),
53–60 (2012)
17. Shuja, A.K.: Enterprise Architecture: What is it and why should we care? (2016). http://
www.shuja.info/publications.html
18. Pontacoloni, M.: SearchSOA (2010). http://searchsoa.techtarget.com/tip/Enterprise-
architects-can-use-BPMN-as-common-language-for-process-modeling. Accessed 18 Nov
2016
19. van Steenbergen, M., van den Berg, M., Brinkkemper, S.: A balanced approach to
developing the enterprise architecture practice. In: Filipe, J., Cordeiro, J., Cardoso, J. (eds.)
ICEIS 2007. LNBIP, vol. 12, pp. 240–253. Springer, Heidelberg (2008). https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-540-88710-2_19
20. Dietz, J.L., Hoogervorst, J.A., Albani, A., Aveiro, D., Babkin, E., Barjis, J., Caetano, A.,
Huysmans, P., Iijima, J., van Kervel, S., Mulder, H.: The discipline of enterprise
engineering. Int. J. Organ. Des. Eng. 3(1), 86–114 (2013)
21. Hope, T., Chew, E., Sharma, R.: The failure of success factors: lessons from success and
failure cases of enterprise architecture implementation. In: Proceedings of the 2017
ACM SIGMIS Conference on Computers and People Research, pp. 21–27. ACM (2017)
22. Seppänen, V.: From problems to critical success factors of enterprise architecture adoption.
Ph.D. dissertation, Jyväskylä Studies in Computing, p. 201 (2014)
23. Hines, P., Taylor, D., Walsh, A.: The Lean journey: have we got it wrong? Total Qual.
Manag. Bus. Excell. 1–18 (2018)
24. McCann, L., Hassard, J.S., Granter, E., Hyde, P.J.: Casting the lean spell: the promotion,
dilution and erosion of lean management in the NHS. Hum. Relat. 68(10), 1557–1577
(2015)
25. Näslund, D.: Lean, six sigma and lean sigma: fads or real process improvement methods?
Bus. Process Manag. J. 14(3), 269–287 (2008)
26. Trkman, P.: Increasing process orientation with business process management: critical
practices’. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 33(1), 48–60 (2013)
27. Bækgaard, L., Olsen, M., Tambo, T.: Architectural issues related to feral information
systems. In: Feral Information Systems Development: Managerial Implications. Business
Science Reference, pp. 227–241 (2014)
Business Process Management, Continuous Improvement and Enterprise Architecture 53

--- PAGE 63 ---
28. Rouhani, B.D.: A systematic literature review on Enterprise Architecture Implementation
Methodologies. Inf. Softw. Technol. 62, 1–20 (2015)
29. von Rosing, M., Hove, M., Subbarao, R. Preston, T.W.: Combining BPM and EA in
complex IT projects, pp. 271–278. Computer Society (2011)
30. Witts, I.: Triaster (2016). http://blog.triaster.co.uk/blog/bpm-vs-ea-pros-cons-beneﬁts-
drawbacks
31. Kemsley, S.: Column2 (2011). http://www.slideshare.net/skemsley/aligning-bpm-and-ea
32. Schooff, P.: ebiz (2012). http://www.ebizq.net/blogs/ebizq_forum/2012/09/what-role-does-
bpm-play-in-enterprise-architecture.php
33. Barros, A., Dumas, M., ter Hofstede, A.H.M.: Service interaction patterns. In: van der Aalst,
Wil M.P., Benatallah, B., Casati, F., Curbera, F. (eds.) BPM 2005. LNCS, vol. 3649,
pp. 302–318. Springer, Heidelberg (2005). https://doi.org/10.1007/11538394_20
34. Clausen, N.: ERP and BPM - a report tool for measuring level of alignment. Aarhus
University (2015)
35. Gartner Inc.: Bimodal (2014). http://www.gartner.com/it-glossary/bimodal/
54 T. Tambo and N. D. Clausen

--- PAGE 64 ---
Mobile Applications as Carriers of Institutional
Pressures: A Case of the Finnish Taxi Industry
Karin Väyrynen1(&)
, Arto Lanamäki1
, and Juho Lindman2
1
Interact Research Unit, Faculty of ITEE, University of Oulu,
PO Box 8000, 90014 Oulun Yliopisto, Finland
{karin.vayrynen,arto.lanamaki}@oulu.fi
2
Applied Information Technology,
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden
juho.lindman@ait.gu.se
Abstract. While the worldwide market expansion of Uber has raised contro-
versy, Uber has also received praise for its mobile phone app. Its many features
– taxi ordering, pricing, real-time location information, paying, and service
evaluation – have provided signiﬁcant customer value. When Uber entered
Finland in November 2014, few other taxi apps were available. Between 2014
and 2018, this shortage of taxi apps turned into an abundance, with many
companies introducing their own taxi apps. By leaning on institutional theory,
and more speciﬁcally by applying coercive, mimetic and normative pressures as
a lens, we provide an explanation for why three Finnish taxi apps now resemble
Uber in some features, whereas they differ in others. Based on our interviews,
we can explain the present-day differences between these apps by coercive and
normative pressures in the institutional environment of the Finnish taxi industry.
We contribute to the IT and institutionalization research stream by illustrating
how mobile applications as IT artefacts can be seen as carriers of institutional
pressures materializing in the features they provide.
Keywords: Taxi industry  Institutional pressures  Mobile apps
1 Introduction
The fame of the transportation network company Uber is mostly associated with its
affordable “ridesharing” service UberX (known as UberPop in some markets) [1].
Uber’s worldwide expansion has fueled controversy [2] and the company’s ethics have
been questioned [3, 4]. Yet, Uber’s mobile app is generally viewed as an impressive
technological achievement [5]. Largely due to Uber, the taxi industry is now one of the
most well-known examples of industry-transforming digital disruption [2, 5].
Theories of organizational institutionalism have discussed change and stability
when evaluating the impacts of digital technologies in various industries. Earlier
research has treated these technologies as exogenous change forces, but a more
nuanced understanding of their endogenous role has recently emerged [6].
Studies on institutional theory have shown that ﬁrms face multiple institutional
pressures that are often incompatible with each other [7]. Gosain [8] argues that
© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018
S. D. Müller and J. A. Nielsen (Eds.): SCIS 2018, LNBIP 326, pp. 55–68, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-96367-9_5

--- PAGE 65 ---
institutional logics are encoded into IT systems. Rajão and Hayes ([9], p. 328) for-
mulate that “institutional theory can provide an important theoretical lens to provide a
historical understanding of the ways in which speciﬁc IT artefacts come about and
change over time”. They look at the institutional context in form of conceptualizations
of control and argue that there is a dialectic relationship between the institutional
context and the IT artefact. IT artefacts are “bundles of material and cultural properties
packaged in some socially recognizable form such as hardware and/or software” ([10],
p. 121). Along these lines, mobile taxi hailing applications represent such IT artefacts.
The institutional environment of Finnish taxi ﬁrms has been heavily regulated.
Finland has one of the tightest barriers to entry in the taxi market in the EU [11]. The
number of taxi licenses is limited and the maximum price for taxi rides is regulated by
the state. Taxi drivers have to pass a test and are required to use the ofﬁcial taximeter in
their cars. Thus, the institutional environment for taxi hailing organizations and their IT
artifacts in form of mobile apps is especially interesting in Finland. In November 2014,
Uber entered the Finnish taxi market. Between November 2014 and the present day
(February 2018), several mobile taxi hailing applications have been introduced in
Finland by existing Finnish taxi companies.
Leaning on Rajão and Hayes [9], we wondered how the institutional context in a
form of different institutional pressures in Finland can help explain the similarities, but
also the differences between three Finnish taxi hailing apps and Uber. We ask the
following research question:
How are institutional pressures implicated in the feature functionalities in taxi hailing apps in
the Finnish market?
Our main contribution is to show that applying the lens of institutional pressures
can help explain why mobile apps that were created for similar purposes resemble each
other in some features, while they differ in other features. We illustrate how IT artefacts
in form of mobile apps can be seen as carriers of institutional pressures.
2 Theoretical Background
We ground our study in literature on institutional theory, and more speciﬁcally, on
institutional pressures, and the inscription of institutional values into IT artefacts.
Institutional theory helps explain why organizations within a certain institutional
environment resemble each other. Institutions mean regulative, normative, and cog-
nitive structures and activities that provide stability and meaning to social behavior
[12]. Organizations operate in institutional environments, and in order to receive
legitimacy and support they have to conform to the rules and requirements of these
environments. Institutional isomorphism means that ﬁrms subscribe to the same
institutions within their ﬁeld [13], and that organizations/units resemble other units in
that same environment. Three forms of institutional pressures/forces that lead to
institutional isomorphism can be distinguished: coercive, normative, and mimetic [13].
Coercive pressures are results of politics and power relationships in the society.
Actors such as the state require compliance in practices threatening with formal and
informal sanctions. In coercive isomorphism, companies of an industry show
56 K. Väyrynen et al.

--- PAGE 66 ---
similarities to each other because of certain regulative or legal pressures. Normative
pressures are results of what is considered proper course of action and often related to
professional values. In normative isomorphism, change is influenced by professional
standards or networks. Mimetic pressures are a reaction to uncertainty: organizations
follow examples that are evaluated as being successful. In mimetic isomorphism, thus,
a company imitates another company because of assuming that the other company’s
structure is somehow beneﬁcial. Regulative pressures often come top-down from
governments, whereas mimetic pressures are result of peer-pressure from other com-
panies and normative pressures come from professional groups primarily from inside
organizations [14].
IS research has also applied institutional theory extensively. Mignerat and Rivard
[15] analyzed 53 IS studies that use institutional theory. They identiﬁed entities from
which institutional pressures arise from in four stages of IS innovation. They found that
coercive pressures arise from, e.g., governments, regulatory agencies and industry
associations, normative pressures from, e.g., technology suppliers, industry and trade
associations and consultants, and mimetic pressures from, e.g., peers, successful
organizations, and competition.
Researchers have brought IT artefacts into the study of institutional theory. Rajão
and Hayes [9] identiﬁed four research streams regarding the relationship between
organizations and IT artifacts: (1) why organizations still invest into IT even though no
clear evidence exists about increased efﬁciency and return-on-investment, (2) IT
innovations, (3) the inscription of institutional values into IT artefacts, and (4) the role
of IT artefacts in change processes. Our research falls into the third category. Rajão and
Hayes ([9], p. 321), building on [16], summarize that “the context of institutions ﬁnd
their way into the design of IT artefacts, which in turn also become institutional carriers
that help to support and reproduce certain institutional arrangements”.
In the present paper, we study how institutional pressures are implicated in the
features of three Finnish taxi-hailing apps.
3 Research Methods and Context
3.1 Research Methods
We conducted this research as a case study, which is a suitable approach in addressing
“how” and “why” questions about a contemporary phenomenon [17]. As the current
research asks how institutional pressures are implicated in different features of taxi
hailing apps available in the Finnish market, case study is a suitable research method.
Case Background. This paper is part of a research program investigating digitalization
in the Finnish taxi service industry. In the present study, we compare the features
implemented in three Finnish taxi apps to the traditional taxi service model on the one
hand, and the Uber app on the other hand. We selected these three apps as they are by
far the “largest” ones in Finland when looking at the number of taxis that can be
reached with the applications. App A (7500 taxis in 200 municipalities in Finland) has
been launched in 2015 and works nationwide. App B (1250 taxis in Southern Finland)
was launched in June 2015 by a taxi dispatch center that dispatches rides in 19 cities in
Mobile Applications as Carriers of Institutional Pressures 57

--- PAGE 67 ---
Southern Finland. App C (1335 taxis in Southern Finland) has been launched by
Southern Taxi (a pseudonym) in November 2017. Before that, Southern Taxi had
already another mobile app (Delta App) with much more restricted feature function-
alities than App C. Southern Taxi used App A in parallel to the Delta App for almost 2
years but separated from App A in November 2017.
Data Collection. We collected publicly available information on the features of
App A, B and C and Uber from the respective websites of the applications. We have
read histories of the taxi service industry in Finland (e.g., [18]) and elsewhere (e.g.,
[19]). Moreover, we have followed public discussion on the media concerning the taxi
service industry. In addition, we conducted 17 interviews with 18 interviewees (one
interview was a group interview with 2 interviewees) with an average length of
88.4 min (see Table 1). Interviewees were representatives of the taxi companies of
App A and App C, technology providers of App A and App C, representatives of Uber
Finland, as well as dispatch centers who use(d) App A. In addition, we interviewed
representatives of other taxi companies and taxi industry stakeholders in Finland. For
anonymization reasons, we are not able to give more detailed information about which
interviewee represented which company. Our comparison of the features of App A, B,
C and Uber is mainly based on publicly available information. Our understanding of
the institutional environment in which App A-C were developed is based on the
interviews.
Table 1. List of interviewees (anonymized).
# Title Organization
1 Executive manager FTOF
2 Executive manager FTOF
3 Manager FTOF
4 Executive manager Technology provider for FTOF
5 Manager Southern Taxi
6 Executive manager/Developer Technology provider for Southern Taxi
7 Executive manager Northern Taxi
8 Executive manager Northern Taxi
9 Representative Uber Finland
10 Lobbyist A PR Agency
11 Representative Taxify
12 Executive manager A regional taxi service association
13 Executive manager A regional taxi service company
14 Executive manager Transportation service company
15 Executive manager A technology provider
16 Chief of licensing A public sector organization
17 Entrepreneur A technology provider
18 Expert A mobility association
58 K. Väyrynen et al.

--- PAGE 68 ---
Data Analysis. In the data analysis, we made use of the ﬁve aspects of the basic
process related to ride sourcing platforms [5] that are relevant to the customer. These
ﬁve aspects are (1) requesting a ride in real time via a smart-phone application,
(2) viewing the vehicle’s real-time location and estimated arrival time while waiting,
(3) automatic payment of the ride through the credit card registered with the app, –
(4) where pricing can respond dynamically to demand – and (5) rider and driver rating
each other after completion of the ride. In the ﬁrst step of the analysis, we analyzed
how these aspects were implemented in the features of the apps. In the second step, we
compared these to the traditional Finnish taxi ride sourcing process and found that the
Finnish taxi apps resemble in some aspects the traditional taxi hailing process in
Finland, and in some aspects Uber. In the third step, we used the concepts of coercive,
normative and mimetic pressures [13] as an analytical lens to help explain the simi-
larities and differences between these features in the three Finnish apps and the Uber
app concerning these ﬁve aspects. We focus our analysis on the time span from Uber’s
entry in the Finnish market in November 2014 to the present day situation (February
2018). We analyze how the institutional environment shaped these three Finnish
mobile apps.
3.2 Institutional Context: The Finnish Taxi Service Industry
The idea of taxi services is virtually uniform everywhere: driving a car for a fee to get a
customer from point A to point B. However, the Finnish taxi industry differs from the
taxi industry in many other countries. Taxi driver-owners are highly unionized as more
than 80% of Finnish taxi drivers belong to the FTOF. Due to the legal framework and
high level of unionization, the taxi service industry has provided a rather uniform
service everywhere in Finland, costing about the same price at all times. The Finnish
government sets the maximum prices for taxis yearly. Finnish taxis are perceived as
safe and reliable, even though perhaps costly. All taxi cars have a taximeter and taxi
drivers pay taxes loyally. Customers receive receipts for their taxi trips, and the
taximeter provides data on all trips. The Finnish taxation ofﬁce has legal rights to
access the taximeter data by request. Due to the aforementioned factors, gray economy
has not been a signiﬁcant factor in the Finnish taxi sector.
Uber entered the Finnish market in November 2014. In August 2017, Uber exited
the Finnish market because of being ruled as not conforming to the law in Finland.
Uber has announced its return to the Finnish market in July 2018, when the new
deregulative Act on Transport Services is enacted in Finland.1
1
https://www.lvm.ﬁ/act-on-transport-services (15.5.2018)
Mobile Applications as Carriers of Institutional Pressures 59

--- PAGE 69 ---
4 Findings
In the time between November 2014 and February 2018, a number of taxi hailing apps
have been introduced in the Finnish market. In this analysis, we focus on the three
major – when counting the number of taxis that can be reached with the app – Finnish
mobile applications for taxi hailing: App A, App B and App C (pseudonyms).
App B and App C are used by only one dispatch center each. App A, in contrast,
has been integrated with 30 Finnish taxi dispatch centers. These centers use ﬁve
different types of dispatch technologies, and as App A should look and feel the same
way to customers all over Finland the different technical requirements set certain limits
to the functionalities that have been implemented in App A so far.
When we refer to all of these Finnish taxi apps collectively, we refer to them as
“Taxi apps”, otherwise we refer to them as App A, B and C. Next, we will describe
how ride requesting, real-time location, paying, pricing and rating in these Taxi apps
differ from or are similar to the Uber app features, and how institutional pressures help
explain the resemblance or difference. Figure 1 summarizes our ﬁndings.
4.1 Requesting a Ride
Starting from the 1950s, customers have been able to call a taxi dispatch center to order
a taxi in Finland. Since the beginning of the 21st century, it was also possible to order a
taxi via a text message.
With all Finnish Taxi apps, the passenger uses the mobile application to order a
ride. The reason that this additional channel for ordering a car was provided to the
customers was related to progressing digitalization and customer expectations in
general:
“Everyone knew about [the new entrants]. Uber came to Helsinki in the end of 2014. Taxify was
another one that entered in 2014, in Oulu. Those brought the message that people wanted to
use [hailing apps]. And if one thinks about our operation model, that you have to call and don’t
even always know where to call, [having an app] was self-evident…” (Interviewee #3).”
Mimetic Pressure: As digital taxi hailing channels were successful and customers
were using them when such channels were available, also the Finnish taxi organizations
wanted to provide this to customers.
4.2 Real-Time Location
Already since 2003, the dispatch centers have had location information of the taxis.
While the taxi drivers have used GPS navigation for the last two decades, customers
did not have access to this information.
All Taxi apps as well as Uber allow for automatic determination of the customer’s
location. This automatic location determination is used as the assumed address the
customer wants to get the taxi to. Once a driver has accepted the requested ride, the
estimated arrival time of the taxi is being displayed in all of the Taxi apps as well as the
60 K. Väyrynen et al.

--- PAGE 70 ---
Uber app. The Uber app, App B and App C show the approaching taxi on a map to the
customer. App A provides this service only for the Helsinki area, not for other geo-
graphic areas in Finland.
Important here is that all app providers see the value of providing real-time location
information through the app. Lack of provision is mainly due to difﬁculties, costs, or
coordination challenges related to integration between different dispatch systems:
“A technical challenge is that … how to provide the user a good and consistent user experience
everywhere. Now, when you order a taxi with [App A] in Oulu, you don’t see the location
information, you only get the arrival estimate. But when you order in Helsinki, you see the car
in real time on your screen. This is because the different dispatch centers and other systems
have different capabilities. We don’t get the same data from different systems. All this scattered
data has to be provided consistently to the user.” (Interviewee #3)
Mimetic Pressure: Having real-time information about the taxi’s location on a map
visible for the customer is one of the core features of Uber and other ride hailing apps
(e.g., Estonia-based Taxify and US-based Lyft). App B and App C provide this feature,
and App A provides it for Helsinki. For App A, this feature is also envisioned to be
implemented for the rest of Finland, but technical challenges related to having to
integrate several different types of dispatch centers with App A slowed down the
implementation of this feature.
4.3 Paying
Since the beginning of taxi history in Finland, payment for the ride has been provided
directly to the driver at the end of the ride. Card payment has been possible in Finnish
taxis since 1980s.
Uber offers only automatic credit card payment through the application. It does not
allowacashpayment.Incontrast,customersusingaTaxiappalwayshavetheoptiontopay
for the ride in cash or by credit card directly to the driver in the taxi. Automatic credit card
payment is not available in App A and B. Also the dispatch centers using App A would
have liked to have this feature in App A. However, due to the technical restrictions
stemming from some of the types of dispatch technology used in Finland, this feature has
not yet been implemented. App C, in contrast, allows the customer to pay automatically
through the app by credit card. Uber was seen as a “role model” with this feature:
Uber showed one thing. They were the ﬁrst app where you did not have to pay separately. […]
Uber users were praising this. Of course, there were other apps around the world [with app-
based payments]. Uber did not invent it, but it succeeded to break through. […] It started this
hype.” (Interviewee #5)
The possibility to implement this feature was one of the reasons why Southern Taxi
decided to use their own app instead of App A. They wanted to have full control over
the development offeatures in a situation of rising competition starting from July 2018.
Mobile Applications as Carriers of Institutional Pressures 61

--- PAGE 71 ---
Table 2. Comparison of traditional taxi industry, App A, App B, App C and Uber across the
ﬁve aspects of the taxi hailing process
Requesting Viewing real-
time location
on a map
Automatic
credit card
payment
Surge pricing Rating
Traditional
taxi industry
Phone call,
text
message,
hailing taxi
down on
street
No
information
about real-
time location
of ordered
taxi available
to customer.
Not
available.
Payment
usually to the
driver either
in cash or via
credit card in
the taxi.
No. Maximum
price for taxi
rides based on
measurement of
time and/or
distance is yearly
set by Finnish
government.
Feedback given
to driver directly
or to “taxi
inspectors” who
help solve
conflicts
between
customer and
driver.
App A Mobile
app
Available
only in
Helsinki.
In the rest of
Finland, the
app displayed
the estimated
time of taxi
arrival only.
Not
available.
Payment to
the driver
either in cash
or via credit
card in the
taxi.
No. Pricing pre-
deﬁned in
adherence to
pricing rules set
by Finnish
government.
Customers can
rate drivers.
Drivers cannot
rate customers.
App B Mobile
app
Available Not
available.
Payment to
the driver
either in cash
or via credit
card in the
taxi.
No. Pricing pre-
deﬁned in
adherence to
pricing rules set
by Finnish
government.
Customers can
rate drivers.
Drivers cannot
rate customers.
App C Mobile
app
Available Available No. Pricing pre-
deﬁned in
adherence to
pricing rules set
by Finnish
government.
Customers can
rate drivers.
Drivers cannot
rate customers.
Uber Mobile
app
Available Available Surge pricing in
use.
Customers can
rate drivers, and
drivers can rate
customers.
Institutional
pressure
type
Mimetic Coercive Mimetic Mimetic Mimetic;
normative
62 K. Väyrynen et al.

--- PAGE 72 ---
Mimetic Pressure: App C was launched in preparation for the ﬁerce competition that
is being expected to arise especially in the Helsinki area after the de-regulation of the
taxi industry through the new Act on Transport Services. Southern Taxi decided to give
up using App A in order to be able to fully make use of the technical abilities and data
provided by the dispatch software used in its own dispatch center. Having the
opportunity to automatically pay via credit card is one of the core features of Uber and
other ride hailing apps (e.g., Estonia-based Taxify and US-based Lyft). Thus, con-
cerning App C, the implementation of this feature can be seen to result from mimetic
pressure. In addition, this feature is also wished for and intended for implementation in
future in App A, but just as is the case with real-time location information, the technical
challenges stemming from having to integrate several different taxi dispatch tech-
nologies with App A slowed down the implementation of this feature in App A.
4.4 Pricing
Throughout the history of Finnish taxi, the government of Finland has regulated taxi
pricing. Maximum prices for traditional taxi rides are decided upon yearly by the
Finnish government. For example, it is deﬁned that taxi companies can bill a fee of
around 7 euros if a customer pre-orders a taxi more than 30 min before the ride.
Currently, all taxis in Finland have to have a measurement device – a taximeter – that
calculates the price based on the regulation set by the government. Prices for taxi rides
ordered with a Finnish Taxi app always correspond to the prices set by the government.
Pricing in Uber, on the other hand, can respond dynamically to demand for and
supply of rides. When demand exceeds supply, the service switches to surge pricing
mode, where rides can be very costly.
Coercive Pressure: As taxi ride pricing is regulated by the Finnish government, none
of the Finnish Taxi apps incorporates surge pricing, which is an essential part of Uber’s
business model and the Uber app. The coercive pressure exercised by the government
helps explain on the one hand why pricing is implemented in the same way in all
Finnish apps, and on the other hand why Finnish apps do not resemble Uber in regard
to pricing.
4.5 Rating
Ever since unionization started occurring in 1950s [18], there has been an expectation
that Finnish taxi services provide a standardized level of service. This has meant that
taxi drivers follow the occupational code of quality service, and by consequence, there
is no need to establish a rating system. While customers regularly give feedback about
the service, rating has not been part of the profession.
All Taxi apps allow the customer to rate the taxi driver, but not the other way
round. Uber, on the other hand, enables a two-way evaluation: drivers evaluate cus-
tomers, and customers evaluate drivers.
Mobile Applications as Carriers of Institutional Pressures 63

--- PAGE 73 ---
In App A it seems that this driver-customer rating is deliberately left out, as the
answer to the question “Does the taxi driver give feedback about the customer?” in the
FAQ section on the website of App A states:
“In [App A], drivers do not evaluate customers. The Finnish taxi serves all of its customers with
equally high quality”.
In addition, several interviewees pointed to the requirement of taxi drivers to be
very socially skilled to be able to offer high-quality service to all kinds of customers,
also in difﬁcult situations (e.g., picking up someone from the hospital who was just
diagnosed with cancer). The general tenor is that taxi drivers are professionals who are
skilled in dealing with different types of customers:
“I don’t see it important to rate customers. (…) In the end, we need to respect every customer.
We need to be humble. I do understand the Uber rating system, that if a customer is difﬁcult,
then the customer pays a price for that. But we will not do that. We need to have enough
workmanship and flexibility to serve all kinds of customers.” (Interviewee #7)
Regarding the rating features, both mimetic and normative pressure help explain
similarities and differences between Finnish Taxi apps and Uber.
Mimetic Pressure: The possibility of customers rating service providers and the other
way around has become a common feature in apps and the sharing economy. Taxify,
Uber and AirBnB make use of this feature, and in the case of customers being able to
rate drivers, it seems that mimetic pressure is at play.
Normative Pressure: Where Uber enforces that drivers rate their customer, this feature
is (deliberately) left out from Finnish Taxi apps. It seems that the decision to exclude
the driver-customer rating is a result of certain standards the taxi associations have set
for the taxi driver occupation and represents an example of how normative pressure
affects taxi app features.
4.6 Summary
Figure 1 summarizes our ﬁndings. We show for each feature whether Finnish Taxi
apps resemble the traditional Finnish taxi hailing process (i.e., the grey bar crosses the
line between “Traditional” and “Finnish Taxi apps”) or Uber (i.e., the grey bar crosses
the line between “Finnish Taxi apps” and “Uber”). For two features – real-time location
information and paying – some apps resemble the traditional taxi hailing process,
whereas other apps resemble Uber. Even though for App A the wish exists to provide
real-time location information and automatic credit card payment, mostly technical
challenges and limitations are reasons for why the app differs from Uber. Rating is
separated into whether customers can rate drivers (Customer –> Driver) and whether
drivers can rate customers (Driver -> Customer).
64 K. Väyrynen et al.

--- PAGE 74 ---
5 Discussion
We set out to answer how institutional pressures are implicated in the feature func-
tionalities of Finnish taxi hailing apps. With our analysis in the previous section, we
demonstrated how different types of institutional pressures help explain similarities and
differences between the Finnish mobile apps on the one hand, and features of the
mobile app provided by the disruptive model of Uber (cf. [20, 21]) on the other hand.
Our main contribution lies in illustrating how mobile applications as IT artefacts are
carriers of institutional pressures that materialize in the features of the IT artifact.
Previous research has already addressed the encodement of institutional logics into
IT systems [4] and argued for applying institutional theory as a historical understanding
of how certain IT artefacts come about over time [9]. With this study, we contribute to
research on institutionalization and IT by illustrating how features of mobile applica-
tions are affected by three types of institutional pressures: mimetic, coercive and
normative. The Uber app has been praised by customers and competitors alike. We
found that mimetic pressures are reflected in certain features of Finnish mobile apps
(e.g., real-time location information and payment), most clearly in App C which pre-
pares for the increased competition that is expected to arise after the de-regulation of
the Finnish taxi industry in July 2018. We found that the Finnish government’s
coercive pressure in form of taxi price regulation is reflected in the pricing feature of
Finnish Taxi apps. Coercive pressures apply to all organizations in a speciﬁc ﬁeld [13]
– in this case the Finnish taxi industry. This helps explain why all Finnish apps differ
from Uber regarding pricing. We also found that normative pressures in form of certain
standards regarding the taxi driver profession and upheld by the FTOF and taxi
organizations are reflected in not allowing drivers to rate their customers in Finnish
Fig. 1. Coercive, normative, and mimetic pressures in the features of Finnish taxi hailing apps
Mobile Applications as Carriers of Institutional Pressures 65

--- PAGE 75 ---
Taxi apps. Our ﬁndings are supported by Mignerat and Rivard [15]. They found that in
IT innovation processes, coercive pressures are exercised, amongst others, by gov-
ernments, and mimetic pressures, for example, by competitors (which Uber can be seen
to represent).
We also contribute to research on the relationship between institutional environ-
ment and IT artefacts by taking a somewhat different approach than extant research.
Much of previous research on institutional theory and IS focused on the effects of the
institutional environment on IT adoption and use [22–24], or the institutional effects in
IT innovation and interaction between IT and institutions [15]. We, in contrast, focused
on the effect of institutional pressures on mobile app features. Just as Rajão and Hayes
[9] found that the design of IT artefacts tends to reflect the currently dominant con-
ceptions of control, we found that the design of mobile apps (which are IT artefacts)
reflects different institutional pressures.
Speciﬁcally in the Finnish taxi industry, there is a long history of the profession of
taxi drivers, and taxi services are generally of a high standard. The Finnish taxi industry
thus differs greatly from, e.g., the North American taxi services, which have been
described as substandard [5].
With our research, we applied principles of the institutional theory from the
organizational level to the mobile app feature level. Institutional theory has been
applied to explain why organizations start to resemble each other [13]. We showed that
the concept of institutional pressures can explain both similarities and differences
between features of IT artifacts. Similarly to how institutions are “carriers of histories”
[25], IT artifacts such as mobile applications are carriers of institutional pressures.
6 Conclusion
In this paper, we applied the three types of institutional pressures (normative, mimetic,
coercive) as an analytical lens to help explain why three Finnish taxi hailing apps on
the one hand resembled – and on the other hand differ from – the Uber app. We focused
on ﬁve app features: (1) ride requesting, (2) pricing, (3) providing real-time location
information, (4) paying, and (5) rating.
We found that (1) coercive pressures exercised from the Finnish government help
explain why pricing in all three Finnish apps resembles each other whereas it differs
from Uber, (2) normative pressures explain why none of the Finnish apps allows
drivers to rate customers, and (3) that mimetic pressures help explain resemblances
between Finnish apps and Uber regarding ride requesting, real-time location infor-
mation, and customers rating drivers.
We contribute to the IT and institutionalization research stream by illustrating how
mobile applications as IT artefacts can be seen as carriers of institutional pressures that
materialize in the features they provide.
This study also has several limitations. First, our analysis focuses on Finland only.
Second, we focus on a customer and service-perspective. Thus, we did not focus on
supply-side issues or (de-)regulation in this paper (e.g., [4, 26]).
Our study opens up avenues for future research. More research is needed to support
or corroborate our ﬁndings, e.g., by conducting a similar analysis in another industry
66 K. Väyrynen et al.

--- PAGE 76 ---
where a “disruptor” entered a highly regulated market with a mobile app. From the
Finnish perspective, the de-regulation of the taxi market in July 2018 can be seen as a
case of re-creation of an institution [27]. This provides interesting research opportu-
nities: will future Finnish taxi hailing apps show more signs of mimetic pressure, with
Finnish taxi apps starting to resemble more and more Uber-type applications (e.g., by
incorporating surge pricing)? Will we still see signs of normative pressures where taxi
apps contain values currently held by the taxi driver profession overall? We call for
further empirical research on and theorization of changes in the taxi industry over
longer time spans (e.g., [9]), making use of historical approaches and longitudinal data.
References
1. Stone, B.: The Upstarts: How Uber, Airbnb and the Killer Companies of the New Silicon
Valley are Changing the World. Bantam Press, London (2017)
2. McGregor, M., Brown, B., Glöss, M.: Disrupting the cab: Uber, ridesharing and the taxi
industry. J. Peer Prod. 6 (2015)
3. Hacker, P.: UberPop, UberBlack, and the regulation of digital platforms after the Asociación
Professional Elite Taxi judgment of the CJEU. Eur. Rev. Contract Law 14, 80–96 (2018)
4. Tucker, E.: Uber and the unmaking and remaking of taxi capitalisms: technology, law and
resistance in historical perspective. In: McKee, D., Makela, F., Scassa, T. (eds.) Law and the
“Sharing Economy”: Regulating Online Market Platforms. University of Ottawa Press,
Ottawa (2018)
5. Cramer, J., Krueger, A.B.: Disruptive change in the taxi business: the case of Uber. Am.
Econ. Rev. 106, 177–182 (2016)
6. Um, S., Yoo, Y., Berente, N., Lyytinen, K.: Digital artifacts as institutional attractors: a
systems biology perspective on change in organizational routines. In: Bhattacherjee, A.,
Fitzgerald, B. (eds.) Shaping the Future of ICT Research. Methods and Approaches. IFIP
Advances in Information and Communication Technology, vol. 389, pp. 195–209. Springer,
Heidelberg (2012). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-35142-6_13
7. Boxenbaum, E., Jonsson, S.: Isomorphism, diffusion and decoupling: concept evolution and
theoretical challenges. In: Greenwood, R., Oliver, C., Lawrence, T.B., Meyer, R.E. (eds.)
The SAGE Handbook of Organizational Institutionalism, pp. 78–98. Sage, London (2008)
8. Gosain, S.: Enterprise information systems as objects and carriers of institutional forces: the
new iron cage? J. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 5, 6 (2004)
9. Rajão, R., Hayes, N.: Conceptions of control and IT artefacts: an institutional account of the
Amazon rainforest monitoring system. J. Inf. Technol. 24, 320–331 (2009)
10. Orlikowski, W.J., Iacono, C.S.: Research commentary: desperately seeking the “IT” in IT
research—a call to theorizing the IT artifact. Inf. Syst. Res. 12, 121–134 (2001)
11. Bekken, J.-T.: Experiences with (De-) Regulation in the European Taxi Industry.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) (2007)
12. Scott, W.R.: Institutions and Organization: Ideas, Interests, and Identities. Sage, Thousand
Oaks (2014)
13. DiMaggio, P., Powell, W.W.: The iron cage revisited: collective rationality and institutional
isomorphism in organizational ﬁelds. Am. Sociol. Rev. 48, 147–160 (1983)
14. Strang, D., Soule, S.A.: Diffusion in organizations and social movements: from hybrid corn
to poison pills. Annu. Rev. Sociol. 24, 265–290 (1998)
Mobile Applications as Carriers of Institutional Pressures 67

--- PAGE 77 ---
15. Mignerat, M., Rivard, S.: Positioning the institutional perspective in information systems
research. J. Inf. Technol. 24, 369–391 (2009)
16. Hasselbladh, H., Kallinikos, J.: The project of rationalization: a critique and reappraisal of
neo-institutionalism in organization studies. Organ. Stud. 21, 697–720 (2000)
17. Yin, R.K.: Case Study Research: Design and Methods. Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks,
California (2009)
18. Mauranen, T.: Taksi! Matka suomalaisen taksin historiaan. Suomen taksiliitto ry, Forssa
(1995)
19. Hodges, G.R.G.: Taxi! A Social History of the New York City Cabdriver. The Johns
Hopkins University Press, Baltimore (2007)
20. Rayle, L., Dai, D., Chan, N., Cervero, R., Shaheen, S.: Just a better taxi? A survey-based
comparison of taxis, transit, and ridesourcing services in San Francisco. Transp. Policy 45,
168–178 (2016)
21. Crittenden, A.B., Crittenden, V.L., Crittenden, W.F.: Industry transformation via channel
disruption. J. Market. Channels 24, 13–26 (2017)
22. Zorn, T.E., Flanagin, A.J., Shoham, M.D.: Institutional and noninstitutional influences on
information and communication technology adoption and use among nonproﬁt organiza-
tions. Hum. Commun. Res. 37, 1–33 (2011)
23. Magnier-Watanabe, R.: An institutional perspective of mobile payment adoption: the case of
Japan. In: 47th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), pp. 1043–
1052 (2014)
24. Lai, K.-H., Wong, C.W.Y., Cheng, T.C.E.: Institutional isomorphism and the adoption of
information technology for supply chain management. Comput. Ind. 57, 93–98 (2006)
25. David, P.A.: Why are institutions the ‘carriers of history’?: Path dependence and the
evolution of conventions, organizations and institutions. Struct. Change Econ. Dynam. 5,
205–220 (1994)
26. Frizell, S.: A Historical Argument Against Uber: Taxi Regulations Are There for a Reason.
Time.com N.PAG (2014)
27. Lawrence, T.B., Suddaby, R., Leca, B. (eds.): Institutional Work: Actors and Agency in
Institutional Studies of Organizations. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2009)
68 K. Väyrynen et al.

--- PAGE 78 ---
Author Index
Beretta, Michela 26
Berg, Martin 1
Bergquist, Magnus 1
Clausen, Nikolaj Dybdal 41
Fors, Vaike 1
Kuonanoja, Liisa 14
Lanamäki, Arto 55
Lindgren, Thomas 1
Lindman, Juho 55
Oinas-Kukkonen, Harri 14
Pink, Sarah 1
Ruiz, Emilie 26
Tambo, Torben 41
Väyrynen, Karin 55