--- PAGE 1 ---
Communications of the Association for Information Systems Communications of the Association for Information Systems 
Volume 28 Paper 
3-2011 
How Does Enterprise Architecture Add Value to Organisations? How Does Enterprise Architecture Add Value to Organisations? 
Toomas Tamm 
Department of Information Systems, The University of Melbourne, Australia, 
toomas.tamm@deakin.edu.au 
Peter B. Seddon 
Department of Information Systems, The University of Melbourne, Australia 
Graeme Shanks 
Department of Information Systems, The University of Melbourne, Australia 
Peter Reynolds 
Center for Information Systems Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA 
Follow this and additional works at: https://aisel.aisnet.org/cais 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Tamm, T., Seddon, P. B., Shanks, G., & Reynolds, P. (2011). How Does Enterprise Architecture Add Value to 
Organisations?. Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 28, pp-pp. https://doi.org/
10.17705/1CAIS.02810 
This material is brought to you by the AIS Journals at AIS Electronic Library (AISeL). It has been accepted for 
inclusion in Communications of the Association for Information Systems by an authorized administrator of AIS 
Electronic Library (AISeL). For more information, please contact elibrary@aisnet.org. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
 
 
Volume 28 Article 10 
How Does Enterprise Architecture Add Value to Organisations? 
Toomas Tamm 
Department of Information Systems, The University of Melbourne, Australia 
t.tamm@pgrad.unimelb.edu.au 
 
Peter B. Seddon 
Department of Information Systems, The University of Melbourne, Australia 
 
Graeme Shanks 
Department of Information Systems, The University of Melbourne, Australia 
 
Peter Reynolds 
Center for Information Systems Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA 
 
Enterprise architecture (EA) is the definition and representation of a high -level view of an enterprise‘s business 
processes and IT systems, their interrelationships, and the extent to which these processes and systems are shared 
by different parts of t he enterprise. EA aims to define a suitable operating platform to support an organisation‘s 
future goals and the roadmap for moving towards this vision. Despite significant practitioner interest in the domain, 
understanding the value of EA remains a challe nge. Although many studies make EA benefit claims, the 
explanations of why and how EA leads to these benefits are fragmented, incomplete, and not grounded in theory. 
This article aims to address this knowledge gap by focusing on the question: How does EA l ead to organisational 
benefits? Through a careful review of EA literature, the paper consolidates the fragmented knowledge on EA 
benefits and presents the EA Benefits Model (EABM). The EABM proposes that EA leads to organisational benefits 
through its impa ct on four benefit enablers: Organisational Alignment, Information Availability, Resource Portfolio 
Optimisation, and Resource Complementarity. The article concludes with a discussion of a number of potential 
avenues for future research, which could build on the findings of this study. 
 
Keywords: enterprise architecture, IT architecture, IT planning, strategic planning, IT infrastructure, performance 
 
Volume 28, Article 10, pp. 141-168, March 2011 
The manuscript was received 11/9/2009 and was with the authors 6 months for 1 revision. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
 
 
How Does Enterprise Architecture Add Value to Organisations? 
How Does Enterprise Architecture Add Value to Organisations? 
142 
Volume 28 Article 10 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Enterprise architecture (EA) is the definition and representation of a high -level view of an enterprise‘s business 
processes and IT systems, their interrelationships, and the  extent to which these processes and systems are shared 
by different parts of the enterprise. The primary goal of EA is to define the desirable future state of the organisation‘s 
business processes and IT systems (often referred to as the ―to -be‖ or target architecture) and to provide a roadmap 
for achieving this target from the current state (―as -is‖ or baseline architecture) [Zachman, n.d.]. Two key 
components of EA are the planning process (―definition‖), and the direct and tangible outputs of that plann ing 
process (―representation‖), i.e., EA documentation (e.g., architecture diagrams, roadmaps, and other artefacts). 
As an organisational role, EA is positioned between IT and business strategy formulation on the one hand, and 
project-focused solution arch itecting (sometimes called system architecting ) on the other. The task of EA is to 
translate the broader principles, capabilities, and goals defined in the strategies into systems and processes that 
enable the enterprise to realise these goals. In this reg ard, EA is a step towards enacting strategy. In turn, EA 
guides solution architectures that are defined prior to specific development or implementation projects and which 
provide the finer specifications necessary for operationalising those systems. The ai m of EA is to guide the building 
of the organisation‘s operating platform, i.e. , the IT systems and digitised business processes that support or 
automate an organisation‘s core capabilities [Ross et al., 2006]. This mediating role means that EA is similar to 
strategy, in that it aims to provide a long -term and organisation -wide vision of business processes and IT systems, 
but it describes this vision in significantly greater detail. 
Since the concept of EA first appeared in academic literature around the ea rly 1990s [Zachman, 1987; Richardson 
et al., 1990] ,1 it has generated substantial practitioner interest. A recent survey by Infosys claims that around 90  
percent of the respondent organisations have an EA function [Obitz and Babu K, 2009], various professi onal 
organisations (e.g. CAEAP, GEAO, IFEAD, The Open Group, ZIFA, etc.) and government EA initiatives (e.g. , FEAF, 
DoDAF, GEA, MoDAF, etc.) have been established, and most large global management consulting firms offer EA -
related services.2 All of this su ggests that organisations around the world spend a considerable amount of time and 
effort on EA. 
At the same time, however, academic activity in the domain has remained comparatively modest. Much of the 
research and highest-cited works in the field come fr om the practitioner community, not academe. In fact, only three 
articles on EA have been published in the Senior Scholars‘ six top IS journals 3—one in the European Journal of 
Information Systems [Peristeras and Tarabanis, 2000], one in the Journal of Management Information Systems [Boh 
and Yellin, 2006], and one in MIS Quarterly [Richardson et al., 1990]. Additionally, only two of the top ten highest -
cited works on EA 4 have been published in academic journals or conferences. Existing studies tend to focus o n the 
applied aspects of EA, in particular how to plan and represent it. At the same time , more fundamental questions —
Why is EA useful? How do organisations benefit from EA? —have been somewhat overlooked. Although there are 
numerous benefit claims in the l iterature, these are often not explained nor supported by empirical evidence. 
Organisations also struggle to justify their EA investments [Aziz and Obitz, 2007; Obitz and Babu K, 2009], which 
again points to a lack of a clear understanding of EA benefits. 
The significant practitioner and organisational interest in EA on the one hand, and the struggle to demonstrate value 
on the other, raise interesting questions about the value proposition of EA. What are the potential benefits of EA? 
What are the mechanism s through which EA leads to these benefits? What are the theoretical underpinnings, and 
empirical evidence, that support these expectations? It is these and similar questions that provided the motivation for 
this study. The question the study seeks to answer is: How does EA lead to organisational benefits? 
                                                      
1 Zachman‘s [1987] article on ―information systems architecture‖ is often regarded as the seminal work on EA. However, the term  ―enterprise 
architecture‖ (introduced to emphasise the necessity for a more business-oriented planning approac h) appears to have been used in the 
academic literature for the first time by Richardson et al. [1990]. 
2 Examples include Accenture, BCG, Capgemini, Deloitte, Ernst & Young, Fujitsu, Gartner, IBM, and KPMG. 
3 The statement by the AIS Senior Scholars Forum  suggests that the top IS journals are European Journal of Information Systems, Information 
Systems Journal, Information Systems Research, Journal of Association for Information Systems, Journal of MIS, and MIS Quarterly [AIS, n.d.]. 
4 Based on Google Scholar citation count as of September 17, 2008. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
 
 
Volume 28 Article 10 143 
To address this question, the study synthesises the existing EA literature and draws on broader IS and management 
theories to propose a synthesis of the EA benefit claims and an improved theoretical expla nation of the underlying 
mechanisms. The paper begins with a description of the research method, followed by a discussion of the current 
state of knowledge on EA benefits. Drawing on the findings of the literature review, the paper proposes the 
Enterprise Architecture Benefits Model (EABM). It is hypothesised in the EABM that EA leads to organisational 
benefits through its impact on four key benefit enablers: Organisational Alignment, Information Availability, Resource 
Portfolio Optimisation, and Resource C omplementarity. The paper concludes with recommendations for further 
research that could build on the EABM and other findings of this study. 
II. RESEARCH APPROACH 
To develop an overview of the existing literature on EA and its benefits, two search approach es were employed. 
First, a systematic review approach was used to look for publications on EA benefits, as well as EA in general. 
Average citation count per year was used as a proxy measure to identify highly cited and , therefore, probable core 
publications. However, filtering based on citation count alone might have excluded some useful and highly relevant 
works. Therefore, an exploratory approach was used in parallel to the systematic review to find additional insightful 
publications on the questions of i nterest. This proved useful, as it led to the identification of some studies that would 
otherwise have been overlooked (e.g. , some very recent academic studies [Kettinger et al., 2010; Salmans and 
Kappelman, 2010], insightful practice -oriented EA surveys [ Aziz and Obitz, 2007; Obitz and Babu K, 2009], etc.). 
The two review approaches, as well as the synthesis process followed to derive the EABM, are described below.  
Systematic Review 
The purpose of the systematic review was to ensure comprehensive coverage of the highly influential works in the 
EA space, based on a relatively objective selection method to reduce potential biases, e.g. , the authors‘ familiarity 
with a subset of literature or personal preferences. This selection method also enabled some conclu sions on the 
primary research interests in the field to be made. 
To identify the relevant literature, two online databases were used to search for the term ―enterprise architecture‖ —
Scopus for its good coverage of academic journals, and Google Scholar for its extensive coverage of both journals 
and books. The search yielded a total of 5,079 results (4,639 from Google Scholar and 440 from Scopus). After 
merging and removing of duplicates, the sample (4,392) remained too extensive for an in -depth analysis. It was also 
found to contain a large number of entries with low (or no) relevance. Therefore, only the more influential works with 
EA as a key focus (in the case of books, the key focus in at least one chapter) were chosen for further analysis.  
In order to d etermine the final set of publications for analysis, Google Scholar‘s citation count was used as a proxy 
measure of relative importance of the works. The threshold for inclusion in the review was set to a minimum of 
twenty-five citations in total, or an average of five citations per year. This limited the sample to 282 articles. Although 
representing about 6.4  percent of the total number of articles, the total citation count for the selected articles forms 
72 percent of that of the entire result pool. 
The 282 publications were then filtered for relevance by analysing the abstracts and skimming the content, resulting 
in fifty-three relevant (i.e. , EA-focused) publications. The full texts of fifty of these could be obtained, and they form 
the basis for the sys tematic review. The first author then carefully examined all the fifty publications , searching for 
discussion of EA benefits. As part of the analysis, the key themes of each publication were also identified to develop 
a better understanding of the primary areas of interest in EA research, and to determine how many existing 
publications have had a significant focus on EA benefits. These fifty studies are listed in Appendix 1, along with a 
high-level analysis of the key topics discussed in each article. 
For each publication, all EA benefit claims were summarised in a spreadsheet. The strength of evidence for each 
benefit claim was also recorded as belonging to one of three categories: empirical evidence, references to prior 
studies, or no evidence provided. In  all, this resulted in 213 recorded benefit claims, many of which were identical or 
very close in meaning. After three cycles of comparing the different claims to identify similarities, overlaps, and 
groupings, a total of twelve unique EA benefits were ide ntified. (These twelve EA benefits are listed shortly in the 
first row of Table 2.) 
Following the analysis of individual benefit claims, the focus turned to the primary question of interest in the study: 
How does EA lead to these benefits? Despite the numerous benefit claims (forty one of the fifty studies mentioned at 
least some EA benefits), the explanations were in most cases missing. Among the fifty studies reviewed, only five 

--- PAGE 5 ---
 
 
144 
Volume 28 Article 10 
[Bernard, 2005; Richardson et al., 1990; Ross et al ., 2006; Ross and Westerman, 2004; Spewak and Hill, 1992] 
provided more than a passing discussion of these details.5 
A challenge that we faced in conducting this literature review was that it was difficult to get a concise overview of the 
explanations, as they were not always presented as a coherent whole in the publications. Instead, the supporting 
explanations often emerged piecemeal throughout the publication. In an attempt to assist with understanding and 
comparison, diagrams of the claims made in each of the five studies above were prepared. These diagrams are 
included in Appendix 2 in the hope that they may provide useful summaries and reference for future studies.  
Exploratory Review 
The sole use of the systematic approach described above has two poten tial weaknesses. First, it can lead to the 
exclusion of some highly relevant publications with modest citation counts. Second, some works on what is defined 
here as enterprise architecture refer to it with a different name. Therefore, an exploratory approa ch was used in 
parallel to identify highly relevant publications that would otherwise have been missed.  
The primary criterion for including additional publications as part of the exploratory review was that they needed to 
contribute insights or empirical e vidence beyond that of publications identified through the systematic review. As the 
name suggests, the exploratory review did not follow a strictly systematic approach. The search approach primarily 
involved trying various keywords using online search too ls such as Google and following up references cited by the 
publications identified during the systematic review. The following terms were considered potentially relevant and 
were treated as candidates for inclusion: IS/IT architecture, enterprise service -oriented architecture (enterprise 
SOA), IS/IT platform, business architecture, strategic architecture, strategic capabilities architecture, business 
platform, architecture framework, and enterprise integration architecture. Also, publications using the term  
―enterprise architecture‖ which did not conform to the minimum citation count threshold for the systematic review, but 
which were found to be highly relevant to the EA benefits question, were included as part of the exploratory 
approach. In all, the explo ratory review added seventeen further publications to the literature pool that informed this 
study, bringing the total number of reviewed publications to sixty-seven. 
Synthesis and Theory Development 
Although the existing explanations about how EA leads to  organisational benefits, when provided, appeared logical 
and plausible, a general lack of empirical evidence and theoretical justification was of concern. Also, as can be seen 
in the diagrams in Appendix 2, it was evident that the proposed benefits were o ften interrelated or overlapping. 
Finally, some studies appeared to focus on the benefits derived directly from EA planning [e.g., Bernard 2005 ], 
whereas others focused on the benefits from the enactment of the plans [e.g., Ross et al., 2006]. 
The focus of  the analysis therefore turned to integrating these findings. We revisited both (1) the list of EA benefit 
claims and (2) the studies that proposed explanations about the relationships between the different factors (primarily 
those presented in Appendix 2) . The claimed resultant organisational benefits (e.g. , cost reduction, strategic agility, 
operational excellence) were too distant from EA to clearly explain how these benefits can be achieved. Therefore, 
we focused on identifying the underlying benefit enablers—factors which could be clearly seen as EA outcomes, and 
that in turn are known to have the potential to deliver organisational benefits.  
In order to identify these benefit enablers, the first author took the list of benefit claims and themes identif ied earlier 
as part of the systematic and exploratory literature review and examined and regrouped the factors until a 
classification was reached where all the major EA benefit claims could be explained by one, or a combination, of the 
identified benefit e nablers. Also, the proposed EA outcomes and mechanisms through which they lead to 
organisational benefits were required to map back to the identified benefit enablers.  
The identification of the factors passed through four major iterations and numerous smal ler refinements. Diagrams 
and tables were used in the course of the analysis to assist with the factor groupings and mappings. An example of 
a table compiled to assist with the analysis is presented below ( Table 1). The first colu mn shows the benefit 
enablers. The initial set of benefit enablers was derived based on a preliminary analysis of the benefit claims and 
explanations, and then refined in subsequent iterations. The next step was to determine whether the other related 
concepts (second column) as well as the outcomes and benefits (third column) could be mapped to the identified 
benefit enablers. During the initial iterations, it was often found that gaps existed, which in turn led to revisions of the 
list of benefit enablers (e.g., a factor from the second column became a candidate benefit enabler).  
                                                      
5 As shown in Appendix 1, nine studies had EA benefits among the primary themes. However, two of these studies only focused on a particular 
aspect of EA —Perks and Beveridge [2003] discuss technical architecture and Kosanke et al. [1999] concentrate on integration and modelling. 
Another two studies listed benefits, but did not describe the ―how‖ and ―why.‖ 

--- PAGE 6 ---
 
 
Volume 28 Article 10 145 
Once a more stable classification was reached, two other co -authors discussed and challenged the benefit enablers 
in order to identify potential gaps or overlaps. The aim was to en sure that the identified factors were both collectively 
exhaustive and mutually exclusive, i.e. , that they collectively explained all the major benefit claims and that there 
were no significant overlaps between the benefit enablers. A degree of overlap bet ween underlying drivers or 
outcomes was considered to be acceptable if the related explanation of how a particular organisational benefit may 
emerge was substantially different. For example, increased customer intimacy [Ross et al., 2006] can be explained 
by (1) knowing the customer better due to the increase in information availability, and (2) by sharing a common 
culture and approach of interacting with the customers achieved through increased organisational alignment. 
Although the high-level outcome may appear similar, the pathways and their specific influence is different. 
Table 1: Benefit Claim Mappings 
Benefit Enabler Related Concepts Related Outcomes and Benefits 
Organisational 
Alignment 
Integrated view of the enterprise; 
common understanding; improved 
communication [Bernard, 2005] 
Bridge between the business and 
technical domains; common goals and 
performance measures [Pereira and 
Sousa, 2004] 
Business-IT alignment [Ross et al., 2006] 
The link between organizational and IS 
strategies is made stronger [Segars and 
Grover, 1996] 
Reduced rework [Bernard, 2005] 
Identify and resolve conflicts; consensus 
[Richardson et al., 1990] 
Encourage cooperation rather than conflict 
[Pereira and Sousa, 2004] 
More customer intimacy [Ross et al., 2006] 
Information 
Availability 
Standardised and shared reference 
information; better access to information; 
improved understanding of 
resources/processes [Bernard, 2005] 
Better access to customer data; shared 
data; more manageable IT environment, 
improved risk management; higher 
system reliability [Ross et al., 2006] 
Common data; more accurate, accessible 
and timely data [Spewak and Hill, 1992] 
Single sources of data; improve 
information quality [Venkatesh et al., 
2007] 
Better and faster decisions [Bernard, 2005] 
Improved information flow [Richardson et al., 
1990] 
More customer intimacy [Ross et al., 2006] 
Prioritization of systems; business 
reengineering [Segars and Grover, 1996] 
Improved decision-making [Spewak and Hill, 
1992] 
Resource 
Portfolio 
Optimisation 
Discovery and elimination of redundancy 
[Pereira and Sousa, 2004] 
Homogeneous architecture [Richardson 
et al., 1990] 
Standardisation; reduction of 
technologies [Ross et al., 2006] 
Fewer costly and complex interfaces; 
common code [Spewak and Hill, 1992] 
Standardizing IT applications and 
business processes [Venkatesh et al., 
2007] 
Reduced resource duplication, fewer people in 
a process; reduced costs [Bernard, 2005] 
Reduced support costs, software portability 
[Richardson et al., 1990] 
Reduced skill variation; simplified 
troubleshooting; lower IT costs; focus on core 
competencies through selective outsourcing 
[Ross and Westerman, 2004] 
Higher ROI from IT; better operational 
excellence [Ross et al., 2006] 
Economies of scale [Venkatesh et al., 2007] 
Resource 
Complementarity 
Improved resource integration [Bernard, 
2005] 
Componentisation; enhanced 
interoperability [Ross et al., 2006] 
Integrated systems [Segars and Grover, 
1996] 
Improved performance [Bernard, 2005] 
Re-use of technology and expertise [Ross and 
Westerman, 2004] 
Increased IT responsiveness; strategic agility 
[Ross et al., 2006] 
The study also sought to provide a theoretical explanation for the identified concepts and relationships. Therefore, 
an additional literature search was performed to ident ify key publications in IS and management theory that related 
to the emerging benefit enablers. This led to further refinement of the concepts, and aided in the interpretation of 
some benefit claims that had not been fully explained in EA literature. The r esult of this process is the Enterprise 
Architecture Benefits Model (EABM), described in-depth in Section IV below. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
 
 
146 
Volume 28 Article 10 
III. LITERATURE REVIEW 
As noted above, the extant literature on EA benefits is generally characterised by numerous benefit claims with littl e 
supportive explanation and evidence. Table 2 shows a selection of these benefit claims from the literature review, 
and compares it with a few influential practitioner -oriented sources. Of the fifty studies analysed as part of th e 
systematic literature review, forty -one mentioned at least some EA benefits. It should be noted, however, that only 
six of these studies provided empirical evidence (often limited) to support the benefit claims. Some of the most 
commonly cited benefits ( listed in the first row of Table 2) were: (1) increased responsiveness and guidance to 
change, (2) improved decision -making, (3) improved communication and collaboration, (4) reduced costs, and (5) 
business-IT alignment. 
Table 2: Organisational Benefits from EA Reported in Literature 
Academic Studies 
Systematic Literature 
Review (50 studies) 
(1) increased responsiveness and guidance to change; (2) improved decision-
making; (3) improved communication & collaboration; (4) reduced (IT) costs; 
(5) business-IT alignment; (6) improved business processes; (7) improved IT 
systems; (8) re-use of resources; (9) improve integration; (10) reduce risk; 
(11) regulatory compliance; (12) provides stability 
SIM EA Survey, 2007 
[Salmans and Kappelman, 
2010] 
(1) improves interoperability between information systems; (2) improves 
utilisation of IT; (3) aligns business objectives with IT investments; (4) more 
effective use of IT resources; (5) better situational awareness; (6) more 
responsive to change; (7) improves organisational communications and 
information sharing; (8) assists with organisational governance; (9) improves 
ROI from IT spending; (10) less wasted time/money on projects which do not 
support business goals/objective; (11) more effective at meeting business 
goals; (12) improves IS security across the business; (13) better collaboration 
within organisation; (14) improves communications between the organisation 
and IT department; (15) reduces IT complexity; (16) reduces organisational 
stovepipes; (17) faster development and implementation of new IS; (18) 
standardises organisational performance measures; (19) improves 
communications within organisation 
Professional Studies 
Infosys EA Survey, 2007 
[Aziz and Obitz, 2007] 
(1) reduced IT cost; (2) higher business and process flexibility; (3) improved 
customer satisfaction; (4) enabling of business and process change; (5) better 
business-IT alignment 
Infosys EA Survey, 2009 
[Obitz and Babu K, 2009] 
(1) improved customer satisfaction; (2) reduced IT cost; (3) business process 
improvement/ standardisation; (4) better business-IT alignment; (5) higher 
business and process flexibility 
TOGAF 9 
[The Open Group, 2009] 
more efficient IT operations; lower IT costs; maximum ROI from existing IT; 
reduced risk for future IT investments; reduced IT complexity; faster, simpler, 
and cheaper procurement 
Zachman International 
[Zachman, 2001] 
(1) alignment enabler; (2) integration enabler; (3) change enabler; (4) reduced 
time-to-market 
The benefits from the literature review, Infosys, and SIM surveys are ranked based on how often they were 
mentioned by authors/respondents. The benefits from Zachman [2001] are listed in the order presented by 
the author, though it is not clear whether any ranking was implied. 
The most recent academic study with a significant EA benefits component [Salmans and Kappelman, 2010] was 
based on a survey of 377 practitioners. It presented respondents with a list of twenty potential EA benefits and 
asked to rate th em on a 5 -point Likert scale. For nineteen out of the twenty benefits, at least 60 percent of the 
respondents agreed or strongly agreed. These nineteen EA benefits are listed in the second row of Table 2. As 
acknowledged by the au thors of the survey, this very high agreement rate may at least in part be attributed to the 
fact that the respondents were asked to comment on potential benefits of EA (rather than benefits they have actually 
observed) and that they were presented with a precompiled list of proposed benefits. The findings of the survey 
may, therefore, need to be treated with care. 
In addition, Table 2 summarises the benefit claims from three influential practitioner sources: Infosys, The Open 
Group, and Zachman International. The annual Infosys EA survey [Aziz and Obitz, 2007; Obitz and Babu K, 2009],  

--- PAGE 8 ---
 
 
Volume 28 Article 10 147 
is likely the largest regularly conducted survey focused on EA trends with publicly accessible reports .6 The Open 
Group is among the largest professi onal EA communities and the author of possibly the widest -adopted EA 
standard—The Open Group Architecture Framework (TOGAF) .7 Zachman International is an organisation founded 
by John A. Zachman, who is often regarded as the founding author of EA and has wr itten some of the most 
influential articles in the EA field.8 
Comparison of the different claims reveals a high agreement between authors about the reduction of costs, 
particularly of IT costs, as a tangible EA benefit. Increased capability to change, impr oved alignment between 
business and IT, and business process improvements are also mentioned repeatedly by academic as well as 
practitioner sources. 
How Does EA Lead to Organisational Benefits? 
Despite the numerous benefit claims, very few studies provide explanations about how EA leads to benefits. 
Empirical evidence to back the explanations is even more scarce. As noted earlier, only five studies were identified 
that devoted considerable attention to explaining EA‘s role in achieving organisational benefi ts [Bernard, 2005; 
Richardson et al., 1990; Ross et al., 2006; Ross and Westerman, 2004; Spewak and Hill, 1992]. Their arguments 
are summarised in the diagrams presented in Appendix 2. 
The analysis of the explanations about how EA leads to organisational b enefits confirmed the need to distinguish 
clearly between benefits flowing directly from EA, and the subsequent impact of EA on the real -world state of the 
organisation [Zachman, 2010]. This distinction is often overlooked in existing research, but it lead s to two distinct 
pathways from EA to organisational benefits. 
Benefits from EA 
In this study, EA is defined as the definition and representation of a high -level view of an enterprise‘s business 
processes and IT systems, their interrelationships, and the e xtent to which these processes and systems are shared 
by different parts of the enterprise. Here, ―definition‖ refers to the process of EA planning, and ―representation‖ to the 
direct and tangible outputs of that planning process (i.e. , the EA artefacts, i ncluding architecture drawings, 
roadmaps, and other documentation). It is necessary to consider both when discussing EA benefits, as not all 
outcomes and benefits of the planning process may be reflected in the documentation. Additionally, it may not 
always be possible or meaningful to distinguish between outcomes from the process and from the documentation —
e.g., should the better understanding of business processes be attributed to the planning (during which the 
knowledge was generated), or to the plans (i n which the knowledge is stored)? Therefore, it is useful to view both 
the planning process and its outputs as an integral part of EA. 
Some benefits may flow directly from EA. These benefits relate to the increased knowledge about the organisation 
and its goals (e.g., a better understanding of the business processes or the organisation‘s current IT systems as a 
result of the EA analysis) and may help decision-makers make better-informed decisions. This pathway has received 
very little attention in existing research, possibly because of lower visibility and difficulties in measuring the benefits 
from planning, as they tend to be less tangible. 
Only one study that discussed benefits from EA planning was found [Bernard, 2005, see Figure A2.1 ]. Bernard 
suggests that a standardised planning approach (i.e. , a common analysis and documentation methodology) applied 
across business unit and departmental boundaries leads to integrated and improved information about the 
organisation‘s resources. This, in turn, enables b etter communication and common understanding between different 
stakeholders and helps to reduce re -work and duplicated efforts. Ultimately, Bernard [2005] claims, this leads to 
better and faster decisions, reduced cycle times, improved (IT) performance, an d lower costs. 
The underlying benefit driver here is a better understanding and increased access to information about the 
organisation itself, emanating from the planning process and stored in the EA artefacts. Although at first glance the 
reasoning may appear similar to other studies discussed below, the explanations behind the source and the nature 
of the benefits presented by Bernard [2005] are in fact very different. This can be illustrated by comparing the 
seemingly similar factors of ―better access to  information‖ [Bernard, 2005] and ―better access to customer data‖ 
[Ross et al., 2006]. Whereas Ross et al. [2006, p.  2] focus on the shared access to customer data —implying that an 
improved operating platform has been previously implemented —Bernard [2005,  p. 69] refers to information about 
                                                      
6 The survey had 315 responses in 2007 and 207 in 2008 (effective sample size 262 and 173 correspondingly). 
7 TOGAF had the highest adoption rate among Infosys EA survey respondents (32 percent) [Obitz and Babu K, 2009]. 
8 Zachman‘s three highest-cited works on EA have a total citation count of 1,879 (based on Google Scholar as of August 12, 2009). This is higher 
than the combined citation count of the top twenty highest-cited works on ―enterprise architecture.‖ 

--- PAGE 9 ---
 
 
148 
Volume 28 Article 10 
the organisation itself, that is stored in the EA artefacts. The nature of the stored information in these two examples 
(about customers in Ross et al. and the organisation itself in Bernard) —and even how and where it is  stored—is 
very different. 
Although Bernard‘s [2005] study proposes a clear link between EA and benefits, its weakness lies in the lack of 
evidence to support those claims. Neither the research method nor the research sample are discussed. Nor are any 
illustrative real-world examples presented to validate the claims. 
Benefits from an EA-Guided Operating Platform 
Most of the EA benefits discussed in the literature depend on the enactment of the EA plans. This is not surprising 
since the key purpose of EA is to guide the building of an improved operating platform, i.e. , the IT systems and 
digitised business processes that support or automate an organisation‘s core capabilities [ Ross et al., 2006, p. 4].9 
It is important to note that the operating platform can exist and evolve regardless of EA. Every organisation has 
processes and systems, but not all organisations engage in EA planning. Therefore, to demonstrate the value of EA 
in relation to the benefits that are contingent on the implementation, it needs to b e shown that EA either enables the 
organisation (a) to build an operating platform that would otherwise not have been possible, or (b) to improve the 
delivery of the platform in some way (e.g., faster, cheaper, or with increased likelihood of success). 
A number of studies discuss benefits from an EA -guided operating platform. A prevalent claim is that an EA -guided 
operating platform is likely to have a higher level of standardisation and integration [e.g. , Bernard, 2005; Boh and 
Yellin, 2006; Ross and Weste rman, 2004; Spewak and Hill, 1992]. However, apart from the themes of 
standardisation and integration (which are not organisational benefits per se), the various studies tend to diverge in 
the ultimate benefit claims and the discussion of related underlying mechanisms. 
For example, in one of the earliest studies on EA, Richardson et al. [1990] (Figure A2.2) argue that it is through 
building consensus and a homogenous (standardised) architecture that EA enables an enterprise to achieve 
improved information f lows and reduced IT costs. In a book published two years later, Spewak and Hill [1992] 
(Figure A2.5) claim that EA enables a firm to achieve well -planned and tightly integrated systems, leading to more 
reliable systems and data and to increased reuse, whic h ultimately results in higher responsiveness, better 
decisions, service improvements, reduced costs, and higher employee morale. More recently, Ross and Westerman 
[2004] (Figure A2.3) claim that through standardisation, EA enables componentisation and inc reases the possibilities 
for reuse and reduced duplication of technologies. According to the study, standardisation and componentisation 
improve a company‘s chances of succeeding with outsourcing and lead to a number of other improvements, which 
ultimately translate into lower IT costs, reduced time -to-market, and enable the organisation to focus on their core 
activities. These ideas are developed further by Ross et al. [2006] (Figure A2.4) —again, standardisation, integration, 
and componentisation appear to  be the primary benefit drivers according to the study, but ultimately, Ross et al. 
claim, EA enables an organisation to improve operational excellence, customer intimacy, product leadership, and 
strategic agility. Note that the ultimate benefit claims in these studies are different. 
Further, although most of these studies attribute improvements in the operating platform to EA, the role that EA 
plays in leading to these improvements is often not thoroughly discussed. For example, Ross et al.‘s [2006] 
discussion of benefits is focused on the operating platform and the role of EA in building that platform receives only 
limited attention. Although the authors state that EA is of key importance by allowing the organisation to map out 
―important processes, data, and technology enabling desired levels of integration and standardisation‖ [Ross et al., 
2006, p. 92], why this is the case and how this happens is left largely unexplained.  
There are two key questions that need to be addressed to understand better the imp act of EA on the operating 
platform and resultant benefits. First: How does EA help improve the operating platform and could these 
improvements be achieved without the use of EA?  As will be shown in Section IV below, it appears that EA may 
really have the potential to contribute to improvements of the operating platform that may otherwise not be possible 
or very difficult to achieve. This is primarily due to looking across the various internal boundaries of the organisation, 
and the close consideration of both business and technology. 
Second: If EA does have a unique role in enabling improvements to the operating platform, are there any factors that 
affect moving from the plans to execution?  It is hardly surprising that having an EA plan is far from a guaran tee of 
implementation success [Boh and Yellin, 2006], which is dependent on a number of additional factors. As the 
operating platform improvements proposed in the EA plans are implemented through a series of IT projects and 
                                                      
9 The definition of ―operating platform‖ has been adapted from Ross et al.‘s [2006] ―foundation for execution.‖ 

--- PAGE 10 ---
 
 
Volume 28 Article 10 149 
business improvement projects, a ll the usual project success factors apply [e.g. , Finney and Corbett, 2007; Parr et 
al., 1999]. Such factors include top management support, change management, and project management, among 
many others. In addition to individual project successes, proper I T governance is of central importance to ensure 
that the various projects follow the EA guidelines [Boh and Yellin, 2006; Ross et al., 2006; Weill and Ross, 2004]. 
Also, due to the duration and cost, EA implementations are more likely to be subject to unex pected changes in 
business priorities, emerging financial constraints, or loss of interest [Armour et al., 1999; Richardson et al., 1990; 
Segars and Grover, 1996; Spewak and Hill, 1992]. Finally, due to its aim of enterprise -wide optimisation, which may 
mean trade -offs in local optimisation and autonomy, EA implementations are also very likely to be hampered by 
organisational politics [Janssen and Hjort-Madsen, 2007; Kettinger et al., 2010; Segars and Grover, 1996]. 
Towards an Enhanced Explanation of EA Benefits 
Three key conclusions can be drawn from the findings of the literature review presented above. First, it is important 
to distinguish between benefits that can flow from EA directly and benefits that can be achieved only through the 
implementation of the EA plans, i.e. , from an EA -guided operating platform. This distinction is important for two 
reasons. First, it helps to better understand the extant literature by differentiating between seemingly similar, but 
actually different sources of EA benefits (e.g., Bernard‘s [2005] ―better access to information‖ and Ross et al.‘s 
[2006] ―better access to customer data‖ discussed in the ―Benefits from EA‖ section above). Second, due to the high 
uncertainty in progressing from plans to implementation (see the pr evious paragraph) it seems likely that EA‘s 
impact on benefits that are contingent on implementation is somewhat weaker than on benefits that can be derived 
from the EA plans directly. 
Second, a considerable amount of collective knowledge on the benefits of EA exists. It is evident from the discussion 
above and from the diagrams presented in Appendix 2 that there are many common themes in the explanations of 
how EA leads to benefits and what these benefits ultimately are. These include standardisation and i ntegration, cost 
reduction, business-IT alignment, process improvement, etc. However, these benefit claims and related explanations 
are fragmented. No single study presents a concise overview of this existing knowledge. Integrating this existing 
knowledge can therefore provide a valuable step towards enhancing the understanding of how EA leads to 
organisational benefits. 
Third, in addition to conceptual work needed to integrate the existing knowledge on EA benefits, further empirical 
enquiry is essential. N ot only do the existing claims need further empirical validation, but due to the lack of studies 
focusing on a careful explanation of EA benefits, it seems likely that some benefits or explanations may have been 
overlooked. 
The following section takes a st ep towards enhancing knowledge on how EA leads to organisational benefits by 
proposing the EA Benefits Model (EABM). The EABM integrates the existing explanations in the EA literature and 
draws on relevant IS and management theory to enhance these explanat ions. It suggests that it is through its impact 
on four key benefit enablers that EA delivers organisational benefits. While it does not address the third theme 
discussed above, i.e. , the current study does not have an empirical component, the proposed mod el provides a 
useful starting platform for future empirical studies of EA benefits. 10 
IV. THE EA BENEFITS MODEL (EABM) 
The EA Benefits Model (EABM) presented in  Figure 1 synthesises the findings from the literature review. The model 
suggests that it is thro ugh the impact of EA on four key benefit enablers —Organisational Alignment, Information 
Availability, Resource Portfolio Optimisation, and Resource Complementarity (P1a –P4a)—that EA leads to 
organisational benefits (P1b –P4b). The term ―benefit enablers‖ em phasises that these outcomes from EA are not 
benefits per se , but are factors which have been demonstrated in earlier research to have a high potential for 
enabling organisational benefits. 
Definitions of the EABM constructs are summarised in Table 3 and discussed in detail in the following sections. The 
thickness of the arrows in P1a –P4a denotes the hypothesised strength of the relationship, based on how reliant a 
given benefit enabler is on the enactment of the EA plans. This ack nowledges the high uncertainties involved in 
progressing from EA to implementation discussed in section III above. The least strong (dotted) lines indicate that  
Resource Portfolio Optimisation (P3a) and Resource Complementarity (P4a) are entirely dependent  on at least  
partial enactment of EA plans. Information Availability (P2a) is partly contingent on enactment, and is presented as a 
thin line. Finally, Organisational Alignment (P1a) may to a large extent be achieved through the EA planning 
activities and resultant documentation per se, and is therefore represented as a thick line. 
                                                      
10 Some potential avenues for empirical work are described in further detail in Section V. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
 
 
150 
Volume 28 Article 10 
 
  
Figure 1. EA Benefits Model (EABM) 
 
Table 3: Definitions of the EABM Constructs11 
Enterprise Architecture 
Quality 
EA is the definition and representation of a high-level view of an enterprise‘s 
business processes and IT systems, their interrelationships, and the extent to 
which these processes and systems are shared by different parts of the 
enterprise. 
A high-quality EA is one that provides a vision for the future operating platform 
that is well-aligned with the organisation‘s strategic goals, complemented by an 
optimal roadmap for moving towards that vision, based on an accurate 
understanding of the current operating platform. 
Organisational Benefits Outcomes that contribute directly to organisational performance, including lower 
costs, increased revenue, competitive differentiation, more accurate decisions, 
strategic agility, etc. 
Benefit Enablers 
Organisational Alignment The extent to which an organisation‘s subunits share a common understanding 
of its strategic goals, and contribute towards achieving these goals 
Information Availability The extent of useful, high-quality information accessible to organisational 
decision makers 
Resource Portfolio 
Optimisation 
The extent to which an organisation leverages its existing resources, invests in 
resources that target performance gaps, and minimises unnecessary 
investments in duplicated resources 
Resource Complementarity The extent to which the organisation‘s resources synergistically support the 
pursuit of its strategic goals 
The following discussion of the EABM begins with an explanation of the independent variable, Enterprise 
Architecture Quality. The four sections that follo w draw on both the review of EA literature as well as broader IS and 
management theory to define the four benefit enablers, and explain how these relate to organisational benefits from 
EA. For this explanation to be complete, it is necessary to consider fo r each benefit enabler (1) the connection 
between EA and the benefit enabler (P1a –P4a) and (2) the connection between the benefit enabler and 
organisational benefits (P1b–P4b). As the benefit enablers draw on existing IS and management research, the latter  
relationships have usually been extensively explored in earlier studies. The primary contribution of this study lies in 
the synthesis of EA literature to explain the proposed relationships between EA and the four benefit enablers (i.e ., 
P1a–P4a), as well as in the identification of these four enablers. 
                                                      
11 These definitions are ours, though they have been adapted from the existing literature on the related concepts. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
 
 
Volume 28 Article 10 151 
Enterprise Architecture Quality 
A high -quality EA is one that provides a vision for the future operating platform that is well -aligned with the 
organisation‘s strategic goals, complemented by an optimal road map for moving towards that vision, based on an 
accurate understanding of the current operating platform. EA quality depends on the quality of the planning process 
and is embedded in the resultant documentation. Therefore, there are two ways of assessing E A quality. First, it is 
possible to directly evaluate the quality of the outputs, i.e. , EA documentation. Second, it is possible to use EA 
planning process quality as a proxy measure of output quality. 
Assessing the quality of EA documentation is likely to  provide a more accurate and objective measure of EA quality. 
For example, the accuracy of EA in documenting the existing operating platform can be objectively assessed 
through audits and system analysis. Although assessing the EA roadmap can be more diffi cult due to the potential 
existence of equivalent alternatives, objective evaluation measures still exist, e.g. , the costs and business impact 
involved in changing the processes and systems in a given sequence. However, the quality of the EA vision is very  
difficult to measure objectively, as it depends on guesses about future strategic directions, which may easily change. 
The best quality measure regarding the vision may, therefore, be a scenario analysis to test how easily the proposed 
EA can accommodate plausible shifts in business strategy. 
Table 4: Proxy Measures for Evaluating EA Quality 
Appropriate scope-detail-cost balance [Spewak and 
Hill, 1992, pp. 33, 34] 
Appropriate CIO skills [Ross et al., 2006, pp. 113–115] 
Compatible org. culture [Spewak and Hill, 1992, p. 34] 
Clear and agreed-upon architecture principles 
[Richardson et al., 1990, p. 399] 
Documentation tools [Bernard, 2005; Spewak and Hill, 
1992, p. 34] 
Effective presentations [Spewak and Hill, 1992, p. 34] 
Effective project management [Spewak and Hill, 1992, 
p. 33] 
Intermediate deliverables [Spewak and Hill, 1992, p. 
34] 
Skilled architecture team [Bernard, 2005; Spewak and 
Hill, 1992, p. 34] 
Sufficient (on-going) funding [Bernard, 2005; Spewak 
and Hill, 1992, p. 21, 26] 
Suitable management practices [Ross et al., 2006] 
Stakeholder acceptance & involvement [Bernard, 
2005; Spewak and Hill, 1992, p. 33] 
Top management support and involvement [Ross et 
al., 2006, p. 111; Spewak and Hill, 1992, p. 33] 
Use of consultants [Spewak and Hill, 1992] 
Possibly the greatest weakness of evaluating EA quality through a direct assessment of EA documentation relates to 
practical considerations. Although the approaches discussed above provide potential avenues for directly measuring 
EA quality, such assessments require a substantial effort and time. For organisations, these quality measures may 
not be practicable due to the costs involved; for academic studies, both time, extent of required research access, 
and expertise are likely to be prohibitive. 
A more cost -efficient, though less accurate, approach to evaluating EA quality may be to assess the quality of the 
EA planning process. This approximate evaluation can rely on assessing the extent to which a particular EA 
planning effort addresse d key factors that have been found to be highly correlated with high -quality results. A 
number of indicators of EA planning quality, which can in turn act as proxy quality measures of the resultant plans, 
can be derived from EA literature. These are presen ted in Table 4. Reflecting on these measures leads to the 
following three conclusions about how the quality of EA planning process can be evaluated.  
First, it appears that the most important determinant of EA planning quality is t he availability of sufficient high-quality 
resources during EA planning. The higher the quality of the available resources, the higher the likely quality of the 
EA planning process and the resultant outputs. These resources include not only skilful and exp erienced enterprise 
architects [Bernard, 2005; Spewak and Hill, 1992 ], but also the involvement of top management [Ross et al., 2006; 
Spewak and Hill, 1992] and other key stakeholders [Bernard, 2005; Spewak and Hill, 1992], access to external 
expertise whe n necessary [Spewak and Hill, 1992], and sufficient ongoing funding to guarantee the availability of 
these resources for the duration of EA planning [Bernard, 2005; Spewak and Hill, 1992]. Whether or not the 
necessary resources were available for EA planni ng can be relatively easily assessed by interviewing the planning 
team members and reviewing attendee lists of key planning meetings. 
Second, EA planning quality may also be measured by the quality of the methodologies and approaches used. For 
example, eff ective project management [Spewak and Hill, 1992], effective presentations [Spewak and Hill, 1992], 
and use of proper documentation tools [Bernard, 2005; Spewak and Hill, 1992] have been suggested to be related to 
EA planning success. However, it could be argued that these are largely contingent on the quality of resources. A 

--- PAGE 13 ---
 
 
152 
Volume 28 Article 10 
skilled EA team that has access to sufficient on -going funding appears likely to make use of the best methodologies 
and tools available. 
Finally, it is important to note that a high -quality EA has to strike an appropriate balance among scope, detail, and 
cost [Spewak and Hill, 1992]. After the scope and depth of planning reaches a certain threshold, investing more 
resources and effort in the planning is likely to lead to diminishing ret urns. Eventually, the marginal improvements in 
the accuracy and amount of information captured in the plans will no longer be able to offset the required 
investments. 
Organisational Alignment 
Organisational Alignment is the extent to which an organisation‘ s subunits share a common understanding of its 
strategic goals and contribute towards achieving these goals. The alignment between business and IT, an aspect of 
Organisational Alignment, has received extensive attention in IS literature [Chan and Reich, 20 07a,b]. The 
underlying claim of the business -IT alignment literature is that IT strategies and the resultant deliverables should be 
closely informed by, and aligned with, business strategies and processes [Henderson and Venkatraman, 1993]. This 
is to ensure that the IT systems in which an organisation invests provide the best possible support for the strategic 
needs of the business. 
However, it is not only alignment between business and IT that is a challenge in large, complex organisations. The 
relationship between alignment and organisational performance is also an important topic of interest in the broader 
management literature [e.g., Miller, 1986; Porter, 1996]. Alignment is not only a challenge across all functional areas 
(e.g., between Sales and Market ing), sometimes referred to as horizontal alignment, but also between the corporate 
level and various strategic business units (SBUs) [Reynolds et al., 2010]. 
How Does EA Improve Organisational Alignment? 
Both EA planning as well as related improvements in  the operating platform have the potential to improve 
Organisational Alignment. The EA planning activity itself requires cross -organisational dialogue and input. As EA is 
not only concerned with IT systems, but begins with an understanding of the business processes that these systems 
need to support, it has the potential to bring IT in closer alignment with the business goals [Gregor et al., 2007; 
Ross, 2003]. The objective of greater business -IT alignment is also among the top reasons why organisations inv est 
in EA [Aziz and Obitz, 2007; Obitz and Babu K, 2009]. 
However, because the business analysis that is undertaken during EA planning spans different departments and/or 
business units, there is potential for EA to have a positive impact not only on busine ss and IT alignment, but also on 
other dimensions of Organisational Alignment. The basis for this broader impact is the facilitation of dialogue and 
identification of interdependencies between the various parts of the enterprise [Segars and Grover, 1996]. The 
increased understanding of the process interdependencies and potential synergies provides a better basis for 
identifying the stakeholders that may be affected by, and should be consulted about, a given process or technology 
change [Bernard, 2005]. The relevant people can be involved early in the decision -making process, allowing for 
potential conflicts to be identified and resolved early, which may have a positive impact on collaboration and 
collective decision-making [Richardson et al., 1990]. The awar eness that EA creates about the dependencies may 
also be used to ensure the alignment between performance measures of employees, which can further contribute to 
collaboration [Pereira and Sousa, 2004]. The set of agreed -upon EA principles also provides obj ective decision -
making criteria, which in turn can help to avoid costly, prolonged, or repeated arguments.  
Therefore, EA reduces the subjectivity of the decision -making process [Johnson et al., 2007; Spewak and Hill, 1992] 
and brings the business and IT in vestment decisions in closer alignment to the organisational goals, as opposed to 
the personal agendas of individual key stakeholders: 
P1a: A high-quality EA is likely to improve Organisational Alignment. 
Organisational Benefits from Organisational Alignment 
Extant research suggests that Organisational Alignment in general, as well as its sub -dimension of business -IT 
alignment, are related to improved organisational performance [Chan et al., 2006; Kearns and Lederer, 2003; Miller, 
1986; Porter, 1996; Sabher wal and Chan, 2001]. Firms with high Organisational Alignment may achieve a better 
total return on investments through the reduction of incoherent or duplicated efforts, and achieve their strategic goals 
with minimal overhead. Based on this literature, it is posited in EABM that firms with higher Organisational Alignment 
are likely to achieve greater organisational benefits (P1b). 

--- PAGE 14 ---
 
 
Volume 28 Article 10 153 
Information Availability 
Information Availability is defined as the extent of useful, high -quality information accessible to org anisational 
decision makers. Information quality does not only encompass accuracy, but also aspects such as relevance, 
completeness, timeliness, interpretability, and accessibility [Lee et al., 2002; Wang and Strong, 1996]. These 
dimensions suggest that in  order to improve Information Availability and quality, the purpose of the information 
needs to be considered (e.g. , the measure of timeliness can be substantially different in strategic and operational 
decision-making). 
For the purposes of the discussion below, it is useful to consider that the information underpinning an organisation‘s 
knowledgebase consists of ― what/who” (i.e., data about an organisation‘s clients, suppliers, and transactions) and 
―how” (organisational processes) type of data. Informatio n systems normally focus on storing the ― what/who” 
information. The ―how” information about processes is less often explicitly and systematically captured. To an extent, 
it is embedded in the information systems that support these processes (through custom isation and integration) and 
captured in the related configuration specification documents. However, these detailed technical descriptions are 
interpretable only by technical specialists and, therefore, cannot be readily used by organisational decision-makers. 
How Does EA Improve Information Availability? 
EA has the potential to improve both the information about an organisation‘s processes, as well as data about its 
clients, suppliers, and business transactions. The improved information about organisationa l processes primarily 
flows directly from EA. Through the business and system analysis performed as part of the EA planning, previously 
undocumented information about the organisation‘s processes may be captured [Bernard, 2005]. The whole -of-
enterprise ana lysis approach may even reveal interdependencies or inefficiencies that were previously not only 
undocumented, but also unknown. This information will be captured in the current state documentation of EA and 
will help to enhance and retain organisational k nowledge about its processes. Even if the EA vision and roadmaps 
are later not followed, this documentation in itself may prove valuable for informing organisational decision -making: 
P2.1a: A high-quality EA is likely to improve Information Availability about the organisation‘s resources. 
In contrast, improved availability of information about business transactions, customers, and vendors is primarily 
contingent on the enactment of EA plans. This information is normally captured in an organisation‘s databas es. EA 
can help to improve the availability of this information by guiding the building of an improved operating platform that, 
in turn, provides better information to decision makers in the organisation. First, EA has been suggested to improve 
the sharing  of information through more carefully planned integration between the organisation‘s information 
systems [Boh and Yellin, 2006; Ross et al., 2006; Spewak and Hill, 1992]. In addition to identifying and helping to 
standardise the interfaces and messaging b etween different applications, EA may also facilitate information sharing 
by advocating common data definitions and structures [Boh and Yellin, 2006; Spewak and Hill, 1992]. Second, as 
will be discussed in the following section, an EA -guided operating plat form is likely to have lower complexity and 
fewer components, contributing to increased reliability of the operating platform [Pereira and Sousa, 2004; Ross et 
al., 2006]. This has a positive impact on information accessibility. Finally, by identifying and  helping to reduce the 
number of redundant data stores, EA may also have a positive impact on data accuracy [Venkatesh et al., 2007].  
P2.2a: An operating platform guided by a high -quality EA is likely to improve Information Availability from the 
organisation‘s transactional and analytic data stores. 
Organisational Benefits from Information Availability 
Information is widely recognised as a key organisational asset. Access to better information —when coupled with 
enhanced capabilities to interpret that inform ation—may serve as an important source of competitive advantage 
[Davenport and Harris, 2007; Davenport et al., 2010]. For example, improved information about the customers and 
the marketplace enables better targeted product development, sales, and marketin g efforts [Davenport and Harris, 
2007], leading in turn to increased revenues. Based on this literature, it is posited in EABM that firms with higher 
Information Availability are likely to achieve greater organisational benefits (P2b).  
Resource Portfolio Optimisation 
Resource Portfolio Optimisation is defined as the extent to which an organisation leverages its existing resources, 
invests in resources that target performance gaps, and minimises unnecessary investments in duplicated resources. 
Resources can be defined as ―all assets, capabilities, organisational processes, firm attributes, information, 
knowledge, etc. controlled by the firm‖ [Barney, 1991, p.  101]. In relation to EA, three types of resources are 
primarily of interest: human resources, IT, and  organisational processes. Optimisation could , therefore, involve the 
removal of duplicated or non -value-adding technology or human resources, and/or replacing them with resources 
that are more efficient in assisting with the achievement of organisational goals. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
 
 
154 
Volume 28 Article 10 
How Does EA Help to Optimise the Resource Portfolio? 
EA can help to identify areas where either resource gaps or overlaps occur and to provide recommendations on how 
to improve on the existing state [Bernard, 2005; Pereira and Sousa, 2004]. While it  is likely that areas of 
underinvestment make themselves known through the related business impact, areas of overinvestment may be 
much less visible. If each business unit with similar needs invests in its own systems, the costs incurred are likely to 
be significantly higher than when using a single, shared system. However, if the systems are working fine and the 
costs are manageable, the organisation may remain unaware of the opportunity for cost cutting by leveraging 
economies of scale. 
EA planning involv es not only the definition of a future vision, but also an analysis of the current state. By looking 
across the verticals and horizontals of an organisation, current resource overlaps will become apparent [Boh and 
Yellin, 2006]. Existing studies suggest th at EA, therefore, contributes to building a more standardised IT platform 
with fewer technologies, leading in turn to simplified interfaces, higher reliability through reduced operating platform 
complexity, and lower maintenance and support costs [Boh and Yellin, 2006; Hjort-Madsen, 2006; Richardson et al., 
1990; Ross et al., 2006; Spewak and Hill, 1992; Venkatesh et al., 2007]. 
EA may also help to promote the decoupling of monolithic systems to smaller components, which facilitates both 
reuse as well as fl exibility of reconfiguring or replacing the components as required [Janssen and Hjort -Madsen, 
2007; Ross et al., 2006]. Componentisation helps in optimising the resource portfolio by reducing the overlaps 
between individual components and simplifying the r eplacement of components that no longer meet business needs 
or are more costly to maintain than newer alternatives. Also, the knowledge about the purpose and 
interdependencies of the components captured in EA documentation makes the replacement process con siderably 
easier and less risky [Iyer and Gottlieb, 2004]. Finally, the awareness about the components, the stage of their 
lifecycle, and business impact can also help to better channel investments to resources with the highest value 
potential in the case of financial constraints [Segars and Grover, 1996]. 
Through the business analysis that precedes the evaluation of the IT systems, EA can also contribute to the 
identification of suboptimal business processes and use of human resources [Bernard, 2005; Boh a nd Yellin, 2006; 
Pereira and Sousa, 2004]. It has also been suggested that as a result of the enterprise -wide optimisation, the 
organisation may be able to shift the focus of its business processes from a department - or business -unit centric 
view to increa sed customer-focus, as it gains the ability to share a single view of its customers across the different 
organisational units [Ross et al., 2006; Venkatesh et al., 2007]. 
It is necessary to note that while EA plans may have a direct positive on the benefit  enablers discussed earlier 
(Organisational Alignment and Information Availability), the benefits from Resource Portfolio Optimisation are 
contingent on the implementation of these plans, or at least parts of it: 
P3a: An operating platform guided by a high -quality EA is likely to have increased Resource Portfolio 
Optimisation. 
Organisational Benefits from Resource Portfolio Optimisation 
The organisational benefits from Resource Portfolio Optimisation mainly relate to reduced costs and higher 
efficiencies, which translate to a better return on investment from the organisation‘s resources. Process optimisation, 
an aspect of Resource Portfolio Optimisation, has been found to have the potential to not only deliver substantial 
cost savings, but also to improve qu ality and reliability of product and service delivery [Davenport and Short, 1990; 
Hammer and Champy, 1994; Harrington, 1991]. Based on this literature, it is posited in EABM that firms with higher 
Resource Portfolio Optimisation are likely to achieve greater organisational benefits (P3b). 
Resource Complementarity 
Resource Complementarity is defined as the extent to which the organisation‘s resources synergistically support the 
pursuit of its strategic goals. The resource -based view (RBV), a well -established and widely accepted theoretical 
perspective in strategic management, posits that the basis for a firm‘s sustained competitive advantage comes from 
its control of a set of resources which are rare, valuable, inimitable, difficult to substitute, and relativ ely immobile 
[Barney, 1991]. While it is very difficult to find individual resources that meet these criteria, once embedded in 
organisational processes in unique combinations  with other resources , these desirable characteristics become 
easier to achieve [ Brynjolfsson and Saunders, 2010; Grant, 1996]. A major difficulty in imitating complex resource 
configurations stems from causal ambiguity, i.e. , it may not be clear which components or interactions underpin the 
system‘s success [Lippman and Rumelt, 1982; Reed and DeFillippi, 1990]. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
 
 
Volume 28 Article 10 155 
Therefore, the competitive advantage of organisations tends to rely not on individual resources but on unique 
combinations of complementary resources. The mechanism which helps to make use of these combined resources 
is sometimes referred to as capabilities —human-based skills and processes that enable an organisation to deploy 
other resources in order to achieve desired goals [Amit and Schoemaker, 1993]. Capabilities are developed over 
time through the creation, exchange , and retention of information, and are grounded in the skills, knowledge , and 
processes of the organisation. Therefore , they cannot be readily sourced from the market [Amit and Schoemaker, 
1993]. 
There is a subtle but important difference between Organisational Al ignment and Resource Complementarity in the 
EABM. Organisational Alignment (Porter‘s [1996] ―first -order fit‖) relates to shared understanding and simple 
consistency between the activities of the organisational units and the corporate strategy. Resource Co mplementarity 
(Porter‘s [1996] ―second -order fit‖) occurs when resources synergistically reinforce each other. These reinforcing 
effects coupled by the difficulty in imitating such combinations, lead to different organisational benefits from the two 
benefit enablers. 
How Does EA Improve Resource Complementarity? 
The primary mechanism through which EA helps an organisation to improve Resource Complementarity is through 
the identification of the potential enterprise -wide synergies, and by providing recommenda tions on how to leverage 
these synergies. In one of the most influential articles on RBV, Prahalad and Hamel [1990, p.  89] suggest that the 
fragmentation of resources is inevitable if proper measures are not taken to ensure complementarity, and that the 
key mechanism in ensuring complementarity is the development of ―a corporatewide strategic architecture that 
establishes objectives for competence building. A strategic architecture is a road map of the future that identifies 
which core competencies to build  and their constituent technologies.‖ The importance of EA in enabling increased 
Resource Complementarity has also been later discussed by King [1995].  
Many of the mechanisms through which EA may help to enhance Resource Complementarity are similar to thos e 
discussed in relation to Resource Portfolio Optimisation. Both depend on the organisation -wide analysis and 
identification of resources and their interdependencies. Both benefit from the reduction of overlaps between 
resources achieved through componenti sation. However, while the primary focus of Resource Portfolio Optimisation  
is on reducing redundancy related to resource duplication and overlaps and improving the quality of these 
resources, Resource Complementarity focuses on leveraging synergies between the resources and combining them 
in ways that enhance performance and are difficult for competitors to replicate. As noted by Henderson and Clark 
[1990], improvements in a system can stem from either the introduction of superior components (component 
innovation) or an enhanced reconfiguration of components (architectural innovation). Resource Portfolio 
Optimisation focuses on the former, whereas Resource Complementarity focuses on the latter. Therefore, in 
proposing the EABM, resource complementarity and optimisation are treated as two distinct benefit enablers. 
Similarly to Resource Portfolio Optimisation, the achievement of Resource Complementarity is contingent on the 
implementation of EA: 
P4a: An operating platform guided by a high-quality EA is likely to have increased Resource Complementarity. 
Organisational Benefits from Resource Complementarity 
As discussed above, the major organisational benefit from Resource Complementarity is potential competitive 
differentiation from achieving a mutually reinfor cing resource configuration that is difficult to replicate [Brynjolfsson 
and Saunders, 2010]. The exact tangible benefits from Resource Complementarity are dependent on the 
competitive strategy of the organisation, which determines the desirable resource c onfiguration to pursue. It has 
been suggested that the three key ways in which organisations can compete are a focus on (1) operational 
excellence (reliable, conveniently accessible, and low -cost products/services), (2) customer intimacy (highly 
personalised products and services), or (3) product leadership (innovative, ―state -of-the-art‖ products/services) 
[Treacy and Wiersema, 1993]. For a company pursuing operational excellence, the result of Resource 
Complementarity could be a superior cost position, ac hieved through combining resources in a way which cuts 
overheads to a minimum while retaining the desired product/service standards. On the other hand, a company 
pursuing a customer -intimate strategy would want to make sure that its resources complement ea ch other in a way 
that delivers a single view of the customer, helps to gather superior customer information and feedback, and 
ensures consistency of customer service organisation -wide. Based on this literature, it is posited in EABM that firms 
with higher Resource Complementarity are likely to achieve greater organisational benefits (P4b).  

--- PAGE 17 ---
 
 
156 
Volume 28 Article 10 
Contextual Factors and the Value Potential of EA 
An important question related to understanding how EA leads to organisational benefits is whether all organisations 
can expect to get similar value from EA, or whether benefits vary from organisation to organisation based on 
contextual, i.e., internal or environmental, factors. Both an analysis of the four benefit enablers in EABM, as well as 
existing EA research, suggest t hat some organisations under some circumstances are better positioned to benefit 
from EA investment. 
For example, it has been suggested that larger organisations with more complex IT environments may expect to 
benefit more from EA than those whose operatin g platform is relatively simple and well -understood [Bernard, 2005]. 
The benefit enablers discussed earlier appear to support this proposition. First, large and more complex 
organisations are likely to have a more diverse resource portfolio. This means tha t they may be able to derive more 
benefits from Resource Portfolio Optimisation. Second, large organisations with complex structures are more likely 
to experience problems with alignment, increasing the potential impact of the Organisational Alignment bene fit 
enabler. 
The quality of the existing operating platform is another factor suggested in earlier research to affect the extent of 
potential benefits from EA [Bernard, 2005]. For example, high redundancy or quality issues provide larger potential 
gains fr om Resource Portfolio Optimisation. Also, the performance gaps may leave more opportunities for 
improvements in Information Availability. 
Another important contextual factor discussed by Ross et al. [2006] is the organisation‘s operating model. According 
to Ross et al., a firm‘s operating model is determined by two independent choices —the level of desired 
standardisation (commonality of processes and systems), and integration (sharing of data) across the organisation. 
The authors mention that organisations with low levels of standardisation and integration can benefit from EA if they 
choose to standardise or integrate certain aspects of their foundation [Ross et al., 2006, p p. 56–57]. It is implicit in 
this argument that the higher the level of desired stand ardisation and/or integration, the higher the extent of potential 
benefits that an organisation can expect from EA. In terms of the EABM, standardisation is closely related to 
Resource Portfolio Optimisation, and integration to both Information Availabilit y and Organisational Alignment. 
Spewak and Hill [1992] argue that the higher the rate of organisational change, the greater the benefits from EA. 
This is probably based on the claim that EA can improve an organisation‘s flexibility and change capability. B oth 
Resource Portfolio Optimisation and Information Availability help to explain why organisations undergoing larger 
changes can benefit more from EA. Understanding of the interdependencies of processes and IT systems (an 
aspect of Information Availability ) becomes more essential when an organisation needs to start making changes to 
these components. Also, the fewer interdependencies and components there are (i.e. , the more optimised the 
resource portfolio), the cheaper and less risky it is to make changes to the environment. 
There are also environmental factors, which may affect the extent of potential benefits from EA. For example, the 
legislation and regulations governing a particular industry can be an important factor. In some cases EA may simplify 
compliance [Ross et al., 2006; Winter and Fischer, 2006], whereas in others it can even be mandatory (e.g. , Clinger-
Cohen Act in the USA), making EA an ―organisational benefit‖ per se. The information intensity of a given industry 
appears also likely to affect  the extent of potential benefits from EA. Specifically, Information Availability is more 
critical for organisations that rely heavily on information in providing products or services to their customers or for 
whom information is the key product or service they provide. 
V. LIMITATIONS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR RESEARCH 
This study has taken a step towards improving the understanding of how EA leads to organisational benefits through 
a careful review of the EA literature and by identifying relevant theoretical ex planations from established IS and 
management theories. We hope that the Enterprise Architecture Benefits Model and related discussion provides 
useful insights for both academics and practitioners interested in EA, and serves as a platform for future studi es on 
EA benefits. Some suggested opportunities for future research are presented below, discussed in the light of the 
EABM and other findings of this study. 
Possibly the most important shortcoming in existing research on EA benefits is the lack of rigorou s empirical 
validation of the benefit claims. For example, of the fifty studies analysed as part of the systematic review, forty -one 
made EA benefit claims, while only six provided some empirical evidence to support the claims. The current study 
has taken a step towards improving the theoretical explanation of the benefit claims. The next important step would 
be to explore whether empirical evidence supports the nine propositions. Both qualitative studies that explore the 
proposed relationships in -depth, as  well as quantitative studies to test the proposed relationships based on a 
broader sample would be beneficial. A further line of enquiry would be to explore the interrelationships between the 

--- PAGE 18 ---
 
 
Volume 28 Article 10 157 
benefit enablers. For example, could Resource Complementarity b e an outcome of Organisational Alignment and 
Resource Portfolio Optimisation? Does Information Availability lead to Resource Portfolio Optimisation and 
Organisational Alignment? 
A challenge faced in this study arose from the interdependencies between facto rs. Therefore, another useful theme 
for future study is the grouping of the different benefit enablers. Is the EABM complete? Are there factors beyond 
those identified in the EABM that should be added to the benefit enablers? Are there better ways to group  the 
benefit enablers? Although we performed a careful analysis, as explained in Section II, there is no theoretical basis 
for concluding that the model is complete. While the EABM is in our opinion a considerable advance over the 
existing explanations of how EA leads to organisational benefits, both further empirical and conceptual work could 
undoubtedly help to improve on this first attempt. 
An important question that has so far not been well -addressed is the impact of EA on the operating platform. An 
empirical study focusing on this question, preferably quantitative or using a multi -case approach, may, therefore, be 
another potential avenue for research. While it has been suggested that certain benefits flow directly from EA, 
regardless of implementation, the very limited discussion of these benefits offers another interesting line of empirical 
enquiry. A quantitative study looking at how often EA plans get implemented, and how often they get used in 
organisational decision-making, even if not implemented, could provide useful insights on this question. 
Another important and promising theme for future research is the question: What are the key factors that affect the 
extent of potential benefits an organisation can expect from EA? Although a number of organ isational and 
environmental factors that affect benefits have been suggested, no study appears to have systematically compared 
the different factors. This leaves open the question of whether all of the mentioned factors are important, or whether 
some have a higher impact than others. 
Finally, while this study has proposed some potential approaches for the assessment of EA quality, further studies 
could contribute by substantially enhancing and validating the quality measures. Comparing the accuracy of diffe rent 
measures and measurement approaches, and identifying those that provide the best cost -accuracy balance would 
not only benefit academic studies on EA, but may also provide useful insights for organisations in evaluating the 
quality of their EA efforts. 
From an academic perspective, finding answers to the questions above would help to explain why organisations find 
EA to be useful, what kind of organisations may benefit the most from EA, and if and how EA is superior to 
alternative, shorter-term or narro wer-scope planning approaches. From a practical perspective, the answers would 
enable organisations to understand what benefits they might realistically expect from EA, to assess whether these 
are relevant to them, and accordingly to make better -informed decisions on the appropriate level of investment in 
EA. This may also give organisations an improved basis for justifying the EA investment choices —an issue with 
which many organisations are currently struggling [Obitz and Babu K, 2009].  
VI. CONCLUSION 
Through a careful review of EA literature and related academic theory, this study has proposed an enhanced 
explanation of how EA leads to organisational benefits. The EA Benefits Model posits that it is through 
improvements in Organisational Alignment, Informa tion Availability, Resource Complementarity, and Resource 
Portfolio Optimisation that EA leads to organisational benefits. These benefits may include lower costs, higher 
strategic agility, and a more reliable operating platform. It appears that large organ isations with a complex IT 
environment, whose business model favours high levels of organisation -wide standardisation and integration, can 
expect to benefit the most from EA. 
This study has also provided some recommended opportunities for future research t o improve the understanding of 
the role and value of EA. In particular, empirical studies to test and enhance the proposed EABM, to develop a 
better understanding of the role of EA in guiding the operating platform, to study the extent to which EA plans ar e 
used in organisational decision -making, and to explore the contextual factors that affect the value of EA for different 
organisations would help to enhance the current state of knowledge. Such studies would lead to better 
understanding of the value poten tial of EA, and of how organisations can maximise the likelihood of deriving these 
potential benefits. 
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
 
 
158 
Volume 28 Article 10 
REFERENCES 
Editor’s Note : The following reference list contains hyperlinks to World Wide Web pages. Readers who have the 
ability to access the Web direc tly from their word processor or are reading the article on the Web, can gain direct 
access to these linked references. Readers are warned, however, that: 
1. These links existed as of the date of publication but are not guaranteed to be working thereafter.  
2. The contents of Web pages may change over time. Where version information is provided in the 
References, different versions may not contain the information or the conclusions referenced.  
3. The author(s) of the Web pages, not AIS, is (are) responsible for the accuracy of their content. 
4. The author(s) of this article, not AIS, is (are) responsible for the accuracy of the URL and version 
information. 
 
Alhanasiadis, I.N. (2008) ―Towards a Virtual Enterprise Architecture for the Environmental Sector ‖ in Protogeros, N. 
(ed.) Agent and Web Service Technologies in Virtual Enterprises , chapter XV , Hershey, PA: IGI Global, pp. 
256–266. 
Ambler, S.W., J. Nalbone, and M.J. Vizdos (2005) The Enterprise Unified Process: Extending the Rational Unified 
Process, Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall PTR, chapter 9. 
Amit, R. and P.J. Schoemaker (1993) ― Strategic Assets and Organizational Rent‖, Strategic Management Journal  
(14)1, pp. 33–46. 
Armour, F.J., S. Kaisler, and S. Liu (1999) ―Building an Enterprise Architecture Step by Step ‖, IT Professional (1)4, 
pp. 31–39. 
Association for Information Systems (n.d.) ―Senior Scholars‘ Basket of Journals ‖, 
http://home.aisnet.org/displaycommon.cfm?an=1&subarticlenbr=20346 (current August 18, 2009). 
Aziz, S. and T. Obitz (2007) ―Enterprise Architecture Is Maturing. Infosys Enterprise Architecture Survey 2007 ‖, 
Survey, Infosys , http://www.infosys.com/offerings/IT-services/architecture-services/ea-survey/Documents/ea-
maturing.pdf (current August 18, 2009). 
Barnett, W. et al.  (1994) ―An Architecture for the Virtual Enterprise ‖, 1994 IEEE Internationa l Conference on 
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, San Antonio, TX, (1), pp. 506–511. 
Barney, J. (1991) ―Firm Resources and Sustained Competitive Advantage ‖, Journal of Management  17(1), pp. 99 –
120. 
Bernard, S.A. (2005) An Introduction to Enterprise Architecture, 2nd edition, Bloomington, IN: AuthorHouse. 
Bernus, P. and L. Nemes (1996) ―A Framework to Define a Generic Enterprise Reference Architecture and 
Methodology‖, Computer Integrated Manufacturing Systems (9)3, pp. 179–191. 
Bernus, P., L. Nemes, and T.J. W illiams (eds.) (1996)  Architectures for Enterprise Integration , London, New York: 
Chapman & Hall. 
Bernus, P., L. Nemes, and G. Schmidt (eds.) (2003)  Handbook on Enterprise Architecture , Heidelberg, Germany: 
Springer-Verlag. 
Boh, W. and D. Yellin (2006) ―Us ing Enterprise Architecture Standards in Managing Information Technology ‖, 
Journal of Management Information Systems (23)3, pp. 163–207. 
Boster, M., S. Liu, and R. Thomas (2000) ―Getting the Most from Your Enterprise Architecture ‖, IT Professional  
(July–August), pp. 43–50. 
Braun, C. and R. Winter (2005) ―A Comprehensive Enterprise Architecture Metamodel and Its Implementation Using 
a Metamodeling Platform ‖, Proceedings of the Workshop on Enterprise Modelling and Information Systems 
Architectures, Verlag Ritter, Austria: Klagenfurt, 2005, pp. 64–79. 
Brynjolfsson, E. and A. Saunders (2010) Wired for Innovation, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. 
Carlock, P. and R. Fenton (2001) ―System of Systems (SoS) Enterprise Systems Engineering for Information -
Intensive Organizations‖, Systems Engineering (4)4. 
Chan, Y.E. and B.H. Reich (2007a) ―IT Alignment: What Have We Learned?‖ Journal of Information Technology  
(22)4, pp. 297–315. 
Chan, Y.E. and B.H. Reich (2007b) ―IT Alignment: An Annotated Bibliography‖, Journal of Inform ation Technology  
(22)4, pp. 316–396. 

--- PAGE 20 ---
 
 
Volume 28 Article 10 159 
Chan, Y.E., R. Sabherwal, and J.B. Thatcher (2006) ―Antecedents and Outcomes of Strategic IS Alignment: An 
Empirical Investigation‖, IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management (51)3, pp. 27–47. 
Chen, D., B. Vallespir, and G. Doumeingts (1997) ―GRAI Integrated Methodology and Its Mapping onto Generic 
Enterprise Reference Architecture and Methodology‖, Computers in Industry (33)2–3, pp. 387–394. 
Chen, D., G. Doumeingts, and F.B. Vernadat (2008) ―Architectures for Enterpri se Integration and Interoperability: 
Past, Present and Future‖, Computers in Industry (59)7, pp. 647–659. 
Cummins, F.A. (2002)  Enterprise Integration: An Architecture for Enterprise Application and Systems Integration , 
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. 
Davenport, T.H. and J.G. Harris (2007) Competing on Analytics: The New Science of Winning , Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard Business School Press. 
Davenport, T.H., J.G. Harris, and T. Morison (2010) Analytics at Work: Smarter Decisions, Better Results , 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business Press. 
Davenport, T.H. and J.E. Short (1990) ―The New Industrial Engineering: Information Technology and Business 
Process Redesign‖, Sloan Management Review (31)4, pp.11–27. 
El Sawy, O. A. et al. (1999) ―IT -Intensive Value Innovation in the El ectronic Economy: Insights from Marshall 
Industries‖, MIS Quarterly (23)3, pp. 305–335. 
Finney, S. and M. Corbett (2007) ―ERP Implementation: A Compilation and Analysis of Critical Success Factors‖, 
Business Process Management Journal (13)3, pp. 329–347. 
Gartner (2005) ―Gartner Survey of 1,300 CIOs Shows IT Budgets to Increase by 2.5 Percent in 2005 ‖, 
http://www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=492096 (current August 18, 2009). 
Gartner (2006) ―Gartner Survey of 1,400 CIOs Shows Transformation of IT Organisation is Accelerating ‖, 
http://www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=492238 (current August 18, 2009). 
Gartner (2007) ―Gartner EXP Survey of More than 1,400 CIOs Shows CIOs Must Create Leverage to Remain 
Relevant to the Business‖, http://www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=501189 (current August 18, 2009). 
Gartner (2008) ―Gartner EXP Worldwid e Survey of 1,500 CIOs Shows 85 Percent of CIOs Expect ‗Significant 
Change‘ Over Next Three Years‖, http://www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=587309 (current August 18, 2009). 
Gartner (2009) ―Gartne r EXP Worldwide Survey of More than 1,500 CIOs Shows IT Spending to Be Flat in 2009 ‖, 
http://www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=855612 (current August 18, 2009). 
Grant, R.M. (1996) ―Toward a Knowled ge-Based Theory of the Firm ‖, Strategic Management Journal  (17)Winter 
Special Issue, pp. 109–122. 
Gregor, S., D. Hart, and N. Martin (2007) ―Enterprise Architectures: Enablers of Business Strategy and IS/IT 
Alignment in Government‖, Information Technology & People (20)2, pp. 96–120. 
Guijarro, L. (2007) ―Interoperability Frameworks and Enterprise Architectures in E -Government Initiatives in Europe 
and the United States‖, Government Information Quarterly (24)1, pp. 89–101. 
Hammer, M. and J. Champy (1994) Reengineering the Corporation: A Manifesto for Business Revolution , New York, 
NY: HarperBusiness. 
Harmon, P., M. Rosen, and M. Guttman (2001) Developing E -Business Systems and Architectures: A Manager's 
Guide, Burlington, MA: Morgan Kaufmann, chapter 6, pp. 141–167. 
Harrington, H.J. (1991) Business Process Improvement: The Breakthrough Strategy for Total Quality, Productivity, 
and Competitiveness, New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Professional. 
Hay, D.C. (2003)  Requirements Analysis: From Business Views to Architecture , Upper Saddle River, NJ:  Prentice 
Hall PTR. 
Henderson, J.C. and N. Venkatraman (1993) ―Strategic Alignment: Leveraging Information Technology for 
Transforming Organisations‖, IBM Systems Journal (32)1, pp. 4–16. 
Henderson, R.M. and K.B. Clark (1990) ―Arch itectural Innovation: The Reconfiguration of Existing Product 
Technologies and the Failure of Established Firms‖, Administrative Science Quarterly (35)1, pp. 9–30. 
Hoque, F. (2000) E-Enterprise: Business Models, Architecture, and Components , New York , NY : Cambridge 
University Press, chapter 6, pp. 173–201. 

--- PAGE 21 ---
 
 
160 
Volume 28 Article 10 
Humphries, M., M.W. Hawkins, and M.C. Dy (1999) Data Warehousing: Architecture and Implementation , Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall PTR, chapter 1. 
Iyer, B. and R. Gottlieb (2004) ―The Four -Domain Ar chitecture: An Approach to Support Enterprise Architecture 
Design‖, IBM Systems Journal (43)3, pp. 587–597. 
Janssen, M. and K. Hjort -Madsen (2007) ―Analyzing Enterprise Architecture in National Governments: The Cases of 
Denmark and the Netherlands ‖, Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences, p. 218a. 
Johnson, P. and M. Ekstedt (2007)  Enterprise Architecture: Models and Analyses for Information Systems Decision 
Making, Lund, Sweden: Studentlitteratur. 
Johnson, P. et al. (2004 ) ―Using Enterprise Architecture for CIO Decision -Making: On the Importance of Theory ‖, 
Proceedings of the 2nd Annual Conference on Systems Engineering Research (CSER) . 
Johnson, P. et al. (2007) ―Enterprise Architecture Analysis with Extended Influence Dia grams‖, Information Systems 
Frontiers (9)2–3, pp. 163–180. 
Jonkers, H. et al. (2003) ―Towards a Language for Coherent Enterprise Architecture Descriptions ‖, Proceedings of 
the 7th IEEE International Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Conference (EDOC) , pp. 28–37. 
Jonkers, H. et al.  (2004) ―Concepts for Modeling Enterprise Architectures ‖, International Journal of Cooperative 
Information Systems (13)3, pp. 257–287. 
Kaisler, S., F.J. Armour, and M. Valivullah (2005) ―Enterprise Architecting: Critical Prob lems‖, Proceedings of the 
38th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, p. 224b. 
Kappelman, L.A. (ed.) (2010) The SIM Guide to Enterprise Architecture, New York, NY: CRC Press. 
Kearns, G.S. and A.L. Lederer (2003) ―A Resource -Based View of Strategic IT Alignment: How Knowledge Sharing 
Creates Competitive Advantage‖, Decision Sciences (34)1, pp. 1–29. 
Kettinger, W.J., D.A. Marchand, and J.M. Davis (2010) ―Designing Enterprise IT Architectures to Optimize Flexibility 
and Standardization in Global Business―, MIS Quarterly Executive (9)2, pp. 95–113. 
King, W.R. (1995) ―Creating a Strategic Capabilities Architecture‖, Information Systems Management (12)1. 
Kosanke, K., F.B. Vernadat, and M. Zelm (1999) ―CIMOSA: Enterprise Engineering and Integrat ion‖, Computers in 
Industry (40)2–3, pp. 83–97. 
Lankhorst, M.M. (2005)  Enterprise Architecture at Work: Modelling, Communication, and Analysis , Heidelberg, 
Germany: Springer-Verlag. 
Lee, Y.W. et al.  (2002) ―AIMQ: A Methodology for Information Quality Assessment‖, Information & Management  
(40)2, pp. 133–146. 
Liles, D. and A. Presley (1996) ―Enterprise Modeling Within an Enterprise Engineering Framework ‖ in Charnes, J.M. 
et al. (eds.) Proceedings of the 1996 Winter Simulation Conference, pp. 993–999. 
Lindström, Å. et al. (2006) ―A Survey on CIO Concerns —Do Enterprise Architecture Frameworks Support Them?‖  
Information Systems Frontiers (8)2, pp. 81–90. 
Lippman, S.A. and R.P. Rumelt (1982) ―Uncertain Imitability: An Analysis of Interfirm Differences in Efficienc y Under 
Competition‖, The Bell Journal of Economics (13)2, pp. 418–438. 
McGovern, J. et al.  (2006) Enterprise Service Oriented Architectures: Concepts, Challenges, Recommendations , 
New York, NY: Springer. 
McGovern, J. et al. (2004) A Practical Guide to Enterprise Architecture, Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Miller, D. (1986) ―Configurations of Strategy and Structure: Towards a Synthesis‖, Strategic Management Journal  
(7)3, pp. 233–249. 
Obitz, T. and M. Babu K (2009) ―Enterprise Architecture Expands its Role in Strategic Business Transformation: 
Infosys Enterprise Architecture Survey 2008/2009 ‖, Survey, Infosys , http://www.infosys.com/offerings/IT-
services/architecture-services/ea-survey/Pages/index.aspx (current August 19, 2009). 
O‘Rourke, C., N. Fishman, and W. Selkow (2003)  Enterprise Architecture Using the Zachman Framework , Boston, 
MA: Thomson Course Technology. 
Parr, A.N., G.G. Shanks, and  P. Darke (1999) ―Identification of Necessary Factors for Successful Implementation of 
ERP Systems‖, Proceedings of the IFIP TC8 WG8.2, pp. 99–120 

--- PAGE 22 ---
 
 
Volume 28 Article 10 161 
Pereira, C.M. and P. Sousa (2004) ―A Method to Define an Enterprise Architecture Using the Zachman Framework‖, 
Proceedings of the 2004 ACM Symposium on Applied Computing, pp. 1366–1371. 
Peristeras, V. and K. Tarabanis (2000) ―Towards an Enterprise Architecture for Public Administration Using a Top -
Down Approach‖, European Journal of Information Systems (9)4, pp. 252–260. 
Perks, C. and T. Beveridge (2003) Guide to Enterprise IT Architecture, New York, NY: Springer. 
Porter, M.E. (1996) ―What Is a Strategy?‖ Harvard Business Review (74)6, pp. 61–78. 
Prahalad, C. and G. Hamel (1990) ―The Core Competence of the Corpora tion‖, Harvard Business Review (68)3, pp. 
79–91. 
Pulkkinen, M. (2006) ―Systemic Management of Architectural Decisions in Enterprise Architecture Planning. Four 
Dimensions and Three Abstraction Levels ‖, HICSS '06: Proceedings of the 39th Annual Hawaii Inter national 
Conference on System Sciences, pp. 179a–179a. 
Reed, R. and R.J. DeFillippi (1990) ―Causal Ambiguity, Barriers to Imitation, and Sustainable Competitive 
Advantage‖, The Academy of Management Review (15)1, pp. 88–102. 
Reynolds, P., A. Thorogood, and  P. Yetton (2010) "Allocation of IT Decision Rights in Multibusiness Organizations: 
What Decisions, Who Makes Them, and When Are They Taken?" ICIS 2010 Proceedings, Paper 169. 
Richardson, G., B. Jackson, and G. Dickson (1990) ―A Principles -Based Enterprise  Architecture: Lessons from 
Texaco and Star Enterprise‖, MIS Quarterly (14)4, pp. 385–403. 
Ross, J.W. (2003) ―Creating a Strategic IT Architecture Competency: Learning in Stages ‖, MIS Quarterly Executive  
(2)1, pp. 31–43. 
Ross, J.W. and G. Westerman (2004) ―Preparing for Utility Computing: The Role of IT Architecture and Relationship 
Management‖, IBM Systems Journal (43)1, pp. 5–19. 
Ross, J.W., P. Weill, and D.C. Robertson (2006)  Enterprise Architecture As Strategy: Creating a Foundation for 
Business Execution, Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press. 
Ruh, W.A., F.X. Maginnis, and W.J. Brown (2001) Enterprise Application Integration: A Wiley Tech Brief , Hoboken, 
NJ: John Wiley & Sons, chapter 7, pp. 131–151. 
Sabherwal, R. and Y.E. Chan (2001) ―Alignment Bet ween Business and IS Strategies: A Study of Prospectors, 
Analyzers, and Defenders‖, Information Systems Research (12)1, pp. 11–33. 
Salmans, B. and L.A. Kappelman (2010) ―The State of EA: Progress, Not Perfection ‖ in Kappelman, L.A. (ed.) The 
SIM Guide to Enterprise Architecture, pp. 165–217. 
Schekkerman, J. (2006) How to Survive in the Jungle of Enterprise Architecture Frameworks: Creating or Choosing 
an Enterprise Architecture Framework, 3rd edition, Bloomington, IN: Trafford. 
Segars, A.H. and V. Grover (1 996) ―Designing Company-Wide Information Systems: Risk Factors and Coping 
Strategies‖, Long Range Planning (29)3, pp. 381–392. 
Sowa, J. and J.A. Zachman (1992) ―Extending and Formalizing the Framework for Information -Systems 
Architecture‖, IBM Systems Journal (31)3, pp. 590–616. 
Spewak, S.H. and S.C. Hill (1992)  Enterprise Architecture Planning: Developing a Blueprint for Data, Applications, 
and Technology, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. 
Tapscott, D. and A. Caston (1993)  Paradigm Shift: The New Promise of Information Technology , New York , NY: 
McGraw-Hill. 
The Open Group (2009) The Open Group Architecture Framework (TOGAF), Version 9. 
Treacy, M. and F. Wiersema (1993) ―Customer Intimacy and Other Value Disciplines ‖, Harvard Business Review  
(71), pp. 84–93. 
Venkatesh, V. et al. (2007) ―Enterprise Architecture Maturity: The Story of the Veterans Health Administration ‖, MIS 
Quarterly Executive (6)2, pp. 79–90. 
Vernadat, F. (2007) ―Interoperable Enterprise Systems: Principles, Concepts, and Methods ‖, Annual Revie ws in 
Control (31)1, pp. 137–145. 
Wang, R.W. and D.M. Strong (1996) ―Beyond Accuracy: What Data Quality Means to Data Consumers‖, Journal of 
Management Information Systems (12)4, pp. 5–34. 

--- PAGE 23 ---
 
 
162 
Volume 28 Article 10 
Wegmann, A. (2003) ―On the Systemic Enterprise Architecture Methodo logy (SEAM)‖, International Conference on 
Enterprise Information Systems (ICEIS), pp. 483–490. 
Weill, P. and J.W. Ross (2004) IT Governance: How Top Performers Manage IT Decision Rights for Superior 
Results, Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press. 
Whitman, L., K. Ramachandran, and V. Ketkar (2001) ―A Taxonomy of a Living Model of the Enterprise ‖, 
Proceedings of the 2001 Winter Simulation Conference, pp. 848–855. 
Winter, R. and R. Fischer (2006) ―Essential Layers, Artifacts, and Dependencies of Enterpr ise Architecture ‖, 
Proceedings of the 10th IEEE Conference on International Enterprise Distributed Object Computing 
Workshops, p. 30. 
Woods, D. and T. Mattern (2006) Enterprise SOA: Designing IT for Business Innovation, Cambridge, MA: O'Reilly. 
Youngs, R. et al. (1999) ―A Standard for Architecture Description‖, IBM Systems Journal (38)1, pp. 32–50. 
Zachman, J.A. (1987) ―A Framework for Information Systems Architecture ‖, IBM Systems Journal  (26)3, pp. 276 –
292. 
Zachman, J.A. (1997) ―Enterprise Architecture: The Issue of the Century‖, Database Programming and Design. 
Zachman, J.A. (2001) ―You Can't ‗Cost -Justify‘ Architecture ‖, Zachman International , 
http://www.aeablogs.org/eakd/files/You_Cant_Justify_Architecture.pdf (current August 24, 2009). 
Zachman, J.A. (2010) ―Architecture Is Architecture Is Architecture ‖ in Kappelman, L.A. (ed.) The SIM Guide to 
Enterprise Architecture, pp. 37–45. 
Zachman, J.A. (n.d.) ―Enterprise Archite cture FAQs ‖, http://zachmaninternational.com/index.php/home-
article/11#faq1 (current April 19, 2009). 

--- PAGE 24 ---
 
 
Volume 28 Article 10 163 
APPENDIX 1: STUDIES ANALYSED IN THE SYSTEMATIC LITERATURE REVIEW 
Table A1 presents a summary of the fifty studies that were analysed as part of the systematic literature review. The 
table lists the publications, their total and average citation counts, and the key theme(s) covered. The last column 
indicates whether or not EA benefit claims were presented in the study and if yes, whether empirical evidence (**), 
or references (*) were provided to support these claims. 
Table A1: Publications Analysed in the Systematic Literature Review 
Study 
Citation count Primary themes EA benefit 
claims Total Avg. 
annual 
Planning Artefacts Benefits Success 
factors 
Alhanasiadis [2008] 6 6.0      
Ambler et al. [2005] 28 7.0      
Armour et al. [1999] 29 2.9      
Barnett et al. [1994] 34 2.3      
Bernard [2005] 32 8.0      
Bernus and Nemes [1996] 56 4.3      
Bernus et al. [1996] 92 7.1      
Bernus et al. [2003] 50 8.3      
Braun and Winter [2005] 23 5.8      
Carlock and Fenton [2001] 30 3.8      
Chen et al. [1997] 38 3.2      
Chen et al. [2008] 5 5.0      
Cummins [2002] 85 12.1      
El Sawy et al. [1999] 103 10.3      
Guijarro [2007] 23 11.5      
Harmon et al. [2001] 35 4.4      
Hay [2003] 36 5.1      
Hoque [2000] 69 7.7      
Humphries et al. [1999] 33 3.3      
Iyer and Gottlieb [2004] 35 7.0      (*) Janssen and Hjort-Madsen [2007] 14 7.0      (**) Johnson et al. [2004] 29 5.8      
Johnson et al. [2007] 23 11.5      
Jonkers et al. [2003] 43 7.2      
Jonkers et al. [2004] 47 9.4      
Kaisler et al. [2005] 25 6.3      
Kosanke et al. [1999]  104 10.4      (**) Lankhorst [2005] 125 31.3      
Liles and Presley [1996]  31 2.4      
Lindström et al. [2006] 18 6.0      (*) McGovern et al. [2004] 59 9.8      
O'Rourke et al. [2003] 48 8.0      
Pereira and Sousa [2004] 36 7.2      (*) Peristeras and Tarabanis [2000] 50 5.6      
Perks and Beveridge [2003] 42 7.0      
Pulkkinen [2006] 17 5.7      (**) Richardson et al. [1990] 44 2.3      (**) Ross and Westerman [2004] 46 9.2      (**) Ross et al. [2006] 59 19.7      (**) Ruh et al. [2001] 233 29.1      
Schekkerman [2006] 108 21.6      
Spewak and Hill [1992] 190 11.9      
Tapscott and Caston [1993] 64 5.8      
Vernadat [2007] 10 5.0      
Wegmann [2003] 59 9.8      
Whitman et al. [2001] 25 3.1      (*) Winter and Fischer [2006] 29 9.7      
Woods and Mattern [2006] 39 13.0      
Youngs et al. [1999] 35 3.5      
Zachman [1997] 94 7.8      
Total: 50 studies 2588  19 42 9 18 41 

--- PAGE 25 ---
 
 
164 
Volume 28 Article 10 
APPENDIX 2: HOW DOES EA DELIVER BENEFITS? 
The five diagrams below present an overview of some of the existing explanations of how EA leads to organisational 
benefits. It is important to note that in none of the five cases was a diagrammatic summary (e.g. , in the form of a 
research model) presented by the original author(s). Figures A2.1 –2.5 rely on the analysis of the verbal discussion 
and explanations, and may, therefore, not entirely accurately and/or completely capture the original authors‘ 
thinking. However, we hav e aimed to provide as impartial and precise overview of the claims made in the original 
five studies as possible. The purpose of these diagrams was to assist in obtaining a concise overview of the EA 
benefit-related claims and proposed explanations about h ow EA leads to benefits. We believe that these diagrams 
may provide useful summaries and reference for future studies and, therefore, have included them in this report. 
The solid arrows in the diagrams represent explicitly stated associations and dotted ar rows represent associations 
that were strongly implicit in the authors‘ arguments. 12 For example, Figure A2.4 is an attempt to summarise the EA 
benefit claims from Ross et al. [2006]. It shows a process model consisting of twenty-three concepts (represented as 
boxes) arranged in five columns. The left -most two columns in Figure A2.4 present Ross et al.‘s [2006] key 
argument, which says that an organisation‘s operating model should determine its enterprise architecture, which, in 
turn, should guide the buildi ng of its foundation for execution (i.e ., the operating platform). The middle column in 
Figure A2.4 summarises Ross et al.‘s arguments, presented on pp.  94–99 of their book, that organisations with an 
appropriate foundation for execution have higher levels  of componentisation and reuse, standardisation and 
reduction of technologies, increase in shared IT services, and increased business -IT alignment. Moving right one 
column, eight IT-related benefits are shown (e.g., increased IT responsiveness and reduced development time) that 
Ross et al. claim on p . 2 and pp.  94–99 ultimately lead to greater senior management satisfaction with IT and 
greater ROI from IT. Finally, at the far right are business benefits , such as strategic agility and better operational 
excellence, that Ross et al. claim flow from EA, and which it is asserted on p . 2, ultimately lead to greater 
profitability. Connections between these business benefits and IT benefits in the previous column are strongly 
implicit in the discussion on p. 100 of Ross et al. [2006]. 
 
Figure A2.1. Adapted from Bernard [2005] 
 
                                                      
12 Although these associations may vary in importance and strength, it is difficult to make fin er distinctions due to the lack of detailed 
explanations. 

--- PAGE 26 ---
 
 
Volume 28 Article 10 165 
 
Figure A2.2. Adapted from Richardson et al. [1990] 
 
 
Figure A2.3. Adapted from Ross and Westerman [2004] 
 

--- PAGE 27 ---
 
 
166 
Volume 28 Article 10 
 
Figure A2.4. Adapted from Ross et al. [2006] 
 
 
Figure A2.5. Adapted from Spewak and Hill [1992] 

--- PAGE 28 ---
 
 
Volume 28 Article 10 167 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Toomas Tamm is a Ph.D. Candidate in the Department of Information Systems at the University of Melbourne. His 
research interests include enterprise architecture and organisational design, IT strategy and managem ent, business 
value from IT, and how to increase the likelihood of realising that value potential. His Ph .D. research focuses on 
enterprise architecture, particularly on understanding if and how organisations can benefit from this planning 
approach. Prior to commencing his Ph .D. studies, Toomas completed the Master of Information Systems degree at 
the University of Melbourne. He has worked as sales consultant, web editor, and business systems project manager.  
Peter B. Seddon  is a Professor in the Department  of Information Systems at the University of Melbourne. His 
research interests include enterprise systems, IT management, IT outsourcing, business analytics, organisational 
processes, evaluation and alignment, and accounting information systems. He has pub lished in many prominent 
academic journals such as Information Systems Research, MIS Quarterly, Journal of Strategic Information Systems , 
European Journal of Information Systems , and MISQ Executive . Peter has also served on the editorial board of 
many leading academic journals, most recently as a Senior Editor for the MIS Quarterly. 
Graeme Shanks is an Australian Professorial Fellow in the Department of Information Systems at the University of 
Melbourne. His research interests focus on business analytics, t he implementation and impact of information 
systems, data quality and conceptual modeling. Graeme has published in journals including MIS Quarterly, Journal 
of Information Technology, Information Systems Journal , Information & Management , Journal of the A ssociation for 
Information Systems , Electronic Commerce Research , Journal of Strategic Information Systems , Information 
Systems, Behaviour and Information Technology , Communications of the A ssociation for Information Systems , 
Communications of the ACM , and Requirements Engineering. He is a member of the editorial boards of six journals 
and was recently a member of the Australian Research Council College of Experts. Prior to becoming an academic, 
Graeme worked for a number of years as programmer, programmer -analyst, and project leader in several large 
organisations. 
Peter Reynolds  is a Research Scientist at MIT CISR and previously a Research Fellow in the Department of 
Information Systems at the University of Melbourne. Supported by a strong academic backgroun d and experience 
across a variety of industries including defence, manufacturing and financial services, Peter‘s research focuses on 
how firms drive value from IT through business and IT strategy, organisational design, IT  based business 
transformation, an d mergers in IT. He completed his Ph .D. studies in Strategy and Entrepreneurship at the 
Australian Graduate School of Management (AGSM). Peter is on the editorial board of the Journal of Information 
Technology. 

--- PAGE 29 ---
 
 
168 
Volume 28 Article 10 
Copyright © 2011 by the Association for Information Systems. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part 
of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for 
profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice  and full citation on the first page. Copyright for 
components of this work owned by others than the Association for Information Systems must be honored. 
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers, or to redis tribute to lists 
requires prior specific permission and/or fee. Request permission to publish from: AIS Administrative Office, P.O. 
Box 2712 Atlanta, GA, 30301-2712, Attn: Reprints; or via e-mail from ais@aisnet.org. 
 
 

--- PAGE 30 ---
 
 
Volume 28 Article 10  
 . 
  
                                                                                                                                                     ISSN: 1529-3181 
EDITOR-IN-CHIEF 
Ilze Zigurs 
University of Nebraska at Omaha 
 
AIS SENIOR EDITORIAL BOARD 
Guy Fitzgerald 
Vice President Publications  
Brunel University 
Ilze Zigurs 
Editor, CAIS  
University of Nebraska at Omaha 
Kalle Lyytinen 
Editor, JAIS 
Case Western Reserve University 
Edward A. Stohr 
Editor-at-Large 
Stevens Institute of Technology 
Blake Ives  
Editor, Electronic Publications 
University of Houston 
Paul Gray 
Founding Editor, CAIS 
Claremont Graduate University 
CAIS ADVISORY BOARD 
Gordon Davis 
University of Minnesota 
Ken Kraemer 
University of California at Irvine 
M. Lynne Markus  
Bentley University 
Richard Mason 
Southern Methodist University 
Jay Nunamaker  
University of Arizona 
Henk Sol 
University of Groningen 
Ralph Sprague 
University of Hawaii 
Hugh J. Watson 
University of Georgia  
CAIS SENIOR EDITORS 
Steve Alter 
University of San Francisco 
Jane Fedorowicz 
Bentley University 
Jerry Luftman 
Stevens Institute of Technology 
CAIS EDITORIAL BOARD 
Monica Adya 
Marquette University 
Michel Avital 
University of Amsterdam 
Dinesh Batra 
Florida International 
University 
Indranil Bose 
University of Hong Kong 
Thomas Case 
Georgia Southern 
University 
Evan Duggan 
University of the West 
Indies 
Mary Granger 
George Washington 
University 
Åke Gronlund 
University of Umea 
Douglas Havelka 
Miami University 
K.D. Joshi 
Washington State 
University 
Michel Kalika 
University of Paris 
Dauphine 
Karlheinz Kautz 
Copenhagen Business 
School 
Julie Kendall 
Rutgers University 
 
Nancy Lankton 
Marshall University 
Claudia Loebbecke 
University of Cologne 
Paul Benjamin Lowry 
Brigham Young University 
Sal March 
Vanderbilt University 
Don McCubbrey  
University of Denver 
Fred Niederman 
St. Louis University 
 
Shan Ling Pan 
National University of 
Singapore 
Katia Passerini 
New Jersey Institute of 
Technology 
Jan Recker 
Queensland University of 
Technology 
Jackie Rees 
Purdue University 
Raj Sharman 
State University of New 
York at Buffalo 
Mikko Siponen 
University of Oulu 
Thompson Teo 
National University of 
Singapore 
Chelley Vician 
University of St. Thomas 
Padmal Vitharana 
Syracuse University 
Rolf Wigand  
University of Arkansas, 
Little Rock 
Fons Wijnhoven 
University of Twente 
Vance Wilson 
Worcester Polytechnic 
Institute 
Yajiong Xue 
East Carolina University 
 
DEPARTMENTS 
Information Systems and Healthcare 
Editor: Vance Wilson 
Information Technology and Systems 
Editors: Sal March and Dinesh Batra 
Papers in French 
Editor: Michel Kalika 
ADMINISTRATIVE PERSONNEL 
James P. Tinsley 
AIS Executive Director 
 
Vipin Arora 
CAIS Managing Editor 
University of Nebraska at Omaha 
Sheri Hronek 
CAIS Publications Editor 
Hronek Associates, Inc. 
Copyediting by  
S4Carlisle Publishing 
Services 
 