--- PAGE 1 ---
International Journal of Information Management 67 (2022) 102554
Available online 18 August 2022
0268-4012/© 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Research Article
How enterprise architecture leads to organisational benefits
Toomas Tamma,*
, Peter B. Seddonb
, Graeme Shanksb,c
a
Deakin Business School, Deakin University, Burwood, VIC 3125, Australia
b
The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3010, Australia
c
UQ Business School, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Enterprise architecture
IS architecture
IS strategy
IS planning
Organizational benefits
A B S T R A C T
Enterprise architecture (EA) is an important IS management capability that has attracted much practitioner
interest and has many claimed benefits. However, the mechanisms underpinning EA benefit realisation are not
fully understood and have only relatively recently begun to receive research attention. Based on twenty-two
expert interviews and two in-depth case studies, this theory building paper develops a new EA Benefit Mecha­
nisms Model (the EABMM). It argues that EA benefits depend on the quality of EA service provision and are
realised through three key mechanisms. First, EA helps improve IS decision-making by creating a transparent and
structured decision process, by providing objective information to inform decisions, and by educating decision
makers on good IS investment practices. Second, EA services help improve IS project delivery by improving
project coordination through contextual awareness and by accelerating projects through guiding standards.
Finally, EA services help an organisation to improve its IS platform by increasing platform alignment with
business needs, platform flexibility, IS resource utilisation, and IS resource complementarity. Each of these three
benefit mechanisms ultimately contributes to organisational benefits from EA, including higher return on IT
investment, increased organisational agility, and competitive differentiation. The paper also highlights a
conundrum in demonstrating value from EA.
1. Introduction
Enterprise architecture (EA) is the definition and representation of a
high-level view of an enterprise’s current business processes and IT
systems, their interrelationships, the extent to which these processes and
systems are shared by different parts of the enterprise, and plans for the
future enhancement of those processes and systems. EA does not focus
only on technology. Rather, it seeks to create an IS platform, i.e., “an
integrated set of electronic business processes and the technologies,
applications and data supporting those processes” (Weill & Ross, 2009,
p. 4). Enterprise architects define what this IS platform should look like
in order to support the organisation’s strategic goals and provide a
roadmap for moving towards this vision.
Large organisations today are heavily reliant on these increasingly
complex and sophisticated IS platforms, which continue to be shaped by
changing organisational requirements (e.g., due to mergers, takeovers,
and business model changes) and new technologies (e.g., cloud
computing and artificial intelligence). Thus, effective EA-guided plan­
ning of these platforms is likely to be an important factor in many
organisations’ success. However, despite strong practitioner interest in
EA (e.g., CIO Council, 2008; Lankhorst, 2013; The Open Group, 2018),
justifying investment in EA has been a challenge (Aziz & Obitz, 2007;
Obitz & Babu, 2009).
Until recently, there has been little academic research examining the
casual mechanisms that explain how and why EA leads to organisational
benefits. Although research shedding light on some aspects of EA ben­
efits realisation began to emerge over the last decade (e.g., Foorthuis
et al., 2016; Lux et al., 2010; van den Berg et al., 2019; Weiss et al.,
2013), there are only a handful of empirical studies that aim to provide a
comprehensive explanation of EA benefit mechanisms (Ahlemann et al.,
2021; Niemi & Pekkola, 2016; Shanks et al., 2018). However, compar­
ison, reconciliation, and integration of theoretical models from these
various studies is difficult because different research teams have
focussed on different concepts and different aspects of the EA-enabled
benefit realisation process, guided by different reference theories.
Overall, this state of EA literature means that insights into how and why
EA leads to these benefits remain fragmented (Ahlemann et al., 2021;
Tamm et al., 2011) and while a wide list of potential benefits from EA
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: toomas.tamm@deakin.edu.au (T. Tamm).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
International Journal of Information Management
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijinfomgt
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2022.102554
Received 27 November 2020; Received in revised form 4 August 2022; Accepted 4 August 2022

--- PAGE 2 ---
International Journal of Information Management 67 (2022) 102554
2
have been identified (e.g., Boucharas et al., 2010; Tamm et al., 2011),
there is less clarity around how organisations should go about achieving
these benefits.
Therefore, in an effort to improve the understanding of EA benefit
realisation, we focus on the following research question in this paper:
How does enterprise architecture lead to organisational benefits?
To address this question, we decided to go back to first principles
through a qualitative theory building approach (Eisenhardt, 1989a;
Neuman, 2005) based on three complementary data streams (including
nine EA consultant interviews, twelve EA vignettes, and two in-depth
case studies). This allowed us to identify first-hand the key mecha­
nisms (Mingers, 2000; Wynn & Williams, 2012) through which EA de­
livers organisational benefits. Following our primary data analysis, we
were then in an empirically-grounded position to integrate insights from
prior research where appropriate to refine and enrich our empirical
findings (Eisenhardt, 1989b). The result of our study is a model that
identifies three distinct mechanisms through which EA contributes to
organisational benefits, which we refer to as the Enterprise Architecture
Benefit Mechanisms Model (EABMM). We believe the EABMM provides
a rich, yet parsimonious, explanation of EA benefit realisation.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. First, we review
the current state of the related literature and explain the positioning of
our study in this context. Second, we describe and explain the choice of
our research method. Third, we present the insights that emerged from
our theory building efforts and present the resultant EABMM. Finally,
we reflect on our key findings, discuss the study’s contribution, and
highlight three issues for future research.
2. Literature review
In our literature review we examined the three main themes sum­
marised in Fig. 1. Theme 1 in Fig. 1 involves understanding what EA
activities entail and what EA deliverables are; Theme 2 involves un­
derstanding what organisational benefits from EA are; and Theme 3
concerns the identification of causal relationships between the two, i.e.,
how and why does EA lead to organisational benefits? In other words,
the literature on Theme 1 concerns the “quest for the independent
variables” (Petter et al., 2013), the literature on Theme 2 concerns the
“quest for the dependent variables” (DeLone & McLean, 1992), and the
literature on Theme 3—the key theme of interest inthis study—concerns
identification of causal mechanisms that explain the link between
Theme 1 and Theme 2.1
Our literature review began with a search for the term “enterprise
architecture” on Google Scholar and Scopus databases. This led to the
identification of 61 studies relevant to EA benefit realisation for an
initial detailed analysis. We then used this initial pool of papers to
identify others citing or cited by these papers. Over the course of the
study, we periodically repeated this citation-based search and also
scanned the list of recently published articles in the top IS journals
(Senior Scholars Consortium, 2011) to update our literature-based
insights.
The first publications on EA emerged about three decades ago, with
Zachman (1987) often regarded as the seminal publication in the field.
In the first decade of EA research (1990s), the EA literature predomi­
nantly focused on Theme 1 in Fig. 1, with many influential publications
practice-focused and centred on EA processes (Spewak & Hill, 1993) or
EA products/artefacts (Lankhorst, 2005; Zachman, 1987). While many
of these publications contain EA benefit claims, most of these claims
were not supported by justification or empirical evidence (Tamm et al.,
2011). EA benefit realisation studies remained limited in 2000s, with
just a few empirical studies on Theme 2 (organisational benefits from
EA) (Boh & Yellin, 2006; Ross et al., 2006). However, over the past
decade (2010s), research on the different facets of EA benefit realisation
has begun to appear. First, with regards to Theme 1, there has been an
increase in studies examining the quality dimensions of EA processes
and deliverables, which are a key prerequisite for benefit realisation
(Cram et al., 2015; Kluge et al., 2006; Lange et al., 2016; Shanks et al.,
2018). Second, there has been a growing number of empirical studies
addressing Theme 2 (Lange et al., 2016; Schmidt & Buxmann, 2011;
Weiss et al., 2013). Third, and of most relevance for this paper, re­
searchers have also begun investigating Theme 3, i.e., the causal
mechanisms that explain how and why EA leads to organisational
benefits.
The first studies addressing Theme 3 (see Table 1 for an overview)
were mostly conceptual (Boucharas et al., 2010; Tamm et al., 2011), but
more recently there has been increasing emphasis on empirical work.
Some of these studies focus only on one specific EA benefit mechanism,
e.g., IT resource exploitation (Lux et al., 2010), EA institutionalisation
(Weiss et al., 2013), project compliance with EA (Foorthuis et al., 2016),
or impact of EA maturity on IT investment decision outcomes (van den
Berg et al., 2019). However, three studies share the aim of our study­
—which is to provide an integrated explanation of the key mechanisms
for EA benefits realisation (Ahlemann et al., 2021; Niemi & Pekkola,
2016; Shanks et al., 2018). The theoretical models from these three
studies (two case studies and one survey) are presented in Fig. 2 and
discussed below.
The firstmodelin Fig. 2(panel a), byNiemi andPekkola (2016),used
the IS Success Model as its primary theoretical lens to explore how EA
leads to organisational benefits through several stages. Their study is
based on 14 semi-structured interviews from a single exploratory case
study. Their study identified three EA quality dimensions (process,
product, and service quality), 16 first-order benefits, five second-order
benefits, and one third-order benefit. While Niemi and Pekkola (2016)
refer to allofthese as benefits,theirfirst-order and second-order benefits
are consistent with our definition of benefit mechanisms, as the
higher-order benefits emerge from the lower-order benefits. Due to the
many benefit dimensions involved, cause-and-effect relationships are
not always fully discussed, however, leaving open the possibility of
construct overlaps and some questions about the direction of causality.
For example, the first-order benefit “Provide standards” is very close in
essence to the second-order benefit “Provide requirements and re­
strictions”. As another example, “Reduce duplication” is identified as a
first-order benefit and “Provide requirements and restrictions” as a
second-order benefit. However, requirements and restrictions could be
considered a direct EA deliverable (i.e., a first-order benefit) while
reduced duplication may be a consequence of such standards (i.e., a
second-order benefit). The study identifies reduced IT costs as the ulti­
mate EA benefit, but does not consider other strategic benefits.
The second model in Fig. 2 (panel b), by Shanks et al. (2018), used a
dynamic capabilities theoretical lens to explore the role of EA as an
enabler of organisational change. The model was empirically evaluated
using data from a survey of 192 CIOs of US private sector organisations,
and all hypotheses were significantly supported. The independent var­
iable focuses on EA services (as opposed to EA artefacts) as the key
driver of organisational benefits from EA. Their study also considers EA
quality dimensions, though not quite as in-depth as Niemi and Pekkola
(2016). Three key EA benefit mechanisms were identified: (1) enabling
IT change and (2) enabling business change, leading to (3) project
benefits that, in turn, lead to organisational benefits. Shanks et al.
(2018) define project benefits as “improved decision-making, project
management effectiveness, improved business capabilities and
improved IT platform and systems”. The latter two outcomes could
1
In the spirit of DeLone and McLean (1992) and Petter et al. (2013), we use
the terms “independent variable” and “dependent variable” throughout this
paper as a simple and familiar way to refer to the left-most and right-most
constructs of interest in a research model (using more precise language, “con­
cepts” would be a more accurate term considering the complexity of the un­
derlying phenomenon).
T. Tamm et al.

--- PAGE 3 ---
International Journal of Information Management 67 (2022) 102554
3
potentially be viewed as higher-order, organisation-level benefits,
somewhat blurring the boundary between the project and organisational
benefit constructs. Finally, Shanks et al. (2018) identify three organ­
isational benefits from EA: agility, competitive advantage, and increased
value. Unlike Niemi and Pekkola (2016), all of these benefits are highly
strategic in nature (with cost efficiency treated as part of competitive
advantage).
The third model in Fig. 2 (panel c), by Ahlemann et al. (2021), used
the resource-based theory lens to explore the interrelationship between
EA resources, EA capabilities and IS capabilities. The model is based on
interviews with a total of 32 interviewees in eight case-study organisa­
tions. Unlike Niemi and Pekkola (2016) and Shanks et al. (2018),
Ahlemann et al. (2021) provide limited consideration of EA quality di­
mensions and their model does not explicitly focus on quality. The two
key EA benefit mechanisms identified are (1) IT planning and change
management and (2) IT-business partnerships. These, in turn, lead to
market responsiveness and cost-effective IT operations. While Ahlemann
et al. (2021) classify the latter constructs as IS capabilities, these out­
comes are consistent with our definition of organisational benefits from
EA. There are also some potential construct overlaps. For example, EA
modelling is treated as a separate construct to EA planning, while other
EA research often treats modelling as an integral part of EA planning. A
similar issue applies to the delineation between the constructs “EA
planning” and “IS planning and change management”, with the latter
defined as the “ability to ‘plan, manage, and use appropriate technology
architectures and standards’” (Ahlemann et al., 2021, p. 8). Based on this
definition, EA planning could be considered an integral part of, rather
than distinct from, IS planning.
In summary, the current EA literature provides valuable, and prob­
ably complementary, perspectives on various aspects of EA benefit
Fig. 1. Three themes in the EA benefit realisation literature.
Table 1
Prior research on EA benefit mechanisms.
Study Independent Variable
(s)
EA Benefit Mechanism(s) EA Benefit(s) Theoretical Lens(es) Empirical Analysis
Theory
Building
Theory
Testing
Boucharas
et al.
(2010)
EA standardsEA
models
100 EA outcomes or benefits and 65 relationships between them Synthesis of prior EA
literature
– –
Lux et al.
(2010)
EA management
capability
IT resource exploitation;
business process performance
Cost reduction; productivity
enhancements
Resource-based theory (
Barney, 1991; Bharadwaj,
2000; Melville et al., 2004)
Case study (1
case, 3
interviews)
–
Schmidt and
Buxmann
(2011)
EA management
approach
– IT flexibility; IT efficiency City planning metaphor of IS (
Longépé, 2003; Namba, 2005)
Expert
interviews (14
org.-s)
Survey (85
responses)
Tamm et al.
(2011)
EA quality Organisational alignment;
information availability;
resource portfolio optimisation;
resource complementarity
Lower costs; competitive
differentiation; strategic
agility
Synthesis of prior EA
literature
– –
Weiss et al.
(2013)
EA stakeholder
response; EA
consistency
– Project coordination; cost
reduction; risk reduction;
process standardisation;
business strategy realisation
Institutional theory (
DiMaggio & Powell, 1983;
Meyer & Rowan, 1977)
– Survey (105
responses)
Foorthuis
et al.
(2016)
EA approach Project compliance with EA;
EA-induced organisational
knowledge; project
performance
Controlling costs;
organisational agility
Synthesis of prior EA
literature
Survey (293
responses)
–
Lange et al.
(2016)
EA management
quality
– Organisational and project
efficiency, effectiveness and
flexibility
IS success model (DeLone &
McLean, 1992, 2003)
– Survey (133
responses)
Niemi and
Pekkola
(2016)
EA process quality; EA
product quality; EA
service quality
16 first-order mechanisms; 5
second-order mechanisms
IT cost reduction IS success model (DeLone &
McLean, 1992, 2003)
Case study (1
case, 14
interviews)
–
Shanks et al.
(2018)
EA service capability;
EA governance
EA-guided IT change; EA-
guided business change; project
benefits
Agility; competitive
advantage; increased value
Resource-based theory (
Barney, 1991; Wade &
Hulland, 2004); Dynamic
capabilities (Teece et al.,
1997; Wheeler, 2002)
– Survey (192
responses)
van den Berg
(2019)
EA maturity – Improved IT investment
decision outcomes
Dynamic Architecture
Maturity Matrix (van
Steenbergen et al., 2010; van
Steenbergen et al., 2008)
Survey (142
responses)
–
Ahlemann
et al.
(2021)
EA planning; EA
implementation
IS planning and change
management; IS business
partnerships
Market responsiveness; cost
effective IS operations
Resource-based theory (
Barney, 1991; Wernerfelt,
1984)
Case studies (8
cases, 32
interviews)
–
T. Tamm et al.

--- PAGE 4 ---
International Journal of Information Management 67 (2022) 102554
4
realisation. However, there are three important limitations when it
comes to a comprehensive understanding of EA benefit mechanisms.
First, as is evident from the examples of the three closely relevant studies
discussed above and other studies summarised in Table 1, existing
benefit models have adopted various foundational theories which, in
turn, have led to different choices around both the key constructs,
benefit mechanisms, and the overall structure of these models. This
makes it difficult to reconcile and integrate their theoretical insights,
Fig. 2. Three EA benefit mechanism models.21
T. Tamm et al.

--- PAGE 5 ---
International Journal of Information Management 67 (2022) 102554
5
and raises the possibility that the choice of the theoretical lens may
perhaps to some extent have constrained the interpretation of the
empirical findings. Second, very few qualitative studies have been
published on EA benefit realisation (Ahlemann et al., 2021; Niemi &
Pekkola, 2016), and most existing research is based on quantitative
surveys (Foorthuis et al., 2016; Lange et al., 2016; Schmidt & Buxmann,
2011; Shanks et al., 2018; Weiss et al., 2013) which are good for
exploring correlation, but not causality. Third, and closely related to the
previous issue, existing EA benefit realisation models tend to identify
benefit mechanisms at a very high level of abstraction, and usually do
not explicitly identify the inner workings (i.e., sub-mechanisms) that
explain how the high-level mechanisms operate.
To address the first of the above limitations, a fresh, empirically-
grounded look at EA benefit realisation would be useful. Going back
to first principles and being guided by data would enable us to (a)
consider several foundational theories (where appropriate) and (b)
provide a comprehensive explanation of the phenomenon that is not
constrained by any one lens—at least not initially. To address the second
and third limitation, further qualitative work that focuses on examining
causality by identifying and describing in greater detail the EA benefit
mechanisms would be valuable. In this study, we have endeavoured to
achieve all of these objectives.
3. Research method
Consistent with the current state of the literature, and as explained in
the Introduction, we embarked on a back-to-first-principles study of EA
benefits realisation to identify first-hand empirically the key concepts
and mechanisms through which EA contributes to realisation of organ­
isational benefits. More specifically, we chose a qualitative theory
building approach (Eisenhardt, 1989a; Neuman, 2005). Qualitative
research methods enable researchers to address how and why questions
(Myers, 1997; Neuman, 2005; Yin, 2008) and to study causal mecha­
nisms (Mingers, 2000; Wynn & Williams, 2012), which are the central
focus in this study. To guide our data collection, we followed Walsham
(1995) recommendations and used insights from our early review of the
EA literature (Tamm et al., 2011) to provide “an initial theoretical
framework which takes account of previous knowledge, and which
creates a sensible theoretical basis to inform the topics and approach of
the early empirical work” (Walsham, 1995, p. 76). However, during our
interviews and analysis we also paid careful attention to maintaining
“openness to the field data, and a willingness to modify initial as­
sumptions and theories” (Walsham, 1995, p. 76). In other words, while
our data collection was informed by our early reading of the literature, it
was not constrained by it.
3.1. Data collection
Data collection took place in Australia in three distinct streams: (1)
interviews with nine highly experienced EA consultants, (2) interviews
with thirteen senior managers in twelve EA-user organisations, and (3)
two in-depth case studies (InfraCo, a major public infrastructure orga­
nisation and RetailCo, one of Australia’s largest retail firms). Key fea­
tures of thesethree datastreams,includingthe strengthsand weaknesses
of each, are summarised in Table 2.
The goal in collecting data through these three streams was to ach­
ieve a balance between breadth (supporting generalisability claims) and
depth (supporting understanding of the underlying mechanisms). In
Stream 1, our focus was on breadth, with the extensive experience of the
EA consultants enabling us to capture lessons learnt from tens, if not
hundreds, of client organisations. The key trade-offs were the “pre-
synthesised” nature of these insights and the special nature of consulting
projects potentially influencing the consultants’ perspective on EA
benefits realisation (see Table 2). Stream 2 sought more contextually
grounded insights while still covering a variety of organisational set­
tings. We therefore adopted a sampling strategy of maximum variation
(Patton, 1990). The key limitation of this data stream was limited
triangulation, as in each organisation we relied on a single key infor­
mant (Huber & Power, 1985).
In Stream 3, our focus shifted to depth of contextual understanding
through two in-depth case studies at large Australian organisations.
InfraCo is a public sector organisation responsible for the planning,
implementation, and maintenance of core public infrastructure in the
state of Victoria, Australia. It also provides regulatory and certification
services around the use of this infrastructure. RetailCo is one of Aus­
tralia’s largest retailers and has a diverse portfolio of business divisions.
Key attributes of both organisations are summarised in Table 4. Both
case studies examined the role of EA in a five-year period following the
announcement of organisational restructures. The RetailCo case focused
on 2002–2007, and the InfraCo case on 2007–2011. In both cases, the
data was collected retrospectively and relied on the interviewees’
reconstruction of the events. A broad range of EA stakeholders were
interviewed and an extensive amount of supporting documentation was
reviewed, presenting us with an intimate, in-depth understanding of the
role, value proposition, and challenges of EA. In contrast to the two
preceding streams, the key trade-off in this stream was the limited
number of organisations covered.
Details ofinterviewee and organisation backgroundsare presentedin
Table 3 and Table 4. The guiding questionnaire used in all these in­
terviews is presented in the appendix. However, the interviews were
semi-structured and the questions and focus of each interview were
tailored based on the background of the interviewee (Myers & Newman,
2007). Names of individuals and organisations are not disclosed because
all interviewees were promised anonymity. Therefore, in what follows
we refer to interviewees simply by their interviewee identifier (ID), e.g.,
“I4”. For the EA vignettes and case studies, the organisation’s pseu­
donym reflects the industry. To improve opportunities for later data
analysis, all but one interview were audio-recorded and transcribed (one
interviewee preferred not to be recorded, so we took hand-written
notes). In total, the interviews resulted in over 43 h of recordings.
3.2. Data analysis
The first step in data analysis was normally taken right after each
interview in the form of a debriefing session (Carson et al., 2001) be­
tween the authors (most interviews were conducted by two authors).
The key messages from the interview were discussed while still fresh and
where our interpretations differed, the potential reasons for this were
also considered. The second step in data analysis came in the form of
preliminary memos, summaries, and drafts that were written at various
phases of the study and provided useful initial understanding of
emerging insights and themes (Walsham, 2006). The third step was
systematic coding of the transcripts and documents, broadly following
the open, axial, and selective coding phases (Neuman, 2005).
As part of the systematic coding, the interview transcripts were
coded by the first author, with frequent discussion and input from the
co-authors. Although themes from our preliminary, literature-based
model informed our initial coding categories, we used open coding to
look for other potentially important benefit mechanisms and for better
ways to conceptualise and organise the benefit mechanisms. An Excel
spreadsheet was used during the coding to organise—and reorgan­
ise—codes and relevant empirical insights from the interviews. We
initially recorded in the spreadsheet any benefit mechanisms mentioned
or implied in an interview. We maintained separate columns for
recording insights relating to (1) the independent variable (initially EA
quality), (2) preliminary, literature-based benefit mechanisms, (3) new,
2
Fig. 2(a) reprinted from Fig. 3 in Niemi and Pekkola (2016) with permission
from the authors. Fig. 2(b) reprinted from Fig. 1 in Shanks et al. (2018) with
permission from Elsevier. Fig. 2(c) reprinted from Fig. 1 in Ahlemann et al.
(2021) with permission from Elsevier.
T. Tamm et al.

--- PAGE 6 ---
International Journal of Information Management 67 (2022) 102554
6
previously unidentified benefit mechanisms, and (4) the dependent
variable. We used the spreadsheet cells to also carefully capture the
explanations and insights from the interviews about how and why each
mechanism leads to EA benefits. The coding scheme was revised several
times, as our understanding of the emerging themes, but also of the
phenomenon in general, improved. Analysis iterated between the broad
picture and the detail, similarly to the hermeneutic circle (Ramberg &
Gjesdal, 2009; Walsham, 2006).
Each of our three data streams played an equally important role in
the data analysis and provided different insights into EA benefit real­
isation (see Table 2). Due to the different nature of the data and back­
grounds of the interviewees in the three data streams, analysis and
synthesis of findings was performed at two levels. First, each data stream
was analysed separately and sub-conclusions were drawn from each.
Second, the findings were synthesised across the three streams. This
resembles the multi-method approach (Morse, 2003), in that it could be
viewed as a research program of three semi-independent studies with a
fourth, overarching one to integrate the findings.
The benefits of this analysis approach were two-fold. First, from a
process perspective, it helped approach the data within each stream
using an appropriate depth and unit of analysis. In Stream 1, the unit of
analysis was the interviewee and their extensive professional experience
with EA. In Streams 2 and 3, the unit of analysis was the organisation. In
these two streams (and particularly in Stream 3), data triangulation
(Yin, 2008) was used whenever possible and insights from the in­
terviews were complemented with relevant available documents such as
annual reports, strategy and EA plans, presentations, press releases, and
newspaper articles. In Stream 3, case study narratives were also devel­
oped for a deeper understanding of the organisational context, pro­
cesses, and practices surrounding EA activity.
Second, from a content perspective, instead of averaging out dis­
crepancies between the three data streams, any differences could be
clearly identified. This provided opportunities for further reflection and
additional insights (e.g., see the discussion at the end of Section 4.3.2
and the EA value conundrum discussed in Section 5.3). Reasons for
cross-stream differences were carefully considered, and the final syn­
thesis was informed by balancing the strengths and weaknesses of each
stream. For example, we were mindful that the key informant approach
used for interviewee selection in Streams 1 and 2 meant the samples in
these two streams were skewed towards individuals with a close rela­
tionship to EA. Potentially, these informants might have had a positive
bias towards EA. This methodological risk was largely overcome
through our use of Stream 3, analysis of the literature, and the focus of
our study being on how EA benefits are realised (as opposed to making
claims about the extent of the benefits or likelihood of their realisation).
Table 5 illustrates how the qualitative data was coded with example
excerpts from the transcripts presented in the middle column and the
coding rationale shown in the right-most column (many of these and
other illustrative quotations from the coding spreadsheet are presented
in the theory development sections that follow). Relevant documents
such as annual reports, strategy and EA plans, presentations, press re­
leases, and newspaper articles were also reviewed. These provided
additional context for understanding interviewees’ remarks.
By the end of the analysis, after various causal mechanisms and sub-
Table 2
Comparison of the three data streams.
Data Stream 1 Data Stream 2 Data Stream 3
Overview 9 interviews with EA consultants, focusing on
general opinions and experiences
12 organisational EA vignettes, based on 13
interviews and some document analysis
2 in-depth case studies, each based on 6–7 interviews
and extensive document analysis
Purpose Gain a broad perspective on EA benefit
realisation(common benefits,challenges, good
practices)
Explore EA benefit realisation in a variety of
organisational contexts
Explore EA benefit realisation in-depth in an
organisational context
Unit of Analysis Interviewee (personal experiences) Organisation Organisation
Sampling
Strategy:
Individuals
• Focus on breadth of experience and
expertise
• All but one interviewee with at least 10
years of EA experience, and three working in
EA since the discipline’s inception
• Balanced mix of business and IT
backgrounds
• Following key informant selection principles
(Huber & Power, 1985)
• Sought the most senior person in charge of EA
(usually the Chief Enterprise Architect or Chief
Information Officer), and achieved this goal in all
but two organisations (see Table 3).
• All interviewees with well over 10 years of IT
experience, often in senior leadership roles
A variety of EA stakeholders were interviewed (see
Table 3): (a) the leader of EA, (b) other EA team
members (to better understand the EA processes), (c)
senior IT executives (as the main “customers” of EA
services), and (d) representatives of major projects
(as “customers” of EA services, but also to explore the
tension between EA and project objectives).
Sampling
Strategy:
Organis-ation
N/A • Maximum variation (Patton, 1990), on three dimensions: (1) industry sector, (2) level of data and process
sharing between business units (Ross et al., 2006), and (3) rate of organisational change (Spewak & Hill,
1993).
• All large organisations, as more likely to have a dedicated EA practice (min. 1 billion AUD revenue).
• All Australian-based firms, for ease of access.
Strengths • Captured collective lessons learnt from a
very broad variety of client organisations
• Insights from senior and highly experienced
EA practitioners
• Such a broad coverage of insights from
many organisational settings would
otherwise not have been feasible
• Provided a first-hand view into EA in a range of
different organisational contexts
• The organisationally-grounded perspectives share
some features of case studies (Perry, 1998)
• Provided an intimate, in-depth understanding of
the role, value proposition, and challenges of EA
service provision.
• Case studies are considered the method of choice
to gain a rich and deep understanding of
phenomenon in its natural context (Yin, 2008).
Limitations • Data in a pre-synthesised form (in­
terviewees’ interpretations), not possible to
examine first-hand the contexts from which
these opinions emerged
• Due to project-based nature of work, con­
sultants may have a somewhat short-term
view of EA benefits realisation
• Consultants may overestimate benefits in
their expertise area (Ernst & Kieser, 2002)
• We use the term “vignettes”, as despite being
organisationally grounded and richer in contextual
information, they lack the triangulation and depth
of case studies.
• In the absence of multiple informants, our
interpretation of supporting documentation could
also be coloured to a considerable extent by the
single informant.
Two organisational contexts, meaning limited
breadth
Key Insights • Strong emphasis on mechanisms related to
IS decision-making and IS platform.
• Pointed to the need to include IS project
delivery as a third benefit mechanism.
• Highest emphasis on IS platform, particularly the
resource utilisation dimension.
• Strong emphasis on IS decision-making.
• Very limited mention of IS project-related benefits,
raising doubts about the mechanism emerging from
Stream 1
• Strong support for EA benefit mechanisms related
to IS decision-making and IS platform.
• Compelling evidence for IS project delivery as an
EA benefit mechanism (e.g., RetailCo’s
transformation coupled with strong EA-project
relationships)
T. Tamm et al.

--- PAGE 7 ---
International Journal of Information Management 67 (2022) 102554
7
mechanisms had been considered, integrated or rejected, we had
grouped those mechanisms into three key categories: (1) Improved IS
Decision Making, (2) GuidingIS ProjectDelivery, and (3) Building a Better IS
Platform. Our analysis also led us to the conclusion that access to high-
quality EA service provision was required for all three mechanisms to
produce desirable outcomes.
3.3. Integration of insights
In the final step of our theory-building process, we shifted our focus
to refining our empirical findings with insights from the literature. In
other words,we used insightsfrom the literatureto “sharpen the insights
yielded by the inductive process” (Eisenhardt, 1989b, p. 548) of our
empirical data analysis. We also used this as an opportunity to leverage
the latest studies that had emerged since our data collection. In partic­
ular, we decided that the resource-based theory (Barney, 1991; Wer­
nerfelt, 1984) that has guided a few recent EA benefit studies (Ahlemann
et al., 2021; Shanks et al., 2018), provides valuable insights for
explaining the role of EA as one of an organisation’s dynamic capabil­
ities (Eisenhardt & Martin, 2000; Teece, 2007). For example, EA im­
proves an organisation’s dynamic capabilities by guiding the
transformation of its IT assets and resources into a valuable and com­
plementary IS platform that helps the organisation achieve higher per­
formance and, ultimately, an advantage over its competitors.
The final result of our iterative theory building process was the En­
terprise Architecture Benefit Mechanisms Model (EABMM), which is
presented in Fig. 3 and the details of the analysis that led to the model
are discussed in the Findings section below. This new theoretical model
is the result of our effort to infer to the best available explanation based
on both our data and prior literature (Lipton, 2004).
Table 3
Interviewee profiles.
ID Interviewee Organisation Tenurea
Background
Data Stream 1: EA Consultants (9 interviewees)
I1 Enterprise Architect Global IT consultancy
1
5 IT
I2 Principal Global IT consultancy
2
10+ Business
I3 CEO Specialist EA
consultancy
10+ Business
I4 Director, Consulting Specialist EA
consultancy
15 IT
I5 Chief Architect Specialist EA
consultancy
15 Business
I6 Consultant Self-employed 20+ IT
I7 Consultant Self-employed 20+ IT
I8 Principal Global management
consultancy
10+ IT
I9 Research Director, EA Global IT research
firm
20+ Business
Data Stream 2: EA Vignettes (13 interviewees)
I10 Lead Architect,
Business Unit
BankCo 2 IT
I11 Manager, IT
Architecture
EduCo 3 IT
I12 Senior IS Planner GovCo ?b
?
I13 Chief Architect InsuranceCo 20 Business
I14 CIO, Business Unit LeisureCo 6 IT
I15 Chief Architect,
Business Unit
20 IT
I16 Chief Architect MetalCo 9 IT
I17 Chief Architect MiningCo 5 Business
I18 CIO PaperCo 8 IT
I19 Chief Enterprise
Architect
ShopCo 20 IT
I20 CIO StaffCo 3 IT
I21 Solution Architect TelCo 9 IT
I22 General Manager,
ICT
UtilityCo 1 Business
Data Stream 3: EA Case Studies (InfraCo 7, RetailCo 6 interviewees)
I23 Executive Director,
Tech. & Inf.
InfraCo 10 Business
I24 CIO 3 IT
I25 Manager, IT Strat. &
Planning
2 ?
I26 Manager, Information
Services
8 IT
I27 Manager, IT Program
Office
33 IT
I28 Deputy Program
Director,Major Business
Project
4 Business
I29 Technology Manager,
Major Business Unit
16 Business
I30 CIO RetailCo 6 Business
I31 Manager, EA 4 IT
I32 Manager, IT Strategyc
6 ?
I33 Manager, Emerging
Tech.c
9 IT
I34 General Manager,
eBusinessc
4 IT
I35 Program Director, EDW 4 IT
Total: 35 interviewees
a
For Stream 1, the Tenure column reflects the duration of their career in EA
(as the focus in these interviews was on the consultants’ general experience). For
Streams 2 and 3 the column reflects the interviewees’ tenure with the
organisation.
b
“?” indicates that the tenure or background data was not obtained for the
interviewee.
c
These three interviews at RetailCo were conducted as part of as part of
another research project on IT management. The data was highly relevant and
re-analysed for the purposes of this study.
Table 4
Organisation profiles.
Organisation Revenue
(AUD)
NPAT (AUD) Employees Countries
EA Vignettes
BankCo $10–25
billion
$1000–5,000
million
25,000–50,000 5–10
EduCo $1–5
billion
$50–100 million 5000–10,000 1
GovCo $5–10
billion
$500–1000
million
10,000–25,000 1
InsuranceCo $5–10
billion
$50–100 million 10,000–25,000 5–10
LeisureCo $1–5
billion
$100–500
million
10,000–25,000 1
MetalCo $5–10
billion
$100–500
million
10,000–25,000 >10
MiningCo $1–5
billion
$500–1000
million
5,000–10,000 5–10
PaperCo $5–10
billion
$ < 0 5000–10,000 >10
ShopCo $1–5
billion
$100–500
million
10,000–25,000 1
StaffCo $1–5
billion
$10–50 million 1000–5000 5–10
TelCo $10–25
billion
$1000–5,000
million
25,000–50,000 5–10
UtilityCo $1–5
billion
$100–500
million
1000–5000 1
EA Case Studies
InfraCo $1–5
billion
$100–500
million
1000–5000 1
RetailCo $25–50
billion
$500–1000
million
100,000–200,000 1
Total: 14 organisations
*The pseudonyms indicate the industry of each organisation. In order to ensure
anonymity, the annual revenue (Column 2), net profit after tax (3), the number
of employees (4), and the number of countries in which the organisation oper­
ates (5) are provided as ranges.
T. Tamm et al.

--- PAGE 8 ---
International Journal of Information Management 67 (2022) 102554
8
4. Findings
Our empirical findings are organised following the three key themes
required to explain EA benefits realisation that were also used to
structure our literature review (see Fig. 1). Consistent with our theory
building approach, and similarly to Eisenhardt (1989b) and Graebner
(2004), we complement our empirical data with relevant
literature-based insights where appropriate to refine our empirical
findings. First, we discuss our findings related to the independent
“variable”, resulting in the creation of a new construct termed Quality of
EA Service Provision. Second, we discuss the findings related to the
dependent “variable”, Organisational Benefits from EA. Third, we turn to
the causal relationships linking the two and identify three key mecha­
nisms through which Quality of EA Service Provision leads to Organisa­
tional Benefits from EA, i.e., Quality of IS Decision-making, Quality of IS
Project Delivery, and Quality of the IS Platform. Finally, we capture all
these key findings in the Enterprise Architecture Benefit Mechanisms
Model (EABMM), presented in Fig. 3.
4.1. The independent variable: quality of EA service provision
Most of the work that enterprise architects do is focused on helping
an organisation adjust its resource base to align with changes to the
business environment and/or technology opportunities. In this regard,
EA exhibits all three key dimensions of a dynamic capability, i.e., the
ability to (1) sense such changes, (2) identify ways in which to seize the
resultant opportunities, and (3) help the organisation find an optimal
transformation path (Eisenhardt & Martin, 2000; Teece, 2007).
EA has traditionally been conceptualised as either a planning process
(Spewak & Hill, 1993) or a collection of artefacts (Zachman, 1987).
However, our data suggest that neither of these conceptualisations
emphasises sufficiently that a key purpose of EA is to provide advice to IT
and business decision-makers. This is consistent with more recent
studies, which have started to drawattention to the need to also consider
EA service quality (e.g., Cram et al., 2015; Kluge et al., 2006; Lange
et al., 2016; Niemi & Pekkola, 2016; Shanks et al., 2018).
Based on careful analysis of and reflection on our empirical data
(discussed in more detail below), adopting a service mindset appeared to
be the key to realising organisational benefits from EA. Therefore, we
Table 5
Five examples of data and analysis in the three data streams.
Data
Stream
Quotation from Transcript Interpretation
1
“[Without EA] there is collective wisdom. [But] in order to
make a decision I need to get five people in a room and we all
argue and we’re trying torationalise a view. One willgo: “But I
think it’s a fabulous asset!” Another will go: “Well, I think it’s
complete junk!” Well, now what? What does that mean?” (I4)
Here, I4, the Director of Consulting in a leading specialised EA
consultancy, is explaining how in the absence of EA, decision-
makers often lack objective criteria to lean on in formulating their
opinions. The interviewee also later explicitly mentioned the
typically prolonged nature of such arguments. I4′
s views were
classed as consistent with Benefit Mechanism 1 (presented in the
next section).
“[…] enterprise architecture team that gets invited to lots and
lots of discussions, that is functioning as a trusted advisor.
Mostly between business and IT because that’s still a major rift
in most enterprises but they can also be asked into discussions
between business units, for instance to give a holistic
perspective on what each business unit can see only from their
own, limited point of view.” (I9)
Here, the Research Director of a leading global IT research firm
(I9) describes the key features of a successful EA team. Having first
mentioned that the very best EA teams are ones which are able to
provide evidence and measures around their results, the inter­
viewee turned to the second key characteristic—acting as a trusted
advisor that facilitates cross-functional discussions. Not only is this
view consistent with Benefit Mechanism 1, but it also increased
our confidence in conceptualising EA as an advisory service.
2
“A lot of it was about education to be honest. Even re-use
before buy, before build—a lot of people have never actually
[...] done large-scale development, they just don’t get it. Or
they haven’t had the experience to understand how difficult it
is to actually build software or how difficult it is to integrate
software.” (I13)
Here, I13, the Chief Architect of InsuranceCo, is discussing his
team’s involvement in guiding IT delivery. The interviewee’s focus
is on guiding project decisions by educating members of the
project team. This example is consistent with the education
dimension for Benefit Mechanism 1.
3
“A major cost of all of these projects are the different envi­
ronments: development, integrated testing, user acceptance
testing, system testing, pre-production, and production
environments. This costs a lot of money. [...] We created a
common environment management group that could book
projects into their environment.” (I31)
Here, I31, the EA Manager of RetailCo, explains how the creation
of a common development and testing environment provided
substantial savings across RetailCo’s project portfolio. This had a
direct impact on project costs, and through that, provided cumu­
lative savings to the organisation. This example is consistent with
Benefit Mechanism 2 (i.e., how IS capability is delivered), rather
than Benefit Mechanism 3 (i.e., what IS capability is delivered).
“There were classic examples of how we avoided multiple
different projects trying to do different things and leveraging
the one. [...] A good example is SAP implementations. We did
two major ones for Financials and HR. We leveraged a lot of
capability we had built.” (I31)
Here, I31, the EA Manager of RetailCo discusses the theme of
capability sharing. However, the key focus in this comment is on
leveraging the existing IS platform and minimising the duplication
of capability in the IS platform that disparate projects would
introduce. Therefore, unlike the prior example, this example pro­
vides support for Benefit Mechanism 3, not Benefit Mechanism 2.
T. Tamm et al.

--- PAGE 9 ---
International Journal of Information Management 67 (2022) 102554
9
have gone a step further than prior studies (summarised in Table 1) and
created a new construct, Quality of EA Service Provision, as the inde­
pendent variable for explaining EA benefits realisation. Quality of EA
Service Provision is conceptualized as subsuming three key EA quality
dimensions identified in prior research, i.e., (1) EA content quality, (2)
EA communication quality, and (3) EA process quality (Niemi & Pek­
kola, 2016).
4.1.1. The importance of a service mindset to EA
A common criticism of EA is that the approach is document-heavy,
rigid and/or unresponsive, and EA teams have sometimes been
described as an “ivory tower” function (e.g., McGovern et al., 2003;
Rehkopf & Wybolt, 2003; van der Raadt, Schouten, & van Vliet, 2008).
This is particularly problematic as the enterprise architects rarely have
the mandate to decide which major IT investments their organisation
makes, and even the level of control they have over project execution
varies greatly from organisation to organisation. Therefore, in practice
the primary way in which enterprise architects can drive business value
or organisational benefits is by informing and positively influencing
decisions taken by others (van den Berg et al., 2019).
Many of our interviewees emphasised the need to communicate EA-
related information tailored to the understanding and information needs
of specific stakeholders. This suggests a need for a more personalised,
interactive approach for conveying this information. Lack of engage­
ment and relevance (also referred to as an “ivory tower” approach) were
among the most frequently mentioned failures of less-effective EA
teams, reflecting a mindset where producing EA artefacts, rather than
providing advice to decision-makers, had become the end-game. In­
terviewees I4 and I9 suggested that the strongest indicator of EA success
is when the EA team becomes an integral part of key decision processes
and when the decision-makers themselves start proactively turning to
the EA team for advice. These observations were also consistent with our
findings from the RetailCo case, whose highly effective EA team worked
closely with both IT executives and project teams to provide relevant
and timely advice.
Your only relevance [as an enterprise architect] will come from informing
decisions that others make and being relevant in key processes. […]
Success is that they come to you looking for stuff—because it informs their
decision-making or it’s critical to the way that they manage their invest­
ment cycle. (I4)
The first sign that the [EA team is] doing something right is that they are
being invited to lots of discussions, that they are trusted adviser on many
issues. The second attribute I would say […] that they don’t stand out as
something separate but that they are a natural part of the process of
creating plans, turning those plans into projects, tracing the progress of
those projects all the way to implementation and actually measuring the
expected benefits. So good enterprise architecture efforts embed them­
selves into the governance structure. That’s very important in my view.
(I9)
Based on the insights from across our interviews and case studies, we
believe that high-quality EA service provision is key to maximising
organisational benefits from EA. It may be useful to think of the EA team
as an internal advisory service function focused on guiding organisational
IS decision-making. Although high-quality EA service provision does not
necessarily guarantee service use, it is likely to be a strong driver of
service use (and reuse) through its positive impact on customer satis­
faction and service value perceptions (Niemi & Pekkola, 2016), just as IS
service quality is a driver of IS service reuse (Kettinger et al., 2009).
This service view of EA is broader than the prevalent “product” view
and can subsume the latter. EA advice can be conveyed through docu­
mentation, e.g., diagrams, reports or slide decks, but it can also be
conveyed through other means, e.g., formal or informal conversations
and meetings. The key, we argue, is to choose the most appropriate
service-delivery mechanisms depending on the specific issue, context,
and stakeholder(s) in question (Armour et al., 1999; Aziz & Obitz, 2007;
Fig. 3. The Enterprise Architecture Benefit Mechanisms Model (EABMM).
T. Tamm et al.

--- PAGE 10 ---
International Journal of Information Management 67 (2022) 102554
10
Bernus et al., 1996; van den Berg et al., 2019).
This perspectivealso aligns withthe service-dominant logic(Vargo &
Lusch, 2004), i.e., the macro-trend of moving from goods to services.
Although the service-dominant logic applies to economic exchange be­
tween an organisation and its customers, it has several useful parallels
with the EA value creation context. In order to illustrate the key dif­
ferences between the EA-as-product and EA-as-service view, in Table 6
we have adapted the comparison of goods- and service-centred views
(Vargo & Lusch, 2004, p. 7, table 2) to the EA context.
Based on these findings, we define our independent variable as
follows:
Quality of EA Service Provision is the extent to which the EA team
effectively and efficiently produces and provides IT decision-makers
with relevant, timely, high-quality information and advice pertaining
to the EA vision, current state, and/or roadmap.
4.1.2. Three dimensions of EA service provision quality
What constitutes the Quality of EA Service Provision? Building on the
work of Lange et al. (2016) and Niemi and Pekkola (2016), we differ­
entiate between three key sub-dimensions of Quality of EA Service Pro­
vision: (1) EA Communication Quality (how the information and advice is
conveyed), (2) EA Content Quality (what information and advice is
conveyed), and (3) EA ProcessQuality (howthe informationand adviceis
created).
First, EA Communication Quality refers to the ability of the EA team to
effectively convey and communicate EA-related advice to relevant
decision-makers (Lange et al., 2016; Niemi & Pekkola, 2016). While EA
artefacts are one important vehicle for the delivery of EA services, the
most appropriate means of communication (e.g., documentation, dia­
logue, presentations, etc.) depends on the task at hand. Therefore, this
quality dimension encompasses the extent to which EA advice is deliv­
ered in a format aligned with the decision task and stakeholder prefer­
ences, EA team’s efforts to raise awareness of EA services (Niemi &
Pekkola, 2016) relevant to various decision scenarios, and their proac­
tiveness in engaging with relevant stakeholders.
Second, EA Content Quality refers to the EA vision being well-aligned
with the organisation’s strategic goals, the content pertaining to the
current IS platform accurately reflecting this platform at an appropriate
level of detail, and the EA roadmap suggesting an optimal path for
moving from the current state to the desired future state (Lange et al.,
2016). EA Content Quality is closely related to EA product quality (Lange
et al., 2016; Niemi & Pekkola, 2016), but rather than view the EA vision,
EA current state, and EA roadmap as documents, artefacts, or “prod­
ucts”, we propose that these are best thought of as the key content do­
mains for EA service provision (Shanks et al., 2018). As noted above, EA
content need not necessarily be conveyed through documents.
Third, EA Process Quality refers to the extent to which the EA team
operates effectively and efficiently. While the focus of the communica­
tion and content quality dimensions is on the customer-facing aspects of
the EA team (i.e., the quality of the advice and how effectively it is
communicated), this quality dimension considers the processes internal
to the EA team. It encompasses appropriate EA roles and skills, work
routines, tools and frameworks (e.g., Jallow et al., 2017; Lankhorst,
2013; Lnenicka & Komarkova, 2019; The Open Group, 2018; Zachman,
1987), and a clear mandate (Lange et al., 2016; Niemi & Pekkola, 2016).
Although EA Process Quality can impact service and content quality
(Niemi & Pekkola, 2016), it is also possible for an EA team to provide
good-quality services through inefficient processes. This could reduce,
or even marginalise, the return on investment in EA.
4.2. The dependent variable: organisational benefits from EA
The dependent variable in our study is Organisational Benefits from
EA, which we define as positive EA-related outcomes that are directly
related to organisational performance. This variable captures the
highest-order positive organisational outcomes from EA, while the
benefit mechanisms discussed in the following section focus on the in­
termediate EA-driven outcomes that explain how EA leads to these
benefits.
A broad variety of positive EA outcomes have been identified in prior
research, ranging from micro-level to macro-level and from quantifiable
to largely qualitative, e.g., improved communication, identification of
system and/or project dependencies, improved alignment, faster
problem-solving, higher agility, cost reduction (for projects, IT and/or
operations), risk reduction, reduced duplication of effort and/or sys­
tems, and many others (Boucharas et al., 2010; Gong & Janssen, 2019;
Lange et al., 2016; Niemi & Pekkola, 2016; Tamm et al., 2011). Many of
these studies also classify these outcomes, e.g., using the dimensions of
Kaplan and Norton (1992) Balanced Scorecard (Boucharas et al., 2010),
value categories such as strategic, communication, and economic ben­
efits (Gong & Janssen, 2019), or differentiating between lower and
higher order EA benefits (Niemi & Pekkola, 2016).
As per our definition, in this study Organisational Benefits from EA
refers to the highest-order positive organisational outcomes from EA
(some of the lower-order benefits identified in prior studies are more
relevant to the causal EA benefit mechanisms discussed in the following
section). Based on a careful analysis of EA outcomes discussed in the
prior literature and our empirical data, most valuable EA outcomes ul­
timately revolve around one of three types of organisational benefits: (1)
better return on IS investment, (2) improved strategic agility, and (3)
competitive differentiation.
The first type of organisational benefit relates to better return on IS
investment (Obitz & Babu, 2009; Salmans & Kappelman, 2010). Ex­
amples of lower-order benefits that contribute to this higher-order
Table 6
From product to service logic (adapted from Vargo & Lusch, 2004).
Dimension Goods-Centred
Dominant Logic
Service-Centred
Dominant Logic
Implications for the
EA Context
Primary unit of
exchange
Goods Specialised
competences
(knowledge and
skills) or services
Specialist
competencies
(knowledge and
advice) of the EA
team as opposed to
EA “goods”
(artefacts) become
the primary unit for
EA knowledge
exchange.
Role of goods Goods as end
products.
Goods as
transmitters of
knowledge and as
intermediate
“products” used by
customers for
value creation.
EA “goods”
(artefacts) only
carry value if they
are relevant,
meaningful, and
accessible to
“customers”
(organisational
decision-makers).
Role of
customer
The customer as
goods recipient.
Organisations do
things to
customers.
The customer as
service
coproducer.
Organisations do
things with
customers.
EA “customers”
(organisational
decision-makers)
should be active
participants in EA
services rather than
passive recipients of
EA “goods”
(artefacts).
Determination
and meaning
of value
Value is
determined by
the producer and
embedded in the
goods.
Value is perceived
and determined by
the consumer
based on “value in
use”.
The value of EA
“goods” (artefacts)
and services is
determined by the
extent to which
these are used by
and useful to
“customers”
(organisational
decision-makers).
T. Tamm et al.

--- PAGE 11 ---
International Journal of Information Management 67 (2022) 102554
11
benefit from EA include cost reduction in IS projects and/or operations
(Gong & Janssen, 2019), reduced IS resource duplication (Niemi &
Pekkola, 2016), and more efficient utilisation of existing IS resources
(Niemi & Pekkola, 2016).
The second type of organisational benefit relates to improved stra­
tegic agility, i.e., the ability to better sense and respond to change
(Fallmyr & Bygstad, 2014; Salmans & Kappelman, 2010; Shanks et al.,
2018). Examples of lower-order benefits that contribute to this
higher-order benefit from EA include increased IT flexibility (Gong &
Janssen, 2019), faster project execution (Niemi & Pekkola, 2016), and
better organisational transformation capabilities (Gong & Janssen,
2019; Tamm, Seddon, Shanks, Reynolds, & Frampton, 2015).
The third type of organisational benefit relates to competitive dif­
ferentiation (Shanks et al., 2018). Examples of lower-order benefits that
contribute to this higher-order benefit from EA include better alignment
between business and IT and/or strategy and execution (Gong & Jans­
sen, 2019; Shanks et al., 2018), greater client satisfaction (Gong &
Janssen, 2019), and improved acquisition management (Gong & Jans­
sen, 2019).
4.3. Three EA benefit mechanisms
The key goal of our study is to identify and examine the underlying
mechanisms (Mingers, 2004) through which EA leads to organisational
benefits. We have identified three such EA benefit mechanisms: (1)
Improving IS Decision-making, (2) Guiding IS Project Delivery, and (3)
Building a Better IS Platform. All three benefit mechanisms are clearly
attributable to and triggered by the Quality of EA Service Provision (the
independent variable in this study) and, in turn, have the potential to
deliver Organisational Benefits from EA (the dependent variable in this
study).
Table 7 presents a summary of which of our interviews provided
insights concerning each of the three EA benefit mechanisms. A tick “✓”
in a cell of Table 7 indicates that the specific interview or case provided
evidence of the importance of the given benefit mechanism. Each of the
three mechanisms is defined and discussed in detail in the following
three sub-sections.
4.3.1. Benefit mechanism 1: improving IS decision-making
Better decision-making, faster decision-making, more responsive decision-
making to me are the sort of high-level benefits of the work that we do in
enterprise architecture. (I8)
The first key mechanism through which EA leads to the realisation of
organisational benefits, is improving the Quality of IS Decision-Making, i.
e., the extent to which the organisational IS decision-making processes
are effective and efficient, both at the strategy level (e.g., large IT in­
vestment or sourcing decisions) and the project level (i.e., decisions
relating to the IT programs and projects that follow from these strategic
investment decisions). EA acts as a complementary and reinforcing
capability to strategic decision-making, which is an essential organisa­
tional dynamic capability (Eisenhardt & Martin, 2000; Eisenhardt,
1999), and helps improve strategic IS decision-making in three ways: (1)
creating a transparent, structured process for IS decision-making, (2)
providing objective information to inform these decisions, and (3)
educating decision makers on good IT investment practices. Each of
these three ways is discussed in turn below.
4.3.1.1. A structured process for IS decision-making. EAis by its naturean
evidence-based approach to IS decision-making (Johnson et al., 2007;
Spewak & Hill, 1993). It facilitates the identification of all major
stakeholders who may be affected by, and should be consulted about, a
given process or technology change and ensures these stakeholders are
involved in the decision process (Bernard, 2005).
At both our case organisations, InfraCo and RetailCo, EA led to the
introduction of a more transparent, inclusive, and objective decision
process around IT investments. The decisions were guided by the EA
principles and deviations had to have a clear business reason. Stake­
holders contributing to the decisions were selected based on a clearer
understanding of who should be involved. This also improved dialogue
between business divisions.
Some of the decisions that the project managers wanted to take would
have a great impact on the support teams—they would not be able to
support them. So we had people who actually run the shop in the Archi­
tecture Review Groups. (I31, RetailCo)
Involving the relevant stakeholders early in the decision-making
process allows for potential conflicts to be identified and resolved
early, improving collaboration and dialogue between different parts of
the organisation (Richardson et al., 1990). In some organisations that we
spoke with, enterpise architects took an active role in mediating this
dialogue, whereas in others their job was to establish the foundations to
empower this dialogue.
The supply chain team and the merchandising team on the business side
weren’t talking to each other. [...] We had to get the head people in supply
chain, merchandise, in a room and facilitate a discussion that said: You
want to do all this stuff? Now hang on, let’s put a plan together that
combines it. (I31, RetailCo)
Before, I think the architects were go-betweens between a lot of the
business units.So now we’veput the responsibility backinto the [business]
unit heads to communicate directly and to make sure that they are
working together. (I20)
4.3.1.2. Providing the data to inform IS decisions. Many EA planning
activities are aimed at capturing or finding the relevant facts to underpin
future IS decisions (Niemi & Pekkola, 2016; van den Berg et al., 2019), e.
g., documenting existing systems, or defining EA principles to set a clear
basis for evaluating software or IT service providers. At both InfraCo and
Table 7
Three EA benefit mechanisms emerging from the data.
Interview / Case Mechanism 1: IS
Decision-Making
Mechanism 2: IS
Projects
Mechanism 3: IS
Platform
Data Stream 1: 9 EA Consultant Perspectives
I1 ✓ – ✓
I2 ✓ ✓ ✓
I3 ✓ ✓ ✓
I4 ✓ ✓ ✓
I5 ✓ ✓ ✓
I6 – ✓ –
I7 ✓ – ✓
I8 ✓ – ✓
I9 ✓ ✓ ✓
Data Stream 2: 12 EA Vignettes
I10 (BankCo) ✓ – ✓
I11 (EduCo) ✓ – ✓
I12 (GovCo) – – –
I13
(InsuranceCo)
✓ ✓ ✓
I14 & I15
(LeisureCo)
✓ – ✓
I16 (MetalCo) ✓ ✓ ✓
I17 (MiningCo) ✓ – ✓
I18 (PaperCo) ✓ – ✓
I19 (ShopCo) ✓ – ✓
I20 (StaffCo) ✓ – ✓
I21 (TelCo) ✓ – ✓
I22 (UtilityCo) ✓ – ✓
Data Stream 3: 2 EA Case Studies
InfraCoa
✓ ✓ ✓a
RetailCo ✓ ✓ ✓
a
InfraCo was still at early stages of its EA-driven IS planning. The reported IS
platform-related benefits were expected, but not yet realised.
T. Tamm et al.

--- PAGE 12 ---
International Journal of Information Management 67 (2022) 102554
12
RetailCo, EA helped managers to understand better their existing IS
platform, including the IT assets and interdependencies between the
business units, providing a foundation for better-informed
decision-making.
[We didn’t] have that view of what dependencies there might be, what
opportunities or synergies there are. So we’re also looking for this
architectural program to help better inform, hopefully make better de­
cisions with our ICT investments. (I26, InfraCo)
It was a struggle at the beginning [...] understanding really what is it we
had. It took a while. (I30, RetailCo)
Some of our interviews also suggested that EA can help save a sub­
stantial amount of time and resources in reaching decisions by defining
and documenting the guiding principles and decision processes up-front.
There are likely to be fewer prolonged arguments (e.g., which software
solution or service provider to select) and fewer misunderstandings
about how or why a given investment decision was made (due to greater
transparency of the process and principles).
[Without EA] there is collective wisdom. [But] in order to make a deci­
sion, I need to get five people in a room and we all argue and we’re trying
to rationalise a view. One will go: “But I think it’s a fabulous asset!”
Another will go: “Well,Ithink it’s completejunk!”Well, nowwhat? What
does that mean? (I4)
4.3.1.3. Educating decision-makers. A third aspect relating to IS
decision-making that emerged from our interviews was EA teams’ role
as an educator, assisting both IT and business stakeholders by sharing
knowledge and good practices for better IT-related decisions. This
advice was of a more general nature and different from the specific
guidance relating to concrete applications or technologies (that is usu­
ally captured in EA content). Rather, it related to sharing broader
experience and general good practices that the stakeholders could later
apply to similar contexts or decisions.
[I] educate where I have to. So I don’t want to try and isolate either the
technology or the business from the other side’s language. What I try to do
is where there is clearly a misunderstanding about something—educate.
(I10)
A lot ofit wasabout education tobe honest.Even re-use before buy, before
build—a lot of people have never actually [...] done large-scale devel­
opment, they just don’t get it. Or they haven’t had the experience to un­
derstand how difficult it is to actually build software or how difficult it is
to integrate software. (I13)
4.3.1.4. Summary of benefit mechanism 1. In summary, the findings
discussed throughout Section 4.3.1 suggest that high-quality EA services
improve the quality of the organisation’s IS decision-making by (1)
creating a transparent, structured process for IS decision-making, (2)
providing objective information to inform these decisions, and (3)
educating decision makers on good IT investment practices, resulting in
greater organisational benefits.
It is important to keep in mind that while high-quality EA services
have the potential to lead to organisational benefits through improved
decision-making as per Benefit Mechanism 1, they do not guarantee these
outcomes. Even high-quality EA services and advice may be overlooked
or ignored by organisational decision-makers for a variety of reasons, e.
g., organisational constraints for action and/or politics (Smith et al.,
2012).
4.3.2. Benefit mechanism 2: guiding IS project delivery
I have a particular client here in Australia that measured, for instance,
that the initiation phase of projects was shortened by 30–60 % [by
introducing EA]. (I9)
The second key mechanism through which EA leads to the realisation
of organisational benefits is improving the Quality of IS Project Delivery, i.
e., the extent to which the cost, effort, time, and risk across the orga­
nisation’s project portfolio is optimised. EA can enhance an organisa­
tion’s dynamic capabilities through an improved ability to seize and
transform (Teece, 2007), by improving IS project delivery in two key
ways: (1) better coordination and (2) guiding standards. Each of these
two ways is discussed in turn below.
4.3.2.1. Improving project coordination through contextual awareness. EA
helps improve the division and sequencing of work across and within
projects by providing information about the current and planned IS
projects and, most importantly, the interdependencies between the
systems and processes that these projects are going to affect (Lange
et al., 2012).
At both InfraCo and RetailCo, EA helped better sequence projects at a
program level. Projects delivering foundational or reusable capabilities
could be prioritised, avoiding duplicated investment. At RetailCo, dur­
ing a major transformation program this understanding of project in­
terdependencies also helped to reduce risk and unanticipated delays in
related projects, as well as identify opportunities for projects to leverage
existing resources, thereby reducing cost across the project portfolio.
The architects suggested: ‘why don’t you run this as one program, there
are so many project synergies and synergies of the infrastructure.’ And
they actually then restructured the program because the architecture was
so common. (I31, RetailCo)
There was an enterprise data warehouse program, which was broken up
into releases. Those releases aligned with the key change pieces in the
other parts of the transformation. So release management strategy was
absolutely critical to the success of implementing this enterprise platform.
(I35, RetailCo)
Similarly, work can be better coordinated within individual projects.
Although project managers are primarily concerned with the scope and
deliverables of their project, project managers at both InfraCo and
RetailCo pointed out that EA helped them understand how their work
fitted into the broader picture.
When you pick a project up you like to be told—here’s the environment
you’re working in. [...] If we’re not enterprise architects and we’re trying
to do enterprise architecture, then we may get it wrong. (I27, InfraCo)
Our interviews also suggested that awareness of other projects helps
project managers anticipate and avoid delays and risks, e.g., requiring
subject matter experts who are preoccupied with other projects or
attempting to modify a system concurrently with another project.
Quite often if you look back at the project audits and go: “Why was it over
time, over budget?”, [the reply is]: “Oh, we had a surprise.” “What was
the surprise?”—“We had a dependency on a system we didn’t realise was
being turned off.” (I4)
4.3.2.2. Accelerating projects through guiding standards. The standards
and guidelines established as part of EA planning are not only useful for
organisation-wide consistency, but can also act as valuable catalysts for
project execution (Wagter et al., 2005), particularly in the project
initiation phase (Foorthuis et al., 2016). Guidelines help narrow down
the number of solutions to be evaluated in-depth, allowing project
managers to complete the solution selection phase quicker (Foorthuis
et al., 2016). This can provide significant savings in cost and time from
T. Tamm et al.

--- PAGE 13 ---
International Journal of Information Management 67 (2022) 102554
13
the project perspective.
For the initiation phase of the project, projects usually go out and do their
own discovery. If they do it under the guidance of enterprise architecture,
there is far less to discover. (I9)
At InfraCo, EA guidelines were seen to be valuable in guiding se­
lection and procurement of the IT systems in the project initiation phase.
When we went out with our expression of interest, we had no constraints.
[...] If we had had an enterprise architecture group, we might have
specified [criteria] like Service Oriented Architecture or something, just to
narrow it down. (I28, InfraCo)
Our interviews also suggested that in addition to the EA standards
and guidelines, the whole-of-enterprise view enables the EA team to
point out useful practices, use cases, and prototypes elsewhere in the
organisation that a project may be able to leverage. This may also
include architecture good practices beyond the organisation’s EA stan­
dards. At RetailCo, an example of this was solution architects within the
EA team engaging closely with the projects throughout implementation
to provide guidance on architectural issues.
4.3.2.3. Summary of benefit mechanism 2. In summary, the findings
discussed throughout Section 4.3.2 suggest that high-quality EA services
improve the quality of the organisation’s IS project delivery by (1)
improving project coordination through contextual awareness and (2)
accelerating projects through guiding standards, resulting in greater
organisational benefits.
As with Benefit Mechanism 1, high-quality EA services are a neces­
sary but insufficient condition for realising organisational benefits
through EA-enabled improvement to IS project delivery. There are
numerous other factors beyond EA service provision that are important
for successful IS project delivery (e.g., strong project leadership, stake­
holder involvement, change management, and many others (Fortune &
White, 2006; Schmidt et al., 2001)).
It is also important to note that our empirical data provided some­
what mixed messages regarding this benefit mechanism. While the EA
Consultant Perspectives and the two case studies provided strong basis
for Benefit Mechanism 2, only two of the twelve EA Vignette interviews
provided support for the importance of thisbenefit mechanismand some
interviewees expressed the view that seeking to provide project benefits
should not be a key objective for enterprise architects, e.g., I19 stated
that “enterprise architecture is not about the project, enterprise archi­
tecture is about the supportability down the line.” Prior to making the
decision to include Benefit Mechanism 2, we carefully considered po­
tential reasons for this discrepancy (explained in detail in Section 5.3,
“The EA Value Conundrum”).
4.3.3. Benefit mechanism 3: building a better IS platform
You get an enterprise that is as a whole more effective than it is if you just
look at the parts. And the important role that enterprise architecture plays
is preventing local sub-optimisation, where you improve the parts to a
point that it’s actually impeding the function of the parts around it. (I9)
The third key mechanism through which EA leads to the realisation
of organisational benefits, is improving the Quality of the IS Platform, i.e.,
the extent towhich an organisation’sIS resources supportits current and
future business needs and are cost effective. Whereas the first benefit
mechanism relates to how IS decisions are made, and the second to how
organisational IS capabilities are delivered, this third and final benefit
mechanism focuses on EA’s impact on what IS capabilities are ultimately
delivered.
An IS platform includes the IT infrastructure and digitised business
processes that support the execution of an organisation’s strategies and
operations (Ross et al., 2006), including applications, data, and physical
infrastructure. EA can have a beneficial impact on an organisation’s IS
platform by improving: (1) the alignment of the IS platform to business
needs, (2) IS platform flexibility, (3) IS resource utilisation, and (4) IS
resource complementarity. Each of these four ways for EA-enabled IS
platform improvement is discussed in turn below.
4.3.3.1. Alignment to business needs. An IS platform is aligned with
business needs if the platform supports the organisation’s strategic and
operational objectives (Henderson & Venkatraman, 1993; Reynolds &
Yetton, 2015). EA has been found to have a positive impact on alignment
(Gregor et al., 2007; Ross, 2003), and business-IT alignment is among
the top reasons why organisations invest in EA (Aziz & Obitz, 2007;
Obitz & Babu, 2009).
EA facilitates alignment of the IS platform through an organisation-
wide consideration of both corporate and business unit needs and the
required digitised business processes and enabling IS to support these
needs. In the absence of this organisation-wide approach, the business
units may be unaware of (or sometimes uninterested in) their role or
impact to shared capabilities or processes, potentially leading to a poor
fit of local systems in meeting corporate process and/or information
needs.
Previously a general manager would say: “I’ve been to a symposium, I’ve
seen other paper companies and they’re all running this thing called
[AppName]. I’m going to have [AppName]!” You go well, hang on, how
does that fit within our strategy? And we’re not going to buy it for one
business, we need to look at it across all businesses. So we started thinking
of the business holistically rather than business by business. (I18)
4.3.3.2. Flexibility of the IS platform. A flexible IS platform is one that
can be quickly and easily adapted to organisational change (Chanopas
et al., 2006). EA helps improve flexibility by promoting the decoupling
of monolithicsystems to smallercomponents.These smaller components
are easier to reconfigure or replace as required (Janssen &
Hjort-Madsen, 2007; Ross et al., 2006). Carefully planned modularisa­
tion through EA also provides the flexibility for local customisations at
the business unit level, without compromising the pursuit of
standardisation-related benefits on the organisation-wide level (Ket­
tinger et al., 2010). Improved knowledge about the interdependencies of
the components captured in EA documentation can make changes
considerably easier and less risky (Iyer & Gottlieb, 2004). Finally, EA
contributes to IS platform flexibility through the avoidance of the
“complexity trap” (Murer et al., 2010, pp. 17–18), i.e., the pursuit of
business value through point-solutions in the short term that leads to a
complex, inflexible, and costly IS platform in the long-term.
Improved flexibilityofthe IS platformcontributes to greater strategic
agility (Murer et al., 2010). While the organisational benefits from
strategic agility may be difficult to quantify, the ability to respond to
environmental forces quicker than competitors may be a source of
(temporary) competitive advantage (Sambamurthy et al., 2003; Weill
et al., 2002) or help minimise competitive disadvantage through the
ability to respond faster to competitors. In the words of I18, good EA
helps an organisation keep as many doors open as possible in responding
to change:
When you’re putting an enterprise architecture together it’s actually
looking at saying how do I keep as many doors open as I can. So how do I
put a flexible architecture in that can take account of other businesses we
buy, what we do with our business, how it changes. If I want to chop a
piece of the business off and sell it, if I want to acquire another piece, or if
one of our business partners in the space fails. (I18)
4.3.3.3. IS resource utilisation. EA helps improve the extent to which an
organisation leverages its IS resources. The whole-of-enterprise view
provided by EA helps organisations to identify areas where resource
gaps or duplication occur, and provide recommendations on how to
T. Tamm et al.

--- PAGE 14 ---
International Journal of Information Management 67 (2022) 102554
14
improve on the existing state (Bernard, 2005; Boh & Yellin, 2006; Per­
eira & Sousa, 2004). This includes prioritising investment into capability
gaps and ageing system replacements, while maximising the use of
existing capabilities.
The ability to communicate the functional capability of assets that are not
actually enabled is actually also a powerful thing. Because often the
business will [say]: I had no idea that we already had that capability, so I
bought it. (I4)
I can make more effective use of the capabilities I have within the orga­
nisation by understanding what I have and how I can better leverage it.
(I8)
At both InfraCo and RetailCo, EA had an important role in reducing
system and process duplication. First, EA helped to reveal duplication of
existing IT assets, business impact (e.g., high maintenance costs, data
redundancy), and opportunities for improvement. Second, EA helped
avoid further duplication by identifying opportunities for capability
sharing and reuse in future business initiatives.
Based on the normal evolution of IT we’ve got ten of [these systems]. So a
key thing about enterprise architecture is to ensure that as we move from
the ten now, that we don’t make another ten. (I25, InfraCo)
There were classic examples of how we avoided multiple different projects
trying to do different things and leveraging the one. (I31, RetailCo)
In terms of preventing undesirable investment in duplicated or leg­
acy IT resources, the interviewees cautioned though that although
important, its value is often difficult to measure and get credit for.
We stopped undesirable investment in assets that we know have been
sunsetted. Great! Measure the value. What, dollar value? You know it is
right. It is like saying—what is the value of speed tickets, speed cameras?
(I4)
The difficulty lies in the fact that a lot of what enterprise architects do is
preventing bad things from happening. And it’s very hard to get credit for
things that didn’t happen. (I9)
Reduced duplication, in turn, leads to a more standardised IS plat­
form with fewer disparate applications, technologies, and interfaces.
This notonly improves resource utilisation (Kappelman et al., 2008), but
can also contribute towards higher system reliability and availability
(Pereira & Sousa, 2004; Ross et al., 2006), reduce maintenance and
support costs, and sourcing costs through a better contract negotiation
position (Boh & Yellin, 2006; Hjort-Madsen, 2006; Richardson et al.,
1990; Ross et al., 2006; Spewak & Hill, 1993; Venkatesh et al., 2007). At
RetailCo, in the first year of the transformation program EA was esti­
mated to have already helped avoid around 20 million dollars in costs,
most of this through the reuse of existing capabilities.
Certainly the common [benefits] I’ve seen are a reduction in IT
complexity, a reduction in duplication of costs. (I7)
We have got too many [applications and] that’s costing us money because
I’ve got to resource it, to have people to sit there and look after them. (I29,
InfraCo)
4.3.3.4. IS resource complementarity. EA enables an organisation to in­
crease the complementarity of its IS resources (Kohli & Grover, 2008;
Nevo & Wade, 2010, 2011). Complementary or synergistic resources are
those that “mutually reinforce each other, leading to outcomes greater
than the additive effect of the individual resources” (Someh & Shanks,
2013).
EA can help improve compatibility, integration, and interoperability
between IT systems (Boh & Yellin, 2006; Kappelman et al., 2008; Ven­
katesh et al., 2007). At both InfraCo and RetailCo, EA had an important
role in increasing compatibility, integration, and sharing of IT systems
across business units. For example, at RetailCo elements of an advanced
finance managementsolution built for the Financedepartment were also
provided to the Human Resource Management department to support
their business processes.
I’m hoping at a technical level [the EA] will be able to help us too. So that
we are buying equipment that fits together. (I23, InfraCo)
[During the merger] a lot of the decisions made were based on asset value
[rather than EA]. You know this is worth more than that so we’ll use that
one. And we had a hell of a job trying to piece it all together. (I15)
Further, EA assists in the identification of potential enterprise-wide
synergies, and how to leverage them. While a project-focused IT in­
vestment approach tends to deliver individual resources (e.g., an
application), EA shifts the focus to resource bundles by considering all
the elements that need to be in place to fully leverage the new resource
(King, 1995) and helps build complementary resources and capabilities
(Prahalad & Hamel, 1990).
As an enterprise architect I want the solution, I don’t just want one
component. (I17)
For example, at RetailCo, EA helped first identify and build solid
enterprise-wide foundations that provided the enabling capabilities for
subsequently implemented business applications:
We had to identify the IT projects that were foundational or mandatory
for the business projects to land on. This is where the architects come back
to the picture. You can’t just land all these business projects on quicksand.
You have to land them on solid foundations. (I31, RetailCo)
According to resource-based theory, the sources of a firm’s
competitive advantage are rare, valuable, inimitable, difficult to sub­
stitute, and relatively immobile resources (Barney, 1991). Unique
combinations of mutually reinforcing, complementary resources
embedded in organisational processes and routines are more likely to
exhibit these features than individual resources (Brynjolfsson & Saun­
ders, 2009; Grant, 1996). A major difficulty in imitating or replicating
these complex resource configurations stems from causal ambiguity, i.e.,
it may not be clear which components or interactions underpin the or­
ganisation’s success (Lippman & Rumelt, 1982; Reed & DeFillippi,
1990). Therefore, EA has not only the potential to focus organisational
efforts on building more valuable IS resources, but also to help the
organisation build an IS platform that serves as a competitive
differentiator.
4.3.3.5. Summary of benefit mechanism 3. In summary, the findings
discussed throughout Section 4.3.3 suggest that high-quality EA services
improve the quality of the organisation’s IS platform by increasing (1)
the alignment of the IS platform with the business needs, (2) IS platform
flexibility, (3) IS resource utilisation, and (4) IS resource complemen­
tarity, resulting in greater organisational benefits.
As with the preceding benefit mechanisms, high-quality EA services
nevertheless cannot guarantee these outcomes. IS platform improve­
ments depend on the success of a series of IS projects and programs,
project compliance with the EA (Ross et al., 2006; Segars & Grover,
1996), and many other factors.
4.3.4. The EA value conundrum
Consistent with prior studies (e.g., Obitz & Babu, 2009), a recurring
theme throughout the interviews was the challenge of demonstrating
and explaining the value of EA. This challenge may stem from an
inherent conundrum in the causal links between EA service provision
and value realisation. That conundrum is as follows.
The directimpact of EAis likely tobethe strongest onthe firstbenefit
mechanism (IS decision-making), as enterprise architects provide a
direct input into these decision processes. Some organisational benefits
may flow directly from these improvements. For example, by expediting
T. Tamm et al.

--- PAGE 15 ---
International Journal of Information Management 67 (2022) 102554
15
decision-making, EA can help to save top management time and free it
up for other strategic activities. EA can also contribute to strategic
agility by helping an organisation to sense and decide on how to respond
to changes in its environment (Fallmyr& Bygstad, 2014). However, such
benefits are likely to bedifficult to assess and quantify, and most benefits
only flow if the decisions are successfully implemented.
The direct impact of EA on the second benefit mechanism (IS project
delivery) is likely to be weaker than on IS decision-making. There are
many other factors beyond EA service provision that contribute to IS
project success, e.g., strong project leadership, stakeholder involvement,
and change management (Fortune & White, 2006; Schmidt et al., 2001).
However, this benefit mechanism is likely to generate more tangible
benefits. EA-enabled improvements to project delivery can provide cost
savings, faster project execution, and reduced project risk (Foorthuis
et al., 2016; Lange et al., 2012). Although the impact from each indi­
vidual project may be not very significant from an organisation-wide
perspective, the cumulative effects across the project portfolio could
be substantial.
Finally, the contribution of EA to the third benefit mechanism (IS
platform) is likely to be even more challenging to gauge. IS platform
improvements depend on the success of a series of major and minor IS
projects over many years, appropriate IT governance mechanisms to
ensure project compliance with the EA plans (Ross et al., 2006; Segars &
Grover, 1996), the stability of the organisation’s strategic direction, and
many other factors. However, as discussed above, the potential organ­
isational benefits from EA-guided IS platform improvements are the
most substantial, including IT cost reduction, greater strategic agility,
and potential competitive differentiation.
This points to a conundrum in demonstrating and convincing
stakeholders of EA value. Where the impact of EA services is likely to be
the clearest, the directly resultant organisational benefits are likely to be
relatively modest. Conversely, where the impact of EA services is likely
to be the most difficult to establish, the resultant benefits are likely to
have the greatest organisational impact. Therefore, perhaps the best
middle ground for demonstrating EA value is by improving IS project
delivery. The reason is that the impact of EA services on IS projects is
likely to be more easily measurable than its impact on the IS platform.
There are fewer confounding factors and shorter lead times between
cause and effect. However, the related benefits are tangible and more
readily quantifiable (e.g., cost savings, faster execution) than those
flowing from the improvements to IS decision-making.
It is important to be mindful that this does not imply that improving
project delivery is the most important source of EA-driven benefits.
However, this might be the place where demonstrating value is the easiest
and could give the EA team an opportunity to demonstrate “quick wins”
while simultaneously working towards the long-term “big wins” related
to the IS platform. Furthermore, as these IS platform improvements can
only be implemented through projects, establishing a strong collegial
relationship between EA and project teams may have a positive impact
on realising the “big wins” as well.
4.4. The Enterprise Architecture Benefit Mechanisms Model
The purpose of this section is to assemble the insights from the prior
section into a new theoretical model, the Enterprise Architecture Benefit
Mechanisms Model (EABMM), depicted in Fig. 3. The EABMM is framed
as a variance model (Langley, 1999; Mohr, 1982), meaning all five
constructs are measurable as variables, and the six arrows in Fig. 3
(Propositions 1.1–3.2) define variance relationships between the con­
structs. These constructs, which emerged from the data analysis dis­
cussed in the previous section, are defined in Table 8. The EABMM
propositions, summarised in Table 9, capture the implications of the
three benefit mechanisms identified in the previous section.
Benefit Mechanism 1, Improving IS Decision-making (discussed in
detail in Section 4.3.1), says that higher Quality of EA Service Provision
results in greater Organisational Benefits from EA through (1) more
transparent, structured processes for IS decision-making (see Section
4.3.1.1), (2) greater reliance on objective information to inform IS de­
cisions (see Section 4.3.1.2), and (3) better educated decision makers on
good IT investment practices (see Section 4.3.1.3). The implications of
Benefit Mechanism 1 are captured in the EABMM through proposition
1.1 (i.e., the higher the Quality of EA Service Provision, the higher the
Quality of IS Decision-Making) and proposition 1.2 (i.e., the higher the
Quality of IS Decision-Making, the greater the Organisational Benefits from
EA).
Benefit Mechanism 2, Guiding IS Project Delivery (discussed in detail
in Section 4.3.2), says that higher Quality of EA Service Provision results
in greater Organisational Benefits from EA through (1) improved project
coordination through contextual awareness (see Section 4.3.2.1) and (2)
accelerated project completion through guiding standards (see Section
4.3.2.2). The implications of Benefit Mechanism 2 are captured in the
EABMM through proposition 2.1 (i.e., the higher the Quality of EA Ser­
vice Provision, the higher the Quality of IS Project Delivery) and proposi­
tion 2.2 (i.e., the higher the Quality of IS Project Delivery, the greater the
Organisational Benefits from EA).
Benefit Mechanism 3, Building a Better IS Platform (discussed in
detail in Section 4.3.3), says that higher Quality of EA Service Provision
results in greater Organisational Benefits from EA through (1) IS platform
alignment to business needs (see Section 4.3.3.1), (2) IS platform flexi­
bility (see Section 4.3.3.2), (3) IS resource utilisation (see Section
4.3.3.3), and (4) IS resource complementarity (see Section 4.3.3.4). The
implications of Benefit Mechanism 3 are captured in the EABMM
through proposition 3.1 (i.e., the higher the Quality of EA Service Pro­
vision, the greater the Quality of the IS Platform) and proposition 3.2 (i.e.,
the higher the Quality of the IS Platform, the greater the Organisational
Benefits from EA).
While the EABMM posits that Quality of EA Service Provision is the
primary driver of Organisational Benefits from EA, it is important to be
mindful that it is not the only driver or determinant of EA value. In other
words, the presence of high-quality EA services is a necessary but
insufficient condition for the realisation of EA-related benefits.
The EABMM also captures the EA value conundrum identified in the
previous section. The vertical sequence of benefit mechanisms in Fig. 3
reflects both (a) increasing lead times and a growing number of con­
tingencies in benefit realisation, and (b) growing potential resultant
benefits. To depict the different strengths of these relationships, the
arrows on the left of Fig. 3 (P1.1, P2.1 and P3.1) are represented with
Table 8
Definitions of the constructs in the EABMM.
Construct Definition
Quality of EA Service
Provision
Quality of EA Service Provision is the extent to which the
EA team effectively and efficiently produces and
provides IT decision-makers with relevant, timely, high-
quality information and advice pertaining to the EA
vision, current state, and/or roadmap. Quality of EA
Service Provision comprises (1) EA content quality
(quality of the information provided), (2) EA
communication quality (how well the information is
conveyed), and (3) EA process quality (how the
information is obtained or created).
Quality of IS Decision-
Making
Quality of IS Decision-Making is the extent to which the
organisational IS decision-making processes are effective
and efficient.
Quality of IS Project
Delivery
Quality of IS Project Delivery refers to the extent to
which the cost, effort, time, and risk across the
organisation’s project portfolio is optimised.
Quality of the IS
Platform
Quality of the IS Platform is the extent to which an
organisation’s IS resources support its current and future
business needs and are cost effective.
Organisational Benefits
from EA
Organisational Benefits from EA are the EA-related
outcomes that are directly and positively related to
organisational performance. These include better return
on IS investment, higher strategic agility, and greater
competitive differentiation.
T. Tamm et al.

--- PAGE 16 ---
International Journal of Information Management 67 (2022) 102554
16
diminishing thickness, and the arrows on the right (P1.2, P2.2 and P3.2)
are represented with increasing thickness. In other words, as one moves
vertically down Fig. 3, one gets increasing potential organisational
impact, but such impact is also increasingly contingent on factors
beyond the scope and control of the EA team.
4.5. Boundary conditions (generalisability)
In all social science theories and models, it is important to specify
their boundary conditions (Rivard, 2021; Shepherd & Suddaby, 2017).
With respect to the EABMM, all organisations included in this study
were large (at least one billion AUD annual revenue) Australian orga­
nisations. We would expect the EABMM to apply in similarly large or­
ganisations in similar cultures. This is also supported by the findings of
our study being broadly consistent with the reviewed literature, which
mostly originates from Europe and the USA. We are less confident that
the EABMM is generalisable to small and medium organisations or to
organisations in cultures different from the regions mentioned above, as
organisation size, culture, business traditions, and economic factors may
change the scale and nature of EA activity.
Considering the rapid evolution of digital technologies (e.g., social,
mobile, analytics, cloud, and internet of things technologies) and IT
management practices (e.g., the increasing prominence of agile ap­
proaches and design thinking), a salient question is whether the EABMM
is generalisable over time. The data used in this paper was collected
between 2010 and 2011. Despite profound changes to organisational IT
use, we expect the EABMM’s three EA benefit mechanisms to hold over
time. This is because the mechanisms operate at a higher level of
abstraction and are largely technology agnostic. For example, although
agile practices may speed up EA-related planning and implementation
cycles, they do not change the fundamental underlying benefit mecha­
nisms such as project coordination (which continues to be highly rele­
vant) and the need for digital platforms (which only continue to grow in
importance). However, the enabling practices at a micro-level are more
likely to change and may benefit from periodic re-examination.
5. Discussion
As explained in our Literature Review, the three key limitations of
the existing literature on EA benefits realisations are that (1) knowledge
on the topic is fragmented and difficult to integrate due to the different
concepts and theories used, (2) there is limited qualitative research on
the topic to explain causation, and (3) the causal mechanisms and how
they operate would benefit from being described in greater detail. In this
study, we have endeavoured to address these issues through a compre­
hensive, qualitative theory building study of how EA leads to organisa­
tional benefits.
More specifically, this study makes three key contributions to
furthering the understanding of EA benefit realisation: (1) identification
and explanation of three distinct EA benefit mechanisms, their nine sub-
dimensions, and both cost-related and strategic benefits of EA, (2)
highlighting the importance of EA service provision quality and defining
this construct, and (3) explaining the difficulties in demonstrating
organisational EA value through the EA value conundrum. Through
these three contributions, the EABMM (Fig. 3) provides novel insights
into EA benefit realisation and improves on existing key EA benefit
mechanism models (summarised in Table 10, also compare Fig. 2 and
Fig. 3). Each of these three key contributions of our study is discussed in
further detail below.
Table 9
The EABMM propositions.
P1.1 The higher the Quality of EA Service Provision, the higher the Quality of IS
Decision-Making.
Causal mechanisms: High-quality IS decision-making relies on sound
decision processes and access to comprehensive relevant information. High
quality EA service provision leads to a more transparent decision-making
process where major stakeholders are clearly identified, and decisions are
guided by EA principles. EA also provides relevant facts to help decision-
makers better understand existing IS and their interdependencies and future
IS requirements. EA service provision acts as an educator for stakeholders by
sharing knowledge and good practices for better IT-related decisions. Quality
of EA Service Provision is therefore posited to be an important driver of the
Quality of IS Decision-Making.
P1.2 The higher the Quality of IS Decision-Making, the greater the Organisational
Benefits from EA.
Causal mechanisms: EA-supported improvements to IS decision-making
lead to more efficient and effective decisions around IT investments, leading
to cost reductions and better use of IT resources. It also improves strategic
decision-making, enabling organisations to better sense and respond to
change. This is an important dynamic capability that leads to increased IT
flexibility and better organisational transformation capabilities. Improved IS
decision-making also enables organisations to better differentiate from their
competitors and gain competitive advantage by making both faster and more
objective decisions. EA-supported Quality of IS Decision Making is therefore
posited to be an important driver of Organisational Benefits from EA.
P2.1 The higher the Quality of EA Service Provision, the higher the Quality of IS
Project Delivery.
Causal mechanisms: High-quality IS project delivery relies on the
organisation’s ability to manage project cost, effort, time, and risk. High
quality EA service provision leads to improved division and sequencing of
work across and within projects and better understanding of the
interdependencies between projects. EA also provides standards and
guidelines that act as valuable catalysts for project execution and are useful
for organisation-wide project consistency. The whole-of-enterprise
perspective provided by EA also enables good practices, use cases, and
prototypes to be shared between projects. Quality of EA Service Provision is
therefore posited to be an important driver of the Quality of IS Project Delivery.
P2.2 The higher the Quality of IS Project Delivery, the greater the Organisational
Benefits from EA.
Causal mechanisms: EA-supported improvements to IS project delivery lead
to reduced project risk, less duplication of effort, and more efficient
utilisation of existing resources across IS projects. This contributes to cost
reductions in IS projects leading, in turn, to better overall return on IS
investment. Furthermore, improved IS project delivery leads to faster project
execution enabling better ability to respond to change and therefore higher
strategic agility. High-quality IS project delivery can also provide competitive
differentiation when it is consistently more reliable, faster, or lower cost than
competitor’s project delivery. EA-supported Quality of IS Project Delivery is
therefore posited to be an important driver of Organisational Benefits from EA.
P3.1 The higher the Quality of EA Service Provision, the greater the Quality of the IS
Platform.
Causal mechanisms: High-quality IS platform relies on the organisation’s
ability to retain and adjust a consistent set of IS resources in alignment with
current and future business needs. EA facilitates the alignment of the IS
platform and business needs using an organisation-wide consideration of
strategic and operational objectives for IS resources. EA also improves
flexibility in the IS platform by decoupling of monolithic systems to smaller
components that are easier to reconfigure or replace. EA assists organisations
to identify duplicated IT assets and opportunities for sharing and/or
standardising IT assets. Furthermore, EA identifies complementarities and
potential synergies between IT assets, enabling organisations to improve
compatibility, integration,and interoperability between IT systems. Qualityof
EA Service Provision is therefore posited to be an important driver of the
Quality of the IS Platform.
P3.2 The higher the Quality of the IS Platform, the greater the Organisational Benefits
from EA.
Causal mechanisms: EA-supported improvements to the IS platform lead to
better strategic alignment, enhanced ability to modify the platform, and
better utilisation of IT assets. When the IS platform is aligned to business
needs it closely supports the organisation’s strategic and operational
processes, leading in turn to better return on IT investment and potential
competitive advantage. Improved flexibility of the IS platform leads to a
better ability to sense and respond to change and therefore better
organisational transformation capabilities and overall strategic agility. More
efficient utilisation and reduced duplication of IS resources leads to better
return on IS investment. Furthermore, increased complementarity and
synergies between IS resources can act as an important competitive
Table 9 (continued)
differentiator, as such mutually reinforcing resources can be very difficult to
imitate. EA-supported Quality of the IS Platform is therefore posited to be an
important driver of Organisational Benefits from EA.
T. Tamm et al.

--- PAGE 17 ---
International Journal of Information Management 67 (2022) 102554
17
5.1. Three EA benefit mechanisms
The first and most important contribution of this study is its
empirically-grounded identification and explanation of three key EA
benefit mechanisms and their sub-dimensions. Identification of mecha­
nisms is important, as “discovering a mechanism is the gold standard for
establishing and explaining causal connections” (Glennan, 2009, p.
315), and identifying causal connections is often the primary objective
when theory building (Illari et al., 2011).
With respect to prior EA-benefits research, our study complements
and extends studies such as Lange et al. (2016), Niemi and Pekkola
(2016), and Shanks et al. (2018) by unpacking the mechanisms driving
EA benefit realisation and explaining how these mechanisms operate.
Each of the EABMM benefit mechanism constructs is also carefully
delineated to avoid potential construct overlaps (see Table 10). The
three EA benefit mechanisms identified in this study—which have not
been examined in as much depth in any prior study—are as follows:
(a) Improving IS decision-making is the first, least tangible, but
nevertheless important, EA benefit mechanism. This finding is
consistent with van den Berg et al. (2019), who focused specif­
ically on the role of EA in decision making in their study.
(b) Guiding IS Project Delivery is the second mechanism that results in
organisational benefits from EA. This finding is consistent with
Foorthuis et al. (2016), who were one of the first to emphasise the
need to distinguish between project and organisation-wide ben­
efits. While project benefits also feature in Lange et al. (2016),
Niemi and Pekkola (2016), and Shanks et al. (2018), the latter
three studies all combine some or all project and platform-related
outcomes within the same benefits construct. We highlight and
clearly delineate the role of project-level and organisation-wide
IS platform outcomes as the second and third mechanism that
both contribute to organisational benefits, but in different ways.
(c) Building a Better IS Platform is the third mechanism that contrib­
utes to organisational benefits from EA. This mechanism is likely
to be the major driver of organisational benefits from both EA and
IT. While platform-related outcomes are touched on in some
earlier studies (e.g., Shanks et al., 2018 discuss it as one of the
project benefits), no other EA benefit model has identified it as an
independent benefit mechanism.
Our study also contributes to a more nuanced understanding of how
these three benefit mechanisms operate through the nine sub-
dimensions identified in this paper (summarised as the dot-points in
each benefit mechanism construct in Fig. 3). For example, with respect
to the first benefit mechanism, the EA team’s role as educator in
decision-making has not received much attention in prior studies.
Finally, with regards to the organisational benefits that unfold as a
result (i.e., the “quest for the dependent variable” (DeLone & McLean,
1992)), our organisational benefits construct includes both cost-related
and strategic benefits of EA, whereas prior models have tended to focus
on one or the other (cf. Table 10 and Fig. 2).
Overall, the EABMM in Fig. 3 provides a comprehensive yet parsi­
monious explanation of mechanisms through which EA yields organ­
isational benefits. Although a number of quantitative studies on EA
benefits have emerged in recent years (e.g., Foorthuis et al., 2016; Lange
et al., 2016; Schmidt & Buxmann, 2011; Shanks et al., 2018; Weiss et al.,
2013), qualitative studies on the topic (Ahlemann et al., 2021; Niemi &
Pekkola, 2016) remain scarce. The analysis of our three qualitative data
streams has enabled us to identify empirically and examine in detail
these three different and important EA benefit mechanisms.
5.2. EA as service provision
The second contribution of this study relates to the “quest for the
independent variable” (Petter et al., 2013) by highlighting the impor­
tance of EA service provision to realisation of organisational benefits
from EA. Building on the DeLone and McLean (1992, 2003) IS success
model, twoother recent studies havedrawn attention toservice as oneof
the three key quality dimensions of EA (Lange et al., 2016; Niemi &
Pekkola, 2016) and one has used EA service capability as a key inde­
pendent variable (Shanks et al., 2018). The EABMM presented in this
paper goes beyond these earlier studies by (1) developing the Quality of
EA Service Provision construct which subsumes three key EA quality di­
mensions (i.e., content, communication, and process quality), (2)
unpacking the detailed quality sub-dimensions and explaining their
significance, (3) providing further empirical insights into the impor­
tance of viewing EA from a service perspective, and (4) explaining its
theoretical foundations through parallels with the service-dominant
logic (Vargo & Lusch, 2004).
Our claim is not that EA service quality is more important than EA
content (or product) quality—both are essential. For example, Lange
et al. (2016) found EA product quality to be directly associated with
organisational benefits, while EA service quality affected benefits indi­
rectly through its strong, positive impact on top management commit­
ment to EA, and stakeholder awareness of EA. However, our findings
suggest that adopting a service provision mind-set can enable an EA team
to improve both EA content and service quality. Seeing the ultimate focus
as service provision, as opposed to documentation production, helps the
EA team to focus on activities that truly provide value and can improve
the relevance and uptake of EA recommendations through stronger re­
lationships with EA stakeholders. These relationships, including stake­
holder participation and trust in EA (C. Schmidt & Buxmann, 2011;
Weiss et al., 2013), are important prerequisites for realising EA value
and for institutionalising EA in organisational processes (Lange et al.,
2016; Weiss et al., 2013).
Table 10
Comparing the EABMM benefit mechanisms to prior research.
Study Independent
Variables
EA Benefit
Mechanisms
Organisational
Benefits
EABMM EA services as the
key independent
variable. Three EA
quality dimensions.
Three benefit
mechanisms and 9
sub-dimensions. All
mechanisms clearly
delineated.
Distinguishes
between project and
platform outcomes.
Both cost benefits
(return on IS
investment) and
strategic benefits
(strategic agility;
competitive
differentiation)
Niemi and
Pekkola
(2016)
EA processes as the
key independent
variable. Three EA
quality dimensions.
16 first-order and
5 s-order benefit
mechanisms. Some
mechanisms have
potential overlaps.
Direction of causal
relationships not
always clear. Does
not distinguish
between project and
platform outcomes.
Cost benefits (IT
cost reduction)
Shanks
et al.
(2018)
EA services and
governance as the
key independent
variables. Limited
consideration of EA
quality dimensions.
Three benefit
mechanisms. Project
and platform
outcomes not
clearly delineated.
Strategic benefits
(agility;
competitive
advantage;
increased value)
Ahlemann
et al.
(2021)
EA planning and
implementation as
the key independent
variables. Limited
consideration of EA
quality dimensions.
Two benefit
mechanisms. Some
potential construct
overlap (e.g., “EA
planning” and “IS
planning and
change
management”).
Does not distinguish
between project and
platform outcomes.
Cost benefits (cost
effective IS
operations) and
limited strategic
benefits (market
responsiveness)
T. Tamm et al.

--- PAGE 18 ---
International Journal of Information Management 67 (2022) 102554
18
The risk with a product-centric or process-centric view of EA is that it
can invite disconnectedness from the decision-makers, i.e., there is a risk
of creating architecture for the sake of architects. Conceptualising EA as
a service should help to address this problem—it is difficult to imagine
providing a service without having an interested client, while it is quite
possible to produce documents in the absence of an interested reader.
The interested clients, in this case, are IS decision-makers on both the
strategic and project level, in both the business and the IT function.
It is important to acknowledge though that high-quality EA services
are an essential, but not necessarily sufficient, precondition for EA ser­
vice use. Other factors, such as organisational politics and vested in­
terests, mean that relying solely on service quality, trust, and goodwill
for uptake of EA advice is not always possible. At the same time, our
findings suggest that when EA teams apply formal power to achieve
compliance, they can undermine the trust and goodwill that is critical
for effectively engaging in and influencing business decisions in the
long-term. Therefore, under which circumstances should EA teams
apply formal power to ensure compliance is an interesting issue for
future research. Also, there may be ways of designing and implementing
formal EA governance controls that do not undermine goodwill, or even
help build it. For example, many of the good practices for EA controls
identified by Cram et al. (2015) could potentially serve both purposes (e.
g., formal EA stakeholder reviews, expedited low-risk EA decisions, and
co-ownership of EA initiatives).
5.3. The EA value conundrum
The third contribution of this study is providing an explanation for
the difficulties that many EA teams face in demonstrating and
convincing top management of EA value. Recent studies have shown
there is a correlation between good EA practice and organisational
performance (Foorthuis et al., 2016). However, the issue of causation
remains more challenging to ascertain. We believe the explanation may
be found in what we refer to as the “EA value conundrum”. Our findings
suggest that the organisational benefits from the outcomes that follow
most immediately from EA activity are largely intangible and difficult to
measure. Conversely, the EA-related outcomes that have the clearest,
tangible organisational impact have long lead times and depend on so
many other factors that the role of EA in delivering these benefits be­
comes confounded and difficult to establish.
Our study also draws attention to project support as a potential area
where EA teams may find a good balance in demonstrating value. This
does not mean that project support is the main source of EA benefits nor
that it should be their primary focus area. We concur with Foorthuis
et al.’s (2016) findings in that, ultimately, the primary EA benefits stem
from supporting organisation-wide objectives. However, project support
appears to be a valuable but often overlooked opportunity for demon­
strating value and building the relationships and trust that can later be a
powerful enabler for achieving the organisation-wide outcomes.
This potentially missed opportunity is evidenced by the mixed
messages regarding the importance of Benefit Mechanism 2 across our
three data streams (see Table 7), with strong support from the EA
Consultant Perspectives and the two case studies and very limited sup­
port from the EA Vignettes. One possible explanation is that, due to the
short-term nature of consulting engagements, EA consultants may need
to focus more on the project-related “quick wins” whereas for organ­
isational enterprise architects providing project-level advice is an un­
desirable distraction from working on “big picture” issues. An
alternative explanation is that supporting projects is an important
benefit mechanism that is not leveraged by organisational enterprise
architects to its full potential.
A critical analysis of the views and explanations across our three data
streams is more consistent with the latter view. In particular, the
RetailCo case clearly illustrated that close collaboration between the EA
and project teams can be very powerful (but is contingent on the right
working culture and sufficient resourcing of the EA team to handle both
strategy and project work). This viewpoint also converges with the
findings of Niemi and Pekkola (2016), whose interviewees pointed out
project support as a desirable, yet lacking, EA service.
Therefore, we believe project support is an important but often
overlooked mechanism for providing—and demonstrating—EA value.
That said, there is also some inherent tension between the short-term
goals of projects and long-term goals of EA. Therefore, a delicate bal­
ance needs to be sought in the pursuit of project-related EA benefits
through Benefit Mechanism 2 and organisation-wide IS platform bene­
fits through Benefit Mechanism 3.
5.4. Implications for practice
Building on the above three key contributions of this paper, we now
offer three practical recommendations to EA teams and their key
stakeholders for maximising value from EA.
The first recommendation—for IT executives and EA teams—is to
position EA as an internal advisory service function. EA teams are often
criticised for being “document heavy” or aloof to the daily realities of
“keeping the lights on” and delivering successful and cost-effective
projects quickly. Taking a service view helps address these issues.
More specifically, successful advisory service provision requires effec­
tive communication with target stakeholders and careful consideration
of their information needs. Although EA advice may in some instances
be most effectively conveyed through various documents (e.g., dia­
grams, reports, or slide decks), it may also be conveyed through other
means (e.g., formal or informal conversations and meetings). In other
words, the service view shifts the focus from EA products/artefacts to­
wards utilising appropriate communication mechanisms. It emphasises
that in addition to EA content, the way in which this content is
communicated to stakeholders is also very important. To effectively
inform decisions, EA teams should choose the most appropriate service-
delivery mechanisms depending on the specific issue, context, and
stakeholder(s) in question.
The second recommendation—for EA teams and project manager­
s—is to acknowledge the shared goals and the mutual interdependence
of EA and projects in enabling each other’s success. The different
timeframes and scope of EA and project work sometimes cause tensions
between the two. However, the common goal of both EA and project
work is to deliver valuable organisational capabilities to support the
fulfilment of organisational strategy and mission. Further, any capabil­
ities envisioned in EA plans typically require successful project execu­
tion for realisation, and successful project execution requires
understanding project interdependencies with other systems and capa­
bilities that is captured through EA. In short, EA and project teams are
interdependent; each supports the other’s success. In addition, as
explained in relation to the EA value conundrum, the extent of EA
support for projects may also provide a useful avenue for demonstrating
shorter-term benefits (“quick wins”) from EA.
The third recommendation—for top management and IT execu­
tives—is to acknowledge the long-term nature of EA benefit realisation
through platform-building, which is the source of the “big wins” from EA
work. As noted in the empirical findings, most of the work that enter­
prise architects do is ultimately intended to help organisations adjust
their resource bases to align with changes to the business environment
and/or technology opportunities. The ability to do so is clearly of stra­
tegic importance. However, due to long lead times in EA benefit real­
isation and many confounding factors, it may be difficult to demonstrate
EA’s contribution to the business. In some organisations, this can even
lead to the need for an EA function being called into question. Therefore,
if doubts arise about the value of the EA function, top management and
IT executives need to ask themselves long-term questions such as: (1)
“How well does our current IS platform support our strategic needs?”;
(2) “What is the desired strength and flexibility of the IS platform?”; and
(3) “How much, and what sort of, contribution from EA is required to
achieve that desired future state?”. Answers to such long-term, platform-
T. Tamm et al.

--- PAGE 19 ---
International Journal of Information Management 67 (2022) 102554
19
related questions are likely to be one of the most reliable indicators of
the value of the organisation’s current and future EA function.
In combination, the above three recommendations should assist in
maximising the benefits realised from EA efforts, clearer demonstration
of these benefits, and stronger working relationships between the EA
team and all its key stakeholder groups.
5.5. Limitations and issues for future research
In light of the findings as well as the limitations of our study, we
would like to highlight three important avenues for future research on
EA benefits realisation.
First, since this is a theory building study, further independent
testing of the EABMM is necessary. For example, as explained in the
Research Method section, two of our data streams relied on the key
informant approach. While this helped maximise insights from each
interview, key informants are inevitably individuals close to EA and may
have a more positive view on EA value. This limitation in our study was
addressed through the case studies in the third data stream, analysis of
the literature, and focusing on the mechanisms for (rather than the
magnitude of) benefits realisation. However, future studies could seek
out even more diverse and negative perspectives on EA value. Benefit
mechanism interrelationships may also be useful to investigate further.
While each of the three benefit mechanisms in the EABMM appears to be
an independent and distinct contributor to organisational benefits, there
could be interaction effects between them. Finally, testing the explan­
atory power of the EABMM in different contexts as compared to other
current and emerging EA benefit models would be most valuable. Froma
research methods perspective, future large cross-sectional surveys
would be useful for testing the generalisability of the EABMM and lon­
gitudinal studies would be highly valuable in further examining how EA
benefit mechanisms operate over time (as there is often a long lead time
between EA service provision and benefits realisation).
Second, an area requiring further empirical examination is how to
strike an appropriate balance between the advisory and compliance
roles of EA. Positioning EA as a service, as we have proposed in this
study, may help address some of the most common issues in EA benefits
realisation. However, it may also have some negative implications and,
at times, taking a compliance approach may be necessary. Studies on
trust and formal controls in the management (e.g., Das & Teng, 1999;
Inkpen & Currall, 2004; Poppo & Zenger, 2002) and IS literatures (e.g.,
Gallivan & Depledge, 2003; Heiskanen et al., 2008; Langfield-Smith &
Smith, 2003) could provide a useful foundation for future research on
this issue.
Third, another delicate yet essential balancing act is between EA and
project delivery. This issue—closely linked to our EA value conun­
drum—has received surprisingly little attention. What is the relative
importance and organisational impact of EA-enabled project benefits
versus IS platform benefits? How can organisations improve the often-
strained relationship between EA and project teams? Under what cir­
cumstances should the pursuit of EA-enabled project benefits take pre­
cedence over EA-enabled platform benefits, and vice versa? As the
realisation of IS platform benefits is contingent on projects, future
research on how these benefit mechanisms may interact would likely
help organisations to more effectively leverage both of these benefit
mechanisms.
6. Conclusion
The past decade has witnessed growing research interest in EA
benefits and ways to achieve them. Various studies now provide a range
of differing, though complementary, insights into EA benefits realisa­
tion. However, EA benefits realisation processes remain relatively
under-explored, particularly with respect to how and why EA benefits
are realised. In this study, we sought a first-principles-based under­
standing of EA benefit mechanisms, based on three streams of
qualitative interviews with EA experts and stakeholders. The resultant
Enterprise Architecture Benefit Mechanisms Model (EABMM) proposed
in this study suggests that Quality of EA Service Provision is the key driver
of EA benefits realisation, and that a service-oriented mindset may help
overcome issues with EA activity sometimes being disengaged from its
key stakeholders. With respect to how EA leads to organisational ben­
efits, the EABMM suggests that researchers and organisations have three
key benefit mechanisms to consider: (1) improved IS decision-making,
(2) guiding IS project delivery, and (3) improved IS platform. Finally,
the EABMM highlights an EA value conundrum, i.e., the EA outcomes
which can be realised quickly and are easiest to demonstrate have
relatively limited tangible value, while EA outcomes that have the
highest tangible value take a long time to realise and are complex to
demonstrate and quantify. Organisations need to be mindful of this
conundrum and balance the pursuit of both EA “quick wins” and “big
wins”.
We hope that the insights captured in the EABMM will help organi­
sations achieve better outcomes from their EA activity and provide re­
searchers a useful steppingstone on the journey towards deeper
understanding of EA benefit realisation!
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Toomas Tamm: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis,
Methodology, Investigation, Project administration, Writing – original
draft, Writing – review & editing. Peter B. Seddon: Conceptualization,
Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Supervision,
Writing – review & editing. Graeme Shanks: Conceptualization,
Investigation, Methodology, Project administration,Supervision,
Writing – review & editing.
Appendix A. : Interview Guide
This appendix presents the questionnaire that was used to guide the
semi-structured interviews. Please note that this questionnaire was a
guide only, and its purpose was to encourage the interviewees to reflect
on the research themes, rather than constrain this discussion. The
phrasing of the questions varied based on the role of the interviewee and
the organisational context. Depending on the interviewee’s role and
experience (e.g., enterprise architect, CIO, project manager), the focal
themes also varied from interview to interview. Not all questions were
necessarily covered in every interview, and some themes were covered
in greater depth than others depending on the interviewee’s
background.
Interviewee Background
Please describe your background and current role in the organisation
(incl. educational and professional background, EA-related experience,
current role, reporting line, key deliverables).
Theme 1: Organisational Context
1. What is the current and desired level of process and data sharing
between the business units?
2. How do you decide what should be shared between different busi­
ness units?
3. How much change is the organisation currently going through in
terms of business and IT?
4. What are the current key drivers and directions of business change?
Theme 2: Current and Future EA
5. Does the organisation have a goodoverview of its existingprocess
and application portfolio?
T. Tamm et al.

--- PAGE 20 ---
International Journal of Information Management 67 (2022) 102554
20
6. What are the key processes and IT systems that support the
business (i.e., the current EA)?
7. How diverse is the organisations IT portfolio (e.g., can you give
an approximate estimate about the number of systems and in­
terfaces that the portfolio is comprised of)?
8. What is the future vision for the organisation’s processes and IT
systems? How is this vision expected to improve on the current
state?
9. What are the high-level principles that guide this future vision?
10. Does a pre-defined project roadmap exist for moving towards the
EA vision? If yes, what is the general approach used and/or the
key phases of the roadmap? If not, why is the roadmapconsidered
to be unnecessary?
Theme 3: EA Approach
11. Who is responsible for EA planning in the organisation? How
many people are involved and how are the responsibilities
distributed?
12. What level of detail and which timeframes do you consider in
your EA?
• What do you plan up-front, and what is developed “on-the-go”?
• How do you accommodate for the rapid technology and business
changes?
13. What processes and/or governance structures link EA planning
with business planning on the one hand and project delivery on
the other?
14. How are the EA plans produced and updated?
• Who are the key contributors to the vision?
• How often are the plans reviewed and updated?
Theme 4: Deriving Benefits from EA
15. What are the characteristics of a good EA? What do these char­
acteristics depend on?
16. To what extent do the on-going IT and business projects adhere to
the EA vision and principles (e.g., can you suggest percentages)?
Does this accurately reflect the potential of EA and if not what is
the reason for the discrepancy?
17. What have been the key benefits of EA for your organisation?
• Can you give some specific examples on how certain architectural
decisions (or lack thereof) have affected your organisation?
• Can you give any approximate figures on the extent of EA-related
impacts (e.g. $ saved/lost, time saved/wasted, etc.)?
18. What have been the key success factors for EA planning and
implementation?
19. What have been the main challenges relating to EA planning and
implementation?
20. Is EA more important for some organisations than others? Why or
why not?
Thank you for finding the time to contribute to this research
project!.
Appendix B. Supporting information
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the
online version at doi:10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2022.102554.
References
Ahlemann, F., Legner, C., & Lux, J. (2021). A resource-based perspective of value
generation through enterprise architecture management. Information & Management,
58(1), Article 103266. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2020.103266
Armour, F. J., Kaisler, S. H., & Liu, S. Y. (1999). A big-picture look at enterprise
architectures. IT Professional, 1(1), 35–42. https://doi.org/10.1109/6294.774792
Aziz, S., & Obitz, T. (2007). Enterprise architecture is maturing: infosys enterprise.
Architecture Survey, 2007.
Barney, J. B. (1991). Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage. Journal of
Management, 17(1), 99–120. https://doi.org/10.1177/014920639101700108
Bernard, S. A. (2005). An introduction to enterprise architecture (2nd ed.). AuthorHouse.
Bernus, P., Nemes, L., & Williams, T. J. (1996). Architectures for enterprise integration.
Chapman & Hall.
Bharadwaj, A. S. (2000). A resource-based perspective on information technology
capability and firm performance: an empirical investigation. MIS Quarterly, 24,
169–196.
Boh, W. F., & Yellin, D. (2006). Using enterprise architecture standards in managing
information technology. Journal of Management Information Systems, 23(3), 163–207.
https://doi.org/10.2753/MIS0742-1222230307
Boucharas, V., van Steenbergen, M., Jansen, S., & Brinkkemper, S. (2010). The
contribution of enterprise architecture to the achievement of organizational goals:
establishing the enterprise architecture benefits framework technical report UU-CS-2010-
2014. Utrecht University.
Brynjolfsson, E., & Saunders, A. (2009). Wired for innovation. The MIT Press.
Carson, D., Gilmore, A., Perry, C., & Gronhaug, K. (2001). Qualitative marketing research.
Sage Publications.
Chanopas, A., Krairit, D., & Khang, D. B. (2006). Managing information technology
infrastructure: A new flexibility framework. Management Research News, 29(10),
632–651. https://doi.org/10.1108/01409170610712335
CIO Council. (2008). A practical guide to federal service oriented architecture.
Cram, W. A., Brohman, M. K., & Gallupe, R. B. (2015). Addressing the control challenges
of the enterprise architecture process. Journal of Information Systems, 29(2),
161–182. https://doi.org/10.2308/isys-50913
Das, T. K., & Teng, B.-S. (1999). Cognitive biases and strategic decision processes: an
integrative perspective. Journal of Management Studies, 36(6), 757–778. https://doi.
org/10.1111/1467-6486.00157
DeLone, W. H., & McLean, E. R. (1992). Information systems success: the quest for the
dependent variable. Information Systems Research, 3(1), 60–95. https://doi.org/
10.1287/isre.3.1.60
DeLone, W. H., & McLean, E. R. (2003). The DeLone and McLean model of information
systems success: A ten-year update. Journal of Management Information Systems, 19
(4), 9–30.
DiMaggio, P. J., & Powell, W. W. (1983). The iron cage revisited: Institutional
Isomorphism and collective rationality in organizational fields. American Sociological
Review, 48(2), 147–160. https://doi.org/10.2307/2095101
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989aaa). Building theories from case study research. Academy of
Management Review, 14(4), 532–550.
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989bbb). Making fast strategic decisions in high-velocity
environments. Academy of Management Journal, 32(3), 543–576. https://doi.org/
10.2307/256434
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1999). Strategy as strategic decision making. Sloan Management
Review, 40, 65–72.
Eisenhardt, K. M., & Martin, J. A. (2000). Dynamic capabilities: What are they? Strategic
Management Journal, 21(10/11), 1105–1121. https://doi.org/10.1002/1097-0266
(200010/11)21:10/11%3C1105::AID-SMJ133%3E3.0.CO;2-E
Ernst, B., & Kieser, A. (2002). Consultants as agents of anxiety and providers of
managerial control. Academy of Management Proceedings, 2002(1), C1–C6. https://
doi.org/10.5465/APB.7516889
Fallmyr, T., & Bygstad, B. (2014). Enterprise architecture practice and organizational
agility: An exploratory study. In Proceedings of the forty seventh Hawaii international
conference on system sciences (HICSS) (pp. 3788–3797). Retrieved from 〈https://doi.
org/10.1109/HICSS.2014.471〉.
Foorthuis, R., van Steenbergen, M., Brinkkemper, S., & Bruls, W. A. G. (2016). A theory
building study of enterprise architecture practices and benefits. Information Systems
Frontiers, 18(3), 541–564. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10796-014-9542-1
Fortune, J., & White, D. (2006). Framing of project critical success factors by a systems
model. International Journal of Project Management, 24(1), 53–65. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijproman.2005.07.004
Gallivan, M. J., & Depledge, G. (2003). Trust, control and the role of interorganizational
systems in electronic partnerships. Information Systems Journal, 13(2), 159–190.
https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2575.2003.00146.x
Glennan, S. (2009). Mechanisms. In H. Beebee, C. Hitchcock, & P. C. Menzies (Eds.), The
Oxford handbook of causation. Oxford University Press.
Gong, Y., & Janssen, M. (2019). The value of and myths about enterprise architecture.
International Journal of Information Management, 46, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijinfomgt.2018.11.006
Graebner, M. E. (2004). Momentum and serendipity: How acquired leaders create value
in the integration of technology firms. Strategic Management Journal, 25(8–9),
751–777. https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.419
Grant, R. M. (1996). Toward a knowledge-based theory of the firm. Strategic Management
Journal, 17 (Special Issue: Knowledge and the Firm), 109–122.
Gregor, S., Hart, D., & Martin, N. J. (2007). Enterprise architectures: Enablers of business
strategy and IS/IT alignment in government. Information Technology & People, 20(2),
96–120.
T. Tamm et al.

--- PAGE 21 ---
International Journal of Information Management 67 (2022) 102554
21
Heiskanen, A., Newman, M., & Eklin, M. (2008). Control, trust, power, and the dynamics
of information system outsourcing relationships: A process study of contractual
software development. The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 17(4), 268–286.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis.2008.10.001
Henderson, J. C., & Venkatraman, N. (1993). Strategic alignment: Leveraging
information technology for transforming organisations. IBM Systems Journal, 32(1),
4–16.
Hjort-Madsen, K. (2006). Enterprise architecture implementation and management: A
case study on interoperability. In Proceedings of the thirty ninth Hawaii international
conference on system sciences.Retrieved from 〈https://doi.org/10.1109/HICSS.2006.
154〉.
Huber, G. P., & Power, D. J. (1985). Retrospective reports of strategic-level managers:
Guidelines for increasing their accuracy. Strategic Management Journal, 6(2),
171–180. https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.4250060206
Illari, P., Russo, F., & Williamson, J. (Eds.). (2011). Causality in the sciences. Oxford
University Press.
Inkpen, A. C., & Currall, S. C. (2004). The coevolution of trust, control, and learning in
joint ventures. Organization Science, 15(5), 586–599. https://doi.org/10.1287/
orsc.1040.0079
Iyer, B., & Gottlieb, R. M. (2004). The four-domain architecture: an approach to support
enterprise architecture design. IBM Systems Journal, 43(3), 587–597.
Jallow, A. K., Demian, P., Anumba, C. J., & Baldwin, A. N. (2017). An enterprise
architecture framework for electronic requirements information management.
International Journal of Information Management, 37(5), 455–472. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2017.04.005
Janssen, M., & Hjort-Madsen, K. (2007). Analyzing enterprise architecture in national
governments: The cases of Denmark and the Netherlands. In Proceedings of the fortieth
Hawaii international conference on system sciences.
Johnson, P., Lagerström, R., Närman, P., & Simonsson, M. (2007). Enterprise architecture
analysis with extended influence diagrams. Information Systems Frontiers, 9(2–3),
163–180. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10796-007-9030-y
Kaplan, R. S., & Norton, D. P. (1992). The balanced scorecard: Measures that drive
performance. Harvard Business Review, 83, 172–180.
Kappelman, L., McGinnis, T., Pettite, A., & Sidorova, A. (2008, August 14). Enterprise
architecture: Charting the territory for academic research. In Proceedings of the
fourteenth Americas conference on information systems. Retrieved from 〈http://aisel.ais
net.org/amcis2008/162/〉.
Kettinger, W. J., Marchand, D. A., & Davis, J. M. (2010). Designing enterprise IT
architectures to optimize flexibility and standardization in global business. MIS
Quarterly Executive, 9(2), 95–113.
Kettinger, W. J., Park, S.-H.“S., & Smith, J. (2009). Understanding the consequences of
information systems service quality on IS service reuse. Information & Management,
46(6), 335–341. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2009.03.004
King, W. R. (1995). Creating a strategic capabilities architecture. Information Systems
Management, 12(1), 67–69.
Kluge, C., Dietzsch, A., & Rosemann, M. (2006). How To realise corporate value from
enterprise architecture. In Proceedings of the fourteenth European conference on
information systems (pp.1572–1581).
Kohli, R., & Grover, V. (2008). Business value of IT: An essay on expanding research
directions to keep up with the times. Journal of the Association for Information
Systems, 9(1), 23–39.
Lange, M., Mendling, J., & Recker, J. (2012). A comprehensive EA benefits realization
model—an exploratory study. In Proceedings of the Forty fifth Hawaii international
conference on systems sciences (pp. 4230–4239). Retrieved from 〈https://doi.org/10
.1109/HICSS.2012.50〉.
Lange, M., Mendling, J., & Recker, J. (2016). An empirical analysis of the factors and
measures of enterprise architecture management success. European Journal of
Information Systems, 25(5), 411–431. https://doi.org/10.1057/ejis.2014.39
Langfield-Smith, K., & Smith, D. (2003). Management control systems and trust in
outsourcing relationships. Management Accounting Research, 14(3), 281–307. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S1044-5005(03)00046-5
Langley, A. (1999). Strategies for theorizing from process data. The Academy of
Management Review, 24(4), 691–710. https://doi.org/10.2307/259349
Lankhorst, M. M. (2005). Enterprise architecture at work: Modelling, communication and
analysis. Springer-Verlag.
Lankhorst, M. M. (2013). Enterprise architecture at work: Modelling, communication and
analysis (3rd ed.). Springer.
Lippman, S. A., & Rumelt, R. P. (1982). Uncertain imitability: An analysis of interfirm
differences in efficiency under competition. The Bell Journal of Economics, 13(2),
418–438.
Lipton, P. (2004). Inference to the best explanation (2nd ed.). Routledge.
Lnenicka, M., & Komarkova, J. (2019). Developing a government enterprise architecture
framework to support the requirements of big and open linked data with the use of
cloud computing. International Journal of Information Management, 46, 124–141.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2018.12.003
Longépé, C. (2003). The enterprise architecture IT project: The urbanisation paradigm (1st
ed.). Butterworth-Heinemann.
Lux, J., Riempp, G., & Urbach, N. (2010). Understanding the performance impact of
enterprise architecture management. In AMCIS 2010 Proceedings. Retrieved from
〈http://aisel.aisnet.org/amcis2010/403〉.
McGovern, J., Ambler, S. W., Stevens, M. E., Linn, J., Sharan, V., & Jo, E. K. (2003).
A practical guide to enterprise architecture. Prentice Hall PTR.
Melville, N., Kraemer, K., & Gurbaxani, V. (2004). Information technology and
organizational performance: An integrative model of IT business value. MIS
Quarterly, 28(2), 283–322.
Meyer, J. W., & Rowan, B. (1977). Institutionalized organizations: Formal structure as
myth and ceremony. American Journal of Sociology, 83(2), 340–363.
Mingers, J. (2000). The contribution of critical realism as an underpinning philosophy
for OR/MS and systems. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 51(11),
1256–1270.
Mingers, J. (2004). Real-izing information systems: Critical realism as an underpinning
philosophy for information systems. Information and Organization, 14(2), 87–103.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infoandorg.2003.06.001
Mohr, L. B. (1982). Explaining organizational behavior (1st ed.). San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass.
Morse, J. M. (2003). Principles of mixed methods and multimethod research design (pp.
189–208). Sage Publications.
Murer, S., Bonati, B., & Furrer, F. J. (2010). Managed evolution: A strategy for very large
information systems. Berlin Heidelberg: Springer.
Myers, M. D. (1997). Qualitative research in information systems. MIS Quarterly, 21(2),
241–242.
Myers, M. D., & Newman, M. (2007). The qualitative interview in IS research: Examining
the craft. Information and Organization, 17(1), 2–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
infoandorg.2006.11.001
Namba, Y. (2005). City planning approach for rebuilding enterprise information systems (Ph.
D. thesis). Tokyo Institute of Technology.
Neuman, W. L. (2005). Social research methods: Qualitative and quantitative approaches
(sixth). Pearson Education.
Nevo, S., & Wade, M. R. (2010). The formation and value of IT-enabled resources:
antecedents and consequences of synergistic relationships. MIS Quarterly, 34(1),
163–183.
Nevo, S., & Wade, M. R. (2011). Firm-level benefits of IT-enabled resources: A conceptual
extension and an empirical assessment. Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 20
(4), 403–418. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis.2011.08.001
Niemi, E. I., & Pekkola, S. (2016). Enterprise architecture benefit realization: Review of
the models and a case study of a public organization. SIGMIS Database, 47(3), 55–80.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2980783.2980787
Obitz, T., & Babu K, M. (2009). Enterprise architecture expands its role in strategic business
transformation: Infosys enterprise architecture survey 2008/2009.
Patton, M. Q. (1990). Qualitative evaluation and research methods (2nd ed.). Sage
Publications, Inc.
Pereira, C.M. & Sousa, P. (2004). A method to define an enterprise architecture using the
Zachman framework. In Proceedings of the 2004 ACM symposium on applied computing
(pp. 1366–1371).
Perry, C. (1998). Processes of a case study methodology for postgraduate research in
marketing. European Journal of Marketing, 32(9), 785–802. https://doi.org/10.1108/
03090569810232237
Petter, S., DeLone, W., & McLean, E. R. (2013). Information systems success: The quest
for the independent variables. Journal of Management Information Systems, 29(4),
7–62. https://doi.org/10.2753/MIS0742-1222290401
Poppo, L., & Zenger, T. (2002). Do formal contracts and relational governance function
as substitutes or complements? Strategic Management Journal, 23(8), 707–725.
Prahalad, C. K., & Hamel, G. (1990). The core competence of the corporation. Harvard
Business Review, 68(3), 79–91.
Ramberg, B., & Gjesdal, K. (2009). Hermeneutics. In The Stanford encyclopedia of
philosophy. Summer. 〈https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2009/entries/hermen
eutics/〉.
Reed, R., & DeFillippi, R. J. (1990). Causal ambiguity, barriers to imitation, and
sustainable competitive advantage. Academy of Management Review, 15(1), 88–102.
https://doi.org/10.5465/AMR.1990.4308277
Rehkopf, T. W., & Wybolt, N. (2003). Top 10 architecture land mines. IT Professional, 5
(6), 36–43. https://doi.org/10.1109/MITP.2003.1254967
Reynolds, P., & Yetton, P. (2015). Aligning business and IT strategies in multi-business
organizations. Journal of Information Technology, 30(2), 101–118. https://doi.org/
10.1057/jit.2015.1
Richardson, G. L., Jackson, B. M., & Dickson, G. W. (1990). A principles-based enterprise
architecture: Lessons from Texaco and star enterprise. MIS Quarterly, 14(4),
385–403.
Rivard, S. (2021). Theory building is neither an art nor a science. It is a craft. Journal of
Information Technology, 36(3), 316–328. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0268396220911938
Ross, J. W. (2003). Creating a strategic IT architecture competency: Learning in stages.
MIS Quarterly Executive, 2(1), 31–43.
Ross, J. W., Weill, P., & Robertson, D. C. (2006). Enterprise architecture as strategy:
Creating a foundation for business execution. Harvard Business School Press.
Salmans, B., & Kappelman, L. A. (2010). The state of EA: Progress, not perfection (pp.
165–217). CRC Press.
Sambamurthy, V., Bharadwaj, A. S., & Grover, V. (2003). Shaping agility through digital
options: Reconceptualizing the role of information technology in contemporary
firms. MIS Quarterly, 27(2), 237–263.
Schmidt, C., & Buxmann, P. (2011). Outcomes and success factors of enterprise IT
architecture management: Empirical insight from the international financial services
industry. European Journal of Information Systems, 20(2), 168–185. https://doi.org/
10.1057/ejis.2010.68
Schmidt, R. C., Lyytinen, K. J., Keil, M., & Cule, P. E. (2001). Identifying software project
risks: An international Delphi study. Journal of Management Information Systems, 17
(4), 5–36.
Segars, A. H., & Grover, V. (1996). Designing company-wide information systems: Risk
factors and coping strategies. Longest Range Planning, 29(3), 381–392.
Senior Scholars Consortium. (2011). Senior scholars’ basket of journals. Association for
Information Systems. 〈http://aisnet.org/?SeniorScholarBasket〉.
T. Tamm et al.

--- PAGE 22 ---
International Journal of Information Management 67 (2022) 102554
22
Shanks, G., Gloet, M., Asadi Someh, I., Frampton, K., & Tamm, T. (2018). Achieving
benefits with enterprise architecture. The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 27
(2), 139–156. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis.2018.03.001
Shepherd, D. A., & Suddaby, R. (2017). Theory building: A review and integration.
Journal of Management, 43(1), 59–86. https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206316647102
Smith, H. A., Watson, R. T., & Sullivan, P. (2012). Delivering an effective enterprise
architecture at Chubb insurance. MIS Quarterly Executive, 11(2), 75–85.
Someh, I.A., & Shanks, G. (2013, December 15). The role of synergy in achieving value
from business analytics systems. In Proceedings of the thirty fourth international
conference on information systems.
Spewak, S. H., & Hill, S. C. (1993). Enterprise architecture planning: Developing a blueprint
for data, applications, and technology. John Wiley & Sons.
van den Berg, M., Slot, R., van Steenbergen, M., Faasse, P., & van Vliet, H. (2019). How
enterprise architecture improves the quality of IT investment decisions. Journal of
Systems and Software, 152, 134–150. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2019.02.053
van der Raadt, B., Schouten, S., & van Vliet, H. (2008). Stakeholder perception of enterprise
architecture (pp. 19–34). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-88030-1_4
van Steenbergen, M., Schipper, J., Bos, R., & Brinkkemper, S. (2010). The dynamic
architecture maturity matrix: instrument analysis and refinement. In A. Dan, F.
Gittler, & F. Toumani (Eds.), Service-oriented computing. ICSOC/ServiceWave 2009
workshops (pp. 48–61). Springer. Retrieved from 〈https://doi.org/10.1007/
978–3-642–16132-2_5〉.
van Steenbergen, M., van den Berg, M., & Brinkkemper, S. (2008). A balanced approach
to developing the enterprise architecture practice. In J. Filipe, J. Cordeiro, &
J. Cardoso (Eds.), Enterprise Information Systems (pp. 240–253). Springer. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-540-88710-2_19.
Tamm, T., Seddon, P. B., Shanks, G., & Reynolds, P. J. (2011). How does enterprise
architecture add value to organisations? Communications of the Association for
Information Systems, 28(1), 141–168. https://doi.org/10.17705/1CAIS.02810
Tamm, T., Seddon, P. B., Shanks, G., Reynolds, P. J., & Frampton, K. M. (2015). How an
Australian retailer enabled business transformation through EA. MIS Quarterly
Executive, 14(4), 181–193.
Teece, D. J. (2007). Explicating dynamic capabilities: The nature and microfoundations
of (sustainable) enterprise performance. Strategic Management Journal, 28,
1319–1350. https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.640
Teece, D. J., Pisano, G., & Shuen, A. (1997). Dynamic capabilities and strategic
management. Strategic Management Journal, 18, 509–533.
The Open Group. (2018). The TOGAF standard, Version 9 .2.
Vargo, S. L., & Lusch, R. F. (2004). Evolving to a new dominant logic for marketing.
Journal of Marketing, 68(1), 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1509/jmkg.68.1.1.24036
Venkatesh, V., Bala, H., Venkatraman, S., & Bates, J. (2007). Enterprise architecture
maturity: The story of the veterans health administration. MIS Quarterly Executive, 6
(2), 79–90.
Wade, M. R., & Hulland, J. (2004). Review: The resource-based view and information
systems research: Review, extension, and suggestions for future research. MIS
Quarterly, 28(1), 107–142.
Wagter, R., van den Berg, M., Luijpers, J., & van Steenbergen, M. (2005). Dynamic
enterprise architecture: How to make it work. John Wiley & Sons.
Walsham, G. (1995). Interpretive case studies in IS research: Nature and method.
European Journal of Information Systems, 4(2), 74–81. https://doi.org/10.1057/
ejis.1995.9
Walsham, G. (2006). Doing interpretive research. European Journal of Information
Systems, 15(3), 320–330. https://doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.ejis.3000589
Weill, P., & Ross, J. W. (2009). IT savvy: What top executives must know to go from pain to
gain. Harvard Business School Press.
Weill, P., Subramani, M., & Broadbent, M. (2002). Building IT infrastructure for strategic
agility. Mitosz Sloan Management Review, 44, 57–65.
Weiss, S., Aier, S., & Winter, R. (2013). Institutionalization and the effectiveness of
enterprise architecture management. In Proceedings of the thirty fourh international
conference on information systems.
Wernerfelt, B. (1984). A resource-based view of the firm. Strategic Management Journal, 5,
171–180.
Wheeler, B. C. (2002). NEBIC: A dynamic capabilities theory for assessing net-
enablement. Information Systems Research, 13, 125–146. https://doi.org/10.1287/
isre.13.2.125.89
Wynn, D., Jr, & Williams, C. K. (2012). Principles for conducting critical realist case
study research in information systems. MIS Quarterly, 36(3), 787–810.
Yin, R. K. (2008). Case study research: Design and methods (4th ed.). Sage Publications.
Zachman, J. A. (1987). A framework for information systems architecture. IBM Systems
Journal, 26(3), 276–292.
T. Tamm et al.