--- PAGE 1 ---
Strategic Management Journal
Strat. Mgmt. J., 28: 1319–1350 (2007)
Published online 7 August 2007 in Wiley InterScienc e (www.interscience.wiley.com) DOI: 10.1002/smj.640
Received 16 February 2004 ; Final revision received 20 June 2007
EXPLICATING DYNAMIC CAPABILITIES: THE NATURE
AND MICROFOUNDATIONS OF (SUSTAINABLE)
ENTERPRISE PERFORMANCE
DAVID J. TEECE*
Institute of Management, Innovation and Organization, Haas School of Business,
University of California, Be rkeley, California, U.S.A.
This paper draws on the social and behavioral sciences in an endeavor to specify the nature
and microfoundations of the capabilities necessary to sustain superior enterprise performance
in an open economy with rapid innovation and globally dispersed sources of invention, innova-
tion, and manufacturing capability. Dynamic capabilities enable business enterprises to create,
deploy, and protect the intangible assets that support superior long- run business performance.
The microfoundations of dynamic capabilities—the distinct skills, processes, procedures, orga-
nizational structures, decision rules, and disciplines—which undergird enterprise-level sensing,
seizing, and reconﬁguring capacities are difﬁcult to develop and deploy. Enterprises with strong
dynamic capabilities are intensely entrepreneurial. They not only adapt to business ecosystems,
but also shape them through innovation and through collaboration with other enterprises, enti-
ties, and institutions. The framework advanced can help scholars understand the foundations of
long-run enterprise success while helping managers delineate relevant strategic considerations
and the priorities they must adopt to enhance enterprise performance and escape the zero proﬁt
tendency associated with operating in markets open to global competition. Copyright
 2007
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
INTRODUCTION
Recent scholarship stresses that business enter-
prises consist of portfolios of idiosyncratic and
difﬁcult-to-trade assets and competencies (’re-
sources’).1 Within this framework, competitive
advantage can ﬂow at a point in time from the
ownership of scarce but relevant and difﬁcult-to-
imitate assets, especially know-how. However, in
Keywords: cospecialization; intangible assets; innovation;
business ecosystems; entrepreneurship; managerial capi-
talism; global competitiveness
*Correspondence to: David J. Teece, F402 Haas School of
Business #1930, University of California, Berkeley, California
94720-1930, U.S.A. E-mail: teece@haas.berkeley.edu
1 The reference here is to the r esource-based theory of the
enterprise advanced by Rumelt (1984), Wernerfelt (1984), Amit
and Schoemaker (1993), and others. Some of my earlier work
(Teece, 1980, 1982) was also in this vein.
fast-moving business environments open to global
competition, and characterized by dispersion in the
geographical and organizational sources of inno-
vation and manufacturing, sustainable advantage
requires more than the ownership of difﬁcult-
to-replicate (knowledge) assets. It also requires
unique and difﬁcult-to-replicate dynamic capabili-
ties. These capabilities can be harnessed to con-
tinuously create, extend, upgrade, protect, and
keep relevant the enterprise’s unique asset base.
For analytical purposes, dynamic capabilities can
be disaggregated into the capacity (1) to sense
and shape opportunities and threats, (2) to seize
opportunities, and (3) to maintain competitiveness
through enhancing, combining, protecting, and,
when necessary, reconﬁguring the business enter-
prise’s intangible and tangible assets. Dynamic
capabilities include difﬁcult-to-replicate enterprise
Copyright  2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.


--- PAGE 2 ---
1320 D. J. Teece
capabilities required to adapt to changing cus-
tomer and technological opportunities. They also
embrace the enterprise’s capacity to shape the
ecosystem it occupies, develop new products and
processes, and design and implement viable busi-
ness models. It is hypothesized that excellence
in these ‘orchestration’
2 capacities undergirds an
enterprise’s capacity to successfully innovate and
capture sufﬁcient value to deliver superior long-
term ﬁnancial performance. The thesis advanced is
that while the long-run performance of the enter-
prise is determined in some measure by how the
(external) business environment rewards its her-
itage, the development and exercise of (internal)
dynamic capabilities lies at the core of enterprise
success (and failure). This paper ﬁrst describes the
nature of dynamic capabilities, and then explicates
their microfoundations.
The ambition of the dynamic capabilities frame-
work is nothing less than to explain the sources of
enterprise-level competitive advantage over time,
and provide guidance to managers for avoiding the
zero proﬁt condition that results when homoge-
neous ﬁrms compete in perfectly competitive mar-
kets. A framework, like a model, abstracts from
reality. It endeavors to identify classes of relevant
variables and their interrelationships. A framework
is less rigorous than a model as it is sometimes
agnostic about the particular form of the theoreti-
cal relationships that may exist. Early statements of
the dynamic capabilities framework can be found
in Teece, Pisano, and Shuen (1990a, 1990b, 1997)
and Teece and Pisano (1994). An extensive lit-
erature on dynamic capabilities now exists (e.g.,
Helfat et al., 2007) that can be organized and inte-
grated into the general framework offered here.
As indicated, the possession of dynamic capabil-
ities is especially relevant to multinational enter-
prise performance in business environments that
display certain characteristics. The ﬁrst is that the
environment is open to international commerce and
fully exposed to the opportunities and threats asso-
ciated with rapid technological change. The sec-
ond is that technical change itself is systemic in
2 The management functions identiﬁed are analogous to that of
an orchestra conductor, although in the business context the
‘instruments’ (assets) are themse lves constantly being created,
renovated, and/or replaced. More over, completely new instru-
ments appear with some frequency, and old ones need to be
abandoned. While ﬂexibility is certainly an element of orches-
tration, the latter concept implies much more.
that multiple inventions must be combined to cre-
ate products and/or services that address customer
needs. The third is that there are well-developed
global markets for the exchange of (component)
goods and services; and the fourth is that the busi-
ness environment is characterized by poorly devel-
oped markets in which to exchange technological
and managerial know-how. These characteristics
can be found in large sectors of the global econ-
omy and especially in high-technology sectors. In
such sectors, the foundations of enterprise success
today depend very little on the enterprise’s abil-
ity to engage in (textbook) optimization against
known constraints, or capturing scale economies
in production. Rather, enterprise success depends
upon the discovery and development of opportuni-
ties; the effective combination of internally gener-
ated and externally generated inventions; efﬁcient
and effective technology transfer inside the enter-
prise and between and amongst enterprises; the
protection of intellectual property; the upgrading
of ‘best practice’ business processes; the inven-
tion of new business models; making unbiased
decisions; and achieving protection against imita-
tion and other forms of replication by rivals. It
also involves shaping new ‘rules of the game’ in
the global marketplace. The traditional elements
of business success—maintaining incentive align-
ment, owning tangible assets, controlling costs,
maintaining quality, ‘optimizing’ inventories—are
necessary but they are unlikely to be sufﬁcient for
sustained superior enterprise performance.
Executives seem to recognize new challenges
in today’s globally competitive environments and
understand how technological innovation is nec-
essary but not sufﬁcient for success. A. J. Laﬂey,
CEO of Proctor & Gamble, notes that ‘the name
of the game is innovation. We work really hard to
try to turn innovation into a strategy and a process
... ‘.
3 Sam Pamisano, CEO of IBM, remarks that
‘innovation is about much more than new prod-
ucts. It is about reinventing business processes and
building entirely new markets that meet untapped
customer demand.’
4 Put differently, there is an
emerging recognition by managers themselves that
the foundations of enterprise success transcend
simply being productive at R&D, achieving new
product introductions, adopting best practice, and
delivering quality products and services. Not only
3 Fortune, December 11, 2006: 4.
4 Business Week, April 24, 2004: 64.
Copyright  2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 28: 1319–1350 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj

--- PAGE 3 ---
Explicating Dynamic Capabilities: Nature and Microfoundations 1321
must the innovating enterprise spend heavily on
R&D and assiduously develop and protect its intel-
lectual property; it must also generate and imple-
ment the complementary organizational and man-
agerial innovations needed to achieve and sustain
competitiveness.
As indicated, not all enterprise-level responses
to opportunities and threats are manifestations of
dynamic capabilities. As Sidney Winter (2003:
991) notes, ‘ad hoc problem solving’ isn’t neces-
sarily a capability. Nor is the adoption of a well-
understood and replicable ‘best’ practice likely to
constitute a dynamic capability. Implementing best
practice may help an enterprise become or remain
viable, but best practices that are already widely
adopted cannot by themselves in a competitive
market situation enable an enterprise to earn more
than its cost of capital, or outperform its competi-
tors. Likewise, invention and innovation by them-
selves are insufﬁcient to generate success (Teece,
1986).
Two yardsticks can be proposed for calibrating
capabilities: ‘technical’ ﬁtness and ‘evolutionary’
ﬁtness (Helfat et al., 2007). Technical ﬁtness is
deﬁned by how effectively a capability performs
its function, regardless of how well the capability
enables a ﬁrm to make a living. Evolutionary or
external ﬁtness refers to how well the capability
enables a ﬁrm to make a living. Evolutionary ﬁt-
ness references the selection environment. Helfat
et al. (2007) further note that both technical and
evolutionary ﬁtness range from zero to some pos-
itive value. These yardsticks are consistent with
the discussion here. Dynamic capabilities assist in
achieving evolutionary ﬁtness, in part by helping
to shape the environment. The element of dynamic
capabilities that involves shaping (and not just
adapting to) the environment is entrepreneurial in
nature. Arguably, entrepreneurial ﬁtness ought to
have equal standing with evolutionary ﬁtness.
Dynamic capabilities have no doubt been rele-
vant to achieving competitive advantage for some
time. However, their importance is now ampli-
ﬁed because the global economy has become more
open and the sources of invention, innovation, and
manufacturing are more diverse geographically
and organizationally (Teece, 2000), and multiple
inventions must be combined to achieve market-
place success (Somaya and Teece, 2007). Achiev-
ing evolutionary ﬁtness is harder today than it was
before the millennium. Moreover, regulatory and
institutional structures must often be reshaped for
new markets to emerge; and as discussed later, the
ubiquity of ‘platforms’ must now be recognized
(Evans, Hagiu, and Schmalensee, 2006).
While the development and astute management
of intangible assets/intellectual capital is increas-
ingly recognized as central to sustained enter-
prise competitiveness, the understanding of why
and how intangibles are now so critical still
remains opaque and is not addressed by orthodox
frameworks. What is needed is a new framework
for business and economic analysis. As former
U.S. Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan
remarked, ‘we must begin the important work of
developing a framework capable of analyzing the
growth of an economy increasingly dominated by
conceptual products.’
5 The dynamic capabilities
approach developed here endeavors to be respon-
sive to this challenge at the enterprise level.
In an earlier treatment (Teece et al., 1997: 530)
it was noted that ‘we have merely sketched an out-
line for a dynamic capabilities approach.’ In what
follows, the nature of various classes of dynamic
capabilities is identiﬁed, and an effort is made to
separate the microfoundations of dynamic capa-
bilities from the capability itself. Put differently,
important distinctions are made between the orga-
nizational and managerial processes, procedures,
systems, and structures that undergird each class
of capability, and the capability itself. One should
note that the identiﬁcation of the microfounda-
tions of dynamic capabilities must be necessarily
incomplete, inchoate, and somewhat opaque and/or
their implementation must be rather difﬁcult. Oth-
erwise sustainable competitive advantage would
erode with the effective communication and appli-
cation of dynamic capability concepts.
Of course, the existence of processes, proce-
dures, systems, and structures already ubiquitously
adopted by competitors does not imply that these
have not in the past been the source of competitive
advantage, or might not still be a source of compet-
itive advantage in certain contexts. For example,
studies of the diffusion of organizational innova-
tions (e.g., Armour and Teece, 1978; Teece, 1980)
5 Chairman Alan Greenspan also noted recently, ‘over the past
half century, the increase in the value of raw materials has
accounted for only a fraction of the overall growth of U.S. gross
domestic product (GDP). The rest of that growth reﬂects the
embodiment of ideas in products and services that consumers
value. This shift of emphasis from physical materials to ideas as
the core of value creation appears to have accelerated in recent
decades.’ (Remarks of Alan Green span, Stanford Institute for
Economic Policy Research, 2004.)
Copyright  2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 28: 1319–1350 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj

--- PAGE 4 ---
1322 D. J. Teece
indicate that diffusion is by no means instanta-
neous, and that proﬁts can persist for many years
before being competed away. Decade-long adop-
tion cycles for new business structures and pro-
cedures (e.g., performance measurement systems)
are not uncommon. Uncertain imitability (Lippman
and Rumelt, 1982) may also serve to slow the dif-
fusion process and support persistent differential
performance.
Fortunately, the existing literature on strategy,
innovation, and organization and the new literature
on dynamic capabilities have identiﬁed a panoply
of processes and routines that can be recognized
as providing certain microfoundations for dynamic
capabilities. For instance, Eisenhardt and Martin
(2000) identify cross-functional R&D teams, new
product development routines, quality control rou-
tines, and technology transfer and/or knowledge
transfer routines, and certain performance mea-
surement systems as important elements (micro-
foundations) of dynamic capabilities. The effort
here is not designed to be comprehensive, but to
integrate the strategy and innovation literature and
provide an umbrella framework that highlights the
most critical capabilities management needs to sus-
tain the evolutionary and entrepreneurial ﬁtness of
the business enterprise.
SENSING (AND SHAPING)
OPPORTUNITIES AND THREATS
Nature of the capability
In fast-paced, globally competitive environments,
consumer needs, technological opportunities, and
competitor activity are constantly in a state of ﬂux.
Opportunities open up for both newcomers and
incumbents, putting the proﬁt streams of incum-
bent enterprises at risk. As discussed in Teece
et al. (1997), some emerging marketplace trajecto-
ries are easily recognized. In microelectronics this
might include miniaturization, greater chip density,
and compression and digitization in information
and communication technology. However, most
emerging trajectories are hard to discern. Sensing
(and shaping) new opportunities is very much a
scanning, creation, learning, and interpretive activ-
ity. Investment in research and related activities is
usually a necessary complement to this activity.
Opportunities get detected by the enterprise
because of two classes of factors. First, as stressed
by Kirzner (1973), entrepreneurs can have differ-
ential access to existing information. Second, new
information and new knowledge (exogenous or
endogenous) can create opportunities, as empha-
sized by Schumpeter (1934). Kirzner stressed how
the entrepreneurial function recognizes any dise-
quilibrium and takes advantage of it. The Kirzner-
ian view is that entrepreneurship is the mechanism
by which the economy moves back toward equi-
librium. Schumpeter, on the other hand, stressed
upsetting the equilibrium. As Baumol (2006: 4)
notes, ‘the job of Schumpeter’s entrepreneur is
to destroy all equilibria, while Kirzner’s works
to restore them. This is the mechanism under-
lying continuous industrial evolution and revolu-
tion.’ Equilibrium is rarely if ever achieved (Shane,
2003). Both forces are relevant in today’s econ-
omy.
To identify and shape opportunities, enterprises
must constantly scan, search, and explore across
technologies and markets, both ‘local’ and ‘dis-
tant’ (March and Simon, 1958; Nelson and Winter,
1982). This activity not only involves investment
in research activity and the probing and reprob-
ing of customer needs and technological possibili-
ties; it also involves understanding latent demand,
the structural evolution of industries and mar-
kets, and likely supplier and competitor responses.
To the extent that business enterprises can open
up technological opportunities (through engaging
in R&D and through tapping into the research
output of others) while simultaneously learning
about customer needs, they have a broad menu
of commercialization opportunities. Overcoming a
narrow search horizon is extremely difﬁcult and
costly for management teams tied to established
problem-solving competences. Henderson (1994)
notes that General Motors (GM), IBM, and Dig-
ital Equipment Corporation (DEC) encountered
difﬁculties because they became prisoners of the
deeply ingrained assumptions, information ﬁlters,
and problem-solving strategies that made up their
world views, turning the solutions that once made
them great into strategic straitjackets.
When opportunities are ﬁrst glimpsed, entrepre-
neurs and managers must ﬁgure out how to inter-
pret new events and developments, which tech-
nologies to pursue, and which market segments
to target. They must assess how technologies will
evolve and how and when competitors, suppli-
ers, and customers will respond. Competitors may
or may not see the opportunity, and even if they
Copyright  2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 28: 1319–1350 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj

--- PAGE 5 ---
Explicating Dynamic Capabilities: Nature and Microfoundations 1323
do they may calibrate it differently. Their actions,
along with those of customers, suppliers, standard-
setting bodies, and governments, can also change
the nature of the opportunity and the manner in
which competition will unfold.
There are also constraints on the rules by which
competitive forces will play out. These constraints
are imposed by regulators, standard-setting bod-
ies, laws, social mores, and business ethics. The
shape of the ‘rules of the game’ is thus the
result of co-evolution and complex interaction
between what might be thought of as (business)
ecosystem participants. Because of uncertainty,
entrepreneurs/managers must make informed con-
jectures about the path ahead. These conjectures
become working hypotheses that can be updated as
evidence emerges. Once a new evolutionary path
becomes apparent, quick action is needed.
Microfoundations
The literature on entrepreneurship emphasizes that
opportunity discovery and creation can originate
from the cognitive and creative (’right brain’)
capacities of individual(s). However, discovery can
also be grounded in organizational processes, such
as research and development activity. The ability
to create and/or sense opportunities is clearly not
uniformly distributed amongst individuals or enter-
prises. Opportunity creation and/or discovery by
individuals require both access to information and
the ability to recognize, sense, and shape devel-
opments. The ability to recognize opportunities
depends in part on the individual’s capabilities and
extant knowledge (or the knowledge and learning
capacities of the organization to which the indi-
vidual belongs) particularly about user needs in
relationship to existing as well as novel solutions.
This requires speciﬁc knowledge, creative activity,
and the ability to understand user/customer deci-
sion making, and practical wisdom (Nonaka and
Toyama, 2007). It involves interpreting available
information in whatever form it appears—a chart,
a picture, a conversation at a trade show, news of
scientiﬁc and technological breakthroughs, or the
angst expressed by a frustrated customer. One must
accumulate and then ﬁlter information from profes-
sional and social contacts to create a conjecture or
a hypothesis about the likely evolution of technolo-
gies, customer needs, and marketplace responses.
This task involves scanning and monitoring inter-
nal and external technological developments and
assessing customer needs, expressed and latent.
It involves learning, interpretation, and creative
activity.
While certain individuals in the enterprise may
have the necessary cognitive and creative skills,
the more desirable approach is to embed scan-
ning, interpretative, and creative processes inside
the enterprise itself. The enterprise will be vulner-
able if the sensing, creative, and learning functions
are left to the cognitive traits of a few individuals.
6
Organizational processes can be put in place inside
the enterprise to garner new technical information,
tap developments in exogenous science, monitor
customer needs and competitor activity, and shape
new products and processes opportunities. Infor-
mation must be ﬁltered, and must ﬂow to those
capable of making sense of it. Internal argument
and discussion about changing market and tech-
nological reality can be both inductive and deduc-
tive. Hypothesis development, hypothesis ‘testing,’
and synthesis about the meaning of information
obtained via search are critical functions, and must
be performed by the top management team. The
rigorous assembly of data, facts, and anecdotes can
help test beliefs. Once a synthesis of the evidence
is achieved, recurrent synthesis and updating can
be embedded in business processes designed by
middle management and/or the planning unit in
the business organization (Casson, 1997). If enter-
prises fail to engage in such activities, they won’t
be able to assess market and technological devel-
opments and spot opportunities. As a consequence,
they will likely miss opportunities visible to others.
As noted in Teece et al. (1997), more decen-
tralized organizations with greater local autonomy
are less likely to be blindsided by market and
technological developments. Because of the prob-
lem of information decay as information moves
up (and down) a hierarchy, businesses must devise
mechanisms and procedures to keep management
informed. Bill Hewlett and David Packard devel-
oped ‘management by walking about’ (Packard,
1995) as a mechanism to prevent top management
at Hewlett-Packard from becoming isolated from
6 In a limited sense, that is about decision making under uncer-
tainty. As Knight observes, with uncertainty there is ‘a necessity
to act upon opinion rather than knowledge’ (Knight, 1921: 268).
The problem is not just about knowledge asymmetries and incen-
tive problems as Alchian and Demsetz (1972) seem to suggest.
Rather, it involves ﬁltering and interpreting information about
evolving technologies and marketplaces.
Copyright  2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 28: 1319–1350 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj

--- PAGE 6 ---
1324 D. J. Teece
what was going on at lower levels in the enter-
prise, and outside the enterprise as well. In other
organizations (e.g., professional services) the man-
agement ranks can be ﬁlled by leading profession-
als who remain involved with professional work.
This protects them from the hazards of managerial
isolation.
The search activities that are relevant to ‘sens-
ing’ include information about what’s going on in
the business ecosystem. With respect to technolo-
gies, R&D activity can itself be thought of as a
form of ‘search’ for new products and processes.
However, R&D is too often usually a manifesta-
tion of ‘local’ search. ‘Local’ search is only one
component of relevant search. In fast-paced envi-
ronments, with a large percentage of new prod-
uct introductions coming from external sources,
search/exploration activity should not just be local.
Enterprises must search the core as well as to
the periphery of their business ecosystem. Search
must embrace potential collaborators—customers,
suppliers, complementors—that are active in inno-
vative activity.
Customers are sometimes amongst the ﬁrst to
perceive the potential for applying new technol-
ogy. Visionary members of customer organizations
are often able to anticipate the potential for new
technology and possibly even begin rudimentary
development activities. Moreover, if the suppli-
ers of new technology do not succeed in properly
understanding user/customer needs, it is unlikely
that new products they might develop will be suc-
cessful. Indeed, one of the most consistent ﬁndings
from empirical research is that the probability that
an innovation will be successful commercially is
highly correlated with the developers’ understand-
ing of user/customer needs (Freeman, 1974). Elec-
tronic computing and the Internet itself can rightly
be viewed as having a signiﬁcant component of
user-led innovations. Business enterprises that are
alert and sense the opportunity are often able to
leverage customer-led efforts into new products
and services, as the users themselves are frequently
ill prepared to carry initial prototypes further for-
ward.
Suppliers can also be drivers of innovation
important in the ﬁnal product. Innovation in micro-
processor and DRAMs is a classic case. This
upstream or ‘component’ innovation has impacted
competition and competitive outcomes in personal
computers, cellular telephony, and consumer elec-
tronics more generally. Failure to ‘design in’ new
technology/components in a timely fashion will
lend to failure; conversely, success can some-
times be achieved by continuous rapid ‘design in.’
Indeed, continuous and rapid design around new
technology/components developed elsewhere can
itself be a source of durable competitive advan-
tage. Put differently, with rapid innovation by com-
ponent suppliers, downstream competitive success
can ﬂow from the ability of enterprises to continu-
ously tap into such (external) innovation ahead of
the competition. External search and acquisition of
technology have been going on for decades, but as
Chesbrough (2003) explains, ‘Open Innovation’ is
now a mandate for enterprise success.
The concept and practice of open innovation
underscore the importance of broad-based external
search and subsequent integration involving cus-
tomers, suppliers, and complementors. Establish-
ing linkages between corporations and universities
assists broad-based search, as university programs
are usually unshackled from the near at hand.
Indeed, a recent study of patenting in the opti-
cal disk industry (Rosenkopf and Nerkar, 2001)
seems to suggest that exploration that is more con-
ﬁned generates lower impacts, and that the impact
of exploration is highest when exploration spans
organizational (but not technological) boundaries.
However, it is not just a matter of searching for
external inventions/innovations that represent new
possibilities. Frequently it is a matter of combining
complementary innovations so as to create a solu-
tion to a customer problem. The systemic nature
(Teece, 2000) of many innovations compounds the
need for external search.
Sensing opportunities and threats can also be
facilitated if the enterprise and/or the entrepreneur
explicitly or implicitly employ some kind of ana-
lytical framework, as this can help highlight what
is important. The ﬁeld of strategic management
has been stranded for some time with a frame-
work that implicitly assumes that industry struc-
ture (and product market share), mediated by
enterprise behavior, determines enterprise perfor-
mance. In Porter’s (1980) Five Forces frame-
work, a good strategy involves somehow picking
an attractive industry and positioning oneself to
be shielded from competition. Porter’s approach
mandates ‘industry’ analysis
7 and the calibration
of ﬁve distinct industry-level forces: the role of
7 The Five Forces framework undergirds ‘industry’ analysis in
business school curriculum and in practice. However, the very
Copyright  2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 28: 1319–1350 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj

--- PAGE 7 ---
Explicating Dynamic Capabilities: Nature and Microfoundations 1325
potential entrants, suppliers, buyers, substitutes,
and rivalry amongst competitors. Because of its
rather static nature and the fact that it ignores many
aspects of the competitive environment includ-
ing the role of complementarities, path dependen-
cies, and supporting institutions, its application in
the contexts outlined in the Introduction of this
paper will limit the ability of the entrepreneur
and/or the enterprise to properly sense opportu-
nities and threats and properly calibrate strengths,
weaknesses, and technological and market trajec-
tories. If network effects, path dependencies, and
the co-evolution of technologies and institutions
are signiﬁcant, the Five Forces framework is of
limited utility.
The Five Forces framework has inherent weak-
nesses in dynamic environments. Fundamental is
that it implicitly views market structure as exoge-
nous, when in fact market structure is the (endoge-
nous) result of innovation and learning.
8 Changes
in science and technology create opportunities for
innovation. Enterprises can search amongst new
possibilities and engage in development activities.
If successful, such development impacts the rela-
tive fate of ﬁrms. This in turn determines market
structure. Outcomes for individual enterprises are
shaped in part by the selection processes at work in
the business ecosystem. Relevant factors ignored
or underplayed by Five Forces include techno-
logical opportunities, path dependencies, appropri-
ability conditions, supporting institutions, installed
base effects, learning, certain switching costs, and
regulation. In short, in regimes of rapid technologi-
cal change with well-developed markets for goods
and services (and poorly developed markets for
know-how), the Five Forces framework is com-
promised because it has insufﬁcient appreciation
(a) for the importance of and nature of innova-
tion and other factors that change the ‘rules of the
concept of an industry is itself of questionable value. If indus-
try boundaries exist, they are faint, at least in technologically
progressive environments. For instance, the telecommunications
‘industry’ may have had distinct boundaries over half a cen-
tury ago around the telegraph and the telephone and associated
regulated services. However, by the 1960s, facsimile and data
services had begun to be overl aid on the public telephone net-
work. Today telephony is routinely carried by the Internet (using
V oice over IP) and cable TV networks.
8 Indeed, the (basic) market structure–conduct–performance
paradigm from industrial econom ics that undergirds the Five
Forces approach has been in need of revision for quite some
time. Phillips (1971) was perhaps the ﬁrst to recognize that cau-
sation is the reverse of what is assumed, with market structure
being shaped by innovation.
game,’ (b) for factors inside the business enter-
prise that constrain choices, (c) for factors that
impact imitation and appropriability issues, (d) for
the role of supporting institutions, complementary
assets, cospecialization, and network externalities,
or (e) for the blurred nature of industry boundaries.
Also, as discussed later, in many ‘platform’ indus-
tries or where there is signiﬁcant outsourcing, scale
is an industry asset.
The dynamic capabilities framework represents
a strong break with Five Forces. Within the
dynamic capabilities framework, the ‘environmen-
tal’ context recognized for analytical purposes is
not that of the industry, but that of the busi-
ness ‘ecosystem’—the community of organiza-
tions, institutions, and individuals that impact the
enterprise and the enterprise’s customers and sup-
plies. The relevant community therefore includes
complementors, suppliers, regulatory authorities,
standard-setting bodies, the judiciary, and educa-
tional and research institutions. It is a framework
that recognizes that innovation and its support-
ing infrastructure have major impacts on com-
petition. The dynamic capabilities framework is
grounded in Kirznerian, Schumpeterian, and evolu-
tionary theories of economic change, whereas Five
Forces is grounded in the Mason–Bain paradigm
of industrial economics.
9 Also, whereas according
to Porter the essence of strategy formulation is
‘coping with competition’ (Porter, 1991: 11), in the
dynamic capabilities tradition the essence of strat-
egy involves selecting and developing technolo-
gies and business models that build competitive
advantage through assembling and orchestrating
difﬁcult-to-replicate assets, thereby shaping com-
petition itself.
Even when utilizing the ecosystem as the orga-
nizing paradigm for assessing developments in the
business environment, the full import of particular
facts, statistics, and developments is rarely obvi-
ous. Accordingly, the evaluative and inferential
skill possessed by an organization and its manage-
ment is important. Indeed, much of the informa-
tion gathered and communicated inside the enter-
prise has minimal decision relevance. Even if rel-
evant, it often arrives too late. Management must
ﬁnd methods and procedures to peer through the
9 Developed in the 1930s, 1940s, a nd 1950s, it is still relevant
to some of the ‘rust belt’ industries that experience low rates of
technological innovation where complementors are not impor-
tant, and where the coevolution of technologies and institutions
is not signiﬁcant (Teece, 1990).
Copyright  2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 28: 1319–1350 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj

--- PAGE 8 ---
1326 D. J. Teece
Processes to Tap
Supplier and
Complementor
Innovation.
Processes to Direct 
Internal R&D and Select 
New Technologies.
Processes to Identify
Target Market Segments,
Changing Customer
Needs, and Customer
Innovation.
Processes to Tap
Developments in
Exogenous Science and
Technology.Analytical Systems (and
Individual Capacities) to
Learn and to Sense, Filter,
Shape, and Calibrate
Opportunities.
 
Figure 1. Elements of an ecosystem framework fo r ‘sensing’ market and technological opportunities
fog of uncertainty and gain insight. This involves
gathering and ﬁltering technological, market, and
competitive information from both inside and out-
side the enterprise, making sense of it, and ﬁgur-
ing out implications for action. However, because
attention is a scarce resource inside the enterprise
(Cyert and March, 1963), management must care-
fully allocate resources to search and discovery.
The enterprise’s articulated strategy can become
a ﬁlter so that attention is not diverted to every
opportunity and threat that ‘successful’ search
reveals. Likewise, scenario planning can collapse
likely situations into a small number of scenarios
that can facilitate cognition, and then action, once
uncertainty is resolved. Figure 1 summarizes indi-
vidual and enterprise traits that undergird sensing
capabilities.
SEIZING OPPORTUNITIES
Nature of the capability
Once a new (technological or market) opportunity
is sensed, it must be addressed through new prod-
ucts, processes, or services. This almost always
requires investments in development and commer-
cialization activity. Multiple (competing) invest-
ment paths are possible, at least early on. The
quintessential example is the automobile industry,
where in the early days different engine technolo-
gies—steam, electric, and gasoline—each had
their champions. Once a dominant design begins
to emerge, strategic choices become much more
limited. This paradigm, which was ﬁrst offered
by Abernathy and Utterback (1978) and then built
upon by Teece (1986, 2007), now has considerable
evidence supporting it over a wide range of tech-
nologies (Klepper and Graddy, 1990; Utterback
and Suarez, 1993; Malerba and Orsenigo, 1996).
It implicitly recognizes inﬂexion points in tech-
nological and market evolution. These inﬂexion
points impact investment requirements and strate-
gic choices. Implications for investment decisions
have been noted elsewhere (Teece, 1986) and
include staying ﬂexible until the dominant design
emerges and then investing heavily once a design
looks like it can become the winner. Any strat-
egy is, of course, likely to be fraught with hazards
because of uncertainties. Moreover, the manner
and time at which an enterprise needs to place its
bets depend on competition in the ‘input’ markets
and on the identity of the enterprise itself. Mitchell
(1991) suggests that the timing of resource com-
mitments can differ according to the enterprise’s
existing positions with respect to the relevant com-
plementary assets. Enterprises that are well posi-
tioned can wait, while those that are not must
scramble.
Addressing opportunities involves maintaining
and improving technological competences and
complementary assets and then, when the opportu-
nity is ripe, investing heavily in the particular tech-
nologies and designs most likely to achieve mar-
ketplace acceptance. When network externalities
are present, early entry and commitment are nec-
essary. The presence of increasing returns means
that if one network gets ahead, it tends to stay
ahead. Getting ahead may require signiﬁcant up-
front investments. Customers will not want an
enterprise’s products if there are strong network
effects and the installed base of users is rela-
tively small. Accordingly, one needs to strategize
around investment decisions, getting the timing
right, building on increasing return advantages, and
leveraging products and services from one applica-
tion to another. The capacity to make high-quality,
Copyright  2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 28: 1319–1350 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj

--- PAGE 9 ---
Explicating Dynamic Capabilities: Nature and Microfoundations 1327
unbiased but interrelated investment decisions in
the context of network externalities, innovation,
and change is as rare as decision-making errors
and biases are ubiquitous.
However, the issue that the enterprise faces is
not just when, where, and how much to invest.
The enterprise must also select or create a partic-
ular business model that deﬁnes its commercial-
ization strategy and investment priorities. Indeed,
there is considerable evidence that business suc-
cess depends as much on organizational innova-
tion, e.g., design of business models, as it does on
the selection of physical technology. This is true
at the enterprise level as well as at the economy-
wide level (Nelson, 2005). Indeed, the invention
and implementation of business models and asso-
ciated enterprise boundary choices involve issues
as fundamental to business success as the devel-
opment and adoption of the physical technologies
themselves. Business models implicate processes
and incentives; their alignment with the physical
technology is a much overlooked component of
strategic management. The understanding of the
institutional/organizational design issues is typi-
cally more limited than the understanding of the
technologies themselves. This ignorance affords
considerable scope for mistakes around the proper
design of business models and the institutional
structures needed to support innovation in both the
private and public sectors.
In theory, one could imagine transactions
between entities that scout out and/or develop
opportunities, and those that endeavor to execute
upon them. In reality, the two functions cannot
be cleanly separated, and the activities must be
integrated inside a single enterprise, where new
insights about markets—particularly those that
challenge the conventional wisdom—will likely
encounter negative responses. The promoters/
visionaries must somehow defeat the naysayers,
transform internal views, and facilitate necessary
investment. Some level of managerial consensus
will be necessary to allow investment decisions to
be made. Investment will likely involve commit-
ting ﬁnancial resources behind an informed con-
jecture about the technological and marketplace
future. However, managers of established product
lines in large organizations can sometimes have
sufﬁcient decision-making authority to starve the
new business of ﬁnancial capital. This posture can
be buttressed by capital budgeting techniques that
more comfortably support investments for which
future cash ﬂow can be conﬁdently projected. In
short, the new can lose out to the established unless
management is sensitive to the presence of cer-
tain biases in accepted investment decision pro-
cesses. An important class of dynamic capabilities
emerges around a manager’s ability to override
certain ‘dysfunctional’ features of established deci-
sion rules and resource allocation processes.
It helps to begin by recognizing that decision-
making processes in hierarchically organized enter-
prises involve bureaucratic features that are use-
ful for many purposes, but they nevertheless may
muzzle innovation proclivities. In particular, a for-
mal expenditure process involving submissions
and approvals is characteristic of ‘well-managed’
companies. Decision making is likely to have a
committee structure, with top management requir-
ing reports and written justiﬁcations for signif-
icant decisions. Moreover, approvals may need
to be sought from outside the organizational unit
in which the expenditure is to take place. While
this may ensure a matching up of expenditures
to opportunities across a wider range of economic
activity, it unquestionably slows decision making
and tends to reinforce the status quo. Commit-
tee decision-making structures almost always tend
toward balancing and compromise. But innovation
is often ill served by such structures, as the new
and the radical will almost always appear threat-
ening to some constituents. Strong leaders can fre-
quently overcome such tendencies, but such lead-
ers are not always present. One consequence is a
‘program persistence bias.’ Its corollary is various
forms of ‘anti-innovation bias,’ including the ‘anti-
cannibalization’ basis discussed in a later section.
Program persistence refers to the funding of pro-
grams beyond what can be sustained on the merits,
and follows from the presence or inﬂuence of pro-
gram advocates in the resource allocation process.
This proclivity almost automatically has the coun-
tervailing effect of reducing funds available to new
initiatives.
One should not be surprised, therefore, if an
enterprise senses a business opportunity but fails
to invest. In particular, incumbent enterprises tend
to eschew radical competency-destroying innova-
tion in favor of more incremental competency-
enhancing improvements. The existence of layer
upon layer of standard procedures, established
capabilities, complementary assets, and/or admin-
istrative routines can exacerbate decision-making
biases against innovation. Incumbent enterprises,
Copyright  2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 28: 1319–1350 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj

--- PAGE 10 ---
1328 D. J. Teece
relying on (path-dependent) routines, assets, and
strategies developed to cope with existing tech-
nologies, are handicapped in making and/or adopt-
ing radical, competency-destroying, noncumula-
tive innovation (Nelson and Winter, 1982; Tush-
man and Anderson, 1986; Henderson and Clark,
1990). This is true whether the competence is
external to the ﬁrm or internal to the ﬁrm.
Evidence also shows that decision-makers dis-
count outcomes that are merely probable in com-
parison with outcomes that are certain. This has
been called the certainty effect (Kahneman and
Lovallo, 1993). It contributes to excessive risk
aversion when choices involve possible losses.
Further, to simplify choices between alternatives,
individuals generally evaluate options in isolation.
Viewing each alternative as unique leads decision-
makers to undervalue possibilities for risk pooling.
This approach to decision making may produce
inconsistent preferences and decision biases (timid
choices) that lead to outcomes that block inno-
vation (Kahneman and Tversky, 1979; Kahneman
and Lovallo, 1993). An opposing bias to loss/risk
aversion is excessive optimism. This leads to
investment in low or negative return projects. As a
result, entry decisions often fail. Audretsch (1995)
found that over the period 1976–86 the average
10-year failure rate in two-digit SIC manufacturing
sectors ranged from 75.8 percent to 54.8 percent.
Similar failure rates have been reported in other
studies (Dunne, Roberts, and Samuelson, 1988;
Klepper and Miller, 1995). However, these failure
rates disguise wide variation amongst particular
enterprises and between new entrants and incum-
bents.
The existence of established assets and routines
exacerbates problems of excessive risk aversion.
Speciﬁcally, both the isolation effect and the cer-
tainty effect can be intensiﬁed by the existence of
established assets, causing incumbent enterprises
to become comparably more risk averse than new
entrants. In terms of innovative activity, this exces-
sive risk aversion leads to biased decision making
and limits the probability that incumbent enter-
prises will explore risky radical innovations. In
short, success in one period leads to the establish-
ment of ‘valid’ processes, procedures, and incen-
tives to manage the existing business. This can
have the unintended effect of handicapping the
new business. The proﬁciency with which such
biases are overcome and a new opportunity is
embraced is likely to depend importantly on the
quality of the enterprise’s routines, decision rules,
strategies, and leadership around evaluating new
investment opportunities. Business historians (e.g.,
Chandler, 1990a; Lazonick, 2005) and others have
reminded us that over the long run the ability of
enterprises to commit ﬁnancing and invest astutely
around new technologies is critical to enterprise
performance.
10
In regimes of rapid technological innovation, it
is clear that making investment choices requires
special skills not ubiquitously distributed amongst
management teams. Nor are they ubiquitously dis-
tributed amongst investors.
11 Resource/asset align-
ment and coalignment issues are important in
the context of innovation, but they are quite
different from portfolio balance issues faced by
ﬁnancial investors. The presence of increasing
returns means that one also needs to strategize
around investment decisions, getting the timing
right, building on increasing return advantages, and
leveraging products and services from one appli-
cation to another. Value-enhancing investments
inside the knowledge-based enterprise are often
cospecialized
12 to each other. Also, the nature of
the portfolio ‘balance’ needed inside the enterprise
is different from the portfolio balance sought by
pure ﬁnancial investors. The economics of cospe-
cialization are not the economics of covariance
with which investors are familiar. In short, the
task of making astute project- and enterprise-level
investment decisions is quite challenging because
of cospecialization, and irreversibilities.
The project ﬁnance and related literatures pro-
vide tools and clear decision rules for project
selection once cash ﬂows are speciﬁed, uncertainty
and/or risk are calibrated, and interdependencies
10 Consider the development of civ ilian jet transport aircraft in
the United States in the 1950s. As Phillips (1971: 126) noted:
‘Any one of Boeing, Douglas, Lockheed, or Corvair might
have been ﬁrst. ... The technology was there to adapt to—not
risklessly or costlessly to be sure, but it was there. Perhaps the
biggest risk in 1953 was not technological in character. Instead,
it was risk with respect to what sort of jet to build and when to
build it.’
11 The decision skills required of management have limited
commonality with those of an investor. One difference is the
illiquidity and irreversibility of most managerial investment
decisions. Another is the need to achieve continuous alignment
amongst the assets at work in the enterprise. Both public and
private equity investors typically lack this kind of orchestration
and integration capability or capac ity. Moreover, their skills are
most applicable when investments are liquid.
12 Cospecialization is deﬁned and discussed in Teece (1986) and
explored further in the section b elow entitled ‘Managing threats
and reconﬁguration.’
Copyright  2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 28: 1319–1350 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj

--- PAGE 11 ---
Explicating Dynamic Capabilities: Nature and Microfoundations 1329
between and amongst cash ﬂows are ignored.
However, the essence of the investment decision
for the (strategic) manager is that it involves esti-
mating interdependent future revenue streams and
cost trajectories, and understanding a panoply of
continuous and interrelated cospecialized invest-
ment issues.
13 The returns to particular cospecial-
ized assets cannot generally be neatly apportioned
or partitioned. As a result, the utility of traditional
investment criteria is impaired. Thus while project-
ﬁnancing criteria (e.g., discounted cash ﬂow, pay-
back periods and the like) and techniques for deci-
sion making under uncertainty are well known,
there is little recognition of how to value intangi-
bles and take into account features such as cospe-
cialization, irreversibility, and opportunity costs.
14
Nor is the concept of a ‘strategic investment’ rec-
ognized in the ﬁnance literature. Finance theory
provides almost no guidance with respect to how to
estimate future cash ﬂows, although making such
estimates is as much, if not more, the essence of
good decision making as are the methodologies
and procedures for analyzing cash ﬂow.
In short, managers need to make unbiased judg-
ments under uncertainty around not just future
demand and competitive responses associated with
multiple growth trajectories, but also around the
pay-offs from making interrelated investments in
intangible assets. In the world of tangible assets,
this can sometimes be precisely modeled; not
so for the world of cospecialized intangibles.
In essence, the organizational challenge appears
to be that in environments experiencing rapid
change, activities are not fully decomposable.
Cross-functional activities and associated invest-
ments must take place concurrently, rather than
sequentially, if enterprises are to cut time-to-
market for new products and processes. Man-
agerial judgments (decision-making skills) take
on great signiﬁcance in such contexts. This was
also true during prior centuries, as Alfred Chan-
dler’s (1990a, 1990b) analysis of successful enter-
prises from the 1870s through the 1960s makes
13 Monteverde and Teece’s (1982) study of the automobile indus-
try showed that ‘systems integra tion’ considerations impacted
make–buy decisions. This evidence hints at the value to be
created from ﬁguring out heuristics and protocols likely to aid
decisions involving interrelated i nvestments. Evans, Hagiu, and
Schmalensee (2006) recognize multisided market interdependen-
cies which likewise requi re a systems perspective.
14 Ghemawat (1991) and many others have examined uncertainty
and irreversibilities. However, cospecialization has received very
little attention.
apparent. No matter how much analytical work is
done, tacit investment skills are of great impor-
tance. Chandler further argues that success in the
late-nineteenth and much of the twentieth century
came to those enterprises that pursued his ‘three-
pronged’ strategy: (1) early and large-scale invest-
ments behind new technologies; (2) investment in
product-speciﬁc marketing, distribution, and pur-
chasing networks; and (3) recruiting and organiz-
ing the managers needed to supervise and coordi-
nate functional activities. The ﬁrst and second ele-
ments require commitment to investments where
irreversibilities and cospecialization are identiﬁed.
While the nature of required investments may
have changed in recent decades (less decompos-
able/more interrelated), investment decision skills
remain important.
Microfoundations
Selecting product architectures and business
models
The design and performance speciﬁcation of prod-
ucts, and the business model employed, all help
deﬁne the manner by which the enterprise deliv-
ers value to customers, entices customers to pay
for value, and converts those payments to proﬁt.
They reﬂect management’s hypothesis about what
customers want and how an enterprise can best
meet those needs, and get paid for doing so. They
embrace: (1) which technologies and features are
to be embedded in the product and service; (2) how
the revenue and cost structure of a business is to be
‘designed’ and if necessary ‘redesigned’ to meet
customer needs; (3) the way in which technolo-
gies are to be assembled; (4) the identity of market
segments to be targeted; and (5) the mechanisms
and manner by which value is to be captured.
The function of a business model is to ‘articu-
late’ the value proposition, select the appropriate
technologies and features, identify targeted market
segments, deﬁne the structure of the value chain,
and estimate the cost structure and proﬁt potential
(Chesbrough and Rosenbloom, 2002: 533–534). In
short, a business model is a plan for the organi-
zational and ﬁnancial ‘architecture’ of a business.
This model makes assumptions about the behav-
ior of revenues and costs, and likely customer and
competitor behavior. It outlines the contours of the
solution required to earn a proﬁt, if a proﬁt is avail-
able to be earned. Once adopted it deﬁnes the way
the enterprise ‘goes to market.’ Success requires
Copyright  2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 28: 1319–1350 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj

--- PAGE 12 ---
1330 D. J. Teece
that business models be astutely crafted. Other-
wise, technological innovation will not result in
commercial success for the innovating enterprise.
Generally there is a plethora of business models
that can be designed and employed, but some will
be better adapted to the ecosystem than others.
Selecting, adjusting, and/or improving the business
model is a complex art.
Nevertheless, the importance of ‘business mod-
els’ has been given short shrift in the academic
literature, at least until quite recently. Important
(business model) choices include technological
choices, market segments to be targeted, ﬁnancial
terms (e.g., sales vs. leasing), choices with respect
to bundled vs. unbundled sales strategies, joint
ventures vs. licensing vs. go-it-alone approaches,
etc. For example, in the early days of the copier
industry, Xerox focused on leasing rather than
selling copiers. This stemmed from a belief that
customer trial would lead to further use. Another
example from the United States is Southwest Air-
lines, which believes that most customers want
low frills, reliability, and low cost. It eschews
the hub-and-spoke model, does not belong to any
alliances, and does not allow interlining of passen-
gers and baggage. Nor does it sell tickets through
travel agencies—all sales are direct. All aircraft
are Boeing 737s. Its business model is quite dis-
tinct from the major carriers, although many have
tried (without much success) to copy elements of
the Southwest model.
15
The capacity an enterprise has to create, adjust,
hone, and, if necessary, replace business models
is foundational to dynamic capabilities. Choices
around how to capture value all help determine
the architecture or design of a business. Having
a differentiated (and hard-to-imitate) yet effective
and efﬁcient ‘strategic architecture’ to an enter-
prise’s business model is important. Both Dell Inc.
and Wal-Mart have demonstrated the value associ-
ated with their business models (Webvan and many
15 Let us take another example. A rock star might decide to use
concerts as the key revenue generator, or the concert may be
used primarily to stimulate sales of recordings. The star could
decide to spend less time perfo rming at concerts, and more time
in the recording studio. There is clearly a choice of various
media to extract value: live productions, movies, sale of CDs
through stores, online sale of music through virtual stores such
as the iTunes store offered by Apple, etc. The emergence of
the Internet, Napster, and Napster clones in turn requires artists
(and record companies) to reth ink their business models. The
ability to reconﬁgure business mode ls for delivering and pricing
music proﬁtably is undoubtedly a dynamic capability for both
the record companie s and the artists.
other dot-coms demonstrated just the opposite).
Both Dell Inc.’s and Wal-Mart’s business models
were different, superior, and hard for competitors
to replicate. They have also constantly adjusted
and improved their processes over time.
16
One might be tempted to argue that designing,
implementing, and validating business models is
straightforward, but this simply is not so. Aspects
of designing (and redesigning) a business model
are undoubtedly readily routinized and codiﬁed.
Note the plethora of business books providing
instruction on how to write a business plan. Such
manuals can provide some discipline to the busi-
ness model questions that one should ask. How-
ever, designing a new business requires creativity,
insight, and a good deal of customer, competitor,
and supplier information and intelligence. There is
a signiﬁcant tacit component. Entrepreneurs and
executives are forced to make many informed
guesses about customer and competitor behavior,
as well as the behavior of costs. Indeed, validat-
ing a business model and a business plan requires
both effort and judgment. It takes detailed fact-
speciﬁc inquiry including: a keen understanding of
customer needs and customer willingness to pay;
an understanding of procurement cycles and the
sales cycle; knowledge of supply and distribution
costs; and an understanding of competitor position-
ing and likely competitive responses. Put differ-
ently, selecting the right ‘architecture’ for a busi-
ness requires not just understanding the choices
available; it also requires assembling the evidence
needed to validate conjectures and hunches about
costs, customers, competitors, complementors, dis-
tributors, and suppliers.
Designing good business models is in part
‘art.’ However, the chances of success are greater
if enterprises (1) analyze multiple alternatives,
(2) have a deep understanding of user needs,
(3) analyze the value chain thoroughly so as to
understand just how to deliver what the customer
wants in a cost-effective and timely fashion, and
(4) adopt a neutrality or relative efﬁciency per-
spective to outsourcing decisions. Useful tools
include market research and transaction cost eco-
nomics. Chesbrough and Rosenbloom (2002) sug-
gest that established enterprises often have blinders
16 Indeed, a critical element of D ell’s success is not just the
way it has organized the value chain, but also the products that
it decides to sell through its distribution system. The initial
products were personal computers, but now include printers,
digital projectors, and computer-related electronics.
Copyright  2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 28: 1319–1350 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj

--- PAGE 13 ---
Explicating Dynamic Capabilities: Nature and Microfoundations 1331
with respect to alternative business models—and
that this prevails even if the technology is spun
off into a separate organization, where other (path-
dependent constraints) are less likely to exist.
In short, designing the business correctly, and
ﬁguring out what John Seeley Brown refers to
as the ‘architecture of the revenues’
17 (and costs),
involve processes critical to the formation and suc-
cess of new and existing businesses. No amount of
good governance and leadership is likely to lead
to success if the wrong business model is in place.
Good business models achieve advantageous cost
structures and generate value propositions accept-
able to customers. They will enable innovators to
capture a large enough portion of the (social) value
generated by innovation
18 to permit the enterprise
at least to earn its cost of capital.
Selecting enterprise boundaries
In regimes of rapid technological progress, setting
the enterprise boundaries correctly is important,
and can be viewed as an element of getting the
business model right. In Teece (1986), Chesbrough
and Teece (1996), and Teece (1986, 2007) norma-
tive rules were advanced indicating how enterprise
boundaries ought to be set to ensure that innovation
is more likely to beneﬁt the sponsor of the inno-
vation rather than imitators and emulators. Key
elements of this framework were: (1) the appropri-
ability regime (i.e., the amount of natural and legal
protection afforded the innovation by the circum-
stances prevailing in the market); (2) the nature
of the complementary assets (cospecialized or oth-
erwise) that an innovating enterprise possessed;
(3) the relative positioning of innovator and poten-
tial imitators with respect to complementary assets;
and (4) the phase of industry development (pre or
post the emergence of a dominate design). The
framework is prescriptive not only as to strategy
but also as to outcomes.
Enterprise boundary decisions need to reﬂect
other criteria too. A company’s integration up-
17 Quoted in Chesbrough and Rosenbloom (2002: 529).
18 A recent effort to establish a new business model is exem-
pliﬁed by the efforts of Rambus to rely exclusively on patent
licensing to capture value from its signiﬁcant technological con-
tributions to the design of semiconductor memory devices. Such
an approach avoids building f abrication facilities (which are
extremely expensive) but its vi ability depends entirely on Ram-
bus’s ability to enforce its patents in an environment in which
courts are sometimes reluctant to enjoin infringers and where
enforcing broad patents may engender antitrust challenges.
stream, downstream, as well as externally, is
partly driven by the need to build capabilities,
particularly when such capabilities are not widely
distributed in the industry. Of course, vertical spe-
cialization is not itself independent of enterprise
strategy, and vice versa (Macher and Mowery,
2004). Studies of the early vertical evolution of
the petroleum industry stressed the need to align
upstream and downstream capacities in an envi-
ronment where qualiﬁed business partners were
limited (Teece, 1976). Pisano, Shan, and Teece
(1988: 202) developed a framework for under-
standing R&D outsourcing that recognized that the
locus of world-class research/productive capabil-
ity might lie external to the enterprise, requiring
outsourcing as a way to compete.
19 Jacobides and
Winter (2005: 398) have also clearly stated that ‘it
is necessary to look at the distribution of produc-
tive capabilities—to understand when enterprises
are integrated and when they are not. It becomes
clear that vertical specialization must be in part a
function of heterogeneity in productive capabili-
ties along the value chain.’ They also note that the
capability development process itself changes as a
consequence of changing scope. Recognition that
systemic innovation favors integration, for both
transaction costs and capability reasons, is also
embedded in the saga of the development of the
diesel electric locomotive (Teece, 1988). The abil-
ity of enterprises to procure technology externally
as well as develop it internally are critical skills,
as discussed above and in Teece (1986), Ches-
brough and Teece (1996), and Teece (2000). Firms
must dispel prejudices against technology from
the outside, and hone their absorptive capacity
through learning activities and skill accumulation.
Enterprises may require alliance arrangements to
actively learn and upgrade relevant skills (Branzei
and Vertinsky, 2006).
The critical strategic element associated with
capturing value from innovation is the ability of
the innovating enterprise to identify and control the
‘bottleneck assets’ or ‘choke points’ in the value
chain from invention through to market (Teece,
1986, 2006). Outsourcing those assets/services that
19 The model identiﬁed transaction costs, the locus of capabilities
(inside or outside the enterpris e), and appropriability regimes
as three relevant classes of factors driving enterprise boundary
decisions. In particular, it was noted that transaction cost factors
‘must be weighed against any losses in productive efﬁciency
that result from being less skilled t han specialists in the relevant
stages of production.’
Copyright  2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 28: 1319–1350 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj

--- PAGE 14 ---
1332 D. J. Teece
are in competitive supply is, of course, consis-
tent with such a strategy. In short, the boundaries
of the enterprise need to be artfully contoured
for each major innovation, using decision crite-
ria referenced above. Failure to do so is likely to
be associated with the failure to stimulate market
development (especially of complementary tech-
nologies) and incomplete capture of the proﬁts
available from innovation.
Managing complements and ‘platforms’
Investment choices in many high-technology
industries today are driven by imperatives quite
different from the (industrial) contexts that have
animated strategy research over the past half cen-
tury. Scale and scope economy ‘mandates,’ which
to some strategists dictate the scale and scope of
the enterprise, have given way to a different set
of mandates around developing (or encouraging)
complementary investments and capturing cospe-
cialization beneﬁts. The reason for this is that in
many industries outsourcing has made scale an
industry asset, in the sense that economies of scale
can be captured by outsourcing to contract manu-
facturers who, in the face of competition, pass on
the beneﬁts of scale. Witness the contract semicon-
ductor fabricators. They enable fabless semicon-
ductor ‘designers’ to capture most of the beneﬁts
of scale without engaging in manufacturing. Like-
wise, in the clothing industry, small-scale design-
ers of footwear and outerwear can source at com-
petitive rates from large suppliers, thereby cap-
turing the beneﬁt of scale economics previously
enjoyed only by large integrated manufacturers.
With competition, scale advantages are not propri-
etary, and are unlikely to be a source of sustainable
differentiation.
When intermediate (product) markets are well
developed, neither economies of scale nor
economies of scope need deﬁne the scale and scope
of the enterprise. Contractual access (on compet-
itive terms) to scale-based ‘facilities’ vitiates the
need for enterprise scale and scope. This was the
major theme in Teece (1980) but the importance
of the argument was often not appreciated. Today
its importance is more evident.
While the importance of scale and scope
economies to enterprise boundary decisions may
have been softened, the signiﬁcance to enter-
prise strategy of cospecialization has been ele-
vated. As viewed by customers, high-technology
‘products’ are often systems. These systems con-
sist of interdependent components resting on ‘plat-
forms.’ There is strong functional interdependence
amongst components of the system. End user
demand is for the system, not the platform. There
is often a multisided ‘market’ phenomenon at work
as well. For instance, electronic game consoles are
not much use without games; computer operating
systems are not much use without a suite of appli-
cation programs; credit cards are not much use
to cardholders without merchants that will accept
them, and vice versa; and hydrogen cars are not
much use without hydrogen ﬁlling stations, and
vice versa. This important class of situations has
highlighted the importance of cospecialization, and
strategic decision making must now take this into
account.
The phenomenon is not new—the automobile
industry depended ﬁrst on the general store and
then specialized retail outlets to make gasoline
ubiquitously available to motorists. The role of
complementary assets and cospecialization has
already been recognized in the innovation process,
and a decision framework outlined to chart the
innovator on a course more likely to lead to a
higher share of the available proﬁt (Teece, 1986,
2007). What is new is that complements often sit
on top of what might be thought of as ‘platforms,’
which are managed by an incumbent enterprise
(Evans et al., 2006). In these circumstances, entry
decision and ‘boundary’ conundrums exist. The
platform owner needs complementary products to
be provided by others, particularly when it has
little or no relevant skills to develop them itself.
Fostering innovation and entry by the providers of
complementary products may, in fact, require the
platform manager to commit (by word or deed) not
to provide certain complements. When the inter-
face between the complementors and the platform
is itself evolving, decision rules become ever more
complex. The platform owner and the complemen-
tors might also need to consider whether the plat-
form needs to be open or proprietary, and whether
tools and other incentives should be provided to
stimulate investment by the complementors. Deci-
sion frameworks that recognize the importance
of network effects, dispersion in the sources of
innovation of complementary products, interoper-
ability issues, and installed base trajectories must
all be factored into decisions. Quality decisions
will require uncommon foresight and the ability to
shape outcomes. In this regard, the existing asset
Copyright  2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 28: 1319–1350 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj

--- PAGE 15 ---
Explicating Dynamic Capabilities: Nature and Microfoundations 1333
base of the platform manager, including its ﬁnan-
cial resources, is of considerable signiﬁcance. The
distribution of (development) capabilities between
the platform manager and the complementors will
also be important. Also, as discussed below, the
boundaries of the enterprise (i.e., whether the plat-
form manager is also providing complements) is
likely to be of signiﬁcance, possibly deterring (or
encouraging) entry and innovation by complemen-
tors.
Avoiding bias, delusion, deception, and hubris
20
As noted, proclivities toward decision errors are
not uncommon in managerial decision making,
particularly in large organizations. Investment deci-
sion errors already identiﬁed include excessive
optimism, loss aversion, isolation errors, strate-
gic deception, and program persistence. As Nelson
and Winter (2002: 29) note, organizational deci-
sion processes often display features that seem to
defy basic principles of rationality and sometimes
border on the bizarre. These errors can be espe-
cially damaging in fast-paced environments with
path dependencies and network effects, as there is
less opportunity to recover from mistakes. When
investments are small and made frequently, there
are many opportunities to learn from mistakes.
Since large investments are usually occasional,
major investment decisions are likely to be (poten-
tially) more vulnerable to error.
Fortunately, biases can be recognized ahead of
time. Enterprises can bring discipline to bear to
purge bias, delusion, deception, and hubris. How-
ever, the development of disciplines to do so is still
in its infancy. The implementation of procedures
to overcome decision-making biases in enterprise
settings is, accordingly, not yet a well-distributed
skill, and may not be for decades to come. Accord-
ingly, competitive advantage can be gained by
early adopters of techniques to overcome decision
biases and errors.
Overcoming biases almost always requires a
cognitively sophisticated and disciplined approach
to decision making. Being alert to the incentives
of the decision-makers and to possible informa-
tion asymmetries is a case in point. Obtaining an
‘outside view’ through the review of external data
can help eliminate bias. Testing for errors in logic
20 I would like to thank Dan Lovallo for inspiration and help in
this section.
is also essential. Management also needs to create
an environment where the individuals involved in
making the decision, at both the management and
board level, feel free to offer their honest opinions,
and look at objective (historical) data in order to
escape from closed thinking. Incentives must also
be designed to create neutrality when assessing
investments in the old and the new.
Considerable progress in combating biases has
been made. Advisors call upon managers to adopt
radical, nonformulaic strategies in order to over-
come the inertias that inhibit breakthrough inno-
vation (Davidow and Malone, 1992; Handy, 1990).
Speciﬁcally, corrective strategies encourage
change through two basic mechanisms: (1) design-
ing organizational structures, incentives and rou-
tines, to catalyze and reward creative action; and
(2) developing routines to enable the continual
shedding of established assets and routines that no
longer yield value. Strategies that provide struc-
tures, incentives, and processes to catalyze and
reward creative action serve to attenuate problems
of excessive risk aversion. For example, strategies
that call on the enterprise to ‘cut overhead’ and
‘increase divisional authority’ can be interpreted as
efforts to reduce the number of management lay-
ers of the enterprise and to push decision making
down to lower levels to minimize the inherent iso-
lation errors associated with multilevel, hierarchi-
cal decision-making processes. These recommen-
dations can be viewed as organizational processes
and strategic mechanisms to mitigate decision-
making biases.
Perhaps most importantly, executives must
acknowledge the interaction effect between own-
ing established assets and decision-making biases.
Many recommended strategies (such as cannibal-
izing proﬁtable product lines and licensing your
most advanced technology) call for the shed-
ding of established capabilities, complementary
assets and/or administrative routines to reduce the
intensity of decision-making biases. By jettisoning
‘dead’ or dying assets, the enterprise is no longer
shackled with an asset base that can be a crutch
and provide a false sense of security, and sustain
groups inside the enterprise that persist in torpedo-
ing new initiatives. In abandoning dead or dying
assets, the enterprise frees itself of certain routines,
constraints, and opportunities for undesirable pro-
tective action inside the enterprise.
Sources of the ‘anti-cannibalization’ bias men-
tioned earlier can also be attacked. Self-serving
Copyright  2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 28: 1319–1350 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj

--- PAGE 16 ---
1334 D. J. Teece
behavior inside the enterprise to ‘protect’ incum-
bent constituencies undergirds this bias. Flawed
investment frameworks may also contribute. Entry
into a market by an enterprise with a new and
superior technology will cause rapid deprecia-
tion of the economic value of an incumbent’s
plant and equipment. However, the incumbent may
well make business decisions based on exam-
ining accounting proﬁts that reﬂect depreciation
rates speciﬁed by accepted accounting standards.
If decision-makers confuse depreciation calculated
according to generally accepted accounting prin-
ciples (GAAP) with real economic depreciation,
and conclude that the existing business is still
proﬁtable when, in fact, it is not, then the busi-
ness enterprise may eschew proﬁt-enhancing can-
nibalization of its own products. To guard against
this bias, investment decision-makers and incum-
bents must use accounting data cautiously. In par-
ticular, they must also consider the opportunity
cost associated with not cannibalizing their own
products. Capital-budgeting procedures implicitly
biased against projects with long-term horizons
must be jettisoned or used cautiously. That is not
to say that incumbents need to invest on the same
schedule as new entrants. As Teece (1986) and
Mitchell (1991) demonstrate, incumbents need not
be the ﬁrst movers. Superior positioning in com-
plementary assets may enable incumbents to let
the new entrants do the prospecting, investing later
once market and technological risk has diminished.
There is an obvious role for leadership in making
quality decisions, communicating goals, values,
and expectations, while also motivating employees
and other constituencies. Organizational identiﬁ-
cation (and commitment, which is the corollary)
can dramatically augment enterprise performance,
although it is doubtful it can override completely
misaligned incentives. Nevertheless, group loy-
alty is a ‘powerful altruistic force’ that conditions
employee goals and the cognitive models they
form of their situation (Simon, 1993: 160). Top
management through its action and its commu-
nication has a critical role to play in garnering
loyalty and commitment and achieving adherence
to innovation and efﬁciency as important goals.
Since there is already an extensive literature on
culture, commitment, and leadership, these issues
are not discussed further. However, it would be
a signiﬁcant oversight in a summary statement of
the dynamic capabilities framework to ignore them
completely. Their full integration into the frame-
work is left to others. However, it is recognized
that to the extent such properties are not ubiq-
uitously distributed amongst business enterprises,
they can be a very important source of superior
performance. Figure 2 summarizes the microfoun-
dations identiﬁed in this section of the paper.
MANAGING THREATS AND
RECONFIGURATION
Nature
The successful identiﬁcation and calibration of
technological and market opportunities, the judi-
cious selection of technologies and product attri-
butes, the design of business models, and the
Selecting Decision-Making Protocols
Recognizing Inflexion Points and
Complementarities; 
Avoiding Decision Errors and
Anticannibalization Proclivities.
Enterprise Structures,
Procedures, Designs and
Incentives for Seizing
Opportunities
Selecting the Technology and Product
Architecture;
Designing Revenue Architectures;
Selecting Target Customers;
Designing Mechanisms to Capture
Value.
Delineating the Customer Solution and
the Business Model
Demonstrating Leadership; 
Effectively Communicating;
Recognizing Non-Economic Factors,
Values, and Culture.
Building Loyalty and Commitment
Calibrating Asset Specificity;
Controlling Bottleneck Assets;
Assessing Appropriability; 
Recognizing, Managing, and
Capturing Cospecialization
Economies.
Selecting Enterprise Boundaries to
Manage Complements and “Control”
Platforms
Figure 2. Strategic decision skills/execution
Copyright  2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 28: 1319–1350 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj

--- PAGE 17 ---
Explicating Dynamic Capabilities: Nature and Microfoundations 1335
commitment of (ﬁnancial) resources to investment
opportunities can lead to enterprise growth and
proﬁtability. Proﬁtable growth will lead to the aug-
mentation of enterprise-level resources and assets.
Success will cause the enterprise to evolve in a
path-dependent way. A key to sustained proﬁtable
growth is the ability to recombine and to recon-
ﬁgure assets and organizational structures as the
enterprise grows, and as markets and technolo-
gies change, as they surely will. Reconﬁguration
is needed to maintain evolutionary ﬁtness and, if
necessary, to try and escape from unfavorable path
dependencies. In short, success will breed some
level of routine, as this is necessary for operational
efﬁciency. Routines help sustain continuity until
there is a shift in the environment. Changing rou-
tines is costly, so change will not be (and should
not be) embraced instantaneously. Departure from
routines will lead to heightened anxiety within the
organization, unless the culture is shaped to accept
high levels of internal change. If innovation is
incremental, routines and structures can probably
be adapted gradually or in (semi-continuous) steps.
When it is radical, possibly because it is science
based, then there will be a mandate to completely
revamp the organization and create an entirely new
‘break out’ structure (Teece, 2000) within which an
entirely different set of structures and procedures
is established.
As discussed earlier, the ‘anti-cannibalization’
bias is a particular manifestation of incentive
and structural problems that can thwart innova-
tion in established enterprises. Incumbent enter-
prises possessing ﬁxed assets may further tend to
limit their new investments to innovations that
are ‘close-in’ to the existing asset base. They
tend to narrowly focus search activities to exploit
established technological and organizational assets.
This effect makes it difﬁcult for these enterprises
to see potential radical innovations. In addition,
incumbent enterprises tend to frame new prob-
lems in a manner consistent with the enterprise’s
current knowledge base, assets, and/or established
problem-solving heuristics and established busi-
ness model. This second effect means that man-
agers may not successfully address opportunities or
potential innovations even when they do recognize
them. Managers face and must overcome at least
two constraints—cognitive limitations and fram-
ing biases—arising from established assets (Teece,
2000).
As the enterprise grows, it has more assets to
manage and to protect against malfeasance and
mismanagement. Shirking, free riding, the strategic
manipulation of information, and internal compla-
cency are all issues that established enterprises
will confront continuously. As discussed earlier,
over time successful enterprises will develop hier-
archies and rules and procedures (routines) that
begin to constrain certain interactions and behav-
iors unnecessarily. Except in very stable envi-
ronments, such rules and procedures are likely
to require constant revamping if superior perfor-
mance is to be sustained. It is not uncommon to
ﬁnd that a once functional routine becomes dys-
functional, providing inertia and other rigidities
that stand in the way of improved performance
(Leonard-Barton, 1995; Rumelt, 1995). As a result,
less well-resourced enterprises (sometimes estab-
lished enterprises that have divested certain assets,
sometimes new entrants) end up winning in the
marketplace.
Traditional management approaches endorse
strong hierarchies with at least three levels of
management: top, middle, and lower. Control is
exerted at the top and cascades down through mul-
tiple levels. Employees tend to end up beholden
to the management and CEO, and not the cus-
tomer. The existence of independent proﬁt centers
can lead to internal boundaries that stand in the
way of providing integrated solutions that bene-
ﬁt customers. With centralized structures, strategic
decisions made at the top tend to become iso-
lated from marketplace realities. Customer care is
relegated to employees who are lower down in
the organization. In short, the systems and rules
needed to manage many layers of organization
tend to create structural rigidities and perversities
that in turn handicap customer and technological
responsiveness. To sustain dynamic capabilities,
decentralization must be favored because it brings
top management closer to new technologies, the
customer, and the market.
Top management leadership skills are required
to sustain dynamic capabilities. An important man-
agerial function is achieving semi-continuous asset
orchestration and corporate renewal, including the
redesign of routines. This is because the sustained
achievement of superior proﬁtability requires semi-
continuous and/or continuous efforts to build,
maintain, and adjust the complementarity of prod-
uct offerings, systems, routines, and structures.
Inside the enterprise, the old and the new must
Copyright  2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 28: 1319–1350 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj

--- PAGE 18 ---
1336 D. J. Teece
complement. If they do not, business units must
be disposed of or placed in some type of sepa-
rate structure. Otherwise, work will not proceed
efﬁciently, and conﬂicts of one kind or another
will arise. Put differently, periodic if not continu-
ous asset orchestration—involving achieving asset
alignment, coalignment, realignment, and rede-
ployment—is necessary to minimize internal con-
ﬂict and to maximize complementarities and pro-
ductive exchange inside the enterprise.
Redeployment and reconﬁguration (Capron,
Dussauge, and Mitchell, 1998) may also involve
business model redesign as well as asset-realign-
ment activities, and the revamping of routines.
Redeployment can involve transfer of nontrad-
able assets to another organizational or geographic
location (Teece, 1977, 1980). It may or may not
involve mergers, acquisitions, and divestments.
21
Helfat and Peteraf (2003: 1006) suggest that capa-
bility redeployment takes one of two forms: the
sharing of capability between the old and the new,
and the geographic transfer of capability from one
market to another. Both are possible, but neither is
easy.
Microfoundations
Achieving decentralization and near
decomposability
Every system comprises subsystems (elements)
that are to some extent interdependent and inde-
pendent. However, as discussed earlier, enterprises
are unlikely to be continuously responsive to cus-
tomers and new technologies absent a high degree
of decentralization. With decentralized decision
making, different managers observe different infor-
mation and control different decisions, but there is
not the need for communication to a single central
decision-maker, and hence no comprehensive ‘roll-
up’ of information is required. Decentralization
must be pursued as enterprises expand, otherwise
ﬂexibility and responsiveness will erode.
One well-documented restructuring that is
widely adopted as enterprises grow is the adoption
of the multidivisional form. This involves decom-
position and the devolution of decision rights
21 As Capron et al. (1998) explain, failures in the market for
resources sometimes cause enterp rises to buy and sell business.
What they refer to as market failure appears to relate to the
‘thin market’ problem discussed by the author in this paper and
elsewhere (Helfat et al., 2007).
to quasi-independent proﬁt centers. The abandon-
ment of functional structures in favor of the mul-
tidivisional form has been analyzed by Chan-
dler (1962), Williamson (1975), and many others.
The basic rationale of this reconﬁguration was
to achieve greater accountability of managerial
decisions so that the recognition of opportunities
and threats could proceed more thoroughly and
expeditiously. With functional internal structures,
day-to-day problems tend to distract management
from long-run strategic issues. Studies showed
that decentralization along product or market lines
with independent proﬁt centers led to performance
improvements in many industries, at least during
the period in which these organizational innova-
tions were diffusing (Armour and Teece, 1978;
Teece, 1980, 1981). More recent scholarship has
suggested that even further decentralization and
decomposition in large organizations may be ben-
eﬁcial (Bartlett and Ghoshal, 1993). There is also
some evidence that ‘modern’ human resource man-
agement techniques—involving delayering, decen-
tralization of decision rights, teamwork, ﬂexi-
ble task responsibilities and performance-based
rewards—also improve performance (Jantunen,
2005).
Of course, achieving decentralization can com-
promise the organization’s ability to achieve inte-
gration. There is little harm and much beneﬁt from
decentralization when the customer does not ben-
eﬁt from an integrated product offering, or when
sourcing and other inputs do not beneﬁt from inte-
gration and/or aggregation. If customer and sup-
ply considerations allow decomposability (because
the required integration between units is less than
within units), then management’s ability to iden-
tify and implement decomposable subunits should
enhance performance. However, if ﬁrm-speciﬁc
economies of scale and scope are available, they
must be captured—otherwise the enterprise is tan-
tamount to a conglomerate. This tension can be
managed through a collaborative nonhierarchical
management style assisted by establishing councils
and other integration forums. Middle management
can also play a critical role when such forums
are established. They can also design and imple-
ment tight ﬁnancial controls and performance-
based reward systems. Since intangibles are key
drivers of performance, their enhancement and
protection must become a managerial priority.
The open innovation model of Chesbrough
(2003) also recognizes the beneﬁts of relying on
Copyright  2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 28: 1319–1350 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj

--- PAGE 19 ---
Explicating Dynamic Capabilities: Nature and Microfoundations 1337
a distributed model of innovation where the enter-
prise reaches out beyond its own boundaries to
access and integrate technology developed by oth-
ers. By way of example, Henderson and Cock-
burn (1994) found that an enterprise’s ability to
integrate knowledge from external sources—their
‘architectural competence’—was positively asso-
ciated with research productivity, as measured by
patent counts. Likewise, Iansiti and Clark (1994)
found that ‘integration capability’ in the automo-
bile industry and in the computer industry was
associated with positive enterprise performance,
again demonstrating the importance of knowledge
integration skills. In the end, it appears that in
fast-paced environments organizational units must
have considerable autonomy (to make decisions
rapidly) but remain connected to activities that
must be coordinated. Achieving this delicate bal-
ance is what Simon (2002) called ‘near decom-
posability’ and implementing it is an important
microfoundation of dynamic capabilities.
Managing cospecialization
The ﬁeld of strategic management and the dynamic
capabilities framework recognizes that ‘strategic
ﬁt’ needs to be continuously achieved. However,
unless the concept is operationalized it has lim-
ited utility. The key dimension of ‘ﬁt’ emphasized
in the dynamic capabilities framework is that of
‘cospecialization.’ The concept of cospecialization,
introduced in Teece (1986) and discussed in the
‘Managing complements and “platforms”’ section
above, operationalizes at least one dimension of
the otherwise rather vague concept of organiza-
tional adaptation and ‘ﬁt.’ Cospecialization can be
of one asset to another, or of strategy to struc-
ture, or of strategy to process. It is important to
both seizing and reconﬁguration. In environments
of rapid change, there is a need for continuous or
at least semi-continuous realignment.
In many ways, much of the traditional literature
on organizational adaptation and ‘ﬁt’ (e.g., Miles
and Snow, 1994) is consistent with dynamic capa-
bilities. In particular, both the strategy and organi-
zational behavior literature emphasize ﬁt between
and amongst strategy, structure, and processes.
While it is not central to his framework, Michael
Porter does note that:
[S]trategic ﬁt among many activities is fundamental
not only to competitive advantage but also to sus-
tainability of that advantage. It is harder for a rival
to match an array of interlocked activities than it is
merely to imitate a particular sales force approach,
match a process technology, or replicate a set of
product features. (Porter, 1996: 73)
Despite Porter’s clear recognition of the concept
of ‘ﬁt,’ neither complementarities nor cospecializa-
tion are recognized in the Five Forces framework.
However, complementarities and cospecialization
are recognized in various ways in Teece (1986,
2000, 2006, 2007), Brandenburger and Nalebuff
(1996), and Santoro and McGill (2005). Economic
historians (Rosenberg, 1982; Hughes, 1983) have
also noted the phenomenon at a general level; but
in most analyses of competition and competitive
advantage, it is common to stress that various inno-
vations are substitutes, rather than complements
that may be cospecialized to each other. Indeed,
Schumpeter (1934) stressed that successful inno-
vations/enterprises are threatened by swarms of
imitators, all striving to produce ‘me-too’ substi-
tutes.
22 He completely neglected complementari-
ties.
However, complementary innovation and com-
plementary assets are of great signiﬁcance, partic-
ularly in industries in which innovation might be
characterized as cumulative, and/or where indus-
try ‘platforms’ exist or are needed. Examples of
complementary innovation are ubiquitous. In the
enterprise software industry, business applications
can be especially valuable to users if they can
somehow be integrated into a single program, or
into a tightly integrated suite. The development
of gyroscopic stabilizers made imaging devices
such as video cameras and binoculars easier to
use by minimizing the impact of camera shake,
and enhanced the product, especially when the
new feature was able to be introduced at low cost.
Likewise, better high-energy rechargeable batteries
enable laptop computers and cell phones to operate
for longer times. Situations of complementarities
where there is also cospecialization between tech-
nologies, and between technologies and other parts
22 Schumpeter wrote (1934: 223) that innovations/new combi-
nations carried out by entrepreneurs ‘are not, as one would
expect according to general prin ciples of probability, evenly
distributed through time ... but appear, if at all, discontinu-
ously in groups or swarms.’ This ‘swarming’ of innovations
and innovative activity occurs ‘exc lusively because the appear-
ance of one or a few entreprene urs facilitates the appearance
of others, and these the appearance of more, in even increasing
number’ (Schumpeter, 1934: 228). Recent studies that analyze
patent races have also reinfor ced the view that innovations are
substitutes, not complements.
Copyright  2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 28: 1319–1350 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj

--- PAGE 20 ---
1338 D. J. Teece
of the value chain, are common, yet until recently
poorly analyzed in economic analysis and in strat-
egy formulation.
Cospecialized assets are a particular class of
complementary assets where the value of an asset
is a function of its use in conjunction with other
particular assets.
23 With cospecialization, joint use
is value enhancing. 24 Cospecialization results in
‘thin’ markets; i.e., the assets in question are
idiosyncratic and cannot be readily bought and
sold in a market. Capturing cospecialization ben-
eﬁts may require integrated operations (Teece,
1980). Cospecialization allows differentiated prod-
uct offerings or unique cost savings. The inher-
ent ‘thin’ market environment surrounding spe-
ciﬁc assets means that competitors are not able to
rapidly assemble the same assets by acquisition,
and hence cannot offer the same products/services
at competing price points.
Management’s ability to identify, develop, and
utilize in combination specialized and cospecial-
ized assets built or bought is an important dynamic
capability, but it is not always present in enterprise
settings. Special value can be created (and poten-
tially appropriated by another party) through asset
combinations, particularly when an asset owner
is not cognizant of the value of its assets to
another party that owns assets whose value will
be enhanced through combination.
25 This arises
because the markets for cospecialized assets are
necessarily thin or nonexistent. Langlois (1992)
highlights the case of the diesel-electric locomo-
tive where, in the 1920s, Charles Kettering had
developed advanced lightweight diesel technology
23 Lippman and Rumelt’s (2003a, 2003b) recent work on devel-
oping the microfoundations for resource-based theory is very
complementary to my development of the microfoundations of
dynamic capabilities. I acknowledge their efforts in modeling
cospecialized and complementary assets. In particular, they use
the concept of supermodularity to bring in the tools of cooper-
ative game theory. The idea of supermodularity was introduced
by Donald Topkins as a way to formalize complementarity, and
is also used by economists such as Milgrom and Roberts (see, in
particular, Milgrom and Roberts, 1990) and evolutionary game
theorists to model (strategic) co mplementarities (for instance, in
models of R&D spillovers).
24 Complete cospecialization is a special case of economies of
scope where not only are complementary assets more valuable
in joint use than in separate use, but they may, in fact, have zero
value in separate use and high valuein joint use. Cospecialization
may stem from economies of scope, but they could also stem
from the revenue enhancement associated with producing a
bundled or integrated solution for the customer.
25 Even if they are cognizant, they do not have the bargaining
power to take advantage of the situation.
at the GM labs. The earliest use was in sub-
marines. Alfred P. Sloan, GM’s chairman, saw
the possibility of applying the technology to make
diesel-electric locomotives—steam power was, at
the time, completely dominant. To accomplish this,
GM needed capabilities resident in the locomotive
manufacturers and at Westinghouse Electric. Lan-
glois (1992: 115) notes that the three sets of capa-
bilities might have been combined by some kind
of contract or joint venture, but the steam man-
ufacturers—Alco, Baldwin, and Lima—failed to
cooperate.
26 In short, both innovation and reconﬁg-
uration may necessitate cospecialized assets being
combined by management in order for (systemic)
innovation
27 to proceed. Managers do not always
succeed in doing so, sometimes because they do
not sense the need or the opportunity, and some-
times because they do but they are unable to effec-
tuate the integration. If the assets cannot be pro-
cured externally, they will need to be built inter-
nally.
The ability of management to identify needs
and opportunities to ‘invest’ in cospecialized
assets (through its own development or astute
purchase) is fundamental to dynamic capabilities.
Mere ‘horse-trading’ skills (which market agents
possess) will not sufﬁce to build sustainable
competitive advantage, and decisions on when and
how to invest—whether and when to build or
buy cospecialized assets—will depend upon many
factors, including transaction costs. In particular,
it will depend on management’s entrepreneurial
capacities with respect to matching up and
integrating relevant cospecialized assets.
It is apparent that cospecialization involves
‘lock-in’ and is a particular form of complemen-
tarity that exists when technologies and other
assets need to be part of a tightly integrated sys-
tem to achieve the performance that customers
want. Business success in such circumstances
requires the coordination of R&D investment and
alliance activity. The manner and timing with
which such coordination needs to be accomplished
is important to success (Teece, 1986; Mitchell,
26 This was not because the companies feared holdup in the face
of highly speciﬁc assets. Rather, it was because they actively
denied the desirability of the d iesel and fought its introduction
at every step. GM was forced to create its own capabilities in
locomotive manufacturing.
27 For a discussion of system ic innovation, see Teece (1988,
2000).
Copyright  2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 28: 1319–1350 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj

--- PAGE 21 ---
Explicating Dynamic Capabilities: Nature and Microfoundations 1339
1991). Common ownership of the parts facili-
tates system-wide innovation and economic per-
formance (Teece, 2000) and protects against oppor-
tunism (Williamson, 1975).
To summarize, entrepreneurs and managers can
create special value by combining cospecialized
assets inside the enterprise (Teece, 2007). This may
require investments to create the necessary cospe-
cialized technologies—as illustrated by Thomas
Edison and the creation of electric power as
a system. It is not uncommon in technology-
based industries to ﬁnd that certain technologies
are worth more to some market participants than
to others, based on the technology they already
have, and their technology and product strat-
egy.
Learning, knowledge management, and corporate
governance
With intangible assets being critical to enterprise
success, the governance and incentive structures
designed to enable learning and the generation of
new knowledge become salient. There are many
types of learning—including experiential, vicari-
ous, individual, and organizational—and a large
literature that explores each type. Also ‘sensing’
requires learning about the environment and about
new technological capabilities. R&D was seen as
one way that the enterprise could promote such
learning. However, in the context of the dynamic
capability discussed in this section, the ability to
integrate and combine assets including knowledge
is a core skill (Kogut and Zander, 1992; Grant,
1996). The combination of know-how within the
enterprise, and between the enterprise and organi-
zations external to it (e.g., other enterprises, uni-
versities), is important.
Integrating know-how from outside as well
as within the enterprise is especially important
to success when ‘systems’ and ‘networks’ are
present. Good incentive design and the creation
of learning, knowledge-sharing, and knowledge-
integrating procedures are likely to be critical to
business performance, and a key (micro)foundation
of dynamic capabilities (Nonaka and Takeuchi,
1995; Chesbrough, 2003). Of equal importance
are monitoring and managing the ‘leakage,’ mis-
appropriation, and misuse of know-how, trade
secrets, and other intellectual property. Of course,
tacit know-how is difﬁcult to imitate and has a
certain amount of ‘natural’ protection. However,
much know-how does leak out. Innovating busi-
ness enterprises with limited experience have been
known to inadvertently compromise or lose their
intellectual property rights. Failure to proactively
monitor and protect know-how and intellectual
property is common.
The outsourcing of production and the prolif-
eration of joint development activities likewise
create requirements that enterprises develop gov-
ernance procedures to monitor the transfer of tech-
nology and intellectual property. Technology trans-
fer activities, which hitherto took place inside the
enterprise, increasingly take place across enterprise
boundaries. The development of governance mech-
anisms to assist the ﬂow of technology while pro-
tecting intellectual property rights from misappro-
priation and misuse are foundational to dynamic
capabilities in many sectors today. Figure 3 sum-
marizes the microfoundations of this third class of
dynamic capability.
There are also several other ‘governance’ issues
relevant to dynamic capabilities. At one level there
are governance and business model issues associ-
ated with an enterprise’s ability to achieve asset
‘combinations’ and reconﬁguration. As noted ear-
lier, there is a continuous need to modify product
offerings, business models, enterprise boundaries,
and organizational structures. Decentralized struc-
tures that facilitate near decomposability are likely
to assist in achieving reconﬁguration.
One class of governance issues relate to incen-
tive alignment. The microfoundations of incentive
issues are embedded in an understanding of agency
and incentive design issues, also discussed earlier.
Agency theory has long emphasized that the sep-
aration of ownership from control creates interest
alignment problems, particularly around manage-
ment compensation and the allocation of corpo-
rate perquisites. The abuse of discretion and the
use of corporate assets for private purposes can
occur absent appropriate accountability/oversight.
These issues become more severe as an enter-
prise grows and the separation between ownership
and management widens. Recent corporate gover-
nance scandals in the United States, Europe, and
Japan indicate the need for continued vigilance.
However, increasing the mix of independent and
‘inside’ directors will not necessarily ameliorate
problems associated with strategic ‘malfeasance.’
There are likely to be beneﬁts associated with
participation at the board level by individuals who
can calibrate whether the top management team
Copyright  2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 28: 1319–1350 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj

--- PAGE 22 ---
1340 D. J. Teece
Governance
Achieving Incentive Alignment;
Minimizing Agency Issues;
Checking Strategic Malfeasance;
Blocking Rent Dissipation.
Knowledge Management
Learning;
Knowledge Transfer;
Know-how Integration;
Achieving Know-how and Intellectual
Property Protection.
Cospecialization
Managing Strategic Fit So That
Asset Combinations Are Value
Enhancing.
Continuous Alignment and
Realignment of Specific Tangible
and Intangible Assets.
 
Adopting Loosely Coupled Structures;
Embracing Open Innovation;
Developing Integration and
Coordination Skills.
Decentralization and Near
Decomposability
Figure 3. Combination, reconﬁguration, and asset protection skills
is sufﬁciently ‘dynamic.’ The replacement of the
CEO and other members of the top management
team, if they demonstrate weak sensing, seizing,
and reconﬁguration capabilities (strategic ‘malfea-
sance’), is important to effectuate. That is not to
say that guarding against ﬁnancial malfeasance is
unimportant. It will always remain as an important
corporate governance function; but its signiﬁcance
is likely to pale next to strategic ‘malfeasance,’
which is harder to detect and evaluate. The cur-
rent wave of governance reforms in the United
States—with its strong emphasis on accounting
controls and systems integrity—may inadvertently
lead to much bigger ‘strategic’ performance fail-
ures by management. Boards stacked with inex-
perienced ‘independent’ board members may not
have the requisite talents to properly diagnose
strategic ‘malfeasance’ and respond accordingly.
A related literature in economics has stressed
how poorly designed incentives can produce ten-
sions between the actions of employees and the
actions needed to achieve proﬁtable performance.
Dysfunctional behavior, such as activity that gen-
erates inﬂuence costs, has received considerable
attention (Teece, 2003). Also, through use of col-
lective bargaining, employees in industries insu-
lated from global competition have been able
to appropriate economic surplus. Above-market
wages—which characterized, and to some extent
still characterize, certain enterprises in the auto,
steel, and airline industries in the United States—
are a case in point. These conditions can extend to
managerial ranks as well. Restructuring may then
require the judicious use of bankruptcy laws to
rewrite uncompetitive supply contracts that are the
product of unrealistic collective bargaining actions
in an earlier period. The ability of some enterprises
to craft work speciﬁcations, attract and retain more
committed talent, design reward systems, develop
corporate cultures, and blunt the formation of
coalitions that extract quasi-rents through threat-
ening to withhold participation, is an important
managerial capacity.
The design and creation of mechanisms inside
the enterprise to prevent the dissipation of rents by
interest groups (both management and employees)
would also appear to be very relevant to dynamic
capabilities, but has not been high on the agenda of
strategy researchers. One exception is Gottschalg
and Zollo (2007), who point out that the capac-
ity to continuously achieve incentive alignment
is an important performance-enhancing (and rent-
protecting) dynamic capability.
Many of the issues discussed here have, in the
past, fallen under the rubric of human resource
management; a closer connection of these issues
to strategic management issues would appear to
be warranted. The reason is that strategic man-
agement is focused not only on how to gen-
erate rent streams, but also on how to prevent
them from being dissipated or captured by various
entities or groups inside and outside the enter-
prise. For instance, the concepts of the ‘appropri-
ability regime’ and ‘isolating mechanisms’ were
developed by strategic management scholars to
help explain how rents from innovation and other
sources of superior performance can be protected
and guarded from dissipation by competitors and
Copyright  2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 28: 1319–1350 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj

--- PAGE 23 ---
Explicating Dynamic Capabilities: Nature and Microfoundations 1341
others. However, the earlier focus on markets
or ‘external’ competition did not address internal
appropriation by interest groups.
DYNAMIC CAPABILITIES,
‘ORCHESTRATION’ SKILLS, AND
COMPETITIVE ADV ANTAGE
The general framework advanced here sees
dynamic capabilities as the foundation of enter-
prise-level competitive advantage in regimes of
rapid (technological) change. The framework indi-
cates that the extent to which an enterprise devel-
ops and employs superior (nonimitable) dynamic
capabilities will determine the nature and amount
of intangible assets it will create and/or assemble
and the level of economic proﬁts it can earn (see
Figure 4). Furthermore, the framework emphasizes
that the past will impact current and future perfor-
mance. However, there is much that management
can do to simultaneously design processes and
structures to support innovation while unshackling
the enterprise from dysfunctional processes and
structures designed for an earlier period.
In Teece and Pisano (1994) and Teece et al.
(1997), we proposed three organizational and man-
agerial processes—coordination/integrating, learn-
ing, and reconﬁguring—as core elements of
dynamic capabilities. These processes are a sub-
set of the processes that support sensing, seiz-
ing, and managing threats. Together they might
be thought of as asset ‘orchestration’ processes.
A key strategic function of management is to
ﬁnd new value-enhancing combinations inside the
enterprise, and between and amongst enterprises,
and with supporting institutions external to the
enterprise. Because many of the most valuable
assets inside the ﬁrm are knowledge related and
hence nontradable, the coordination and integra-
tion of such assets create value that cannot be repli-
cated in a market. This establishes a distinctive role
for managers in economic theory and in the eco-
nomic system. Managers seek new combinations
by aligning cospecialized assets (Teece, 2007). The
need to sense and seize opportunities, as well as
reconﬁgure when change occurs, requires the allo-
cation, reallocation, combination, and recombina-
tion of resources and assets. These are the key
strategic function of executives. Indeed, skills used
to identify and exploit complementarities and man-
age cospecialization are scarce. Figuring out how
to increase value from the use of the assets the
enterprise owns involves knowing the ﬁne-grained
structure of the ﬁrm’s asset base, and ﬁlling in
the gaps necessary to provide superior customer
solutions. Gap ﬁlling may involve building new
assets, or acquisitions and strategic partnerships
(Ettlie and Pavlou, 2006).
The dynamic capabilities framework recognizes
that the business enterprise is shaped but not
necessarily trapped by its past. Management can
make big differences through investment choice
and other decisions. Enterprises can even shape
their ecosystem. In this sense, the framework
is quite Chandlerian (Chandler, 1990a, 1990b).
Managers really do have the potential to set
technological and market trajectories, particularly
early on in the development of a market (David,
1992). Indeed, the enterprise and its environ-
ment frequently coevolve. However, because of the
assumed context—regimes of rapid technological
change exposed to the full force of international
competition—there is little room for big mistakes.
Hence, the dynamic capabilities framework is
partially but not entirely in the spirit of evolution-
ary theorizing. The dynamic capabilities frame-
work endeavors to capture the key variables and
relationships that need to be ‘manipulated’ to cre-
ate, protect, and leverage intangible assets so as to
achieve superior enterprise performance and avoid
the zero-proﬁt trap. However, building and assem-
bling tangible and intangible assets and effectuat-
ing change is seen as difﬁcult. Long-run success
is likely to require achieving necessary internal
creative destruction, possibly involving spin-outs
and spin-offs to help sustain superior performance.
Decision biases must also be neutralized. In short,
enterprises may be more like biological organ-
isms than some economists, managers, and strategy
scholars are willing to admit; but they are also
more malleable than some organizational ecolo-
gists are willing to recognize.
The enterprise will need sensing, seizing, and
transformational/reconﬁguring capabilities to be
simultaneously developed and applied for it to
build and maintain competitive advantage. Simul-
taneity may not be necessary at the product level—
indeed, Helfat and Peteraf (2003) distinguish
between capability development and subsequent
honing, grafting, and branding. Endeavoring to
simultaneously achieve sensing, seizing, and recon-
ﬁguring at the individual product level could lead
to chaos and lack of effectiveness, as routines and
Copyright  2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 28: 1319–1350 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj

--- PAGE 24 ---
1342 D. J. Teece
SENSING SEIZING
MANAGING
THREATS/
TRANSFORMING
DYNAMIC
CAPABILITIES
SELECTED
MICRO-
FOUNDATIONS
Selecting
Decision-Making
Protocols
 
Delineating the
Customer
Solution and the
Business Model
Building Loyalty
and Commitment
Selecting
Enterprise
Boundaries to
Manage
Complements
and “Control”
Platforms.
Processes to Tap
Supplier and
Complementor
Innovation.
Processes to
Direct Internal
R&D and Select
New
Technologies.
Processes to
Identify Target
Market
Segments,
Changing
Customer Needs
and Customer
Innovation.
Processes to Tap
Developments in
Exogenous
Science and
Technology.
Governance
Decentralization
and Near
Decomposability
Knowledge
Management.
Cospecialization.
Enterprise
Structures,
Procedures,
Designs and
Incentives
for Seizing
Opportunities
Continuous
Alignment and
Realignment of
Specific
Tangible and
Intangible
Assets
 
Analytical Systems
(and Individual
Capacities) to Learn
and to Sense, Filter,
Shape, and Calibrate
Opportunities.
 
Figure 4. Foundations of dynamic capabilities and business performance
Copyright  2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 28: 1319–1350 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj

--- PAGE 25 ---
Explicating Dynamic Capabilities: Nature and Microfoundations 1343
rules in the organization would likely be in a con-
tinuous state of ﬂux.
The ﬁrst two capabilities recognized as funda-
mental—sensing and seizing—are related to but
different from March’s (1991, 1996, 2006) con-
cepts of exploration and exploitation. March seems
clear that both are necessary for adaptation, but
he has recognized the tensions, if not incompat-
ibilities, between the two. His argument in part
is that incompatibilities ﬂow from the fact that
exploration and exploitation compete for resources
and that the mindsets and organizational routines
needed for one are different from the other, mak-
ing simultaneous pursuit difﬁcult, if not impossible
(March, 1996: 280). While there is merit to each
assumption, both need to be put into perspective.
With respect to competition for resources, sensing
does not necessarily involve large commitments
of resources, at least not relative to seizing. Cer-
tain aspects, such as monitoring the environment,
can be a low-cost activity. Early-stage exploratory
research is also relatively inexpensive. Mansﬁeld
et al.’s (1971: Table 6.2) studies of new prod-
uct development showed that the cost of early-
stage research activities was a small percentage
of the total new product development costs. For
instance, the costs of pharmaceutical development
typically far exceed those of pharmaceutical dis-
covery. Also, with respect to the different mindsets
and routines, while there are undoubtedly tensions,
these can be relieved by having different organi-
zation units (or different parts of an organizational
unit) specializing to some degree on sensing as
compared to seizing. As Gupta, Smith, and Shal-
ley (2006: 697) note: ‘exploration or exploitation
in one domain may coexist with high levels of
exploration or exploitation in the other domain.’
Of course, the outsourcing of manufacturing and
other aspects of seizing reconciles the issues even
more starkly, as the routines needed for proﬁcient
manufacturing then lie external to the ﬁrm.
The need for both exploration and exploitation
is well accepted for adaptative systems, and is
embedded in the literature on ambidexterity (e.g.,
O’Reilly and Tushman, 2007). This literature rec-
ognizes that both exploration and exploitation can
be assisted by differentiated but partially or weakly
integrated subunits (divisions, departments). Sens-
ing activities need to be decentralized with the
information rolling up to top management. Tight
planning will be a part of seizing, but less so of
sensing.
To summarize, an enterprise’s ability to man-
age competitor threats and to reconﬁgure itself
is dependent on its investment activity, which
is in turn dependent on its ability to sense an
opportunity. This aspect of dynamic capabilities
indicates that the likelihood of achieving ﬁnan-
cial success depends on events and responses to
them. Formally, let the probability of a high eco-
nomic proﬁts ranking for an enterprise, condi-
tional on some extraordinary event E (e.g., an
exogenous technological change that opens up the
possibility of a new business opportunity) occur-
ring,
28 be Pr(/Pi1|E). Then: Pr(/Pi1|E = Pr(sense|E) ×
Pr(seize|E, sense) × Pr(manage threats/transform
|E, sense, seize) × P r((/Pi1|E), sense, seize,
manage threats/transform).
As indicated throughout this paper and through-
out earlier treatments by this author, it is also
necessary to assess the issue of the ‘sustainabil-
ity’ or nonimitability of both assets and capa-
bilities. This in turn depends upon a number of
factors summarized adequately by the twin con-
cepts of ‘isolating mechanism’ and ‘appropriabil-
ity regimes.’29 When the appropriability regime is
‘tight’ and the business enterprise’s own isolating
mechanisms are strong, differential performance
can be sustained, at least for a time. Dynamic
capabililties of course require the creation, integra-
tion, and commercialization of a continuous stream
of innovation consistent with customer needs and
technological opportunities.
Note that in the dynamic capabilities framework,
enterprises must employ sensing, seizing, and
reconﬁguring mechanism to direct their ﬁnancial
resources consistent with marketplace needs and
imperatives. However, as a matter of pure theory,
enterprises need not continuously reinvent them-
selves. The need to reinvent depends on events,
anticipated or otherwise. If the ecosystem in which
the enterprise is embedded remains stable, the need
to change can be modulated accordingly.
30 Indeed,
28 Alternatively, one could asse ss the unconditional probability
Pr(/Pi1)of earning such proﬁts. Pr(/Pi1)= Pr(/Pi1|E) + Pr(/Pi1|∼
E) with Pr(/Pi1|∼ E) deﬁned analogously to the deﬁnition of
Pr(/Pi1|E) in the text. In competitive markets without dynamic
capabilities, Pr(/Pi1|∼ E) is likely to be zero.
29 Intellectual property protection, the tacit nature of know-how,
and the inherent difﬁculty of the technology, all affect the ease of
imitation. Another factor devel oped in this article is the unique
coalignment of speciﬁc assets . Achieving such combinations
may be difﬁcult for imitators to effectuate.
30 This assumes that the ecosystem remains attractive. If it does
not, the enterprise will have to consider migrating to a different
Copyright  2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 28: 1319–1350 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj

--- PAGE 26 ---
1344 D. J. Teece
if an enterprise controls standards, or can some-
how help stabilize its own environment, then it
may not need to engage in the continuous and
costly exploration of radical alternatives (March,
1991). Selecting suitable business models, making
the right strategic investment decisions, and pursu-
ing incremental innovation can keep an enterprise
highly competitive for a decade or so (e.g., Boe-
ing’s decision to build the 747, which 30 years
later is much improved and still competitive in
some conﬁgurations on some routes) if the envi-
ronment is stable. Excessive internal change for
the sake of it can lead to internal chaos and per-
formance failure.
RESOURCES/COMPETENCES
DISTINGUISHED FROM DYNAMIC
CAPABILITIES
The dynamic capabilities framework advances a
neo-Schumpeterian theory of the ﬁrm and orga-
nizational decision making that is recognizable to
those familiar with the behavioral theory of the
ﬁrm, with evolutionary theorizing in economics,
and with a Schumpeterian characterization of the
innovation process. It also builds on what has come
to be known as the resource-based approach. While
the resource-based approach is inherently static, it
is nevertheless relevant to dynamic capabilities. As
noted by Teece et al.:
the resource-based perspective also invites consid-
eration of strategies for developing new capabil-
ities. Indeed, if control over scarce resources is
the source of economic proﬁts, then it follows
that such issues as skill acquisition and learning
become fundamental strategic issues ... (Teece
et al., 1990a: 9)
Zott similarly recognizes that
dynamic capabilities are more than a simple addi-
tion to resource based view since they manipulate
the resources and capabilities that directly engender
rents. (Zott, 2003: 120)
Collis (1994) and Winter (2003) also note that
one element of dynamic capabilities is that they
ecosystem, or reshaping the eco system itself. Both are very
challenging tasks.
govern the rate of change of ordinary capabili-
ties.31 However, the notion advanced here is that,
at least analytically, dynamic capabilities can be
disaggregated into sensing, seizing, and transfor-
mational activities. Enterprises with good dynamic
capabilities will have entrepreneurial management
that is strategic in nature and achieves the value-
enhancing orchestration of assets inside, between,
and amongst enterprises and other institutions
within the business ecosystem. Dynamic capability
is a meta-competence that transcends operational
competence. It enables ﬁrms not just to invent but
also to innovate proﬁtably (Teece, 1986, 2006).
The dynamic capabilities framework is integra-
tive. Dosi, Nelson, and Winter (2000: 4) noted at
one point the ‘terminological ﬂotilla’ in the lit-
erature on organizational competences. However,
perhaps there is now an emerging consensus that
resources/competences map well into what his-
torically we have thought of as the enterprise’s
operational capabilities, which help sustain techni-
cal ﬁtness. Dynamic capabilities, by contrast, relate
to high-level activities that link to management’s
ability to sense and then seize opportunities, nav-
igate threats, and combine and reconﬁgure spe-
cialized and cospecialized assets to meet changing
customer needs, and to sustain and amplify evolu-
tionary ﬁtness, thereby building long-run value for
investors.
If an enterprise possesses resources/competences
but lacks dynamic capabilities, it has a chance
to make a competitive return (and possibly even
a supra-competitive return) for a short period;
but it cannot sustain supra-competitive returns for
the long term except due to chance. It may earn
Ricardian (quasi-)rents when demand increases for
its output, but such quasi-rents will be competed
away. It does not earn those Schumpeterian rents
associated with ‘new combinations’ and subse-
quent recombination, or Kirznerian rents associ-
ated with bringing markets back into equilibrium.
It might earn short-term Porterian rents associated
with ‘building defenses against competitive forces’
(Porter, 1991: 22), but this is far too reactive for
long-term success. Dynamically competitive enter-
prises don’t just build defenses to competition;
they help shape competition and marketplace out-
comes through entrepreneurship, innovation, and
31 As discussed here, dynamic capabilities certainly include this
element, as well as several others.
Copyright  2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 28: 1319–1350 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj

--- PAGE 27 ---
Explicating Dynamic Capabilities: Nature and Microfoundations 1345
semi-continuous asset orchestration and business
reconﬁguration.
The archetypical enterprise with competences/
resources but lacking dynamic capabilities will
in equilibrium ‘earn a living by producing and
selling the same product, on the same scale and
to the same customer population’ (Winter, 2003:
992). Such an enterprise might even be good
at invention, but it will likely fail to capitalize
on its technological accomplishments. The oper-
ational/technical competences possessed might in-
clude basic ones such as order entry (to commu-
nicate what needs to be made/supplied), billings
(to collect from customers), purchasing (to decide
what inputs to buy and to then pay suppliers),
ﬁnancial controls (to restrict behavior and prevent
theft), inventory controls (to minimize inventory
costs) ﬁnancial reporting (to access capital), mar-
keting (to identify customers), and sales (to obtain
orders). Management of these functions is com-
monly considered operations management.
Operations management is arguably at the foun-
dation of basic management functions; but while
knowledge of modern production systems took
generations to develop, it is now widely diffused.
The division of labor, uniform standards, the mov-
ing assembly line, measurement techniques for
inspection, and control all of course had to be
invented and they now constitute what we now
think of as the (American) system of production.
Competitive advantage can in theory ﬂow from
superior operations, or what was referred to ear-
lier as ‘technical ﬁtness.’ Indeed, the Industrial
Revolution saw signiﬁcant differentials open up
between craft systems and modern production sys-
tems, and these innovations led to an almost com-
plete reordering of the industrial landscape. As
Charles Babbage noted almost 200 years ago:
[W]e shall notice, in the art of making even the
most insigniﬁcant of [articles], processes calculated
to excite our admiration by their simplicity, or to
rivet our attention by their unlooked-for results.
(Babbage, 1835: 3)
However, the postwar period has led to great
progress in the understanding of how produc-
tion systems work. Many useful techniques have
been developed and improved. With developments
in the ﬁeld of management science and opera-
tions research, precise answers to narrow problems
exist. Much is known about inventory manage-
ment, scheduling, planning, quality control, and
about managing isolated subsystems. The pursuit
of ‘benchmarking’ and the adoption of ‘best prac-
tices’ has helped with the diffusion of discrete
skills, protocols, and procedures. However, accord-
ing to one of the ﬁeld’s pioneers, ‘we have not
learned very much about the relationships between
these subsystems’ (Buffa, 1982: 2). This is one
place where dynamic capabilities come into play.
One implication is that special know-how—
know-how that is difﬁcult to obtain and apply—is
needed to sense opportunities, execute plans, and
conﬁgure and reconﬁgure assets and systems as
necessary. Skill in putting things together to cap-
ture cospecialization beneﬁts is important. Even
with respect to operations management, it seems
the pay-off today is in understanding how sub-
systems are related and interact together. Put dif-
ferently, the understanding of the basic business
functions that constitute business administration
and operations management is widely diffused and
hence well known, at least in advanced economies.
The wide diffusion of knowledge with respect to
such functions means that much can be outsourced
or implemented inside any enterprise with rela-
tive facility. However, by running hard at this, an
enterprise may manage only to stand still—what
some refer to as the ‘Red Queen’ effect. Absent
a broader overarching set of dynamic capabilities,
a ﬁrm that is merely competent in operations will
fail. However, understanding how to enhance per-
formance of the enterprise through sensing future
needs, making quality, timely, and unbiased invest-
ment decisions inside a well-designed business
model, executing well on those decisions, effec-
tuating productive combinations, promoting learn-
ing, reengineering systems that no longer work
well, and implementing good governance remains
enigmatic. The requisite managerial services that
undergird dynamic capabilities cannot be out-
sourced. Understanding and implementing the pro-
cesses and structures that undergird dynamic capa-
bilities is enterprise speciﬁc, and requires intimate
knowledge of both the enterprise and the ecosys-
tem in which the enterprise cooperates and com-
petes.
In this regard, a useful distinction can be made
between entrepreneurs, managers, and administra-
tors. Administrators are responsible for the day-to-
day operations and the routine; they help ensure
that the enterprise is technically ﬁt, in the sense
deﬁned earlier. They are not expected to engage in
entrepreneurial activities; e.g., they are not relied
Copyright  2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 28: 1319–1350 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj

--- PAGE 28 ---
1346 D. J. Teece
on to sense new business opportunities. Nor are
they typically expected to discover the need for
and to design new enterprise-wide operating rou-
tines, as this constitutes evolutionary ﬁtness. The
distinctions made earlier are implicitly recognized
by Porter (1996) when he claims that operational
effectiveness is not strategy. He recognizes that
both operational effectiveness and strategy are
essential to superior performance, but notes:
The quest for productivity, quality, and speed has
spawned a remarkable number of management
tools and techniques, total quality management
benchmarking, time-based competition, outsourc-
ing, partnering, reengineering and change manage-
ment. Although the resulting operational improve-
ments have been dramatic, many companies have
been frustrated by their inability to translate gains
into sustainable proﬁtability. And bit-by-bit, almost
imperceptibly, management tools have taken the
place of strategy. As managers push to improve
on all fronts, they move farther away from viable
competitive positions (Porter, 1996: 61).
Yet it is perhaps an overstatement to say that ‘oper-
ations management’ tools and procedures cannot
be the basis of competitive advantage, or work
against it. If there is a signiﬁcant, tacit, non-
inimitable component of an enterprise’s superior
operational competence, it has the potential for
a time to support superior performance (it will,
in fact, generate Ricardian rents).
32 Nevertheless,
superior operational efﬁciency, while valuable, is
not a dynamic capability.
CONCLUSION
For open economies exposed to rapid technolog-
ical change, the dynamic capabilities framework
highlights organizational and (strategic) manage-
rial competences that can enable an enterprise to
achieve competitive advantage, and then semi-
continuously morph so as to maintain it. The
framework integrates and synthesizes concepts and
research ﬁndings from the ﬁeld of strategic man-
agement, from business history, industrial eco-
nomics, law and economics, the organizational sci-
ences, innovation studies, and elsewhere.
Implicit in the dynamic capabilities framework
is a recognition that relatively open regimes of
32 Wal-Mart and Dell Inc. have both used differentiated business
models to anchor their competitive advantages.)
free trade and investment, global dispersion in the
sources of new knowledge, and the multi-invention
or systemic character of such innovation have
‘upped the ante’ for modern management. Improv-
ing quality, controlling costs, lowering inventories,
and adopting best practices (’technical ﬁtness’)
will no longer sufﬁce for long-run competitive
success. Nor do traditional scale economies in pro-
duction always have the differentiating power they
may once have had. More than scale and scope
advantage are needed. Success requires the cre-
ation of new products and processes and the imple-
mentation of new organizational forms and busi-
ness models, driven by an intensely entrepreneurial
genre of management constantly honing the evo-
lutionary and entrepreneurial ﬁtness of the enter-
prise. Entrepreneurial managers can sense and
even help shape the future, unshackle the enter-
prise from the past, and stay ahead by augment-
ing knowledge assets, protecting them with intel-
lectual property rights, establishing new value-
enhancing asset combinations, and transforming
organizational and, if necessary, regulatory and
institutional structures. Dynamic capabilities reside
in large measure with the enterprise’s top manage-
ment team, but are impacted by the organizational
processes, systems, and structures that the enter-
prise has created to manage its business in the
past.
Maintaining dynamic capabilities thus requires
entrepreneurial management. The entrepreneurial
management in question is different but related
to other managerial activity. Entrepreneurship is
about sensing and understanding opportunities,
getting things started, and ﬁnding new and better
ways of putting things together. It is about cre-
atively coordinating the assembly of disparate and
usually cospecialized elements, getting ‘approvals’
for nonroutine activities, and sensing business
opportunities. Entrepreneurial management has lit-
tle to do with analyzing and optimizing. It is more
about sensing and seizing—ﬁguring out the next
big opportunity and how to address it.
We have come to associate the entrepreneur
with the individual who starts a new business
providing a new or improved product or ser-
vice. Such action is clearly entrepreneurial, but
the entrepreneurial management function embed-
ded in dynamic capabilities is not conﬁned to
startup activities and to individual actors. It is
a new hybrid: entrepreneurial managerial capital-
ism. It involves recognizing problems and trends,
Copyright  2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 28: 1319–1350 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj

--- PAGE 29 ---
Explicating Dynamic Capabilities: Nature and Microfoundations 1347
directing (and redirecting) resources, and reshap-
ing organizational structures and systems so that
they create and address technological opportu-
nities while staying in alignment with customer
needs. The implicit thesis advanced here is that
in both large and small enterprises entrepreneurial
managerial capitalism must reign supreme for
enterprises to sustain ﬁnancial success. Nor is
entrepreneurial management merely ‘intrapreneur-
ship,’ as there is a large role for the entrepreneurial
manager in external activities, including shaping
the ecosystem.
As discussed, there are obvious tensions and
interrelationships between and amongst the three
classes of capabilities identiﬁed. The managerial
skills needed to sense are quite different from those
needed to seize and those needed to reconﬁgure.
All functions have a signiﬁcant ‘entrepreneurial’
and ‘right brain’ component. Successful enter-
prises must build and utilize all three classes of
capabilities and employ them, often simultane-
ously. Since all three classes are unlikely to be
found in individual managers, they must be some-
where represented in top management, and the
principal executive ofﬁcer must succeed in getting
top management to operate as a team. Of course,
if the principal executive ofﬁcer has depth in all
three classes of capabilities, the organization has a
better chance of success.
The dynamic capabilities framework goes
beyond traditional approaches to understanding
competitive advantage in that it not only empha-
sizes the traits and processes needed to achieve
good positioning in a favorable ecosystem, but it
also endeavors to explicate new strategic consider-
ations and the decision-making disciplines needed
to ensure that opportunities, once sensed, can be
seized; and how the business can be reconﬁgured
when the market and/or the technology inevitably
is transformed once again. In this sense, dynamic
capabilities aspire to be a relatively parsimonious
framework for explaining an extremely seminal
and complicated issue: how a business enterprise
and its management can ﬁrst spot the opportu-
nity to earn economic proﬁts, make the decisions
and institute the disciplines to execute on that
opportunity, and then stay agile so as to contin-
uously refresh the foundations of its early success,
thereby generating economic surpluses over time.
If the framework has succeeded in some small
measure, then we have the beginnings of a gen-
eral theory of strategic management in an open
economy with innovation, outsourcing, and off-
shoring.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
An earlier version of this paper formed the basis
of a lecture delivered in Finland on September
3, 2003, on the occasion of the award of the
Viipuri Prize in Strategic Management. I wish to
thank Mie Augier, John Blair, Hank Chesbrough,
Antonia Cusumano Binette, Connie Helfat, Dan
Lovallo, Cyndi Morrow, Richard Nelson, Ikijiro
Nonaka, Christos Pitelis, Dan Schendel, Valeska
Scheren-Guivel, Edward F. Sherry, and Sydney
Winter for many helpful comments and sugges-
tions on early drafts. I also thank Richard Rumelt
for insights provided over the years, which have
undoubtedly shaped my thinking on strategy and
on dynamic capabilities. Two anonymous refer-
ees provided trenchant comments on several dif-
ferent drafts. These were immensely helpful, and
I am much indebted to them. Patricia Murphy,
Patricia Lonergan, Frances Darnley, and Elizabeth
Olson provided tenacious assistance in preparing
the manuscript for publication.
REFERENCES
Abernathy WJ, Utterback JM. 1978. Patterns of industrial
innovation. Technology Review 80(7): 40–47.
Alchian A, Demsetz H. 1972. Production, information
costs, and economic organization. American Economic
Review 62: 777–795.
Amit R, Schoemaker PJH. 1993. Strategic assets and
organization rent. Strategic Management Journal
14(1): 33–46.
Armour H, Teece DJ. 1978. Organizational structure
and economic performance: a test of the multidivi-
sional hypothesis. Bell Journal of Economics 9(2):
106–122.
Audretsch DB. 1995. Innovation, growth, and survival.
International Journal of Industrial Organization
13(4): 441–457.
Babbage C. 1835. On the Economy of Machinery and
Manufactures (4th edn). Charles Knight: London.
Bartlett CA, Ghoshal S. 1993. Beyond the M-form:
toward a managerial theory of the enterprise. Strategic
Management Journal , Winter Special Issue 14:
23–46.
Baumol W. 2006. Entrepreneurship and invention: toward
restoration into microeconomic value theory. Working
paper, Ringberg Castle Presentation, Germany.
Brandenburger AM, Nalebuff BJ. 1996. Co-opetition.
Harvard Business School Press: Boston, MA.
Copyright  2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 28: 1319–1350 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj

--- PAGE 30 ---
1348 D. J. Teece
Branzei O, Vertinsky I. 2006. Pathways to product
innovation capabilities in SMEs. Journal of Business
Venturing 21(1): 75–105.
Buffa E. 1982. Research in operations management.
Journal of Operations Management 1(1): 1–7.
Capron L, Dussauge P, Mitchell W. 1998. Resource rede-
ployment following horizontal mergers and acqui-
sitions in Europe and North America, 1988–1992.
Strategic Management Journal 19(7): 631–661.
Casson M. 1997. Information and Organization: A New
Perspective on the Theory of the Enterprise . Oxford
University Press: New York.
Chandler A. 1962. Strategy and Structure: Chapters in the
History of Industrial Enterprise . Harvard University
Press: Cambridge, MA.
Chandler A. 1990a. Scale and Scope: The Dynamics
of Industrial Capitalism . Harvard University Press:
Cambridge, MA.
Chandler A. 1990b. The enduring logic of industrial
success. Harvard Business Review 68(2): 130–140.
Chesbrough H. 2003. Open Innovation: The New Impera-
tive for Creating and Proﬁting from Technology .H a r -
vard Business School Press: Boston, MA.
Chesbrough H, Rosenbloom RS. 2002. The role of the
business model in capturing value from innovation:
evidence from Xerox Corporation’s technology.
Industrial and Corporate Change 11(3): 529–555.
Chesbrough H, Teece DJ. 1996. Organizing for inno-
vation: when is virtual virtuous? Harvard Business
Review 74(1): 65–73.
Collis DJ. 1994. Research note: how valuable are
organizational capabilities? Strategic Management
Journal, Winter Special Issue 15: 143–152.
Cyert RM, March JG. 1963. A Behavioral Theory of the
Enterprise. Prentice-Hall: Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
David P. 1992. Heroes, herds and hysteresis in
technological history: Thomas Edison and the battle
of the system reconsidered. Industrial and Corporate
Change 1(1): 129–180.
Davidow W, Malone M. 1992. The Virtual Corporation .
Harper Business: New York.
Dosi G, Nelson RR, Winter SG. 2000. Introduction.
In The Nature and Dynamics of Organizational
Capabilities, Dosi G, Nelson, RR, Winter SG (eds).
Oxford University Press: New York; 1–24.
Dunne T, Roberts MJ, Samuelson L. 1988. Patterns of
enterprise entry and exit in U.S. manufacturing
industries. Rand Journal of Economics 19(4):
495–515.
Eisenhardt K, Martin J. 2000. Dynamic capabilities:
what are they? Strategic Management Journal ,
October–November Special Issue 21: 1105–1121.
Ettlie JE, Pavlou PA. 2006. Technology-based new
product development partnerships. Decision Sciences
37(2): 117–147.
Evans DS, Hagiu A, Schmalensee R. 2006. Invisible
Engines: How Software Platforms Drive Innovation
and Transform Industries . MIT Press: Cambridge,
MA.
Freeman C. 1974. The Economics of Industrial Innova-
tion. Penguin: Harmondsworth, U.K.
Ghemawat P. 1991. Commitment: The Dynamics of
Strategy. Free Press: New York.
Gottschalg O, Zollo M. 2007. Interest alignment and
competitive advantage. Academy of Management
Review 32(2): 418–437.
Grant RM. 1996. Prospering in dynamically competitive
environments. Organizational Science 7(4): 375–387.
Gupta AK, Smith KG, Shalley CE. 2006. The interplay
between exploration and exploitation. Academy of
Management Journal 49(4): 693–706.
Handy C. 1990. The Age of Unreason . Harvard Business
School Press: Boston, MA.
Helfat C, Peteraf M. 2003. The dynamic resource-based
view: capability lifecycles. Strategic Management
Journal, October Special Issue 24: 997–1010.
Helfat C, Finkelstein S, Mitchell W, Peteraf MA, Singh
H, Teece DJ, Winter SG. 2007. Dynamic Capabilities:
Understanding Strategic Change in Organizations .
Blackwell: Oxford, U.K.
Henderson RM. 1994. Managing innovation in the
information age. Harvard Business Review 72(1):
100–106.
Henderson RM, Clark K. 1990. Architectural innovation:
the reconﬁguration of existing product technologies
and the failure of established ﬁrms. Administrative
Science Quarterly 35: 9–30.
Henderson RM, Cockburn I. 1994. Measuring com-
petence? Exploring ﬁrm effects in pharmaceutical
research. Strategic Management Journal , Winter Spe-
cial Issue 15: 63–84.
Hughes TP. 1983. Networks of Power Electriﬁcation
in Western Society 1880–1930 . Johns Hopkins
University Press: Baltimore, MD.
Iansiti M, Clark KB. 1994. Integration and dynamic
capability: evidence from product development in
automobiles and mainframe computers. Industrial and
Corporate Change 3(3): 557–605.
Jacobides MG, Winter S. 2005. The coevolution of capa-
bilities and transaction costs: explaining the institu-
tional structure of production. Strategic Management
Journal 26(5): 395–413.
Jantunen A. 2005. New HRM practices and knowledge
utilization. In Proceedings of the 5th International
Workshop on Human Resource Management , Seville,
Spain.
Kahneman D, Lovallo D. 1993. Timid choices and bold
forecasts: a cognitive perspective on risk taking.
Management Science 39(1): 17–31.
Kahneman D, Tversky A. 1979. Prospect theory: an
analysis of decisions under risk. Econometrica 47(2):
263–291.
Kirzner I. 1973. Competition and Entrepreneurship .
University of Chicago Press: Chicago, IL.
Klepper S, Graddy E. 1990. The evolution of new
industries and the determination of market structure.
Rand Journal of Economics 21(1): 27–44.
Klepper S, Miller J. 1995. Entry, exit, and shakeouts
in the United States in new manufactured products.
Internal Journal of Industrial Organization 13(4):
567–591.
Knight FH. 1921. Risk, Uncertainty, and Proﬁt. Houghton
Mifﬂin: New York.
Copyright  2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 28: 1319–1350 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj

--- PAGE 31 ---
Explicating Dynamic Capabilities: Nature and Microfoundations 1349
Kogut B, Zander U. 1992. Knowledge of the enterprise,
combinative capabilities and the replication of
technology. Organizational Science 3(3): 383–397.
Langlois R. 1992. Transactions-cost economics in real
time. Industrial and Corporate Change 1(1): 99–127.
Lazonick W. 2005. The innovative ﬁrm. In The Oxford
Handbook of Innovation , Fagerberg J, Mowery D,
Nelson RR (eds). Oxford University Press: New York;
29–55.
Leonard-Barton D. 1995. Wellsprings of Knowledge-
Building and Sustaining the Sources of Innovation .
Harvard Business School Press: Boston, MA.
Lippman SA, Rumelt RP. 1982. Uncertain imitability: an
analysis of interﬁrm differences under competition.
Bell Journal of Economics 13(2): 418–438.
Lippman SA, Rumelt RP. 2003a. A bargaining perspec-
tive on resource advantage. Strategic Management
Journal 24(11): 1069–1086.
Lippman SA, Rumelt RP. 2003b. The payments perspec-
tive: micro-foundations of resource analysis. Strate-
gic Management Journal , October Special Issue 24:
903–927.
Macher JT, Mowery DC. 2004. Vertical specialization
and industry structure in high technology industries.
Advances in Strategic Management 21: 317–356.
Malerba F, Orsenigo L. 1996. The dynamics and
evolution of industries. Industrial and Corporate
Change 5(1): 51–87.
Mansﬁeld E, Rapoport J, Schnee J, Wagner S, Ham-
burger M. 1971. Research and Innovation in the Mod-
ern Corporation. WW Norton: New York.
March JG. 1991. Exploration and exploitation in
organizational learning. Organizational Science 2(1):
71–87.
March JG. 1996. Continuity and change in theories
of organizational action. Administrative Science
Quarterly 41: 278–287.
March JG. 2006. Rationality, foolishness, and adaptive
intelligence. Strategic Management Journal 27(3):
201–214.
March JG, Simon HA. 1958. Organizations. Wiley: New
York.
Miles R, Snow C. 1994. Fit, Failure, and the Hall of
Fame: How Companies Succeed or Fail . Free Press:
New York.
Milgrom P, Roberts J. 1990. The economics of modern
manufacturing: technology, strategy, and organization.
American Economic Review 80(3): 511–528.
Mitchell W. 1991. Dual clocks: entry order inﬂuences
on industry incumbent and newcomer market share
and survival when specialized assets retain their value.
Strategic Management Journal 12(2): 85–100.
Monteverde K, Teece DJ. 1982. Supplier switching costs
and vertical integration in the U.S. automobile
industry. Bell Journal of Economics 13(1): 206–213.
Nelson RR. 2005. Technology, Institutions, and Economic
Growth. Harvard University Press: Cambridge, MA.
Nelson RR, Winter SG. 1982. An Evolutionary Theory
of Economic Change . Harvard University Press:
Cambridge, MA.
Nelson RR, Winter SG. 2002. Evolutionary theorizing in
economics. Journal of Economic Perspectives 16(2):
23–46.
Nonaka I, Takeuchi H. 1995. The Knowledge Creating
Company. Oxford University Press: New York.
Nonaka I, Toyama R. 2007. Strategic management as
distributed practical wisdom (phronesis). Industrial
and Corporate Change 16(3): 371–394.
O’Reilly CA, Tushman M. 2007. Ambidexterity
as a dynamic capability: resolving the inno-
vator’s dilemma. (March 2007). http://ssrn.com/
abstract=978493 [24 June 2007].
Packard D. 1995. The HP Way: How Bill Hewlett and I
Built Our Company . HarperCollins: New York.
Phillips A. 1971. Technology and Market Structure: A
Study of the Aircraft Industry. Heath Lexington Books:
Lexington, MA.
Pisano G, Shan W, Teece DJ. 1988. Joint ventures and
collaboration in the biotechnology industry. In Inter-
national Collaborative Ventures in U.S. Manufactur-
ing, Mowery D (ed.). Ballinger: Cambridge, MA;
183–222.
Porter M. 1980. Competitive Strategy: Techniques for
Analyzing Industries and Competitors . Free Press:
New York.
Porter M. 1991. How competitive forces shape strategy.
In Strategy: Seeking and Securing Competitive
Advantage, Montgomery C, Porter M (eds). Harvard
Business School Press: Boston, MA; 11–26.
Porter M. 1996. What is strategy? Harvard Business
Review 74(6): 61–80.
Rosenberg N. 1982. Inside the Black Box. Cambridge
University Press: New York.
Rosenkopf L, Nerkar A. 2001. Beyond local search:
boundary-spanning, exploration and impact in the
optical disc industry. Strategic Management Journal
22(4): 287–306.
Rumelt R. 1984. Towards a strategic theory of the
enterprise. In Competitive Strategic Management ,
Lamb RB (ed). Prentice-Hall: Englewood Cliffs, NJ;
556–570.
Rumelt R. 1995. Inertia and transformation. In Resource
Based and Evolutionary Theories of the Enterprise ,
Montgomery C (ed.). Kluwer Academic: Boston, MA;
101–132.
Santoro D, McGill JP. 2005. The effect of uncer-
tainty and asset cospecialization on governance in
biotechnology alliances. Strategic Management Jour-
nal 26(13): 1261–1269.
Schumpeter J. 1934. The Theory of Economic Develop-
ment. Harvard University Press: Cambridge, MA.
Shane S. 2003. A General Theory of Entrepreneurship .
Edward Elgar: Northampton, MA.
Simon HA. 1993. Altruism and economics. American
Economic Review 83(2): 156–161.
Simon HA. 2002. Near decomposability and the speed
of evolution. Industrial and Corporate Change 11(3):
587–599.
Somaya D, Teece DJ. 2007. Patents, licensing and
entrepreneurship: effectuating innovation in multi-
invention contexts. In Entrepreneurship, Innovation,
and the Growth Mechanism of the Free-Market
Copyright  2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 28: 1319–1350 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj

--- PAGE 32 ---
1350 D. J. Teece
Enterprise, Sheshinski E, Strom RJ, Baumol WJ
(eds). Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ;
185–212.
Teece DJ. 1976. Vertical Integration and Vertical
Divestiture in the U.S. Oil Industry . Stanford
University Institute for Energy Studies: Stanford, CA.
Teece DJ. 1977. Technology transfer by multinational
enterprises: the resource cost of transferring tech-
nological know-how. Economic Journal 87: (June):
242–261.
Teece, DJ, 1980. Economies of scope and the scope
of the enterprise. Journal of Economic Behavior and
Organization 1(3): 223–247.
Teece DJ. 1981. Internal organization and economic per-
formance: an empirical analysis of the proﬁtability of
principal enterprises. Journal of Industrial Economics
30(2): 173–199.
Teece DJ. 1982. Towards an economic theory of the
multiproduct ﬁrm. Journal of Economic Behavior and
Organization 3(1): 39–63.
Teece DJ. 1986. Proﬁting from technological innovation.
Research Policy 15(6): 285–305.
Teece DJ. 1988. Technological change and the nature
of the enterprise. In Technical Change and Eco-
nomic Theory , Dosi G, Freeman C, Nelson RR, Sil-
verberg G, Soete, L (eds). Pinter: London; 256–281.
Teece DJ. 1990. Contributions and impediments of eco-
nomic analysis to the study of strategic management.
In Perspectives on Strategic Management , Fredrick-
son JW (ed.). HarperCollins: New York; 39–80.
Teece DJ. 2000. Managing Intellectual Capital: Orga-
nizational, Strategic, and Policy Dimensions . Oxford
University Press: Oxford, U.K.
Teece DJ. 2003. Expert talent and the design of
(professional services) enterprises. Industrial and
Corporate Change 12(4): 895–916.
Teece DJ. 2006. Reﬂections on proﬁting from innovation.
Research Policy 35(8): 1131–1146.
Teece DJ. 2007. Managers, markets, and dynamic capa-
bilities. In Dynamic Capabilities: Understanding
Strategic Change in Organizations , Helfat C, Finkel-
stein S, Mitchell W, Peteraf MA, Singh H, Teece DJ,
Winter SG (eds). Blackwell: Oxford, U.K.; 19–29.
Teece DJ, Pisano G. 1994. The dynamic capabilities of
enterprises: an introduction. Industrial and Corporate
Change 3(3): 537–556.
Teece DJ, Pisano G, Shuen A. 1990a. Enterprise capabil-
ities, resources and the concept of strategy. Consor-
tium on Competitiveness and Cooperation, Working
paper CCC 90-8, Institute of Management, Innovation
and Organization, University of California, Berkeley,
CA.
Teece DJ, Pisano G, Shuen A. 1990b. Firm capabilities,
resources and the concept of strategy. Economic
Analysis and Policy Working Paper EAP-38,
Institute of Management, Innovation and Organization,
University of California, Berkeley, CA.
Teece DJ, Pisano, G, Shuen, A. 1997. Dynamic capabili-
ties and strategic management. Strategic Management
Journal 18(7): 509–533.
Tushman M, Anderson P. 1986. Technological disconti-
nuities and organizational environments. Administra-
tion Science Quarterly 31: 439–465.
Utterback J, Suarez F. 1993. Innovation, competition, and
market structure. Research Policy 22(1): 1–21.
Wernerfelt B. 1984. A resource-based view of the ﬁrm.
Strategic Management Journal 5(2): 171–180.
Williamson OE. 1975. Markets and Hierarchies .F r e e
Press: New York.
Winter SG. 2003. Understanding dynamic capabilities.
Strategic Management Journal , October Special Issue
24: 991–996.
Zott C. 2003. Dynamic capabilities and the emergence
of intraindustry differential ﬁrm performance: insights
from a simulation study. Strategic Management
Journal 24(2): 97–125.
Copyright  2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 28: 1319–1350 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj

--- PAGE 33 ---
[No extractable text on this page]