--- PAGE 1 ---
1673
ACTA UNIVERSITATIS AGRICULTURAE ET SILVICULTURAE MENDELIANAE BRUNENSIS
Volume 67 149 Number 6, 2019
DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION MATURITY:
A SYSTEMATIC REVIEW OF LITERATURE
Roman Teichert1
1
 Department of Management, Faculty of Business and Economics, Mendel University in Brno, Zemědělská 1,
613 00 Brno, Czech Republic
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.11118/actaun201967061673
Received: 3. 6. 2019, Accepted: 26. 9. 2019
To cite this article: TEICHERT ROMAN. 2019. Digital Transformation Maturity: A Systematic Review of Literature.
 Acta Universitatis Agriculturae et Silviculturae Mendelianae Brunensis, 67(6): 1673–1687.
Abstract
Thegoalofthispaperistopresentcontemporarydevelopmentsinthefieldofdigitalmaturitymodels.
By conducting a systematic literature review finally 24 relevant studies including 22 different models
were identified and various characteristics of different digital maturity models were extracted. Focus
was placed on the dimensions used to measure digital maturity in different model approaches.
Special light was shed on organizational culture and to what extent it is represented in the models.
Among other things, the findings indicate, that dimensions applied in various models can be very
different and that just a few models incorporate transformational in addition to digital capabilities.
In particular, organizational culture as a dedicated dimension of digital maturity is represented
already in a few models, which indicates the growing importance of culture as an enabler of digital
transformation efforts. Beside a comprehensive overview of the most widely used dimensions
measuring digital maturity, a synthesis of the most frequently addressed cultural attributes is
presented in this paper as well. This review finally reveals that most of the existing models give
an incomplete picture of digital maturity, that cultural attributes reflecting a digital culture are not
integrated systematically, and that digital maturity models specific to the domain of services are
clearly under-represented. It also clearly demonstrates that research about digital transformation
maturity as a holistic concept is scarce and needs more attention by research in the future.
Keywords: systematic literature review, digital transformation, digital maturity, digital maturity
models, digital transformation maturity, digital culture
INTRODUCTION
In the digital age, the environment of
organizations is changing faster and has become
more volatile, uncertain and complex than in
the past. Rapid changes in competition, demand,
technology and regulations make it more important
than ever for organizations to be able to respond
and adapt to their environment. In this context,
the pressure on firms for aligning their business
strategy with the technological changes in the
environment has significantly increased with
the emergence and growing importance of new
digital technologies, such as Social Media, Cloud
Computing, Big Data and Analytics, Embedded
Devices, 3D-Printing, the Internet of Things,
and Artificial Intelligence. They are profoundly
transforming the strategic context of organizations:
changing the structure of competition, the
behaviour and expectations of customers, the
way business is conducted, the way products are
manufactured and services are delivered, the way
of working and, ultimately, the nature of entire
industries (Fichman et al., 2014). Consequently, the
phenomenon of digital transformation, notably the
levers crucial for success and the hurdles critical to
transformation efforts, have gained a lot of attention
and interest from practitioners and researchers
in recent years. In this regard, also the role of
organizational culture as a roadblock or a catalyst

--- PAGE 2 ---
1674 Roman Teichert
for digital transformation is moving more and
more to the foreground and to the top of CEOs’
agendas. Several surveys reported that company
culture is considered as the number one hurdle
to digital transformation (Goran et al., 2016; Buvat
et al., 2017; Solis, 2017). Hence, cultural change
is a prerequisite and can become a bottleneck for
digital transformation, if not adapted properly.
Especially in a volatile environment and its
pressure to innovate, organizational culture must
change and evolve (Sörensen, 2002). This suggests
a dynamic view of culture, which defines an
adaptive organizational culture as an inherent
attribute by which cultures change and respond to
environmental changes (Kotter and Heskett, 1992).
Therefore it can be argued that adaptive attributes
of culture can positively influence progress of
digital transformation efforts.
Digital transformation itself simultaneously
affects multiple areas of an organization. Several
stakeholders have to be involved in defining
a transformation strategy. All these groups need
a common and consistent understanding of the
relevant areas to be addressed and the prioritization
of digital transformation activities (Berghaus
and Back, 2016). Therefore managers need to
understand the current state with regard to digital
transformation of their organization and “need
to define action items for their transformation
roadmap, prioritize between different activities
and develop a strategic vision for the digital age”
(Berghaus and Back, 2016). Consequently, the
need to systematically assess an overall status of
digital transformation and to map an effective
path towards a desirable future digital maturity
state is significantly growing in organizations.
Digital maturity matters for companies because
there is evidence that firms with a higher level of
digital maturity outstrip industry competitors along
different dimensions of financial performance
(Westerman et al., 2012).
A digital maturity model can assist management
and employees in developing a clear roadmap for
their transformation activities in order to improve
the level of digital maturity. In recent years, an
unclear number of various maturity models have
been developed to conceptualize and assess digital
maturity in organizations with the intention to
effectivelymanageandguidedigitaltransformation.
Although previous reviews of digital maturity
models have already been conducted (Chanias and
Hess, 2016; Remane and Hanelt, 2017; Canetta et al.,
2018), there is still a lack of understanding what
the most common maturity dimensions used across
existing models are. Chanias and Hess (2016) also
stated that there is a content-related (e.g. underlying
dimensions) heterogeneity of the different digital
maturity models. In addition, there is indication
that a lot of models are too generic in nature to
be applied to any particular industry and as such
are not designed to offer specific guidance (Valdez-
de-Leon, 2016). Moreover, none of the previous
reviews investigated the aspect of company culture
as a dimension of digital maturity, even though
there is evidence that culture is the number one
hurdle to digital transformation (Goran et al., 2016;
Buvat et al., 2017; Solis, 2017). In the light of this,
a systematic literature review is carried out with
the following questions guiding the review:
1. Who is driving the development of digital
maturity models – practitioner or academic?
2. What are the different domains (industrial
contexts) addressed by digital maturity models?
3. Whatarethemostcommonmaturitydimensions
used in digital maturity models?
4. To what extent is organizational culture
represented and which cultural attributes are
addressed in digital maturity models?
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Defining Digital Transformation
& Digital Maturity
Digital Transformation
Currently, there is no commonly accepted
definition for the term “digital transformation”
(Schallmo et al., 2017). The term “transformation”
expresses a fundamental change within the
organization, which impacts strategy, structure
(Matt et al., 2015) and the distribution of power
(Wischnevsky and Damanpour, 2006). Digital
transformation itself can be seen as an ongoing
process of adoption to a significantly changing
digital landscape in order to meet the digital
expectations of customers, employees and partners.
This process of adoption has to be actively designed,
initiated and executed (Berghaus and Back, 2016;
Kane et al., 2017). McKinsey developed a definition
whichstatesthatdigitalislessaboutanyoneprocess
and more about how companies run their business
(Dörner and Edelman, 2015). Their definition of
“digital” can be broken down into three areas:
creating value at the new frontiers of the business
world, optimizing the processes that directly
affect the customer experience, and building
foundational capabilities that support the entire
overall business initiative. The implementation of
technologies in business processes is only a small
part of digitally transforming a business. Moreover,
digital technologies need to create additional value
for the customers, the business itself, and other
essential stakeholders (Schallmo and Williams,
2017). For a successful digital transformation,
companies have to focus on two complementary
activities: reshaping customer value propositions
and transforming their operations using digital
technologies for greater customer interaction and
collaboration (Berman, 2012). Henriette et al. (2016)

--- PAGE 3 ---
Digital Transformation Maturity: A Systematic Review of Literature 1675
propose defining the digital transformation as
a disruptive or incremental change process.
It starts with the adoption and use of digital
technologies, then evolving into an implicit holistic
transformation of an organization. Morakanyane
et al. (2017) compared several definitions of digital
transformation (Liu et al., 2011; Bharadwaj et al.,
2013; Fitzgerald et al., 2013; Lucas et al., 2013;
Mithas et al., 2013; Westerman et al., 2014; Henriette
et al., 2015; Piccinini et al., 2015; Schuchmann and
Seufert, 2015; Chanias and Hess, 2016; Hess et al.,
2016) and proposed that digital transformation
is “an evolutionary process that leverages digital
capabilities and technologies to enable business
models, operational processes and customer
experiences to create value”. Overall, the definitions
of Henriette et al. (2016) and of Morakanyane
et al. (2017) are proposing good definitions of
digital transformation. Especially the definition of
Henriette et al. (2016) underlines that in the context
of using and adopting digital technology a holistic
transformation of an organization is required in
order to create value.
Digital Maturity
The term “maturity” refers to a state of being
complete, perfect or ready (Lahrmann et al., 2011)
and is the result of progress in the development
of a system. Maturing systems (e.g. organizations)
improve their capabilities over time towards
the achievement of some desirable future state.
Sometimes digital transformation and digital
maturity are used interchangeably without
considering differences (Leipzig et al., 2017), but
digital maturity can be seen more as a systematic
way for an organization to transform digitally
(Kane et al., 2017). Hence the term “digital maturity”
specifically reflects the status of a companyʼs
digital transformation (Chanias and Hess, 2016). It
describes what a company has already achieved
in terms of performing transformation efforts
and how a company systematically prepares to
adapt to an increasingly digital environment in
order to stay competitive. Digital maturity goes
beyond a merely technological interpretation
simply reflecting the extent to which a company
performs tasks and handles information flows by
IT, but also reflects a managerial interpretation
describing what a company has already achieved in
terms of performing digital transformation efforts
including changes in products, services, processes,
skills, culture and abilities regarding the mastery of
change processes (Chanias and Hess, 2016). Thus,
digital maturity comprises a technological and
a managerial aspect and therefore can be seen as
a holistic concept. Organizations reach the highest
level of maturity when they have both a strong
digital foundation and a good understanding of how
to leverage this foundation for a strategic business
advantage (Shahiduzzaman et al., 2017). Moreover,
digital maturity is not a static concept because the
digital landscape is continuously changing. As such,
an organization will need to assess maturity over
time (Shahiduzzaman et al., 2017). In this systematic
literature review, the term “digital transformation
maturity” is used to reflect the connection between
the concept of “digital transformation” and “digital
maturity” and to underline that digital maturity
is a holistic concept reflecting a technological and
managerial aspect.
Digital Maturity Model
A maturity model provides some guidance on
how organizations approach their transformation
and maps out typical paths of how organizations
go about their transformation (Berghaus and
Back, 2016). Maturity models can be seen as a tool
that mainly enables an assessment of the status-
quo (Becker et al., 2009) and indicates a potential,
anticipated or typical development path to the
desired target state (Pöppelbuß and Röglinger,
2011; Paulk et al., 1993). Digital maturity models
help companies to assess their ability to encounter
digital transformation according to pre-defined
dimensions. Especially in the case of transformation
journeys can they assist in understanding the
current state and the capabilities of an organization
in effectively managing and guiding digital
transformation efforts in a systematic way. Digital
maturity models consist of dimensions and criteria
which describe areas of action and measures
in various levels which indicate the evolution
path towards maturity (Berghaus and Back,
2016). A dimension is a specific, measurable and
independent component which reflects a major,
fundamental and distinct aspect of digital maturity
and describes an area of action (de Bruin et al.,
2005). The definition for the term “maturity level”
can be linked to the Capability Maturity Model. In
that context, a maturity level consists of related
specific and generic practices for a predefined
set of maturity dimensions that can improve the
organizationʼs overall maturity. The maturity level
of an organization provides a way to characterize its
performance and can be defined as an evolutionary
plateau for organizational maturity improvement.
The terms “maturity stage” and “maturity level” can
be used interchangeably.
Search Strategy
The primary tool used for preliminary search
with keywords was Google Scholar, a freely
accessible web search engine that indexes the full
text or metadata of scientific documents across an
array of publishing formats and disciplines. Other
electronic databases were used to extract abstracts,
and finally full texts in the following screening
phases (Tab. I). The search process applied consists
of four phases and was not restricted to a certain
time period. All results of the first three search and

--- PAGE 4 ---
1676 Roman Teichert
screening phases were saved and retained in the
Google Scholar Library. Together with the results
stemming from screening the reference lists of
included studies, all finally included studies were
documented in a separate overview reflecting
characteristics of included studies and reports on
digital transformation maturity.
Search terms that address the concept of digital
transformation maturity (Tab. II) were used in
order to identify applicable articles and papers. In
the adopted search strategy, the buzz-word “digital
transformation” was not used as a stand-alone
search term, but in combination with words like
efforts, progress, levels, stages, phases and maturity,
with the intention of emphasizing the evolutionary
aspect of maturing digitally. This search strategy
generated 1,925 first hits sorted by relevance after
running the preliminary search.
The first three screening phases for the final
inclusion of articles and studies were guided by
defined inclusion criteria (Tab. III). In the primary
screening phase, only the first 20 search results
were considered. Search results beyond those first
20 hits did not bring any additional valuable search
results. Results were evaluated on their applicability
by assessing, whether all used keywords were
identified in the displayed title or text of the search
result. After this initial screening phase, 64 studies
were left. In the secondary screening stage, the
abstracts and associated keywords of the remaining
studies were evaluated on their eligibility with
regards to the concept of digital transformation
maturity. Of the remaining 14 papers, full texts were
I: Search process documentation
Data source Search process documentation
Google Scholar
• Date of search: 8October 2018 – 29 October 2018
• Preliminary search by using defined keywords (Tab.II), not limited to a time period
• First hit results sorted by relevance; most cited literature is ranked higher
• All screening and search results are saved and retained in Google Scholar Library
ResearchGate, IEEE
Xplore Digital Library,
ScienceDirect, Emerald
• Retrieve and review abstracts in terms of inclusion criteria (secondary screening)
• Retrieve and review full text in terms of inclusion criteria (final screening)
• Final set of included studies documented (“characteristics of included studies & reports”)
Reference lists
• Screening reference lists of already included papers
• Retrieve identified papers (Google)
• Review identified papers in terms of inclusion criteria
• Final set of included studies documented (“characteristics of included studies & reports”)
II: Search terms used
Search terms
“Digital Maturity” / “Digital Transformation” + “Digital Maturity” / “Digital Transformation Maturity” /
“Digital Maturity Levels” / “Digital Transformation Efforts” / “State of Digital Transformation” /
“State of Digital Transformation” / “Digital Transformation Progress” / “Phases of Digital Transformation”
III: Inclusion criteria used
Screening phase Inclusion criteria
Primary Screening
1. English language
2. Search keywords identified in the title or text of displayed search result
3. Not restricted to a time period
4. First 20 hits sorted by relevance
5. Industrial company context (B2B, B2C)
6. Scholarly literature (no text books)
7. No duplicates
Secondary Screening
(abstracts, keywords)
1. A research article / study
2. Addressing digital transformation maturity in a company context
3. Conceptualizing digital transformation maturity
Final Screening
(full text assessment for eligibility)
1. Full-text article available
2. Criteria used for Secondary Screening
Screening reference lists of the already
included papers
1. Article is addressing the concept of digital maturity models
2. Papers describing digital maturity models

--- PAGE 5 ---
Digital Transformation Maturity: A Systematic Review of Literature 1677
retrieved, completely read and again checked for
matching inclusion criteria. In the end, 11 eligible
studies remained. To increase the reliability of
the systematic literature review and to avoid
missing important literature describing digital
transformation maturity models and concepts,
a complementary search was conducted. For this,
the reference lists of the 11 included studies were
screened, which resulted in 13 additional studies
describing various digital maturity models. Finally,
24 studies were suitable for data extraction and
were retrieved successfully from the used data
sources (Tab. I).
The entire screening process and yielded results
of the search strategy are illustrated in Fig. 1.
Data Extraction
From the final set of included studies, information
regarding the characteristics of the study itself and
the included digital maturity models was extracted.
The 24 included studies represented 22 different
digital maturity models. Special attention was
placed on the model approach and the design
parameters of the included models in order to
better categorize and compare different approaches
(Tab. IV). To gain insight, as to who was driving
research about digital maturity over time, all
studies were clustered into studies published by
practitioners or academics.
With the purpose of taking the context and
challenges of different industries into account,
the included digital maturity models further were
categorised into two model approaches: (i) models
addressing a specific industrial domain, e.g.
manufacturing, and (ii) models not developed for
a specific industrial context which therefore can be
considered as general models. This categorization
enables a better understanding of which different
domains are addressed by contemporary models
and furthermore if various model approaches
differ with regard to maturity dimensions used.
All 22 included digital maturity models comprise
1,925 first hits
PRELIMINARY SEARCH with keywords
Digital Maturity 1.050 Digital Transformation Efforts 111
Digital Transformation + Digital Maturity 499 State of Digital Transformation 87
Digital Transformation Maturity 38 Stages of Digital Transformation 69
Digital Maturity Levels 30 Digital Transformation Progress 29
Phases of Digital Transformation 12
PRIMARY SCREENING: Assessing first hits by applying inclusion criteria (first 20 hits,
search keywords found in article title and text) – number remaining:
64 studies
SECONDARY SCREENING: assessment of abstracts and abstract keywords with regard
to inclusion criteria - number remaining:
14 studies
FINAL SCREENING: Check of availability (ResearchGate, ScienceDirect, IEEE, Emerald) +
full text assessed for eligibility
24 studies included
SCREENING REFERENCE LISTS: reviewing reference lists of already included studies.
Additional 13 studies matching inclusion criteria.
11 studies included
1: Overview of search process
IV: Used characteristics for data extraction
Study Model design Model approach Culture
Author
Year of publication
Journal
Publisher
Dimensions and specific attributes
(content)
Number of maturity levels/stages
Number of assessment items
Focus of model (domain, general)
Application purpose (descriptive, prescriptive)
Maturing approach (linear, non-linear)
Application method (self-/ 3rd
party assessment)
Developed by practitioner or academic
Culture
reflected
in the model
(yes/no)

--- PAGE 6 ---
1678 Roman Teichert
125 maturity dimensions, out of which 41 are
similar across all models and 84 have quite
different and unique denominations, which makes
comparability impossible. To gain a better insight
into the meaning of maturity dimensions, all
identified attributes which describe the dimension
in more detail were extracted. This allowed for
developing a nomenclature representing the most
common maturity areas and facilitated mapping
each of the 125 original dimensions. How often
a common maturity area could be mapped with
original dimensions of included models was
counted and consequently resulted in a frequency
per common maturity area. In a similar way, 25
different attributes related to culture across all
models were identified and counted based on
their occurrence across all models. All 25 identified
attributes were clustered into main categories
of cultural attributes (Tab. IX) in order to better
analyse and compare them with other cultural
models. In a next step, all identified attributes were
mapped to the main categories. In this way, the
frequency of occurrence of cultural categories could
be evaluated.
RESULTS
Descriptive Results of Studies (n = 24)
The first hit results (Tab. V) for applied search
keywords addressing the concept of digital
maturity are significantly lower (1,925 first hits)
than first hit results for “digital transformation”
(25,400 first hits). This indicates in general that
there is little scholarly literature available in the
field of digital maturity compared to the field of
digital transformation. With the specific keyword
“digital transformation maturity”, just 38 first hits
were found, and during the screening process the
number of eligible studies remaining for synthesis
was reduced down to 3 studies. This evidences that
there was less attention to this field in the past, and
therefore academic research seems quite immature
in that area. Additional sources were identified
by screening the reference lists of the 11 included
studies (Canetta et al., 2018; Remane et al., 2017;
Colli et al., 2018; Chanias and Hess, 2016). Thus,
13 additional studies describing digital maturity
models and concepts were identified and included
in the final set of studies. All digital maturity models
(n = 22) included in the final set of studies were
clustered into the categories “practitioner” and
“academic” and classified by specific characteristics
(Tabs. VI–VII).
Most of the studies were published in the last
3 years, whereas nearly 40% of the included studies
were published in 2016 (Fig. 2).
The first studies on digital maturity were
published in 2011 and 2012. Both studies were
developed by a practitioner (Friedrich et al.,
2011; Westermann et al., 2012). The first study
was measuring industry digitization across 15
different industry sectors and different business
process dimensions. The study of MIT/Capgemini
described a digital transformation maturity model
which distinguishes between “digital intensity”
and “digital transformation intensity” and defined
4 archetypes reflecting different levels of digital
maturity. This study pointed out that beside IT
capabilities also transformational capabilities are
necessary for a successful digital transformation. Up
to 2015, practitioners were driving the development
of digital maturity models. Just one of the included
studies was published by academics (Lichtblau et al.,
2015). Since 2016, academics have started to bring
attention to this field of research, and since then,
nearly 70% of the included studies have originated
from academics. Overall, the included set of studies
shows that slightly more digital maturity models
have been developed by academics (12 models)
than by practitioners (10 models) since 2011 (Fig. 3).
A domain-specific approach is reflected in 41%
of all included models, whereas 78% (7 models)
of all domain-specific digital maturity models
are developed by academics, which underlines
V: First hits of search process (n = 1,925) and final number of studies included (n = 11)
Search keywords First hits Studies included after 3 screening phases
“Digital Maturity” 1,050 5
“Digital Transformation” + “Digital Maturity” 499 0
“Digital Transformation Maturity” 38 3
“Digital Maturity Levels” 30 3
“Digital Transformation Efforts” 111 0
“State of Digital Transformation” 87 0
“Stages of Digital Transformation” 69 0
“Digital Transformation Progress” 29 0
“Phases of Digital Transformation” 12 0
1,925 11

--- PAGE 7 ---
Digital Transformation Maturity: A Systematic Review of Literature 1679
the increasing attention academics have started
to place on research about digital maturity since
2015, driven by Industry 4.0 and the need for more
specific and sophisticated models.
This also explains why the most-represented
domain is “manufacturing” (89% of all domain-
specific digital maturity models). There is only one
included study on digital transformation maturity
representing “telecommunication services”. Clearly
this shows that there is not sufficient focus on the
service industry – neither by practitioners nor
academics.
Nearly all included digital maturity models are
descriptive in their nature and therefore limiting
their scope to just assessing the level of digital
maturity, but not giving guidance nor a clear
road-map as to how to achieve a higher level of
maturity (prescriptive). 13 models (59%) pursue
a linear maturity approach, which means that they
assume a linear evolutionary path for organizations
pursuing digital transformation efforts. The rest
reflectanon-linearmaturityapproach.Themajority
(78%, 7 models) of the non-linear digital maturity
models represent a general model approach.
Assessing the level of digital maturity is carried
out by means of self-assessment in 59% of the
models. Models developed by practitioners – mostly
consultants – tend to apply a third-party assisted
assessment, because their intention is to identify
ademic practitioner domain specific
1
1
1 3 2
6 3 4
4 2 2
3 2
ademia practitioner
Fig. 2 Publication distribution
1 1
3 1
2
2
80%
Studies (n=24)
TM models (n=22)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
number of publications
Included studies (n=24)
academic practitioner
2: Distribution of publications over time (n = 24)
Academics 5 models (23%) 7 models (32%)
Practitioners 8 models (36%) 2 models (9%)
General approach Domain-specific approach
3: Models clustered by originator and model approach (n = 22)
VI: Digital maturity models developed by practitioners
PRACTITIONER
Study
Model Character.
(# dimensions/
# maturity levels)
Model approach
(focus of model, maturing approach,
application method)
Domain Culture
Valdez-de-Leon (2016) [ ] 7 / 6 stages Domain-specific, linear, self-assessment Telecom Serv. Yes
MIT / Deloitte (2017) [ ] 4 / 3 archetypes General, n/a, n/a Yes
MIT / Capgemini (2012) [ ] 6 / 4 archetypes General, non-linear, self-assessment No
PWC (2016) – Industry 4.0 7 / 4 stages Domain-specific, linear, 3rd
party assisted Manufacturing Yes
Forrester (2016) 4 / 4 archetypes General, linear, self-assessment Yes
McKinsey (2015) 4 / “Dig. Quotient” General, non-linear, 3rd
party assisted Yes
Roland Berger (2015) 4 / “Digital Gap” General, linear, 3rd
party assisted Industry sectors No
Strategy&/Booz (2012) 4 / “Digitiz. Index” General, linear, 3rd
party assisted Industry sectors No
Neuland (2015) 8 / 5 stages General, linear, 3rd
party assisted Yes
PWC (2017) 9 / 4 archetypes General, non-linear, self-assessment Yes

--- PAGE 8 ---
1680 Roman Teichert
maturity gaps and offer consultancy services to
close the gaps.
All included studies were proposing digital
maturity models with different maturity-
dimensions, stages and assessment items.
Some models distinguish between two main
areas, encompassing digital assets (e.g. digital
capabilities, investments, digital infrastructure)
and transformation enablers (e.g. vision, culture,
leadership, governance, innovation or agility),
clustering dimensions into these two domains
(Westerman and MacAfee, 2012; Shahiduzzamann
et al., 2017). This underlines the importance
of the managerial and “soft” aspect of digital
transformation efforts. The number of dimensions
describing digital maturity is different between
the models and lies between 4 and 9, the number
of stages of digital maturity lies between 4 and
6. The majority of the examined models (55%)
use defined stages for describing maturity. Some
models (23%) propose archetypes describing
digital maturity, which in combination with two
main dimensions depict the digital maturity of
a company in a 2 × 2 matrix. A minor part of the
models – mainly originated by consultants – uses
a kind of digital index to describe digital maturity
(Catlin and Scanlan, 2015; Oltmanns et al., 2015,
Friedrich et al., 2011). Regarding organizational
culture, the research identified that 55% of the
examined models include “culture” as one of the
maturity dimensions. The majority of the models
developed by practitioners represent “culture” as
a dimension (in 70% of the cases), but only 40% of
models developed by academics reflect “culture” in
their models.
Qualitative Analysis of Studies (n = 24)
Most Common Maturity Areas Identified
To understand and compare to which extent
digital maturity areas get addressed, all original
dimensions from the existing maturity models that
have been analysed were clustered to the proposed
“most common maturity areas” (Tab. VIII). In
a next step all original dimensions were mapped
to the most common maturity areas. Multiple
mappings per dimension were possible, because
dimensions and included attributes sometimes
address several maturity areas. The frequency of
original dimensions mapped to common maturity
areas in domain-specific and general digital
maturity models was evaluated and is depicted
in Figs. 4, 5. The analysis shows that in domain-
specific digital maturity models, “technology” is
the most addressed maturity area, followed by
“digital skills” and “operations & processes”. Due
to the lack of available digital maturity models of
other industries, this ranking mainly reflects the
manufacturing sector driven by Industry 4.0 and
its strong emphasis on technology. Directly linked to
this is the importance of digital skills and expertise
required to be able to handle the technological
complexity. The importance of process-automation
and -flexibility is evidenced by the strong
representation of the maturity area “operations
& processes”. This maturity area is – similar to
domain-specific models – also strongly addressed
in general maturity model approaches. A strong
difference can be identified regarding the maturity-
area “products & services”, which is much more
strongly addressed in domain-specific models than
in models with a general approach. This reflects
VII: Digital maturity models developed by academics
ACADEMIC
Study
Model Character.
(# dimensions /
# maturity levels)
Model approach
(focus of model, maturing approach,
application method)
Domain Culture
Lichtblau et al. (2015) 6 /6 stages Domain-specific, linear, 3rd
party assisted Manufacturing No
Schuhmacher et al. (2016) 9 / 5 stages Domain-specific, non-linear, self-assessment Manufacturing Yes
Colli et al. (2018) 5 / 6 stages Domain-specific, non-linear, self-assessment Manufacturing No
Remane et al. (2017) 2 / 5 clusters General, non-linear, self-assessment No
Berghaus, Back (2016) 9 / 5 stages General, linear, self-assessment Yes
Canetta et al. (2018) 5 / n/a. Domain-specific, non-linear, self-assessment Manufacturing No
Uhl, Gollenia (2016) 6 / 4 stages General, linear, self-assessment No
KPMG (2016) 7 / 4 archetypes General, non-linear, self-assessment Yes
Leyh et al. (2016) 4 / 5 stages Domain specific, linear, 3rd
party assisted Manufacturing No
A de Carolis et al. (2017) 4 / 5 stages Domain-specific, linear, self-assessment Manufacturing No
Leino et al. (2017), VTT 6 / 4 stages General, non-linear, self-assessment Yes
Acatech (2017) [ ] 4 / 6 stages Domain-specific, linear, 3rd
party assisted Manufacturing Yes

--- PAGE 9 ---
Digital Transformation Maturity: A Systematic Review of Literature 1681
the fact that in the domain of Industry 4.0, smart
products and data-driven services play a critical
role. It also highlights, that the aspect of “products &
services” is clearly not of same relevance in general
models because they apply to any industry.
At the same time, “innovation” gets much more
attention in general digital maturity model, what
underlines that the capability of an organization
to develop new products and services is indicated
there much more strongly. “Customer insight
& experience” is also represented more strongly
in general than in domain-specific digital maturity
models, which could be an indication that the
capability of understanding customers and
designing an excellent customer experience is
not seen as important in domain-specific models.
Significantly more weight is placed on “Compliance
& Security” in domain-specific than in general
models. This is driven by the strong focus on
“technology”, which brings along IT compliance
VIII: Most common digital maturity areas identified in included studies (n = 22)
Maturity area Attributes & characteristics
Digital Culture
Attributes enhancing digital transformation efforts: risk-taking, test & learn, no-blame
culture, customer centric, open to change, agile, autonomy of employees, …
Technology
ICT, IT architecture/systems and new digitalization-based IT systems, agility of
supporting systems, digital data processing, …
Operations & Processes
Process digitization and automation, flexibility/agility of processes, bringing processes to
an industrialized standard, operations excellence, …
Digital Strategy
Development/execution of a strategy using digital technology to do business in
fundamentally new ways, bold long-term orientation, linked to business strategy,
I4.0 roadmap, …
Organization
Management structure/practices supporting digital business, cross-functional
collaboration, digital skills embedded throughout the organization, roles/tasks related
to digitalization defined, adequate resource allocation, cross-functional teams to
implement digital business priorities, flexible communities, agile management, …
Digital Skills
Digital skills, expertise, experience and interest; personnel dedicated to I4.0, ICT
competencies of employees, data empowered decision making, openness to new
technologies, employees have access to digital skills/expertise as needed, …
Innovation
Capabilities enabling a more flexible/agile way of working, development of disruptive
business models, using agile methods, involving customer into innovation process,
funding innovation, innovation conducted regularly, …
Customer Insight & Experience
Customer benefit from digitization; personalization of products/services; utilizing
digital services to engage customers; focus on customer value; digitization of customer
touchpoints; creating value out of data, customer participation and empowerment, …
Governance
Ensuring comprehensive/reliable execution of digital strategy; everyone has a mandate
to think creatively and innovate, systematic approaches are taken to innovation/change
management, engagement on different hierarchical levels, standards and regulations,
adequate resource allocation, …
Vision
Organization has defined an initial digital vision; digital technology realizes the vision of
the organization; all staff work in sync with the digital vision, …
Digital Ecosystem
The organization works as a part of a digital ecosystem; digitization/integration of
vertical/horizontal value chains, digital connection with the business network (e.g.
through API), interoperable technology platforms enable new/highly customizable
solutions configured by end-users, …
Leadership
Leadership team learning new technologies, leaders have a compelling long-term vision,
leaders actively identify and realize new opportunities, foster collaboration, existence of
central coordination for I4.0 or digital transformation, …
Compliance & Security
ITsecurity,digitalsecurity,ITcompliancewithinorganizationandtowardsstakeholders,
assessing risk factors, risk management, IP, optimizing value-chain network for
compliance; avoid unauthorized access, …
Products & Services
Smart products/services, digitization of product/service offerings, data analytics
deployed for individualization, data-based services, digital features, …
Business Model
Development of new and disruptive business models, integrated customer solutions
across supply chain, digital product/service portfolio with SW, network (M2M) and
data as key differentiator, digital initiatives are generating value, business models are
expanding, …

--- PAGE 10 ---
1682 Roman Teichert
and IT/digital security topics. All maturity-areas of
relevance for transformational capabilities of an
organization (e.g. vision, leadership, digital culture,
innovation, governance, …), which leverage digital
technology, are playing a more important role in
general digital maturity models than in domain-
specific ones. Both capabilities – digital and
transformational capabilities – are needed in every
organization to succeed in digital transformation
efforts. This analysis gives some evidence that
transformational capabilities are under-represented
in domain-specific digital maturity models.
Cultural Attributes Addressed in Included
Digital Maturity Models
To understand to which extent organizational
culture is reflected in digital maturity models, main
categories of cultural attributes were established
(Tab. IX) by semantically clustering all 25 various
attributes identified across all models. All original
cultural attributes were counted with regard to
their occurrence across all included models and
finally mapped to the main categories of cultural
attributes. The addressed cultural categories ranked
by their count are depicted in Fig. 6. Cultural
attributes like “collaboration”, “agility & flexibility”
and “organizational learning” are most frequently
addressed in the included digital maturity models.
The ability of an organization to change and
continuously reinvent itself is another critical
attribute of a digital culture, along with failure and
risk tolerance. “Ideating new digitalized working
methods”, “open communication” and “customer
centricity” are also addressed frequently in the
cultural dimension of the models. To some extent
this is in line with a recent research study which
was conducted in order to establish a definition of
“Digital Culture” in a digital mature organization
(Buvat et al., 2017).
Building on an extensive research programme
and the definition of a digital organization,
“digital culture” was defined as a set of several key
attributes (Tab. X).
The cultural attributes identified in the included
digitalmaturitymodels(Fig.6)showsomeconformity
with the digital culture definition established in the
Digital Strategy 5 vision, digital strategy, management processes supporting digital strategy implementation, poduction strategy, I4.0 roadmap, innovation, inve
Digital Culture 5 change ability, participative leadership, open communciation, trust in processes and systems, knowledge sharing, open-innvoation, value of I
Compliance & Security 5
cyber-security, digital trust, IT-security, digital challenges rocgnized, legal risk consistently addressed with collaboration partners, optimising t
access, intellectual property,
Products & Services 7
smart products & services, digitization of product/service offerings, data analytics deployed for individualization, digital features, possibility o
product data usage, data analysis in usage phase, integrated customer journey management
Operations & Processes 8 flexible production planning and steering; automation, flexible processes, autonomous processes, information exchange, decentralization of p
Digital Skills 8 mind-set and skills needed for performing digital transformation and operating with digital solutions, training and learning culture, personel d
Technology 12 smart factory, ICT, IT-systems, digital data processsing, smart factory, IT-architecture, data lake, BI-tools, cloud, ERP,MES, VR, resilient IT infras
Fig.4
GENERAL MODELS - Synthesis of maturity areas
most common maturity areas count description
Business Model 2
business model defined and digitization taken into account, business models are expanding, digital initiatives are generating value, there are
digitalization effects positively the result
Products & Services 2
degree of digitization, degree of innovation in business model; E-commerce, infotainment, drones, autonomous vehicles, predictive maintena
maintenance
Compliance & Security 3 IT security, digital security, IT compliance within organisation and towards stakeholders, assessing risk factors, risk management
Leadership 4
leadership team learning new technolgies, creating sense of urgency for change, leaders have a compelling long-run vision, leaders actively id
achieve objectives
all leaders mandated to executed and shape digital strategy
Digital Ecosystem 4
the organisation works as part of a digital ecosystem, digital connection with the business network (e.g. through API), technological foundatio
technology plattforms enable the delivery of more efficient outcomes, interoperable technology plattforms enable new or highly customizab
and environments, managment of personal health data aggregated from many service providers and wearable devisces)
Vision 5 digital technology realizes the vision of the organization, all staff work in sync with the digital vision, communicating and conveying digital vis
Governance 6 ensuring comprehensive und reliable execution of digital strategy, steering tools used, everyone has a mandate to think creatively and innova
Customer Insight & Experience 8
experience design, customer centricity, customer benefit from digitization, personalization, organization utilizes digital services when trying t
interaction with the business, customers and suppliers effectively communicate with the organisation to co-create value, sensing and identify
Innovation 9 involvign customers into innovation process, using agile methods, funding innovation, innovation activities conducted regularly
Digital Skills 9
digital affinity, digital competences, digital expertise available, required resources available, digital skills/experience/interests/resources is uti
empowered decision making
Organization 9
digital team set-up, organizational agility, partner network, roles/tasks related to digitization are defined, adaequate resource allocation, cros
structure/practices supporting digital business; cross-functional collaboration, digital skills embedded throughout the organization, vendor an
related to digitization, organization can pivot based on analysis of customer insight (agility)
Digital Strategy 9 digital strategy developed/communicated, digital technology used to do business fundamentally new, bold longterm orientation, digital strat
Operations & Processes 10
process automation, data-driven business, level of digitization of information, bringing business process to an industrialized level, avoiding in
collaboration with external partners and suppliers, agility of processes, integration of digital activity, extent of digital processes in procuremen
digital processes in the sales function; processes and systems are used to react to business change
Technology 11
integrated IT-architecture, agile project management, IT roadmap, fluid IT budget, adaequately funding IT, new digitalisation-based IT system
of supporting systems, process automation, use of APIs, cloud, additive manufacturing, robotics, broadband, IoT, wearables
Digital Culture 12
risk-taking, risk-tolerance, collaboration, error/no-blame culture, employees encouraged to ideate new digitalized working methods and servi
speed, agility, test & learn, external orientation
Fig.5 103
60
2
2
3
4
4
5
6
8
9
9
9
9
10
11
12
BusinessModel
Products & Services
Compliance & Security
Leadership
Digital Ecosystem
Vision
Governance
Customer Insight & Experience
Innovation
Digital Skills
Organization
Digital Strategy
Operations & Processes
Technology
Digital Culture
Frequencyofmaturityareasaddressedin generaldigitalmaturitymodels
1
1
2
3
3
3
4
4
5
5
5
7
8
8
12
Leadership
Vision
Digital Business Model
Customer Insight & Experience
Innovation
Digital Ecosystem
Governance
Organization
Digital Strategy
Digital Culture
Compliance & Security
Products & Services
Operations & Processes
Digital Skills
Technology
Frequencyofmaturityareasaddressedin domainspecificdigitalmaturitymodels
Split of maturityareasin ge
Business Model Products &Services
Digital Ecosystem Vision
Innovation Digital Skills
Operations &Processes Technology
Split of maturityareas
Leadership Vision
Innovation Digital Ecosystem
Digital Strategy Digital Culture
Operations &Processes Digital Skills
4: Frequency of maturity areas addressed in domain-specific models, n = 9
Source: Included models, n = 22
Fig.4
GENERAL MODELS - Synthesis of maturity areas
most common maturity areas count description
Business Model 2
business model defined and digitization taken into account, business models are expanding, digital initiatives are generating value, there are
digitalization effects positively the result
Products & Services 2
degree of digitization, degree of innovation in business model; E-commerce, infotainment, drones, autonomous vehicles, predictive maintena
maintenance
Compliance & Security 3 IT security, digital security, IT compliance within organisation and towards stakeholders, assessing risk factors, risk management
Leadership 4
leadership team learning new technolgies, creating sense of urgency for change, leaders have a compelling long-run vision, leaders actively id
achieve objectives
all leaders mandated to executed and shape digital strategy
Digital Ecosystem 4
the organisation works as part of a digital ecosystem, digital connection with the business network (e.g. through API), technological foundatio
technology plattforms enable the delivery of more efficient outcomes, interoperable technology plattforms enable new or highly customizabl
and environments, managment of personal health data aggregated from many service providers and wearable devisces)
Vision 5 digital technology realizes the vision of the organization, all staff work in sync with the digital vision, communicating and conveying digital vis
Governance 6 ensuring comprehensive und reliable execution of digital strategy, steering tools used, everyone has a mandate to think creatively and innova
Customer Insight & Experience 8
experience design, customer centricity, customer benefit from digitization, personalization, organization utilizes digital services when trying t
interaction with the business, customers and suppliers effectively communicate with the organisation to co-create value, sensing and identify
Innovation 9 involvign customers into innovation process, using agile methods, funding innovation, innovation activities conducted regularly
Digital Skills 9
digital affinity, digital competences, digital expertise available, required resources available, digital skills/experience/interests/resources is uti
empowered decision making
Organization 9
digital team set-up, organizational agility, partner network, roles/tasks related to digitization are defined, adaequate resource allocation, cross
structure/practices supporting digital business; cross-functional collaboration, digital skills embedded throughout the organization, vendor an
related to digitization, organization can pivot based on analysis of customer insight (agility)
Digital Strategy 9 digital strategy developed/communicated, digital technology used to do business fundamentally new, bold longterm orientation, digital strate
Operations & Processes 10
process automation, data-driven business, level of digitization of information, bringing business process to an industrialized level, avoiding int
collaboration with external partners and suppliers, agility of processes, integration of digital activity, extent of digital processes in procuremen
digital processes in the sales function; processes and systems are used to react to business change
Technology 11
integrated IT-architecture, agile project management, IT roadmap, fluid IT budget, adaequately funding IT, new digitalisation-based IT system
of supporting systems, process automation, use of APIs, cloud, additive manufacturing, robotics, broadband, IoT, wearables
Digital Culture 12
risk-taking, risk-tolerance, collaboration, error/no-blame culture, employees encouraged to ideate new digitalized working methods and servi
speed, agility, test & learn, external orientation
Fig.5 103
60
2
2
3
4
4
5
6
8
9
9
9
9
10
11
12
BusinessModel
Products & Services
Compliance & Security
Leadership
Digital Ecosystem
Vision
Governance
Customer Insight & Experience
Innovation
Digital Skills
Organization
Digital Strategy
Operations & Processes
Technology
Digital Culture
Frequencyofmaturityareasaddressedin generaldigitalmaturitymodels
1 Leadership
Split of maturityareasin ge
Business Model Products &Services
Digital Ecosystem Vision
Innovation Digital Skills
Operations &Processes Technology
Operations &Processes Digital Skills
5: Frequency of maturity areas addressed general models, n = 13
Source: Included models, n = 22

--- PAGE 11 ---
Digital Transformation Maturity: A Systematic Review of Literature 1683
IX: Main categories of cultural attributes identified
Main culture categories Original cultural attributes identified
Knowledge sharing Sharing knowledge
Empowerment Empowerment, decentralized decision making
Customer centricity Centred around customer needs, customer focus and alignment
Open communication Openness of communication, transparency
Ideating new digitalized
working methods and services
Employees are encouraged to ideate new digitalized working methods/services, value
of ICT in company, trust in processes and systems
Risk tolerance Taking risks, risk appetite, risk tolerance
Failure tolerance No-blame culture, failure tolerance
Change-ability
Open/willing to change ways of work, change ability, ability of organ. to constantly
reinvent itself
Organizational learning
Learning from failures, test & learn, experimenting, organizational mutual/continuous
learning
Agility & flexibility
Flexible working, speed, agility, quickly sensing/responding to changes in the
environment, external orientation, flexibility
Collaboration Collaboration across company boundaries, cross-company/functional collaboration
ed in included models
Fig. 6 Main categories of cultural attributes ranked by their count
count
1
1
1
4
4
1
learning, contionous learning 5
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
3
1
2
Clusters of cultural attributes ID Total Count Characteristics
Knowledge Sharing 3, 21 2 knowledge sharing
ctional collaboration 3 Empowerment 17 2 empowerment, decentralized decision m
1 Customer Centricity 12, 28 3 customer centricity, centered around cu
1 Open Communication 13, 25, 14 3 openess of communication, open comm
1 Ideating new digitalized working methods/services 9, 22, 26 3
emloyees are encouraged to ideate new
trust in processes and systems
1 Risk Tolerance 5 4 risk-taking, risk-tolerance, risk appetite
1 Failure Tolerance 6 4 failure-tolerance/no blame culture
1 Open to Change 8, 23, 10, 11 4 open/willing to change ways of work, ch
1 Organizational Learning 7 5
learning from failures, test & learn, expe
learning
1 Agility & Flexibility 2, 15, 16, 27 6
flexible working, speed & agility, quickly
orientation, agility, flexibility
1 Collaboration 4, 19, 1 8 collaboration across company boundari
1
2
2
3
3
3
4
4
4
5
6
8
Knowledge Sharing
Empowerment
Customer Centricity
Open Communication
Ideating new digitalized working…
Risk Tolerance
Failure Tolerance
Open to Change
Organizational Learning
Agility & Flexibility
Collaboration
Ranking of main categoriesof cultural attributes
6: Main categories of cultural attributes ranked by their count
X: Attributes of a digital culture
Attributes of a “digital culture” Description
Customer Centricity
The use of digital solutions to expand the customer base, transform the customer
experience and co-create new products
Innovation
The prevalence of behaviours that support risk-taking, disruptive thinking, and the
exploration of new ideas
Data-driven decision making The use of data and analytics to make better business decisions
Open Culture
The extent of partnerships with external networks such as third-party vendors, start-
ups or customers
Digital-first mindset A mindset where digital solutions are the default way forward
Agility and Flexibility
The speed and dynamism of decision-making and the ability of the organization to
adapt to changing demands and technologies
Collaboration The creation of cross-functional, inter-departmental teams to optimize the
enterprise’s skills
Source: Buvat et al., 2017

--- PAGE 12 ---
1684 Roman Teichert
study of Buvat et al. 2017. Particularly cultural
attributes reflected in the examined digital
maturity models, like “collaboration”, “agility &
flexibility” and “customer centricity”, also can be
found as an attribute of a digital culture definition
established by Buvat et al. 2017. Attributes like
“failure tolerance”, “risk tolerance” and “ideating
new digitalized working methods and services”
show some correlation to the behavioural attribute
“innovation”, which is also part of the digital culture
model developed by Buvat et al. 2017. Innovation
itself is well represented as a separate dimension
of examined digital maturity models, but rather
addresses the process and methods of innovation.
Attributes like “open culture”, “data-driven decision
making” and “digital-first mind-set” are not
found to be part in the “culture” dimension of the
examined digital maturity models. To some extent
they are included in other dimensions like “digital
ecosystem” and “technology”. When furthermore
comparing the extracted cultural attributes (Fig. 6)
with the attributes of the cultural model of Denison
(Denison and Mishra, 1995) – one of the most
popular organizational culture models – it can be
argued that the extracted cultural attributes are to
a large extent described by a culture of adaptability
(organizational learning, customer focus,
creating change) and a culture of involvement
(empowerment, team orientation). These cultural
traits indicate higher levels of product & service
innovation and creativity, as well as a fast response
to customers’ and employees’ changing needs.
DISCUSSION
This systematic literature review takes stock
of research and contemporary development in
the field of digital maturity. The findings identify
that there has been an increase in the quantity of
academic research in the field of digital maturity
since 2016 – mainly driven by Industry 4.0. The
number of identified digital maturity models is in
line with previously published papers (Chanias
and Hess, 2016; Remane and Hanelt, 2017; Canetta
et al., 2018). In this systematic literature review,
22 eligible digital maturity models were identified
and included. The analysis conducted in this paper
is going beyond the work presented in previously
published papers mentioned above, since special
attention has been placed on the type of dimensions
used in the various digital maturity models.
The research results of this article provide
strong evidence that all identified models pursue
different approaches in describing digital maturity.
There is no consistent definition of digital maturity
available because all the different maturity models
and their underlying definition of digital maturity
show a heterogeneity in content and methodology.
Even domain-specific digital maturity models
examined in this paper – mainly reflecting the
manufacturing sector – show significant differences
in maturity-dimensions, nomenclature, levels and
characteristics applied. The comparison of maturity-
areas addressed in different models provides
interesting findings. Firstly, the dimension “product
& services” plays a clearly minor role in general
models compared to domain-specific models.
Secondly, the cultural aspect plays a significantly
more important role in general digital maturity
models than in domain-specific models. Other “soft”
dimensions, more attached to transformational
capabilities, like leadership, vision, and innovation
culture, are also addressed more in general digital
maturity models than in domain-specific models.
Thirdly, it becomes evident, that in all examined
models included in this review the maturity area
“business model” is hardly addressed. It seems,
that the digitalization of the business model is
neglected in most digital maturity approaches.
Just a few models address this aspect. This can be
interpreted that most companies rather focus on
the exploitation of digital technology than on the
exploration of digital innovation and development
of new digital products and business models to
generate new digital revenues. Fourthly, “customer
insight and experience” as a characteristic of digital
maturity plays a minor role in domain-specific
models. Hence it can be argued that general digital
maturity models more comprehensively address
transformational capabilities, and domain-specific
models more strongly address digital-technological
capabilities in the assessment of the digital maturity
of a company. Also, general models tend to show
more external orientation and therefore take
customer experience as criteria for digital maturity
much stronger into account than domain-specific
models. The comparison of all maturity dimensions
represented in various models makes evident that
the majority of models provide an incomplete
picture of digital maturity. Either transformational
management capabilities (e.g. vision, culture,
leadership, governance, innovation, agility, …) or an
organization’s digital foundation (e.g. technology,
digital skills, organization, strategy, customer
experience, …) are not addressed sufficiently and
systematically.
In this context, a special light has been shed on
the dimension of “culture” because organizational
culture is seen more and more as the number one
hurdle to digital transformation (Buvat et al., 2017;
Solis, 2017) and as the most significant barrier
to digital effectiveness (Goran et al., 2016). What
separates digital leaders from the rest is a clear
digital strategy combined with a culture and
leadership focussing on driving the transformation.
Employees in digitally mature organizations
describe their culture as more collaborative and
innovative compared to other organizations and
they state that leadership has sufficient digital skills
(Kane et al., 2015). Digitally mature companies also
have cultures that embrace an expanded appetite

--- PAGE 13 ---
Digital Transformation Maturity: A Systematic Review of Literature 1685
for risk, rapid experimentation, heavy investment
in talent and recruiting and leaders excelling in
soft skills (Kane et al., 2016). More than half the
examined digital maturity models include “culture”
as a separate dimension. Within the models,
attributes like “collaboration”, “agility & flexibility”,
“organizational learning”, “change-ability” and
“customer centricity” are among the most
represented cultural attributes across all models.
Innovation is addressed indirectly by attributes
like “failure tolerance”, “risk tolerance” and
“ideating new digitalized working methods”. When
comparing the identified cultural attributes with
the attributes proposed by popular culture models
like Buvat et al. 2017 and Denison and Mishra
1995, it becomes evident that to some extent there
is conformity. Other proposed attributes describing
a digital culture (Buvat et al., 2017), like “digital-
first mindset”, “data-driven decision making” and
“open culture”, are clearly under-represented in
the examined digital maturity models. Hence, there
is a clear need to consistently define attributes of
a digital culture enabling digital transformation and
to systematically include these cultural attributes in
digital maturity models.
Furthermore, the findings of this paper reveal
a lack of digital maturity models reflecting domains
other than manufacturing, taking the context
and challenges of other industries into account.
Driven by Industry 4.0, the majority part existing
models address the domain of manufacturing.
More specific and granular model approaches
providing additional layers of detail are required
in order to reflect industry-specific capabilities
and characteristics and give companies effective
guidance towards digital maturity in different
industrial and functional contexts. Especially the
service industry needs stronger attention in the
future, because more and more manufacturing
companies recognize aftermarket services as
a revenue driver, and digital technologies are
opening up new opportunities especially in service
(Baines et al., 2009; Falk and Peng, 2013; Ardolino,
2018; Benjamin, 2019).
With regards to the design of the models,
an inconsistency of levels and characteristics
describing digital maturity can be found across all
examined models. There is no standard approach
for describing digital maturity levels, not even
within a domain like manufacturing. In most
cases, the description of digital maturity levels and
consequently the classification of companies is
too vague. Therefore, an assessment does not give
clear reference points for new digital initiatives and
does not provide a clear map of potential actions
for management. Thus, more granular assessment
approaches with specific characteristics for each
defined maturity level would be required.
CONCLUSION
Themainobjectiveofthisextensivesystematicliteraturereviewwastoprovideabetterunderstanding
of the contemporary development in the field of digital maturity and related models. This could be
achieved by identifying, examining and comparing 22 digital maturity models in detail. The research
results of this paper indicate that most models provide an incomplete picture of digital maturity and
that the description of digital maturity stages is inconsistent across all models. Furthermore, the
review reveals that the majority of existing digital maturity models addresses just the manufacturing
domain. Other domains like service are clearly under-represented. Special attention was placed on
theroleofcultureplayingindigitaltransformationandinwhichwayitisreflectedindigitalmaturity
models. It is schown that attributes of a digital culture which enhance digital transformation efforts
are not systematically incorporated in contemporary digital maturity models.
Overall, the findings of this paper indicate that research in this domain is not sufficient and future
research has to place more attention to the issues highlighted above: (1) Incomplete digital maturity
models need to be extended to “digital transformation maturity” models which are holistic and
specific, respectively granular, at the same time. (2) Furthermore, models addressing other domains
than manufacturing have to be developed. In this context the domain of service needs more
attention. (3) Clearly defined attributes of a digital culture have to be integrated systematically in
digital maturity models.
REFERENCES
ARDOLINO, M., RAPPACCINI, M., SACCANI, N. et al. 2018. The role of digital technologies for the
service transformation of industrial companies. International Journal of Production Research, 56(6):
2116–2132.
BAINES, T., BENEDETTINI, O. and LIGHTFOOD, H. 2009. The servitization of manufacturing: A review
of literature and reflection on future challenges. Journal of Manufacturing Technology Management,
20(5): 547–567.
BECKER, J., KNACKSTEDT, R. and PÖPPELBUSS, J. 2009. Development of maturity modells for IT-
management. Business Information & Systems Engineering, 1(3): 213–222.

--- PAGE 14 ---
1686 Roman Teichert
BENJAMIN, G., LAVANDIER, H. and MUTHIHA, S. 2019. The service solution for unlocking industry's
next growth opportunity. Operations Report. Ney York: McKinsey & Company.
BERGHAUS, S. and BACK, A. 2016. Stages in Digital Business Transformation: Results of an Empirical
Maturity Study. In: Tenth Mediterranean Conference on Information Systems (MCIS) Proceedings.
Paphos, Cyprus, September 2016. St. Gallen: University of St. Gallen.
BERMAN, B. 2012. 3-D printing: The new industrial revolution. Business Horizons, 55: 155—162.
BHARADWAJ, A. et al. 2013. Digital business strategy: toward a next generation of insights. MIS
quarterly, 37(2): 471–482.
BUVAT, J., CRUMMERNEL, C., KAR, K. et al. 2017. The digital culture challenge: closing the employee-
leadership gap. Capgemini Digital Transformation Institute Survey. Paris: Capgemini Digital
Transformation Institute.
CANETTA, L., BARNI, A. and MONTINI, E. 2018. Development of a digitalization maturity model for
the manufacturing sector. In: International Converence on Engineering, Technology and Innovation.
Manno, Switzerland 2018. Manno: University of Applied Sciences Manno.
CATLIN, T. and SCANLAN, J. 2015. Raising your Digital Quotient. Boston: McKinsey Digital.
CHANIAS, S. and HESS, T. 2016. How digital are we? Maturity models for assessment of a company’s
status in digital transformation. LMU Munich Management Report 2/2016. Munich_ Munich School
of Management.
COLLI, M., MADSEN, O., BERGER, U. et al. 2018. Contextualizing the outcome of a maturity assessment
for Industry 4.0. IFAC PapersOnLine, 51(11): 1347–1352.
DE BRUIN, T. et al. 2005. Understanding the Main Phases of Developing a Maturity Assessment Model.
In: 16th
Australasian Conference on Information Systems (ACIS). Nov 29 2005–Dec 2 2005, Sidney,
Australia.
DENISON, D. R. and MISHRA, A. K. 1995. Toward a theory of organizational culture and effectiveness.
Organization Science, 6(2): 204–223.
DÖRNER, K. and EDELMAN, D. 2015. What ‘digital’ really means. McKinsey & Company.
FALK, M. and PENG, F. 2013. The increasing service intensity of European manufacturing. Service
Industries Journal, 33(15–16): 1686–1706.
FICHMAN, R. et al. 2014. Digital innovation as fundamental and powerful concept in the information
system curriculum. MIS Quarterly, 38(2): 329–353.
FIZTGERALD, M. et al. 2013. Embracing digital technology: A new strategic imperative. MIT Sloan
Management Review, Capgemini.
FRIEDRICH, R. et al. 2011. Measuring industry digitization. Leaders and laggards in the digital economy.
Booz & Company.
GORAN, J., SRINIVASAN, R. and LA BERGE, L. 2016. Culture for a digital age. McKinsey Quarterly July
2017. New York: McKinsey.
HENRIETTE, E., FEKI, M. and BOUGHZALA, I. 2016. Digital Transformation Challenges. In: MICS
Proceedings 2016. Mediterranean Conference on Information Systems. AIS.
HENRIETTE, E. et al. 2015. The shape of digital transformation: A systematic literature review. In:
MCIS 2015 Proceedings. Mediterranean Conference on Information Systems, Paper 10.
HESS, E. et al. 2016. Options for formulating a digital transformation strategy. MIS Quarterly Executive,
15(2): 123–139.
KANE, G., PALMER, D., PHILLIPS, A. et al. 2015. Strategy, not technology, drives digital transformation.
Research Report Summer 2015. MIT Sloan Management Review & Deloittee University Press.
KANE, G., PALMER, D., PHILLIPS, A. et al. 2016. Aligning the organization for its digital future. Research
Report Summer 2016. MIT Sloan Management Review & Deloittee University Press.
KANE, G., PALMER, D., PHILLIPS, A. et al. 2017. Achieving digital maturity. Research Report Summer
2017. MIT Sloan Management Review & Deloittee University Press.
KITCHENHAM, B. 2004. Procedures for Performing Systematic Reviews. Keele University Technical
Report TR/SE-0401. Keele: Keele University.
KOTTER, J. P. and HESKETT, J. L. 1992. Corporate culture and performance. New York: Macmillan.
LAHRMANN, G. et al. 2011. Business Intelligence Maturity: Development and Evaluation of
a Theoretical Model. In: HICSS ‘11 Proceedings of the 2011 44th
Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences. Washington: IEEE.
LICHTBLAU, K., STICH, V., BERTENRATH, R. et al. 2015. Impulse. Industry 4.0 Readiness [in German:
Impuls. Industrie 4.0-Readiness]. 1st
Edition. Achen, Köln: Institut der deutschen Wirtschaft Köln,
RWTH Achen.
LIU, D. Y. et al. 2011. Resource fit in digital transformation: Lessons learned from the CBC Bank global
e-banking project. Management Decision, 49(10): 1728–1742.

--- PAGE 15 ---
Digital Transformation Maturity: A Systematic Review of Literature 1687
LEIPZIG, T., GAMP, M., MANZ, D. et al. 2017. Initialising customer-oriented digital transformation
in enterprises. In: 14th
Global Conference on Sustainable Manufacturing. Stellenbosh, Southafrica,
3–5 October 2016. Elsevir: Procedia Manufacturing 8, pp. 517–524.
LUCAS,H.C.etal.2013.Impactresearchontransformationalinformationtechnology:Anopportunity
to inform new audiences. MIS Quarterly, 37(2): 371–382.
MATT, C. et al. 2015. Digital transformation strategies. Business and Information System Engineering,
57(5): 339–343.
MITHAS, S. et al. 2013. How a firm’s competitive environment and digital strategic posture influence
digital business strategy. MIS Quarterly, 37(2): 511–536.
MORAKNYANE, R., GRACE, A. and O‘REILLY, P. 2017. Conceptualizing Digital Transformation Business
Organizations – A Systematic Review of Literature. 30th
Bled eConference. Bled, Slovenia.
OLTMANNS,T.,REMANE,G.,BLOCHING,B.etal.2015.Thedigitaltransformationofindustry.1st
Edition.
Munich: Roland Berger, Bundesverband Der Deutschen Industrie.
PAULK, M., CURTIS, B., CHRISSIS, M. B. et al. 1993. Capability Maturity Model for Software. Version 1.1.
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213: Carnegie Mellon University.
PICCININI, E. et al. 2015. Transforming industrial business: The impact of digital transformation on
automotive organizations. In: 36th
International Conference on Information Systems. Fort Worth 2015.
PÖPPELBUSS, J. and RÖGLINER, M. 2011. What makes a useful maturity model? A Framework
of general design principles for maturity models and its demonstration in business process
management. In: European Converence on Information Systems (ECIS). 10th
June 2011. ECIS 2011
Proceedings 28.
REMANE, G. and HANELT, A. 2017. Discovering digital business models in traditional industries.
Journal of Business Strategy, 38(2): 41–55.
SHAHIDUZZAMAN, M. D. 2017. Digital business: Towards a value centric maturity model. Part A.
Queensland: PWC Chair in Digital Economy/Queensland University of Technology.
SCHALLMO, D. and WILLIAMS, C. 2017. Digital Transformation of Business Models – Best Practice,
Enablers and Roadmap. International Journal of Innovation Management, 21(8): 1740014.
SCHUCHMANN, D. and SEUFERT, S. 2015. Corporate learning in times of digital transformation:
A conceptual framework and service portfolio for the learning function in banking organizations.
iJAC, 8(1): 31–39.
SOLIS, B. 2017. The 2017 State of Digital Transformation. Research Report. Altimeter.
SSÖRENSEN, J. B. 2002. The Strength of Corporate Culture and the Reliability of Firm Performance.
Research Article. MIT.
VALDEZ-DE-LEON, O. 2016. A digital maturity model for telecommunication service providers.
Technology Innovation Management Review, 6(8): 19–32.
WESTERMAN, G. and MC-AFEE, A. 2012. The digital advantage: How digital leaders outperform their
peers in every industry. Capgemini Consulting.
WESTERMAN, G. and BONNET, D. 2015. Revamping your business through digital transformation.
MITSloan Management Review.
WISCHNEVSKY, D. and DAMANPOUR, F. 2006. Organizational transformation and performance: An
examination of three perspectives. Journal of Managerial Issues, 18(1): 104–128.
Contact information
Roman Teichert: roman.teichert@otis.com