--- PAGE 1 ---
Volume 9 Issue 2
ISSN 2694-7161
www.ejobsat.com
A MODEL FOR ASSESSING DIGITAL
TRANSFORMATION MATURITY FOR
SERVICE PROVIDER ORGANIZATIONS
Roman Teichert1
1Mendel University in Brno, Czech Republic
TEICHERT, Roman. 2023. A Model for Assessing Digital Transformation Maturity for Service Provider
Organizations. European Journal of Business Science and Technology, 9 (2): 205–230. ISSN 2694-7161,
DOI 10.11118/ejobsat.2023.014.
ABSTRACT
The research presented aims to close a gap in the measurement of digital maturity for the
domain of service which was identified through a systematic literature review. The study provides
a holistic Digital Service Transformation Maturity Self-Assessment Model for service provider
companies in a B2B-context based on analysis of different digital maturity models and by means of
a qualitative approach through expert feedback in a Delphi-process and additional complementary
literature review to define maturity assessment items. The presented Digital Service Transforma-
tion Maturity Model comprises 8 factors, 27 subfactors and 403 related specific assessment items
describing digital maturity from a holistic point of view. The model has been further converted
into a simple and practical tool to self-assess and visualize current state of digital maturity. The
assessment model finally was pilot tested and the outcomes are also outlined in this article. The
designed model provides practical implications for the ease of evaluating and improving digital
maturity levels in every aspect of its factors and contributes to the successful management of
digital transformation in service provider organizations by offering effective guidance how to move
to the desired future maturity level based on a solid understanding of current digital maturity
accomplishments.
KEY WORDS
digital transformation, digital service transformation, digital maturity, digital maturity assess-
ment model, digital maturity matrix
JEL CODES
M14, M15, O31, O32

--- PAGE 2 ---
206 Roman Teichert
1 INTRODUCTION
Digital technology causes disruptions and calls
for strategic responses from organizations that
change the value creation (Vial, 2019). By
2030 it is estimated that approximately 70%
of new value creation in the economy will be
reliant on digitally enabled platform business
models (World Economic Forum, 2020). Hence,
embracing emerging new opportunities coming
from digital technologies and new industries
require companies to continuously transform
(Gimpel et al., 2018) to stay competitive. So
digital transformation will stay an ongoing
and increasingly complex journey for organiza-
tions (Verhoef et al., 2021) involving different
aspects. Technology is just one part of it
(Vial, 2019) but the first stage towards digital
transformation (Ragnedda, 2017; van Deursen
and van Dijk, 2019). Moreover, digital trans-
formation needs a comprehensive view (Peter
et al., 2020) involving several dimensions like
strategy, HR, culture, process management, IT
and others (Neff et al., 2014; DXC Technology
Company, 2017). Peter et al. (2020) identified
in their research study seven strategic action
fields for digital transformation, where just two
are linked to technology. A survey with 1700
respondents across different countries reported
that 62% of respondents consider especially cul-
ture as the number one hurdle to digital trans-
formation (Buvat et al., 2017; Leipzig et al.,
2017). Hence, it is inevitable for organizations
to address and manage the different dimensions
of digital transformation and to view the
progress and achievement of digital transforma-
tion in a holistic way (Haryanti et al., 2023).
Still today a lot of companies do not know
where they exactly stand with regards to digital
transformation and lack a distinct plan and
path for their transformation initiatives. Some
research states that executives are aware of
the urgency but are not sure how to develop
and deploy a digital agenda as there is a
lack of guidance to determine the right course
of action (Bughin and van Zeebroeck, 2017).
Other research identified a lack of an integrated
approach when formulating a company-wide
digital transformation strategy (Hess et al.,
2016; Hyvönen, 2018; Ismail et al., 2017). Digi-
tal immaturity as a consequence can potentially
turn into a business problem, especially for com-
panies in traditional industries as improvements
regarding digital maturity have been made less
rapid than in industries like software industry
(Štolfa et al., 2019) – due to the fact that these
companies have been quite successful in the past
and they have not been realizing the benefits
of digitalization (Fitzgerald et al., 2013). Also,
in some cases managers do not know how to
approach digitalization and how to respond to it
(Hess et al., 2016; Bumann and Peter, 2019) and
therefore start initiatives very isolated (Tumbas
et al., 2017).
Thus, the need to systematically assess the
status of digital maturity and to develop a clear
strategy and roadmap for the required future
transformation to stay competitive is notably
growing in companies. There is evidence that
companies which achieve higher digital matu-
rity and therefore manage their transformation
more effectively, have a digital advantage and
outperform competitors related to financial
performance (Westerman and McAfee, 2012).
However, despite of the awareness that digital
transformation provides potential advantages, a
lot of companies have been facing challenges in
creating a clear roadmap to adapt existing pro-
cesses and business models in line with new dig-
ital technologies (Gökalp and Martinez, 2021).
In this context models to evaluate digital ma-
turity are gaining importance and are developed
to guide companies by providing a compre-
hensive roadmap for improvement (Gökalp and
Martinez, 2021). Today it is a necessity to mea-
sure the maturity level of digital transformation
as a kind of guidance for companies (Haryanti et
al., 2023) through systematically assessing the
status-quo (Becker et al., 2009) and to develop
a distinct strategy and roadmap related to re-
quired digital transformation activities to reach
a desired future state (Berghaus and Back,
2016; Pöppelbuß and Röglinger, 2011; Paulk et
al., 1993). More specifically a digital maturity
model helps companies to better understand the
capabilities needed to encounter and success-

--- PAGE 3 ---
A Model for Assessing Digital Transformation Maturity for Service Provider Organizations 207
Tab. 1: Digital maturity models developed by practitioner and academia (Teichert, 2019)
Study
Model character.
(# dimensions /
# maturity levels)
Model approach (focus of model,
maturing approach, application method)
Domain Culture
Practitioner
Valdez-de-Leon (2016) 7 / 6 stages Domain specific, linear, self-assessment Service Yes
Kane et al. (2017) 4 / 3 arch.typ. General, n.a, n.a Yes
Westerman and McAfee (2012) 6 / 4 arch.typ. General, non-linear, self-assessment No
Geissbauer et al. (2016) 7 / 4 stages Domain specific, linear, 3rd
party assisted Manufac. Yes
Gill and van Boskirk (2016) 4 / 4 arch.typ. General, linear, self-assessment Yes
Catlin et al. (2015) 4 / “Dig. Quotient” General, non-linear, 3rd
party assisted Yes
Bloching et al. (2015) 4 / “Digital Gap” General, linear, 3rd
party assisted Industry No
Friedrich et al. (2011) 4 / “Digitiz. Index” General, linear, 3rd
party assisted Industry No
Azhari et al. (2014) 8 / 5 stages General, linear, 3rd
party assisted Yes
Shahiduzzamann et al. (2017) 9 / 4 arch.typ. General, non-linear, self-assessment Yes
Academia
Lichtblau et al. (2015) 6 / 6 stages Domain specific, linear, 3rd
party assisted Manufac. No
Erol et al. (2016) 9 / 5 stages Domain specific, non-linear, self-assessment Manufac. Yes
Colli et al. (2018) 5 / 6 stages Domain specific, non-linear, self-assessment Manufac. No
Remane et al. (2017) 2 / 5 clusters General, non-linear, self-assessment No
Berghaus and Back (2016) 9 / 5 stages General, linear, self-assessment Yes
Canetta et al. (2018) 5 / n.a. Domain specific, non-linear, self-assessment Manufac. No
Uhl and Gollenia (2016) 6 / 4 stages General, linear, self-assessment No
Sharma et al. (2016) 7 / 4 arch.typ. General, non-linear, self-assessment Yes
Leyh et al. (2016) 4 / 5 stages Domain specific, linear, 3rd
party assisted Manufac. No
De Carolis et al. (2017) 4 / 5 stages Domain specific, linear, self-assessment Manufac. No
Leino et al. (2017) 6 / 4 stages General, non-linear, self-assessment Yes
Schuh et al. (2017) 4 / 6 stages Domain specific, linear, 3rd
party assisted Manufac. Yes
fully manage digital transformation holistically
as per various dimensions, criteria and matu-
rity levels, which indicate a pathway towards
desired maturity (Berghaus and Back, 2016).
A systematic literature review (Tab. 1) as
part of this work identified 22 various digital
maturity models, which were analysed in detail
regarding domains addressed, type of dimen-
sions used, and specific cultural attributes
included in the different models.
The findings showed that domain-specific
models focus more on the digital-technological
aspect and related capabilities, and that gen-
eral digital maturity models address more
the managerial aspect and related transforma-
tional capabilities in the assessment of digital
maturity of an organization. A few of the
identified general models (Westerman et al.,
2012; Shahiduzzamann et al., 2017; Berghaus
and Back, 2016) include already both as-
pects and cluster their dimensions accordingly,
which clearly underlines the importance of
the more soft and transformational aspect of
digital transformation. These models propose a
comprehensive description of digital maturity
and were used as guiding models for this re-
search. Out of the 22 identified digital maturity
models just half of it addresses “Culture” as
a dimension, although organizational culture
is seen as a critical enabler for a successful
digital transformation (Buvat et al., 2017;
Leipzig et al., 2017). Among the examined
digital maturity models just one is addressing
specifically the domain of service (Valdez-de-
Leon, 2016). This fact is surprising, because
more and more industrial companies started
to shift their focus from goods-centric offerings
to service as digital technology and advanced
analytics are especially revolutionizing services
and are creating new sources of value for
industrial companies (Ananthakrishnan et al.,
2018). Also, the aspect of digital business model
is hardly addressed in any of the 22 reviewed
digital maturity models.
This research aims to close the identified
gap in the measurement of digital maturity for
the domain of service. The study provides a
Digital Service Transformation Maturity Self-

--- PAGE 4 ---
208 Roman Teichert
Assessment Model for service provider com-
panies in a B2B-context based on analysis
of different digital maturity models and a
qualitative approach through expert feedback in
a Delphi-process. It addresses 3 research ques-
tions regarding digital transformation maturity:
1. How the “as-is” position should be assessed
in a holistic way for service provider compa-
nies (diagnostic function)?
2. How the “to-be” position should be deter-
mined to develop a roadmap for improving
the position from the “as-is” to their desired
“to-be” position (roadmap function)?
3. How critical attributes of a digital culture
should be addressed to reflect the criticality
of organizational culture for the success of
digital transformation efforts?
The paper is structured as follows. In Section
2 the adopted development framework and
the designed DSTM-Meta Model are presented.
Furthermore, the Delphi-process applied is
outlined. In Section 3 the DSTM-Assessment
Model and related details as result of this
research are introduced. In Section 4 the find-
ings from pilot-testing the model in several
service provider companies are outlined. Section
5 continues with the discussion of the research
work. Finally, the conclusion about the main
findings, the limitations of the model and
recommendations for future research will be
found in Section 6.
2 METHODOLOGY
A proven standard development framework
used to guide the design of maturity models
in other domains (de Bruin et al., 2005) was
adopted (Fig. 1).
The scope of this research was limited to the
first four phases of the framework. In phase
“Scope” and phase “Design” the meta-model
for the DSTM was developed. The proposed
basic design of the DSTM-Meta Model is
consisting of factors, subfactors and 6 well
defined maturity stages including a default
level zero which reflects business-as-usual and
a “state of inactivity trying to keep the status-
quo and believing that it remains the solution to
digital relevance” (Solis, 2016). The factors are
describing the success-crucial levers of digital
transformation. The number of factors for this
model was limited to a maximum of 10 factors
to avoid complexity. The factors are further
broken down into subfactors, which represent
the critical abilities and enablers within a factor
and specify what should be measured by the
model for each factor. The number of subfactors
per factor was limited to a maximum of 5
factors. Hence, the proposed model can rep-
resent a maximum of 50 subfactors describing
digital maturity and therefore enable a quite
comprehensive assessment of digital maturity.
After defining scope and design of the model,
in the phase “Populate” the content of the
maturity model was decided. The goal of this
phase is to decide what needs to be measured
in the maturity assessment and how this can
be measured. The outcome are the factors and
subfactors that are mutually exclusive. Due to
the fact, that the domain of digital transforma-
tion maturity for service-provider organizations
was not established properly and that there
was not sufficient literature available, a Delphi
method with an expert panel was applied
to develop the critical success factors (levers
Fig. 1: Development framework and scope of research work (de Bruin et al., 2005)

--- PAGE 5 ---
A Model for Assessing Digital Transformation Maturity for Service Provider Organizations 209
Fig. 2: Proposed Digital Service Transformation Maturity (DSTM) Meta Model
Tab. 2: Expert panel for Delphi-study
Company (Country) Industry # Role of participants
Company A (Austria) Elevator and Escalator products &
Services
2 P1: Director Sales & Marketing
P2: Director Field Operations
Company B (Austria) High-end Domestic Appliances and
Commercial Equipment & Services
1 P1: Director Technical Services
Company C (Austria) Print and digital document products
& Services
2 P1: Managing Director
P2: Customer Service Expert
Company D (Austria) Building Technology & Solutions 1 P1: Business Development Manager
Company E (Austria) Ventilation, Heating,
Air-Conditioning, Commercial
Refrigeration, Equipment & Services
2 P1: Managing Director
P2: Director Customer Services
Company F (Germany) Automatic Door Systems & Services 1 P1: Business Unit Manager
Company G (Austria) Food & Beverages B2B 1 P1: Director B2B
Company H (Germany) Facility Management 1 P1: Technology & CDO,
Member of Executive Board
Company I (Austria) Automation Solutions for Production
& Logistics
1 P1: Corporate Head of Service
Relation Mgmt.
University of Applied
Science A (Austria)
Institute Industrial Engineering &
Innovation
1 P1: Professor Industrial Engineering
University of Applied
Science B (Austria)
Institute Industrial Engineering &
Innovation
1 P1: Professor Industrial Engineering
Consulting Company
A (Austria)
Innovation Strategy Consulting 1 P1: Managing Director
Consulting Company
B (Austria)
Customer Experience & Service
Consulting
1 P1: Managing Director

--- PAGE 6 ---
210 Roman Teichert
Tab. 3: Delphi process applied to develop the DSTM-Model
Researcher Export Panel Time
Round 1
• Request 5 success-factors and hinders/barriers
considered critical for digital transformation
efforts
Round 1
• Propose 5 success-factors and hinders/barriers
considered critical for digital transformation
efforts in service organizations
15
work
days
Round 2
• Consolidate success-factors and hinders/barriers
considered critical (maximum 10) → derive list
of factors for model
• Compare, match and complement with list of
model factors identified in a systematic
literature review (Teichert, 2019)
• Propose a consolidated list of model factors
(maximum 20)
Round 2
• Rate list of consolidated factors for the model
• Provide commentaries, suggestions and other
important input
18
work
days
Round 3
• Propose final list of factors for the model based
on ratings and commentaries provided
(maximum 10)
• Request factor definition and identification of
critical elements to be included in each factor
(max 5 per factor)
Round 3
• Inform about final list of factors based on
ratings
• Rate satisfaction of final factors and provide
comments and suggestions
• Propose definition for final factors by identifying
elements considered critical for inclusion in
factors (max 5 per factor)
21
work
days
Round 4
• Consolidate/aggregated elements considered
critical for inclusion in factor definition
(maximum 10 per factor)
• Provide aggregated themes per factor and
propose first draft of definition per factor to
review
Round 4
• Review aggregated list of elements considered
critical for definition
• Review and comment on first draft of definition
per factor
• Propose critical abilities and enablers within the
factors to be included and assessed in the model
33
work
days
Round 5
• Consolidate comments and suggestions related
to definitions per factor
• Propose revised definitions per factor
• Consolidate critical abilities/enablers
(subfactors) within the factors to be included
and assessed in the model
• Propose a consolidated list of critical
abilities/enablers (subfactors; max 5 per factor)
Round 5
• Review revised definitions per factor
• Review consolidated list of critical
abilities/enablers (subfactors) within the factors
to be included and assessed in the model
• Comment on proposed list of critical
abilities/enablers (subfactors)
• Rate satisfaction per factor with final results
and provide comments and further suggestions
(factors, definition, subfactors)
30
work
days
Summarize findings
• Summarize final factors and definition (critical
levers for digital transformation maturity)
• Summarize final list of subfactors (areas within
the factors for assessment by the model →
critical abilities/enablers)
Information about findings
• Information about final list of factors and
definitions
• Information about final list of subfactors (areas
within the factors for assessment by the model
→ critical abilities/enablers)
10
work
days
for digital transformation) and its subfactors
(capabilities/characteristics) in more detail.
The DSTM-Meta Model was the guiding
model for the Delphi-process to establish a
common understanding and language among
the experts and to provide overview and ori-
entation related to the scope and tasks for each
Delphi-round. The factors and subfactors were
derived from clusters of themes generated by
the experts during the process. The DSTM-
Meta Model and the elements addressed by each
of the Delphi-rounds are illustrated in Fig. 2.
Along the five Delphi-rounds 16 experts
reflecting 10 different companies and two Uni-
versities of Applied Sciences were involved. To
link the model to the context of a service-
provider organization the expert panel (Tab. 2)
was recruited mainly from service provider
companies. Due to the innovativeness of the
model to be developed and the lack of research
in the domain of DSTM, the focus was laid on
practitioners (76% industry, 12% consultants,
12% academia). All selected practitioners from
industry offer a product-service system to their

--- PAGE 7 ---
A Model for Assessing Digital Transformation Maturity for Service Provider Organizations 211
customers. The functions in the expert panel
vary from managing directors, country man-
agers, service managers and technical service
specialists to consultants. Three experts are
from Germany, the rest is Austrian.
In the first 3 rounds the factors reflecting the
critical levers for the digital transformation in
service were developed. In round 4–5 the sub-
factors reflecting critical abilities and enablers
per factor were clustered and mapped out. The
entire Delphi process applied to develop the
DSTM-Model is summarized in Tab. 3.
The average duration of each Delphi-round
was 24 days and the average response rate was
at 89%. The outcome of the Delphi process were
factors, their definition and related subfactors
described by associated topics and themes
generated by the experts.
The overall satisfaction of the expert panel
with all developed factors, subfactors and their
definition along the Delphi-process was quite
high, with 74% of respondents being very satis-
fied, 25% quite satisfied and 1% being neutral.
The mapping of each subfactor with 5
maturity stages, which represents the third
dimension of the model, was the last step
to finalize the DSTM-Model. By using the
specific inputs from the Delphi-study and from
a complementing literature review related to
each subfactor, all identified subfactors were
described and characterized by specific and
assessable attributes for each of the maturity
stages. Because of this granularity the model is
on the one hand descriptive, which is important
for understanding the status-quo of digital
maturity (“as-is” position), and on the other
hand prescriptive (“to-be” position), what is
important for developing specific paths and
action plans to improve digital maturity. This
model approach enables a very comprehensive
and holistic view of digital transformation for
service provider organizations.
In phase “Test” the maturity model and the
assessment instrument of the model were pilot
tested by members of the expert panel involved
in the Delphi-study. In this way the application
could be tested, and the achievement of the
desired design objectives was validated. The
digital maturity levels of the participating com-
panies were evaluated and visualized in the Dig-
ital Maturity Matrix. The deployment in the in-
dustry and ongoing maintenance of the DSTM-
Model were not in the scope of this research.
In the following chapters the developed DSTM-
Assessment Model and the first pilot-test result
as outcome of this research work are presented.
3 RESULTS
3.1 Factors and Subfactors of the
Digital Service Transformation
Maturity Model
Finally, 8 factors and 27 subfactors describing
“Digital Service Transformation Maturity” were
developed during the Delphi-study. All 8 factors
and associated subfactors were further grouped
into two main dimensions reflecting digital en-
abler (technological aspect) and transformation
enabler (managerial aspect) as proposed by
some comprehensive digital maturity models
(Shahiduzzaman et al., 2017; Westerman and
McAfee, 2012) identified in the systematic
literature review (Teichert, 2019). Finally, the
two dimensions adopted to measure digital
maturity are “Digital Capabilities” and “Digital
Impact”, in line with the digital maturity model
of PWC (Shahiduzzaman et al., 2017). This
model was used as a guiding model for the “Dig-
ital Service Transformation Maturity Model”
developed in this research work, as it is one of
the most comprehensive models identified in the
systematic literature review (Teichert, 2019).
This allows that digital maturity is measured in
these two dimensions and therefore guarantees
a more holistic approach of digital maturity also
underlining the criticality of the managerial and
“soft” aspects for the success of digital transfor-
mation initiatives. “Digital Capability” should
reflect “the strength of the organization‘s digital
foundation”, and “Digital Impact” how “digital
technology is leveraged in the organization to
respond to customer demand and changes in

--- PAGE 8 ---
212 Roman Teichert
Tab. 4: Digital Capability Indicators (Source: Delphi-study)
Factors Subfactors Number of assessment items
Digital Service Strategy Digital transformation scenario for service 12
Market analysis of digitalization in service 12
Digitalization fields in service 9
Roadmap for digitalization 9
Digital Competence Profiles of digital competence 23
Digital talents 17
HR-development agenda for digitalization 13
Customer Experience Personalization of service 17
Simplification of interactions 17
Management of expectations 23
Digital Technology Adoption of new digital technology 14
Digital IT-architecture 10
Tab. 5: Digital Impact Indicators (Source: Delphi-study)
Factors Subfactors
Number of
assessment items
Digital Service Business Model Framework of digital service business model 19
Service Engineering & Innovation 21
Digital service ecosystem 24
Smart Services Smart product 12
Smart data 11
Digital service platform 12
Digital Leadership & Organization Creating the organizational frame 14
Providing orientation 15
Managing change 18
Digital savvy 15
Digital Culture Digital-first mindset 7
Innovation 15
Agility 10
Data-driven decisions 21
Collaboration 13
the environment through new product and
service offerings and hence make transformation
impact in the market” (Shahiduzzaman et al.,
2017). “Organizations reach the highest level
of maturity when they have both a strong
digital foundation and a good understanding of
how to leverage this foundation for a strategic
business advantage” (Shahiduzzaman et al.,
2017). Final grouping of factors and related
subfactors into Digital Capability Indicators
and Digital Impact Indicators is outlined in
Tab. 4 and Tab. 5.
3.2 Maturity Levels
To define the digital maturity levels of the
DSTM-Model three digital maturity models
addressing different perspectives were adopted.
Two of the applied models were identified
during the systematic literature review (Te-
ichert, 2019). The third model adopted was
identified during additional literature research
and reflects more the perspective of business
and IT alignment to drive digital transforma-
tion. The first underlaying model developed

--- PAGE 9 ---
A Model for Assessing Digital Transformation Maturity for Service Provider Organizations 213
Tab. 6: Digital Maturity Levels (Solis, 2016; Whalen, 2015; Valdez-de-Leon, 2016; adopted by the author)
Stages Description of stages
Level 0
Business-as-Usual
• Organization: Organization operates with an intimate legacy perspective of customers,
processes, metrics, business models and technology, believing that it will remain the
answer and solution to digital transformation.
• Digital Initiatives: No steps taken by the organization yet to transform.
• Business and IT alignment: There is a disconnect between business and IT digital
initiatives, which are also poorly aligned with company strategy. Customer experience is
not focused at all.
• Business Outcome: Business provides weak customer experiences. Digital technology is
just used to riposte threats.
Level 1
Testing &
Learning
• Organization: Imagination and experimentation is triggered by new technology.
Experimentation is driving digital skills and creativity throughout the organization,
although disparately, while aiming to improve specific touchpoints and processes.
• Digital Initiatives: The organization is taking intentionally first steps to move toward
a digital business.
• Business and IT alignment: The organization has discovered the need to evolve a
digitally enhanced business strategy. Execution still is on a project basis and progress
cannot be predicted or repeated.
• Business Outcome: Digital enabled customer experiences, products and services are
inconsistent and poorly integrated.
Level 2
Formalized &
Enabling
• Organization: Sense of urgency accelerates, more formalized investments with greater
impact. Programs become more intentional. More organized and cross-functional
pilots. Digital literacy becomes primary focus. Executive sponsor for DT is
established.
• Digital Initiatives: The organization is implementing initiatives within the factor
that will form the foundation of its digital business.
• Business and IT alignment: Organization has started to evolve a digitally enhanced
business strategy in a more formal way. Execution is on a more intentional and
programmatic basis by connecting business and digital IT initiatives.
• Business Outcome: Digital enabled customer experiences, products and services are
more consistent and better integrated.
Level 3
Strategic &
Integrated
• Organization: Strive for relevance escalates. Change starts to be recognized and
appreciated by the entire organization. DT becomes intentional with short- and
long-term goals supported by investment and infrastructure. More ambitious efforts
formally organized. DT efforts span every category (DCX, sales, service….). Digital
literacy is a mandate.
• Digital Initiatives: To support end-to-end capabilities all digital initiatives are being
integrated across the business.
• Business and IT alignment: Business and IT goals are aligned at company level
related to the creation of digital products, services and experiences. Business is still
not focussing on the disruptive potential of digital initiatives.
• Business Outcome: Products, services, and experiences are provided consistently but
they are not truly innovative.
Level 4
Converged &
Managed
• Organization: To guide strategy and operations a dedicated transformation team is
formed. The new organizational structure takes shape. Roles, models, processes and
systems to support transformation gets consolidated.
• Digital Initiatives: Digital initiatives are being fine-tuned and utilized to further
drive overall business performance.
• Business and IT alignment: Integrated business and IT management disciplines
exploit synergies and deliver digitally enabled products, services and experiences on a
continuous basis.
• Business Outcome: Business is providing world-class digital products, services, and
experiences and is a leader in its markets.
Level 5
Innovative &
Adaptive
• Organization: Digital transformation becomes a way of business for the organization
and its executives. A new ecosystem is established to identify and act upon
technology and market trends in pilot and eventually in scale. Culture of innovation
becomes a priority.
• Digital Initiatives: The organization is breaking new ground with its digital
initiatives and is advancing the state of the practice within the factor.
• Business and IT alignment: The organization is very disruptive in the use of new
digital technologies and business models. Ecosystem awareness and feedback drives
business innovation continuously.
• Business Outcome: Business renews existing markets and develops new ones to its
own advantages. The company is a fast-moving target for competitors.

--- PAGE 10 ---
214 Roman Teichert
Tab. 7: Example of assessment attributes per level for subfactor “Profiles of Digital Competence” (ability of the service
company to develop systematic digital skills management to identify existing and future required digital skills and to
implement targeted measures to close the identified skills gaps)
Maturity Description
Level 0 • There is no awareness of required digital capabilities in the service company and no effort to
address them.
Level 1 • The awareness of and need for individual digital skills is recognized ad hoc during the first digital
pilot projects.
• Digital “hard skills” or more technologically oriented skills are in the foreground (e.g. cloud
computing, analytics, big data, digital tools).
• It is recognized that employee profiles need to be updated in terms of their digital skills. Job
descriptions need to reflect the required digital skills.
Level 2 • The systematic assessment of digital skills is initiated and driven forward at management level.
• A recognized digital skills framework is used to ensure currency and completeness (hard/soft
digital skills) of digital skills.
• A thorough inventory of digital skills that already exist in the service company is available.
• Required digital skills for the relevant functions are defined in light of the first planned
digitalization initiatives and programs.
Level 3 • The service company sees digital skills for employees and managers as a key enabler for the digital
strategy and a competitive factor.
• In addition to digital “hard” skills (e.g. cloud computing, analytics, big data, etc.), digital “soft”
skills (e.g. collaboration, change management, etc.) and digital leadership skills are playing an
increasingly important role.
• Digital skills are anchored in job/function descriptions based on a unified digital skills framework.
• Digital skills required in the future are derived from the digital strategy.
• The majority of employees and managers conduct a self-assessment of their existing and required
digital skills.
• Descriptions of digital skills and their assessment play an important role in the recruiting process.
Level 4 • Considering external trends and functional strategies, a clear understanding of areas in the service
business is created, that provides insights as to which specific digital skills are needed and where
they have the greatest impact (e.g. Advanced Analytics, Service 4.0, Agility, Digital Business,
Digital Marketing).
• The digital job profiles and functions that the service company needs for digital transformation
and the related digital initiatives in the next 1–2 years are identified (e.g. Data Scientist,
Marketing Automation, UI/UE Designer).
• Management can pinpoint the risks posed by the lack of or gaps in required critical digital skills,
(e.g. delay in digital transformation, cyber security risks).
• Required digital skills and skill levels for existing job/function profiles in the service organization
are identified and specified in a digital skills matrix. A systematic assessment of existing digital
skills and skill gaps is carried out regularly.
• A majority of employees see the gap between existing and required digital skills for their current
job and future career path.
Level 5 • The digital skills matrix is updated on an ongoing basis to reflect key external trends, service
market requirements and changes in strategy.
• Required digital job profiles (e.g. digital product manager, UX/CX designer) and digital soft skills
(e.g. collaboration, change management, customer centricity, data-driven decision making, …) for
the development of innovative/disruptive services / business models take centre stage and are
mapped in the digital skills matrix.
• Most employees have an individual development plan that targets the existing digital skills gap
and development goals for potential future jobs.
• Contractual partners/service providers/suppliers are evaluated and selected based on the digital
skills framework used in terms of their digital skills, skill levels and experience.
by Alimeter (Solis, 2016) describes digital
transformation in six stages. This model claims
that “companies typically pursue change from a
known, safe approach correlating with business-
as-usual practices. Operating within the con-
fines of traditional paradigms without purpose
or far-seeing vision eventually challenges the
direction, capacity, and agility for thriving in
our digital economy” (Solis, 2016). Building
on interviews of companies engaging in digital
transformation the researchers have found a
“series of patterns, components, and processes
that form a strong foundation for change”
(Solis, 2016). These phases represent a kind of

--- PAGE 11 ---
A Model for Assessing Digital Transformation Maturity for Service Provider Organizations 215
Tab. 8: Comparing DSTM-Model with other digital maturity models
Model Domain
# of
factors/
dimensions
# of
subfactors
# of maturity
levels/stages
# of attributes/
characteristics
specifying
maturity
“Digital Service Transformation
Maturity Model” (Teichert, 2019)
Service 8 27
5
(plus default
level “zero”)
403
“Digital Maturity Model for
Telecommunication Service
Providers” (Valdez-de-Leon, 2016)
Service 7 –
5
(plus default
level “zero”)
129
“Value Centric Maturity Model”
(Shahiduzzaman et al., 2017)
General 13 – 4 62
“St. Gallen-Model”
(Berghaus and Back, 2016)
General 9 – 5 60
blueprint for digital maturity to guide effec-
tively digital transformation efforts and were
used as underlaying digital maturity level model
to address the organizational perspective of
digital transformation. The next model adopted
is a specific digital maturity model for ser-
vice providers acting in the telecommunication
industry (Valdez-de-Leon, 2016). It was the
only domain specific model for service providers
identified in the systematic literature review
(Teichert, 2019). In this model “maturity in
each dimension is assessed across five levels plus
a default level zero reflecting a state of inaction”
(Valdez-de-Leon, 2016). Each of the proposed
levels in this model builds on the previous
one and especially addresses the perspective
of digital initiatives for service organizations
to drive digital transformation. To reflect the
IT perspective of digital transformation the
DSTM-Model was complemented with IDC’s
“Information Digital Transformation Maturity
Scape” model (Whalen, 2015). The IDC model
especially addresses the perspective of busi-
ness and IT-alignment with specific business
outcomes of digital transformation. Finally,
the overall maturity level model adopted and
the description for each level and different
perspectives (organization, digital initiatives,
business & IT alignment, business outcome)
are outlined in Tab. 6. Based on this adopted
digital maturity level model, all subfactors were
specified and described in detail with specific
attributes and characteristics for each maturity
level to enable a distinct assessment of maturity
per subfactor. In addition to the systematic
literature review (Teichert, 2019) and the in-
put from the Delphi-study, further literature,
reports, concepts, and generic models related
to the subfactor topic were reviewed to support
the development and definition of attributes
for each maturity level. The attributes were
created step by step by the author, starting
with the description of the first level of maturity
(Business-as-Usual) and then formulating the
attributes and characteristics of the next higher
level. In this way, every maturity level is
building on the previous level. Attributes of
digital maturity identified in specific literature
related to a subfactor were integrated into
the maturity level description accordingly. All
attributes always were compared and matched
with the guiding overall digital maturity level
framework (Tab. 6) to ensure alignment. The
whole development process was iterative to en-
sure consistency and differentiation between the
maturity levels. Eventually 403 specific items
to assess the maturity of all subfactors were
created (Tab. 4 and Tab. 5). For example, for
the subfactor “Profiles of Digital Competence”
within the factor “Digital Competence” the
specific attributes per maturity level are illus-
trated in Tab. 7. Building on these attributes
each subfactor will be rated between “Level 1”
and “Level 5” depending on what level best
describes the current state of DSTM of the
service company.
This detailed description of digital maturity
per subfactor and per level provides also good
guidance and orientation for stepping up to
the next level of digital maturity. Even if

--- PAGE 12 ---
216 Roman Teichert
Fig. 3: Digital Transformation Maturity Matrix
actions to improve digital maturity are not fully
prescribed in the model, the way attributes are
formulated provides already a good informative
basis for discussing and deriving possible course
of actions from each attribute.
Compared with other examined digital ma-
turity models the presented DSTM-Model
comprises the highest number of attributes
and characteristics describing digital maturity
(Tab. 8). This also is driven by the fact that the
8 factors were broken down into 27 subfactors,
which finally were described with 403 specific
attributes across 5 maturity levels.
3.3 Digital Service Transformation
Maturity Matrix
The DSTM-Model specifies each maturity level
for each subfactor and therefore provides an ori-
entation how to move up the maturity scale for
each subfactor and what overall a more mature
digital service organization and business means.
Grouping of factors into Digital Capability and
Digital Impact Indicators helps companies to
pursue a balance between both dimensions. To
achieve the highest level of digital maturity a
balance between both indicators is required.
Hence, achieving high level of maturity in just
one dimension is not enough to achieve an
overall high level of digital maturity. In this
sense the model spans a matrix consisting of the
two dimensions Digital Capability and Digital
Impact (Fig. 3).
Within the matrix the different digital matu-
rity areas defined by maturity levels and scoring
range are depicted (Tab. 9). The key principle
of the DSTM-Model is to always pursue a
balance between Digital Capability and Digital
Impact. Service companies just focusing on
one dimension will not achieve higher level of
DSTM. Particularly, if transformation efforts
are mainly addressing the digital foundation,
which starts with digital technology, and just
aim to implement the latest technology trend to
become digital, it will not drive digital maturity
to a sufficient level. At the same time Digital
Impact factors like Digital Culture, Leadership
& Organization, Smart Services and Digital
Service Business Model are needed to leverage
digital technology to react to market demand
and changes through improved service offerings.
If a service company scores strong on Digital
Capability factors and less on Digital Impact
factors, the emphasis of actions needs to be
placed on developing the weakest subfactors
regarding Digital Impact first and vice versa.

--- PAGE 13 ---
A Model for Assessing Digital Transformation Maturity for Service Provider Organizations 217
Tab. 9: Maturity levels, scoring points assigned and arche-types of digital maturity
Maturity levels
Level 1
“Testing &
Learning”
Level 2
“Formalized &
Enabling”
Level 3
“Strategic &
Integrated”
Level 4
“Converged &
Managed”
Level 5
“Innovative &
Adaptive”
DC, DI-Score Range 0–10 10–25 25–45 45–70 70–100
Archetypes
Digital
Explorer
Digital
Promoter
Digital
Player
Digital
Transformer
Digital
Innovator
In this way the DSTM-Matrix also supports
the prioritization of actions to improve digital
maturity. By positioning a service company
in the DSTM-Matrix areas to improve digital
maturity can be spotted depending on how far
the “as-is-position” is off the ideal maturity
evolution path and the future “to-be-position”
of digital maturity can be envisioned. The ideal
evolutionary path is to keep Digital Capa-
bility and Digital Impact always in balance.
In that context the DSTM-Matrix also is a
communication tool to facilitate discussion and
understanding of the positioning, identifying
potential focus areas and deciding a concrete
improvement path and course of action address-
ing relevant subfactors and attributes.
3.4 DSTM-Assessment Model
The specific description of attributes for each
maturity level per subfactor – 403 attributes
for the model in total – forms the backbone of
the assessment model. To quantify the level of
maturity for a subfactor a simple scoring model
was adopted. The scale of maturity is ranging
from 0 to 100 points, whereby “Level 0” repre-
sents zero points, and “Level 5” represents 100
points. Higher maturity levels provide higher
incremental points. This should reflect that
lower maturity levels can be achieved faster and
easier than higher levels of maturity. Therefore,
higher levels of maturity are weighted stronger
in the scoring model. During an assessment
each subfactor will be rated between “Level
1” and “Level 5” depending on what level
best describes the current state of DSTM of
the service company. To qualify for a certain
maturity level all attributes of this level and
all previous levels must be fulfilled. Finally,
the assessment scores of all subfactors are
used to calculate an overall average Digital
Capability (DC) and Digital Impact (DI) Score.
Basing on the determined DC- and DI-Score
the assessed service company can be positioned
in the two-dimensional DSTM-Matrix (Fig. 3).
The overall maturity level model and the
proposed archetypes of digital maturity form
the foundation for classifying service provider
companies. The different typologies will be
used to characterize companies related to their
overall DSTM and to give a labelling and
a description regarding their position (as-is
position) in the DSTM-Matrix. Based on the
defined maturity levels and scale of maturity
ranging from 0 to 100 for each archetype a range
of assessment scores for DC-Score and DI-Score
was defined (Tab. 9).
4 TESTING THE MODEL
In the following the results obtained from
testing the designed DSTM-Assessment Model
are presented. Seven experts representing five
service provider companies (Tab. 10) participat-
ing in the expert-panel of the Delphi-study, were
testing the model based on a standardized easy-
to-use assessment template which was provided
per email.
The goal of the test was to proof firstly
the understandability of assessment logic and
attributes describing digital maturity, secondly
the practicability and ease of use of the as-
sessment templates itself, thirdly the evaluation
of the assessment and fourthly the depiction
in the DSTM-Matrix. The determination and
evaluation of scores was facilitated by the

--- PAGE 14 ---
218 Roman Teichert
Tab. 10: Companies testing the DSTM-Model
Company A Company B Company C Company D Company E
Industry Elevator and
Escalator
products &
services
High-end domestic
appliances and
commercial
equipment &
services
Print and digital
document
products &
services
Automation
technologies and
services for
commercial,
industrial, public
buildings and
infrastructures
Ventilation,
heating,
air-conditioning,
commercial
refrigeration
equipment &
services
Participants 2 1 2 1 1
Roles of
Participants
P1: Managing
Director,
P2: Senior Leader
(Mgmt. Board)
P1: Senior Leader
(Mgmt. Board)
P1: Managing
Director,
P2: Customer
Service Expert
P1: Business
Development Mgr.
P1: Senior Leader
(Mgmt. Board)
Tab. 11: Digital Capability Scores per Company and Subfactor (max = 100)
Factors
Company & Participant
Assessment Scores Score per
(critical levers) Subfactor (critical enabler) A1 A2 B1 C1 C2 D1 E1 subfactor
Digital Service 1.1 Digital Transformation Scenario for Service 45 10 25 70 70 100 70 56
Strategy 1.2 Market Analysis of Digitalization in Service 25 10 10 45 70 70 70 43
1.3 Domains of Digitalization in Service 70 70 25 25 70 70 70 57
1.4 Roadmap for Digitalization 45 10 0 45 45 100 70 45
Digital 2.1 Profiles of Digital Competence 10 10 0 25 25 70 45 26
Competence 2.2 Digital Talents 10 10 10 10 25 100 25 27
2.3 HR-Development Agenda for Digitalization 10 10 10 10 25 70 45 26
Customer 3.1 Personalization of Service 25 45 25 10 45 100 45 42
Experience 3.2 Simplification of Interactions 25 10 25 0 45 70 25 29
3.3 Management of Expectations 10 25 10 10 25 25 45 21
Digital 4.1 Application of New Digital Technology 45 25 45 10 45 45 45 37
Technology 4.2 Digital IT Architecture 25 45 25 25 45 100 45 44
Average Digital Capability Score per Participant 29 23 18 24 45 77 50
Average Digital Capability Score per Company 26 18 34 77 50
Tab. 12: Digital Impact Scores per Company and Subfactor (max = 100)
Factors
Company & Participant
Assessment Scores Score per
(critical levers) Subfactor (critical enabler) A1 A2 B1 C1 C2 D1 E1 subfactor
Digital Service 5.1 Framework of Digital Service Business Model 10 10 10 10 45 100 45 33
Business Model 5.2 Service Engineering & Innovation 45 45 25 25 45 70 70 46
5.3 Digital Service Ecosystem 10 10 10 10 25 25 45 19
Smart Services 6.1 Smart Product 45 25 100 25 45 100 45 55
6.2 Smart Data 25 45 45 45 45 70 70 49
6.3 Digital Service Platform 25 45 25 10 25 70 45 35
Digital 7.1 Creating the Organizational Frame 25 25 10 25 25 100 45 36
Leadership and 7.2 Providing Orientation 25 10 25 10 45 100 45 37
Organization 7.3 Managing Change 25 10 10 25 25 100 45 34
7.4 Digital Savvy 10 10 10 25 25 100 25 29
Digital Culture 8.1 Digital First Mind-Set 45 45 10 10 25 70 25 33
8.2 Innovation 25 10 10 25 25 70 45 30
8.3 Agility 25 25 10 25 45 70 25 32
8.4 Data-Driven Decisions 25 10 25 10 45 70 25 30
8.5 Collaboration 10 10 10 10 45 70 45 29
Average Digital Impact Score per Participant 25 22 22 19 36 79 43
Average Digital Impact Score per Company 24 22 28 79 43

--- PAGE 15 ---
A Model for Assessing Digital Transformation Maturity for Service Provider Organizations 219
Fig. 4: Ranking of Digital Capability and Impact Subfactors by Digital Maturity Scores (max = 100)
applied assessment templates for each factor
and average Digital Capability and Digital
Impact scores per factor and finally for each
service company could be evaluated quite easily
(Tab. 11 and Tab. 12).
Furthermore, the overall scores of subfactors
for all the service companies could be evalu-
ated, which gives good insight into the overall
maturity status for subfactors of the domain
of service and provides guidance for service
companies on which subfactors they should
focus to drive digital transformation maturity
further (Fig. 4).
Regarding Digital Capability it became evi-
dent that the subfactors related to “Customer
Experience” (3.2 Simplification of Interactions,
3.3 Management of Expectations) and related
to Digital Competence (2.1 Profiles of Digi-
tal Competence, 2.2 Digital Talents, 2.3 HR-
Development Agenda for Digitalization) show
lowest level of maturity. Subfactors related to
“Digital Strategy” (1.1 Digital Transformation
Scenario for Service, 1.3 Domain of Digitaliza-
tion in Service) reflect highest level of maturity,
which clearly underlines that service compa-
nies are working on their digital strategy but
seem to lack the required digital competencies
and talents. The ability to manage customer
experience seems also to be underdeveloped,
except the ability to personalize services. This
clearly indicates that the factors “Customer
Experience” and “Digital Competence” need to

--- PAGE 16 ---
220 Roman Teichert
Tab. 13: Distribution of Digital Capability and Impact subfactors across maturity levels
Maturity level (score)
Digital capability
% of subfactors per maturity level
(n = 12 subfactors)
Digital impact
% of subfactors per maturity level
(n = 15 subfactors)
Digital Innovator (>70) 0% 0%
Digital Transformer (46–70) 25.0% (16.7%) 20.0% (13.3%)
Digital Player (26–45) 66.7% (41.7%) 73.3% (33.3%)
Digital Promoter (11–25) 8.3% (41.7%) 6.7% (53.3%)
Digital Explorer (0–10) 0% 0%
Note: Figures in brackets reflect % distribution without scores of outliers (Company D)
be specifically addressed in the digital strategy
of the service companies participating in this
assessment.
Regarding Digital Impact most of the subfac-
tors related to “Digital Culture” (8.2 Innova-
tion, 8.3 Agility, 8.4 Data-Driven Decisions, 8.5
Collaboration) show lower levels of maturity.
This assessment result clearly indicates that
these service companies need a strong focus
on “Digital Culture” to drive digital maturity.
The subfactor “Digital Savvy”, which reflects
the digital competence of the leadership team,
is also ranking very low. The lowest level
of maturity of all Digital Impact subfactors
is represented by the subfactor 5.3 Digital
Service Ecosystem. The subfactors 6.1 Smart
Products, 6.2 Smart Data and 5.2 Service
Engineering & Innovation rank highest in this
group, what underlines the main starting point
of digital transformation in these service com-
panies, namely making the product smart by
adding sensors, capturing data in the cloud,
analyzing data with algorithms to gain valuable
insights and creating new services. Regarding
the factor “Digital Service Business Model” it is
quite interesting that the subfactor 5.2 Service
Engineering & Innovation shows a higher level
of maturity, but the other two subfactors which
are 5.1 Framework of Digital Service Business
Model and 5.3 Digital Service Ecosystem reflect
clearly lower levels of maturity. This indicates
that these service companies assess their ability
to develop and engineer new services relatively
high but are not able to translate this ability
into developing digital service business models
or a digital service ecosystem.
This ranking suggests that on average just
a few subfactors are on a Digital Transformer
level and most subfactors are still on a “Digital
Promoter” or “Digital Player” level (Tab. 13).
If you would take out the scores of the outlier
service company positioned on Digital Innova-
tor level (Company D) the average scores per
subfactor would be even lower and just 16.7%
of Digital Capability subfactors and 13.3% of
Digital Impact factors would be on Digital
Transformer level.
The transfer and depiction of the Digital
Capability and Impact scores into the DSTM-
Matrix was straight forward and worked out
well. The matrix visualized clearly the “as-
is” position of each assessed service company
and lays a foundation for comparison and
developing a path for the desired future state
of digital maturity (Fig. 5).
The position of assessed service companies
in the DSTM-Matrix depicts that most of the
service companies – three out of five – are
Digital Promoters or Digital Players. Overall,
there is a big spread between the five assessed
service companies ranging from Digital Pro-
moter to Digital Innovator. All assessed service
companies show a good balance between Digital
Capability and Digital Impact factors, although
three out of the five service companies close to
Digital Player or Digital Transformer level need
to improve their Digital Impact factors. Finally,
the first test results suggest that most of the
assessed service companies still reflect some dig-
ital immaturity and not have reached a Digital
Transformer level yet. More attention on the
factors highlighted above is needed to improve
digital transformation maturity further.

--- PAGE 17 ---
A Model for Assessing Digital Transformation Maturity for Service Provider Organizations 221
Fig. 5: Service companies positioned in the Digital Service Transformation Maturity Matrix (Source: pilot test)
5 DISCUSSION
5.1 Systematic Literature Review
A systematic literature review (Teichert, 2019)
as part of this research took stock of research
and contemporary development in the field of
digital maturity and has identified 22 different
digital maturity models. These models were
examined in detail to better understand the
contemporary development of digital maturity
models and – building on the findings – a
comprehensive Digital Service Transformation
Maturity Assessment model for the domain of
service was developed.
All reviewed digital maturity models are
proposing different maturity dimensions, ma-
turity stages and assessment items. Overall,
15 different maturity areas are identified in
the included models: Digital Culture, Tech-
nology, Operations & Processes, Digital Strat-
egy, Organization, Digital Skills, Innovation,
Customer Insight & Experience, Governance,
Vision, Digital Ecosystem, Leadership, Com-
pliance & Security, Products & Services and
Business Model. Maturity areas of relevance
for transformational capabilities of an organi-
zation like vision, leadership, digital culture,
innovation and governance are playing a more
important role in general than in domain-
specific contemporary digital maturity models.
But to succeed in digital transformation efforts
both transformational and digital capabilities
are needed in organizations. When comparing
the maturity areas addressed in different mod-
els, it also becomes evident that nearly all
models place strong focus on the technological
and process-side of digital transformation. In
domain-specific digital maturity models, “tech-
nology” is the most addressed maturity area,
followed by “digital skills” and “operations &
processes”. Analysis of maturity areas in general
models clearly indicates that “digital culture”
is the most addressed maturity area, followed
by “technology” and “operations & processes”.
Hence, the culture aspect plays a significantly
more important role in general digital maturity
models than in domain-specific models. Other
“soft” dimensions, more attached to transfor-
mational capabilities like leadership, vision, and

--- PAGE 18 ---
222 Roman Teichert
innovation culture are also more addressed
in general than in domain-specific models. In
addition, most of the contemporary digital
maturity models – general and domain-specific
– neglect and hardly reflect the capability to
develop new and disruptive business models as
an indicator for digital maturity. Just very few
models address the aspect of the developing
a new business model and to which extent
digital is taken into consideration for it. This
underlines that most companies rather focus
on the exploitation of digital technology than
on the exploration of digital innovation and
development of new digital products and busi-
ness models to generate new digital revenues.
Another interesting finding is that maturity
dimension “customer insight & experience” as
characteristic of digital maturity plays a minor
role in domain-specific models. General models
also tend to show more external orientation and
therefore take customer experience as criteria
for digital maturity much stronger into account
than domain-specific models.
A special light was shed in the analysis
on the cultural aspect of digital transforma-
tion. Overall, more than half of the exam-
ined digital maturity models include “culture”
as a maturity dimension. Especially general
digital maturity models developed by practi-
tioner (e.g. consultants) address “culture” as
a critical enabler for digital transformation,
because culture can be one of the barriers,
which is often underestimated and usually not
recognized by companies in the context of
digital transformation. Especially attributes of
a digital culture need to be well presented
in a service-specific digital maturity model.
When taking a closer look to the most fre-
quently addressed cultural attributes in the
examined digital maturity models, attributes
like “collaboration”, “agility & flexibility” and
“organizational learning” could be found. The
ability of an organization to change and contin-
uously reinvent itself (“change ability”), along
with “failure tolerance” and “risk tolerance”
were identified as additional critical attributes
of a digital culture. “Ideating new digitalized
working methods”, “open communication” and
“customer centricity” were also addressed quite
frequently in the culture dimension of the
examined models. This is in line with a research
study (Buvat et al., 2017), which was conducted
to establish a definition of “digital culture”.
Basing on the examined digital maturity
models in this dissertation it can be argued that
general digital maturity models more compre-
hensively address transformational capabilities,
and the domain-specific models more strongly
address digital-technological capabilities in the
assessment of digital maturity of a company.
There were some general models identified
(Westerman and McAfee, 2012; Shahiduzza-
man et al., 2017; Berghaus and Back, 2016),
which already distinguish between two main
areas encompassing digital assets, like digital
capabilities, digital infrastructure and invest-
ments, and transformation enabler, like vision
culture, leadership, governance, innovation or
agility. These models cluster their dimensions
into these main areas, which underlines the
importance of the managerial and soft aspect
of digital transformation efforts. They also pro-
pose a very comprehensive description of digital
maturity and were used as guiding models in
this dissertation. Following key findings of the
systematic literature review are addressed by
the developed Digital Service Transformation
Maturity Model (DSTM) for service provider
organizations:
• There is a lack of digital maturity models
reflecting domains other than manufactur-
ing, taking the context and challenges of
other industries into account (e.g. service in
technical industries). Major part of existing
models addresses the domain of manufac-
turing (Industry 4.0). More specific and
granular assessment approaches are required
to give companies effective guidance towards
digital maturity in different contexts.
• Inconsistency of dimensions, maturity levels
and characteristics describing digital ma-
turity across all existing digital maturity
models. Underlaying definition of digital
maturity demonstrate a significant hetero-
geneity in content and methodology.
• Most of the models provide an incomplete
picture of digital maturity. Either trans-
formational management capabilities (e.g.

--- PAGE 19 ---
A Model for Assessing Digital Transformation Maturity for Service Provider Organizations 223
vision, leadership, governance, innovation,
agility) or an organization’s digital foun-
dation (e.g. technology, digital skills, or-
ganization, strategy, customer experience…)
are not addressed sufficiently and systemat-
ically.
• Most of the examined digital maturity
models are descriptive in their nature, just
assessing the level of digital maturity, and
do not give guidance and a clear roadmap
how to achieve higher level of maturity
(prescriptive).
• Cultural attributes enhancing digital trans-
formation are not represented systemati-
cally in existing models. A consistent defi-
nition of “digital culture” has to be estab-
lished.
• The aspect of digital business model is
hardly addressed in any models.
5.2 Digital Service Transformation
Maturity Model (DSTM)
Building on these findings a comprehensive
Digital Service Transformation Maturity Model
was developed by applying a development
framework which was used for the development
of other maturity models in other domains (de
Bruin et al., 2005). By adopting the Delphi-
Method 16 experts reflecting 10 different com-
panies and two Universities of Applied Sciences
were involved in the design of the model. The
goal was to establish a very granular model
consisting of factors, subfactors and five matu-
rity levels including a default level zero which
reflect business-as-usual and a state of inactiv-
ity trying to keep the status-quo and believing
that it remains the solution to digital relevance.
By breaking down the factors into subfactors a
better granularity and guidance in striving for
a desired future maturity state is provided. The
subfactors were derived from clusters of themes
generated by the experts. Finally, 8 factors and
27 subfactors were identified to describe digital
transformation maturity for service provider
organizations. When comparing the DSTM-
Model with other relevant digital maturity
models (Tab. 7) it becomes evident that the
scope of the DSTM-Model is broader and the
level of granularity significantly higher. None
of the other models is using an additional layer
of subfactors. In line with the guiding models
(Westerman and McAfee, 2012; Shahiduzzaman
et al., 2017; Berghaus and Back, 2016) a balance
between digital capabilities and digital impact
factors was pursued to ensure that digital
maturity in the DSTM-Model is understood as
a holistic concept addressing the managerial
and soft aspect of digital transformation efforts,
which is even more important in the service
industry. The proposed model clearly addresses
the identified lack of digital maturity models
for the domain of service and the dissertation
is enriching literature related to the topic of
digital maturity models.
5.3 DSTM Assessment
Model & Matrix
To make Digital Service Transformation Matu-
rity assessable for each subfactor several specific
attributes per maturity level were generated.
Compared to other digital maturity models
it is a very comprehensive model (Tab. 8).
Eventually 403 specific attributes to assess the
maturity of the subfactors were created in a
way that each maturity level is building on
the previous level. Building on these attributes
each subfactor will be rated between “Level 1”
and “Level 5” depending on what level best
describes the current state of Digital Trans-
formation Maturity of the service company.
This detailed description of digital maturity
per subfactor and per level provides also good
guidance and orientation for moving to the next
level of digital maturity. Even if actions to im-
prove digital maturity are not fully prescribed
in the model, the way attributes are formulated
provides already a good informative basis for
deriving possible actions from each attribute.
To visualize the assessment results of a ser-
vice company (as-is-position) a two-dimensional
Digital Transformation Maturity Matrix with
a Digital Capability and Digital Impact Score
was established. Within the matrix the different
digital maturity areas are depicted. The key
principle of the DSTM-Model is to always
pursue a balance between Digital Capability

--- PAGE 20 ---
224 Roman Teichert
and Digital Impact factors. Service compa-
nies just focusing on one dimension will not
achieve higher level of Digital Transformation
Maturity. Particularly, if transformation efforts
are mainly addressing the digital foundation,
which starts with digital technology, and just
aim to implement the latest technology trend
to become “digital”, it will not drive digital
maturity to a sufficient level. At the same
time Digital Impact factors like Digital Culture,
Leadership & Organization, Smart Services and
Digital Service Business Model are needed to
leverage digital technology to respond to cus-
tomer demand and changes in the environment
through improved product and service offerings.
By positioning a service company in the DSTM-
Matrix areas to improve digital maturity can
be spotted depending on how far the as-is-
position is off the ideal maturity evolution path.
If a service company scores strong on Digital
Capability factors and less on Digital Impact
factors, the emphasis of actions needs to be
placed on developing the weakest subfactors
regarding Digital Impact first and vice versa.
In this way the DSTM-Matrix also supports
the prioritization of actions to improve digital
maturity. Overall, the designed DSTM-Matrix
fulfils several important functions supporting
the development and deployment of digital
transformation efforts of a service company:
• Visualization-function: helping to visualize
the as-is-position of the service company’s
digital transformation maturity in a two-
dimensional continuum basing on Digital
Capability and Impact Scores.
• Benchmarking-function: comparing the as-
is-position with regards to maturity-zones in
the matrix labelled with clear arche-types
(Digital Resister, Digital Explorer, Digital
Promoter, Digital Player, Digital Trans-
former, Digital Innovator). This maturity-
zones reflect a position of balance between
Digital Capability and Digital Impact fac-
tors.
• Alignment-function: supporting the discus-
sion of results and review of detailed sub-
factor assessment to create common under-
standing of current state. Basing on the
common understanding of current state the
desired future state of digital transformation
maturity can be developed.
• Roadmap-function: helping to decide the to-
be-position of digital transformation matu-
rity and to develop a path along the different
maturity-zones. Underlaying subfactors and
its specific attributes will help to develop a
certain course of action fueling the transfor-
mation effort of a service company.
• Simulation-function: supporting to assess
the impact of actions addressing different
subfactors and make the progress visible. In
this way the focus areas with biggest impact
can be identified, prioritized and an effective
course of action can be decided.
The DSTM-Matrix with its functions can
effectively support the development process of
the digital service strategy for a service provider
company.
5.4 Test of the DSTM-Assessment
Model
Finally, the designed DSTM-Assessment Model
was tested by 7 experts participating in the
expert panel of the Delphi-Study representing
five service companies. The goal of the test
was to proof firstly the understandability of
assessment logic and attributes describing dig-
ital maturity, secondly the practicability and
ease of use of the assessment templates itself,
thirdly the evaluation of the assessment and
fourthly the depiction in the DSTM-Matrix.
Beyond that a first analysis and interpretation
basing on the results was conducted. Basing
on the feedback of experts the DSTM-Model
is understandable, practicable and can be used
in an easy way with the template provided
for the test. Also, experts indicated that the
assessment gives a clear picture of the as-is-
situation and shows what could be possible
regarding a potential desired state for different
factors. This gives evidence that the attributes
describing digital transformation maturity were
clearly understandable for the assessors. At
the same time some limitations and areas for
improvement were pointed out. Especially it
was highlighted that not all aspects can be
assessed by one person, what proposes that

--- PAGE 21 ---
A Model for Assessing Digital Transformation Maturity for Service Provider Organizations 225
an interdisciplinary group of employees should
be involved into the assessment. Beside inter-
disciplinarity it was mentioned that employees
participating in the assessment should represent
different levels of hierarchy, because perception
of digital maturity might differ between various
levels of hierarchy in a sense that employees
from higher levels of hierarchy tend to assess
digital maturity more optimistic than employ-
ees on lower levels. Regarding understandability
one limitation was indicated. Although the
assessment tool is clearly understandable for
people who were involved in the development
of the DSTM-Model like the experts testing it,
it might be difficult for people not involved
in the development and not being expert in
the topic. In that context also the use of
abbreviations should be reduced to a minimum
because it could be misleading if assessors do
not understand the concepts behind and are not
familiar with it.
The determination and evaluation of scores
was facilitated by the applied assessment tem-
plates for each factor and average Digital Capa-
bility and Impact Scores per factor and finally
for each service company could be evaluated
quite easily. Furthermore, the overall scores of
subfactors for all the service companies could
be evaluated, which gives good insight into the
overall maturity-status for subfactors of the
domain of service and provides overall guidance
for service companies on which subfactors they
should focus to drive digital transformation
maturity further. The transfer and depiction
of the Digital Capability and Impact Scores
into the DSTM-Matrix is straight forward
and worked out well. The Matrix visualized
clearly the as-is-position of each assessed service
company and lays a foundation for comparison
and developing a path for the desired future
state of digital transformation maturity.
The first results indicated that the subfactors
related to Digital Capability Factors “Customer
Experience” and “Digital Competence” show
lowest levels of maturity in all assessed ser-
vice provider companies. On the opposite the
subfactors related to “Digital Service Strategy”
reflect highest level of maturity compared to
all other Digital Capability subfactors. This
underlines that service companies feel quite
comfortable with their digital service strategy.
At the same time results also reveal that there
is a lack of digital competence and talents
in the service organization, which could be a
roadblock for the development and execution of
a digital service strategy. The ability to manage
and design customer experience systematically
also seems to be underdeveloped within the
assessed service companies. Consequently, the
factors “Digital Competence” and “Customer
Experience” need to be addressed in the digital
service strategy of service companies assessed in
the test. Regarding Digital Impact Factors most
of the subfactors related to “Digital Culture”
indicate the lowest levels of maturity compared
to all other subfactors. This is kind of alerting
because research clearly shows that culture is
the roadblock number one for digital trans-
formation efforts. Creating a digital culture
requires strong leadership and digital compe-
tence among the leaders and managers of an
organization. However, the subfactor “Digital
Savvy” also ranks very low compared to other
subfactors. This clearly illustrates an overall
risk for the assessed service companies in pur-
suing their transformation efforts successfully.
Another finding in the test results is that out of
the three subfactors related to “Digital Service
Business Model” the subfactor “Framework of
Digital Service Business Model” and “Digital
Service Ecosystem” reflect quite low maturity
levels compared to the third subfactor which
is “Service Engineering & Innovation”. This
gives some evidence that service companies feel
quite comfortable in developing and innovating
their services but lacking a common framework
for digital service business models they are
not able to translate this ability into a new
digital service ecosystem. To drive maturity
of the factor “Digital Service Business Model”
is a key requirement for becoming a Digital
Innovator. The ranking of all the subfactors
basing on their assessment scores suggests that
Digital Capability and Digital Impact factors of
assessed service companies are immature and
assessed service companies have still to take
some effort to become a Digital Transformer or
Digital Innovator. Especially “Digital Culture”,

--- PAGE 22 ---
226 Roman Teichert
“Digital Competence”, “Customer Experience”
and “Digital Service Business Model” are the
clear areas of attention to positively impact
Digital Service Transformation Maturity.
The position of assessed service companies
in the DSTM-Matrix depicts that most of the
service companies – three out of five – are
Digital Promoters or Digital Players. Overall,
there is a big spread between the five assessed
service companies ranging from Digital Pro-
moter to Digital Innovator. Overall, all assessed
service companies show a good balance between
Digital Capability and Digital Impact factors,
although three out of the five service companies
close to Digital Player or Digital Transformer
level need to improve their Digital Impact
factors. Finally, the first test results suggests
that most of the assessed service companies
still reflect some digital immaturity and not
have reached a Digital Transformer level yet.
More attention on the factors highlighted above
is needed to improve digital transformation
maturity further.
5.5 Practical Implication, Limitation
and Recommendation
The practical implication of the developed
DSTM-Model for service provider companies
is that it gives a full picture of digital trans-
formation, because it is a multidimensional
maturity model which offers a better approach
in approximating the digital transformation
status than a one-dimensional model. Beyond
a systematic and granular assessment of the
status of digital transformation it also provides
guidance on how to improve digital transforma-
tion maturity by making the areas of attention
transparent. The systematic literature review
identified just one digital maturity model in the
domain of service. The DSTM-Model therefore
offers an additional approach to management or
other stakeholders for assessing digital maturity
of a service company and supports internal
strategy discussions to derive specific strategic
initiatives like the initiation of company-wide
digital projects and programs. Furthermore, the
model enables systematic benchmarking and
comparison related to digital transformation
maturity between service companies.
The focus of the presented research work was
placed on identifying the critical factors describ-
ing digital maturity, which provide insight how
digital transformation success can be improved
rather than just being measured.
The limitation of the model is that it is not
fully prescriptive. The specific attributes used
to describe digital transformation maturity give
indeed some indication and idea of tangible
measures, but they are not fully predefined.
Furthermore, the model practicability and un-
derstandability just were tested by service com-
panies participating in the Delphi-Study. They
have special insight into the model, what will
not be the case for other companies conducting
an assessment.
As a next step it is recommended to apply the
model in the companies, which were involved
in the development of the model as a first
step. In a second step it should be applied
within service-provider entities that are inde-
pendent of the model development. To establish
generalizability of the DSTM-Model a higher
volume of model applications is required (e.g.
via web-interface). The evolution of the model
will occur as the domain knowledge and model
understanding broadens and deepens. This is
required to ensure the continued relevance of
the model. A further recommendation for future
research is to investigate the link between
digital maturity and transformation success
and final business success. In this way the
effectiveness of digital maturity models for the
service industry can be proven.
6 CONCLUSION
This research work presented here is intended
to complement the contemporary research and
to close an identified gap related to digital
maturity models in the domain of service.
As a result, a domain-specific and holistic
assessment model for the digital maturity of

--- PAGE 23 ---
A Model for Assessing Digital Transformation Maturity for Service Provider Organizations 227
service provider companies in a B2B-related
context was developed. In comparison to other
digital maturity models the model presented
includes and specifies in more detail than other
models the soft and managerial aspect of digital
transformation, which can potentially be a
critical hurdle for the transformation.
It serves a scientific and a practical purpose.
The scientific purpose aims at addressing a
white spot in the contemporary research related
to digital maturity models for the domain of
service in a B2B-related context. The developed
model enables to collect data regarding the
state of evolution of service provider companies
related to digital maturity across different
industries and will help researchers to further
investigate and better understand potential
interrelations between factors and digital trans-
formation success for the domain of service in a
B2B-related context, what further contributes
to the digital maturity body of knowledge. The
practical purpose of this research aims to gain
systematic insights for management where a
service provider company stands with regards
to digital transformation, to identify digital
maturity gaps and to develop a course of action
for the relevant areas. Therefore, it provides a
substantiated model for practitioners to apply
within service provider companies to determine
a solid reference point for further strategic
initiatives to move effectively to the next level
of digital maturity.
The presented DSTM-Model is not intended
to fully prescribe the best and most easy route
to the desired future state of digital maturity.
Basing on its granularity and specific attributes
describing current and potential target levels of
digital maturity it indicates areas of attention,
which might positively affect the effectiveness
of digital transformation efforts, and therefore
provides some guidance on how to move for-
ward. As digital maturity is more a moving
target than a static concept, the DSTM-Model
needs to be continuously adapted to reflect new
emerging technologies and new customer and
market requirements.
Finally, the assessment model was tested
successfully by five service companies. Prac-
ticability and understandability of the assess-
ment model was confirmed. Basing on first
comparisons related to the positioning of the
companies in the DSTM-Matrix a clear variance
related to digital transformation maturity be-
came evident. Overall, the results suggest that
just a few service provider companies reflect
high levels of digital maturity and can be seen
as Digital Transformers or Digital Innovators.
A big portion of them still is on lower levels
of digital maturity and are rated as Digital
Promoter or Digital Player. They need to
clearly define and drive their transformation
efforts further to improve their level of digital
transformation maturity.
A limitation of the research might be that
the model just was tested by a small sample
of service companies and experts participating
in the development of the model and not by
other service provider companies independent
from the model development, what might not
give a full picture regarding generalisability of
the model. In addition, the relationship between
the proposed factors and digital transformation
success of service provider companies is not
proven yet and needs further attention. Basing
on the mentioned limitations and potential
shortcomings following recommendations for
future research are proposed:
• Identifying and linking best practices to
successfully drive digital transformation ma-
turity to each of the maturity levels per
subfactor. This could be organized in a
kind of knowledge-management database, in
which service provider companies using the
DSTM-tool provide input. In this way the
DSTM-Model over time will become a more
prescriptive model.
• Review and adoption of the content describ-
ing digital transformation maturity (factors,
subfactors, specific attributes) to ensure a
dynamic view of digital maturity reflecting
new emerging trends and technologies and
customer and market requirements.
• To establish generalisability of the digital
maturity model successfully a high applica-
tion and data collection volume is required
(e.g. assessment via web-interface). The
model will evolve as the domain-knowledge
and model understanding broadens and

--- PAGE 24 ---
228 Roman Teichert
deepens. This phase is important to assure
the relevance of the model over time and
needs ongoing attention in future.
• Better understanding the relationship be-
tween the proposed factors, digital transfor-
mation success and business success.
7 REFERENCES
Ananthakrishnan, B., Atluri, V.,
Krishnamurthy, H. and Muthiah, S. 2018.
How Disruptive Technologies are Opening Up
Innovative Opportunities in Services [online].
Available at: https://www.mckinsey.com/
capabilities/mckinsey-digital/our-insights/
how-disruptive-technologies-are-opening-up
-innovative-opportunities-in-services#/.
Azhari, P., Faraby, N., Rossmann, A., Steimel, B.
and Wichmann, K. 2014. Digital Transformation
Report 2014: Eine emprische Studie von Neuland
in Zusammenarbeit mit Wirtschaftswoche. Neuland
GmbH & Co. KG, Köln.
Becker, J., Knackstedt, R. and Pöppelbuß, J.
2009. Development of Maturity Models
for IT Management. Business Information
& Systems Engineering, 1 (3), 213–222.
DOI: 10.1007/s12599-009-0044-5.
Berghaus, S. and Back, A. 2016. Stages in Digital
Business Transformation: Results of an Empirical
Maturity Study. In MCIS 2016 Proceedings, 22.
Bloching, B., Leutiger, P., Oltmanns, T.,
Rossbach, C., Schlick, T., Remane, G., Quick,
P. and Shafranyuk, O. 2015. The Digital
Transformation of Industry. Roland Berger.
Bundesverband Deutscher Industrie, Munich.
Bughin, J. and van Zeebroeck, N. 2017. The Best
Response to Digital Disruption. MIT Sloan
Management Review, 58 (4), 80–86.
Bumann, J. and Peter, M. K. 2019. Action
Fields of Digital Transformation – A
Review and Comparative Analysis of Digital
Transformation Maturity Models and Frameworks.
In Verkuil, A. H., Hinkelmann, K. and
Aeschbacher, M. (eds.). Digitalisierung und
andere Innovationsformen im Management, 13–40.
Buvat, J., Crummenerl, C., Kar, K., Sengupta, A.,
Solis, B., Aboud, C. and El Aoufi, H. 2017.
The Digital Culture Challenge: Closing the
Employee-Leadership Gap. Capgemini Digital
Transformation Institute Survey.
Canetta, L., Barni, A. F. and Montini, E. 2018.
Development of a Digitalization Maturity
Model for the Manufacturing Sector. In
2018 IEEE International Conference on
Engineering, Technology and Innovation.
DOI: 10.1109/ICE.2018.8436292.
Catlin, T., Scanlan, J. and Willmott, P. 2015.
Raising your Digital Quotient. McKinsey Quarterly
June 2015, Boston.
Colli, M., Madsen, O., Berger, U., Møller, C.,
Vejrum Wæhrens, B. and Bockholt, M.
2018. Contextualizing the Outcome of a
Maturity Assessment for Industry 4.0.
IFAC PapersOnLine, 51 (11), 1347–1352.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ifacol.2018.08.343.
de Bruin, T., Freeze, R. D., Kulkarni, U. and
Rosemann, M. 2005. Understanding the Main
Phases of Developing a Maturity Assessment
Model. In ACIS 2005 Proceedings – 16th
Australasian Conference on Information Systems.
De Carolis, A., Macchi, M., Negri, E. and
Terzi, S. 2017. A Maturity Model for Assesssing
the Digital Readiness of Manufacturing
Companies. In Lödding, H., Riedel, R.,
Thoben, K. D., von Cieminski, G. and
Kiritsis, D. (eds.). Advances in Production
Management Systems. The Path to Intelligent,
Collaborative and Sustainable Manufacturing,
13–20. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-66923-6 2.
DXC Technology Company. 2017. Digitale Agenda
2020. Unternehmen Zukunft. Deutschland,
Österreich, Schweiz. DXC Technology Consulting.
Erol, S., Schumacher, A. and Sihn, W. 2016.
Strategic Guidance towards Industry 4.0 – A
Three Stage Process Model. In Dimitrov, D.
and Oosthuizen, T. (eds.). Proceedings of
the International Conference on Competitive
Manufacturing – Resource Efficiency for Global
Competitiveness, 495–501.
Fitzgerald, M., Kruschwitz, N., Bonnet, D.,
Welch, M. 2013. Embracing Digital Technology:
A New Strategic Imperative. MIT Sloan
Management Review. Capgemini Consulting.
Friedrich, R., Le Merle, M., Gröne, F. and
Koster, A. 2011. Measuring Industry Digitization:
Leaders and Laggards in the Digital Economy.
Strategy &.
Geissbauer, R., Vedso, J. and Schrauf, S. 2016.
Industry 4.0: Building the Digital Enterprise. 2016
Global Industry 4.0 Survey, PWC.
Gill, M. and Van Boskirk, S. 2016. The
Digital Maturity Model 4.0. Global Business
Technographics Marketing Survey 2015, Forrester.

--- PAGE 25 ---
A Model for Assessing Digital Transformation Maturity for Service Provider Organizations 229
Gimpel, H., Hosseini, S., Huber, R., Probst, L.,
Röglinger, M. and Faisst, U. 2018. Structuring
Digital Transformation: A Framework of Action
Fields and its Application at ZEISS. Journal of
Information Technology Theory and Application,
19 (1), 31–54.
Gökalp, E. and Martinez, V. 2021. Digital
Transformation Capability Maturity Model
Enabling the Assessment of Industrial
Manufacturers. Computers in Industry, 132,
103522. DOI: 10.1016/j.compind.2021.103522.
Haryanti, T., Rakhmawati, N. A. and Subriadi,
A. P. 2023. The Extended Digital Maturity
Model. Big Data Cognitive Computing, 7 (1), 17.
DOI: 10.3390/bdcc7010017.
Hess, T., Matt, C., Benlian, A. and Wiesböck, F.
2016. Options for Formulating a Digital
Transformation Strategy. MIS Quarterly Executive,
15 (2), 123–139. DOI: 10.7892/BORIS.105447.
Hyvönen, J. 2018. Strategic Leading of Digital
Transformation in Large Established Companies
– A Multiple Case-Study. Master Thesis. Aalto
University, Helsinki.
Ismail, M. H., Khater, M. and Zaki, M. 2017. Digital
Business Transformation and Strategy: What Do
We Know So Far? Working paper. University of
Cambridge, Cambridge Service Alliance.
Kane, G. C., Palmer, D., Phillips, A. N., Kiron, D.
and Buckley, N. 2017. Achieving Digital Maturity:
Adapting Your Company to a Changing World.
MIT Sloan Management Review and Deloitte
University Press.
Leino, S.-P., Paasi, J., Kuusisto, O. and
Thihinen, M. 2017. VTT Model of Digimaturity.
In Paasi, J. (ed.). Towards a New Era in
Manufacturing: Final Report of VTT’s for
Industry Spearhead Programme, 41–46.
Leipzig, T., Gamp, M., Manz, D., Schöttle, K.,
Ohlhausen, P., Oosthuizen, G., Palm, D.
and von Leipzig, K. 2017. Initialising
Customer-Oriented Digital Transformation
in Enterprises. Procedia Manufacturing, 8,
517–524. DOI: 10.1016/j.promfg.2017.02.066.
Leyh, C., Schäffer, T., Bley, K. and Bay, L. 2017.
The Application of the Maturity Model SIMMI
4.0 in Selected Enterprises. In 23rd Americas
Conference on Information Systems, 41–46.
Lichtblau, K., Stich, V., Bertenrath, R., Blum,
M., Bleider, M., Millack, A., Schmitt, K.,
Schmitz, E. and Schröter, M. 2015. Impuls:
Industrie 4.0 Readiness. Institut der deutschen
Wirtschaft Köln, RWTH Achen.
Neff, A. A., Hamel, F., Herz, T. P.,
Uebernickel, F., Brenner, W. and vom Brocke,
J. 2014. Developing a Maturity Model for Service
Systems in Heavy Equipment Manufacturing
Enterprises. Information & Management, 51 (7),
895–911. DOI: 10.1016/j.im.2014.05.001.
Paulk, M. C., Curtis, B., Chrissis, M. B. and
Weber, C. V. 1993. Capability Maturity Model for
Software. Version 1.1. Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
15213. Carnegie Mellon University.
Peter, M. K., Kraft, C. and Lindeque, J. 2020.
Strategic Action Fields of Digital Transformation.
Journal of Strategy and Management, 13 (1),
160–180. DOI: 10.1108/JSMA-05-2019-0070.
Pöppelbuß, J. and Röglinger, M. 2011. What Makes
a Useful Maturity Model? A Framework of General
Design Principles for Maturity Models and its
Demonstration in Business Process Management.
In Proceedings of the 19th European Conference
on Information Systems (ECIS 2011).
Ragnedda, M. 2017. Third Digital Divide: A Weberian
Approach to Digital Inequalities. 1st ed. Routledge.
Remane, G., Hanelt, A., Nickerson, R. C.
and Kolbe, L. M. 2017. Discovering Digital
Business Models in Traditional Industries.
Journal of Business Strategy, 38 (2), 41–55.
DOI: 10.1108/JBS-10-2016-0127.
Schuh, G., Anderl, R., Gausmeier, J., ten
Hompel, M. and Wahlster, W. 2017. Industrie
4.0 Maturity Index – Managing the Digital
Transformation of Companies. Acatech Study.
National Academy of Science and Engineering,
Munich.
Shahiduzzaman, M., Kowalkiewicz, M., Barrett, R.
and McNaughton, M. 2017. Digital Business:
Towards a Value Centric Maturity Model. Part A.
Queensland: PWC Chair in Digital Economy.
Sharma, P., Härtlein, M. and Marschner, C. 2016.
Digital Readiness Assessment. KPMG.
Solis, B. 2016. The 2017 State of Digital
Transformation. Altimeter Research Report.
Štolfa, J., Štolfa, S., Baio, C., Madaleno, U.,
Dolejší, P., Brugnoli, F. and Messnarz, R.
2019. DRIVES-EU Blueprint Project for the
Automotive Sector – A Literature Review of
Drivers of Change in Automotive Industry. Journal
of Software: Evolution and Process, 32 (3), e2222.
DOI: 10.1002/smr.2222.
Teichert, R. 2019. Digital Transformation Maturity:
A Systematic Review of Literature. Acta
Universitatis Agriculturae et Silviculturae
Mendelianae Brunensis, 67 (6), 1673–1687.
DOI: 10.11118/actaun201967061673.

--- PAGE 26 ---
230 Roman Teichert
Tumbas, S., Berente, N. and vom Brocke, J.
2017. Born Digital: Growth Trajectories
of Entrepreneurial Organizations Spanning
Institutional Fields. In Proceedings of the 38th
International Conference on Information Systems.
Uhl, A. and Gollenia, L. A. 2016. Digital Enterprise
Transformation: A Business-Driven Approach to
Leveraging Innovative IT. London, New York:
Routledge.
Valdez-de-Leon, O. 2016. A Digital Maturity
Model for Telecommunication Service Providers.
Technology Innovation Management Review, 6 (8),
19–32. DOI: 10.22215/timreview/1008.
van Deursen, A. J. A. M. and van Dijk, J. A. G. M.
2019. The First-Level Digital Divide Shifts from
Inequalities in Physical Access to Inequalities in
Material Access. New Media & Society, 21 (2),
354–375. DOI: 10.1177/1461444818797082.
Verhoef, P. C., Broekhuizen, T., Bart, Y.,
Bhattacharya, A., Dong, J. Q., Fabian, N. and
Haenlein, M. 2021. Digital Transformation: A
Multidisciplinary Reflection and Research Agenda.
Journal of Business Research, 122, 889–901.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jbusres.2019.09.022.
Vial, G. 2019. Understanding Digital Transformation:
A Review and a Research Agenda. The Journal of
Strategic Information Systems, 28 (2), 118–144.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jsis.2019.01.003.
Westerman, G. and McAfee, A. 2012. The Digital
Advantage: How Digital Leaders Outperform Their
Peers in Every Industry. The MIT Center for
Digital Business.
Whalen, M. 2015. Digital Transformation Maturity
Model and Your Digital Roadmap. IDC Digital
Transformation Maturity Model Benchmark.
World Economic Forum. 2020. Digital Transformation:
Powering the Great Reset [online]. Available at:
https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Digital_
Transformation_Powering_the_Great_Reset_
2020.pdf.
AUTHOR’S ADDRESS
Roman Teichert, Department of Management, Faculty of Business and Economics, Mendel
University in Brno, Zemědělská 1, 613 00 Brno, Czech Republic, e-mail: roman.teichert@otis.com