--- PAGE 1 ---
sustainability
Article
Sustainable Government Enterprise Architecture Framework
Montree Thirasakthana and Supaporn Kiattisin *


Citation: Thirasakthana, M.;
Kiattisin, S. Sustainable Government
Enterprise Architecture Framework.
Sustainability 2021, 13, 879.
https://doi.org/10.3390/su13020879
Received: 16 December 2020
Accepted: 13 January 2021
Published: 16 January 2021
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affil-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
Faculty of Engineering, Mahidol University, Nakorn Pathom 73170, Thailand; montree.thi@student.mahidol.ac.th
* Correspondence: supaporn.kit@mahidol.ac.th; Tel.: +66-81-866-4207
Abstract: The suitable utility of driving the enterprise architecture exercise is to utilize the enterprise
architecture framework as the fundamental guidance. But there are some challenges of applying
those frameworks for government and their agencies because most of the frameworks have concen-
trated focus for the private sector which some fundamentally requirement of government would be
specifically different. This paper aims to propose that the sustainable government enterprise archi-
tecture framework specifically applies for the national strategic planning in the optimum exercise
process and clarity guidance for the information technology organization being able to transform
and improve their services for an achievable adaptation efficiency, simplification, cost management,
collaboration, shareability, and standardization which accommodate the rapidly changing service
usability on digitalization known as “e-Government.” The fundamental design idea of this proposed
framework has identified five keys principles, which are (1) legislation support, (2) top-down target
architecture, (3) architecture governance, (4) shared services, and (5) cross-organization collaboration
that would be considered as the key critical success factors for achieving the exercise. The overall
response of the specific expert survey of this proposed framework has demonstrated the consensus
responded at 90 percentage agreeable, which would strongly consider this framework applicable for
groups of developing countries as the baseline framework for their digitalized transformation.
Keywords: enterprise architecture framework; government enterprise architecture; sustainable
government; e-Government
1. Introduction
Since the 1980s, most practitioner and scientific enterprises have recognized the con-
tribution of an enterprise architecture (EA) [1] as the key criteria of improving enterprise
ontology or enterprise re-engineering [2] by concentrating in reshaping information tech-
nology landscapes in order to steer the organizational strategic execution and its operation.
Specifically, in the national public services, there are a series of strategic initiatives for
transforming from “Government Public Services,” which intensively require physical
accessibilities, having physical interaction in between citizen and government officer to
“e-Government Public Services,” which mainly presented by internet accessibilities using
any mobility devices at any times and anywhere, having all digitalization processes with
less of people interaction each other. The typical key improvement in the public services
is to emphasize on digital enablement whereby the overall service offering would be con-
centrated in simplification of usage adoption, standardization of operation procedure for
commonality services, strengthen in security and privacy of data protection, efficiency of
cost management, and improving of time consumption for people who request for services.
In contrast, the adoption efficiency of enterprise architecture to address those strategic
goals is still struggled in the reason of having fragmentation execution for each agency
organization; also, each of them performs isolation and redundancy development, and hav-
ing overlapping service functions [3]. More importantly, the understandability of usability
on the practical enterprise architecture framework is still challenged, being viewed as
a complexity utility [4] and lack of fruitfulness for accommodating the fundamentals of
the government culture, which might need to serve the committed political agenda that
Sustainability 2021, 13, 879. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13020879 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability

--- PAGE 2 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 879 2 of 26
is being changed according to the level of stabilization of that government. There is no
certainty of normative standardization for those operation procedures on the government
direction or governance as per the complexity and understandability of the EA framework
in principle, which would be reflected to the capability of design, fragmented mainte-
nance, high complexity, and cost, especially supporting the new strategic announcement,
new request of enforcement, regulatory, or compliance being adopted.
There are several researchers who have proposed the exercise frameworks and trans-
formation methods that are relevant to serve a modernization of the government in public
services as the e-government capability. The researchers have proposed the encouraging
of interoperability adoption [3,5,6], agile framework [7], Supply-Chain Operations Refer-
ence based [8], or lean theoretical [9] in combination with practical enterprise architecture
frameworks like The Open Group Architecture Framework (TOGAF) [10] or The Zachman
Framework For Enterprise Architecture (ZFEA) [11]. In addition, there are several organi-
zations at the government of developed countries, or their agencies have also implemented
their own enterprise architecture framework as country or owned organization specific
by adopting and refining on those particular practical enterprise architecture frameworks
with legislation or governance enforcement like Federal Enterprise Architecture framework
(FEAF) [12] or European Statistical System Enterprise Architecture Reference Framework
(ESS EARF) [13]. The benefit realization of those specific governments has been recognized
as achievable establishment of enforcing the execution framework addressing the strategic
target of public administrative services with sustainable information technology landscapes
according to the design fundamental. Importantly, those achievable has been adapted
and improved their exercise guideline in the series of version with multi-years evolution,
specifically within their organizations. Thus, in comparing with the group of developing
countries who have purely adopted those practical enterprise architecture frameworks
like TOGAF or ZFEA without truly understanding, inappropriate refinement, uncertain
guidance, and no legislation enforcement for example of Thailand Government enterprise
architecture policy which each agency department has been required to establish the target
architecture on their owned decision and method for example of an adoption of Digital
Government Agency (DGA )Enterprise Architecture Plan [14].
This article objective is to fulfill the gap of the proposed sustainable government
enterprise architecture framework for government by addressing the new comprehensive
enterprise architecture framework that would be the solid guidance for developing coun-
tries being able to effectively adopt this framework appropriately and efficiently with a
more sustainable manner.
This article has been structured with four major sections which begins with the
introduction in Section 1, then followed by all related topics of enterprise architecture
framework. Section 2 has mentioned about literature review findings, with the main search-
ing scope concentrated in “Enterprise Architecture”, “Enterprise Architecture Framework”,
“Interoperability”, “Enterprise Ontology”, “E-Government”, “E-Government Adoption
and Barrier”, “E-Participation” and “Citizen Centricity” including the proposed research
methodology and the proposed sustainable government enterprise architecture framework.
Section 3 concludes the review response in the statement findings, including the summary
of research discussion and presenting the case study of exercise on identifying target archi-
tecture of Thailand’s Land Transport. Finally, Section 4 proposes the research conclusion.
2. Materials and Methods
As mentioned in the previous section, the key objective of proposing the sustainable
government enterprise architecture framework is to comprehensively provide the clear
guidance of executing the enterprise architecture framework for government or public
administrative offices being able to effectively adopt with achievable results in the areas
of standardization, services sharable, and cost efficient. There are several key reviewing
areas that would lead to better understanding on the fundamental approach of enterprise
architecture principal and its evolution in the proposed execution frameworks. The fact

--- PAGE 3 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 879 3 of 26
findings below have briefly described the related matter information leading the idea of
this paper.
2.1. Fundamental Needed of Achievable in Information Technology Enablement
The fundamental requirement of executive management emphasis on Chief Informa-
tion Officer level (CIO) who manage the information technology portfolio has indicated
several valid points that typically Information Technology management in general would
be targeted to achieve, especially leading by the exercise contribution of enterprise archi-
tecture. The survey has performed with several CIOs with the list of survey deliverable by
priority ranking as per described in Table 1 [15].
Table 1. The Survey Result.
Survey
Ranking
Survey Result of CIO Expectation
1
Decrease the cost related to the business organization, such as cost for personnel in
the business organization
2
Improve the quality of the interplay between the IT organization and the business
organization, such as support, helpdesk, and end-user training
3
Provide new computer aided support to the business organization, such as new
functionality, new information, and communication means
4
Improve the quality of the IT systems, such as security, performance, availability,
reliability, quality of data, and correctness of functionality
5
Improve the quality of existing services or products that the business organization
provides to the customer
6
Improve the quality of operation and maintenance, development, and acquisition of
IT systems
7
Develop new services or products that the business organization provides to
the customers
8
Improve the maintainability and modifiability, e.g., by improving interfaces,
introducing middleware, and standardizing protocols and products
9 Decrease the costs related to hardware and software
10
Decrease the costs related to the IT organization, such as wages and training for
IT staff
11
Provide new IT based solutions to the IT organization, such as administrative tools,
b-logs, and backup tools
In the survey findings, most management expectations in summary have been con-
centrated in several dimensions which could be summarized as better cost management,
better collaboration in between businesses and IT, and better architecture and solution.
The survey results are still challenged up until today for the organization that would expect
to improve their information technology landscapes suited with their business operation
and performance of their organization.
2.2. Enterprise Architecture and Enterprise Architecture Frameworks
The majority situations, the organization in general both of enterprise business and
government, have operated their business or mission as per publicly commitment in
the long periods of service duration even more prior than the establishment of an enterprise
architecture which firstly proposed the commencement of information architecture by Zach-
man since the 1980s [16]. The mean of architecture has been identified by ISO/IEC/IEEE
42020 as fundamental concepts or properties of an entity in its environment and gov-
erning principles for the realization and evolution of this entity and its related life cycle
processes [17]. Also, this standard has defined the definition of architecture framework
as conventions, principles, and practices used by architecture-related activities that have
been established within a specific domain of application or community of stakeholders.
The adoption of the term architecture and its framework can be applied for both the system
level and enterprise level. To enable the architecture practice, there are five key dimen-

--- PAGE 4 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 879 4 of 26
sions processes being proposed which are governance, management, conceptualization,
evaluation, and elaboration. All dimensions would be relatively depended to each other,
as shown in Figure 1.
The key components of designing the architecture frameworks as of today’s avail-
ability is concentrated in the core processes, which give more emphasis on the stage of
conceptualization, evaluation, and elaboration with more detail steps. For instance, the pro-
posed enterprise architecture framework of the TOGAF [10], which guide the exercise
steps of performing enterprise architecture activity. In the findings, TOGAF has clearly de-
scribed how to conduct the enterprise architecture exercise concentrating in identifiable of
the current baseline architecture and proposed target architecture covering business, infor-
mation system and technology but in the form of project execution style, with the business
strategy or business requirement generally having its own characteristic to dynamically
change according to government strategy and public commitment. Also, the proposed
TOGAF has fundamentally emphasized on descriptive deliverables of each exercise step;
the practitioner may not be able to completely understand and conduct the exercises for all
those required activities fulfilling those required descriptive as per mentioned by Dinh and
Pekkola [4].
Figure 1. ISO/IEC/IEEE 42020 Architecture Enablement Processes.
For other practical enterprise architecture frameworks like Zachman Framework
for Enterprise Architecture (ZFEA) [11] or Gartner Enterprise Architecture Framework
(GEAF) [18], there are few identifiable commonalities conceptual of the framework method-
ology; the practitioner should mainly be able to describe the abstraction layer of the pro-
posed target enterprise architecture landscapes and its execution roadmap. As mentioned
earlier, the completeness of execution according to those frameworks might be challenged
due to the clarity of understandability. And the context of availability enterprise architec-
ture frameworks is still lacking level of detail for execution and managing dynamic changes
in business strategic and planning appropriately [19]. More importantly for the government
or public administrative offices, there is an analysis research for the systematic literature
review on enterprise architecture in the public sector with the findings that there are still a
limited number of researches that paid strong attention on concentrating over the adaptable
of enterprise architecture framework to satisfy the public sector especially for the group of
developing countries [4]. The analysis result was demonstrated that most researches have
strongly concentrated on private sector or serving enterprise business which have more op-
portunities to successfully adopt the framework in collaboration with organization strategy.
Thus, this paper has intended to comprehensively propose the sustainable government
enterprise architecture framework that is suited to government or public sector, especially
for developing countries by addressing the gap of survey or analysis findings [20,21].

--- PAGE 5 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 879 5 of 26
2.3. Enterprise Ontology and Alignment of Business to Information Technology
The clear description of the term “Ontology” was defined in several definitions, and
the fundamental concept can be defined into the same terminology. Thus, the simplest
term of object-oriented perspective an ontology would be defined as the objects class
and their corresponding class relationship whereby the class category has consisted with
seven kinds of class, which are subject, object, community, tools, rules, division of labor,
and outcome [22]. The adaptation of ontology would be described as the capabilities,
functionalities, and their interoperability, such as the application packages which would be
described in a single application or set of applications within the ecosystem. Consideration
of the term “Enterprise Ontology,” O’Leary has also described that the enterprise ontology
has comprised with five primary top-level classes called as meta ontology (entity, relation-
ship, role, actor, and state), activities and processes, organization, strategy, and marketing.
This means the comprehensive exercise of establishment of the enterprise ontology strategy
for efficiency execution should necessarily incorporate all of those components.
The most successful criteria of deliverable information technology solution is to be
able to comprehensively accommodate business operation as per strategically defined
under the theorical of enterprise ontology. Hence, this would be a basic fundamental of
working method for enterprise architecture in order to align and interpret the business
strategic planning to the suitable information technology solution by practicality concep-
tual. There are several researches that have also mentioned business and information
technology alignment, which expected increasing an efficiency of organization to achieve
the improvement of decision making, better business process execution, or gaining incre-
mentally customer satisfaction [23,24]. Presently, the challenge of performing alignment of
business and information technology depends on the continuous alignment approach in
order to support rapidly changing in the business and information technology strategic
planning, which several new initiatives or innovations have been concentrated their focus
on, such as the digital transformation program or digitalization era which would dramat-
ically impact the ability of maintaining the deliverable capabilities in a much faster and
more agile manner [2].
2.4. Enterprise Architecture and Interoperability Framework for e-Government
The ultimate goal of establishing the enterprise architecture for government and its
agencies has been targeted to renovate and modernize over the overall public service
operating model in order to improve the level of citizen satisfaction and quality of life,
better manage and control cost of investment, promote an inter-collaboration by serving
the standardization of information shared service, and increase the capability of data
protection under legislation. All these are directed to the commonality objective which
is to transform the current government service capability to be e-government service ca-
pability, whereby introducing automated process, enablement of digital service channels,
and comprehensively promote information shared services as open architecture under
the control guideline of legislation. By doing this exercise as the strategic plan, the in-
teroperability framework of each country has been developed [25,26] and proposed of
adoption in compensating with the exercise of enterprise architecture for strategically driv-
ing the e-government program [6]. The conceptualized of interoperability is to complete
the entire operating model in comprised of multidimensional capabilities in coverage of
policy, management, and technology while several agency organizations of government
have considered interoperability as information technology enablement of information
integration/sharing from one to another (Pardo et al., 2012). The adoption of e-government
interoperability framework of those developed countries have demonstrated in some
different context as per the comparison analysis [27]. The emphasis of this enforcement
as the certainty guideline of implementing interoperability capability has brought up to
the legislation as the federal policy such as the FEAF, which included the e-Government
policy guideline into the framework itself. There are some samples of clear enforcement
guideline of interoperability frameworks which promote European countries inclusion of

--- PAGE 6 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 879 6 of 26
European Commission. They had identified their intention to ensure the establishment of
interoperability would address the ability of exchange and mutually use the information
in between organizations [28]. The group of developing countries specifically on each
agency organization are still fragmented adoption of an enterprise architecture frame-
work for their internal organization improvement with uncertainty guidance of improving
the interoperability approach [3].
2.5. An Adoption of e-Government
Comprehensively, the e-government capability has identified the fundamentally re-
quired level of articulation in connecting with the government strategic goal, whereas an
enterprise architecture would play in the key role of critical driven in order to describe
the abstraction roadmap and interoperability guideline. All those would accommodate
in different challenges of their deliverable capability [29]. The proposed framework
of e-government architecture which comprised four architecture layers (access layer,
e-government layer, e-business layer, and infrastructure layer) would be the key driver
in order to enable the public services conceptually. In the meantime, there are key bar-
riers, which are IT infrastructure, security, privacy, IT skills, organizational issues, and
cost. These barriers would be considerable factors of impact to the success of achieving
the improvement of e-government intension, as well as some uncertainty of e-government
policy and lack of expertise resources, including some constrains such as constitutional of
legislation, jurisdictional, and collaboration [30–32]. With the surveying reported by World
Market Research Center, there is 6 percentage of national e-government that could provide
single one-stop service portal.
Ojo et al. has defined 11 maturity factors shown in Table 2 [33], being proposed for consid-
eration as the key success driver of practically exercise on government enterprise architecture.
Table 2. Government Enterprise Architecture Maturing Factors by Ojo.
Factor Number Factor Description
1 Management Commitment/Support and Involvement
2 Business Unit Participation/Alignment
3 Governance Structure and Compliance (Legislation)
4 Technical Skills and Development
5 Policies and Processes
6 External Support
7 Change Management
8 Functional Knowledge and Processes
9 Communication
10 Resources Availability and Organization
11 Clear Vision and Goal/Strategy
2.6. e-Government Proposed Architecture
There are several architectures being proposed for accommodating the proposed
public services by having some key considerable success of adoption. In fact, the proposed
public service as the capability of e-government has been categorized into three kinds of
categories, which are government to citizen, government to business, and government
to government [34]. The fundamental of information availability of each category is
dedicatedly designed, whereby the design for serving citizen would concentrate in general
demographic, education, health, employment, income tax, and social welfare, such as
the proposed unified data modelling and document standardization [35]. The concentration
of business services would be more on corporate tax, custom, registration, and permits.
Additionally, the definition of citizen centric would be the key consideration for improving
the capability of public services, whereby the smart city would be presented in consisting
with four key dimensions: technology in concentration of automation/information and
transformation, service purpose, service authority, and delivery [36]. This would be highly
considered as prioritization of concern due to (1) the complexity of citizen as the sources of

--- PAGE 7 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 879 7 of 26
key consideration for developing citizen centricity, (2) citizen would be a direct beneficiary,
and (3) they would be the key participants and responsible for development [37].
More importantly, the key architecture designed of e-government would empha-
size the level of participation, which is called e-participation and become one of the key
focuses of the maturity level of government transformation into digitalization where
the United Nations has the measurement survey frequently. The commonality definition
of e-participation defined by the United Nations is to propose the process of engaging
citizens through Information and Communication Technology in policy, decision-making,
and service design and delivery so as to make it participatory, inclusive, and delibera-
tive [38]. This also means the fundamental functions of e-participation would incorporate
four dimensions, which are (1) e-services; informative or program announcement over
internet, (2) e-democracy; participation in decision-making process via electronic channels,
(3) e-commerce; all proposed public services to citizens such as tax paying, vehicle regis-
tration, exchange service, recreational programs also including government procurement
process, (4) e-management; government internal improvement process [39]. Conceptually,
e-participation has widely architected the propose solution having two possible alternative
ways to engage with the citizen which are top-down engagement from government or
bottom-up engagement by citizen whereby the proposed e-participation ontology was
exercised [40].
An alternative view of architecting the e-participation suite, the government may
consider the capability enablement the services into three kinds of participation engage-
ments, which are one-way communication from government to citizen for information
announcement, interactive two-way communication in the mode of consultation or re-
sponse of any feedback, and the third is to encourage citizens to actively participate for
deep engagement, whereby a citizen may participate in responding the request of defining
or sharping the policies for instance [41,42].
2.7. Fundamental of Research Methodology
The proposed exercise for this research methodology is shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2. Research Methodology.
There are five exercise steps that would be the research guideline. Each step and its
findings are described below.
1. Assessment. This step is to understand on availability of the frameworks (enterprise
architecture framework or interoperability framework), co-relation of frameworks un-
der multidisciplinary, origination of country specific frameworks, and its enforcement
and the adoption capability of the e-government initiatives. Additionally, the review
also seeks for some challenges or barriers that would impact the success of framework
adoptable. Hence, the ultimate goal of this is to potentially find an opportunity of
improvement in the framework context for more sustainable information technol-
ogy landscape in terms of better cost control, better collaboration under the same
standardization, and better resources consumption by sharable services.
The review topics that would be the key interested of this research and findings are
described in Table 3.

--- PAGE 8 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 879 8 of 26
Table 3. Review Findings.
Review Topic Objectives Findings
Fundamental need of achievable in
information technology improvement
To understand the key concentration
requirement or expectation of
information technology executive
management have intended to achieve.
Concentrate in the survey results of the
relevant information technology
executive management.
By the survey with information
technology executive management,
the key concentration of their expectation
has identified to the efficiency of cost
control, better collaboration with
business and organization strategy,
and improving the quality of service.
Enterprise Architecture and Enterprise
Architecture Framework
To validate the principle of
conceptualization of the enterprise
architecture which are being
standardized by ISO/IEC/IEEE. Review
the deliverables of practical enterprise
architecture frameworks like Zachman
Framework for Enterprise Architecture
(ZFEA), The Open Group Architecture
Framework (TOGAF), Gartner Enterprise
Architecture Framework (GEAF),
and specific enterprise architecture
frameworks likes Federal Enterprise
Arhcitecture (FEA)which concentrated
serving the public sector or suitable for
national governments.
Basically, the practical enterprise
architecture frameworks have proposed
the framework in concentration within
the core process as per described by
Figure 1. The challenge would be
the clarity guidance or governance and
strategic direction of driving
the framework, which the government
would expect to clearly define.
Additionally, the analysis finding by
systematic literature review has shown
that there are a limited number of
researches paid attention on adaption of
enterprise architecture framework and its
challenges, especially on the group of
developing countries.
Enterprise Ontology and Alignment of
Business to Information Technology
To explore the means of enterprise
ontology and the importance of
alignment needed in between business
and information technology in principle.
Realize the meaning of linkage of those to
enterprise architecture.
Theoretically, an enterprise ontology has
described the entity, relationship of
the entity, role, actor, and state with its
activities and processes also
incorporating the impact of organization,
strategy, and marketing, which would be
considered as mandated of
successfulness enterprise architecture to
collaborate with enterprise ontology.
Enterprise Architecture and
Interoperability Framework
for e-Government
To understand the key role of
interoperability on enterprise architecture
frameworks in order to enable
the information sharing in between
the inter-government agencies
and public.
There are implemented clarity legislation
of enterprise architecture framework by
also incorporating the principal of
interoperability into the framework
specifically for developed countries.
Developing countries have fragmented
guidance of interoperability and
enterprise architecture framework,
which lead to challenges of sustainable
information technology landscape.
An Adoption of e-Government
To seek the overall outcome of
deployment of the e-Government by
understanding the success factors and
challenges facing.
Important to successful enabling
the e-government initiative,
standardization, policy, and governance
must be taken into consideration for
fundamentally mandated
the architecture context.
e-Government Proposed Architecture
To understand on availability of
e-government proposed architecture and
implementation rationale in order to
analyze the detail architecture, its
advantages and benefits and challenges
for identifying opportunity
of improvement.
Key consideration of architecting
the e-government is to concern on firstly
the national data model, whereby all
government agencies would be able to
leverage, and secondly the concern on
e-participation, whereby the conceptual
of having full participation of citizens
under the national strategy and plan.

--- PAGE 9 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 879 9 of 26
2. Analysis. The step of analysis is to study on any availability survey results that link
to the expectation of effective outcome of adapting enterprise architecture frame-
work into national government and their agencies at the comprehensive and holistic
viewpoint. Hence, the goal of this analysis is to identify the level of intensity of each
survey expectation against the existing practicality enterprise architecture framework.
The concentration analysis for this paper would be focused on ZFEA and TOGAF as
peridentifiableatthemostreferralforboththeprivateandpublicsector. Bydoingthis,
the analysis result would expect to lead the opportunity of proposing the sustainable
enterprise framework for government specifically for developing countries.
The step of analysis has begun with the understanding of organization expectation on
exercising the enterprise architecture followed by validating the proposed deliverables of
each enterprise architecture framework for adoptability over the government organizations.
Step 1—Understandable of Organization Expectation
In the survey results of expectation on deliverable contribution of enterprise archi-
tecture and interoperability for e-government conducted by Janssen [3] with a group of
line management, decision maker and enterprise architect for government agencies have
demonstrated three kinds of expectation being concerned (desired goals, desired enterprise
architecture products, and desired governance). Table 4 has described the analysis finding
of expectations as mentioned above.
Table 4. Janssen’s Survey Result.
Survey Expectation As-is Expected
Desired Goals
Interoperability H H
Client-Orientation H H
Enabling Reuse M H
Flexibility and Agility M H
Coherency M S
Aligning IT and Business L SH
Decision Making L SH
Enabling Transformation L SH
Desired Enterprise Architecture Products
Framework H H
Principals and Policies H H
Patterns H H
Tools L H
Basic Facilities L H
Shared Services L SH
Desired Governance
Decision Making Structure and Support L SH
Alignment Process ensuring Involvement L SH
Formal Communication to enable knowledge distribution L SH
As-is (H: High Contribution, M: Medium Contribution, L: Low Contribution); Expected (H: Higher than As-is, S:
Same as As-is, SH: Significantly Higher than As-is).
The opportunity of proposed sustainable government enterprise architecture frame-
work supporting the national government would be concentrated in considering shared
services and governance concerns being the framework component. Ultimately, this pro-

--- PAGE 10 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 879 10 of 26
posedwillalsoincorporatetheneedofflexibilityandagilityaswellasbeingthebettersource
of decision making which this expectation also being mentioned by Lapalme et al. [43].
Step 2—Validating the Selected Enterprise Architecture Framework
The summary below has described the lists of required maturity factor by each of
literature review exercise shown in Table 5.
The summary of this exercise has demonstrated that there are lists of required maturity
factors being significantly impacted by the success of exercise on government enterprise
architecture using the practical enterprise architecture framework. The figure below has de-
scribed the highly frequently mentioned required maturity factor relevant with government
enterprise architecture framework shown in Figure 3.
Table 5. Lists of Required Maturing Factor by Literature Review.
Components Mentioned
Ojo et al. (2012)
Janssen (2012)
Dinh et al. (2017)
Cameron et al. (2013)
Vries, M. d. (2010)
Lapalme et al. (2016)
O’Leary (2010)
Hinkelmann et al. (2016)
Guijarro (2006)
Pardo et al. (2012)
Ebrahim et al. (2005)
Lam (2005)
Scholl et al. (2007)
Blanc (2020)
Porwol et al. (2016)
Islam (2007)
Management Support &
Involvement
x x x x x x x
Business Participation (Business
Alignment)
x x x x x x x x x x
Governance Structure x x x x x x x x x x
Legislation (Compliance) x x x x x x x x x
Skills Development x x x
EA Policies & Processes x x x x x x
External Support (Consultant) x x
Change Management x x x x x x x
Functional Knowledge &
Processes
x x x x x x x x
Communication & Adoption x x
Resources (Organization & Roles) x x x x x x x x x
Clear Vision & Goal (Strategic
Alignment)
x x x x x x x x x
Marketing x x
Funding x x
Interoperability x x x x x x x x x x x x
Sharable Services & Collaboration x x x x x x x x
Standard x x x x x x x x
Taxonomy x
Reference Model x x x
Integration x x x x x
Government Data Catalog x x x x x x x
Citizen Centric Data Model x x x
Technology & Security x x x x x x
e-Participation x x

--- PAGE 11 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 879 11 of 26
Figure 3. Relevant Required Maturing Factors.
The validation method was designed using the scoring of 0 where the capability does
not exist, 1 where the capability does exist, and 0.5 where the capability partially exists with
the proposed of weight scores for a critical level of government required fundamentally.
The rationale of designing the weight score has been based on the e-Government/e-
Participation description in Section 2.6, whereby several developing countries have faced
some challenges in order to strategically manage the transformation program by centralized
cascading with proper collaboration and sharable for cross-government agencies.
The validation finding in Table 6 has demonstrated that those selected enterprise
architecture frameworks having less concentration (40 scores out of 100 for ZEAF and
50 scores out of 100 for TOGAF) in government adoption while those frameworks have
demonstrated accomplishment widely in the private sectors which those frameworks
would be well recognized. In this regard, the most significantly higher expectation has
been motivated researcher to comprehensively consider the possibility of an enhancement
of the enterprise architecture framework for government in general concentrating on
the group of developing countries by having explicitly described the framework execution
guidance for more clarity and understandability.
Table 6. Validation Exercise Capability for Government.
Key Validation Topics % Weight
ZFEA TOGAF
Existing
Score
Weight
Score
Existing
Score
Weight
Score
1. Alignment IT and Business/Participation in Business Exercise 10 0.5 5 0.5 5
2. Decision Making/Legislation Impact and Support 10 0 0 0 0
3. Enabling Transformation/National Transformation
Cascading/Top-Down Architecture
15 0.5 7.5 0.5 7.5
4. Promoting Shared Services Capability 10 0 0 0 0
5. Emphasis in Architecture Exercise Governance 5 0 0 0.5 2.5
6. Emphasis in Interoperability 5 0.5 2.5 1 5
7. Emphasis in Operational Process Improvement during
the Architecture Exercise
10 0.5 5 1 10
8. Emphasis in Analysis of Gap, Impact, and Dependency during
the Architecture Exercise
5 1 5 1 5
9. Emphasis in Information Policy 15 1 15 1 15
10. Emphasis in Cross-Organization Collaboration 15 0 0 0 0
Total Scores 100 40.0 50.0

--- PAGE 12 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 879 12 of 26
3. Design. The main activity of this step is to identify the theoretical baseline frame-
work to be the design fundamental which the Supply-Chain Operations Reference
(SCOR) will be used as the baseline structure of the design context of the sustainable
government enterprise architecture framework. In principle, SCOR has declared
the exercise steps to be four stages, which are Plan, Source, Make, and Deliver.
Basically, this model would be able to apply as one of the best-in-class with practi-
cal management and having clarity in four levels of exercise method starting from
identify broad definitions under the four stages of SCOR dimensions (Plan, Source,
Make, and Deliver), identifying core process categories under those four stages, define
the execution method of those core processes in detail, finally implementing those
designs as shown in Figure 4 [44].
Figure 4. Supply-chain Operations Reference Model Structure.
Additionally, the basic principle of SCOR was fundamentally designed to be mainly
suited with the manufacturing process, beginning with the planning stage and delivering
the product result at the end stage, thus holistically realizing the enablement result of
enterprise architecture framework exercise under the SCOR methods and being able to
properly propose the appropriate improvement further. The additional Evaluate step as
described in Figure 5 has been proposed as enhanced SCOR to apply over the original
SCOR process which is to mainly recognize the outcome efficiency as per designated of
measurable method likes the total return ratio, total spending for instance.
Figure 5. Enhanced Supply-Chain Operations Reference (SCOR).
4. Validation. The validation exercise has proposed having two activities, which are
(1) validating capability of the proposed framework same as validation criteria that
exercise over ZEAF and TOGAF, which analysis findings has described in the Analysis
step, and (2) conducting an interview session with a predefined list of questionnaires
for field expertise to respond with their satisfaction level on the propose of sustainable
government enterprise architecture framework.
The plan for conducting an interview is to identify the list of field expertise who have
direct experience on heading the function of enterprise architecture or related function,
whereby experiencing adoption of enterprise architecture framework for government in
whole or partial. Thereafter, the exercise would submit the brief proposal in containing
the descriptive of this research objective, motivation, literature review in literature cat-
egories, research method, and propose sustainable government enterprise architecture
framework with the list of questionnaires using the satisfaction and agreement level from
“not agree” or scoring as 1 to “strongly agree” or scoring as 5. After collecting all interview

--- PAGE 13 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 879 13 of 26
responses, the analysis finding would be proceeded by firstly calculating mean score using
Equation (1) of each questionnaire item in order to realize the agreeable proposed frame-
work components relevant with government perspective. Secondly, the acknowledged
score findings is found by calculating the mean score of all inputs and the expectation
of acceptable score of satisfaction level should not be less than 4.25 or 85 percentage of
overall score.
Mean (µ) =
1
n
n
∑
i=1
ai =
a1 +a2 +a3 + ··· +an
n
(1)
Symbolic description, n means the total number of observations set of data where
a1 +a2 +a3 + ··· +an representing the observations set of data.
Additionally, before making the score findings, the experiment has proposed to prove
the index of dispersion [45] or variance-to-mean ratio (VMR) described in Equation (2)
in order to realize the level of dispersion of the probability distribution over the set of
observation data using variance Equation (3), which the VMR result would expect to be
equal to 0 (not dispersed) or the minimal value in between 0 and 1 (under-dispersed).
This means the given questionnaire score by all interviewees were consented.
VMR =
δ2
µ
(2)
Variance (δ) =
1
n −1
n
∑
i=1
(ai −µ)2
(3)
5. Stress Testing. The testing step is planned to simulate the adaptation of sustainable
government enterprise architecture framework by proposing the case study of Thai-
land for the proposed architecture landscape for one government agency that would
be able to consolidate into the unified portal public services, which would be able to
accommodate the definition of e-participation defining by the United Nations [46]
and citizen centricity [34].
2.8. The Sustainable Government Enterprise Architecture Framework
The purpose of sustainable government enterprise architecture framework has been
fundamentally designed based upon the enhanced SCOR as the previous section men-
tioned. Figure 6 has described the key components of sustainable government enterprise
architecture framework.
There are 10 groups of activity under the fundamental SCOR process; plan, source,
make, and deliver with an extended process; evaluate to be proposed as the enterprise
architecture framework serving the architecture exercise for government and its agencies.
The detailed explanation of each group is available in the following passages.

--- PAGE 14 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 879 14 of 26
Figure 6. Sustainable Government Enterprise Architecture Framework.
2.8.1. Plan
This is the beginning exercise step of establishing the enterprise architecture initiative
for government. As per the rapid change in the expectation of service capabilities, a variety
of political commitments and modernization of technology evolution, the establishment
of enterprise architecture, and its implementation of the framework must be taken into
account as the permanently facilitated all relevant activities as the general function. Hence,
this step is to fundamentally exercise for initialization of all required principles of further
execution of information technology transformation under properly govern and steer as
described in Figure 7.
Figure 7. Detail Process of Plan Step.
Govern
The step of govern is to fundamentally provide commonality agreement that would
be applied for government and all of its agencies in order to ensure that there are manda-
tory requirements for further collaboration and achieving the goal in between the inter-
organization of the government and its agencies. One important step is to address nec-
essarily required legislation in order to eliminate unnecessarily traditional bureaucratic,
as well as the “Silo” operational management, which would be the key barrier of achieving
the goal.

--- PAGE 15 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 879 15 of 26
Define
This group of the process was designed for proposing the fundamental logistic activi-
ties of an establishment the enterprise architecture organization with clarity on roles and
responsibilities as described in Figure 8 for example. Also, the strategic driver of enterprise
architecture execution for the clarity outcome needs to be incorporated while establishment
of this function has been defined.
Figure 8. Sample Enterprise Architecture Organization, Roles, and Responsibilities.
2.8.2. Source
The source process is to ensure that all relevant information supporting continuously
of enterprise architecture working protocol will be satisfactorily available with appropriate
updating cycle.
Cooperate
The mean of this process is to significantly encourage the collaboration exercise
on identifying strategic and business planning by having enterprise architecture team
members who are competent on business strategic or business planning participating into
the exercise of designing those plans deliverable, which would consider this function to be
part of enterprise architecture in coordinating deep exercise with business strategy unit.
The key benefit of having this responsibility being part of enterprise architecture would
be preventing the loss of understanding on the expectation of business strategy as well as
business planning when translating those plans to be the target capabilities or business
architecture, the proposed business process improvement, or identifying key measurable
of each capability initiative.
Manage and Control
This proposed step is to encourage enterprise architecture taking owned responsibility
managing the information technology portfolio and controlling information technology
assets. Thus, the key importance of this process is to propose the detailed operating proce-
dure of information technology management in order to efficiently manage the information
technology portfolio to be updated and aligned with availability of information service
solutions and defining the effective management and control the status of information tech-
nology inventory assets covering all components of hardware and software. This would be
utilized as the fundamental support information for future investment or enhancement on
information technology solution.
2.8.3. Make
This Make process would need to practically begin with the “Bird-eye” view exercise,
then drilling the relevant architecture contents down to the execution layer which mean
the overall transformation strategy of government would be harmoniously aligned to

--- PAGE 16 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 879 16 of 26
the operational agencies. Additionally, this process also proposes the clarity guidance of
improving the operation process of public services function whereby the “e-”capabilities
like e-verification, e-document for instance and robotic automation process, have been
considered for adaptation as key success factors of achieving the goal of transformation.
As per the proposed activities, there are several steps that should be taken into the exercise
which would be efficiently managed and executed. Figure 9 has described the rationale of
detailed exercise steps of this process which has proposed the exercise activities covering
both of business and information technology with below detail description.
Figure 9. Detailed Process of Make Step.
Business Alignment
The business alignment step has significantly proposed of enterprise architecture to
perform an interpretation of government strategy contexts which would be the national
strategic planning, national development planning, or government public commitment to
architecture capabilities and the interrelationship of those capabilities as the strategic target.
Ultimately, the mean of capability will describe the kind of public and administrative
services that a citizen would be able to utilize in any available channels under commonality
experience. Importantly, this step ensures the cascading of architecture capability has
seamlessly distributed to all responsible units, whereas the commonality capability would
be streamlined and consolidated into common capability and managed separately by a
centralized unit.
Criticality, the end stage of this process exercise ensures all proposed capability
will be measured as the performance outcomes. Thus, the framework would propose
including the design of key performance measurement of each improvement capability,
whereby the key concentration of improvement could be the total cost of ownership or total
turnaround time of citizen service, for instance.
IT Alignment
The importance of Information Technology alignment exercise is to ensure that there is
a comprehensive interpretation of the mean of all required target capabilities as described
in business alignment session to the description of information technology landscapes
in several domain areas and performing the gap analysis of available components in
order to potentially identify leveraging opportunity. The final step of this process is
to design the solution architecture of each agency office. There are two critical keys of
defining the architecture landscape for national perspective, which are (1) national data
model in the description of citizen-centricity approach and (2) integration landscape in
the description of sharable and openable under properly managed and control.

--- PAGE 17 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 879 17 of 26
2.8.4. Deliver
Deliver process is considered as the step that required all logistic supporting further
implementation of proposed target architecture which could be completely or partially
deliverable of the target architecture depending on possibility of that implementation
capability. But more importantly, the plan of deployment would need to consider any
possibility impact to the success of that deployment. Meanwhile, the delivery process
would need to be effectively managed and planned for future activity.
Change Management
The change management has been proposed to be part of the delivery process for
theactivitiesthatneedtoplanforhandlingthedeliveryofnewcapabilityintotheecosystem
for serving the public services in efficient preparation and execution. This framework has
proposed three major activities which are (1) properly managing organization and people,
(2) efficiently defining the adoption plan, and (3) defining the benefit realization approach
to be effectively measurable.
IT Exercise
Thisprocessinconcentrationwithinformationtechnologyistoexerciseoninformation
service solution enablement accommodating the strategic plan of enterprise architecture
that is being defined as the target architecture in the Make process. This process would
begin after the target capability of some specific public service has been prioritized to
implement. Then, the following steps should be exercised, which are (1) smoothly defining
the transition plan of promoting new capability into the ecosystem, (2) properly defin-
ingthe project prioritization and budgeting suiting with strategic plan, and (3) defining
the program management approach to steer and manage the project execution effectively.
2.8.5. Evaluate
The expectation of this process is to measure for better understandability on the ef-
ficiency of releasing the new or enhancing public services to citizens by concentrating
on both quantitative and qualitative realization for further finding and improvement in
the case of evolution or advance innovation being considered for more suitable adoption.
Or, the result of measuring should be transitioned to be a new baseline of releasing other
target architecture or new public service with proper improvement.
Quantitative
The purpose of quantitative measurable is to recognize the overall outcome response
of deliverable for both of business realization and information technology performance
referring to the measurements target designing upon prior process of the framework.
The fundamental measurement objective has defined for comparison before and after on
the efficiency of government strategy and planning as well as the appreciation of public
response. At minimum of enterprise architecture involvement, the following measurements
should be actively concerned.
• Business Realization.
◦ Penetration rate of citizen cooperation,
◦ Government resources efficiency and productivity,
◦ Operation cost reduction,
◦ Improvement ratio of specific campaign like safety ratio.
• Information Technology.
◦ Total cost of ownership of Information Technology Investment,
◦ Service turnaround times,
◦ Accuracy rate improvement.

--- PAGE 18 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 879 18 of 26
Qualitative
The qualitative approach is to realize the challenges facing upon execution of new
architecture or new solution starting at the point of initiation up until the release to public
stage. This activity has intended to gather all challenges facing, understanding the root
cause of challenges, and finding the resolution for further improvement. Additionally,
this stage also suggests further research and feasibility study for future improvement.
In the principal of exercising an enterprise, architecture has targeted to achieve the im-
provement expectation on people, process, and technology; the government perspective
is also targeted the same way. Thus, the evaluated result would be expected to be uti-
lized for that improvement, especially the renovation of government service to public to
be digitalization.
3. Discussion
In the description of fundamental of research methodology, the validation process
after getting the first draft of proposed a sustainable government enterprise architecture
framework was designed into two activities, which are (1) validating capability of the pro-
posed framework same as validation criteria that exercise over ZEAF and TOGAF which
analysis findings have described in Analysis step, and (2) conducting an interview session
with a predefined list of questionnaires for field expertise to response their satisfaction
level. This section is to describe the results of those validation exercises on the following.
3.1. Validating the Capability of Proposed Framework
Referring to the analysis of capability score in Section 2, Table 7 has shown the compar-
ison of capability score over the proposed sustainable government enterprise architecture
framework that the framework designed has emphasized on the transformable traditional
operation procedures such as isolated architecture, struggle with legal policy to be more
integrated architecture with appropriately legal support as well as promoting the strategic
alignment in the view of nation-wide cascading and improving operation processes.
Table 7. Validating Capabilities of Proposed Framework.
Key Validation Topics % Weight
ZFEA TOGAF
Sustainable Government
Enterprise Architecture
Framework
Capability
Score
Weight
Score
Capability
Score
Weight
Score
Capability
Score
Weight
Score
1. Alignment IT and
Business/Participation in
Business Exercise
10 0.5 5 0.5 5 1 10
2. Decision Making/Legislation
Impact and Support
10 0 0 0 0 1 10
3. Enabling Transformation/
National Transformation
Cascading/Top-Down
Architecture
15 0.5 7.5 0.5 7.5 1 15
4. Promoting Shared Services
Capability
10 0 0 0 0 1 10
5. Emphasis in Architecture
Exercise Governance
5 0 0 0.5 2.5 1 5
6. Emphasis in Interoperability 5 0.5 2.5 1 5 1 5
7. Emphasis in Operational
Process Improvement during
the Architecture Exercise
10 0.5 5 1 10 1 10

--- PAGE 19 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 879 19 of 26
Table 7. Cont.
Key Validation Topics % Weight
ZFEA TOGAF
Sustainable Government
Enterprise Architecture
Framework
Capability
Score
Weight
Score
Capability
Score
Weight
Score
Capability
Score
Weight
Score
8. Emphasis in Analysis of Gap,
Impact, and Dependency during
the Architecture Exercise
5 1 5 1 5 1 5
9. Emphasis in Information Policy 15 1 15 1 15 1 15
10. Emphasis in
Cross-Organization Collaboration
15 0 0 0 0 1 15
Total Scores 100 40.0 50.0 100.0
In the findings of validating the capabilities of the proposed sustainable government
enterprise architecture framework, its capabilities have been designed accommodating
the current challenges of cross-organization collaboration and national transformation
strategy. Thus, all required capabilities were considered as key criticality of success in
the intention of effectively drive the changes.
3.2. Interview Responded and Discussions
The activity would be conducted by having an interview session with five selected rel-
evant representatives who have contributed their professional services to the organization
both of private and public sector, which are three professionals in the private sector having
an experience of enterprise architecture and two government officers who are responsible
for transformation execution. The list of questionnaires has been submitted together with
the brief of this article as described in a prior section and guide the score indicator by
having proposed the range of agreeable score as per mentioned in Section 3.
The list of questionnaires has been designed based upon the key consideration of
proposing the sustainable government enterprise architecture framework which empha-
sized five key areas that would create an inference of transformation consensus among all
government agencies that required high collaboration in order to achieve their strategy
alignment with the national target. The keywords of those questionnaires are (1) legislation
support, (2) top-down target architecture, (3) architecture governance, (4) shared services,
and (5) cross-organization collaboration, which the score finding has described in statistical
information as shown in Figure 10.
In summary, the overall scores have demonstrated the consensus of the interviewees
responded which the final mean value was 4.50 or equivalent to 90 percentage. The VMR
is shown as under-dispersed, which supports the scores finding as mentioned.
In a nutshell, the proposed sustainable government enterprise architecture framework
has been emphasized on how to comprehensively transform the national public service
capabilities in the dimensions of collaboration, alignment, structural, sharable, and legal
which the framework would be the suitable method for government or public sector to
execute on target architecture improvement for accommodated national transformation
like digitalization, promoting e-participation, e-government, or structuring the public
service using citizen centricity by satisfying the constrained government way of working,
like privacy law, for instance. Hence, the key highlight of propose of sustainable enterprise
architecture for government has demonstrated the following capabilities.

--- PAGE 20 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 879 20 of 26
strategy alignment with the national target. The keywords of those questionnaires are (1)
legislation support, (2) top-down target architecture, (3) architecture governance, (4)
shared services, and (5) cross-organization collaboration, which the score finding has
described in statistical information as shown in Figure 10.
In summary, the overall scores have demonstrated the consensus of the interviewees
responded which the final mean value was 4.50 or equivalent to 90 percentage. The VMR
is shown as under-dispersed, which supports the scores finding as mentioned.
Figure 10. Questionnaires Response Findings.
In a nutshell, the proposed sustainable government enterprise architecture
framework has been emphasized on how to comprehensively transform the national
public service capabilities in the dimensions of collaboration, alignment, structural,
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
0.0000
0.3500
0.7000
1.0500
1.4000
Q1:Legislation Q2:Top-Down Target
Architecture
Q3:Architecture
Governance
Q4:Shared Services Q5:Cross-Organization
Collaboration
Findings
VMR Variance Mean
Figure 10. Questionnaires Response Findings.
1. Business strategy and target capabilities of business has clearly proposed the cascad-
ing structure from national strategy down to departmental or agency strategy.
2. Cross-organization collaboration will be the key driver of making the successfulness
of target deliverable according to national strategy and target architecture cascading.
3. The architecture governance would be substantially improved to centralized overlook
in order to comprehensively acknowledge all initiatives and transformation execution.
4. The fundamental legislation supporting comprehensively executed enterprise archi-
tecture proposed transformation roadmap has been emphasized at the plan process.
5. Clearly define national data model using the citizen centricity approach. Each agency
should be able to leverage sharable services over the citizen centric model.
6. The proposed framework would be able to execute using an agile approach as there is
no solid dependency of each process whereby the exercise would be partially executed
according to partial readiness of each deliverable. More importantly, the core of
the exercise over this framework is to ensure the strategy driver of national level must
be explicitly defined and be able to further execute properly.
3.3. Framework Exercise for Thailand’s Land Transportation Case Study
One of the most actively required citizen participations in a daily activity is the ser-
vices of land transportation, which Thailand government has structured this majority
services function under the Ministry of Transport. The key consideration of this proposed
framework exercise is to concentrate in land transportation administrative services in
relation with information technology whereby the service responsibility is managed by
the Department of Land Transport.
The proposed exercise activities and defining the target architecture of transportation
administration services would effectively adopt on sustainable government enterprise
architecture framework following all required activities from the plan stage throughout
the evaluate stage. In this case study, the proposed action taken of each framework stage
will be described in the next sub-section, and the proposed of target architecture will be
described in the last sub-section.
3.3.1. The Findings of Strategic Actions
Referring by the detail proposed of exercise on sustainable government enterprise
architecture framework, the figures below have shown the findings of the criticality exercise
over the framework adoption describing required activities of the Department of Land
Transport for transformation adoption and plan.
Firstly, the strategy of enterprise architecture at the national level has been defined as
the fundamental principle for all government offices and its agencies have been directed in
order to transform their information system serving public services into the same standard

--- PAGE 21 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 879 21 of 26
and strategic direction. Figure 11 has described the key strategy of national enterpriswe
architecture (National EA) having five dimensions, which directed all government offices
and its agencies to exercise into the same expected target.
Figure 11. National EA Strategy.
Figure 12 has described the organization structure of enterprise architecture at the na-
tional perspective by including all required organizational layer.
Figure 12. National EA Organization and Governance Body.
Figure 13 has shown the key components of EA Governance that would consider
as key critical success factors of driving the national enterprise architecture program in
the goal of national transformation to fully digital enablement.

--- PAGE 22 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 879 22 of 26
Figure 13. National EA Governance.
3.3.2. The Findings of Target Deliverables
This stage would be exercised upon the readiness of planning preparation as described
in the previous section and the readiness of supporting information, which is described
in the sourcing stage. Thus, the making stage would be concentrated in designing target
capabilities of future stage of information services.
Figure 14 has demonstrated the comprehensive service capabilities of national ser-
vices proposing to their citizen. This target would be considered as the baseline of further
defining the ministry target capabilities in alignment with its national capabilities. Ad-
ditionally, there will be the sharable layer being defined for centralized managing of all
inter-department connectivity in the standardization procedures.
nability 2021, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 22 of 26
Figure 13. National EA Governance.
3.3.2. The Findings of Target Deliverables
This stage would be exercised upon the readiness of planning preparation as
described in the previous section and the readiness of supporting information, which is
described in the sourcing stage. Thus, the making stage would be concentrated in
designing target capabilities of future stage of information services.
Figure 14 has demonstrated the comprehensive service capabilities of national
services proposing to their citizen. This target would be considered as the baseline of
further defining the ministry target capabilities in alignment with its national capabilities.
Additionally, there will be the sharable layer being defined for centralized managing of
all inter-department connectivity in the standardization procedures.
Figure 14. National Public Service Capabilities in Single Access.
Giving by the key focus of this case study, Figure 15 would demonstrate the high-
level capabilities of Ministry of Transport, whereby the key fundamental of national
capabilities has defined transportation being one of the key transformations roadmap for
the service capability suited with Single Access objective as shown in Figure 14. The
mission of defining target capabilities of Ministry of Transport is to transform all public
EA
Governance
Standardization
Technology Blueprint
Data Governance
Integration Method
Information Security
Information Technology
Governance
Legislation
National EA Policy
Information Technology
Investment Policy
Data Collaboration Policy
Interoperation
API First
Reusable Policy
Data Layer
Citizen Vehicle
Social
Welfare
House
hold
Education Employment
Service
Layer
Registration Administration Transaction
Service
Channel
Self-Service Mobility Gov. Service Desk Gov. Contact Center
Security Layer
Authentication
Authorization
DataProtection
Inquiry
CyberProtection
Gov. Agent
Service Category
Family & Housing Welfare & Safety Educational Transportation
Utilities Military Service Logistic & Trading Employment
Manufacturing Healthcare Criminal Voting & Hearing
Sharable
Layer
Identification Verification Referenciation Maintenance
API Gateway
Others
Figure 14. National Public Service Capabilities in Single Access.
Giving by the key focus of this case study, Figure 15 would demonstrate the high-level
capabilities of Ministry of Transport, whereby the key fundamental of national capabilities
has defined transportation being one of the key transformations roadmap for the service
capability suited with Single Access objective as shown in Figure 14. The mission of
defining target capabilities of Ministry of Transport is to transform all public services being

--- PAGE 23 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 879 23 of 26
served as self-service mobility directed to citizens. The collaboration as a sharable service
for cross organization will be also considered as the target of improvement.
nability 2021, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 23 of 26
services being served as self-service mobility directed to citizens. The collaboration as a
sharable service for cross organization will be also considered as the target of
improvement.
Figure 15. Target Capabilities of Ministry of Transport.
Figure 16 has described the target capabilities of the Department of Land Transport
in alignment with the defined target capabilities of Ministry of Transport shown in Figure
15. This stage would consider as the first realization of the transformation roadmap. The
following exercises all detailing will be conducted at the departmental level. The
following exercises have been conducted.
▪ Performing an improvement of operation processes suiting with new expected
target capabilities.
▪ Identifying key performances measurable in alignment with proposed process
improvement.
▪ Conducting an exercise designing architecture landscape covering on these
domains; information systems (application and data), information technology
infrastructure, security, and integration layer. The key success factor of this exercise
is to identify the state of action on all components of each domain whereby the type
of actions is comprised with new acquiring, decommissioning, upgrading, and
replacing.
▪ Conducting gap assessment exercise over the proposed architecture landscape of all
domains.
▪ Conducting the project executable roadmap and prioritization according to the
proposed architecture landscape of each domain.
▪ Conducting the detail design exercise of solution architecture.
▪ Conducting the designing of change management execution plan.
▪ Establishing the program management function for progressive monitoring and
steered the strategic direction.
In summary, the proposed sustainable government enterprise architecture
framework has demonstrated the differentiated exercise activities of establishing the
enterprise architecture program for national public services that target to consolidate all
public services serving into the single access platform with the strategic alignment. The
critical path of this framework is to ensure all government offices and its agencies has
fully aligned with the national strategic objective. All executable capabilities under the
enterprise architecture exercise framework has been completely addressed, whereby all
roadblocks or limitations are being properly resolved using officially legislation
management.
Data Layer
Land
Transport
Marine
Transport
Aviation
Transport
Rail
Transport
Highway Rural Road
Service
Layer
Registration Administration Transaction
Service
Channel
Self-Service Mobility Gov. Service Desk Gov. Contact Center
Security Layer
Authentication
Authorization
DataProtection
Inquiry
Cyber Protection
Gov. Agent
Service Category
APIGateway
Clearing
House
Sharable Layer
CitizenVerification
LawEnforcement
PaymentGateway
Rescue&
Emergency Transport Highway, Rural Road & Tolling
Centralized Traffic Management
Free Flow Tolling
e-Collaboration
Land Marine Aviation Rail
e-License/e-Exam
e-Registration & Tax
e-Logistic
e-Ticket
e-Safety
e-Notification
Figure 15. Target Capabilities of Ministry of Transport.
Figure 16 has described the target capabilities of the Department of Land Transport in
alignment with the defined target capabilities of Ministry of Transport shown in Figure 15.
This stage would consider as the first realization of the transformation roadmap. The fol-
lowing exercises all detailing will be conducted at the departmental level. The following
exercises have been conducted.
n Performing an improvement of operation processes suiting with new expected tar-
get capabilities.
n Identifyingkeyperformancesmeasurableinalignmentwithproposedprocess improvement.
n Conducting an exercise designing architecture landscape covering on these domains;
information systems (application and data), information technology infrastructure,
security, and integration layer. The key success factor of this exercise is to identify
the state of action on all components of each domain whereby the type of actions is
comprised with new acquiring, decommissioning, upgrading, and replacing.
n Conducting gap assessment exercise over the proposed architecture landscape of
all domains.
n Conducting the project executable roadmap and prioritization according to the pro-
posed architecture landscape of each domain.
n Conducting the detail design exercise of solution architecture.
n Conducting the designing of change management execution plan.
n Establishing the program management function for progressive monitoring and
steered the strategic direction.
In summary, the proposed sustainable government enterprise architecture framework
has demonstrated the differentiated exercise activities of establishing the enterprise archi-
tecture program for national public services that target to consolidate all public services
serving into the single access platform with the strategic alignment. The critical path of
this framework is to ensure all government offices and its agencies has fully aligned with
the national strategic objective. All executable capabilities under the enterprise architecture
exercise framework has been completely addressed, whereby all roadblocks or limitations
are being properly resolved using officially legislation management.

--- PAGE 24 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 879 24 of 26
nability 2021, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 24 of 26
Figure 16. Target Capabilities of Department of Land Transport.
4. Conclusions
The purpose of this framework was designed for the group of developing countries
who are going to implement the national enterprise architecture strategy in order to
transform the fundamental national public services and information services ecosystem
addressing the strategy of e-government having e-participation, e-document, and citizen
centricity model as the guideline principal for their further innovation and digitalization.
This article aims to propose a comprehensive view of the potentially compulsory
components of enterprise architecture contribution to the government strategy of
transformation in their proposed public services referring to the definition of e-
government by the United Nations. The fundamental designed idea of this proposed
framework has identified five keys principle which are (1) legislation support, (2) top-
down target architecture, (3) architecture governance, (4) shared services, and (5) cross-
organization collaboration that would be considered as the key critical success factors for
achieving the exercise. The biggest challenge is to create cross-organization collaboration
in concentration of a sharable perspective which might need to resolve the implication of
legislation and regulation using EA Governance under the stage of Plan. The overall
response of specific expert survey of this proposed framework has demonstrated the
consensus responded at 90 percentage agreeable, which would strongly consider this
framework applicable for group of developing countries as the baseline framework for
their strategic planning and execution on the digitalized transformation. Thus, there is
stillsomerequiredtailoringtofittothefundamentalofeachgovernmentanditsoperating
model which might need to refine the framework upon appropriate.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, M.T.; methodology, M.T.; validation, S.K.; formal
analysis, M.T.; investigation, M.T. and S.K.; resources, M.T.; data curation, M.T.; writing—original
draft preparation, M.T.; writing—review and editing, M.T. and S.K.; visualization, M.T.;
supervision, S.K. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: The study was conducted according to the guidelines of the
Declaration of Helsinki, and approved by the Institutional Review Board (or Ethics Committee) of
Mahidol University (protocol code MU-CIRB 2020/219.2108 and date of approval 20 September
2020).
Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the
study.
Data Availability No new data were created or analyzed in this study. Data sharing is not
applicable to this article.
Data Layer
Driver Vehicle
Public
Transport
Logistic Safety Big Data
Service
Layer
Registration Administration Transaction
Service
Channel
Self-Service Mobility Gov. Service Desk Gov. Contact Center
Security Layer
Authentication
Authorization
DataProtection
Inquiry
Cyber Protection
Gov. Agent
Service Category
APIGateway
Sharable Layer
CitizenVerification
LawEnforcement
PaymentGateway
Rescue&
Emergency Driver Vehicle
e-Inspection
e-Tax
Public Transport &
Logistic
e-Monitoring
e-Logistic
e-Examination
e-Driver License
Shared Service
Safety Control
e-Communication
e-Notification
Data Service
e-Registration e-Score
IOT-Identification
Figure 16. Target Capabilities of Department of Land Transport.
4. Conclusions
The purpose of this framework was designed for the group of developing coun-
tries who are going to implement the national enterprise architecture strategy in order to
transform the fundamental national public services and information services ecosystem
addressing the strategy of e-government having e-participation, e-document, and citizen
centricity model as the guideline principal for their further innovation and digitalization.
This article aims to propose a comprehensive view of the potentially compulsory compo-
nents of enterprise architecture contribution to the government strategy of transformation
in their proposed public services referring to the definition of e-government by the United
Nations. The fundamental designed idea of this proposed framework has identified five
keys principle which are (1) legislation support, (2) top-down target architecture, (3) archi-
tecture governance, (4) shared services, and (5) cross-organization collaboration that would
be considered as the key critical success factors for achieving the exercise. The biggest
challenge is to create cross-organization collaboration in concentration of a sharable per-
spective which might need to resolve the implication of legislation and regulation using EA
Governance under the stage of Plan. The overall response of specific expert survey of this
proposed framework has demonstrated the consensus responded at 90 percentage agree-
able, which would strongly consider this framework applicable for group of developing
countries as the baseline framework for their strategic planning and execution on the digi-
talized transformation. Thus, there is still some required tailoring to fit to the fundamental
of each government and its operating model which might need to refine the framework
upon appropriate.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, M.T.; methodology, M.T.; validation, S.K.; formal analysis,
M.T.; investigation, M.T. and S.K.; resources, M.T.; data curation, M.T.; writing—original draft
preparation, M.T.; writing—review and editing, M.T. and S.K.; visualization, M.T.; supervision, S.K.
All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: The study was conducted according to the guidelines of
the Declaration of Helsinki, and approved by the Institutional Review Board (or Ethics Committee) of
Mahidol University (protocol code MU-CIRB 2020/219.2108 and date of approval 20 September 2020).
Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the study.
Data Availability Statement: No new data were created or analyzed in this study. Data sharing is
not applicable to this article.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

--- PAGE 25 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 879 25 of 26
References
1. Simon, D.; Fischbach, K.; Schoder, D. Enterprise architecture management and its role in corporate strategic management. Inf. Syst.
E-Bus. Manag. 2014, 12, 5–42. [CrossRef]
2. Hinkelmann, K.; Gerber, A.; Karagiannis, D.; Thoenssen, B.; van der Merwe, A.; Woitsch, R. A new paradigm for the continuous
alignment of business and IT: Combining enterprise architecture modelling and enterprise ontology. Comput. Ind. 2016, 79, 77–86.
[CrossRef]
3. Janssen, M. Sociopolitical Aspects of Interoperability and Enterprise Architecture in E-Government. Soc. Sci. Comput. Rev. 2012,
30, 24–36. [CrossRef]
4. Dang, D.D.; Pekkola, S. Systematic Literature Review on Enterprise Architecture in the Public Sector. Electron. J. e-Gov. 2017,
15, 130–154.
5. Pardo, T.A.; Nam, T.; Burke, G.B. E-Government Interoperability: Interaction of Policy, Management, and Technology Dimensions.
Soc. Sci. Comput. Rev. 2012, 30, 7–23. [CrossRef]
6. Guijarro, L. Interoperability frameworks and enterprise architectures in e-government initiatives in Europe and the United States.
Gov. Inf. Q. 2007, 24, 89–101. [CrossRef]
7. Gill, A.Q.; Smith, S.; Beydoun, G.; Sugumaran, V. Agile enterprise architecture: A case of a cloud technology-enabled government
enterprise transformation. In Proceedings of the 18th Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems (PACIS 2014), Chengdu,
China, 24–28 June 2014; Association for Information Systems AIS Electronic Library: Atlanta, GA, USA, 2014; pp. 1–11.
8. Medini, K.; Bourey, J.P. SCOR-based enterprise architecture methodology. Int. J. Comput. Integr. Manuf. 2012, 25, 594–607.
[CrossRef]
9. Janssen, M.; Estevez, E. Lean government and platform-based governance—Doing more with less. Gov. Inf. Q. 2013, 30, 1–8.
[CrossRef]
10. The TOGAF Standard Version 9.2 Overview. Available online: https://www.opengroup.org/togaf-standard-version-92-overview
(accessed on 20 February 2020).
11. Zachman, J.A. The Zachman Framework for Enterprise Architecture; Zachman International: El Paso County, CO, USA, 2003.
12. The Office of Management and Budget. Federal Enterprise Architecture Framework Version 2; The Office of Management and Budget:
Washington, DC, USA, 2013.
13. Eurostat. ESS EA Reference Framework; Eurostat, European Commission: Luxembourg, 2015.
14. Digital Government Development Agency. EGA Enterprise Architecture; Digital Government Development Agency (Public
Organization): Bangkok, Thailand, 2015.
15. Lindström, A.; Johnson, P.; Johansson, E.; Ekstedt, M.; Simonsson, M. A survey on CIO concerns-do enterprise architecture
frameworks support them? Inf. Syst. Front. 2006, 8, 81–90. [CrossRef]
16. Zachman, J.A. A framework for information systems architecture. IBM Syst. J. 1987, 26, 276–292. [CrossRef]
17. ISO/IEC/IEEE. ISO/IEC/IEEE 42020: Software, Systems and Enterprise—Architecture Processes; IEEE: Geneva, Switzerland, 2019.
18. Bittler, R.S.; Kreizman, G. Gartner Enterprise Architecture Process: Evolution 2005. Gart. Res. 2005. Available online:
https://www.gartner.com/en/documents/486246/gartner-enterprise-architecture-process-evolution-2005 (accessed on
15 February 2020).
19. Fischer, R.; Aier, S.; Winter, R. A Federated Approach to Enterprise Architecture Model Maintenance. Enterp. Model. Inf.
Syst. Archit. 2007, 2, 14–22.
20. De Vries, M. A framework for understanding and comparing Enterprise Architecture models. Manag. Dyn. 2010, 19, 17–29.
21. Cameron, B.H.; McMillan, E. Analyzing the Current Trends in Enterprise Architecture Frameworks. J. Enterp. Archit. 2013,
9, 60–71.
22. O’Leary, D.E. Enterprise ontologies: Review and an activity theory approach. Int. J. Account. Inf. Syst. 2010, 11, 336–352.
[CrossRef]
23. Zhang, M.; Chen, H.; Luo, A. A Systematic Review of Business-IT Alignment Research with Enterprise Architecture. IEEE Access
2018, 6, 18933–18944. [CrossRef]
24. Gerow, J.E.; Grover, V.; Thatcher, J.; Roth, P.L. Looking Toward the Future of IT–Business Strategic Alignment through the Past.
MIS Q. 2014, 38, 1159–1186. [CrossRef]
25. Charalabidis, Y.; Lampathaki, F.; Askounis, D.; Stassis, A. Shifting to Second Generation E-Government Interoperability Frame-
works. In Proceedings of the International EGOV 2007 Conference, Regensburg, Germany, 3–7 September 2007.
26. European Union. New European Interoperability Framework; Office of the European Union: Luxembourg, 2017.
27. Charalabidis, Y.; Lampathaki, F.; Askounis, D. A Comparative Analysis of National Interoperability Frameworks. In Pro-
ceedings of the 15th Americas Conference on Information Systems 2009 (AMCIS 2009 Proceeding), San Francisco, CA, USA,
6–9 August 2009; Association for Information Systems AIS Electronic Library: Atlanta, GA, USA, 2009; pp. 1–11.
28. Guijarro, L. Semantic interoperability in eGovernment initiatives. Comput. Stand. Interfaces 2009, 31, 174–180. [CrossRef]
29. Hjort-Madsen, K.; Gøtze, J. Enterprise Architecture in Government—Towards a Multi-Level Framework for Managing IT in
Government. In Proceedings of the 4th European Conference on e-Government, Castle Dublin, Ireland, 14 June 2004; pp. 365–374.
30. Ebrahim, Z.; Irani, Z. E-Government Adoption: Architecture and barriers. Bus. Process Manag. J. 2005, 11, 589–611. [CrossRef]
31. Lam, W. Barriers to e-government integration. J. Enterp. Inf. Manag. 2005, 18, 511–530. [CrossRef]

--- PAGE 26 ---
Sustainability 2021, 13, 879 26 of 26
32. Scholl, H.J.; Klischewski, R. E-Government Integration and Interoperability: Framing the Research Agenda. Int. J. Public Adm.
2007, 30, 889–920. [CrossRef]
33. Ojo, A.; Janowski, T.; Estevez, E. Improving Government Enterprise Architecture Practice—Maturity Factor Analysis. In Proceed-
ings of the 2012 45th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, Maui, HI, USA, 4–7 January 2012; IEEE Computer
Sociaty: Washington, DC, USA, 2012; pp. 4260–4269.
34. Islam, P. Citizen-centric E-Government: The Next Frontier. Harv. Kennedy Sch. Rev. 2007, 7, 103–108.
35. Charalabidis, Y.; Lampathaki, F.; Askounis, D. Unified Data Modelling and Document Standardization Using Core Components
Technical Specification for Electronic Government Applications. J. Theor. Appl. Electron. Commer. Res. 2008, 3, 38–51. [CrossRef]
36. Lee, J.; Lee, H. Developing and validating a citizen-centric typology for smart city services. Gov. Inf. Q. 2014, 31, 93–105.
[CrossRef]
37. Lim, S.; Malek, J.A.; Hussain, M.Y.; Tahir, Z. Citizen participation in building citizen-centric smart cities. Malays. J. Soc. Space 2018,
14, 42–53. [CrossRef]
38. UN. E-Government for the Future We Want, E-Government Survey 2014; Department of Economic and Social Affairs, United Nation:
New York, NY, USA, 2014.
39. Dawes, S.S. The Future of E-Government; Center for Technology in Government, State University of New York: Albany,
NY, USA, 2002.
40. Porwol, L.; Ojo, A.; Breslin, J.G. An ontology for next generation e-Participation initiatives. Gov. Inf. Q. 2016, 33, 583–594.
[CrossRef]
41. Al-Dalou, R.; Abu-Shanab, E. E-Participation Levels and Technologies. Available online: https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/273632293_E-participation_levels_and_technologies (accessed on 23 February 2020).
42. Conroy, M.M.; Evans-Cowley, J. E-participation in planning: An analysis of cities adopting on-line citizen participation tools.
Environ. Plan. C Gov. Policy 2006, 24, 371–384. [CrossRef]
43. Lapalme, J.; Gerber, A.; van der Merwe, A.; Zachman, J.; de Vries, M.; Hinkelmann, K. Exploring the future of enterprise
architecture: A Zachman perspective. Comput. Ind. 2016, 79, 103–113. [CrossRef]
44. Stewart, G. Supply-chain operations reference model (SCOR): The first cross-industry framework for integrated supply-chain
management. Logist. Inf. Manag. 1997, 10, 62–67. [CrossRef]
45. Cox, D.R.; Lewis, P.A.W. The Statistical Analysis of Series of Events; Chapman & Hal: London, UK, 1996.
46. Blanc, D.L. E-Participation: A Quick Overview of Recent Qualitative Trends. Available online: https://www.un.org/
development/desa/ (accessed on 15 March 2020).