--- PAGE 1 ---
ScienceDirect
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Procedia Computer Science 239 (2024) 364–371
1877-0509 © 2024 TheAuthors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the CENTERIS / ProjMAN / HCist 2023
10.1016/j.procs.2024.06.183
© 2024 TheAuthors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the CENTERIS / ProjMAN / HCist 2023
ScienceDirect
Procedia Computer Science 00 (2023) 000–000
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia
1877-0509 © 2023 The Authors. Published by ELSEVIER B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the CENTERIS – International Conference on ENTERprise Information Systems /
ProjMAN - International Conference on Project MANagement / HCist - International Conference on Health and Social Care Information Systems
and Technologies 2023
CENTERIS – International Conference on ENTERprise Information Systems / ProjMAN –
International Conference on Project MANagement / HCist – International Conference on
Health and Social Care Information Systems and Technologies 2023
Unicage Architecture Development Method
Nobuaki Tounakaa
, Shuichiro Yamamotob
, Buyanjargal Shirnena,b,
*
a
Unversal Shell Programming Laboratory Ltd., 3-3-3 Nishishimbashi, Minato-ku ,Tokyo 105-0003, Japan
b
IPUT in Nagoyo, 4-27-1 Meieki, Nakamura-ku, Nagoya 450-0002, Japan
Abstract
Digital transformation necessitates the creation of business value or innovation using digital technology in every industry.
Enterprises are facing an unprecedented business environment and competition for resources and market, which forces them to be
more adaptive. Consequently, their Enterprise Information Systems must also be adaptive as so for Architecture Development
Method. As a result, enterprises turn to adopt Agile and Lean approaches at scale, which requires architecture iteration and
refactoring, or evolvability. In this paper, we propose a loosely-coupled, process-based enterprise architecture development
method- Unicage – which aligns with Agile and Lean principles, complementing them with concrete technology architecture.
The proposing Architecture Development Method especially fits for Enterprise Resource Planning systems.
© 2023 The Authors. Published by ELSEVIER B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the CENTERIS – International Conference on ENTERprise
Information Systems / ProjMAN - International Conference on Project MANagement / HCist - International Conference on
Health and Social Care Information Systems and Technologies 2023
Keywords: Enterprise Architecture Development Method; Data Driven Enterprise Architecture; Open Agile Architecture; ArchiMate;
1. Introduction
The objective of the latest Enterprise Architecture (EA) is business transformation, not the overall optimization of
IT systems. Furthermore, since the objective of EA is business transformation, the business capability-based EA
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +81-3-3432-1174; fax: +81-3-3432-1174.
E-mail address: s-buyan@usp-lab.com
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
Procedia Computer Science 00 (2023) 000–000
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia
1877-0509 © 2023 The Authors. Published by ELSEVIER B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the CENTERIS – International Conference on ENTERprise Information Systems /
ProjMAN - International Conference on Project MANagement / HCist - International Conference on Health and Social Care Information Systems
and Technologies 2023
CENTERIS – International Conference on ENTERprise Information Systems / ProjMAN –
International Conference on Project MANagement / HCist – International Conference on
Health and Social Care Information Systems and Technologies 2023
Unicage Architecture Development Method
Nobuaki Tounakaa
, Shuichiro Yamamotob
, Buyanjargal Shirnena,b,
*
a
Unversal Shell Programming Laboratory Ltd., 3-3-3 Nishishimbashi, Minato-ku ,Tokyo 105-0003, Japan
b
IPUT in Nagoyo, 4-27-1 Meieki, Nakamura-ku, Nagoya 450-0002, Japan
Abstract
Digital transformation necessitates the creation of business value or innovation using digital technology in every industry.
Enterprises are facing an unprecedented business environment and competition for resources and market, which forces them to be
more adaptive. Consequently, their Enterprise Information Systems must also be adaptive as so for Architecture Development
Method. As a result, enterprises turn to adopt Agile and Lean approaches at scale, which requires architecture iteration and
refactoring, or evolvability. In this paper, we propose a loosely-coupled, process-based enterprise architecture development
method- Unicage – which aligns with Agile and Lean principles, complementing them with concrete technology architecture.
The proposing Architecture Development Method especially fits for Enterprise Resource Planning systems.
© 2023 The Authors. Published by ELSEVIER B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the CENTERIS – International Conference on ENTERprise
Information Systems / ProjMAN - International Conference on Project MANagement / HCist - International Conference on
Health and Social Care Information Systems and Technologies 2023
Keywords: Enterprise Architecture Development Method; Data Driven Enterprise Architecture; Open Agile Architecture; ArchiMate;
1. Introduction
The objective of the latest Enterprise Architecture (EA) is business transformation, not the overall optimization of
IT systems. Furthermore, since the objective of EA is business transformation, the business capability-based EA
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +81-3-3432-1174; fax: +81-3-3432-1174.
E-mail address: s-buyan@usp-lab.com

--- PAGE 2 ---
Nobuaki Tounaka et al. / Procedia Computer Science 239 (2024) 364–371 365
2 Nobuaki Tounaka et al. / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2023) 000–000
development method starts implementing parts that generate business value in stages. Activities that do not generate
business value are not recommended. Thus, architecture development is a continuous, cyclical process, and in
executing the Architecture Development Method (ADM) repeatedly over time. The Open Group Architecture
Framework (TOGAF) [3] accepts the iterative model, which is a critical component of Agile. In microservice
architecture, microservices that correspond to business capabilities are loosely coupled to promote DX. To achieve
this, it is necessary to design and implement overall business, data and application, and technology architectures,
which are consisting the EA as suggested by TOGAF core architecture layers, in the loosely coupled manner. This
type of architecture enables the flexibility to iterative development such as Agile development or TOGAF ADM
because it considers only input and output (IO) data to/from the business process. The IO data driven architecture
also advantages system developers to achieve a full cycle system development since it requires only understanding
input and output in every business process which directly maps to an IO data-based application component.
Based on the fact mentioned above, we propose an IO data-driven, process-based architecture and its architecture
development method, consisting of loosely coupled building blocks that compose business, application, and
technology architecture layers. The proposing architecture development method aligns with Agile and Lean
development principle, expending their capabilities with an enterprise architecture- Unicage architecture.
In the following, the related research will be explained in Section 2. Next, Section 3 proposes Unicage enterprise
architecture model by ArchiMate [1] and its architecture development method. Then, Section 4 explains a customer
case of the Unicage Architecture Development Method (UADM). Section 5 describes the discussion, and Section 6
summarizes this paper and mentions future issues. We also illustrate a practical model to implement the architecture
with ArchiMate.
2. Related work
Steven H. Spewak [2] suggested a Data-Driven Information System Architecture as Enterprise Architecture
Planning (EAP). It recommends that data be defined before applications, and data dependency determines the
sequence for implementing application systems. Data must be provided at a reasonable, affordable cost. With EAP,
the first architecture defines all the data needed to support the business. When that is completed, the second
architecture defines the applications needed to manage that data.
TOGAF [4] suggests Open Agile Architecture (O-AA) and its Architecture Development Method (ADM). Agile
architecting aims at benefiting from emergence while minimizing unnecessary complexity and undesirable
outcomes. The O-AA suggests that architecture has to evolve when weak solutions are eliminated. Architecture
refactoring refers to the architecture restructuring that occurs when architecture evolves. Moreover, high-performing
teams are more likely to have loosely-coupled architectures than medium and low-performing teams [5]. When
dependencies are minimized, teams can develop, test, and deploy new functions and features without depending on
other teams for additional work, resources, or approvals, and with less back-and-forth communication [6], which
realizes a full cycle development.
O-AA Axiom 9 suggests Modular Data Platform that the centralized and monolithic data platform is an anti-
pattern [7]. In the axiom, Agile Architecture shall create modular data platforms using domain decomposition logic:
“instead of flowing the data from domains into a centrally owned data lake or platform, domains need to host and
serve their domain datasets in an easily consumable way”. Source domain datasets represent closely the raw data at
the point of creation and are not fitted or modeled for a particular consumer.
Yamamoto [8] proposed the Data Driven Process Design Method (DDPDM) which focuses on elimination of the
business process which does not create business value or overlapping the process.
Netflix [9] proposed a model that says “Operate what you built” or a Full Cycle Software Development.
Developing and running a software service involves a full set of responsibilities, which can create inefficiencies
across the entire life cycle when segmented. The full cycle developers are responsible for the full software life cycle,
from design to support, by combining all of these ideas together into a single development team equipped with
amazing developer productivity tools.
CRIBB [10], James P. Houghton [11], João M.P. Moreira [12] mentioned or evaluated the technology
performance of Unicage Architecture.

--- PAGE 3 ---
366 Nobuaki Tounaka et al. / Procedia Computer Science 239 (2024) 364–371
Nobuaki Tounaka et al. / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2023) 000–000 3
3. Unicage Architecture Development Method (UADM)
The Unicage Architecture (UA) complies with TOGAF [3] and Table 1. describes its core building blocks for the
core architecture layers as in the TOGAF, to propose a practical model for Enterprise Information System (EIS)
implementation. The ArchiMate metamodels based on TOGAF ArchiMate Metamodels for the data, application,
and technology layers are explained in the following chapters. As shown in Table 1., a business process design maps
directly to Application and Technology building blocks since each block is designed based on IO data or
information, which allows the microservice architecture and full cycle development. Having the business process
analyzed and designed means having the data and application design ready at a time, which allows efficiency of
development cycle and the full cycle development available. We here emphasize Data, Application, and Technology
Architecture along with the UADM.
Table 1. Data Driven Process-Based Unicage Architecture (UA) Core Building Block
3.1. Data Architecture Model in UA
Based on the principles below, the entire data leaves a complete chronological record of the workings of
Enterprise Information System (EIS). This makes it easier to find out the cause of a problem when it occurs, since
all the workings of the system can be visualized retroactively. Table 2. shows the data type, their application, and
the data management capability. Having the few data types and the data management tool realized by data IO-based
commands which are also used to realize an application component, allows an EIS developer less learning cost.
Without using a middleware for data management, it also allows developers less learning and operation cost, and
less cost for the entire EIS development, which also supports Enterprise Architecture Planning (EAP) suggestion
[2].
• Principle 1: Allow redundancy, eliminate the unnecessary.
• Principle 2: Any data will NOT be overwritten, updated, or deleted, but spawned.
• Principle 3: Avoid data dependency.
The data architecture metamodel for the UA is depicted in Fig 1. which is along with the TOGAF metamodel.
TOGAF
Core Elements
UA Core
Building Block Definition
Note
(IO: Input and Output)
Business Architecture IO data-based business
process
Consider a business process as a function with an input and output data; The processes are
connected through information or data only. Analyze and design it with Data Driven Process
Design Method [8].
Data Architecture Name indexed text file Conform to data architecture design principles, file and directory indexing convention in the
Unicage Architecture Development Method.
Application
Architecture
IO data-based application
component
Implement as-is business process into an application component. The components are
connected through data only as so the business processes. I.e., the components are data-
coupling and it realizes the microservice architecture.
Technology
Architecture
IO data-based command A command is the smallest building block with the same IO data-based structure as a
business process and application component. The command has a sophisticated single
functionality to process an input data, being able to be implemented with any programming
language. I.e., the command is highly cohesive.
Architecture
Development Method
UA development method Composed of Lean and Agile principles with Unicage Architecture, the full cycle
development, project management method, and programming standard including error
handle, low-code, code description, and directory tree conventions.

--- PAGE 4 ---
Nobuaki Tounaka et al. / Procedia Computer Science 239 (2024) 364–371 367
4 Nobuaki Tounaka et al. / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2023) 000–000
Table 2. Data type in UA
Data type Artifact Application Data management
Logical/layout data Plain text file Design, Coding, Documentation Data IO-based software commands
Data Plain text file Business application Data IO-based software commands
Media Binary Business application Data IO-based software commands
Fig. 1. Data Architecture Metamodel in ArchiMate
3.2. Application Architecture Model in UA
An application component consists of component, liner, and command as shown in Fig. 2. A liner is a collection
of commands which are connected by Unix Pipe and it expresses a stage that comprises an application component or
a business process. Any application, liner, or command is connected through data object only. In other words, the
application architecture is microservice architecture or loosely coupled. An IO-based application component
matches its serving business process in structure with the same IO data, which implies that the business process
design is ready so is the application design. The application component also conforms to the following principles in
terms of code understandability, code simplicity, data management, and system maintenance.
• Principle 1: Write a description for input and output file layout into/from a command.
• Principle 2: Write a single command with input data in a line.
• Principle 3: Write a description for each liner and application component/business process.
• Principle 4: Applications that create data should be implemented before applications that use data.
The application component realized by the UA meets the following criterion that Enterprise Architecture
Planning (EAP) [2] suggests, due to the IO data-based microservice application and technology architecture.
• Criterion 1: It should be understandable. The application definitions make sense and are easily understood
by people throughout the enterprise.
• Criterion 2: It should be complete. Applications support most business functions and every data entity is being
managed; and it should be consistent with no overlap or duplication of application capabilities.
• Criterion 3: It should be stable. Each application definition is based solely on the business model and data

--- PAGE 5 ---
368 Nobuaki Tounaka et al. / Procedia Computer Science 239 (2024) 364–371
Nobuaki Tounaka et al. / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2023) 000–000 5
architecture and is independent of who uses the application, how the application works, where the application is
located, or when the application is operated.
Fig. 2. Application Architecture Metamodel in ArchiMate
3.3. Technology Architecture Model in UA
Fig. 4 shows the Technology Architecture Model in which the IO data-based command lies at its core. The
commands are implemented with the core libraries of an operation system based on POSIX (Portable Operating
System Interface) and can be written in any programming language. A command has a highly cohesive and
sophisticated single functionality to process an input data while providing a simple coding syntax or interface such
as below.
The command serves as a software cushion implementing complex algorithm which may take a long line of
codes if it is implemented with a computer programming language.
• Command syntax: {command}, {parameters}, {data}
The command or tool must comply with the following principles.
• Principle 1: Use only core and sophisticated POSIX libraries to implement the command.
• Principle 2: Keep the command syntax normalized as in the command syntax above.
• Principle 3: Keep the number of commands as few as possible. Thus, try combination of commands to solve
any required data processing before creating a new command.
In appreciation to the software cushion and principles above, the Technology Architecture in the UA meets the
criteria that Enterprise Architecture Planning (EAP) [2] suggests to apply open-systems concepts, meaning that
operating systems should be as follow.
• Portable: run across multiple vendor platforms.
• Scalable: run across a wide power range from small to large computers.
• Interoperable: run in a heterogeneous environment.
• Compatible: preserve the investment in existing software and enable technology advances to be integrated with
other components.
Fig 3. proposes the technology architecture model in ArchiMate.

--- PAGE 6 ---
Nobuaki Tounaka et al. / Procedia Computer Science 239 (2024) 364–371 369
6 Nobuaki Tounaka et al. / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2023) 000–000
Fig. 3. Technology Architecture Metamodel in ArchiMate
4. Case study
KYOWA KOGYO Co., LTD is one of international leading automobile part suppliers head-quartered in Nagoya,
Japan and it is well known for its universal joint part with a patented manufacturing method. The company had a
challenge with DX because of not only labor shortage but also lead time, and recent competent business
environment. The company had introduced a standardized yet conventional manufacturing package software but
failed to achieve its goal.
In this case, we overview the phases taken places to introduce Unicage Architecture Development Method
(UADM) and quantitative results the company achieved between 2018 and 2021 years. Table 3. shows the phases
along with the Lean Agile principles and their actual processes in an EIS development.
Table 3. IO Data-based Command category
# Phase Architecture Architecture Development Process
1 See the whole process,
Eliminate waste,
Amplify learning
Business Architecture Hearing up the weak signals from front-line employees with a
company leader and decide if the signal is waste
2 Business Process Kaizen Business Architecture Optimize overall business process toward enterprise goal
3 Enterprise System Development
Deliver as fast as possible, Empower Team,
Testing and re-development based on feed
backs and user capacity upgrades
Data, Application, and
Technology Architecture
Implement the business processes and functions based on an
IO data-based technology architecture
The Fig.4 briefs the result after executing the UADM. We here emphasize the refactor in the UADM means re-
development. To achieve this result, we have re-developed the EIS over time with less cost in appreciation to
microservice Unicage architecture with its ADM. One more thing shall be shared is that the EIS users’ capability in
digital literacy have upgraded while executing the UDAM and it also has allowed the result.

--- PAGE 7 ---
370 Nobuaki Tounaka et al. / Procedia Computer Science 239 (2024) 364–371
Nobuaki Tounaka et al. / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2023) 000–000 7
Fig. 4. The result after introducing UADM
5. Discussion
5.1. Novelty
In the Digital Transformation (DX) era and the current competitive business market, enterprises and their
information systems need to be adaptive to any unpresented event such as Covid-19 [14]. The major enterprise
architecture frameworks such an Open Agile Architecture (O-AA) [4], TOGAF [2], Enterprise Architecture
Planning [EAP] and, Lean and Agile Software Development [6], [13] suggest the enterprises good guidance,
defining a set of deliverables of the guidance or framework. However, this guidance for enterprise information
system architecture is often broad and conceptual which is inevitable to realize higher adoptability for any
enterprise, despite it also sets the enterprises to seek a practical implementation to meet the guidance criteria. Thus,
we proposed the practical building blocks to expand the core architecture layers recommended by TOGAF [3] with
loosely coupled microservice technology architecture along with data and application architecture which especially
fits for Enterprise Resource Planning systems. The novelty here shall be (1) data driven business process design
method which directly maps to (2) loosely-coupled application components constructed with (3) highly cohesive
command modules. The commands as (4) a software cushion also play a decisive role to realize loosely-coupled
application components and the full cycle development [9].
5.2. Effectiveness
The proposed architecture development method has been effectively introduced to the company in the user case
and shown its effectiveness in a quantitative way. It has also shown that the architecture is a microservice or loosely
coupled architecture which has made the architecture refactoring achieve with less cost or effort.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed the data driven enterprise architecture development method- Unicage Architecture
Development Method (UADM) with the practical implementation blocks with ArchiMate metamodels, expanding
the current enterprise architecture framework guidance. Although the proposed architecture development method
has effectively applied to the case, the architecture is designed for Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP), especially.
More quantitative evaluation on its effectiveness shall be conducted and more detailed and methodological
explanation on business architecture be illustrated.
Future work includes more case studies illustrated with the proposed architecture development method.

--- PAGE 8 ---
Nobuaki Tounaka et al. / Procedia Computer Science 239 (2024) 364–371 371
8 Nobuaki Tounaka et al. / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2023) 000–000
Acknowledgements
The cooperation for producing this paper shall be credited to KYOWA KOGYO Co., LTD and the Association
for Support of Economic Sustainable Development for 21st Century (ESD21). Thanks to their cooperation, this
paper has become available.
References
[1] Phillip Beauvoir & Jean-Baptiste Sarrodie. (2022) “Archi -archimate modelling”, Archi version:4.9.3 supporting the ArchiMate® 3.1
language.
[2] Steven H. Spewak and Steven C. Hill. (2008) “Enterprise Architecture Planning: Developing a Blueprint for Data, Applications, and
Technology”, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
[3] The Open Group. (2018) “The TOGAF® Standard, Version 9.2”
[4] The Open Group. (2020) “Open Agile Architecture™”
[5] Puppet Labs. (2015, 2017) “DevOps Technical 2015 & 2017 “, DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.1.3890.2645,
[6] Nicole Forsgren, Kim Humble, and Gene Kim. (2018) “Accelerate: The Science of Lean Software and DevOps: Building and Scaling High
Performing Technology Organizations”, Published by Trade Select.
[7] Zhamak Dehghani. (2019) “How to Move Beyond a Monolithic Data Lake to a Distributed Data Mesh”,
https://martinfowler.com/articles/data-monolith-to-mesh.html
[8] Shuichiro Yamamoto, Junko Hosomi. (2022) “A Proposal on Data Driven Process Design Method”, IEICE Technical Report KBSE2022-24:
vol. 122, no. 139,79-84.
[9] Philip Fisher-Ogden, Greg Burrell, and Dianne Marsh. (2018) “Full Cycle Developers at Netflix – Operate What You Build”, Netflix
Technology Blog.
[10] COMPUTATIONAL RESEARCH in BOSTON and BEYOND (CRIBB). (2013) “How to Analyze 50 Billion Records in Less than a
Second without Hadoop or Big Iron”, https://math.mit.edu/crib/2013/aug2.html
[11] James P. Houghton et al. (2017) “Tracking the evolution of conversational clusters in social media”,
https://doi.org/10.1177/0049124117729705
[12] João M.P. MoreiraHelena GalhardasHelena GalhardasMiguel PardalMiguel Pardal. (2018) “LeanBench: comparing software stacks for
batch and query processing of IoT data”, DOI: 10.1016/j.procs.2018.04.067
[13] Mary Poppendieck, Tom Poppendieck (2003), “Lean Software Development: An Agile Toolkit”, The Agile Software Development Series,
Addison-Wesley
[14] World Health Organization (2019), Coronavirus disease (COVID-19), https://www.who.int/health-topics/coronavirus