--- PAGE 1 ---
JournaloftheKnowledgeEconomy
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13132-026-03210-4
Abstract
In recent years, there has been an increasing scholarly and institutional attention on
digital transformation. This is expected, given that consumers’ widespread adoption
of digital technology, combined with its disruptive influence on various industries,
is prompting organizations to incorporate digital strategies to survive and improve
their competitiveness. Although a substantial body of prior research on digital trans-
formation exists, it remains fragmented, often limited to a single concept, industry,
or framework. Combined with the rapid pace of disruption, many earlier insights
are now outdated or incomplete. This study addresses these gaps by conducting a
systematic literature review of 170 peer-reviewed articles, using the methodology of
Webster and Watson (2002), complemented by bibliometric analysis. Articles were
thematically coded to identify key drivers, barriers, elements, and organizational ac-
tors involved in shaping digital transformation strategies. Based on our findings, we
propose a theoretical model that considers digital transformation as a contingent dy-
namic capability: organizations sense pressures, seize opportunities, and reconfigure
resources, but outcomes depend on multi-level contingencies (institutional, indus-
try, organizational, personal) and the alignment of leadership vision, governance,
digital culture, skills, process redesign, and technological infrastructure, roles often
led by the Chief Digital Officer (CDO) or the Chief Information Officer (CIO). We
also found that barriers related to culture, skills, leadership, and technology, as well
as risks and policies, shape transformation strategies. This research contributes to
the literature by offering a current synthesis and a theoretical framework, provid-
ing both scholars and practitioners with a comprehensive understanding of digital
transformation in rapidly evolving environments.
Keywords Digital strategy · Digital transformation · Industrie 4.0 · Digital
disruption · Organizational change
Received:16April2025/Accepted:12February2026
©TheAuthor(s)2026
FromStimulitoStrategy:DecodingtheComplexitiesof
ModernDigitalTransformation
VasilisTsiavos1
· Fotis Kitsios1
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
1 3

--- PAGE 2 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
Introduction
Numerous industries have experienced disruptive changes as digital technologies
rapidly evolve, reshaping long-standing approaches to value creation and transform-
ing the external business environment regarding consumer expectations and com-
petition. This phenomenon is known as “digital disruption” (Skog et al., 2018) and
has altered the fundamental rules of business. The process by which organizations
adapt to the new reality caused by digital disruption is called “digital transformation”
or “digitalization” (Hess et al., 2016). Organizations that are unable to adapt to the
emerging digital landscape risk falling victim to “Digital Darwinism,” as only the
most flexible and technologically savvy businesses will be able to survive and excel
(Schwartz, 2001).
Digital transformation involves not only adopting new technologies but also how
companies sense, create, and capture value. It is an organization-wide, ongoing
change shaped by digital tools and by the broader ecosystem around the firm (Vial,
2019; Hanelt et al., 2021). Previous reviews have provided valuable insights into
digital transformation from various perspectives, but despite increasing scholarly
interest, several significant knowledge gaps remain. First, the rapid pace of techno-
logical advancement has rendered many previous insights incomplete or obsolete,
particularly those published before 2020 (Kraus et al., 2021; Nadkarni & Prügl,
2021), which ignore recent advances of artificial intelligence and its impact on digi-
tal transformation (Feroz & Kwak, 2024). Furthermore, the COVID-19 pandemic has
accelerated digital transformation initiatives across industries (Agostino et al., 2021;
George & Schillebeeckx, 2022), creating new drivers, challenges, and opportunities
that have not been adequately captured in pre-pandemic literature.
Second, previous literature reviews have identified components, perspectives, and
dimensions of digital transformation, yet they haven’t provided an actionable archi-
tecture that links the triggers of change to design choices across leadership, culture,
people, processes, and technology, while specifying the roles that orchestrate change
and the barriers that impede it (Vial, 2019; Reis & Melão, 2023).
Third, although ecosystem embeddedness and organizational agility are widely
acknowledged, factors such as industry structure, institutional constraints, and orga-
nizational maturity that shape viable configurations, along with the cross-level con-
nection from ecosystem dynamics to firm and unit routines, are still under-explored
(Hanelt et al., 2021; Kraus et al., 2021). Even when enablers or archetypes are iden-
tified, guidance on task sequencing, decision rights assignment, and governance of
execution is often incomplete, resulting in a gap between strategy and outcomes
(Brown & Brown, 2019; Gillani et al., 2024).
To address these gaps, our research aims to provide a comprehensive understand-
ing of the domain by conducting a detailed analysis of 170 peer-reviewed articles,
where we identify concepts such as the drivers of digital transformation, the key
components of a digital transformation strategy, potential barriers faced on the path
to digital maturity, and the various roles involved in shaping the digital future of
organizations. Additionally, we explore how contingencies at institutional, indus-
try, organizational, and personal levels affect the impacts and interactions of these
concepts. Conceptually, we integrate dynamic capabilities (Teece, 2007) and contin-
1 3

--- PAGE 3 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
gency theory (Donaldson, 2001) to argue that digital transformation is a contingent
process of capability building, where outcomes result from configurations of drivers,
strategies, actors, and barriers within multi-level contextual conditions. We believe
that our approach contributes to a clearer understanding of digital transformation
while offering managers and practitioners a practical guide for developing strategies
that support their organizations’goals.
Throughout our research, we encountered several definitions provided by schol-
ars concerning the term “digital transformation” or “digitalization” (Table 1). To
establish a clear basis for analysis, we define digital transformation as the process of
organizational change in which digital technologies are adopted, new workflows and
business models are created, and organizations are enabled to compete more effec-
tively, innovate, and generate additional revenue streams.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 outlines the meth-
odology followed, including article selection criteria and analytical techniques. Sec-
tion 3 presents our bibliometric findings, analyzing publication trends, keyword
patterns, and conceptual categories. Section 4 presents a detailed analysis of the con-
cepts related to digital transformation drivers, strategy components, organizational
actors, and barriers to implementation. Section 5 discusses our theoretical framework
and its implications for both theory and practice. It also highlights the limitations of
our research and offers suggestions for future research.
Author
(Year)
Digital Transformation Definition
Choy
(2020)
Digital transformation is the intellectual process by
which digital technologies are developed (similarly
to general human development) in all social spheres.
Fitzgerald
et al. (2013)
Digital transformation is a company’s use of new
digital technologies, such as social media, mobile,
analytics, or embedded devices, to enable major
business improvements like enhancing customer
experience, streamlining operations, or creating new
business models.
Gurbaxani
et al. (2019)
Digital transformation is the reinvention of a
company’s vision, strategy, organizational structure,
processes, capabilities, and culture to match the
evolving digital business context.
Hanelt et
al. (2021)
Digital transformation is an organizational change
triggered and shaped by the widespread diffusion of
digital technology.
Hess et al.
(2016)
Digital transformation (also known as digitalization)
is concerned with the changes that digital technolo-
gies bring about in a company’s business model,
products, processes, and organizational structure.
Nambisan
et al. (2017)
Digital transformation is characterized as the cre-
ation of, and consequent change in, market offerings,
business processes, or models resulting from the use
of digital technology.
Piccoli et al.
(2024)
Digital transformation is the metamorphosis of an
IT-enabled organization into a digital organization,
focusing on digital resources and digital architecture.
Table1 Digitalization
definitions
1 3

--- PAGE 4 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
Methodology and Data
Our research adopts a two-pronged methodology, consisting of a bibliometric analy-
sis and a Webster and Watson (2002), methodology-driven comprehensive examina-
tion of existing scholarly publications. The research process employed in our paper
involves three specific stages: First, we reviewed existing literature to choose rele-
vant databases and keywords. Second, we conducted a thorough search of references
and citations of the selected articles both backward and forward. Lastly, all identified
papers were grouped by concept based on their content to help identify potential
research gaps.
PreviousLiteratureReviews
We examined previous literature reviews from 2019 to 2024 to analyze how varying
research approaches and findings have evolved from the pre-COVID period through
the COVID and post-COVID eras. As presented in Table 2, Gillani et al. (2024)
combine a literature review with practitioner insights and 16 case studies, identi-
fying five socio-technical enablers and three transformation archetypes. Reis and
Melão (2023) analyze 34 articles to propose a research agenda across six themes:
digital business, business models, sustainability, human resources, technologies, and
smart cities. Hanelt et al. (2021) review 279 papers to frame digital transformation
as organizational change shaped by ecosystems, while Kraus et al. (2021) synthesize
217 studies to outline the state of digitalization research. Nadkarni and Prügl (2021),
based on 58 articles, stress the lack of quantitative empirical evidence, reflecting the
field’s immaturity. Brown and Brown (2019) clarify terminological ambiguities by
synthesizing 53 articles, Mahraz et al. (2019) provide a roadmap from 164 studies,
and (Vial, 2019), reviewing 282 papers, highlights how digital technologies reshape
organizations, industries, and societies, making sustainable competitive advantage
more challenging.
SearchandReviewStrategy
We searched Web of Science (WoS) and Scopus, using key phrase combinations with
wildcard variations of core terms such as “digital transformation”, “digitalization”,
“disruption” and strategic and organizational terms such as “digital strategy,” “busi-
ness strategy,” “organizational transformation,” “change management,” and “digi-
tal maturity.” We also included Industry 4.0 variants (“industry 4.0,” “industry4.0,”
“industrie 4.0,” “industrie4.0”) (Table 3).
The search initially retrieved 3695 records, which we narrowed down by language
(English only), publication type (journals and conferences), and research area (busi-
ness and management).After applying these filters, 709 articles remained. Titles and
abstract screening, along with removing duplicates, reduced the remaining articles to
122. A backward and forward citation search added 48 more studies, resulting in a
total of 170 peer-reviewed articles (Fig. 1).
1 3

--- PAGE 5 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
Table2 Previous literature reviews
Authors Year Approach Findings
Gillani et
al.
2024 Literature review, followed by inter-
views with practitioners and multiple
case studies of 16 firms.
The study identifies five socio-technical
enablers (technology, data, people, pro-
cesses, structure), and three archetypes
(efficiency, responsiveness, agility), each
reflecting different pathways and value
outcomes of transformation.
Reis &
Melao
2023 Reis et al. researched primarily the
terms “digital transformation” and
“systematic literature review” on
Scopus and Web of Science. They
analyzed 34 articles in their study.
The study outlines a research agenda
with six key areas of interest: digital
business, business models, sustain-
ability, technology, smart cities, human
resources.
Hanelt et al. 2021 The EBSCO Business Source Com-
plete (BSC) database was the source
of the articles. 279 peer-reviewed
articles were analyzed.
The authors investigate the phenomenon
from the perspective of organizational
change. Digital ecosystems are shaping
firms adopting flexible designs for adap-
tation and transformation.
Kraus et al. 2022 The key phrase “digital transforma-
tion” was used for searching on Web
of Science. They incorporated 217
articles in their literature review.
The paper offers insights about the
actual literature on digitalization.
Nadkarni
et al.
2021 Nadkarni et al. explored a variety of
keywords including “digitization”,
“digital disruption”, “digital transfor-
mation”. Their literature review was
drawn from 5 databases, with a total of
58 articles being considered.
The absence of quantifiable empirical
data in the literature implies digital
transformation is a research area that is
still unexplored.
Brown &
Brown
2019 Web of Science was searched for
the keywords “digital transforma-
tion”, “digital strategy”, and “digital
business strategy”. 53 articles were
analyzed.
The paper explains the numerous ter-
minologies utilized in articles on digital
transformation and digital strategy.
Additionally, it clears up any misunder-
standings regarding the contributions
that digital transformation business strat-
egy makes in reaching digital maturity.
Mahraz
et al.
2019 Search terms “Industry 4.0”, “smart
factory”, “digital transformation”,
“transformation management”, and
“change strategy” were searched for
on Scopus, and 164 articles were
included in the review.
Apotential roadmap for digital trans-
formation that firms should consider to
undergo the process may find valuable.
Vial 2019 Vial used keyword combinations that
contained terms like “transform”,
“digital”, and “disrupt”. 3 databases
were searched (AIS Library, Business
Source Complete, ScienceDirect),
and 282 articles were included in the
review.
Using digital technologies, distributed
networks of diverse actors can operate
together in novel ways, developing
dependencies between parties whose
interests might not always coincide.
Organizations have a vast potential for
innovation and performance, which can
have a significant impact on individuals,
businesses, and society as a whole.
1 3

--- PAGE 6 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
ClassificationFramework
Two researchers independently evaluated the 170 papers and categorized them based
on publication year, journal, and research method, followed by a keyword analy-
sis using VOSviewer. Additionally, a concept analysis was performed using content
coding with NVivo, and the articles were classified according to the following digi-
Fig.1 Article selection criteria
Search Field Search Keyword
Title (digital*AND (transform* OR
disrupt*)) OR
digitalization OR
(“industry 4.0” OR “industry4.0” OR
“industrie4.0” OR “industrie 4.0”)
Title-Abstract-Keywords “digital strategy” OR “business
strategy” OR “change management”
OR “digital maturity” OR “organi-
zational transformation” OR “digital
transformation”
Table3 Article search criteria
1 3

--- PAGE 7 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
tal transformation concepts: Drivers and Barriers of Digitalization, Actors, and Ele-
ments in a Digital Transformation Strategy.
Results
PublishedArticlesPerYear
Andal-Ancion et al. were among the first researchers to investigate “The Digital
Transformation of Traditional Businesses” (Andal-Ancion et al., 2003). However,
the vast amount of literature was found to have been published after 2016 as shown
in Fig. 2.
ArticlesPerJournalandConference
The examined articles were sourced from 132 different journals and conferences,
reflecting the cross-disciplinary nature of digital transformation research. Seven were
found in the Journal of Business Research, followed by the International Journal of
Production Economics and Technovation with 4 articles each, followed by Business
Strategy and the Environment, MIS Quarterly Executive, and Research-Technology
Management with 3 articles.
Table 4 lists the journals and conference proceedings with 3 or more articles in
our study.
KeywordAnalysis
The articles were examined for the presence of keywords using the relevance score
methodology proposed by van Eck and Waltman, and calculated using VOSviewer
Fig.2 Articles per year
1 3

--- PAGE 8 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
(van Eck &Waltman, 2011).This method assesses noun phrase relevance by compar-
ing its second-order co-occurrences distribution to the co-occurrences distribution
across all noun phrases. The noun phrase relevance is indicated by the Kullback-
Leibler distance, which calculates the difference between these distributions, with a
high distance indicating a greater relevance of the noun phrase. We considered terms
with a minimum occurrence of 10, which resulted in 65 terms, and then we selected
the 60% (VOSviewer default) most relevant (Table 5).
We then created a co-occurrence network visualization, because visual networks
in literature reviews help to understand gaps in current literature and provide a way to
identify research gaps and at the same time highlight areas with significant published
work (Godwin, 2016).
Anetwork (Image 1) and density (Image 2) visualization, as well as a word cloud
(Image 3) based on the most prominent terms can be found below:
1 Term Occurrences Relevance score
digital transformation 362 0.4322
2 industry 135 0.6040
3 organization 77 0.4958
4 digitalization 71 10.474
5 innovation 68 12.895
6 enterprise 58 0.6265
7 change 57 0.5592
8 barrier 52 1.0500
9 challenge 50 0.7826
10 role 49 0.7454
11 effect 44 12.323
12 smes 44 0.8676
13 factor 43 0.6695
14 performance 43 0.9220
15 capability 40 0.6527
16 implementation 39 0.3977
17 business 38 1.0300
18 digital transformation strategy 37 20.541
19 business model 35 0.4282
20 development 34 0.4401
Table5 Keyword analysis
Journals and Conferences Publisher No of
Articles
Journal of Business Research Elsevier 7
International Journal of Production
Economics
Elsevier 4
Technovation Elsevier 4
Business Strategy and the Environment Wiley 3
MIS Quarterly Executive Indiana Uni-
versity Press
3
Research-Technology Management Taylor and
Francis
3
Table4 Articles per Journal/
Conference proceedings
1 3

--- PAGE 9 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
Image2: Density Visualization
Image1: Network Visualization
1 3

--- PAGE 10 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
Image 1: Network Visualization
ConceptDistribution
The classification of the papers resulted in four main concepts, as illustrated in Fig. 3.
Most papers referred to digital transformation strategy (56.5%), 52.9% referred to
barriers of digital transformation, 31.8% of digital transformation drivers, and finally,
15.3% of actors in digital transformation.
Concept Analysis
DriversofDigitalTransformation
The competitive landscape and market dynamics play a significant role in driving
digital transformation across industries (Berman, 2012; Bhattacharya & Momaya,
2021). Scholars have identified these drivers across diverse sectors, such as auto-
motive, retail, hospitality, manufacturing, financial services, construction, travel,
and others, where firms must reconsider their market positioning and strategies or
risk disruption (Sun et al., 2024). The intensity of these drivers is heavily moder-
ated by industry and firm characteristics, with highly disrupted sectors demanding
Image3: Word Cloud
1 3

--- PAGE 11 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
more urgent and comprehensive responses (Mühlburger & Krumay, 2024).The effect
is particularly strong for non-state-owned enterprises and firms operating in more
market-oriented environments (Nguyen et al., 2025). Incumbent firms, in particular,
face existential threats from digitally native entrants and cross-industry competitors
leveraging emerging technologies to deliver radically different value propositions
(Chanias et al., 2019; Forcadell et al., 2020; Högberg & Willermark, 2022). To
remain competitive and survive, incumbents must continuously sense and monitor
their industry landscapes, identify digitally driven substitutes, reassess their differ-
entiating capabilities, and implement an effective digital transformation strategy to
demonstrate organizational mindfulness (Li, 2019). Additionally, organizations are
increasingly turning to strategic partnerships and digital ecosystems to acquire miss-
ing competencies and enhance resilience against disruption, recognizing that compet-
itive advantage often resides in network effects and collaborative innovation (Warner
& Wäger, 2019; Meena et al., 2024).
In addition to responding to external market pressures, the optimization of opera-
tional efficiency through emerging digital technologies has been consistently identi-
fied as a distinct driver of digital transformation across industries. In manufacturing,
for example, production equipment connected to monitoring sensors offers advanced
analytics of both structured and unstructured data, enhancing quality control, produc-
tivity, agility, and waste reduction (Dohale et al., 2023; Wang & Shao, 2024). Such
technologies also support preventive maintenance and downtime mitigation caused
by unexpected failures (Mubarak et al., 2022). Beyond manufacturing, technologies
such as blockchain, IoTsensors, and artificial intelligence (AI) enhance procurement,
production planning, and fulfillment by providing real-time visibility across extended
value chains (Horváth & Szabó, 2019; Kiel, 2017). Similarly, logistics integration,
inventory optimization, and automated supplier coordination further strengthen sup-
ply chain resilience and flexibility in responding to changes in consumer demand
Fig.3 Concept distribution
1 3

--- PAGE 12 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
(Bona et al., 2021). Industrial CAD systems, simulations, and digital twins, also
allow firms to tailor product designs to customer specifications (Björkdahl, 2020).
Collectively, these technologies significantly accelerate decision-making (Bharadwaj
et al., 2013), improve productivity and reduce production costs (Tian et al., 2023),
reinforcing the positive relationship between digital transformation and organiza-
tional performance (Nwankpa & Roumani, 2016; Martín-Peña et al., 2019; Tian et
al., 2023). However, the extent to which such efficiency gains can be fully realized
often depends on an organization’s existing IT infrastructure and its capacity for
seamless integration (Dolganova & Deeva, 2019).
Beyond cost reduction and process optimization, organizations increasingly turn
to innovation as a source of differentiation and renewal. Innovation and business
model evolution are recognized in existing literature as major drivers of digital
transformation, since companies must continually improve their offerings and pro-
cesses to remain competitive (Li, 2020; Niu et al., 2023; Rubio-Andrés et al., 2024).
Scholars agree that, regardless of the sector an organization belongs to, competitive
advantage goes to companies that leverage new technologies to rapidly prototype and
cost-effectively scale new digital solutions, including digitally enabled innovations
in their product portfolio, operations, and business models, following a prospector
strategy (Kotarba, 2018; Mishra et al., 2023). In this way, firms gain more opportu-
nities for new revenue streams, enhanced delivery mechanisms, and value proposi-
tions that can disrupt competitors and enable international expansion. (Parviainen &
Tihinen, 2017; Strange et al., 2022; Ulrich et al., 2024). The literature offers several
examples, particularly of legacy organizations expanding into complementary digital
technologies. For instance, a board game manufacturer might now develop support-
ing digital products to complement its physical offerings (Hess et al., 2016). Some
companies have also undergone more radical restructuring. For example, in the print
media sector, firms are actively exploring entirely new digital revenue streams to
reduce dependence on print (Karimi &Walter, 2015). However, as scholars point out,
blending physical and digital environments requires developing internal capabilities
and forming external partnerships to acquire specialized skills. For example, manu-
facturing firms adopting smart, connected products and integrated digital solutions
across hardware, software, and services often rely on external collaboration (Gurb-
axani & Dunkle, 2019; Lichtenthaler, 2020). However, while digital transformation
promotes innovation performance, the size of the effect depends on firms’absorptive
capacity and weakens for firms with limited resources, particularly in less developed
regions (Xu et al., 2025).
According to existing research, another driver of digital transformation is compa-
nies’ ongoing desire to improve customer experiences and relationships by acquir-
ing digital skills and knowledge (Eling & Lehmann, 2018; Sehgal & Soni, 2024).
Firms aim to leverage technologies to gain detailed customer insights, enable seam-
less omnichannel interactions, personalize offerings, and blend digital with physical
environments. For example, companies can gather customer insights from integrated
data sources, both online and offline, allowing for highly personalized support and
context-aware interactions (Lichtenthaler, 2020; Nadkarni & Prügl, 2021), as well as
maintaining ongoing customer relationships and loyalty (Soto Setzke et al., 2021).
Social media analytics, for instance, helps gauge brand sentiment and adjust strate-
1 3

--- PAGE 13 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
gies to enable personalized marketing strategies. However, earning customer trust
around data transparency remains a challenge (Pandita & Vapiwala, 2024).
The COVID-19 pandemic crisis, uncertainty, and rapidly changing market condi-
tions have made organizational resilience a key focus for digital investments (Agos-
tino et al., 2021; George & Schillebeeckx, 2022; He et al., 2022). Organizations with
adaptive digital cultures that foster learning and encourage employees to innovate are
able to offer quick solutions when turbulences occur (Khurana et al., 2022; Awad &
Martín-Rojas, 2024). It has been proven that firms capable of transforming business
models digitally and reconfiguring value chain relationships, demonstrate resilience
against external disruptions (Gupta & Bose, 2022; Khurana et al., 2022). Addition-
ally, increased research and development (R&D) investments support the develop-
ment of differentiated, resilient competitive strategies (Gupta et al., 2022; Li, 2022;
Wen et al., 2022). Interestingly, firms that had clearly defined digital innovation road-
maps and strategic priorities before COVID-19 managed to show resilience and even
accelerate their transformation during the crisis (Denicolai & Previtali, 2022).
Finally, the literature emphasizes that digital strategies are increasingly informed
not only by competitive and operational concerns but also by the societal contexts
in which firms operate. Technology has changed societies globally, compelling
companies to sense shifts and shape their strategic priorities (Choy, 2020; George
& Schillebeeckx, 2022; Rey et al., 2024) and governments to create national strate-
gies (Yang & Gu, 2021), aiming to maximize their digital dividends (Galindo-Martín
et al., 2019). As emerging technologies like artificial intelligence (AI), blockchain,
and the internet of things (IoT) become deeply embedded into consumer lifestyles,
they profoundly alter societal expectations, relationships, and cultural visions of pos-
sible futures (Franke & Zoubir, 2020; Ndemo & Weiss, 2017). Therefore, corporate
digital strategic priorities are increasingly shaped by societal perspectives, given the
potentially significant impacts of technologies on employment, ethics, inclusion, and
environmental sustainability (Diniz et al., 2023; Petani et al., 2023; Buonocore et al.,
2024). For example, digitally tracking circular economy activities enables organiza-
tions to improve their environmental performance along with their financial results
(Khan et al., 2011; Nayal et al., 2022; Tang et al., 2020). In general, research shows
that digital transformation improves both, corporate social responsibility (CSR) and
environmental, social, and governance (ESG) performance. However, the positive
impact of digital transformation on CSR performance depends on resource abun-
dance and institutional pressures, appearing more strongly in firms with abundant
human, cultural, employment, and economic resources, as well as under strict envi-
ronmental enforcement or high media attention (Sun et al., 2024; Huang, 2025).
DigitalizationStrategy
A digital transformation journey is inherently challenging and requires structured
guidance and planning. Defining and communicating a clear digital strategy is there-
fore essential for any organization (Aghakhani et al., 2024; Chanias et al., 2019).
A roadmap to digital transformation involves more than embracing technology, it
includes shaping a digital culture, introducing organizational changes, and reshaping
mindsets at the organizational, management, and employee levels (Trenkle, 2019;
1 3

--- PAGE 14 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
Lichtenthaler, 2020). To support this, researchers have proposed various frameworks
to guide the development and implementation of digitalization strategies (Hess et
al., 2016; Ng et al., 2018; Nwaiwu et al., 2020; Rautenbach et al., 2019). These
frameworks typically outline phases that organizations should follow during their
digital journey. Common high-level phases encompass sensing the drivers behind the
decision that a digital transformation is necessary, assessing the current state, then
seizing opportunities by defining a vision and strategy, conducting pilot projects prior
to organization-wide implementation, and engaging in a continuous improvement
strategy (Erol et al., 2016; Schallmo et al., 2017) and even apply design thinking to
develop a digital transformation strategy (Vendraminelli et al., 2023).
Before a strategy can be effectively implemented, assessing the organization’s
current digital maturity through audits, capability analysis, and benchmarking can
assist in understanding where the starting point is and determine which gaps need
to be addressed when designing a digital transformation strategy (Issa et al., 2018).
Various tools and techniques are suggested for assessing digital maturity, such as
questionnaires, process mapping, decision matrices, and SWOT analysis. Both inter-
nal stakeholders (e.g., managers) and external ones (e.g., customers, vendors) should
be involved to gather diverse inputs. (Dolla et al., 2023; Kontić & Vidicki, 2018).
Pilot projects to test ideas on a small scale before enterprise-wide implementation are
commonly recommended. Pilot projects, proof of concepts, and controlled experi-
ments are often recommended to validate assumptions and demonstrate business
value before wider rollout. Equally important is ongoing evaluation against key per-
formance indicators (KPIs), ensuring that transformation is treated as a continuous
process rather than a one-time initiative (Ivančić et al., 2019).
A clear strategic vision and strong leadership commitment are recognized as
another fundamental element of a successful digital strategy. Leaders should demon-
strate entrepreneurial behavior and encourage cultural change to promote innovation
(Kane, 2019; Li, 2022; Mugge et al., 2020). They are responsible for articulating
long-term, future-oriented goals and consistently communicating this vision across
the organization (Kringelum et al., 2024; Trzaska et al., 2021). The effectiveness
of leadership, however, is heavily influenced by the existing organizational context,
which should foster leadership styles like transformational leadership that promote
calculated risk-taking to support digitalization (AlNuaimi et al., 2022; Mitroulis et
al., 2023; Yao et al., 2024), innovation levels, support from policymakers, and obsta-
cles faced in the countries where organizations operate (Kludacz-Alessandri et al.,
2025). However, such styles require sufficient managerial capabilities to be enacted
effectively. Where management capabilities are insufficient, organizations may need
to consider a change in leadership (Anim-Yeboah et al., 2020; Kane, 2019; Sanchez
& Zuntini, 2018). Beyond these structural considerations, leadership remains criti-
cal in cultivating a supportive digital culture, strategically allocating resources, and
acting as role models who embody the transformation they promote (Schwarzmüller
et al., 2018). Furthermore, effective digital transformation requires leaders across
departments, particularly business and information systems (IS) managers, to coop-
erate closely to bridge traditional divides and ensure successful strategy implementa-
tion (Hansen, 2011; Veile et al., 2019).
1 3

--- PAGE 15 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
The cultivation of a digital organizational culture acts as a critical enabler of digi-
tal transformation. Research shows that successful digital transformation depends on
fostering a culture that embraces agility, experimentation, collaboration, calculated
risk-taking, and continuous learning (Kane, 2019; Proksch et al., 2021). Adhocracy
culture, in particular, has been shown to strongly support digital transformation capa-
bilities (Cao et al., 2025). Digitally mature firms promote these values by cultivating
mindsets that extend beyond individual roles and silos, encourage knowledge shar-
ing, innovative thinking, entrepreneurial initiative, and open communication (Bindel
Sibassaha et al., 2025).To support this, employees across all functions, not only in IT,
must be empowered to explore digital opportunities, with collaboration and knowl-
edge exchange actively rewarded (Kane, 2019). Tools, platforms, and community-
building initiatives further strengthen this culture (Lanzolla &Anderson, 2008). The
organization’s size and industry often moderate the impact of culture. In smaller,
more agile organizations, cultural shifts might be more readily implemented, whereas
larger, more established enterprises may face deeper-seated resistance to change,
requiring more intensive change management efforts (Chen et al., 2024). Beyond the
firm’s boundaries, partnerships, acquisitions, and participation in digital ecosystems
expand access to shared resources and knowledge, strengthening the strategic goals
of digital transformation (Bharadwaj et al., 2013;Aghimien et al., 2020).
While culture establishes the environment, employee capabilities and human
resources practices form a distinct pillar of implementing a successful digital trans-
formation strategy. Developing the right skills and mindsets within a digital organi-
zational culture enables organizations to adapt effectively to the digital age (Gobble,
2018; Ostmeier & Strobel, 2022).As automation advances, the nature of employees’
work increasingly shifts from machine operation toward higher-order tasks such as
decision-making and problem-solving (Bücker et al., 2016).At the same time, human
abilities, such as empathy, retain their unique value, as they cannot be replicated by
technology (Robu & Lazar, 2021). Additionally, digital skills related to program-
ming, data analysis, and artificial intelligence are becoming more important. Human
resources (HR) strategy plays a key role in proactively assessing required competen-
cies and developing the workforce accordingly through assessments, recruitment,
and capability-building initiatives (Butschan et al., 2019). Sometimes, a complete
workforce transformation is necessary (Furjan et al., 2020; Veile et al., 2019), which
demands significant changes in an organization’s HR management (Eden et al., 2019;
Fettig et al., 2018). However, the success of HR interventions is often contingent on
the broader organizational culture and leadership commitment (Bindel Sibassaha et
al.,2025).Alackofemployeeacceptance,oftenrootedinfearofchange,canseverely
impede transformation efforts, underscoring the need for motivational strategies and
transparent communication (Furjan et al., 2020). Furthermore, employees themselves
must demonstrate strong learning abilities, creativity, and openness to collaboration
to thrive in digitally transformed environments, highlighting a reciprocal relationship
between organizational support and individual capacity (Weber et al., 2022).
Rethinking business processes and organizational structures is widely recognized
as a core component of digital strategy, with direct implications for customer cen-
tricity and operational efficiency. Depending on their context and goals, firms may
initiate the digital transformation process either by transforming their operations by
1 3

--- PAGE 16 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
digitalizing processes or by redesigning customer experiences (Begnini et al., 2024;
Raimo et al., 2023). In many cases, existing processes should not be simply digi-
talized, as multiple studies highlight the need to rethink and reengineer them for
a digital context to maximize automation, efficiency, and even labor productivity
(Heavin & Power, 2018; Zhou et al., 2025). Organizational structures often require
realignmenttoenablecross-functionalcollaborationandinformationsharing,thereby
supporting an integrated digital strategy (Björkdahl, 2020; Piccinini et al., 2015).
Whether firms prioritize digitalizing operations or redesigning customer experiences
is typically a contextual choice shaped by organizational objectives and market pres-
sures (Begnini et al., 2024). Beyond processes and structures, firms can also optimize
supply chains, production systems, and internal value chains by integrating digital
technologies and visualizing workflows (Björkdahl, 2020; Raji et al., 2021; Sanchez
& Zuntini, 2018). In some cases, such transformations require advanced digital capa-
bilities that firms may need to access through strategic partnerships (Lichtenthaler,
2020; Yadav & Nisha, 2022). However, certain critical processes that directly affect
customer experience may need to remain in-house to preserve quality and control
(Sanchez & Zuntini, 2018).
Althoughprocessesandpeopleareessential,technologyandITinfrastructureform
the foundation that enables organizations to execute digital transformation strategies
(Pousttchi et al., 2019). Cloud platforms and internet of things architectures allow
for rapid scaling, innovation, and agility regarding new opportunities (Sebastian et
al., 2020; Wang et al., 2023). Integrated systems, spanning the organization, improve
information flows and data accessibility (Loonam et al., 2018). Using solutions
related to artificial intelligence, big data, and automation can help decision-making,
optimize operations, and transform business flows (Mubarak et al., 2022). They also
provide valuable insights from data that can be utilized to develop additional value
for customers (Eling & Lehmann, 2018).Adopting modular, secure enterprise archi-
tectures facilitates connections with new digital technologies and external partners
(Leyh et al., 2017). The use of APIs and microservices aids rapid application devel-
opment and ecosystem integration (Tsiavos & Kitsios, 2022). Efficient information
system (IS) planning and the use of the appropriate software are also crucial (Eller
et al., 2020; Hansen, 2011). Firms should use agile processes if they decide to create
their own software (Shaughnessy, 2018), which improves time to market and swiftly
adjusts to changes in requirements if they offer digital goods. When implementing
new technologies, pilot testing is recommended before a wider organizational roll-
out (Parviainen & Tihinen, 2017). Monitoring systems and cybersecurity controls
are also critical for digital infrastructure (Stentoft et al., 2020), as security plays a
very important role in digital-driven environments (Imgrund et al., 2018; Veile et al.,
2019). However, simply adopting technology alone is not sufficient to make a mean-
ingful impact.As mentioned earlier, organizations need the right talent and processes
in place to fully exploit the capabilities provided by new technologies (Gaffley &
Pelser, 2021; Loonam et al., 2018) and ensure that technology decisions align with
and support the overall digital strategy (Gurbaxani & Dunkle, 2019).
1 3

--- PAGE 17 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
ActorsinDigitalTransformation
To oversee the strategy execution and drive digital change, several studies have
emphasized the importance of appointing a Chief Digital Officer (CDO) or an equiv-
alent role (Ivančić et al., 2019; Singh et al., 2020). The Chief Digital Officer (CDO)
serves as both the leader and evangelist of the organization’s digital vision, driv-
ing alignment across initiatives and overseeing transformation projects. Ideally, the
CDO combines deep expertise in both business strategy and technology, bridging
the traditional gap between business and IT. Research shows that appointing a CDO
enhances firm performance, with the effect being more pronounced when the CDO
is hired externally rather than promoted internally (Wei et al., 2024; Schäper et al.,
2025). However, the CDO’s role is not solitary, but it is deeply intertwined with the
broader executive team. The CEO’s explicit communication of the digital impera-
tive and the active involvement of other C-suite members are crucial for securing
resources, overcoming resistance, and embedding digital thinking across the organi-
zation (Kringelum et al., 2024). Conversely, the absence of a unified executive vision
can significantly diminish the CDO’s effectiveness (Schwarzmüller et al., 2018). In
addition to appointing a CDO, scholars emphasize the value of establishing a dedi-
cated cross-functional digital transformation or digital innovation unit (DTU/DIU),
typically led by the CDO. Unlike traditional IT departments, these units focus on
planning, regulating, and coordinating digitalization processes across business func-
tions, with their cross-functional nature breaking down silos and fostering collabora-
tion essential for successful transformation, while also building dynamic capabilities
(Schumm et al., 2022).
Technology is an important component of a digital transformation strategy, there-
fore, the Chief Information Officer (CIO) and the ITdepartment, play a critical role in
designing the technology infrastructure, consolidating legacy systems, implementing
new digital platforms, and providing the technical capabilities needed to enable busi-
ness change (Schäper et al., 2025). A critical tension often arises between the need
for operational stability (traditional IT) and the demand for rapid innovation (digital
transformation IT). Some firms address this through a bimodal IT approach with
separate traditional IT and digital transformation IT units to balance daily operations
and innovation (Horlach et al., 2016; Wessel et al., 2021). Beyond IT leadership,
specialized talent is also essential. Data scientists are increasingly important for man-
aging big data and artificial intelligence (AI), enabling efficient data management
and advanced analytics. Similarly, research and development (R&D) staff contribute
by developing new digital offerings and driving innovation across the organization
(Mugge et al., 2020; Holmstrom, 2022).
While internal actors are essential, digital transformation increasingly involves
a wider network of external stakeholders. Strategic partnerships, acquisitions, and
active involvement in digital ecosystems expand access to specialized resources,
knowledge, and capabilities that might not be available internally (Eling & Lehmann,
2018). Customers also play a proactive role, with their changing expectations and
feedback guiding digital initiatives, especially in areas like customer experience and
personalized services (Bharadwaj et al., 2013).Additionally, external consultants and
technology vendors contribute valuable expertise and solutions, though their integra-
1 3

--- PAGE 18 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
tion must be carefully managed to ensure alignment with organizational goals and
capabilities (Lichtenthaler, 2020).
ChallengesandBarriersofDigitalTransformation
Among the most widely cited challenges for digital transformation are cultural bar-
riers, particularly employee resistance and organizational inertia. Employee and
middle management resistance stems from anxiety about job security as technology
changes roles, skepticism toward leadership’s vision, and an aversion to learning new
skills (Ismail et al., 2018). Sufficient engagement, training, and cultural evolution
are imperative to motivate participation (Horváth & Szabó, 2019; Raj et al., 2020).
Moreover, legacy cultural traits like rigid structures, silos, and risk aversion are also
misaligned with digital transformation ideals like agility, collaboration, and innova-
tion (Fettig et al., 2018; Hassan et al., 2024). The intensity of cultural resistance is
often moderated by the organization’s prior experience with change, its communi-
cation effectiveness, and the perceived threat of job displacement, which can vary
significantly across industries and organizational sizes (Chen et al., 2024; Valtonen
& Holopainen, 2025).
Closely related to cultural resistance, but distinct in scope, are barriers tied to
human capital and the absence of necessary skills, such as software development,
data analytics capabilities, and cognitive abilities to leverage new tools (Johannes-
son et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024). Extensive training and competence building are
essential (Nicolás-Agustín et al., 2025). However, HR departments might be unpre-
pared to swiftly organize training for existing staff members to gain the competencies
and skills required (Omrani et al., 2024; Packmohr et al., 2024). Firms may need to
redeploy staff in value-added roles. Lower productivity during transition, as employ-
ees learn new systems, can be disruptive too, however, allowing time for adaptation
is important (Tarutė et al., 2018). Additionally, the impact of skill gaps is moderated
by the complexity of the digital technologies being adopted and the organization’s
ability to attract new and retain digital talent (Gaffley & Pelser, 2021).
Another category of barriers relates to leadership and organizational readiness,
where the absence of a digital vision creates uncertainty (Klein et al., 2024). A com-
mon observation at the management level is the prevailing lack of comprehension
concerning the significance of digitalization and the constituents of digital culture
(Raj et al., 2020; Sanchez & Zuntini, 2018). The absence of a digital transformation
necessity belief, engenders uncertainty regarding the potential return on investment,
typically resulting in insufficient funding and a lack of prioritization (Stentoft et al.,
2020). Assessing benefits in terms of revenue, costs, and sustainability is essential
when designing a digital transformation strategy (Karekla et al., 2021; von Leipzig
et al., 2017). Even if the significance of digital transformation is recognized by man-
agement, many of those in charge lack the appropriate skills and competencies to
formulate a strategy and communicate a clear vision and common thinking towards
a successful digital transformation (Rautenbach et al., 2019). Sometimes, an orga-
nization itself faces challenges due to the lack of its readiness and agility to trans-
form (Dolganova & Deeva, 2019), missing an appropriate organizational structure
(Horváth & Szabó, 2019; Raj et al., 2020) or having difficulties when changing their
1 3

--- PAGE 19 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
processes to exploit new technologies, data, etc. (Björkdahl, 2020; Bollweg et al.,
2020). The impact of these leadership and readiness barriers is amplified in organiza-
tions with hierarchical structures and centralized decision-making, where resistance
to change at the top can cascade throughout the entire organization (Dolganova &
Deeva, 2019).
Technology is not just an enabler, it can also be a barrier to digital transformation
(Tsiavos & Kitsios, 2022). Many companies fear the risks of implementing a digitali-
zation strategy (Andriushchenko et al., 2020; Müller et al., 2020), as there are usually
issues integrating new technologies into their existing outdated information system
stack, because legacy IT systems hinder integration with modern digital solutions,
making upgrading legacy architectures essential but challenging (Irani et al., 2023).
Data management hurdles like integrating distributed datasets and ensuring quality
in complex new data flows also surface (Müller et al., 2020; Struijk et al., 2023).
Moreover, organizations have security concerns that arise from using new technolo-
gies and handling an increased amount of data. Mastering data governance across the
value chain is critical yet difficult. Companies fear that it would be difficult for them
to satisfy data government policies and regulations (Bollweg et al., 2020; Hinings et
al., 2018), therefore, robust access controls and monitoring mechanisms are impor-
tant (Raj et al., 2020).
Furthermore, apart from the aforementioned obstacles pertaining to technology
and organizational factors, external policy hurdles can impede digital progress. Com-
plex and evolving regulatory restrictions around data privacy, industry regulations,
and compliance pose challenges, especially for global firms (Tan et al., 2025).Adapt-
ing dynamically to fragmented regulations across jurisdictions is difficult. Stringent
data localization laws also restrict digital operations reliant on global data flows
(Xia & Md Johar, 2025). Moreover, weak intellectual property protection regimes in
some countries disincentivize technology investments and innovation (Hinings et al.,
2018). Restrictive internet regulations and taxation in some geographies, also impede
digital advancement (Müller et al., 2020).
Based on our research, we are able to propose a theoretical model that supports
the understanding of key components and relationships involved in an organization’s
digital transformation journey (Fig. 4):
Discussion
The purpose of this paper was to provide a comprehensive synthesis of the digital
transformation literature by combining bibliometric mapping with the Webster and
Watson methodology. Drawing on 170 peer-reviewed articles, we aimed to combine
established knowledge with new insights and to clarify how the core elements of
digital transformation are connected under different contextual conditions.
The outcomes of our bibliometric analysis indicate that scholarly publications
concerning digital transformation have experienced a consistent rise since 2016, with
a notable surge during the COVID-19 pandemic period. The body of literature is
extensively distributed across over 132 journals and conferences, encompassing con-
tributions from management, information systems, organizational studies, and other
1 3

--- PAGE 20 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
related fields. Ultimately, our analysis highlights that the terminology used to define
digital transformation lacks standardization, with a multitude of definitions and con-
ceptual frameworks present throughout the literature.
Our thematic analysis revealed four main concepts regarding digital transforma-
tion: drivers, barriers, strategy and actors. While these have become reference points
in the literature, studies often examine them in isolation. Our synthesis demonstrates
that digital transformation is the interplay of these concepts and that contingencies
at institutional, industry, organizational, and personal levels shape their effect and
interaction. We found that drivers, such as competitive pressure, initiate change, but
their impact varies by context. For instance, competitive pressure in turbulent sectors
often speeds up transformation, while in more stable industries, similar pressures
may lead to incremental changes. Translating drivers into strategies, such as devel-
oping leadership vision, cultural renewal, skill development, process redesign, and
technological investment, also depends on the situation. Strategies aligned with an
organization’s size, maturity, and regulatory requirements are more likely to succeed,
whereas misalignment can lead to resistance or limited results.Actors implement and
adjust strategies, yet both structural and institutional factors influence their effective-
ness. A CDO or CIO may be highly effective in flexible governance systems, but
face limitations in rigid hierarchies or under strict regulatory frameworks. Employee
willingness and ability to adopt new practices further influence outcomes, highlight-
ing the importance of personal factors such as skills, openness, and leadership style.
Barriers such as legacy systems, cultural inertia, or compliance requirements not only
slow progress but can also shift strategies and reshape the role of actors.
Fig.4 Theoretical Model. Note:The solid line indicates a relationship, while the dashed line represents
moderation
1 3

--- PAGE 21 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
Viewed through the lens of the dynamic capabilities theory (Teece, 2007), digital
transformation can be interpreted as a process of sensing pressures, seizing oppor-
tunities, and reconfiguring resources and practices. Contingency theory (Donaldson,
2001) clarifies why this process is not uniform: the same drivers, strategies, actors,
and barriers may combine in different ways depending on sectoral turbulence, orga-
nizational characteristics, institutional frameworks, and the competencies of indi-
viduals. Thus, our findings position digital transformation as a contingent dynamic
capability process.
TheoreticalContribution
This study makes three theoretical contributions. First, it advances theory by inte-
grating dynamic capabilities and contingency theory, offering a framework in which
digital transformation is explained as a contingent capability-building process rather
than a deterministic path of technology adoption or strategy alignment. Second, it
moves beyond the separate analysis of drivers, strategies, actors, and barriers by
theorizing their interconnections and showing that outcomes are the result of their
configurations rather than isolated effects. Third, it extends digital transformation
theory by emphasizing multi-level contingencies, industry, organizational, institu-
tional, and personal that define additional, more complex conditions for successful
transformation.
ManagerialandPolicyContribution
For both managers and policymakers, the findings highlight that digital transforma-
tion should be approached as a context-sensitive process rather than a purely techno-
logical process. Managers are advised to align strategy, cultural readiness, workforce
capabilities, process redesign, and technological infrastructure, while treating barri-
ers such as legacy systems, skills gaps, or compliance demands as design constraints
that define successful roadmaps. Cross-functional governance, capability building,
and ecosystem engagement can enhance execution. However, strategies should be
adapted to environmental conditions, where radical reconfiguration is necessary in
turbulent contexts and incremental adaptation is more suitable in more stable ones.
Policymakers, in turn, can influence digital transformation success by providing
clear and consistent regulatory frameworks on data governance, interoperability, and
cybersecurity, as well as targeted support measures that enable firms to build capabil-
ities and access resources. By integrating sustainability and inclusiveness into digital
policy agendas, governments can also encourage firms to embed ESG priorities into
their transformation strategies, thereby aligning organizational objectives with soci-
etal expectations.
SuggestionsforFurtherResearch
The process of digital transformation is complex and ongoing, impacting many parts
of an organization. Therefore, scholars need to conduct further research to gain a
deeper understanding of this process and its implications for both theory and prac-
1 3

--- PAGE 22 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
tice. Based on our research, we propose several avenues for further investigation.
Researchers should examine how the success of digital strategies is influenced by
factors such as the organization’s industry and size, including how different drivers
like competition, customer demands, or regulation impact industries that are chang-
ing rapidly compared to more stable ones. Additionally, researchers could explore
the role of emerging technologies like the metaverse,AI, and blockchain in enabling
new forms of digital transformation and evaluate how these technologies reshape
organizational strategies and structures. Furthermore, there is a need to study how to
foster cultural change to embed a digital transformation mindset at the management
level and how to address employee concerns with specific action points effectively.
Lastly, future research should investigate the challenges of managing large-scale
international transformation initiatives, focusing on identifying barriers, transferable
practices, and effective governance mechanisms.
Limitations
Although we aimed for a thorough review, our study has some limitations. We may
havemissedpublicationsthatdiscussdigitaltransformationbutdonotexplicitlymen-
tion it in the title or abstract, despite using wildcard terms in our database searches
to capture various keyword variations. Additionally, focusing on business journals
excluded more technical papers that could have offered valuable insights. Our search
was also limited to English-language publications, which may have excluded rel-
evant articles written in languages other than English. Furthermore, the analysis is
conceptual rather than empirical. While our theoretical model, which places digi-
tal transformation within a contingent dynamic capabilities frame, provides strong
explanatory potential, its validity requires empirical testing across various contexts.
1 3

--- PAGE 23 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
No Article Year Research
Type
Barriers Strategy Drivers Ac-
tors
1 Aghakhani et al. (Aghakhani et
al., 2024)
2024 Theoretical X
2 Aghimien et al. (Aghimien et
al., 2020)
2020 Empirical X X
3 Agostino et al. (Agostino et al.,
2021)
2021 Empirical X
4 Akberdina (Akberdina, 2018) 2018 Empirical X
5 AlNuaimi et al. (AlNuaimi et
al., 2022)
2022 Empirical X
6 Andal-Ancion et al. (Andal-
Ancion et al., 2003)
2003 Empirical X X
7 Andriushchenko et al. (Andri-
ushchenko et al., 2020)
2020 Empirical X X
8 Anim-Yeboah et al. (Anim-
Yeboah et al., 2020)
2020 Empirical X X
9 Awad and Martín-Rojas (Awad
& Martín-Rojas, 2024)
2024 Empirical X X
10 Begnini et al. (Begnini et al.,
2024)
2024 Empirical X X
11 Berman (Berman, 2012) 2012 Empirical X X
12 Bharadwaj et al. (Bharadwaj et
al., 2013)
2013 Theoretical X X
13 Bhattacharya and Momaya
(Bhattacharya and Momaya,
2021)
2021 Empirical X
14 Bindel Sibassaha et al. (Bindel
Sibassaha et al., 2025)
2025 Empirical X
15 Björkdahl (Björkdahl, 2020) 2020 Empirical X X X X
16 Bollweg et al. (Bollweg et al.,
2020)
2020 Empirical X X X
17 Bona et al. (Bona et al., 2021) 2021 Theoretical X X
18 Brink and Packmohr (Brink &
Packmohr, 2023)
2023 Empirical X X
19 Bücker et al. (Bücker et al.,
2016)
2016 Empirical X
20 Buonocore et al. (Buonocore et
al., 2024)
2024 Theoretical X
21 Butschan et al. (Butschan et al.,
2019)
2019 Empirical X X
22 Cao et al. (Cao et al., 2025) 2025 Empirical X
23 Chanias et al. (Chanias et al.,
2019)
2019 Empirical X X X
24 Chanias and Hess (Chanias &
Hess, 2016)
2016 Empirical X X X
25 Chen et al. (Chen et al., 2024) 2024 Empirical X
26 Choy (Choy, 2020) 2020 Empirical X
27 Correani et al. (Correani et al.,
2020)
2020 Empirical X
Table6 Concept matrix
1 3

--- PAGE 24 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
No Article Year Research
Type
Barriers Strategy Drivers Ac-
tors
28 Dahmani et al. (Dahmani et al.,
2021)
2021 Theoretical X
29 Del Castillo Castro et al. (Del
Castillo Castro et al., 2023)
2023 Empirical X
30 Dengler and Matthes (Dengler
& Matthes, 2018)
2018 Empirical X X
31 Denicolai and Previtali
(Denicolai & Previtali, 2022)
2022 Empirical X X
32 Diniz et al. (Diniz et al., 2023) 2023 Empirical X
33 Dohale et al. (Dohale et al.,
2023)
2023 Empirical X
34 Dolganova and Deeva (Dol-
ganova & Deeva, 2019)
2019 Theoretical X X
35 Dolla et al. (Dolla et al., 2023) 2023 Empirical X
36 Eden et al. (Eller et al., 2020) 2020 Empirical X
37 Ekman et al. (Ekman et al.,
2019)
2019 Empirical X X X X
38 Eling and Lehman (Eling &
Lehmann, 2018)
2018 Theoretical X X X
39 Eller et al. (Eller et al., 2020) 2020 Empirical X
40 Fettig et al. (Fettig et al., 2018) 2018 Empirical X X
41 Forcadell et al. (Forcadell et
al., 2020)
2020 Empirical X
42 Franke and Zubir (Franke &
Zoubir, 2020)
2020 Theoretical X
43 Furjan et al. (Furjan et al.,
2020)
2020 Empirical X X X
44 Gaffley and Pelser (Gaffley &
Pelser, 2021)
2021 Empirical X X X
45 Galindo-Martín et al. (Galindo-
Martín et al., 2019)
2019 Empirical X
46 George and Schillebeeckx
(George & Schillebeeckx, 2022)
2022 Theoretical X
47 Gobble (Gobble, 2018) 2018 Theoretical X
48 Gupta and Bose (Gupta & Bose,
2022)
2022 Empirical X
49 Gupta et al. (Gupta et al., 2022) 2022 Empirical X
50 Gurbaxani and Dunkle (Gurb-
axani & Dunkle, 2019)
2019 Empirical X X
51 Haffke et al. (Haffke et al.,
2016)
2016 Empirical X
52 Hanelt et al. (Hanelt et al.,
2021)
2021 Theoretical X X
53 Hansen (Hansen, 2011) 2011 Empirical X X X
54 Hassan et al. (Hassan et al.,
2024)
2024 Empirical X
55 He et al. (He et al., 2022) 2022 Empirical X X
56 Heavin and Power (Heavin &
Power, 2018)
2018 Theoretical X
Table6 (continued)
1 3

--- PAGE 25 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
No Article Year Research
Type
Barriers Strategy Drivers Ac-
tors
57 Hess et al. (Hess et al., 2016) 2016 Empirical X X X X
58 Hinings et al. (Hinings et al.,
2018)
2018 Theoretical X X
59 Högberg and Willermark (Hög-
berg & Willermark, 2022)
2022 Empirical X X
60 Holmstrom (Holmstrom, 2022) 2022 Theoretical X
61 Horlach et al. (Horlach et al.,
2016)
2016 Theoretical X X X
62 Horlacher et al. (Horlacher &
Hess, 2016)
2016 Empirical X X X
63 Horváth and Szabo (Horváth &
Szabó, 2019)
2019 Empirical X X
64 Huang (Huang, 2025) 2025 Empirical X
65 Imgrund et al. (Imgrund et al.,
2018)
2018 Theoretical X
66 Irani et al. (Irani et al., 2023) 2023 Empirical X
67 Ismail et al. (Ismail et al., 2018) 2018 Theoretical X X
68 Ivančić et al. (Ivančić et al.,
2019)
2019 Empirical X X X
69 Johannesson et al. (Johannesson
et al., 2023)
2023 Empirical X
70 Kane (Kane, 2019) 2019 Empirical X X X
71 Karekla et al. (Karekla et al.,
2021)
2021 Empirical X
72 Karimi and Walter (Karimi &
Walter, 2015)
2015 Empirical X
73 Khan et al. (Khan et al., 2021) 2021 Empirical X X
74 Khurana et al. (Khurana et al.,
2022)
2022 Empirical X X
75 Kiel (Kiel, 2017) 2017 Theoretical X
76 Klein et al. (Klein et al., 2024) 2024 Empirical X
77 Kludacz-Alessandri et al. (Klu-
dacz-Alessandri et al., 2025)
2025 Empirical X
78 Kontić and Vidicki (Kontić &
Vidicki, 2018)
2018 Empirical X
79 Kotarba (Kotarba, 2018) 2018 Theoretical X
80 Kringelum et al. (Kringelum et
al., 2024)
2024 Empirical X
81 Lanzolla et al. (Lanzolla &
Anderson, 2008)
2008 Empirical X X
82 Leyh et al. (Leyh et al., 2017) 2017 Theoretical X
83 Li (Li, 2022) 2022 Empirical X X
84 Li (Li, 2020) 2020 Empirical X
85 Li (Li, 2019) 2019 Empirical X X
86 Li et al. (Li et al., 2018) 2018 Empirical X
87 Li et al. (Li et al., 2022) 2022 Empirical X
88 Lichtenthaler (Lichtenthaler,
2020)
2020 Theoretical X X
Table6 (continued)
1 3

--- PAGE 26 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
No Article Year Research
Type
Barriers Strategy Drivers Ac-
tors
89 Loonam et al. (Loonam et al.,
2018)
2018 Theoretical X X
90 Maletič et al. (Maletič et al.,
2023)
2023 Empirical X X
91 Martín-Peña et al. (Martín-Peña
et al., 2019)
2019 Empirical X
92 Matt et al. (Matt et al., 2015) 2015 Empirical X X X
93 Meena et al. (Meena et al.,
2024)
2024 Empirical X X
94 Mishra et al. (Mishra et al.,
2023)
2023 Empirical Χ
95 Mitroulis et al. (Mitroulis et al.,
2023)
2023 Theoretical X X
96 Mubarak et al. (Mubarak et al.,
2022)
2022 Theoretical X X
97 Mugge et al. (Mugge et al.,
2020)
2020 Empirical X X X
98 Mühlburger and Krumay (Müh-
lburger & Krumay, 2024)
2024 Empirical X
99 Müller et al. (Müller et al.,
2020)
2020 Empirical X X
100 Nadkarni and Prügl (Nadkarni
& Prügl, 2021)
2021 Theoretical X X X X
101 Nayal et al. (Nayal et al., 2022) 2022 Empirical X
102 Ndemo and Weiss (Ndemo &
Weiss, 2017)
2017 Theoretical X X
103 Ng et al. (Ng et al., 2018) 2018 Empirical X
104 Nguyen (Nguyen et al., 2025) 2025 Empirical X
105 Nicolás-Agustín et al. (Nicolás-
Agustín et al., 2025)
2025 Empirical X X
106 Niu et al. (Niu et al., 2023) 2023 Theoretical X
107 Nwaiwu et al. (Nwaiwu et al.,
2020)
2020 Empirical X
108 Nwankpa and Rumani (Nwank-
pa & Roumani, 2016)
2016 Empirical X
109 Omrani et al. (Omrani et al.,
2024)
2024 Empirical X
110 Ostmeier and Strobel (Ostmeier
& Strobel, 2022)
2022 Empirical X
111 Packmohr et al. (Packmohr et
al., 2024)
2024 Empirical X X
112 Pandita and Vapiwala (Pandita
& Vapiwala, 2024)
2024 Empirical X X
113 Parviainen and Tihinen (Parvi-
ainen & Tihinen, 2017)
2017 Empirical X X
114 Petani et al. (Petani et al., 2023) 2023 Empirical X X
115 Piccinini et al. (Piccinini et al.,
2015)
2015 Empirical X
Table6 (continued)
1 3

--- PAGE 27 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
No Article Year Research
Type
Barriers Strategy Drivers Ac-
tors
116 Pousttchi et al. (Pousttchi et al.,
2019)
2019 Empirical X
117 Proksch et al. (Proksch et al.,
2021)
2021 Empirical X
118 Raimo et al. (Raimo et al.,
2023)
2023 Empirical X
119 Raj et al. (Raj et al., 2020) 2020 Empirical X
120 Raji et al. (Raji et al., 2021) 2021 Empirical X
121 Rautenbach et al. (Rautenbach
et al., 2019)
2019 Theoretical X
122 Rey et al. (Rey et al., 2024) 2024 Empirical X X
123 Robu and Lazar (Robu & Lazar,
2021)
2021 Empirical X
124 Rubio-Andrés et al. (Rubio-
Andrés et al., 2024)
2024 Empirical X X
125 Sanchez and Zuntini (Sanchez
& Zuntini, 2018)
2018 Empirical X
126 Schäper et al. (Schäper et al.,
2025)
2025 Empirical X
127 Schallmo et al. (Schallmo et
al., 2017)
2017 Empirical X
128 Schumm et al. (Schumm et al.,
2022)
2022 Empirical X
129 Schwarzmüller et al. (Schwarz-
müller et al., 2018)
2018 Empirical X
130 Sebastian et al. (Sebastian et
al., 2020)
2020 Empirical X X X
131 Sehgal and Soni (Sehgal &
Soni, 2024)
2024 Empirical X
132 Shaughnessy (Shaughnessy,
2018)
2018 Theoretical X
133 Singh et al. (Singh et al., 2020) 2020 Empirical X X X
134 Soto Setzke et al. (Soto Setzke
et al., 2023)
2023 Empirical X
135 Stentoft et al. (Stentoft et al.,
2020)
2020 Empirical X X
136 Strange et al. (Strange et al.,
2022)
2022 Theoretical X
137 Struijk et al. (Struijk et al.,
2023)
2023 Empirical X
138 Sun et al. (Sun et al., 2024) 2024 Empirical X
139 Sun et al. (Sun et al., 2019) 2019 Empirical X X
140 Tan et al. (Tan et al., 2025) 2025 Empirical X
141 Tang et al. (Tang et al., 2020) 2020 Empirical X X
142 Tarutė et al. (Tarutė et al., 2018) 2018 Theoretical X
143 Tian et al. (Tian et al., 2023) 2023 Empirical X
144 Trenkle (Trenkle, 2019) 2019 Empirical X
145 Trzaska et al. (Trzaska et al.,
2021)
2021 Empirical X X X X
Table6 (continued)
1 3

--- PAGE 28 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
Appendix
The concept matrix, which shows the main concept (digital transformation drivers,
barriers, strategy and actors) of each article reviewed during our research, can be
found below (Table 6)
Acknowledgements The publication of the article in OA mode was financially supported by Hellenic
Academic Libraries (HEAL) Link.
No Article Year Research
Type
Barriers Strategy Drivers Ac-
tors
146 Tsiavos and Kitsios (Tsiavos &
Kitsios, 2022)
2022 Theoretical X X
147 Tsou and Chen (Tsou & Chen,
2023)
2023 Empirical X
148 Ulrich et al. (Ulrich et al., 2024) 2024 Empirical X
149 Valtonen and Holopainen (Val-
tonen & Holopainen, 2025)
2025 Empirical X
150 Veile et al. (Veile et al., 2019) 2019 Empirical X
151 Vendraminelli et al. (Vendrami-
nelli et al., 2023)
2023 Empirical X
152 von Leipzig et al. (von Leipzig
et al., 2017)
2017 Empirical X
153 Wang and Shao (Wang & Shao,
2024)
2024 Empirical X X
154 Wang et al. (Wang et al., 2023) 2023 Empirical X
155 Wang et al. (Wang et al., 2024) 2024 Empirical X
156 Warner and Wäger (Warner &
Wäger, 2019)
2019 Empirical X
157 Weber et al. (Weber et al., 2017) 2017 Empirical X
158 Weber et al. (Weber et al., 2022) 2022 Empirical X
159 Wei et al. (Wei et al., 2024) 2024 Empirical X
160 Wen et al. (Wen et al., 2022) 2022 Empirical X
161 Wessel et al. (Wessel et al.,
2021)
2021 Empirical X
162 Xia and Md Johar (Xia & Md
Johar, 2025)
2025 Empirical X X
163 Xu et al. (Xu et al., 2025) 2025 Empirical X
164 Xue et al. (Xue et al., 2024) 2024 Empirical X X
165 Yadav and Nisha (Yadav &
Nisha, 2022)
2022 Theoretical X
166 Yang and Gu (Yang & Gu,
2021)
2021 Empirical X
167 Yao et al. (Yao et al., 2024) 2024 Empirical X X
168 Zhang et al. (Zhang et al., 2021) 2021 Empirical X
169 Zhang and Chen (Zhang &
Chen, 2024)
2024 Empirical X X
170 Zhou et al. (Zhou et al., 2025) 2025 Empirical X X
Table6 (continued)
1 3

--- PAGE 29 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
Author Contributions Vasilis Tsiavos and Fotis Kitsios conceived the idea for the article. Vasilis Tsiavos
conducted the literature search, performed data analysis and drafted the manuscript. Fotis Kitsios critically
revised the work.
Funding Open access funding provided by HEAL-Link Greece. No funding was received for conducting
this study.
DataAvailability Data is available on request.
Declarations
HumanEthicsandConsent This research does not involve human participants and requires no consent.
HumanEthicsandConsentToParticipateDeclarations Not applicable.
Conflict of interest The authors have no competing interests to declare that are relevant to the content of
this article.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line
to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use
is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission
directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit ​h​t​t​p​:​/​/​c​r​e​a​t​i​v​e​c​o​m​m​o​n​s​.​o​r​g​/​l​i​c​e​n​
s​e​s​/​b​y​/​4​.​0​/​​​​​.​​
References
Aghakhani, G., Wautelet,Y., Dijkmans, D., Heng, S., Poelmans, S., & Kolp, M. (2024). Supporting digital
transformation strategy formulation through a customisable set of objectives: Conceptual model and
expert opinions. Enterprise Information Systems. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​8​0​/​1​7​​5​1​7​5​7​​5​.​2​0​2​3​​.​2​3​0​​0​0​8​9
Aghimien, D., Aigbavboa, C., Oke, A., Thwala, W., & Moripe, P. (2020). Digitalization of construction
organisations – a case for digital partnering. Int J Constr Manag, 1–10. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​8​0​/​1​5​​6​
2​3​5​9​​9​.​2​0​2​0​​.​1​7​4​​5​1​3​4
Agostino, D., Arnaboldi, M., & Lema, M. D. (2021). New development: COVID-19 as an accelerator of
digital transformation in public service delivery. Public Money & Management, 41, 69–72. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​
o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​8​0​/​0​9​​5​4​0​9​6​​2​.​2​0​2​0​​.​1​7​6​​4​2​0​6
Akberdina, V. V. (2018). Digitalization of industrial markets: Regional characteristics. Upravlenets, 9,
Article 10. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​2​9​​1​4​1​/​2​​0​7​3​-​1​​0​1​9​-​2​0​​1​8​-​9​​-​6​-​8
AlNuaimi, B. K., Kumar Singh, S., Ren, S., Budhwar, P., & Vorobyev, D. (2022). Mastering digital trans-
formation: The nexus between leadership, agility, and digital strategy. Journal of Business Research,
145, 636–648. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​1​6​/​j​.​​j​b​u​s​r​​e​s​.​2​0​2​​2​.​0​3​​.​0​3​8
Andal-Ancion, A., Cartwright, P. A., & Yip, G. S. (2003). The digital transformation of traditional busi-
nesses. MIT Sloan 10.
Andriushchenko, K., Buriachenko,A., Rozhko, O., Lavruk, O., Skok, P., Hlushchenko, Y., Muzychka, Y.,
Slavina, N., Buchynska, O., & Kondarevych, V. (2020). Peculiarities of sustainable development of
enterprises in the context of digital transformation. Entrepreneurship and Sustainability Issues, 7,
2255–2270. https://doi.org/10.9770/jesi.2020.7.3(53)
Anim-Yeboah, S., Boateng, R., Odoom, R., & Kolog, E.A. (2020). Digital transformation process and the
capability and capacity implications for small and medium enterprises: Int. Journal of E-Entrepre-
neurship and Innovation, 10, 26–44. https://doi.org/10.4018/IJEEI.2020070102
1 3

--- PAGE 30 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
Awad, J. A. R., & Martín-Rojas, R. (2024). Digital transformation influence on organisational resilience
through organisational learning and innovation. Journal of Innovation and Entrepreneurship, 13,
Article 69. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13731-024-00405-4
Begnini, S., Oro, I. M., Tonial, G., & Dalbosco, I. B. (2024). The relationship between the use of technolo-
gies and digitalization strategies for digital transformation in family businesses. Journal of Family
Business Management, 14, 710–726. https://doi.org/10.1108/JFBM-06-2023-0087
Berman, S. J. (2012). Digital transformation: Opportunities to create new business models. Strategy &
Leadership, 40, 16–24. https://doi.org/10.1108/10878571211209314
Bharadwaj,A., El Sawy, O.A., Pavlou, P.A., &Venkatraman, N. (2013). Digital business strategy:Toward
a next generation of insights. MIS Quarterly, 37, 471–482. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​2​5​3​0​0​/​M​I​S​Q​/​2​0​1​3​/​3​7​
:​2​.​3​​​​​​​
Bhattacharya, S., & Momaya, K. S. (2021). Actionable strategy framework for digital transformation in
AECO industry. Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management, 28, 1397–1422. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​
d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​8​/​E​C​A​M​-​0​7​-​2​0​2​0​-​0​5​8​7​​​​​​​
Bindel Sibassaha, J. L., Pea-Assounga, J. B. B., & Bambi, P. D. R. (2025). Influence of digital transforma-
tion on employee innovative behavior: Roles of challenging appraisal, organizational culture support,
and transformational leadership style. Frontiers in Psychology, 16, Article 1532977. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​
1​0​.​3​3​8​9​/​f​p​s​y​g​.​2​0​2​5​.​1​5​3​2​9​7​7​​​​​​​
Björkdahl, J. (2020). Strategies for digitalization in manufacturing firms. California Management Review,
62, 17–36. https://doi.org/10.1177/0008125620920349
Bollweg, L., Lackes, R., Siepermann, M., & Weber, P. (2020). Drivers and barriers of the digitalization of
local owner operated retail outlets. Journal of Small Business and Entrepreneurship, 32, 173–201. ​h​
t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​8​0​/​0​8​​2​7​6​3​3​​1​.​2​0​1​9​​.​1​6​1​​6​2​5​6
Bona, G. D., Cesarotti,V.,Arcese, G., & Gallo,T. (2021). Implementation of industry 4.0 technology: New
opportunities and challenges for maintenance strategy. Procedia computer science (pp. 424–429).
Elsevier B.V. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2021.01.258
Brink, H., & Packmohr, S. (2023). Barriers to DigitalTransformation in SMEs:AQuantitative Study. In R.
Jallouli, M.A. BachTobji, M. Belkhir,A. M. Soares, & B. Casais (Eds.), Digital Economy. Emerging
Technologies and Business Innovation (pp. 3–17). Springer International Publishing. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​
1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​9​7​8​-​3​-​0​3​1​-​4​2​7​8​8​-​6​_​1​​​​​​​
Brown, N., & Brown, I. (2019). From Digital Business Strategy to Digital Transformation - How: A Sys-
tematic Literature Review, in: Proceedings of the SouthAfrican Institute of Computer Scientists and
Information Technologists 2019, SAICSIT ’19. Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, pp. 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1145/3351108.3351122
Bücker, I., Hermann, M., Pentek, T., & Otto, B. (2016). Towards a Methodology for Industrie 4.0 Trans-
formation. In W. Abramowicz, R. Alt, & B. Franczyk (Eds.), Business Information Systems, Lecture
Notes in Business Information Processing (pp. 209–221). Springer International Publishing. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​
o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​9​7​8​-​3​-​3​1​9​-​3​9​4​2​6​-​8​_​1​7​​​​​​​
Buonocore, F., Annosi, M. C., de Gennaro, D., & Riemma, F. (2024). Digital transformation and social
change: Leadership strategies for responsible innovation. Journal of Engineering and Technology
Management. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​1​6​/​j​.​​j​e​n​g​t​​e​c​m​a​n​.​​2​0​2​4​​.​1​0​1​8​4​3
Butschan, J., Heidenreich, S., Weber, B., & Kraemer, T. (2019). Tackling hurdles to digital transforma-
tion — the role of competencies for successful industrial internet of things (Iiot) implementation.
International Journal of Innovation Management, 23, Article 1950036. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​4​2​/​S​1​3​
6​3​9​1​9​6​1​9​5​0​0​3​6​1​​​​​​​
Cao,G.,Duan,Y.,&Edwards,J.S.(2025).Organizationalculture,digitaltransformation,andproductinno-
vation. Information & Management, 62,Article 104135. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2025.104135
Chanias, S., & Hess, T. (2016). Understanding Digital Transformation Strategy Formation: Insights From
Europe’sAutomotive Industry. Proc. 20th Pac.Asia Conf. Inf. Syst. PACIS 2016 17.
Chanias, S., Myers, M. D., & Hess, T. (2019). Digital transformation strategy making in pre-digital orga-
nizations:The case of a financial services provider. The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 28,
17–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis.2018.11.003
Chen, Z.-S., Lu, J.-Y., Wang, X.-J., & Pedrycz, W. (2024). Identifying digital transformation barriers in
small and medium-sized construction enterprises:Amulti-criteria perspective. Journal of Knowledge
Economics. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13132-023-01680-4
Choy, B. G. (2020). Random interaction effect of digital transformation on general price level and eco-
nomic growth. Foresight and STI Governance, 14, 29–47. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​7​​3​2​3​/​2​​5​0​0​-​2​​5​9​7​.​2​0​​2​
0​.​1​​.​2​9​.​4​7
1 3

--- PAGE 31 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
Correani, A., De Massis, A., Frattini, F., Petruzzelli, A. M., & Natalicchio, A. (2020). Implementing a
digital strategy: Learning from the experience of three digital transformation projects. California
Management Review, 62, 37–56. https://doi.org/10.1177/0008125620934864
Dahmani, N., Benhida, K., Belhadi, A., Kamble, S., Elfezazi, S., & Jauhar, S. K. (2021). Smart circular
product design strategies towards eco-effective production systems: A lean eco-design industry 4.0
framework. Journal of Cleaner Production. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​1​6​/​j​.​​j​c​l​e​p​​r​o​.​2​0​2​​1​.​1​2​​8​8​4​7
Del Castro, C., Pajares, C. I., Cabrera, L.A. C., & Díaz, L. I. C. (2023). S.J.S., Emerging Digital Transfor-
mation Model for Teaching Strategies to theAchievement of Meaningful Learning in Education 4.0.
Presented at the Smart Innovation, Systems and Technologies, Springer Science and Business Media
Deutschland GmbH, pp. 314–321. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04435-9_31
Dengler, K., & Matthes, B. (2018). The impacts of digital transformation on the labour market: Substi-
tution potentials of occupations in Germany. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 137,
304–316. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​1​6​/​j​.​​t​e​c​h​f​​o​r​e​.​2​0​​1​8​.​0​​9​.​0​2​4
Denicolai, S., & Previtali (2022). Innovation strategy and digital transformation execution in healthcare:
The role of the general manager. Technovation. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​1​6​/​j​.​​t​e​c​h​n​​o​v​a​t​i​o​​n​.​2​0​​2​2​.​1​0​2​5​5​5
Diniz, E. H., Santos, T. R. R., & Cunha, M.A. (2023). Measuring the grand challenge of the digital trans-
formation of society: Practices for operationalizing robust action strategies. IEEE Transactions on
Engineering Management, 70, 1076–1088. https://doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2022.3212283
Dohale, V., Verma, P., Gunasekaran, A., & Akarte, M. (2023). Manufacturing strategy 4.0: A framework
to usher towards industry 4.0 implementation for digital transformation. Industrial Management &
Data Systems, 123, 10–40. https://doi.org/10.1108/IMDS-12-2021-0790
Dolganova, O., & Deeva, E. (2019). Company readiness for digital transformations: Problems and diag-
nosis. Business & Information Systems Engineering, 13, 59–72. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​7​​3​2​3​/​1​​9​9​8​-​0​​6​6​
3​.​2​0​​1​9​.​2​​.​5​9​.​7​2
Dolla, T., Jain, K., & Kumar, V. S. (2023). Strategies for digital transformation in construction projects:
Stakeholders’perceptions and actor dynamics for Industry 4.0. Journal of Information Technology in
Construction, 28, 151–175. https://doi.org/10.36680/j.itcon.2023.008
Donaldson, L. (2001). The Contingency Theory of Organizations, Foundations for Organizational Sci-
ence. Sage.
Eden, R., Burton-Jones, A., Casey, V., & Draheim, M. (2019). Digital transformation requires workforce
transformation. MIS Q Exec, 18. https://doi.org/10.17705/2msqe.00005
Ekman, P., Thilenius, P., Thompson, S., & Whitaker, J. (2019). Digital transformation of global business
processes: The role of dual embeddedness. Business Process Management Journal, 26, 570–592.
https://doi.org/10.1108/BPMJ-02-2019-0080
Eling, M., & Lehmann, M. (2018). The impact of digitalization on the insurance value chain and the insur-
ability of risks. The Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance - Issues and Practice, 43, 359–396. ​h​t​t​p​s​
:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​5​7​/​s​4​1​2​8​8​-​0​1​7​-​0​0​7​3​-​0​​​​​​​
Eller, R., Alford, P., Kallmünzer, A., & Peters, M. (2020). Antecedents, consequences, and challenges of
small and medium-sized enterprise digitalization. Journal of Business Research, 112, 119–127. ​h​t​t​p​s​
:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​1​6​/​j​.​​j​b​u​s​r​​e​s​.​2​0​2​​0​.​0​3​​.​0​0​4
Erol, S., Schumacher, A., & Sihn, W. (2016). Strategic guidance towards Industry 4.0 – a three-stage
process model.
Feroz, K., & Kwak, M. (2024). Digital transformation (DT) and artificial intelligence (AI) convergence in
organizations. J Comput Inf Syst, 1–17. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​8​0​/​0​8​​8​7​4​4​1​​7​.​2​0​2​4​​.​2​4​2​​4​3​7​2
Fettig, K., Gacic, T., Koskal, A., Kuhn, A., & Stuber, F. (2018). Impact of Industry 4.0 on Organizational
Structures, in: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Engineering, Technology and Innovation
(ICE/ITMC). Presented at the 2018 IEEE International Conference on Engineering, Technology and
Innovation (ICE/ITMC), IEEE, Stuttgart, pp. 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICE.2018.8436284
Fitzgerald, et al. (2013). Embracing digital technology, MIT sloan management. Review, 1-12.
Forcadell, F. J.,Aracil, E., & Ubeda, F. (2020). Using reputation for corporate sustainability to tackle banks
digitalization challenges. Business Strategy and the Environment, 29, 2181–2193. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​
0​.​1​0​0​2​/​b​s​e​.​2​4​9​4​​​​​​​
Franke, T., & Zoubir, M. (2020). Technology for the people? Humanity as a compass for the digital trans-
formation. Wirtschaftsdienst, 100, 4–11. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10273-020-2609-3
Furjan, M. T., Tomičić-Pupek, K., & Pihir, I. (2020). Understanding digital transformation initiatives:
Case studies analysis. Business Systems Research Journal, 11, 125–141. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​2​4​7​8​/​b​s​
r​j​-​2​0​2​0​-​0​0​0​9​​​​​​​
1 3

--- PAGE 32 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
Gaffley, G., & Pelser, T. G. (2021). Developing a digital transformation model to enhance the strategy
development process for leadership in the South African manufacturing sector. South Afr. J Bus
Manag, 52. https://doi.org/10.4102/sajbm.v52i1.2357
Galindo-Martín, M. -Á., Castaño-Martínez, M.-S., & Méndez-Picazo, M.-T. (2019). Digital transforma-
tion, digital dividends and entrepreneurship: A quantitative analysis. Journal of Business Research,
101, 522–527. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​1​6​/​j​.​​j​b​u​s​r​​e​s​.​2​0​1​​8​.​1​2​​.​0​1​4
George, G., & Schillebeeckx, S. (2022). Digital transformation, sustainability, and purpose in the multina-
tional enterprise. Journal of World Business. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jwb.2022.101326
Gillani, F., Chatha, K. A., Jajja, S. S., Cao, D., & Ma, X. (2024). Unpacking digital transformation: Iden-
tifying key enablers, transition stages and digital archetypes. Technological Forecasting and Social
Change, 203,Article 123335. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​1​6​/​j​.​​t​e​c​h​f​​o​r​e​.​2​0​​2​4​.​1​​2​3​3​3​5
Gobble, M. M. (2018). Digital strategy and digital transformation. Research Technology Management, 61,
66–71. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​8​0​/​0​8​​9​5​6​3​0​​8​.​2​0​1​8​​.​1​4​9​​5​9​6​9
Godwin, A. (2016). Visualizing systematic literature reviews to identify new areas of research, in: 2016
IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference (FIE). Presented at the 2016 IEEE Frontiers in Education
Conference (FIE), pp. 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1109/FIE.2016.7757690
Gupta,G.,&Bose,I.(2022).Digitaltransformationinentrepreneurialfirmsthroughinformationexchange
with operating environment. Information & Management. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2019.103243
Gupta, H., Yadav, A. K., Kusi-Sarpong, S., Khan, S. A., & Sharma, S. C. (2022). Strategies to overcome
barriers to innovative digitalisation technologies for supply chain logistics resilience during pan-
demic. Technology in Society. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​1​6​/​j​.​​t​e​c​h​s​​o​c​.​2​0​2​​2​.​1​0​​1​9​7​0
Gurbaxani, V., & Dunkle, D. (2019). Gearing up for successful digital transformation. MIS Quarterly
Executive, 18, 209–220. https://doi.org/10.17705/2msqe.00017
Haffke, I., Kalgovas, B., & Benlian, A. (2016). The role of the CIO and the CDO in an organization’s
digital transformation. Inf Manage 21.
Hanelt, A., Bohnsack, R., Marz, D., & Antunes Marante, C. (2021). A systematic review of the literature
on digital transformation: Insights and implications for strategy and organizational change. Journal
of Management Studies, 58, 1159–1197. https://doi.org/10.1111/joms.12639
Hansen,A. M. (2011). Rapid adaptation in digital transformation:Aparticipatory process for engaging IS
and business leaders. MIS Quarterly Executive, 10, 12.
Hassan, A. M., Negash, Y. T., & Hanum, F. (2024). An assessment of barriers to digital transformation in
circular Construction: An application of stakeholder theory. Ain Shams Engineering Journal. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​
/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​a​s​e​j​.​2​0​2​4​.​1​0​2​7​8​7​​​​​​​
He, Z., Huang, H., Choi, H., & Bilgihan, A. (2022). Building organizational resilience with digital trans-
formation. Journal of Service Management. https://doi.org/10.1108/JOSM-06-2021-0216
Heavin, C., & Power, D. J. (2018). Challenges for digital transformation – Towards a conceptual decision
support guide for managers. Journal of Decision Systems, 27, 38–45. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​8​0​/​1​2​​4​6​0​
1​2​​5​.​2​0​1​8​​.​1​4​6​​8​6​9​7
Hess, T., Matt, C., Benlian, A., & Wiesböck, F. (2016). Options for Formulating a Digital Transformation
Strategy. In R. D. Galliers, D. E. Leidner, & B. Simeonova (Eds.), Strategic Information Manage-
ment (pp. 151–173). Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780429286797-7
Hinings, B., Gegenhuber, T., & Greenwood, R. (2018). Digital innovation and transformation: An insti-
tutional perspective. Information and Organization, 28, 52–61. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​1​6​/​j​.​​i​n​f​o​a​​n​d​o​r​g​
.​​2​0​1​8​​.​0​2​.​0​0​4
Högberg, K., & Willermark, S. (2022). Strategic responses to digital disruption in incumbent firms– A
strategy-as-practice perspective. Journal of Computer Information Systems. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​8​0​/​
0​8​​8​7​4​4​1​​7​.​2​0​2​2​​.​2​0​5​​7​3​7​3
Holmstrom, J. (2022). FromAI to digital transformation:TheAI readiness framework. Business Horizons,
65, 329–339. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bushor.2021.03.006
Horlach, B., Drews, P., & Schirmer, I. (2016). In I. T. Bimodal (Ed.), Business-IT alignment in the age of
digital Transformation, in: Multikonferenz wirtschaftsinformatik (p. 13). Presented at the Multikon-
ferenz Wirtschaftsinformatik.
Horlacher,A., & Hess, T. (2016). What Does a Chief Digital Officer Do? Managerial Tasks and Roles of a
New C-Level Position in the Context of Digital Transformation, in: 2016 49th Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences (HICSS). Presented at the 2016 49th Hawaii International Confer-
ence on System Sciences (HICSS), IEEE, Koloa, HI, USA, pp. 5126–5135. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​
/​H​I​C​S​S​.​2​0​1​6​.​6​3​4​​​​​​​
1 3

--- PAGE 33 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
Horváth, D., & Szabó, R. (2019). Driving forces and barriers of Industry 4.0: Do multinational and small
and medium-sized companies have equal opportunities? Technological Forecasting and Social
Change, 146, 119–132. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​1​6​/​j​.​​t​e​c​h​f​​o​r​e​.​2​0​​1​9​.​0​​5​.​0​2​1
Huang, C. (2025). Digital transformation and corporate ESG performance: Research based on a capability-
motivation dual framework. PLoS One, 20, Article e0325295. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​3​7​1​/​j​o​u​r​n​a​l​.​p​o​n​e​.​
0​3​2​5​2​9​5​​​​​​​
Imgrund, F., Fischer, M., Janiesch, C., & Winkelmann, A. (2018). Approaching digitalization with busi-
ness process Management, in: Multikonferenz wirtschaftsinformatik. Presented at the Multikonferenz
Wirtschaftsinformatik.
Irani, Z.,Abril, R. M.,Weerakkody,V., Omar,A., & Sivarajah, U. (2023).The impact of legacy systems on
digital transformation in European public administration: Lesson learned from a multi case analysis.
Government Information Quarterly, 40,Article 101784. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2022.101784
Ismail, M. H., Khater, M., & Zaki, M. (2018). Digital Business Transformation and Strategy: What Do We
Know So Far? Camb. Serv.Alliance. https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.36492.62086
Issa, A., Hatiboglu, B., Bildstein, A., & Bauernhansl, T. (2018). Industrie 4.0 roadmap: Framework for
digital transformation based on the concepts of capability maturity and alignment. Procedia CIRP,
72, 973–978. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2018.03.151
Ivančić, L., Vukšić, V., & Spremić, M. (2019). Mastering the digital transformation process: Business
practices and lessons learned. Technology Innovation Management Review, 9, 36–50. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​
/​1​0​.​2​2​2​1​5​/​t​i​m​r​e​v​i​e​w​/​1​2​1​7​​​​​​​
Johannesson, P., Sinha, J., Packmohr, S., & Brink, H. (2023). Comparing Barriers to Digital Transforma-
tion Between Small and Medium-sized and Large Enterprises, in: Proceedings of the International
Conferences on E-Society 2023, ES 2023 and Mobile Learning 2023, ML 2023. Presented at the
ProceedingsoftheInternationalConferencesone-Society2023, ES 2023 and Mobile Learning 2023,
ML 2023, IADIS Press, pp. 76–84.
Kane, G. (2019). The technology fallacy: People are the real key to digital transformation. Res -Technol
Manag, 62, 44–49. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​8​0​/​0​8​​9​5​6​3​0​​8​.​2​0​1​9​​.​1​6​6​​1​0​7​9
Karekla, M., Pollalis,Y., &Angelopoulos, M. (2021). Key drivers of digital transformation in Greek busi-
nesses: Strategy vs. Technology. Central European Management Journal, 29, 33–62. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​
/​1​0​.​7​2​0​6​/​c​e​m​j​.​2​6​5​8​-​0​8​4​5​.​4​5​​​​​​​
Karimi, J., & Walter, Z. (2015). The role of dynamic capabilities in responding to digital disruption: A
Factor-Based study of the newspaper industry. Journal of Management Information Systems, 32,
39–81. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​8​0​/​0​7​​4​2​1​2​2​​2​.​2​0​1​5​​.​1​0​2​​9​3​8​0
Khan, Z., Odeh, M., & McClatchey, R. (2011). Bridging the gap between business process models and
service-oriented architectures with reference to the grid environment. International Journal of Grid
and Utility Computing, 2, 253–283. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJGUC.2011.042943
Khan, S.A. R., Razzaq,A.,Yu, Z., & Miller, S. (2021). Industry 4.0 and circular economy practices:Anew
era business strategies for environmental sustainability. Business Strategy and the Environment, 30,
4001–4014. https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.2853
Khurana, I., Dutta, D., & Ghura, A. (2022). SMEs and digital transformation during a crisis: The emer-
gence of resilience as a second-order dynamic capability in an entrepreneurial ecosystem. Journal of
Business Research, 150, 623–641. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​1​6​/​j​.​​j​b​u​s​r​​e​s​.​2​0​2​​2​.​0​6​​.​0​4​8
Kiel, D. (2017).WHATDOWE KNOWABOUTINDUSTRY4.0 SO FAR? IAMOT2017 Conf. Proc. 23.
Klein, S. P., Spieth, P., & Söllner, M. (2024). Employee acceptance of digital transformation strategies: A
paradox perspective. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 41, 999–1021. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​
.​1​1​1​1​/​j​p​i​m​.​1​2​7​2​2​​​​​​​
Kludacz-Alessandri, M., Hawrysz, L., Żak, K., & Zhang, W. (2025). The impact of digital transforma-
tional leadership on digital intensity among primary healthcare entities: A moderated mediation
model. BMC Health Services Research, 25,Article 117. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-025-12283-x
Kontić, L., & Vidicki, Đ. (2018). Strategy for digital organization: Testing a measurement tool for digital
transformation. Strategic Management Journal, 23, 29–35. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​5​9​3​7​/​S​t​r​a​M​a​n​1​8​0​1​0​2​
9​K​​​​​​​
Kotarba, M. (2018). Digital transformation of business models. Foundations of Management, 10, 123–
142. https://doi.org/10.2478/fman-2018-0011
Kraus, S., Jones, P., Kailer, N., Weinmann, A., Chaparro-Banegas, N., & Roig-Tierno, N. (2021). Digi-
tal transformation: An overview of the current state of the art of research. SAGE Open, 11, Article
215824402110475. https://doi.org/10.1177/21582440211047576
1 3

--- PAGE 34 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
Kringelum, L. B., Holm, C. G., Holmgren, J., Friis, O., & Jensen, K. F. (2024). Digital transformation:
Strategy comes first to lay the groundwork. Journal of Business Strategy. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​8​/​J​
B​S​-​0​9​-​2​0​2​3​-​0​1​9​9​​​​​​​
Lanzolla, G., &Anderson, J. (2008). Digital transformation. Business Strategy Review, 19, 72–76. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​
d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​1​​1​1​/​j​.​​1​4​6​7​-​​8​6​1​6​.​2​​0​0​8​.​​0​0​5​3​9​.​x
Leyh, C., Schäffer, T., Bley, K., & Forstenhäusler, S. (2017).Assessing the IT and Software Landscapes of
Industry 4.0-Enterprises: The Maturity Model SIMMI 4.0. In E. Ziemba (Ed.), Information Technol-
ogy for Management: New Ideas and Real Solutions, Lecture Notes in Business Information Process-
ing (pp. 103–119). Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-53076-5_6
Li, H. (2019). Organizational mindfulness towards digital transformation as a prerequisite of information
processing capability to achieve market agility. J. Bus. Res.
Li, F. (2020).The digital transformation of business models in the creative industries:Aholistic framework
and emerging trends. Technovation, 92, Article 102012. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​1​6​/​j​.​​t​e​c​h​n​​o​v​a​t​i​o​​n​.​2​0​​1​7​
.​1​2​.​0​0​4
Li, L. (2022). Digital transformation and sustainable performance: The moderating role of market turbu-
lence. Industrial Marketing Management, 104, 28–37. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​1​6​/​j​.​​i​n​d​m​a​​r​m​a​n​.​2​​0​2​2​.​​0​
4​.​0​0​7
Li, L., Su, F., Zhang, W., & Mao, J. Y. (2018). Digital transformation by SME entrepreneurs:Acapability
perspective. Information Systems Journal, 28, 1129–1157. https://doi.org/10.1111/isj.12153
Li, R., Rao, J., & Wan, L. (2022). The digital economy, enterprise digital transformation, and enterprise
innovation. Managerial and Decision Economics, 43, 2875–2886. https://doi.org/10.1002/mde.3569
Lichtenthaler, U. (2020). Building blocks of successful digital transformation: Complementing technol-
ogy and market issues. International Journal of Innovation and Technology Management, 17,Article
2050004. https://doi.org/10.1142/S0219877020500042
Loonam, J., Eaves, S., Kumar, V., & Parry, G. (2018). Towards digital transformation: Lessons learned
from traditional organizations. Strategic Change, 27, 101–109. https://doi.org/10.1002/jsc.2185
Mahraz, M. I., Benabbou, L., & Berrado,A. (2019).ASystematic literature review of Digital Transforma-
tion. Presented at the International Conference on Industrial Engineering and Operations Manage-
ment, Canada, p. 15.
Maletič, D., Grabowska, M., & Maletič, M. (2023). Drivers and barriers of digital transformation in asset
management. Management and Production Engineering Review, 14, 118–126. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​2​4​
4​2​5​/​m​p​e​r​.​2​0​2​3​.​1​4​5​3​7​0​​​​​​​
Martín-Peña, M.-L., Sánchez-López, J.-M., & Díaz-Garrido, E. (2019). Servitization and digitalization in
manufacturing: The influence on firm performance. Journal of Business & Industrial Marketing, 35,
564–574. https://doi.org/10.1108/JBIM-12-2018-0400
Matt, C., Hess, T., & Benlian, A. (2015). Digital transformation strategies. Business & Information Sys-
tems Engineering, 57, 339–343. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12599-015-0401-5
Meena, A., Dhir, S., & Sushil, S. (2024). Coopetition, strategy, and business performance in the era of
digital transformation using a multi-method approach: Some research implications for strategy and
operations management. International Journal of Production Economics. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​
i​j​p​e​.​2​0​2​3​.​1​0​9​0​6​8​​​​​​​
Mishra, D. B., Haider, I., Gunasekaran,A., Sakib, M. N., Malik, N., & Rana, N. P. (2023). Better together”:
Right blend of business strategy and digital transformation strategies. International Journal of Pro-
duction Economics. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2023.109040
Mitroulis, D.,Tsiavos,V., & Kitsios, F. C. (2023). Leadership as Success Factor for DigitalTransformation
and Innovation. In N. F. Matsatsinis, F. C. Kitsios, M.A. Madas, & M. I. Kamariotou (Eds.), Opera-
tional Research in the Era of Digital Transformation and Business Analytics, Springer Proceedings
in Business and Economics (pp. 291–298). Springer International Publishing. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​
7​/​9​7​8​-​3​-​0​3​1​-​2​4​2​9​4​-​6​_​3​1​​​​​​​
Mubarak, A., Asmelash, M., Azhari, A., Alemu, T., Mulubrhan, F., & Saptaji, K. (2022). Digital Twin
Enabled Industry 4.0 Predictive Maintenance Under Reliability-Centred Strategy, in: 2022 1st Inter-
national Conference on Electrical, Electronics, Information and Communication Technologies,
ICEEICT 2022. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​1​​0​9​/​I​C​​E​E​I​
C​T​​5​3​0​7​9​.​​2​0​2​2​​.​9​7​6​8​5​9​0
Mugge, P., Abbu, H., Michaelis, T. L., Kwiatkowski, A., & Gudergan, G. (2020). Patterns of digitization:
Apractical guide to digital transformation. Research-Technology Management, 63, 27–35. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​
i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​8​0​/​0​8​​9​5​6​3​0​​8​.​2​0​2​0​​.​1​7​0​​7​0​0​3
1 3

--- PAGE 35 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
Mühlburger,M.,&Krumay,B.(2024).Towardsacontext-sensitiveconceptualisationofdigitaltransforma-
tion. Journal of Information Technology, 39, 716–731. https://doi.org/10.1177/02683962231219514
Müller, J. M., Buliga, O., & Voigt, K. I. (2020). The role of absorptive capacity and innovation strategy
in the design of industry 4.0 business Models-A comparison between SMEs and large enterprises.
European Management Journal, S0263237320300190. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.emj.2020.01.002
Nambisan, S. (2017). Digital entrepreneurship: toward a digital technology perspective of entrepreneur-
ship. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 41(6), 1029–1055. https://doi.org/10.1111/etap.12254
Nadkarni, S., & Prügl, R. (2021). Digital transformation: A review, synthesis and opportunities for future
research. Management Review Quarterly, 71, 233–341. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11301-020-00185-7
Nayal, K., Raut, R. D., Yadav, V. S., Priyadarshinee, P., & Narkhede, B. E. (2022). The impact of sustain-
able development strategy on sustainable supply chain firm performance in the digital transformation
era. Business Strategy and the Environment, 31, 845–859. https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.2921
Ndemo, B., & Weiss, T. (2017). Making sense of Africa’s emerging digital transformation and its many
futures. African Journal of Management, 3, 328–347. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​8​0​/​2​3​​3​2​2​3​7​​3​.​2​0​1​7​​.​1​4​0​​0​
2​6​0
Ng, H. Y., Tan, P. S., & Lim, Y. G. (2018). Methodology for Digitalization - A Conceptual Model. 2018
IEEE Int. Conf. Ind. Eng. Eng. Manag. 5.
Nguyen, T., Song, G., Zhao, S., & Zuo, C. (2025). Market competition and digital transformation in firms.
Finance Research Letters, 73,Article 106684. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.frl.2024.106684
Nicolás-Agustín, Á., Jiménez-Jiménez, D., Maeso Fernandez, F., & Di Prima, C. (2025). ICT training,
digital transformation and company performance: An empirical study. European Journal of Innova-
tion Management, 28, 1687–1708. https://doi.org/10.1108/EJIM-11-2022-0622
Niu, Y., Wen, W., Wang, S., & Li, S. (2023). Breaking barriers to innovation: The power of digital trans-
formation. Finance Research Letters. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.frl.2022.103457
Nwaiwu, F., Duduci, M., Chromjakova, F., & Otekhile, C.-A. (2020). Industry 4.0 concepts within the
Czech SME manufacturing sector: An empirical assessment of critical success factors. Business,
Theory and Practice, 21, 58–70. https://doi.org/10.3846/btp.2020.10712
Nwankpa, J. K., & Roumani, Y. (2016). IT Capability and Digital Transformation: A Firm Performance
Perspective, in: 2016 International Conference on Information Systems. Presented at the ICIS, Dub-
lin, Ireland, p. 16.
Omrani, N., Rejeb, N., Maalaoui, A., Dabić, M., & Kraus, S. (2024). Drivers of digital transformation in
SMEs. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 71, 5030–5043. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​T​
E​M​.​2​0​2​2​.​3​2​1​5​7​2​7​​​​​​​
Ostmeier, E., & Strobel, M. (2022). Building skills in the context of digital transformation: How industry
digital maturity drives proactive skill development. Journal of Business Research, 139, 718–730. ​h​t​t​
p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​1​6​/​j​.​​j​b​u​s​r​​e​s​.​2​0​2​​1​.​0​9​​.​0​2​0
Packmohr, S., Paul, F. H., & Brink, H. (2024). Considering company size, level of responsibility, and
employee age for analysing countermeasures against barriers to digital transformation. Journal of
Telecommunications and the Digital Economy, 12, 172–195. https://doi.org/10.18080/jtde.v12n1.857
Pandita, D., & Vapiwala, F. (2024). Waving the flames of fan engagement: Strategies for coping with the
digital transformation in sports organizations. J Strategy Manag, 17, 427–443. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​
0​8​/​J​S​M​A​-​0​2​-​2​0​2​2​-​0​0​4​1​​​​​​​
Parviainen, P., &Tihinen, M. (2017).Tackling the digitalization challenge: How to benefit from digitaliza-
tion in practice. IJISPM - Int J Inf Syst Proj Manag, 63–77. https://doi.org/10.12821/ijispm050104
Petani, F. J., Zaoui, I., Kovalev, S., & Montagnon, P. (2023). What will (and should) sustainable digital
maturity look like in business ecosystems?ADelphi study on the best practices, barriers and regula-
tion of digital transformation. Int J Entrep Small Bus, 49, 87–122. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​5​0​4​/​I​J​E​S​B​.​2​
0​2​3​.​1​3​1​6​1​8​​​​​​​
Piccoli, G., Grover, V., & Rodriguez, J. (2024). Digital transformation requires digital resource primacy:
Clarification and future research directions. The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 33(2),
101835 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis.2024.101835
Piccinini, E., Hanelt, A., Gregory, R., & Kolbe, L. (2015). Transforming Industrial Business: The Impact
of Digital Transformation onAutomotive Organizations, in: 2015 International Conference on Infor-
mation Systems. Presented at the International Conference on Information Systems, p. 20.
Pousttchi, K., Gleiss,A., Buzzi, B., Kohlhagen, M., & Conference on Business Informatics (CBI). (2019).
Technology Impact Types for Digital Transformation, in: 2019 IEEE 21st. Presented at the 2019
IEEE 21st Conference on Business Informatics (CBI), IEEE, Moscow, Russia, pp. 487–494. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​
d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​C​B​I​.​2​0​1​9​.​0​0​0​6​3​​​​​​​
1 3

--- PAGE 36 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
Proksch, D., Rosin,A. F., Stubner, S., & Pinkwart,A. (2021).The influence of a digital strategy on the digi-
talization of new ventures:The mediating effect of digital capabilities and a digital culture. Journal of
Small Business Management. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​8​0​/​0​0​​4​7​2​7​7​​8​.​2​0​2​1​​.​1​8​8​​3​0​3​6
Raimo, N., De Turi, I., Albergo, F., & Vitolla, F. (2023). The drivers of the digital transformation in the
healthcare industry: An empirical analysis in Italian hospitals. Technovation. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​1​6​
/​j​.​​t​e​c​h​n​​o​v​a​t​i​o​​n​.​2​0​​2​2​.​1​0​2​5​5​8
Raj, A., Dwivedi, G., Sharma, A., Lopes de Sousa Jabbour, A. B., & Rajak, S. (2020). Barriers to the
adoption of industry 4.0 technologies in the manufacturing sector: An inter-country comparative
perspective. International Journal of Production Economics, 224, 107546. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​
/​j​.​i​j​p​e​.​2​0​1​9​.​1​0​7​5​4​6​​​​​​​
Raji, I. O., Shevtshenko, E., Rossi, T., & Strozzi, F. (2021). Industry 4.0 technologies as enablers of lean
And agile supply chain strategies:An exploratory investigation. Int J Logist Manag, 32, 1150–1189.
https://doi.org/10.1108/IJLM-04-2020-0157
Rautenbach,W. J., de Kock, I., & Jooste, J. L. (2019).The development of a conceptual model for enabling
a value-adding digital transformation:Aconceptual model that aids organisations in the digital trans-
formation process, in: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Engineering, Technology and Innova-
tion (ICE/ITMC). Presented at the 2019 IEEE International Conference on Engineering, Technology
and Innovation (ICE/ITMC), IEEE, Valbonne Sophia-Antipolis, France, pp. 1–10. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​
.​1​1​0​9​/​I​C​E​.​2​0​1​9​.​8​7​9​2​6​7​5​​​​​​​
Reis, J., & Melão, N. (2023). Digital transformation: A meta-review and guidelines for future research.
Heliyon, 9, e12834. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​1​6​/​j​.​​h​e​l​i​y​​o​n​.​2​0​2​​3​.​e​1​​2​8​3​4
Rey, W. P., Villaluz, A. C., & Rey, K. W. J. D. (2024). The Impact of Digital Transformation in the Phil-
ippines: A Study of the Key Drivers and Barriers, in: ACM International Conference Proceeding
Series. Presented at the ACM International Conference Proceeding Series, Association for Comput-
ing Machinery, pp. 107–113. https://doi.org/10.1145/3647782.3647799
Robu, D., & Lazar, J. B. (2021). Digital transformation designed to succeed: Fit the change into the busi-
ness strategy and people. Electron J Knowl Manag, 19, 133–149. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​3​4​1​9​0​/​E​J​K​M​.​1​
9​.​2​.​2​4​1​1​​​​​​​
Rubio-Andrés, M., Linuesa-Langreo, J., Gutiérrez-Broncano, S., & Sastre-Castillo, M. Á. (2024). Tack-
ling digital transformation strategy: How it affects firm innovation and organizational effectiveness.
The Journal of Technology Transfer. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10961-024-10164-9
Sanchez, M. A., & Zuntini, J. I. (2018). Organizational readiness for the digital transformation: A case
study research. Revista Gestão & Tecnologia, 18, 70–99. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​2​0​​3​9​7​/​2​​1​7​7​-​6​​6​5​2​/​2​0​​1​8​
.​v​​1​8​i​2​.​1​3​1​6
Schallmo, D., Williams, C. A., & Boardman, L. (2017). Digital transformation of business models —
Best practice, enablers, and roadmap. International Journal of Innovation Management, 21, Article
1740014. https://doi.org/10.1142/S136391961740014X
Schäper, T., Bendig, D., Foege, J. N., & Wagner, R. (2025). Shaping innovation outcomes: The role of
CIOs for firms’digital exploration. Journal of Information Technology, 40, 35–54. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​
.​1​1​7​7​/​0​2​6​8​3​9​6​2​2​4​1​2​5​8​2​1​3​​​​​​​
Schumm, M., Hanelt, A., & Firk, S. (2022). Digital Innovation Units: An Empirical Investigation of Per-
formance Implications, in: ICIS 2022 Proceedings. Copenhagen.
Schwartz, E. I. (2001). Digital Darwinism: 7 Breakthrough Business Strategies for Surviving in the Cut-
throat Web Economy, Revised, Updated edition. Broadway.
Schwarzmüller,T., Brosi, P., Duman, D., &Welpe, I. M. (2018). How does the digital transformation affect
organizations? Key themes of change in work design and leadership. Manag Rev - Socio-Econ Stud,
29, 114–138. https://doi.org/10.5771/0935-9915-2018-2-114
Sebastian, I. M., Ross, J. W., Beath, C., Mocker, M., Moloney, K. G., & Fonstad, N. O. (2020). How Big
Old Companies Navigate Digital Transformation. In R. D. Galliers, D. E. Leidner, & B. Simeonova
(Eds.), Strategic Information Management (pp. 133–150). Routledge.
Sehgal, R., & Soni, S. (2024). The impact of digital transformation on customer experience: A study of
how firms use digital to enhance CX. Indian Journal of Information Sources and Services, 14, 54–59.
https://doi.org/10.51983/ijiss-2024.14.4.09
Shaughnessy, H. (2018). Creating digital transformation: Strategies and steps. Strategy and Leadership,
46, 19–25. https://doi.org/10.1108/SL-12-2017-0126
Singh,A., Klarner, P., & Hess,T. (2020). How do chief digital officers pursue digital transformation activi-
ties? The role of organization design parameters. Long Range Planning, 53, Article 101890. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​
d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​l​r​p​.​2​0​1​9​.​0​7​.​0​0​1​​​​​​​
1 3

--- PAGE 37 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
Skog, D. A., Wimelius, H., & Sandberg, J. (2018). Digital Disruption. Business & Information Systems
Engineering, 60, 431–437. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12599-018-0550-4
Soto Setzke, D., Riasanow, T., Böhm, M., & Krcmar, H. (2021). Pathways to digital service innovation:
The role of digital transformation strategies in established organizations. Information Systems Fron-
tiers. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10796-021-10112-0
Soto Setzke, D., Riasanow, T., Böhm, M., & Krcmar, H. (2023). Pathways to digital service innovation:
The role of digital transformation strategies in established organizations. Information Systems Fron-
tiers, 25, 1017–1037. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10796-021-10112-0
Stentoft, J.,AdsbøllWickstrøm, K., Philipsen, K., & Haug,A. (2020). Drivers and barriers for industry 4.0
readiness and practice: Empirical evidence from small and medium-sized manufacturers. Prod Plan
Control, 1–18. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​8​0​/​0​9​​5​3​7​2​8​​7​.​2​0​2​0​​.​1​7​6​​8​3​1​8
Strange, R., Chen, L., & Fleury, M. T. L. (2022). Digital Transformation and International Strategies.
Journal of International Management. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intman.2022.100968
Struijk, M., Angelopoulos, S., Ou, C. X. J., & Davison, R. M. (2023). Navigating digital transformation
through an information quality strategy: Evidence from a military organisation. Information Systems
Journal, 33, 912–952. https://doi.org/10.1111/isj.12430
Sun, Z., Wang, W., Wang, W., & Sun, X. (2024). How does digital transformation affect corporate social
responsibility performance? From the dual perspective of internal drive and external governance.
Corporate Social Responsibility and Environmental Management, 31, 1156–1176. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​
0​.​1​0​0​2​/​c​s​r​.​2​6​1​5​​​​​​​
Sun, Y., Nomiya, H., & Hochin, T. (2019). Automatic Evaluation of Motion Picture Contents by Esti-
mation of Facial Expression Intensity, in: Proceedings –20th IEEE/ACIS International Conference
on Software Engineering, Artificial Intelligence, Networking and Parallel/Distributed Computing,
SNPD 2019. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., pp. 227–232. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​
1​0​9​/​S​N​P​D​.​2​0​1​9​.​8​9​3​5​6​6​0​​​​​​​
Sun, Y., Miao, Y., Xie, Z., & Wu, R. (2024). Drivers and barriers to digital transformation in agriculture:
An evolutionary game analysis based on the experience of China. Agricultural Systems. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​
o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​a​g​s​y​.​2​0​2​4​.​1​0​4​1​3​6​​​​​​​
Tan, W., Tang, Q., Sun, W., & Du, X. (2025). Unintended consequences: Examining the effects of gov-
ernment digital regulation on corporate fintech innovation in China. Emerging Markets Review, 64,
Article 101221. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ememar.2024.101221
Tang, H., Li, D., Wan, J., Imran, M., & Shoaib, M. (2020). A reconfigurable method for intelligent manu-
facturing based on industrial cloud and edge intelligence. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 7, 4248–
4259. https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2019.2950048
Tarutė,A., Duobienė, J., Klovienė, L., Vitkauskaitė, E., & Varaniūtė, V. (2018). Identifying FactorsAffect-
ing Digital Transformation of SMEs, in: Proceedings of The 18th International Conference on Elec-
tronic Business. Presented at the ICEB, p. 9.
Teece, D. J. (2007). Explicating dynamic capabilities: The nature and microfoundations of (sustainable)
enterprise performance. Strategic Management Journal, 28, 1319–1350. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​2​/​s​m​
j​.​6​4​0​​​​​​​
Tian, M., Chen, Y., Tian, G., Huang, W., & Hu, C. (2023). The role of digital transformation practices in
the operations improvement in manufacturing firms:Apractice-based view. International Journal of
Production Economics, 262,Article 108929. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2023.108929
Trenkle, J. (2019). Survival in the digital age – A framework for formulating a Digital Transformation
Strategy in SME. 19th Int. Conf. Electron. Bus. 15.
Trzaska, R., Sulich,A., Organa, M., Niemczyk, J., & Jasiński, B. (2021). Digitalization business strategies
in energy sector: Solving problems with uncertainty under industry 4.0 conditions. Energies. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​
/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​3​3​9​0​/​e​n​1​4​2​3​7​9​9​7​​​​​​​
Tsiavos, V., & Kitsios, F. (2022). Technology as Driver, Enabler and Barrier of Digital Transformation: A
Review. In M. Themistocleous & M. Papadaki (Eds.), Information Systems (pp. 681–693). Springer
International Publishing.
Tsou, H.-T., & Chen, J.-S. (2023). How does digital technology usage benefit firm performance? Digital
transformation strategy and organisational innovation as mediators. Technology Analysis and Strate-
gic Management, 35, 1114–1127. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​8​0​/​0​9​​5​3​7​3​2​​5​.​2​0​2​1​​.​1​9​9​​1​5​7​5
Ulrich, K., Guijarro-García, M., Pagán-Castaño, E., & Nieto-Alemán, P. (2024). Drivers of decision-mak-
ing towards for digital transformation. Review of Managerial Science. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​1​1​8​
4​6​-​0​2​4​-​0​0​7​5​2​-​2​​​​​​​
1 3

--- PAGE 38 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
Valtonen,A., & Holopainen, M. (2025). Mitigating employee resistance and achieving well-being in digi-
tal transformation. Information Technology & People, 38, 42–72. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​8​/​I​T​P​-​0​5​-​2​0​
2​4​-​0​7​0​1​​​​​​​
van Eck, N. J., &Waltman, L. (2011). Text mining and visualization using VOSviewer.ArXiv11092058 Cs.
Veile, J. W., Kiel, D., Müller, J. M., & Voigt, K.-I. (2019). Lessons learned from Industry 4.0 implementa-
tion in the German manufacturing industry. Journal of Manufacturing Technology Management, 31,
977–997. https://doi.org/10.1108/JMTM-08-2018-0270
Vendraminelli, L., Macchion, L., Nosella, A., & Vinelli, A. (2023). Design thinking: Strategy for digital
transformation.JournalofBusinessStrategy,44,200–210.https://doi.org/10.1108/JBS-01-2022-0009
Vial, G. (2019). Understanding digital transformation: A review and a research agenda. J Strateg Inf Syst
SI: Review Issue, 28, 118–144. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis.2019.01.003
von Leipzig, T., Gamp, M., Manz, D., Schöttle, K., Ohlhausen, P., Oosthuizen, G., Palm, D., & von
Leipzig, K. (2017). Initialising Customer-orientated digital transformation in enterprises. Procedia
Manuf, 8, 517–524. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.promfg.2017.02.066
Wang, D., & Shao, X. (2024). Research on the impact of digital transformation on the production effi-
ciency of manufacturing enterprises: Institution-based analysis of the threshold effect. International
Review of Economics & Finance, 91, 883–897. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iref.2024.01.046
Wang, K., Li, B., Tian, T., Zakuan, N., & Rani, P. (2023). Evaluate the drivers for digital transformation in
higher education institutions in the era of industry 4.0 based on decision-making method. Journal of
Innovation & Knowledge. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jik.2023.100364
Wang, K., Guo, F., Zhang, C., & Schaefer, D. (2024). From Industry 4.0 to Construction 4.0: Barriers to
the digital transformation of engineering and construction sectors. Engineering, Construction and
Architectural Management, 31, 136–158. https://doi.org/10.1108/ECAM-05-2022-0383
Warner, K. S. R., & Wäger, M. (2019). Building dynamic capabilities for digital transformation:An ongo-
ing process of strategic renewal. Long Range Planning, 52, 326–349. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​l​r​p​.​
2​0​1​8​.​1​2​.​0​0​1​​​​​​​
Weber, B., Butschan, J., & Heidenreich, S. (2017). Tackling hurdles to digital transformation - the role of
competencies for successful IIoT implementation, in: 2017 IEEE Technology & Engineering Man-
agement Conference (TEMSCON). Presented at the 2017 IEEE Technology & Engineering Manage-
ment Conference (TEMSCON), IEEE, Santa Clara, CA, USA, pp. 312–317. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​
/​T​E​M​S​C​O​N​.​2​0​1​7​.​7​9​9​8​3​9​5​​​​​​​
Weber, E., Buttgen, M., & Bartsch, S. (2022). How to take employees on the digital transformation jour-
ney:An. Journal of Business Research, 143, 225–238. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​1​6​/​j​.​​j​b​u​s​r​​e​s​.​2​0​2​​2​.​0​1​​.​0​3​6
Webster, J., & Watson, R. T. (2002). Analyzing the past to prepare for the future: Writing a literature
review. MIS Quarterly, 26, xiii–xxiii.
Wei,Y., Zhu, M., Lam, H. K. S., Liu, F.,Yeung,A. C. L., Cheng, T. C. E., & Zhou, H. (2024). Protagonists
in digital transformation:The impact of chief digital officers on firms’financial performance. Journal
of Industrial Information Integration, 41,Article 100678. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jii.2024.100678
Wen, H., Zhong, Q., & Lee, C.-C. (2022). Digitalization, competition strategy and corporate innovation:
Evidence from Chinese manufacturing listed companies. International Review of FinancialAnalysis.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.irfa.2022.102166
Wessel, L., Baiyere, A., Ologeanu-Taddei, R., Cha, J., & Jensen, T. B. (2021). Unpacking the difference
between digital transformation and it-enabled organizational transformation. Journal of the Associa-
tion for Information Systems, 22, 102–129. https://doi.org/10.17705/1jais.00655
Xia, Y., & Md Johar, M. G. (2025). How external factors influence organisational digital innovation:
Evidence from China. Technology in Society, 81, Article 102802. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​1​6​/​j​.​​t​e​c​h​s​​o​c​
.​2​0​2​​4​.​1​0​​2​8​0​2
Xu,Y., Ji, J., Qiao,Y., & Huang, J. (2025). How and when does digital transformation promote technologi-
cal innovation performance?Astudy of Chinese high-tech firms. Technovation, 146,Article 103294.​
h​t​t​p​s​:​​​/​​/​d​o​​i​.​o​r​​g​/​​1​0​.​​1​0​​1​​6​​/​j​.​t​e​c​​h​n​o​v​a​​t​​i​o​n​​.​​2​0​2​5​.​1​0​3​2​9​4
Xue, F., Tan, Y., & Anwar, S. (2024). Innovation strategy, digital transformation and competitive advan-
tage of manufacturing enterprises: Evidence from China. European Journal of Innovation Manage-
ment. https://doi.org/10.1108/EJIM-09-2023-0786
Yadav, P., & Nisha, T. N. (2022). Digital transformation strategy of business models: A framework
approach in improving the traditional business model of software industry, in: AIP Conference Pro-
ceedings.American Institute of Physics Inc. https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0109670
Yang, F., & Gu, S. (2021). Industry 4.0, a revolution that requires technology and National strategies.
Complex Intelligent Systems, 7, 1311–1325. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40747-020-00267-9
1 3

--- PAGE 39 ---
Journal of the Knowledge Economy
Yao, Q., Tang, H., Liu,Y., & Boadu, F. (2024). The penetration effect of digital leadership on digital trans-
formation: The role of digital strategy consensus and diversity types. Journal of Enterprise Informa-
tion Management, 37, 903–927. https://doi.org/10.1108/JEIM-09-2022-0350
Zhang, J., & Chen, Z. (2024). Exploring human resource management digital transformation in the digital
age. Journal of Knowledge Economics, 15, 1482–1498. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13132-023-01214-y
Zhang, W., Zhao, S., & Wan, X. (2021). Industrial digital transformation strategies based on differential
games. Applied Mathematical Modelling, 98, 90–108. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apm.2021.05.001
Zhou,Y., Lyu, J., & Li, L. (2025). Can digital transformation enhance labor productivity in enterprises:An
analysis from the perspective of business process reengineering. PLoS One, 20, Article e0325484.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0325484
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional affiliations.
Authors and Affiliations
VasilisTsiavos1
· Fotis Kitsios1
Vasilis Tsiavos
vtsiavos@uom.edu.gr
Fotis Kitsios
kitsios@uom.gr
1
Department ofApplied Informatics, University of Macedonia, Egnatia Str. 156,
Thessaloniki 54636, Greece
1 3