--- PAGE 1 ---
Information and Software Technology 141 (2022) 106734
Available online 30 September 2021
0950-5849/© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
InformationandSoftwareTechnology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/infsof
Amodel-drivenframeworktosupportstrategicagility:Value-added
perspective
Konstantinos Tsilionis, Yves Wautelet∗
KULeuven, Belgium
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Strategic agility
IT governance
Strategic value
Model-driven development
Agile
Agility
i* framework
Scaled agile framework
SAFe
MoDrIGo
StratAMoDrIGo
A B S T R A C T
Context: The Covid-19 pandemic has shown the entire world that the habits of work, freedom, and consump-
tion can change quickly and significantly for an undetermined amount of time. A dynamic environment as
such, prompts organizations to move fast in order to leverage changing circumstances as sources of opportunity
rather than deadly threats. Drastic changes in work organization, consumption habits, compliance, etc., may
require firms to quickly adopt new technology delivering all sorts of added value.
Objective: The development and adoption of new technology – structurally impacting the way the organization
conducts its activities – requires a considerable amount of effort in a short time frame, thus rendering it a
governance decision where the alignment of the technology’s adoption and use to the long term strategy
needs to be evaluated. The short time frame requiring fast response implies that agility should not remain a
development or management/operational concept but should also be adopted onto the strategic layer.
Method: Design Science Research (DSR) has been applied to build-up a framework supporting strategic agility
in a model-driven fashion called Strategic Agile Model Driven IT Governance (StratAMoDrIGo). The relevance,
rigor and design cycles of DSR have been applied and presented.
Results: StratAMoDrIGo is based on the identification of sources of value for the organization’s strategy, its
stakeholders and the users of the implemented/adopted technology. Relevant concepts are consolidated in an
ontology of which the application uses the NFR Model at strategic-level and the i* Strategic Rationale Model
at management-level. The proposal is applied on the case of an hospital facing the Covid-19 pandemic.
Conclusion: The value brought by strategic opportunities’ adoption to the organization, stakeholders and users
can be evaluated ex ante through conceptual models.
1. Introduction
Governance and strategic decisions often face a lack of concrete
data or formalisms supporting them [1]. Unstructured and fragmented
information leads to a vision limited in many ways. Such information
indeed fails to provide an ex ante evaluation of the consequences of IT
adoption on the long term competitive position of the organization and
the fulfillment of stakeholders’ best interests. Furthermore, all type of
IT related decisions (including strategic ones) need to be taken on short
notice because of the rapidly changing socio-economic environment. In-
deed, recent years gave rise to unexpected events deeply impacting the
economy and stakeholders’ (e.g. customers, employees, shareholders,
...) behavior in a very short time frame and without any notice. For
example, we can cite (i) the Covid-19 pandemic stipulating new ways
of working/consumption habits; (ii) the 2008 financial crisis impacting
the budget formulation processes and overall financial management
of organizations, or (iii) random terrorist attacks disrupting civil lib-
erties and worker mobility. When taking place, such events act as
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: yves.wautelet@kuleuven.be (Y. Wautelet).
game changers and reactive measures, impactful on the organizational
strategy, need to be assessed and implemented almost in real-time.
Conceptual modeling involves building a representation of selected phe-
nomena in some domain [2]. Some conceptual models to support strate-
gic decision making based on goal-driven representations (e.g. [3–6])
have been developed and validated lately. Such models are able to
incorporate organizational goals at a very high level of abstraction
but also the goals of a wide variety of stakeholders together with
their intentionality. Their use is significant to highlight, study, and
evaluate the global impact of a new software or system development
and deployment.
This paper depicts the research aimed to build a framework, in-
stantiated through conceptual models, allowing to quickly evaluate
(when the business context changes rapidly) the impact of IT adoptions
in terms of strategic, stakeholder and user value. By strategic value
we mean, in the context of this paper, every development, adoption,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2021.106734
Received 15 January 2021; Received in revised form 12 September 2021; Accepted 14 September 2021

--- PAGE 2 ---
Information and Software Technology 141 (2022) 106734
2
K. Tsilionis and Y. Wautelet
deployment of technology that enhances the long term position or the
organization’s products and services. Similarly, stakeholder value refers
to any kind of support resulting from technology that increases the
level of quality of life of the stakeholder in a specific business context.
Finally, user value essentially concerns furnishing functional and non-
functional elements to an end-user helping him/her to more efficiently
perform its private or business activities. Since the framework depicted
in the paper focuses on the evaluation of the impact of technology
adoption on an extended range of values on the one side and on rapid
development/deployment in changing environments on the other side,
it is aimed to support strategic agility through conceptual models.
The developed framework extends the Model Driven IT Governance
(MoDrIGo) one of [6] to include a broader range of potential tech-
nologies on which governance-level adoption decisions need to be
taken. These are purely based on (added) value evaluation to sus-
tain agile principles; we thus call it Strategic Agile MoDrIGo, in short
StratAMoDrIGo. MoDrIGo uses conceptual modeling to support the IT
governance process especially for business and IT alignment evalua-
tion when adopting IT services. In that sense, StratAMoDrIGo is more
general (not focused on IT services only but on a broader range of
(significant) technological adoptions) but also covering more aspects
(because it allows to overview the impact of the adoption on stake-
holders and users) while being also flexible (different configurations
can be edited beforehand). StratAMoDrIGo is intended to be applied
‘‘on the fly’’ when the business context changes and new technologies
can be adopted while MoDrIGo is applied in a classical service portfolio
approach when IT services are to be developed to replace decommis-
sioned ones or address new needs. The main research questions the
paper is answering to is ‘‘How could conceptual modeling be applied to
highlight strategic, stakeholder and user value within technological adoptions
in a fast moving business context’’. The main contribution of this paper
is the enhanced framework (StratAMoDrIGo).
The proposal is applied on the case of an hospital facing the Covid-
19 situation. This hospital has been used for full validation of a pre-
vious framework in which the one presented in this paper takes roots
(see [6]). We here study the impact of the development of 2 (software)
applications driven by the Covid-19 pandemic on the hospital’s strat-
egy, stakeholders and application’s users. The impact of the pandemic
on the hospital strategy has been, for the research team, an opportunity
for the development and validation of the framework. An expert has
also been consulted for the evaluation of the strengths and weaknesses
of the framework. StratAMoDrIGo also went through a comparison with
other agile development and value-driven methods.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 gives
some background information about strategic agility and stakeholder-
based governance. Section 3 gives the context of the research, more
specifically the application of design science through the relevance,
rigor and design cycles. Section 4 depicts the ontology on which our
framework (StratAMoDrIGo) is based. Section 5 documents the mod-
els that our framework is constituted of. Section 6 depicts a process
fragment that can be applied in order to use StratAMoDrIGo. Section 7
depicts the application and evaluation of the framework on a case for
evaluation/validation. Section 8 compares the framework with other
state-of-the-art approaches and discusses some practical aspects related
to agility and applicability as well as the threats to validity. Finally,
Section 9 concludes the paper.
2. Background
2.1. Defining, characterizing and positioning strategic agility: from concepts
to implementation
Haakanson et al. [7] define strategy as the ... pattern of activities
which has an impact on the achievement of the organizational goals in
relation to its environment. By adjusting the offer of products and services
through an adequate strategy, a better competitive positioning should
quickly be achieved when the environment changes drastically. Indeed,
environmental changes induce strategic opportunities. A strategic op-
portunity involves the acquisition of resources at a price below their
rent generating capacity [8]. The opportunity is outside the scope of
the organization so the latter cannot influence it but it can make use
of it for its own benefit [7]. All in all, it is an opportunity if it brings
more value that the invested resources and we consider it being strategic
when it leads to a competitive advantage through the mobilization of
the resources it involves. Operational measures can mostly be taken on
the fly, but the existence of game-changing events necessitate the swift
evaluation/implementation of strategic (governance) level decisions as
well; the latter are described as the ones having a structural impact on
the organization, its finances and its stakeholders.
Agile practices require the set-up of enterprise-wide, top-down and
bottom-up collaboration and communication mechanisms that identify,
promote and reinforce initiatives encouraging a rapid response to in-
ternal/external organizational challenges [9,10]. However, despite the
proliferation of the importance of agility when crafting organizational
goals, the former does not necessarily constitute a panacea to every
issue related to organizational effectiveness and efficiency. For one
thing, agility is by nature a multipurposed conceptual term, open to
many definitions and action strategies even within the same organiza-
tion [11]. Sambanurthy et al. [12] illustrate the multidimensionality
of agile by differentiating between some of its co-variants such as
customer agility (leveraging customer insights to expedite innovation),
partnering agility (exploiting strategic partnerships and business net-
works to discover competitive opportunities) and operational agility
(swift redesign and co-creation of business processes with the synergies
of customers/developers for maximized business value delivery). The
last variant has become prominent in the field of software development
after the emergence of the so-called ‘Agile Manifesto’ [13] invoking the
simplification of certain code-producing principles/attitudes and the
disavowal of plan-driven rigidity for the attainment of user-oriented
functions that yield maximized value. Operational agility lies into the
use of the existing business model (i.e., improving the accuracy and
quality of software to deliver a better product or service), however, up-
scaling operational agility towards the achievement of strategic agility
(i.e., creating new software developments, exploring new markets,
making new products by the exploitation of opportunities [14]) is not
self-evident.
Progressively, there has been a lot of seminal work in the effort
to chart the notion of agility in a wider organizational perspective by
customizing specific ‘command and control’ mechanisms to software
development teams (i.e., setting-up specific Key Performance Indicators
(KPI), interventions and team coordination tactics) [15,16]. However,
works as such do not consider how agility can be adopted at strategic
level.
Approaches found in literature to achieve strategic agility are most
often a collection of advices or practices to be implemented (see for
example [17]) or inherent qualities – like strategic sensitivity, resource
fluidity and leadership unity [18] – to have to make the organization’s
environment agile at a strategic level. According to several authors
(e.g. [19–22], dynamic capabilities – that were originally defined for
sustaining a competitive advantage in an increasingly interdependent
environment – can be used for achieving strategic agility. Ordinary
capabilities are operating routines concerning the business processes
of an organization [23] while dynamic capabilities are more abstract
ones implying a modification of the operational processes and enabling
the business to evolve and expand using innovation [21,23]. Strong
dynamic capabilities are required when organizations are facing highly
uncertain environments in order to favor strategic agility [21]. A
dynamic capability can be defined as the firm’s ability to integrate, build,
and reconfigure internal and external competences to address rapidly chang-
ing environments [19]. Dynamic capabilities do represent key elements
for an organization’s capacity to innovate, adapt to change, and create
change that is favorable to customers and unfavorable to competitors; they

--- PAGE 3 ---
Information and Software Technology 141 (2022) 106734
3
K. Tsilionis and Y. Wautelet
are a specific type of organizational and managerial skills [21]. Glesne
et al. [24] highlight that three main types of dynamic capabilities are
relevant for strategic agility, i.e. the capacity to sense and shape opportu-
nities (sensing), the capacity to seize opportunities (seizing) and the capacity
to maintain competitiveness through reconfiguring the enterprise’s assets
(shifting). The framework developed in this paper is aimed provide
support to these dynamic capabilities. The inclusion of the framework
in the organization’s practices is intended to enhance the sensing (by
creating an opportunity-aware culture), its use concretely helps the
seizing (by offering a concrete way to evaluate the organizational
impact of opportunities’ adoption) and finally supports the shifting
(by highlighting how organizational resources and structures can be
reconfigured for the adoption of the opportunities). All in all, the
framework is intended to furnish support to reasoning for strategic
agility; this is done through the use of conceptual models.
As already discussed, strategic agility has been mostly explored
in strategic management sources in a very abstract manner via the
exploration of qualities an organization should have to be strategically
agile or via the experimentation of specific practices. To the best of the
authors knowledge, no formal framework has been proposed favoring
agility independently at a strategic level. The SAFe 5.1 framework [25]
drives operational developments by value streams identified at strategic
level but does not see agility as an independent aspect/quality of the or-
ganization. Also, SAFe’s software developments are driven by strategic
value flows but no ex-ante evaluation of the development’s impact can
be realized with the framework. A detailed comparison between SAFe
and StratAMoDrIGo can be found in Section 8.1. At operational-level,
methods like Scrum and XP favor agility in software development;
however, such frameworks do not include conceptual models natively
and focus solely on the employment of user stories for requirements
elicitation [26]. Thereby, the goal, as presented in the present paper,
is to build a framework allowing to represent business/organizational
situations in which rapid change is necessary by focusing on the de-
livered value (the key component of agility). Thereby, the framework
is purposed to evaluate the consequence of the adoption of strategic
opportunities (mostly new technology) onto the organizational setting
as a concrete approach of how to deal with a changing environment.
Traditional (IT) governance frameworks also exist; frameworks like
ISO/IEC 38500 [27] or Cobit 5 [28] provide guidance for a proper
IT governance but do not encompass principles/processes/concepts
to deal with changing environments and recommending immediate
action. The framework developed in this paper covers these two gaps
by being driven by conceptual models and allowing an integration of
the strategic, tactical, and operational levels; strategic and operational
agility can ultimately come together with the support of a structured
approach.
2.2. Towards stakeholder-driven governance
The key concept of stakeholder-based governance lies on the fact
that strategic decisions are not taken to maximize value for sharehold-
ers only but rather for all of the stakeholders of the organization [29].
The group of stakeholders is, by definition, much larger that the
shareholder one since it may include C-level executives, middle and
lower-level managers, users of an IT system, administrative employees,
clients, suppliers, etc. Proper stakeholder-based governance means that
when fixing strategic objectives and taking decisions to fulfill them, all
of these individual groups should be taken into account to maximize
shared value.
Samavi et al. [30] highlight that most modeling techniques that are
used to draw useful business insights may be focusing on maintaining
and reinforcing the existing structure and functions of transactions
in a value-driven network. They, however, do not engage in a fully-
fledged stakeholder-based governance which would imply, by definition,
the consideration of the intentional dimensions of the stakeholders par-
ticipating in a business. This may lead to representational inefficiencies
given the fact that creation and exchange of value in a business ecosys-
tem is triggered and influenced by the goals/intentions/motivations of
a multitude of stakeholders.
2.3. Related work
Lara et al. [31] regard governance from a design science perceptive
where they discover that most software modeling constructs favor the
portrayal of elements from the strategic apex in full concretization
without necessarily incorporating their operational-layer technologies.
As a solution, the authors introduce a set of new modeling elements
which essentially extend ArchiMate [32]. This enables a better oper-
ational imprint of the Enterprise Architecture (EA) but increases by
far the number of inter- and cross-layer connections without provid-
ing a clear contribution in improving the business and IT strategical
decision-making structures when facing rapidly evolving requirements.
Comparatively, Souza & do Prado Leite [33] try to bridge the rep-
resentational disassociations across strategic, tactic and operational
layers by proposing a model-driven methodology which merges i* [34]
and BPMN [35]. In this way, inter-layer traceability is ensured by
using relationships in places where these modeling languages intercept
each other. The authors claim that integrating fit-for-purpose modeling
constructs for each organizational level is bound to improve their in-
between alignment, at least in a vertical perceptive. However, their
contribution seems to be entailing a meticulous up-front design effort
for all organizational tiers. This is seemingly at odds with the paradigm
of using strategic opportunities where only coarse-grained features are
defined to allow businesses to react rapidly to internal or external
change.
Juhnyoung et al. [36] propose a value-centric, model-driven ap-
proach that is meant to identify business and IT gaps during the
exploration of new business opportunities. The approach strives to map
IT functions and capabilities to business performance while facilitating
the demonstration of the delivered value of IT and services. It is
comprised of these key modeling elements: first, a multi-layer model
represents the linkage between business and IT semantics and enables
IT and services to reflect their yielded business value. Second, a busi-
ness modeling component provides a strategic-level business view of
the entire enterprise and enables business analyses based on value and
risk assessment elements such as KPIs and other operational metrics.
Even though the approach aspires to yield an end-to-end integration of
business value with the main IT enablers, the former is defined only in
terms of cost metrics influencing the corporate governance view from
the perceptive of the shareholder.
Thomas & Vom Brocke [37] describe a conceptual modeling-based
methodology to assess and determine valuation metrics of Service-
Oriented Architecture (SOA) deliverables. The study aspires to traverse
the gap between the flexibility that a SOA brings to IT integration and
the leverage of the former to achieve (business) strategic objectives
by providing support to those responsible for the design-decision of
these services. Conceptual models provide with individual, factually
documented, design alternatives evaluated with regard to their long-
term economic viability. There are some points of attention with this
approach with the first one being that value is considered solely insofar
to its economic significance, disregarding in that sense some service
which may be costly to design/implement but holds nonetheless the po-
tential of solving crucial functional and/or strategic concerns. Second,
the methodology describes the setup of a governance decision-support
center for the design of specific services but does not depict the frame-
work by which this center transmits the design-decision implications to
the other layers of the organizational spectrum.
Khurum et al. [38] acclaim that the existing value-construct con-
tributions act in isolation from each other in software product de-
velopment processes. Consequently, the study presents a consolidated
software value map which introduces essentially a balanced scorecard
approach that considers various internal/external factors before a final
software product development decision can be taken. Similarly, Mendes
et al. [39] detail a methodology that calls upon the improvement of
decision-making activities associated with the development processes
of software intensive products and services. This methodology can be

--- PAGE 4 ---
Information and Software Technology 141 (2022) 106734
4
K. Tsilionis and Y. Wautelet
described as an amalgamation of knowledge creation processes and
the use of Bayesian networks purposed to elicit the knowledge of key
stakeholders in terms of the most significant factors that should be
used as input to a Web-based value-assessing tool employed to support
decision making. Both of these approaches seem to be detailing the
value-centric decisions that need to be deliberated during the planning
phase of the development process and do not offer concrete suggestions
on the alignment between strategic and operational aspects during
the running phase of the process. Overall, to the best of the authors’
knowledge, there is no consolidated work up until now that explores
value aside from the economic viability of technological adoptions
in the business context while clearly demonstrating (with the use of
conceptual modeling tools) how the best interest of a wide range
of stakeholders can be supported by rendering the workings of the
organization in a state of strategic agility.
3. Research paradigm, method and approach
This research follows the precepts of the Design Science (DS)
paradigm [40]; DS is meant to build generic solutions for identified
issues. The output of a DS-driven research can be a solution in the
form of an artifact, terminology, methodology, engineering tool, and
so forth. In the present research, an attempt has been made to build
artifacts to improve the handling of strategic opportunities for the
benefit (i.e., provided value) of all stakeholders in a highly dynamic
business context. These artifacts aim to solve an unresolved issue or
a problem considered being in a precarious state. More precisely, we
furnish a tool to overview the impact of the adoption/deployment of
strategic opportunities on (i) strategic objectives (to evaluate strategic
value), (ii) stakeholder goals (to evaluate stakeholder value), and
(iii) technological features (to evaluate user value). To answer the
research question given in the introduction and, in accordance with
the DS research cycles defined by Hevner [41], we are communicating
an analysis of the Relevance Cycle in Section 3.1, the Rigor Cycle in
Section 3.2 and the Design Cycle in Section 3.3.
3.1. Relevance cycle
The Relevance Cycle concerns the identification of opportunities/
problems in the application domain. In our context, we identified the
problem referring to the lack of a framework being able to adopt
strategic opportunities in short time frames through the evaluation of
the value they offer on a strategic, tactical and operational level. The
problem has been identified in practice within a partner organization
(that had already been in collaboration for the build-up of [6]). The
former had been implementing an IT governance framework that was
in a state of disruption with traditional (IT governance) frameworks for
allowing the evaluation of larger technological developments and their
added value on multiple levels; however, the framework was not agile
enough to deal with changing business contexts. Even though agility
was a major area of concern, together with the quest for integration
with operational agility approaches, their existing framework offered
analysis abilities through the use of conceptual modeling. The latter
also contributed to the creation of an archetype for the evaluation of the
strategic opportunities while maintaining uninterrupted the daily mode
of operations within the organization. The recognition of the afore-
mentioned problem along with the creation of the artifact occurred
iteratively. The final release of the artifact had to satisfy each sub-sect
of this problem.
3.2. Rigor cycle
The Rigor Cycle refers to the theories/methods that are used to
ground the construction and evaluation of our artifact. Our framework
is built upon an existing framework for IT governance validated in
previous research. In order to support the contribution of this paper,
we created a so-called ‘pseudo-ontology1
’ [30,42] (i.e., not a fully-
fledged ontological construction but the creation of an informal user
friendly ontology). Indeed, we use a restricted and structured form
of natural language to state and clarify the definition of its concepts.
A Unified Modeling Language (UML) class diagram [43] is used to
formalize the concepts of our ontology as well as the links between
these concepts. The ontology and its application, through the use of
existing models, constitute a contribution to the knowledge base of
agility. More precisely:
• For the strategic layer we started from the MoDrIGo framework
which was applied for the IT governance of the partner organi-
zation. More precisely, the strategic-layer concepts started from
the ontology of MoDrIGo. The latter is aimed at defining key
concepts for a governance situation where development/adoption
decisions need to be taken for IT services. We were interested in
linking the strategic layer with the overall organizational (busi-
ness and/or IT strategy) so we used MoDrIGo for the represen-
tation of the business (and IT) strategies because of its specific
purpose of evaluating business and IT alignment out of conceptual
models for service-based systems. The business situation we aim
to represent here is nevertheless slightly different than in the
traditional MoDrIGo framework. We have reviewed a series of pa-
pers for the identification of relevant concepts for strategic agility.
Unfortunately, and as said before in this paper, we mostly found
sources negotiating it in a very abstract manner through qualities
or practices to align to but never in the form of a framework
that can be instantiated. Therefore, the concepts had to be refined
from the domain of strategic agility but also driven by traditional
agility (thus focusing on value). The framework indeed focuses on
any technological adoption driven by a moving business context
(which could also be an IT service); we have thus included the
ones of business context and strategic opportunity. Finally, with
respect to MoDrIGo, the concept of Business IT Service (by nature
also very abstract thus represented at strategic-level, see [6,44])
has been removed; the strategic opportunity can nevertheless be
a Business IT Service even if the former is broader so can be a
broader range of technological means;
• For the tactical layer, the concepts are driven by stakeholder
analysis so we tried to incorporate/represent the impact on stake-
holders and the value provided to them by the adoption of the
strategic opportunity;
• Finally, for the operational layer, we link the tactical concepts
to the notions of Epic User Story and User Story (these concepts
are defined in [26,45,46]) to point to the agile (operational) de-
velopment of the strategic opportunity; this nevertheless remains
an optional part and is left for future work.
3.3. Design cycle
The Design Cycle refers to the construction and the evaluation of the
artifact. Our framework (which we refer to as the artifact developed
in this research from a DS perspective) has been constructed as an
evolution of existing approaches that have been adapted to support
agility on multiple levels due to the underlying focus on value. The
evaluation is done through a case study onto an organization where
the impending problem has been identified.
The framework focuses on value through the triptych: strategic,
stakeholder and user. The visual representation of the levels and the
respective value brought is made using existing models and following
1
We use here the term ontology because we depict a representation of the
relevant concepts to deal with an agile situation at strategic and management
levels. The pseudo-ontology is then supported by two existing models for
graphical representation. Thereby, it is not a meta-model as such because it is
instantiated using two different models.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Information and Software Technology 141 (2022) 106734
5
K. Tsilionis and Y. Wautelet
the principle of separation of concerns. This means that although the
ontology is presented here as a unified set of concepts, instantiations
are done through the use of different models to illustrate/treat the
different aspects of the problem separately. This allows to keep the
problem manageable; we can also deal better with scalability when
evaluating strategic opportunities having a large impact on the orga-
nizational setting or the representation of situations with the adoption
of multiple strategic opportunities. More specifically:
• At strategic level, an Non Functional Requirements (NFR)-like
diagram [47] is used to represent the benefits of the strategic
opportunity(-ies) on the business objectives to identify strategic
value. Such diagrams were originally used to represent non-
functional requirements but have later evolved to represent high
level (very abstract) strategic objectives and trace the impact
of functional developments (called operationalizations) on these
kinds of developments (see for example [6,48]). This level thus
allows to isolate the strategic objectives and the strategic op-
portunities as coarse grained elements to study instantly the
impact of the later on the former without tactical-level details
(i.e., details on the impact of the deployment of the opportunity
on the organizational setting);
• At tactical and operational levels, a Strategic Rationale Dia-
gram (SRD) [34] is used to represent the stakeholders and identify
stakeholder value. Although it is called strategic, the SRD allows
to represent a tactical-level situation where the goals of individual
actors (i.e., stakeholders) and the means for their realization can
be documented. It allows to study the organizational impact of
the adoption of a strategic opportunity and, consequently, the
induced value for these stakeholders (so stakeholder value, at
tactical-level). Finally, end users of the technology constituting
the strategic opportunity can be represented in the SRD along
with their goals and tasks to identify the value, provided by this
technology, for them (so user value, at operational-level).
To show how the ontology can be dynamically used/applied in
practice and supported with existing models, we also depict a process
fragment, i.e. a set of process elements out of which concrete process
instances can be composed when executed. The latter illustrates how
to apply the framework as a method or within an existing (software)
development method. It has been built generically to highlight the roles
and activities that are performed in the context of a strategic oppor-
tunity evaluation for adoption decision. The constituting activities are
customizable in function of the project and the process fragment should
only be taken as a guidance for application; it is not meant to be used as
a turnkey process but as a plug-in to technology development/adoption
methods and/or agile methods; it has been formalized using the process
fragment concepts of [49] and represented graphically in i* [50] in the
same fashion as in [51,52]. We chose the formalization of i* because
it highlights the social dependencies between the actors/roles without
it being sequential. Indeed, we did not aim to document a sequence
of activities in the process fragment because of the high variability
existing in the sequence and/or parallelism from business situation
to business situation. This also shows implicitly the flexibility in the
adoption of the process fragment by an organization. Indeed, multiple
activities can be performed simultaneously, some can be omitted while
others can be added and the sequence can be chosen in function of
the field requirements/constraints. Workflow-based notations – that
are more directive in terms of sequence – do not highlight social
dependencies and are less tailorable/customizable, thus less relevant.
Conversely, the i* notation accounts for the variability in the activities’
execution and selection.
The validation of the framework has been made through a case
study in a Belgian hospital already studied in previous work (see [6,
53]) but with the new context of the Covid-19 crisis as the cause of
a changing business environment. The same organization had already
applied the MoDrIGo approach (see [6]) but needed a more flexible
approach to deal with crisis situations like for example the Covid-19
pandemic. More specifically, new technological developments helping
to deal with the Covid-19 situation are evaluated through conceptual
modeling to identify the value provided at various levels. For illustra-
tion purposes, we take the examples of a videoconferencing system and a
Covid-19 self assessment app considered here as the strategic opportunities.
This is fully detailed in Section 7. An expert opinion on the framework
and its application has also been gathered for a better appraisal of the
contributions.
4. Ontology
Fig. 1 depicts our reference ontology documenting the concepts
required for dealing with strategic agility.
For the description of the ontology, we will first start with the
strategic-level; strategy is one of the most important aspects of cor-
porate governance [54]. Strategic agility essentially delivers its full
potential in a dynamic business environment where the context changes
without notice and unexpectedly. We refer to this as the Business_Context
which is represented as a class in the ontology. An example of an
instance could be the Covid-19 pandemic, the 2008 financial cri-
sis, the 2015/2016 terrorist attacks in Paris and Brussels, or other
kinds of game changing events like a merger, new trends in cus-
tomer habits, new behavior in employees’ work, etc. The core strategy
may be impacted by the business context; we represent this by the
drives relationship link between the Business_Context and the Strate-
gic_Objective class (the latter can be in nature a Business_Objective
then part of the Business_Strategy or an IT_Objective then part of the
IT_Strategy). In parallel, a changing Business_Context can drive one or
more Strategic_Opportunities; these have a Type attribute that identi-
fies the form it takes, e.g. an IT Service (see for example [44,55]
for a characterization), an entire software system, a single mobile
application or any technological device. These are represented by the
Strategic_Opportunity class in the ontology; what matters is that the
development/adoption of the Strategic_Opportunity requires an amount
of effort/resources having a significant impact on the organization’s
performance jeopardizing its competitive position in the long run.
The adoption of the Strategic_Opportunity can thus sustain pre-existing
Strategic_Objectives and/or new ones driven by the Business_Context.
When a Strategic_Opportunity sustains a Strategic_Objective it delivers
Strategic_Value to the organization.
The management-level further supports the governance one through
the implementation of solutions supporting the strategic decisions/
objectives. We aim here to bring value through the adoption of the
Strategic_Opportunity to all of the stakeholders (represented through the
Stakeholder class). The latter entails all the actors that have an interest
in the organization and can either affect it or be affected by it. The
approach presented here is, by nature, aimed to be stakeholder-driven
and, to such an end, it explicitly identifies Stakeholder_Goals so, as a
consequence, Stakeholder_Value resulting of the adoption of a Strate-
gic_Opportunity. Stakeholders fulfill Management_Tasks some being re-
quired by the Strategic_Opportunity to be successfully adopted/deployed
in the business environment. Also, they achieve their individual Stake-
holder_Goals by the fulfillment of Management_Tasks. In turn, the users
(represented through the User class) are a subgroup of Stakeholders
that are directly using the Strategic_Opportunity in one way or another.
Consequently, Stakeholder_Value is a concept that is broader than the
User_Value, the latter being value given by the immediate use of the
Strategic_Opportunity. More specifically, a User uses a Feature which is a
special kind of Management_Task that possibly sustains, through tech-
nology, the realization of Strategic_Objectives. Stakeholders get direct
(if they are Users) or indirect (if they are not Users) value from the
adoption of the Strategic_Opportunity (through the use of its Features) in
the specific Business_Context.
The evaluation of a strategic opportunity (in the aforementioned
manner) suggests implicitly that the application of the framework is not

--- PAGE 6 ---
Information and Software Technology 141 (2022) 106734
6
K. Tsilionis and Y. Wautelet
Fig. 1. Strategic opportunities driving the strategic objectives: An ontology.
made to be fully top-down but rather a round-trip between the levels
to identify and exploit the relevant identified sources of value at any
level. Further explanation on the followed application process will be
given in Section 6.
5. Model-based value representation
While the previous section concentrated on defining the relevant
concepts for strategic agility and the sources of value, this section pro-
poses an instantiation of the concepts using existing modeling notations
to visualize the sources of value brought by the adoption of a strategic
opportunity at strategic (governance) and management levels.
5.1. Strategic value driven by strategic opportunities: NFR approach
In accordance with MoDrIGo and, as explained earlier, to represent
the strategic level (where the strategic value brought by the adoption
of a strategic opportunity can be identified), we use an NFR tree [56].
Indeed, the latter is used first to build a strategic-level representation
offering a decomposition of the Strategic_Objectives in a refinement
fashion. Note that the same modeling approach can be followed for the
organization’s Business_Strategy and for the IT_Strategy. In both cases,
Strategic_Objectives are refined from top-level parent elements to more
concrete leaf-level elements. In the NFR tree, Strategic_Opportunities are
linked to leaf Strategic_Objectives through contribution links; this is both
valid for the Business_Strategy and the IT_Strategy. Positive and negative
contributions are inferred from the i* Strategic Rationale Diagram (SRD)
– i.e., the management level – as task elements fulfilling a solution con-
tributing to the realization of the Strategic_Objectives (see Section 5.3).
A canonical form of an NFR tree customized for our purpose is given
in Fig. 2.
5.2. Stakeholder and user value driven by strategic opportunities: i* ap-
proach
In accordance with MoDrIGo, to represent the management-level
(where the stakeholder and the user value are identified), we use the
i* SRD [50]. Nevertheless, the latter is slightly adapted/customized for
our specific purpose. Fig. 3 depicts a canonical form of the i* SRD
instantiated to outline the Stakeholders’ intentions with respect to the
Fig. 2. Model-driven representation of strategic value: Canonical form.
Strategic Opportunities (so the impact of the latter on the former) within
the organizational setting.
The i* framework is a goal-oriented graphical requirement modeling
notation [34]. It allows an early requirement engineering analysis in
environments where social actors depend on each other for goals to be
achieved, tasks to be performed, and resources to be furnished [34].
Previous researches proved the relevance and utility of i* to model
organizational requirements of a ‘‘multi-agent system’’ [44] facilitating
stakeholder’s interactions by depicting their dependencies and hence
providing a mean for coordination. i* was previously used to model
several organizational settings [57] like online stores [58], hospital

--- PAGE 7 ---
Information and Software Technology 141 (2022) 106734
7
K. Tsilionis and Y. Wautelet
beds management and health care [6,53], supply chains and more
specifically outbound logistics [59], production support in the steel in-
dustry [60] and also for the development of higher education platforms
like collaborative learning software [48] and Massive Open Online
Courses (MOOCs) [61]. The i* framework is divided in two parts, each
providing a different level of abstraction: the Strategic Dependency
(SD) model (used for the representation of actor-interdependencies)
and the Strategic Rationale (SR) model (used for the representation of
the actors’ internal intents) [34]. Fig. 3 provides the core elements of
the i* framework as well as their graphical representations.
The first element that needs to be highlighted is that Strategic Op-
portunities are explicitly represented, in the diagram, as i* actors stereo-
typed as i* agents (because a Strategic Opportunity is, in our framework,
by nature technological). The most concrete Strategic_Objectives, iden-
tified during the strategic evaluation, are cascaded in the i* SRD
representation at management level as goals in the scope of the agent(s)
representing the strategic opportunity(-ies). A Strategic_Objective found
as a leaf in the NFR Business (or IT) strategy decomposition is found
in the i* SRD representing the management-level organization if and
only if the adoption of the strategic opportunity supports, by the use of
a specific Feature, the realization of the Strategic_Objective. The Feature
is represented as a mean to achieve the Strategic Objective it supports as
an end (so means-end decomposition). The Feature is being pictured as
an i* Task and the Strategic Objective as an i* goal. This allows to trace
the concrete functional realization of the Strategic Objective through a
Feature.
Similarly, the Feature requires the intervention of a user that gets
direct operational value from its use but also has an impact on a broader
range of stakeholders that, even if they are not direct users, need to
be somehow involved for a successful adoption. Stakeholders typically
need the strategic opportunity (through its Features) to help towards
the fulfillment of some of their goals; these goals are represented as
dependencies between the actors. So, all in all they get value from the
adoption of the Strategic Opportunity. Note that, in the canonical form
of Fig. 3, one of the goals is represented as a dependency required
by the Stakeholder (depender) but needs support from the Strategic
Opportunity (dependee); in that case the latter finishes a service like
automation, computing, etc. to fulfill the former’s referenced goal (the
stakeholder is not necessarily a direct user of the technology but is
benefiting for its deployment). The strategic opportunity then furnishes
stakeholder-value (as can be seen in the Figure). A User represents a
Stakeholder that has a direct interaction with the technology imple-
mented through the Strategic Opportunity (e.g. an application end-user).
In the canonical form of Fig. 3, the first goal dependency represents
the User as depender and the Strategic Opportunity as a dependee so
that the User needs a direct interfacing with the Strategic Opportunity
to get (user) value. In the case of the second goal dependency, it is
the Strategic Opportunity (depender) that needs the User (dependee) to
fulfill it. In that case the technology might need direct input from the
stakeholder for its processing.
5.3. Traceability between the strategic and management levels
Fig. 4 merges the strategic- and management-level views to show
that the Strategic Objectives found in the business strategy, depicted in
the NFR graph, can be found within the scope of the actor representing
the Strategic Opportunity at management-level. The Features there
furnish a solution to a Strategic Objective. Similarly, the Strategic
Opportunity is represented at management-level as an actor whose
internal intentions can be depicted, and, at strategic-level, we only see
an aggregation of it summarizing its overall impact of the Strategic
Objectives (so on the business strategy).
The aim is not to build the strategic representation before the
management-level one since one needs the latter to infer the overall
contribution of the strategic opportunity on the strategic objectives.
The goal is rather to do the two representations together and to have a
Fig. 3. Model-driven representation of stakeholder and user value: Canonical form.
round trip where different configurations can be tested. As an example
of how a development team can get along with the different diagrams
and collect the required knowledge, we depict in the next section
a process fragment illustrating the possibilities when applying the
framework. We would rather say that we are in a middle-out approach
than in an top-down or a bottom-up one.
6. Process fragment
As already said, to highlight the Roles involved in the process
fragment, their Work Product dependencies and their Activities, we
use a pictorial Description using the i* framework.2
Each Role can be
played by several individuals; similarly, an individual can play different
Roles.
Table 1 documents all of the process fragment elements defined in
Seidita et al. [49] that are instantiated onto our contribution using
i*; this mapping is taken from previous work and is further justified
in [51].
Fig. 5 depicts our process fragment using an i* SRD; the following
description systematically refers to it. We distinguish several types of
stakeholders, all having various objectives and expectations, i.e.:
• The Board of Directors (BoD) Role represents the top manage-
ment of the organization regrouped in advice and/or decision
boards [62]. The BoD is required to Set-up the Strategy and to be
Dealing with a Changing Business Context which are process Phases
so represented as Goals in the i* SRD. These Phases basically
involve the same Activities as can be viewed in the graphical
representation, so we point out that the former Phase is about
defining the strategy in normal times while the latter represents
evaluating the strategy shift when a new business context (as
2
We use i* in this section to depict how the framework can be used by
a consulting or professional team. i* is also used in the framework to depict
a management-level organization of stakeholders (as seen in Section 5.3). So,
i* is used in 2 very different contexts in this paper and these should not be
mixed to understand the research.

--- PAGE 8 ---
Information and Software Technology 141 (2022) 106734
8
K. Tsilionis and Y. Wautelet
Fig. 4. Traceability between the strategic-level (NFR graph) and the management-level (i* strategic rationale diagram).
Table 1
Instantiation of a process fragment as an i* SRD (mapping made in [51]).
Element Definition (from [49]) i* representation
Phase A specification of the fragment position in the design workflow.
Usually referring to a taxonomy.
Goal
Activity A portion of work assignable to a performer (role). Task
Work product The resulting product of the work done in the fragment; it can
be realized in different ways also depending on the specific
adopted notation.
Resource
Role The stakeholder performing the work in the process and
responsible of producing a work product (or part of it).
Actor
Description It is the textual and pictorial description of the fragment; it
provides a panorama on the whole process the fragments come
from and the fragment overview in terms of tasks to be
performed, roles and work product kind to be delivered.
A Strategic Rationale Diagram
defined in Section 4) takes place. The main Activity (represented
as an i* Task) required to perform these Phases is Determine
Strategic Objectives. The Strategic Objectives are then a Work Product
required by the Strategy Manager to perform its Activities;
• The Strategy Manager Role thus depends on the BoD Role for
obtaining the Strategic Objectives Work Product; that is why it is
represented as a Resource dependency in the i* diagram of Fig. 5.
The Strategy Manager is responsible of the Determine Strategic
Value Phase. This is done through the realization of the Evaluate
Impact of Strategic Opportunities on Strategic Objectives Activity.
For this, the Strategy Manager requires the Strategic Objectives but
also the i-star Strategic Rationale Diagram produced by the Analyst
Role in order to examine the impact of the Strategic Opportunities’
Features on the Strategic Objectives;
• The Chief Information Officer (CIO) Role is in charge of the Evalu-
ate Strategic Opportunities Phase. To such an end the Role performs
the Activity Determine/Overview Features. The latter examines in
detail the main Features brought by the Strategic Opportunity.
The Analyst Role is depending on the CIO Role for the Strategic
Opportunity’s Features Work Product;
• The Analyst Role is in charge of understanding the intentions
of stakeholders with respect to the Strategic Opportunity. To this
end, this Role is in charge of the Determine Stakeholder Value
Phase which is represented as an i* Goal in Fig. 5. A means-
end decomposition then allows to refine the i* Goal representing
this Phase. To fulfill it, the Software Analyst Role performs the
Activity Represent stakeholder’s goals and management tasks. The
purpose of this Activity is to build an i* SRD representation (see
Section 5.3). More domain knowledge is usually needed to fully
perform this Activity so that the Analyst Role needs to discuss
elements with all of the possible stakeholders (including Users) to
understand their Intentions. The (Strategic Opportunity’s Adoption
Stakeholders) Intentions are then a Work Product represented
as a resource dependency: the Analyst depends of the Strategic
Opportunity’s Adoption Stakeholders for furnishing it;
• The Stakeholder Role is in charge of performing the Furnish Knowl-
edge Activity. The result of this Activity is the Work Product
Intentions furnished to the Analyst;
• The Product Owner Role is in charge of the Determine User Value
Phase. To such an end, it performs the Define Epic User Stories
Activity. Epic User Stories are essentially mapped to the Strategic
Opportunity’s Features. The Product Owner Role is also in charge
of collecting the Feature’s User Stories from the User Role for an
Agile development of the Feature;
• The (end) User Role is in charge of performing the Furnish Feature
Requirements Activity. The result of this Activity is the Work
Product Feature’s User Stories furnished to the Product Owner.
7. Framework application, evaluation and validation
This section summarizes the application of the framework on the
case of the hospital. The presentation of the subsections follows a
logical order. Section 7.1 depicts the context of the study. Section 7.2
depicts the data collection process, the evaluation of the representa-
tions, and the gathered expert opinion. Section 7.3 depicts the evolution
of the strategy in the changing business context of the Covid-19 pan-
demic. New business objectives are indeed identified and exposed in
the latter subsection; these new objectives, along with the existing
ones, represent the elements that need to be sustained by strategic
opportunities. The follow-up order explains that we need the infor-
mation provided by the management-level illustrating the tactical and
operational support of the strategic opportunity’s features (depicted in

--- PAGE 9 ---
Information and Software Technology 141 (2022) 106734
9
K. Tsilionis and Y. Wautelet
Fig. 5. Process fragment for strategic Agility.
Section 7.4) to be able to aggregate the overall support of the strate-
gic opportunity on the business objectives constituting the business
strategy. Finally, Section 7.5 overviews the impact of the strategic
opportunities’ adoption on the evolved business strategy as an aggrega-
tion. This is the reason justifying the placement of Section 7.5 as last;
the presentation in Section 7.5 can indeed be seen as a roll-up of the
representations of Section 7.4.
7.1. Case study background
The case study described in this section further develops the case
of a Belgian hospital already used for validation purposes in [6] and
whose strategy has been described extensively in [53]. The example
is adapted in some parts to deal with confidentiality issues but taken
from a real case. Even though the application is only partial, it is meant
to be realistic and relevant. Saint-Romain3
is a Belgian hospital whose
activities have grown exponentially in the last few years; available IT
budgets have nevertheless grown only in a linear way.
The hospital has been dealing recently with a drastic change in
the business context. To be specific, the Covid-19 crisis has drastically
impacted Belgium causing the need for an immediate response from the
authorities. This context is particularly interesting to study the impact
of a few initiatives seen as strategic opportunities on their produced
value at strategic, stakeholder and governance level. The examples
provided here refer to a videoconferencing system and a Covid-19 self-
assessment app developed as part of the measures taken to control the
pandemic.
7.2. Data collection, representations evaluation and expert opinion
The collaboration with the hospital started a few years ago with
the development of a new information system for the hospital (more
information about the implemented software system can be found
3
For confidentiality reasons the name of the hospital has been changed.
in [53]). Back then the university team did not participate in the im-
plementation (coding) of the new software system but it was involved
in the organizational modeling and design of the new system. Organi-
zational representations using i* were realized then and validated as a
continuous process with the staff members in a back and forth fashion.
The business strategy representation is an evolution of the one
presented in [6] and has also been built on the basis of interviews.
With respect to previous developments, the current research implied
collecting new information about the impact of the pandemic on the
hospital’s strategy as well as the IT developments that have (or have
been envisaged) to be set-up in response to it. We consulted sources
internal to the hospital to identify the impact of the pandemic on the
strategy. Nevertheless, the data collection was not done in a systematic
way but rather as a recollection of the impact on the basis of the
documentation at disposal. External sources, including more technical
documentation, were also consulted to evaluate the functions supported
by strategic opportunities and to be taken as example when realizing
the i* representations.
The researchers’ experience with the strategic representations and
with i*, the pre-knowledge on the organization as well as the available
technical documentation assisted in the rapid realization of the model-
ing within two business days. The models were not further validated
with the members of the hospital. Nonetheless, they were audited
(together with the entire approach) by an external expert in digi-
tal transformation having extensive (10+) professional experience in
conducting digitalization projects along with a deep understanding of
academic approaches (the expert holds a PhD in business strategy). The
latter confirmed the interest and value of the approach while he never
made use of a structured (meaning non-textual) approach to depict a
business (or IT) strategy. Similarly the structure and impact given by
the management-level was pointed out as a strength of the approach;
the expert pointed out such a structure is traditionally given/perceived
in an ad-hoc manner (or with the use of a generic digital roadmap
that is not adapted to moving contexts and very waterfall in its spirit)
without any reasoning ability. He notably emphasizes It is not really
about immediately identifying structural changes, it is more about bringing

--- PAGE 10 ---
Information and Software Technology 141 (2022) 106734
10
K. Tsilionis and Y. Wautelet
the necessary, the required bricks in order to identify required changes and
be able to adapt. The interviewee pointed out that the application and
adoption of such a framework in times of business variability changes
the mindset of people seeking for digital innovations ...by reviewing
the involved stakeholders, resources and capabilities and thinking about
potentially integrating strategic opportunities on-the-fly changes your way of
working. In turn, the interviewee explains that before being agile at all
organizational levels, especially at a higher one, a digital maturity needs
to be reached in the organization where knowledge and mastering
of key components like the current IT infrastructure, the strategy,
knowledge about stakeholders, etc needs to be reached. According to
the expert, StratAMoDrIGo is an innovative way of reaching towards
a higher level of digital maturity by becoming more efficient in IT
adoption decisions. The interviewee also identified the importance
of working top-down and bottom-up at the same time (so implicitly
working in a middle-out fashion). By that, the expert referred to the
capability of identifying the structural impact (i.e., the organization of
stakeholders) of technological adoption, the end-user experience and,
at the same time, identifying the strategic impact. The representations
of StratAMoDrIGo can be updated and reconfigured at will and this
allows to support the framework’s round-trip way of working while
reasoning on business situations. Business reasoning is an important
point of consideration for the interviewee pointing out the necessity to
include new business models and streams of revenue which, in chang-
ing times, they can be partially studied through considering strategic
opportunities as new actors impacting the organizational setting. Fi-
nally, the expert recognized the lack of a global reasoning mechanism
within the framework which would act as a way to quantify value
ex ante and measure value ex-post for a full governance life cycle
support. The expert would also like to see a measure of risk and a
cost of adoption of different configurations (i.e. scenarios) represented
through the framework. These elements will be studied later even if
the heaviness of quantification in hazardous times could act against the
simplicity/speed required by agility at all levels.
7.3. Evolution of the business strategy due to the business context
As said previously, the Business Context in our case study is the
Covid-19 pandemic; the Strategic Opportunities that pop-up in this con-
text are the development of a videoconferencing system and a Covid-19
self-assessment app. As can be seen in Fig. 6, because of the pandemic,
new Strategic Objectives have been defined by the BoD; more precisely,
we distinguish 4 new ones brought by the Business Context and 2
existing ones triggered by the Business Context. As an example, we
can take the new Business Objective called Establish a synchronous and
asynchronous communication channel between the citizen and the health
care professional which has risen because of the pandemic and needs to
be further supported by new IT solutions.
7.4. Stakeholder and user value: Graphical representation
Fig. 7 shows a management-level representation of the impact of the
Strategic Opportunities onto the Stakeholders in general and the Users in
particular. As discussed in Section 5.3, the Strategic Opportunities are
represented as actors in the SRD (they are particularly stereotyped as
agents). All of the other actors (except for the Integrated Videoconfer-
encing for Primary and Specialized Care and Mobile App for Covid-19
Self Assessment) represent stakeholders. We see explicitly what are the
intentions of each stakeholder with respect to the Strategic Opportunities
and from the Strategic Opportunities to the Stakeholders through the
dependency elements (i.e., goals and softgoals in this Figure). Following
Yu et al. [34], a softgoal is ... a condition in the world which the actor
would like to achieve, but unlike in the concept of (hard-) goal, the criteria
for the condition being achieved is not sharply defined a priori, and is subject
to interpretation. Within the scope of each actor, the internal goals and
tasks that need to be achieved for a proper integration of the Strategic
Opportunities are specified. Also, the Strategic Objectives supported by
the Strategic Opportunities are cascaded into the agent’s (representing
the Strategic Opportunity) scope. We can take the example of Establish a
synchronous and asynchronous communication channel between the citizen
and the health care professional which is a Strategic Objective cascaded
under the scope of Integrated Videoconferencing for Primary and Special-
ized Care which is a Strategic Opportunity represented as an i* Agent. The
Features are the elements of the Strategic Opportunity that support each
of the relevant Strategic Objectives. Features should be seen as coarse-
grained pieces of functionality requiring IT capabilities to be executed.
We can for example point the Quickly furnish a meeting with the relevant
healthcare professional as a Feature furnishing a (partial) solution to
the Establish a synchronous and asynchronous communication channel
between the citizen and the health care professional through Integrated
Videoconferencing for Primary and Specialized Care which is the Strategic
Opportunity. The Users are the Stakeholders that are directly using the
Features. The Citizen is an example of a Stakeholder that is also a User
of the Integrated Videoconferencing for Primary and Specialized Care app
and that depends on it for the fulfillment of its Reduction of face to face
visits goal. Features can be further developed in an agile fashion on the
basis of bottom-up approach. Users are then expected to specify their
desiderata with respect to the implementation content of the Features.
7.5. Strategic value: Graphical representation
The knowledge extracted from the i* SRD allows us to determine the
positive impact of the Features’ implementation/deployment onto the
Strategic Objectives so as to evaluate the Strategic Value of the Strategic
Opportunity. We can take the example of the Integrated Videoconfer-
encing for Primary and Specialized Care; as we have seen in detail at
the management-level (so in the i* SRD), this Strategic Opportunity’s
Features partially implement the realization of the following Strategic
Objectives (i) Increase the continuity of care to smoothen the patient flow;
(ii) Establish a synchronous and asynchronous communication channel
between the citizen and the health care professional; (iii) Decrease non-
essential visits of patients to the hospital; (iv) Prevent infections; (v) Avoid
increases in waiting lists; (vi) Avoid stress increases in health care profes-
sionals due to not being able to attend to their patients. Within the NFR
graph of Fig. 8 we can thus witness that a positive contribution link has
been put between the Strategic Opportunity and the Strategic Objective.
This gives a rolled-up representation useful to immediately identify the
Strategic Value provided by the Strategic Opportunity.
8. Discussion
This section further discusses different aspects of the framework.
More precisely Section 8.1 compares the framework with other ap-
proaches. Section 8.2 describes the lessons learned, the limitations and
the applicability of the framework. Finally, Section 8.3 describes the
threats to validity.
8.1. Framework comparison with other approaches
This section is dedicated to the comparison of StratAMoDrIGo with
other methods covering the strategic layer with conceptual modeling
or other – relevant to our context – frameworks dealing with agile
development while encompassing a strategic analysis. In Section 8.1.1
StratAMoDrIGo is compared with MoDrIGo for a clear positioning of
the evolution and differences between the kindred frameworks. StratA-
MoDrIGo is being compared to an industry-accredited agile framework
(SAFe) in Section 8.1.2 and a widely researched value-based modeling
framework (e3value) in Section 8.1.3. This comparison is based on a
range of specific determinants (they are summarized in Table 2), i.e., (i)
the frameworks’ intended purpose, (ii) ability to support strategy, (iii) the
inclusion of conceptual modeling, (iv) the employed scope elements, and (v)
the type of value-based modeling they support. Finally, in Section 8.1.4,
each of these frameworks is used as benchmark for the examination
of specific criteria to determine StratAMoDrIGo’s ability to place an
organization in a state of strategic agility.

--- PAGE 11 ---
Information and Software Technology 141 (2022) 106734
11
K. Tsilionis and Y. Wautelet
Fig. 6. Business strategy impacted by the Covid-19 crisis.
Fig. 7. Strategic rationale diagram showing stakeholder and user value for the Integrated Videoconferencing for Primary and Specialized Care and Mobile App for Covid-19 Self
Assessment strategic opportunities.
8.1.1. Comparison with MoDrIGo
The purpose of MoDrIGo is to evaluate business and IT align-
ment of Business IT Services when taking governance-level adoption
or development decisions. As mentioned before, StratAMoDrIGo is
based on MoDrIGo but constitutes a significant evolution in terms
of philosophy and approach. MoDrIGo also supports the strategic
level by using strategic objectives to depict the strategy but, unlike
StratAMoDrIGo, it uses Business IT Services as functional high level
scope elements. Services are mostly centric in IT governance and
management frameworks.
Conceptual modeling wise, the two frameworks represent the or-
ganizational strategy in a similar manner (using NFR representations).
Business IT Services are ultimately the ones for which an adoption
or development decision needs to be taken in MoDrIGo; their tactical
and operational behavior is represented with i* (StratAMoDrIGo on the
other hand uses i* to represent the impact of strategic opportunities
on the organizational setting). These elements (i.e., Business IT Ser-
vices) often represent commodity functions supporting state-of-the-art
business processes indispensable for the organization. Such services,
either align or misalign with the strategy but are never implemented
exclusively for the immediate sustenance of some (or all of the) strate-
gic objectives. On the other hand, StratAMoDrIGo allows to study the
organizational impact of any type of technological deployments; thus,
it is not limited to an adoption or development decision of Business IT
Services (even if these can also be considered). Strategic opportunities,
contrarily to Services, are often very innovative so specifically devel-
oped to furnish strategic, stakeholder and user value in moving business
contexts. As a result, in MoDrIGo, strategic objectives are perceived at
managerial-level into the i* representation as softgoals that elements
within Business IT Services help or hamper to fulfill. In StratAMoDrIGo,

--- PAGE 12 ---
Information and Software Technology 141 (2022) 106734
12
K. Tsilionis and Y. Wautelet
Fig. 8. Impact of strategic opportunities on the business strategy.
Table 2
Comparison of key aspects of the StratAMoDrIGo, MoDrIGo, SAFe and e3Value methods.
Strategic
level support
Conceptual-modeling supported Type of scope
elements
Type of value-based
modeling
StratA-
MoDrIGo
Yes Uses NFR for strategic-level roll-up and i* for the edition of
tactical/operational stakeholders and technology
configurations (drill-down).
Strategic
opportunities.
Strategic, Stakeholder and
User value of Strategic
opportunities.
MoDrIGo Yes Uses NFR for strategic-level roll-up and i*, SSD for Service
Consumer and Provider identification and i* for service
tactical/operational visualization (drill-down).
Business IT
Services.
Service Strategic value only.
SAFe Partial None. Value Streams. None.
e3value Partial Use Case Maps for the top-level evaluation of economic
value streams among actors; UML activity diagrams (or
BPMN models) can be used for the middle-level plot of the
business process activities; Possibility to include an
operational tier to evaluate existing (or upcoming) IS
systems, but only from a capital expense perspective.
Value Exchange
Flows.
Stakeholder value only.
Value is conceived only in a
monetary perspective.
strategic objectives are cascaded, in the management-level i* represen-
tation, as (hard) goals that are immediately fulfilled by functions of
the strategic opportunity. Therefore, the essence of the elements for
which a governance decision for adoption or development is taken
is slightly different. One could say that MoDrIGo is rather oriented
on supporting business processes while StratAMoDrIGo is oriented on
supporting innovation.
As far as value is concerned, StratAMoDrIGo can also be seen as
broader than MoDrIGo. Value is indeed considered at multiple levels;
it also supposes that not all value can be determined beforehand so that
new sources of value (especially for the stakeholder and the user) will
be determined and supported at the time of implementation.
8.1.2. Comparison with the scaled Agile framework
The purpose of the SAFe 5.1 framework is to furnish an ap-
proach for using the agile development approach on large development
projects (i.e., to scale agility). This is not the case with StratAMoDrIGo;
the latter aims to support agility at a strategic level. SAFe partially
supports the strategic level; it uses value streams to determine
which high-level trends need to be supported, and Epics as functional
high-level scope elements; Epics (considered more abstract/coarse
grained than in traditional methods like Scrum) are functions that are
sufficiently large to be developed in a stand alone fashion. SAFe has a
strategic alignment vision based on portfolio management rather than
focusing on individual projects.
Conceptual modeling wise, no support is furnished by SAFe.
As far as value is concerned, SAFe prescribes to be value stream
driven at strategic-level and in that sense it partially overlaps with
StratAMoDrIGo. Strategic value is driven by a value stream involving 4
(time) horizons, while Epics are defined from the portfolio in alignment
with the value stream. Epics are then connected to their Program
Increment (PI) planning in a top-down fashion. In fact a PI is a sequence
of four different sprints where, for each individual sprint, different
teams are working independently on different system parts (in parallel)
by defining the Minimum Viable Product (MVP) of features that first
need to be validated before further building the product. Therefore, the
vision of SAFe is essentially top-down and waterfall (thus poorly agile),
fuzzy in its application and very complex to trace at operational level
since no unique form of conceptual modeling is suggested to support
the alignment between the strategic goals and all the decision-level
structures within an organization.

--- PAGE 13 ---
Information and Software Technology 141 (2022) 106734
13
K. Tsilionis and Y. Wautelet
There is partial congruence between StratAMoDrIGo and SAFe in
their exploration of ways in which governance decisions (i.e., eval-
uation of pending heavy IT investments) can be reconciled with the
agile management of their development. StratAMoDrIGo is similar to
SAFe in terms of not aiming to fund projects but strategic opportunities
encompassing new major functions that need to be supplied by the
IT ecosystem. However, SAFe’s strategic approach is portfolio-based
while ours is strategic opportunity-based. We also embrace new IT
developments by rising opportunities rather than by a horizon-driven
value stream approach as, as an hypothesis, strategic value (streams)
for new IT developments can hardly be anticipated and mostly ap-
pears when the business context changes (e.g. Covid-19 pandemic).
We essentially follow a conceptual modeling approach where new
strategic opportunities are defined and their value is evaluated but
their practical implementation can be realized in a bottom-up fashion.
The formal link is done at middle-out level through linking high-level
conceptual entities (i.e. business objectives, strategic opportunities)
with low-level ones (user features) to be able to trace (so to study) the
strategic/stakeholder and user values delivered. That traceability and
independence in definition is what fundamentally distinguishes the 2
approaches.
8.1.3. Comparison with the e3value framework
We can also analogize our model-driven strategic agility approach
to other value-oriented approaches proposed in literature. We will
make a comparison with e3value [63,64] as it is one of the most
commonly used value-modeling language illustrating the economic
value (or utility) among actors when engaged in in-between value-
exchange prepositions [65]. The purpose of the e3value framework is
to represent organizational business models while integrating business
and IT modeling approaches by focusing solely on how economic value
is created and exchanged within a network of actors. E3value partially
supports the strategic level. The use of the term ‘partially’ refers to
the framework’s limitation of considering economic value exchanges
as the sole decision-making factor during the set-up, extension or
modification of a business model.
Conceptual modeling wise, e3value was created primarily to sup-
port the requirements’ analysis stage for the creation of business in-
formation systems by defining an ontology to compromise business-
oriented concepts with the required formality of information systems
development modalities [63]. Right from the get-go, we experience a
contrast between e3value and StratAMoDrIGo as the latter aims not
only to facilitate the adoption of technological solutions that fulfill
business (long-term strategic) objectives, but it does so by considering
the elimination of any lag between the decision and the incorporation
of these technologies within the organizational gears.
The value concept is central within e3value. Indeed, amongst its
primary concepts, the e3value ontology describes the participating – in
a value-exchange setting – actors; these are to be considered elementary
or composite in nature, but they are strictly economically independent
from each other; this independence seems to be the guarantor of any
gain that might occur during the entire value-exchanging process. A
composite actor is perceived as a group actor that uses value interfaces
with all its internally participating elementary actors. These value
interfaces group value ports that provide (or request) value objects
to or from other actors. Value flows are mapped using ‘AND’ or ‘OR’
operators which attribute a sequential character within the positioning
of value activities [66]. Finally, e3value modeling allocations allow
actors’ compositions but no actor specializations [67]. Contrastingly,
our StratAMoDrIGo approach allows for the vertical decomposition
of actors according to their strategic, tactical and operational facets,
which in turn attributes to them a different ‘value portfolio’. Each
actor’s value portfolio is not considered in isolation and no value
portfolio is considered more important than the rest. The point is to
utilize parts of the i* modeling notations to map the intentionality
among these different actors and determine how their overall social in-
teractions affect these value-portfolios in response to the accumulative
well-being of the entire enterprise. In this context, the value-flow from
the upcoming technological adoption/development, as derived from
the strategic opportunity, is being trichotomized in order to gratify the
needs of all the enterprise actors by simultaneously (i) sustaining their
strategic needs, (ii) accommodating their stakeholder goals, and (iii)
allowing for feature implementations that will contribute towards the
achievement of their strategic objectives. The plausibility of analyzing
these value-interdependencies is not present in the e3value where its
sequential value-flows focus on a quid-pro-quo (i.e., product for a
service, product for a monetary exchange etc.) economic exchange
within bilateral actor-to-actor relationships.
8.1.4. Strategic agility as the evaluation dimension
As already discussed earlier, the ability to render an organization
in a state of strategic agility is construed concerning an organization’s
capacity to sense opportunities in the event of changing business con-
texts, its capacity to seize opportunities when such events occur, and its
capacity to shift (reconfigure) its assets to take advantage of strategic
opportunities [24]. These 3 criteria are used as the constituents of
our main evaluation dimension; in fact, we determine how the pre-
viously identified (and industry accredited) frameworks contribute to
the attainment of these criteria (Table 3). The aim is to identify gaps
and misconceptions compared to our current solution; regardless of the
elements included in the table, a few more considerations are given in
the rest of this Section for the SAFe framework and e3value.
To begin with, SAFe signifies organizational agility as the optimiza-
tion of operational agile development. SAFe considers an organization
to be in a state of enterprise-wide agility when front-to-back supply-
chain streams (they are called operational value streams within the
framework) have been aligned with the agile development of a product
to maximize its delivered value. To do so, SAFe prompts a continuous
engagement of all the business actors in order to identify bottlenecks
that would disrupt this value creation process. Nevertheless, SAFe
does not seem to support a simultaneous top-down/bottom-up ideation
process that would make it susceptible to external and/or internal
business stimuli. On the contrary, the optimization of the operational
value streams has to be reconcilable with the company’s ‘strategic
themes’.4
This limited capability in sensing changes in the business
context admonishes the introduction of mechanisms for the evaluation
of such changes (i.e., non-existent seizing capabilities). Overall, this
asynchronous coping mechanism between the strategic and operational
levels within the organizational ladder facilitates the erection of silos
between development teams and the actual strategic directives ‘indoc-
trinated’ in a top-down manner. In this sense, the actual organizational
leaders (i.e., roles in a position of influence) appear to be the agile
coaches (or external consultants as mediators) acting as the ‘conductors’
of the agile release trains. Consequentially, one of the immediate
actions that may come as a priority when implementing the SAFe
framework is the harmonization of large scale agile development rather
than the ability of the organization to reconfigure (shifting) its strategic
assets to leverage drastic changes in the business context.
Contrastingly, e3value, aims to project the necessary organizational
configurations that need to take place in order to make the release of a
new product/service/technology viable economically. This is done via
the evaluation of 3 distinct value-driven ‘viewpoints’ (i.e., value view-
point for the business layer, the process viewpoint for the operational
layer, and the system architecture viewpoint for the infrastructural
layer); similarly to the purposiveness of Archimate, such an approach
is focused on the successful governance of the endeavor that is under
examination. However, e3value’s consideration of value merely on its
4
SAFe 5.1 describes these as the company’s long-term values and a
compliance evaluation process, reactive to new governmental regulations.

--- PAGE 14 ---
Information and Software Technology 141 (2022) 106734
14
K. Tsilionis and Y. Wautelet
Table 3
StratAMoDrIGo, MoDrIGo, SAFe and e3Value methods facing strategic agility criteria.
Strategic sensitivity (sensing) Strategic response (seizing) Shifting
StratA-
MoDrIGo
Its application and use pushes towards a
culture of opportunities adoption and value
seeking (also emphasized by the interviewee).
Quickly overviews the impact of the
deployment of a strategic opportunity in terms
of strategic, stakeholder and user value. Several
configurations can also be studied through i*.
Through the representation of the information
related to the adoption of a strategic
opportunity with the identification of value, it
supports communication of what to implement
to the tactical/operational levels.
MoDrIGo No support, Business IT Services are driven by
need for IT support from IT clients (internal or
external) and seldom driven by the business
environment.
Overviews the impact of the deployment of a
Business IT Service in terms of strategic value.
Poor flexibility for configuration since Services
are very constrained.
Through the representation of the information
related to the adoption of a service, it supports
communication to the tactical/operational
levels.
SAFe SAFe pushes towards a culture of taking
advantage of external value streams. However,
SAFe is more focused on feeding the
operational Agile development.
No framework for ex-ante solution impact
evaluation.
Development of software following the classical
SAFe canvas, benefits are the one of large scale
agile development.
e3value Limited support in sensing new strategic
opportunities/threats. e3value allows top-down
ideation for the exploration of IT-enabled value
propositions; however, the latter are analyzed
profoundly on their economic viability.
With the use of BPMN or UML activity
diagrams, e3value facilitates the provision of a
resource planning/allocation/release
management cycle. Therefore, e3value offers
the possibility of strategic response.
Limited support in shifting (reconfiguring)
organizational capabilities towards the
achievement of strategic concerns.
economic constituents (and its immediate byproducts) creates various
strategic blind-spots (i.e., inadequacy to organize a faster response
to changing business requirements/faster time to market to beat the
competition etc.,) which impedes the exploration (sensing) of a dy-
namic business setting. In actuality, e3value supports tools/techniques
(i.e., BPMN or UML activity diagrams) to bring the organization in a
state of betterment when it comes to seizing opportunities and going
through organizational configurations (shifting) to achieve such oppor-
tunities. Nonetheless, the latter can hardly be considered as strategic
since they negotiate a better allocation of resources to economize on
internal cost-saving procedures rather than bringing the organization
in a state of readiness to exploit strategic opportunities.
8.2. Practical aspects and applicability
In the case study, we only considered the alignment with the
business strategy. Traditional corporate governance focuses on the
completion of the business strategy while IT governance focuses on the
IT one. The alignment with the IT strategy could be considered in the
same way. Two reasons are given here to justify our focus on the first
one: (i) in a moving business context, a quick adaptation is critical to
get new revenue streams or keep the current ones flowing; this is the
focus of the business strategy; (ii) the hospital is considered as being
in strategy execution mode following the Strategic Alignment Model of
Henderson et al. [68] so, in accordance with the BoD, we considered
that the business strategy primes especially in the context of a changing
business environment.
StratAMoDrIGo offers an interface ensuring continuity in the evalu-
ation of value from the strategic to the management level. Strategic,
stakeholder and user value is indeed evaluated through 2 traceable
diagrams. Features – that can be aligned with epic user stories which
constitute a functional level supported by methods like Scrum – can
then be used to ensure concrete development by a traditional agile
team. More precisely, features are the finest-grained level covered by
our framework and the central pivot elements between strategic and
operational agility. In other words, the framework allows to integrate IT
governance mechanisms for adoption/implementation decisions with
feature-oriented development (which are supported scope elements
in user story-based development). Other types of information tech-
nologies (hardware, devices, off the shelf apps etc.,) being strategic
opportunities can of course be adopted on the fly without a sprint-
based implementation cycle but when strategic opportunities are based
partly or exclusively on software, the latter cycle (or even a DevOps
approach [69]) delivers an interesting way of implementing the fea-
ture(s). More specifically, we prescribe the use of (operational) agile
development (e.g. through Scrum) for user-intensive applications where
innovation plays a critical role. We also point (when possible) to inde-
pendent feature development and deployment; this to effectively get
all the sorts of value as early as possible as well as early field feedback
that can later be used for adjustments and/or relevant knowledge for
other feature(s) development. The strategic opportunity is thus not
necessarily an unbreakable whole but since it is composed of features
all delivering value, those can be implemented and deployed in an
asynchronous manner (if these are of course sufficiently independent).
The StratAMoDrIGo framework is intended to be applied to organi-
zations being in dynamic businesses by people providing support to the
C-level executives. The latter are the ones that can use the framework to
understand the implications of strategic decisions taken in a short time
frame. Internal employees or external consultancy companies can apply
the framework to furnish support and advice to a BoD (so composed of
C-level executives). The process fragment for the application of StratA-
MoDrIGo provided in Section 6 gives an illustration of how internal
employees or an external consultancy team can structure themselves
for the application of the framework. The framework can be used on
a regular basis to identify when the business context changes and new
strategic opportunities can be identified. The results do not furnish a
binary true/false answer but rather a general guidance supporting C-
level executives in the adoption or development decision they might
have to take.
One may raise the question of the willingness of strategy consultants
and agile teams to deal with a modeling approach, something they
could be reluctant to. We cannot avoid making a strategic represen-
tation in the form of a diagram to ensure a proper alignment study;
this is an exercise relevant for helping C-level executives to define their
strategy and is independent of a software development practice (where
mostly conceptual modeling is applied). In our experience from the case
study of the paper but also other cases, the representations can be done
rather quickly with some knowledge of conceptual modeling. Moreover
strategic representations need to be done once from scratch but then it
is more an exercise of updating the information to keep it consistent.
In a strategic agile perspective, the important but challenging aspect
is to update the strategy with the impact of a new business context.
Management-level representations are more time consuming but, in any
case, if a new technology needs to be adopted in a short time frame,
studying the impact of its adoption/deployment needs to be done to
some extend as a premise to its design. Of course, it requires more time
to study the complete stakeholder impact than only the operational
requirements of users; this will eventually pay off with the provision
of important information/insights on the IT investment(s) that needs
to be made.

--- PAGE 15 ---
Information and Software Technology 141 (2022) 106734
15
K. Tsilionis and Y. Wautelet
8.3. Threats to validity
We discuss here the threats to the construct, internal and external
validity of the StratAMoDrIGo framework and of its use.
8.3.1. Construct validity
The design of StratAMoDrIGo had to be checked in terms of its
construct validity. In the scope of a model-driven framework, within
the information systems’ domain, this means that the relevant concepts
defined in this framework have been operationalized adequately into
observable/workable elements [70]. A threat to the construct valid-
ity is that the modeling constructs are incorrectly interpreted by the
modelers or any other practitioner aiming to put StratAMoDrIGo into
use. This entails the risk of using the framework (and its corresponding
concepts) in another way than intended. In our case, the modeling
work has here been realized by the two authors of the paper and
the operationalization of the modeling constructs, within the setting
of the hospital-case, was discussed systematically. In consequence,
every concurrent/conflicting interpretation was discussed and resolved
beforehand. Overall, the threat of not being able to encapsulate exactly
(via the modeling process) what is being claimed to be encapsulated
can be mitigated through the use of meetings or workshops were
every modeling choice is discussed by the practitioners and specialized
consultants.
8.3.2. Internal validity
Through the use of StratAMoDrIGo, the internal validity concerns
the objectivity of the views gathered by the subjects within the knowl-
edge acquisition procedure. Subjects can, during interviews, report on
their personal view (as opposed to a collective consensus) when giving
information on strategic or management-level aspects. This would lead
to inconsistent representations. Since the specialty of each correspond-
ing interviewee can create a partial or bounded view where some as-
pects of the modeled realization are (under)overemphasized, this threat
to validity can be dealt with through multiple interviews and systematic
comparison of the views of these actors for knowledge validation.
In our case, the representations of the strategic-/management-level
configurations in the hospital-case were determined based on a rigorous
interview process (it is discussed in [6]) and an overall cross-reference
of the subjects’ individual opinions.
8.3.3. External validity
External validity can be formally defined as the degree of support
for the generalization of an ‘architectural explanation’ to a theoretical
population [71]. In our case, the architectural explanation refers to the
modeling constructs of StratAMoDrIGo, their in-between interactions,
and the purpose they are supposed to fulfill (i.e., quick assessment of
strategic opportunities in an organizational context according to the
value they expose). A threat to the external validity is the misappro-
priation of StratAMoDrIGo when applied to different organizational
settings by various supporting or consulting groups. This jeopardizes
the generalized use of the framework by the corresponding information
systems’ community (i.e., our population). Until now, the framework
has solely been applied by the authors of this paper, by members of
the research group being familiar with conceptual modeling, goal-based
requirements engineering and i* (so up to 5 people) and a few consul-
tants familiar with conceptual modeling through UML. Such experience
and pre-knowledge certainly has an impact on the ability to apply such
a framework correctly and successfully so not many valuable insights
could be drawn in terms of its generalization. For this reason, the ability
of novice modelers to apply goal-based conceptual modeling has been
tested in [72,73] with other kind of formalisms. The latter showed that
consistently applying goal-based frameworks with some guidance on
real life problems can be done rather easily and it allows practitioners
to understand requirements. Lack of experience with such frameworks
can thus be compensated by proper guidance and it leads to an increase
in understandability. The framework is currently being applied to other
cases by external professionals under the supervision of the authors
who are domain experts but no modeling experts. The application of
the framework is done in an iterative manner including discussions
with the authors of the framework. Typical modeling mistakes are
committed notably at the level of the i* modeling. The modeling of the
strategy nevertheless does not appear to cause any issue. A guide for
application will be developed out of the common mistakes and issues
that are identified in this process and shared through a website.
9. Conclusion
The need for an IT development approach structured around strate-
gic opportunities yet allowing agility at all levels has risen progressively
due to fast moving business contexts. The concept of value is, in StratA-
MoDrIGo tailored to (i) the strategic-level for the long-term competitive
position of the organization, (ii) the tactical-level to ensure taking into
account the broad impact of adopted solutions on stakeholders and (iii)
the operational-level to practically support the end-user requirements.
At this stage, we can get back to the RQ stated in the introduc-
tion (How could conceptual modeling be applied to highlight strategic,
stakeholder and user value within technological adoptions in a fast mov-
ing business context?) To answer this question, we have developed
a framework called StratAMoDrIGo which is to be conceived as an
evolution of MoDrIGo. It has been formalized through an ontology and
its instantiation has been based on the NFR and i* frameworks. On
the one side, NFR allows to model the strategic layer and to roll-up
the impact of the tactical and operational layers onto the (business or
IT) strategy. On the other side, i* allows drilling down to detail how
specific strategic objectives are supported by the (functional) features
of strategic opportunities. StratAMoDrIGo has been applied on a case
in the medical sector. It has also been compared to existing approaches
to highlight its focus and support to strategic agility. The latter has
been depicted within the (strategic management) literature as a concept
describing the capacity of an organization to sense, seize, and shift
opportunities. All in all, the application of StratAMoDrIGo (i) pushes
towards a culture of persistently adopting opportunities and seeking
value (sensing); (ii) allows to overview the impact of the deployment
of a strategic opportunity in terms of strategic, stakeholder and user
value but also to possibly test several configurations with the use of
i* (seizing); and (iii) allows the representation of information related
to the deployment of a strategic opportunity with the identification of
value, supporting thusly the communication of what to implement to the
tactical/operational levels (shifting).
Finally, the framework needs to gain a higher level of maturity with
the utilization of more case studies for its fine-tune. For this reason,
it will be applied in the context of other case studies through the
mediation of a consulting team from a private company. Even if the
framework has been fabricated to be the most expressive possible by
using existing modeling notations, it can be seen as requiring some
technical knowledge to be adopted. Even if the expressiveness and
details may suffer in the process, we aim to provide something as simple
as possible to organizations to ease the adoption on the largest possible
scale. Accordingly, future work also involves simplifying the framework
so that models hold on a structured sheet like for the Business Model
Canvas [74].
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Konstantinos Tsilionis: Conceptualization, Methodology, Valida-
tion, Investigation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.
Yves Wautelet: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Investi-
gation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Project
administration.

--- PAGE 16 ---
Information and Software Technology 141 (2022) 106734
16
K. Tsilionis and Y. Wautelet
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
References
[1] P.P. Tallon, R.V. Ramirez, J.E. Short, The information artifact in IT governance:
Toward a theory of information governance, J. Manage. Inf. Syst. 30 (3) (2014)
141–178, URL http://www.jmis-web.org/articles/927.
[2] A. Olivé, Conceptual Modeling of Information Systems, Springer Science &
Business Media, 2007.
[3] S.J. Bleistein, K. Cox, J.M. Verner, K. Phalp, B-SCP: a requirements analysis
framework for validating strategic alignment of organizational IT based on
strategy, context, and process, Information & Software Technology 48 (9) (2006)
846–868, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2005.12.001.
[4] A. Babar, K. Cox, V. Tosic, S.J. Bleistein, J.M. Verner, Integrating B-SCP and
MAP to manage the evolution of strategic IT requirements, Inf. Softw. Technol.
50 (7–8) (2008) 815–831, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2007.11.005.
[5] J. Horkoff, D. Barone, L. Jiang, E.S. Yu, D. Amyot, A. Borgida, J. Mylopoulos,
Strategic business modeling: representation and reasoning, Softw. Syst. Model.
13 (3) (2014) 1015–1041, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10270-012-0290-8.
[6] Y. Wautelet, A model-driven IT governance process based on the strategic impact
evaluation of services, J. Syst. Softw. 149 (2019) 462–475.
[7] H. Håkansson, I. Snehota, No business is an island: The network concept of
business strategy, Scand. J. Manag. 5 (3) (1989) 187–200.
[8] J.B. Barney, Strategic factor markets: Expectations, luck, and business strategy,
Manage. Sci. 32 (10) (1986) 1231–1241.
[9] S. Vejseli, D. Proba, A. Rossmann, R. Jung, The agile strategies in IT governance:
Towards a framework of agile IT Governance in the banking industry, 2018.
[10] K. Tsilionis, Y. Wautelet, From service-orientation to agile development by
conceptually linking business IT services and user stories: A meta-model and a
process fragment, in: 23rd IEEE Conference on Business Informatics, CBI 2021,
Bolzano, Italy, September 01-03, 2021. Volume 2, IEEE, 2021.
[11] N. Abbas, A.M. Gravell, G.B. Wills, Historical roots of agile methods: Where did
‘‘agile thinking’’ come from? in: International Conference on Agile Processes and
Extreme Programming in Software Engineering, Springer, 2008, pp. 94–103.
[12] V. Sambamurthy, A. Bharadwaj, V. Grover, Shaping agility through digital
options: Reconceptualizing the role of information technology in contemporary
firms, MIS Q. (2003) 237–263.
[13] K. Beck, M. Beedle, A. Van Bennekum, A. Cockburn, W. Cunningham, M. Fowler,
J. Grenning, J. Highsmith, A. Hunt, R. Jeffries, et al., The agile manifesto, 2001.
[14] S. Denning, The next frontier for agile: strategic management, Strategy Leadersh.
(2017).
[15] T.-H. Cheng, S. Jansen, M. Remmers, Controlling and monitoring agile soft-
ware development in three dutch product software companies, in: 2009 ICSE
Workshop on Software Development Governance, IEEE, 2009, pp. 29–35.
[16] J. Vlietland, R. Van Solingen, H. van Vliet, Aligning codependent scrum teams
to enable fast business value delivery: A governance framework and set of
intervention actions, J. Syst. Softw. 113 (2016) 418–429.
[17] S. Denning, Strategic agility: Using agile teams to explore opportunities for
market-creating innovation, Strategy Leadersh. (2017).
[18] Y. Doz, Fostering strategic agility: How individual executives and human resource
practices contribute, Hum. Resour. Manag. Rev. 30 (1) (2020) 100693.
[19] D.J. Teece, G. Pisano, A. Shuen, Dynamic capabilities and strategic management,
Strateg. Manag. J. 18 (7) (1997) 509–533.
[20] D. Teece, G. Pisano, The dynamic capabilities of firms, in: Handbook on
Knowledge Management, Springer, 2003, pp. 195–213.
[21] D. Teece, M. Peteraf, S. Leih, Dynamic capabilities and organizational agility:
Risk, uncertainty, and strategy in the innovation economy, Calif. Manage. Rev.
58 (4) (2016) 13–35.
[22] C.A. Lengnick-Hall, T.E. Beck, et al., Resilience Capacity and Strategic Agility:
Prerequisites for Thriving in a Dynamic Environment, Citeseer, 2009.
[23] M. Zollo, S.G. Winter, Deliberate learning and the evolution of dynamic
capabilities, Organ. Sci. 13 (3) (2002) 339–351.
[24] D. Glesne, M. Pedersen, Strategic agility: adapting and renewing strategic direc-
tion: an exploratory case study, Master’s thesis, Norwegian School of Economics,
2020.
[25] K. Richard, D. Leffingwell, SAFe 5.0 Distilled: Achieving Business Agility with
the Scaled Agile Framework, Addison-Wesley Professional, Boston, 2020.
[26] M. Cohn, User Stories Applied: For Agile Software Development, Addison-Wesley,
2004.
[27] ISO, ISO/IEC 38500:2015 Information Technology – Governance of IT for the
Organization, International Organization for Standardization, 2015.
[28] ISACA, COBIT 5: A Business Framework for the Governance and Management of
Enterprise IT, ISACA, 2012.
[29] R.E. Freeman, Strategic Management: A Stakeholder Approach, Cambr. Univ.
Press, 2010.
[30] R. Samavi, E. Yu, T. Topaloglou, Strategic reasoning about business models: a
conceptual modeling approach, Inf. Syst. E. Bus. Manag. 7 (2) (2009) 171–198.
[31] P. Lara, M.E. Sánchez, J. Villalobos, Bridging the IT and OT Worlds Using an
Extensible Modeling Language, 35th Intl. Conf. in Conceptual Modeling, ER 2016,
Proceedings, Vol. 9974 of LNCS, 2016, pp. 122–129.
[32] T.O. Group, ArchiMate®
3.0.1 Specification, 2017.
[33] H.P. Sousa, J.C.S. do Prado Leite, Modeling organizational alignment, in: E.S.K.
Yu, G. Dobbie, M. Jarke, S. Purao (Eds.), 33rd International Conference on
Conceptual Modeling, ER 2014. Proceedings, in: LNCS, 8824, Springer, 2014,
pp. 407–414.
[34] E. Yu, P. Giorgini, N. Maiden, J. Mylopoulos, Social Modeling for Requirements
Engineering, MIT Press, 2011.
[35] OMG, Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN). version 2.0.1, Tech. rep.
2013.
[36] L. Juhnyoung, A. Ivan, Value-centric, model-driven business transformation.
in: Proceedings of the 8th IEEE International Conference on and Enterprise
Computing, E-Commerce, and E-Services, 2006, 1–31.
[37] O. Thomas, J. Vom Brocke, A value-driven approach to the design of service-
oriented information systems—making use of conceptual models, Inf. Syst. E-Bus.
Manag. 8 (1) (2010) 67–97.
[38] M. Khurum, T. Gorschek, M. Wilson, The software value map—an exhaustive
collection of value aspects for the development of software intensive products,
J. Soft. Evol. Proc. 25 (7) (2013) 711–741.
[39] E. Mendes, P. Rodriguez, V. Freitas, S. Baker, M.A. Atoui, Towards improving
decision making and estimating the value of decisions in value-based software
engineering: the VALUE framework, Softw. Qual. J. 26 (2) (2018) 607–656.
[40] A.R. Hevner, S.T. March, J. Park, S. Ram, Design science in information systems
research, MIS Q. 28 (1) (2004) 75–105.
[41] A.R. Hevner, The three cycle view of design science, Scand. J. Inf. Syst. 19 (2)
(2007) 4, URL http://aisel.aisnet.org/sjis/vol19/iss2/4.
[42] M. Uschold, M. Gruninger, et al., Ontologies: Principles, methods and
applications, TECHNICAL REPORT-UNIVERSITY of EDINBURGH ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE APPLICATIONS INSTITUTE AIAI TR.
[43] OMG, OMG Unified Modeling Language (OMG UML). Version 2.5, Tech. rep.,
2015.
[44] Y. Wautelet, M. Kolp, Business and model-driven development of BDI multi-agent
systems, Neurocomputing 182 (2016) 304–321.
[45] Y. Wautelet, S. Heng, M. Kolp, I. Mirbel, Unifying and extending user story
models, in: M. Jarke, J. Mylopoulos, C. Quix, C. Rolland, Y. Manolopoulos,
H. Mouratidis, J. Horkoff (Eds.), 26th International Conference on Advanced
Information Systems Engineering, CAiSE 2014. Proceedings, in: LNCS, 8484,
Springer, 2014, pp. 211–225.
[46] Y. Wautelet, S. Heng, M. Kolp, I. Mirbel, S. Poelmans, Building a rationale
diagram for evaluating user story sets, in: Tenth IEEE International Conference
on Research Challenges in Information Science, RCIS 2016, IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–12.
[47] L. Chung, B. Nixon, E. Yu, J. Mylopoulos, Non-functional requirements in
software engineering, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2000.
[48] M. Kolp, Y. Wautelet, Human organizational patterns applied to collaborative
learning software systems, Comput. Hum. Behav. 51 (2015) 742–751, http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2014.11.094.
[49] V. Seidita, M. Cossentino, A. Chella, A proposal of process fragment definition
and documentation, in: M. Cossentino, M. Kaisers, K. Tuyls, G. Weiss (Eds.),
Multi-Agent Systems - 9th European Workshop, EUMAS 2011, Maastricht, the
Netherlands, November 14-15, 2011. Revised Selected Papers, in: LNCS, Vol.
7541, Springer, 2011, pp. 221–237.
[50] E.S.K. Yu, P. Giorgini, N.A.M. Maiden, J. Mylopoulos (Eds.), Social modeling for
requirements engineering, Cooperative information systems, MIT Press, 2011.
[51] Y. Wautelet, S. Heng, S. Kiv, M. Kolp, User-story driven development of multi-
agent systems: A process fragment for agile methods, Comput. Lang. Syst. Struct.
50 (2017) 159–176.
[52] Y. Wautelet, S. Shafiee, S. Heng, Revisiting the product configuration systems
development procedure for scrum compliance: An i* driven process fragment, in:
X. Franch, T. Männistö, S. Martínez-Fernández (Eds.), Product-Focused Software
Process Improvement - 20th International Conference, PROFES 2019, Barcelona,
Spain, November 27-29, 2019, Proceedings, in: Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, Vol. 11915, Springer, 2019, pp. 433–451, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-030-35333-9_31.
[53] Y. Wautelet, M. Kolp, S. Heng, S. Poelmans, Developing a multi-agent plat-
form supporting patient hospital stays following a socio-technical approach:
Management and governance benefits, Telemat. Inform. 35 (4) (2018) 854–882.
[54] D.P. Forbes, F.J. Milliken, Cognition and corporate governance: Understanding
boards of directors as strategic decision-making groups, Acad. Manag. Rev. 24
(3) (1999) 489–505.
[55] R. Haesen, M. Snoeck, W. Lemahieu, S. Poelmans, On the definition of service
granularity and its architectural impact, in: Z. Bellahsene, M. Léonard (Eds.),
20th International Conference, CAiSE 2008, Proceedings, in: LNCS, Vol. 5074,
Springer, 2008, pp. 375–389.
[56] L. Chung, B. Nixon, E. Yu, J. Mylopoulos, Non-Functional Requirements in
Software Engineering, Kluwer Academic Publishing, 2000.

--- PAGE 17 ---
Information and Software Technology 141 (2022) 106734
17
K. Tsilionis and Y. Wautelet
[57] Y. Wang, T. Li, Q. Zhou, J. Du, Toward practical adoption of i* framework: an
automatic two-level layout approach, Requir. Eng. (2021) 1–23.
[58] M. Kolp, Y. Wautelet, S. Faulkner, Sociocentric design of multi-agent architec-
tures, in: E. Yu, P. Giorgini, N. Maiden, J. Mylopoulos (Eds.), Social Modeling
for Requirements Engineering, MIT Press, 2011.
[59] Y. Wautelet, Representing, modeling and engineering a collaborative supply
chain management platform, Int. J. Inf. Syst. Supply Chain Manag. 5 (3) (2012)
1–23.
[60] Y. Wautelet, M. Kolp, L. Penserini, Service-driven iterative software project
management with I-Tropos, J. UCS 24 (7) (2018) 975–1011, URL http://www.
jucs.org/jucs_24_7/service_driven_iterative_software.
[61] Y. Wautelet, S. Heng, M. Kolp, L. Penserini, S. Poelmans, Designing an MOOC
as an agent-platform aggregating heterogeneous virtual learning environments,
Behav. IT 35 (11) (2016) 980–997, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0144929X.2016.
1212095.
[62] P. Weill, J.W. Ross, IT Governance: How Top Performers Manage IT Decision
Rights for Superior Results, Harvard Business Press, 2004.
[63] J. Gordijn, H. Akkermans, Designing and evaluating e-business models, IEEE
Intell. Syst. 16 (4) (2001) 11–17.
[64] J. Gordijn, E3-Value in a nutshell, in: International Workshop on E-Business
Modeling, HEC Business School, Citeseer, 2002.
[65] P. Johannesson, M. Bergholtz, Rights and intentions in value modeling, in:
Intentional Perspectives on Information Systems Engineering, Springer, 2010, pp.
195–213.
[66] E. Souza, A. Moreira, J.a. Araújo, S. Abrahão, E. Insfran, D.S. Da Silveira,
Comparing business value modeling methods: A family of experiments, Inf. Softw.
Technol. 104 (2018) 179–193.
[67] V. Pant, Strategic Coopetition-A Conceptual Modeling Framework for Analysis
and Design, in: PoEM Doctoral Consortium, 2018, pp. 1–14.
[68] J.C. Henderson, H. Venkatraman, Strategic alignment: Leveraging information
technology for transforming organizations, IBM Syst. J. 32 (1) (1993) 472–484.
[69] L.J. Bass, I.M. Weber, L. Zhu, DevOps - a Software Architect’s Perspective, in:
SEI series in software engineering, Addison-Wesley, 2015, URL http://bookshop.
pearson.de/devops.html?productid=208463.
[70] R.J. Wieringa, J.M. Heerkens, The methodological soundness of requirements
engineering papers: a conceptual framework and two case studies, Requir. Eng.
11 (4) (2006) 295–307.
[71] R. Wieringa, M. Daneva, Six strategies for generalizing software engineering
theories, Sci. Comput. Program. 101 (2015) 136–152.
[72] Y. Wautelet, M. Velghe, S. Heng, S. Poelmans, M. Kolp, On modelers ability to
build a visual diagram from a user story set: A goal-oriented approach, in: E.
Kamsties, J. Horkoff, F. Dalpiaz (Eds.), Requirements Engineering: Foundation
for Software Quality - 24th Int. Working Conf., REFSQ 2018, Proceedings, in:
LNCS, Vol. 10753, Springer, 2018, pp. 209–226.
[73] K. Tsilionis, J. Maene, S. Heng, Y. Wautelet, S. Poelmans, Conceptual modeling
versus user story mapping: Which is the best approach to agile requirements
engineering? Lect. Notes in Bus. Inf. Process. 415 (2021) 356–373.
[74] A. Osterwalder, Y. Pigneur, Business Model Generation: A Handbook for
Visionaries, Game Changers, and Challengers, vol. 1, John Wiley & Sons, 2010.