--- PAGE 1 ---
Bezesaeoir

A Handbook of
BUSINESS
TRANSFORMATION
MANAGEMENT
METHODOLOGY

--- PAGE 2 ---
"

Bez enegoi

First published 2012 by Gower Publishing

Published 2016 by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017, USA.

Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
Copyright © Axel Uhl and Lars Alexander Gollenia, and the contributors 2012

‘Axel Uhl and Lars Alexander Gollenia have asserted their moral right under the
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, 1988, to be identified as the editors of this work.

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised
in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or
hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information
‘storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.

Notice:
Produet or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are
used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
‘A handbook of business transformation management

methodology.

4. Reengineering (Management) 2. Organizational change~Management.

1. Uhl, Axel. I. Gollenia, Lars Alexander. 658.4'063-de23

ISBN: 9781409449805 (hbk)

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Uhl, Axel,

Ahandbook of business transformation management methodology / by Axel Uhl
and Lars Alexander Gollenia.

pee,

Includes bibliographical references and index.

ISBN 978-1-4094-4980-5 (hbk)
4. Reengineering (Management) 2. Organizational change~Management. 3.
Management,
1.Gollenia, Lars Alexander. 11. Title.

HDs8.87.U45 2012

658.4'06--de23
2012022798

< Preousehpter Hetenaper > 0)

--- PAGE 3 ---
Bezseaes oi

List of Figures
Gi List of Tables
About the Editors
Notes on Contributors
Acknowledgments
Preface

1 Introduction
Axel Uhl

1 Overview
4.2 Background on Business Transformation Management
1.3 Distinction to Other Frameworks and Methodologies
44 Structure of the Book

2 Meta Management
Philip Stiles, Axel Uhl and Paul Stratil

2.1 Overview
2.2 Pillars of Meta Management
2.9 Meta Management Principles
2.4 Conclusion

3 Strategy Management
‘Axel Uhl, Dominic Houlder, Daniel Schmid and Michael von der Horst

3.1 Overview
3.2 Business Transformation Strategy

‘8:3 Procedure for Developing the Business Transformation Strategy
34 Conclusion

4 Value Management
John Ward, Thomas Rennebaum and Stephan Amiing

4:1 Overview
4.2 Value Management in Business Transformation
4.3 Value Identification

4-4 Plan Benefit Realization

4.5 Executing the Benefits Plan and Evaluating Results
4.6 Establishing the Potential for Further Benefits

4:7 Conclusion

5 Risk Management
5. Overview
52 Risk Management in Business Transformation
5:3 Risk Management in BTM?
54 360” Strategic Risk Assessment
5.5 Risk Analysis and Risk Response Plan
5.6 Execute Risk Response Plan and Monitor Risks
5:7 Review and Evaluate Risks
5.8 Conclusion

6 Business Process Management
Jan vom Brocke, Martin Petry and Thomas Gonser
(6.1 Overview
(6.2 What is BPM?
6.3 Business Process Management in Business Transformation,
6.4 Process Maturity Level of the Company (Envisioning)
6.5 BPM Governance and Process Design (Engaging)
6.6 Implementation of Processes and Controlling (Transforming)
{6.7 Run and Monitor (Optimizing)
6.8 Conclusion

7 Transformational IT Management

- Robert +, Philipp Gubler, Felix 1, Andreas Elting and
Schultheis
7. Overview

--- PAGE 4 ---
7 Aranswormauionas 14 syamagement 1b 1 97—

7. Assess and Enable Solution Readiness of the Organization

7.4 To-Be IT Architecture, Operations and Services Planning and IT
‘Transformation Roadmap Development

7.1 Operations, Service Deployment and IT Governance Implementation

7.6 IT Operations and Services Optimization and IT Lifecycle Management

7.7 Key Suecess Factors for Transformational IT Management

7.8 Conclusion

8 Organizational Change Management
Oliver Kohnke, Sebastian Reiche and Ernst Balla
8.1 Overview
‘8.2 Importance of Organizational Change Management
8.3 Organizational Change Management Approach of BTM?
8.4 Set-up and Governance
8.5 Stakeholder Management
8.6 Communication Management
8:7 Performance Management
‘8.8 Organizational Change Monitoring
8.9 Conclusion

‘9 Competence and Training Management

9.1 Overview

19.2 Significance, Definition and Scope

19.3 The Significance of a Working Environment

9.4 Conclusion

10 Program and Project Management

‘Michael Rosemann, Jan Recker, Norizan Safrudin and Ronald Marketsmueller
101 Overview

10.2 The Role of Business Transformation Program and Project Management
10.3 The Process of Business Tra ion Program and Project

10.4 Roles and Responsibilities of Program and Project Managers

410.5 Key Skills of Program and Project Managers

10.6 Lessons Learned about Program and Project Management

10.7 Conclusion

11 Case Study: MotorStars — Implementation of a Global HR System in an
Automotive Company
11.1 Overview
11.2 The Case History
11.3 Problems Faced by Key Players
11.4 Strategic Approach
11.5 Conclusion
wal Learned from the B ‘Transformation Ay Case
Studies
John Ward and Axel Uhl

12. Overview
12.2 An Overview of the Cases and Outcomes
123 Strategic Positioning of Business Transformations
12.4 Transformation Need and Readiness
125 Analyzing the Cases Using the BTM? Management Disciplines
12.6 Lessons Learned in Relation to the Meta Management Key Themes
12.7 Conclusion
Appendices
Appendix A BTM? Strategy Management
‘A. Methods for Strategy Development
Appendix B BTM? Value Management
B.1 Template for Benefits - With Examples
Appendix C BTM? Risk Management ~ Methods and Tools
(C1 Methods and Tools

Appendix D BTM® Business Process Management
D1 Modeling Languages for Process Design
Appendix E BTM? Transformational IT Management
E41 Methods for IT Service Deployment
E.2 Best Practices for IT Service Management
E.3 Framework for IT Governance

--- PAGE 5 ---
Index

 prewousehgtar Netenatar >

3

--- PAGE 6 ---
Bes eng oi

List of Figures

aa
12
43
aa
22

24

3a

Sees

36
37
38
39
aa
42

44

46
47
48
49
5a
52
53

55

57
58

5:10
san
6a
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
6.10
oan
612
6.3,
614
6.5,
7a
72

73
74
75
76
7
78
79
730

Structure of the handbook
‘The BTM? ~ Big Picture

‘The Meta Management framework

‘The transformation lifeeyele
Organizational structure of Meta Management

‘The dimensions of communication within BTM?

Core values and internalization as part of Meta Management

Strategy’ as part of the envision phase in the
lifeeyele

‘The six steps involved in developing a business transformation strategy

Project startup:

As-is data collection

Different stages of transformation and consequences
‘Transformation barriers
‘Transformation readiness
Design business vision
Strategic options
Phases of the BTM? Value Management discipline
‘The transformation portfolio matrix.
Part of a CRM-enabled transformation network
for ng the’ ‘and building the business case

‘Some examples of using benchmarking to establish potential benefit values
Key elements of the review process
‘Model of the review process inputs and outputs,
Ongoing reviews of value delivered
‘Maturation of Risk Management
‘The Risk Management process
‘Manifestation of Risk Management in BTM?
Phases of BTM? Risk Management
Top-down and bottom-up risk assessment
‘Transformation risk champions
Risk portfolio
Determining risk accountability
Characteristics of process
‘The integrative power of process
BPM driving value through an alignment of task, technology and people
‘The role of process in Enterprise Architecture
Phases of BPM in BTM?
BPM interfaces to other management disciplines of BTM
Designing process frameworks on three layers.
Four stages of processes maturity and transformation readiness
Process portfolio for process calibration
Process design using the ARIS framework
‘Example of a process model in BPMN
Finding to-be models via the evaluation of potentials models

vork for. fing the return on pr i
Process implementation matrix
Process performance measurement matrix
nterdependencies with other management disciplines
‘Transformational IT Management interfaces to other disciplines of BTM?

‘Seven steps of Transformational IT Management in BTM?
Assess and enable solution readiness of the organization.
Business capability assessment dimensions

Plan to-be IT architecture, operations and services
Create IT transformation roadmap

Deploy FT operations and services
‘Implement IT governance

--- PAGE 7 ---
yan
7aa

733

734
75
8a
82
83

84
85
86
87
88
89
8.10
an
82

on
92
93
o4

10.4
102

103
104
105
10.6
107

ma

na
ug
4
45
16
12a
122
123
24
125
126
127
128

129
1220
wat
Ea
Ea

E4

Asietoasnat Aansoat of Rusia Tanya Micsoanent Mehlegy (sof Fes

‘TT operations and services optimization and IT lifecycle management

Intended overlap of method components for Transformational IT
Management

Proven and successful patterns, methods and principles for
‘Transformational IT Management

Using an appropriate level of detail to manage business transformation

Apply the same framework on all levels

Levels of transformation processes

Reduction ofthe valley of tears

‘Overview and position of the Organizational Change Management approach
within BTM?

‘Stakeholder management process

‘Stakeholder classification based on portfolio matrix

Stakeholder portfolio matrix and general stakeholder strategies

Communication management process

‘Communication plan

‘Communication activity log,

‘Organizational change monitoring approach

‘Sample KPIs for evaluating the benefits of Organizational Change
‘Management

Overview of the Competence and Training Management process

Example of competence requirements at a job family level

Job profile cards

Gap analysis at job family level

‘Transfer gap model

Program and Project Management as an enabler in business transformation

Activity level per process themes in the four phases of the transformation
lifecycle

"Programs link projects with the strategy of an organization

‘The link between transformation, Program and Project Management

Program quality management

‘Main activities of the program manager

Critical success factors for Program and Project Management

Description ofthe hierarchical relations of and conflicts between the main
players

Envision phase in the BTM2 context

Error analysis based on BTM2

‘Stages of transformation needs

‘Transformation readiness

Strategic options

‘The cases positioned on the transformation portfolio matrix

‘Strategic options: need and readiness

‘Transformation need and readiness in the cases

‘The direction and enablement discipline relationships

‘The pattern that is typical for a successful case

‘Typical pattern for a partially successful case

An unsuccessful ease ~ not completed

‘The relationship triangle: transformation program manager, line managers
and senior management

‘The transformation experience curve (1)

‘The transformation experience curve (2)

‘The underlying philosophy of BTM

‘The two dimensions of RUP

‘The ITIL. framework

‘The COBIT framework

“Ped hater Man eraptar >)

--- PAGE 8 ---
"

a
an
5a
81
82
104,

ezeaao

BL

a
Di

List of Tables =

Comparison of lean transformation and business transformation

Levels of satisfaction with key Value Management activities

Examples of different strategic and operational risks

‘Typical lessons learned from other transformation projects

‘Quality standards for organizational change monitoring activities

Dos and don'ts of Program and Project Management in business
transformation

Classification of benefits: adapted according to Ward and Daniel (2006)

Methods for strategy development

‘Template for benefits — with examples

Methods and tools

BTM? Business Process Management FS

Preah

Pw )98

ent cnaer >

--- PAGE 9 ---
"

ezeaao

About the Editors =

Prof. Dr Axel Uhl is Head of the Business Transformation Academy anda
‘member of the Business Transformation Services Leadership Team within the
Consulting Division of SAP. Dr Ublis also a professor at the University of Applied
Sciences and Arts Northwestern Switzerland. Prior to joining SAP, Prof. Uhl worked
in senior management positions at Novartis, KPMG, DaimlerChrysler and Allianz.
He holds a PhD in Economics, and Master degrees in Business Administration,
Educational Sciences and Information Technology.

Lars Al Gollenia is Head of Business Tra ices at SAP and
a of the SAP Services Delivery Executive team. Business Tr

Services is a global Line of Service with a local presence in all geographies. He is the
founder and sponsor of the Business Transformation Academy, a global leadership
network comprised of leading academics and selected executives of Fortune 2.000
‘companies. He has held a number of positions in the management consulting space.

Prior to his current role he was responsible for Business Consulting in the EMEA

region. Gollenia is a Graduate in Business Administration from the Friedrich-Schiller

University of Jena, Germany and studi is andi 7

at Harvard University in Boston, USA. 3

(Bssvcomsat  AManonk ot bes Tasman Marsan Mealy Ao Fs

Paw)

< preauechagtr Naxtenapter > 0)

--- PAGE 10 ---
"

Bes, eae oi

Notes on Contributors =

Amling, Vice Global SAP: ‘Strategy, SAP AG
‘Stephan is Vice President Strategy and Execution for SAP's Global Services business
unit. He joined SAP in May 2008 after more than 16 years in other business strategy
and IT consulting organizations (e.g. Booz & Co., Accenture, IBM). He studied

‘computer: and business administration at the Ber ein Stuttgart,
Germany, with a focus on research and solution development in the area of artifical
i and expert: He hasa strong business and ay

‘management background with personal experience in large-scale business
transformation, IT strategy and complex IT solution development.

Contact: stephan.amling@sap.com

Dr Ernst Balla, Management Development, voestalpine AG

Dr Ernst Balla is responsible for Management Development at voestalpine which is a

slobally active group with 45,000 employees in 360 companies in 60 countries that

produces, processes and further develops high-quality steel products, His biggest
project so far was the development and i tion of the new

‘group-wide Management Development Program. Balla also teaches communication

and team-development at the University of Applied Sciences in Linz.

Contact: ernst.balla@ voestalpine.com

Prof. Dr Florian Blumer, Lecturer in Communication and Media

Ri at the: of Bi Basel, Ui ity of Applied

and Arts Northwestern Switzerland

Florian Bulmer, a lecturer at the University of Applied Sciences and Arts
Northwestern Switzerland, has 12 years of experience in consulting global companies
in the fields of corporate and project communication, stakeholder management,
innovation- and open space-methodology. He has also’ asa
‘consultant for companies from the financial industry as well as for SME and
startups. Furthermore, he led the media department during the Bob World
‘Championships in St Moritz (1997) and was a head coach of Swiss handball premium
Teague teams.

Contact: florian.blumer@fhnw.ch

Michael Brandenburg, Director International Business Development,
IESE Business School, University of Navarra

Michael Brandenburg leads the development of the international corporate business =
for IESE Business School, ranked since 2006 consistently as a global top-ten

provider of executive education. He received a Masters degree in engineering at

“Aachen University in 1983, his MBA at TESE in 1989 and an AMP in 2009. Michael

has served as Manager at RWE, division head in SEAT-Volkswagen supply chain and

as vice pr in Capgemini Cor ‘ing. His major ributions are in the area of
process improvement in the hightech and automobile sectors and in the creation of
high-performance management teams in international corporations.

Contact: mbrandenburg@iese.edu

Dr Andreas Elting, Principal Enterprise Architect, SAP AG

Andreas has more than 15 years’ experiences in all phases ofa typical business and
IT project. In recent years he focused on leading initiatives on strategic level in SAP
and non-SAP environments. Andreas was leading a global IT architecture
‘community at SAP and contributed to EA service offerings and methods at SAP. He
is also a major contributor to SAP EAF and TOGAF 9.0. Andreas isa speaker at
exhibitions and conferences and published more than 30 papers in all major German
TT newspapers. Andreas holds a diploma in Computer Sciences and a PhD in
Psychology.

Contact: andreas.elting@sap.com

Prof. Dr Brent Furneaux, Assistant Professor in the Department of
Accounting and Information Management, Maastricht University,
‘School of Business and Economies

Brent Furneaux is an Assistant Professor in the department of Accounting and
Information Management at Maastricht University. He is currently pursuing
research that seeks to better understand information system (IS) decision-making
pr such as those 1o lifecycle planning, discontinuance and
transformation. His research interests also include the nature, role, and significance
‘of theory within IS research and the mechanisms by which information systems
deliver value to organizations and individual users. Brent's research has been
published in numerous conference proceedings, book chapters and journals
including MIS Quarterly, The DATA BASE for Advances in Information Systems
and Information Te yy and Mc Prior to his. je career, Brent

--- PAGE 11 ---
‘worked and consulted extensively within the pharmaceutical and hospitality
industries.

Contact: b.furneaux@maastrichtuniversity.nl

Lars Alexander Gollenia, Head of SAP Business Transformation
Services, SAP AG

Lars Alexander Gollenia is Head of Business Transformation Services at SAP and a
member of the SAP Services Delivery Executive team. Business Transformation

Services is a global line of service with a local presence in all geographies. He is the
founder and sponsor of the Business Transformation Academy, a global leadership
network comprised of leading academics and selected executives of Fortune 2000.
‘companies. He has held a number of positions in the management consulting area.

Prior to his current role he was responsible for business consulting in the EMEA

region. Lars is a graduate in Business Administration from the Friedrich-Schiller
University of Jena, Germany and studied economics and international management

at Harvard University in Boston, USA.

Contact: lars.gollenia@sap.com

‘Thomas Gonser, Chief Enterprise Architect, SAP AG.
With more than 25 years of professional experience, Thomas gained strong skills to
bridge technology and business. Starting with software development including,
heading architecture and development at a small software provider and after several
‘years as a middleware architect at Sybase, he joined SAP in the beginning of 2002 as
head of the SAP NetWeaver Solution Center. In 2004 he became responsible for
business and technology architecture within the Industry Business Unit (IBU) for

In 2008 he joined Business Transformation Consulti
‘Telecommunication and Utilities EMEA, where he successfully accomplished
multiple architecture projects.

Contact: thomas.gonser@sap.com

Philipp Gubler, Research A: |, Institute of
Management, University of St Gallen

Philipp Gubler is research assistant and PhD student at the Institute of Information
Mi t, University of St Gallen. He received a in ion, Media

‘and Technology Management from the University of St Gallen,

Robert Giinther, Head of Center of Expertise for Transformation
Management EMEA, SAP AG

Robert Giinther is a Managing Principal at SAP and leading the Center of Expertise
for Transformation Management in EMEA with a focus on organizational change.
Prior to SAP he was a Manager at IDS Scheer AG in Business- and Process
‘Consulting where he overlooked numerous IT transformation projects in the
automotive, consumer products and manufacturing industries. He has considerable
international experience from working with major clients of SAP in the USA, the
Middle East and Japan.

Contact: robert.guenther@sap.com

Dr Jirg Haefliger, Head Learning & Development, Sulzer Ltd.
‘Jirg Haefliger holds a PhD in Philosophy from the University of Basel and a Master
degree in Strategic Human Resource Management from Bocconi University, Milan

‘and Cornell University, thaca (NY). He is Head of Corporate Learning &

Development at Sulzer Management AG (Switzerland). Before joining Sulzer, Jig,
Haefliger held positions as Head Corporate Management Development & Corporate

HRM Projects at Georg AG, as with an international Consulting, z
‘Company, and as Project Leader at the Swiss National Science Foundation. He

possesses in-depth knowledge in the field of learning and development in a global

context.

Prof. Dominic Houlder, Adjunct Professor in Strategic and
Entrepreneurial Management, London Business School
Prof. Dominic Houlder researches and advises major B2B service firms on

C suite client relat and more effective collaboration across lines
of service, geographical boundaries and external partner organizations. He is
‘currently working with PriceWaterhouseCoopers, G4S, Eversheds, SAP and Saatchi
& Saatchi. He designed and led London Business School's new executive workout
program for B2B service businesses, “Unlocking Your Client's Strategy”.

Contact: dhoulder@london.edu

Tomasz Janasz, Research Associate at SAP Switzerland, SAP AG

‘Tomasz Janasz joined SAP in January 2008 as an Associate Business Consultant
within Professional Services and telecommunication industries. Since 2010 he has
been a research associate at SAP Business Transformation Academy where he co-
developed the BTM2. His core competencies are in the fields of project management
with a main focus on the software implementation process and quality assurance.
‘Simultaneously he is pursuing a PhD title at the University of Wuppertal (Germany)
researching into innovative business models for fleet management and city car

--- PAGE 12 ---
sharing providers.

Contact: tjanasz@sap.com

Dr Roberto Kli Di & Controlling, Benz
cars

Dr Roberto Klimmek has worked for Daimler AG since 1986 and has already held
Aiverse positions within the company. Since 1994 he has been part of different
‘executive boards of the company in Greece and Indonesia. From 2002 until 2005 he
‘was the CFO of Smart. After that, he transferred to Mercedes-Benz, where he is now
the Director of Purchasing, Insolvency/Risk-Management and Product Controlling.

Dr Oliver Kohnke, Chief Business Consultant, SAP AG
Oliver Kohnke is a Chief Business Consultant in SAP's Business Consulting. He
received his Doctorate in Industrial and Organizational Psychology and Master of
‘Computer Sciences and Business Administration from University of Mannheim. He
has spent over 15 years supporting large-scale business transformations and IT
system implementations at various international companies in a broad range of
industries. His main areas of interest include organizational behavior, change
‘management and technology acceptance. He is also author of several books and
articles in international journals.

Contact: oliver:kohnke@sap.com

Ronald Marketsmueller, Business Transformation & Program Manager, ©
SAP AG

Ronald is a graduate engineer (Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne) and has

been active for over 20 years in consulting and global program management roles in

many locations all over the world. Ronald's knowledge of English, French and

German allows him to address multicultural challenges. Ronald was head of the

program management Global Practice at SAP and co-developed the SAP BTM? and.
Program Management (PMI based) methodologies. Ronald's actual focus is on

managing business transformation programs and he is actively involved in quality

reviews of major customer programs.

Contact: ronald.marketsmueller@sap.com

Dr Martin Petry, Chief Information Officer, Hilti AG
Martin Petry became Hilt’s CIO in 2005. He is responsible for a global team of 400
TT employees. Since 2009 he has also been in charge of Hiltis Business Excellence
initiatives. Martin came to Hilti in 1993 and has held various leadership roles in
Liechtenstein, Switzerland, Japan, Great Britain and on a global scale since then.
Martin earned his PhD in applied mathematics from Georg-August University in
Gottingen.

Christoph Pimmer, Research Associate, University of Applied Sciences
and Arts Northwestern Switzerland

Christoph Pimmer isa research associate at the University of Applied Sciences
Northwestern Switzerland (FHNW). He studied social and economic sciences. He
‘worked on a number of transdisciplinary projects in Austria, Switzerland and Central
America in the area of education, technology-enhanced mobile learning and

i ion, ina ity and corporate context. He published a
‘number of articles in these areas and is a member of several international practical
and scientific networks such as the London Mobile Learning Group. His current
‘work and research activities focus on the area of mobile learning, work-based
learning and medical learning,

Contact: christoph.pimmer@fhnw.ch

Prof. Dr Jan Recker, Queensland University of Technology
‘Jan is Professor for Information Systems and Woolworths Chair for Retail
Innovation at Queensland University of Technology. His research focuses on process
design practices, IT-enabled business transformations and organizational
innovation. He has written over 100 books, journal articles and conference
proceedings. He occupies editorial roles for several international journals and serves
‘on the program committee of various conferences. He is Academic Director for
Corporate Education and Consultancy at QUT and has provided consultancy and.
‘education services to over 30 Australian organizations.

Contact: j.ecker@qutedu.au

Prof. Dr B. ian Reiche, Assi ‘of Managing Peoplein =
Organizations, IESE Business School

B, Sebastian Reiche is Assistant Professor in the Department of Managing People in
Organizations at IESE Business School, Spain. He earned his PhD from the

University of Melbourne, Australia. His research focuses on how actors access,
maintain and leverage knowledge resources in multinational companies, and has
appeared in scholarly journals such as the Journal of International Business Studies

‘and Human Resource Management. Prof. Reiche teaches courses on human

resource a, ip and cross-cultural in MBA and
executive programs, and he maintains an extensive blog on topics related to

--- PAGE 13 ---
‘expatriation (http://blog iese.edu/expatriatus).
Contact: sreiche@iese.edu

‘Thomas Rennebaum has been working for Volkswagen Financial Services since
2003. After being involved with the Direktbank and with key accounts he is currently
responsible for the marketing department. Before that he was working for
‘Commerzbank and CortalConsors for several years where he had management
functions in the areas of marketing and sales.

Prof. Dr Michael Roseman, Director of the Information Systems
Program, Queensland University of Technology

Dr Michael Rosemann is the author/editor of seven books, more than 200 refereed
papers, editorial board member of ten international journals and co-inventor of two
US patents. His research projects received funding from industry partners such as
Accenture, Brisbane Airport, Infosys, Rio Tinto, Queensland Government, SAP and
Woolworths. Dr Rosemann is a Visiting Professor at Viktoria Institute, Gothenburg,
‘Sweden.

Contact: m.rosemann@qut.edu.au

Niz Safrudin, PhD Qu University of Technology

Nizis a PhD student within QUT's Information Systems School. Her research
focuses on business transformation management and is funded by SAP BTA. She is
‘currently investigating how services from various management disciplines are
‘orchestrated in business transformations, inspired by (jazz) music orchestration.
Prior to her PhD, Niz’s background is in business process management, where her
honours study on how novices model business processes won a best paper award at a
BPM conference in the USA. Ms Safrudin is also an enthusiastic sessional academic
‘who tutors corporate systems and business process modeling for both undergraduate
and post-graduate students at QUT.

Contact: norizan.safrudin@qut.edu.au

‘Thomas Schild, Director Strategic Risk Management, SAP AG =
‘Thomas is Director Strategic Risk Management within SAP's Global Governance,
Risk and Compliance organization. He joined SAP in 1999 as marketing manager for
Public Services. In 2004 he became business development manager for the Public
Services Business Unit covering different roles and responsibilities including market
strategy and portfolio planning and operations. Thomas has more than 20 years of,
‘business experience in product management, marketing, press and analyst relations,
‘business development, operations, strategic planning and strategy development.
Before joining SAP, Thomas had been working in the media and the IT sector in
various positions. He holds a business and computer science degree from the
University of Applied Sciences of Augsburg.

‘Contact: thomas.schild@sap.com

Daniel Schmid, Vice President, Head of Sustainability Operations, SAP
AG

Daniel Schmid holds a degree in industrial engineering from the University of
Kaiserslautern, Germany. He started his career in 1992 as a consultant at Kiefer &
‘Veittinger, a company for customer relationship management that was acquired by
‘SAP in 1997. From then on Schmid held various senior management positions within
‘SAP Consulting, Since March 2009 he has managed Sustainability Operations at SAP
‘ona global level.

Contact: daniel.schmid@sap.com

‘Werner Schultheis, Director of IT & Randstad Deutschland
GmbH & Co. KG

Werner Schultheis is Director of IT & Processes at Randstad Germany and member
ofthe supervisory board at VMS AG. After working five years as a project manager in
the aerospace and automotive area at the Carl Schenck AG, he moved to Randstad
sales management as a branch and afterwards district manager. Before he changed
to IT & Processes, he was responsible for business development and product,
management. He holds a degree in engineering from the TU Darmstadt, Germany.

Contact: werner.schultheis@de.randstad.com

Prof. Dr Philip Stiles, Senior Lecturer in Organisational Behaviour,
Cambridge Judge Business School

Philip isa faculty member at Cambridge Judge Business School, University of
‘Cambridge, UK. Philip's research work focuses on transformation, high-performance
‘organizations and human resource management. He works with a number of major
‘companies worldwide and is currently Co-Director of the Centre for Internal Human
Resource Management at the University of Cambridge.

Contact: p stiles@jbs.cam.ac.uk

Paul |, View Corporate IT, SAS Aut Te =
‘Verwaltungs Gmbit

--- PAGE 14 ---
Paul Stratil, VP Corporate IT at SAS Autosystem Technik Verwaltungs GmbH, is
heading the global IT organization. He has 25+ years’ experience in the automotive
sector with strong international experience at Daimler, Chrysler, Smart and the
‘supplier industry. Based on his academic background as an engineer, he uses IT

technology and \izational as facilit for change mar and
business transformation, focused on innovations, efficiency, establishing strategic
direction and shaping high-performance teams.

Contact: stratil@yahoo.com

Prof. Dr Axel Uhl, Head of Business Transformation Academy, SAP AG
Professor Dr Axel Uhl is head of the Business Transformation Academy at SAP. He
has been a professor at the University of Applied and Arts Né

‘Switzerland (FHNW) since 2009. Uhl received his PhD in Economics and completed
his Master in Business Information Systems. He started his career at Allianz and has
‘worked for DaimlerChrysler IT Services, KPMG and Novartis. His main areas of
research and interest are sustainability and IT, leadership and business
transformation management.

Prof. Dr Jan vom Brocke, Director of the Institute of Information
‘Systems, Hilti Chair of Business Process Management, University of
Liechtenstein
Professor Dr Jan vom Brocke is the Hilti Chair of Business Process Management at
the University of Liechtenstein, Director ofthe Institute of Information Systems and
President of the Liechtenstein Chapter of the Association for Information Systems.
He has more than 15 years of experience in IT and BPM projects, and has published
more than 170 peer-reviewed papers in the proceedings of internationally perceived
and journals, including the Business
‘Management Journal (BPM), Business & Information Systems Engineering
(BISE) and Management Information Systems Quarterly (MISQ). He serves as a
reviewer and editor for major IS conferences and journals including the Journal of
the Association for Information Systems (JAIS) and the Journal of Management
Information Systems (JMIS). He is author and co-editor of 16 books, including
‘Springer’s International Handbook on Business Process Management and the
recently published Springer book Green BPM - Towards the Sustainable
Enterprise. Apart from Liechtenstein, Jan teaches at a number of international
iversiti ‘Addis Ababa University in Ethiopia and the University of St
Gallen in Switzerland. He is an invited speaker and trusted adviser on IT and BPM
around the globe.

Contact: jan.vom.brocke@uni.li

Dr Michael von der Horst, Managing Director Internet Solutions Group,
Cisco Systems GmbH
Dr von der Horst is in charge of Cisco's eBusiness consulting unit for Financial
Services in EMEAR. His team advises executives of Fortune 500 Financial Services
Industry (FSD customers on strategic business topics atthe intersection of
technology and business issues. Before joining Cisco in 1999, he was with the Boston
Consulting Group for 10 years. He holds an MSc in computer sciences, a PhD in

ness administration from the Handelsh Leipzig and an MBA from
INSEAD.

Contact: mvonderh@eiseo.com

Prof. John Ward, Emeritus Professor, Cranfield University, School of
Management

John was. Ff Strategic Information. and Director of the IS Re
Centre at Cranfield prior to retiring in 2010. He is the co-author of the books
Strategic Planning for Information Systems and Benefits Management and has
published many papers in leading journals. John has a degree in Natural Sciences
from Cambridge, is a Fellow of the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants
and is a past-President of the UK Academy for Information Systems.

Contact: j.m.ward@cranfield.ac.uk

Prof. Dr Robert Winter, Professor and Director of the Institute of
Information Management, University of St Gallen

Robert Winter is Full Professor of Information Management and Director of the
Institute of Information Management, University of St Gallen (HSG). He is academic
director of HSG's Executive Master of Business Engineering and HSG's PhD in

Mi t programs. His areas i ‘method engineering,
information logistics management, Enterprise Architecture management,
integration management, healthcare network management and corporate controlling
systems.

Contact: robert.winter@unisg.ch.

Prof. Dr Felix Wortmann, Assistant Professor, University of St Gallen
Felix Wortmann is Assistant Professor at the Institute of Information Management,

--- PAGE 15 ---
University of St Gallen. His: interests include business intelligence, big data
and smart energy. From 2006 to 2009 he worked as an assistant to the executive
board of SAP. He received a BScIS and MScIS from the University of Muenster and a
PhD in Management from the University of St Gallen.

P98

< Prewousenpter Nestenater > 0)

--- PAGE 16 ---
"

ezeaao

u

Acknowledgments

‘We gratefully acknowledge all the help and support we received, especially from the
many business and IT managers, consultants and academies whose ideas and
{feedback enabled us to create this book. Their commitment and expertise did not
only ensure that the methodology has been tried and tested in a wide area of
‘business transformations initiatives, but also proved its relevance and value. For
‘example the case study presented in chapter 1 is based on a real transformation

‘We would also like to thank the SAP organization and the University of Applied
‘Sciences and Arts Northwestern Switzerland, especially Nicolas Steib and Prof. Dr
Rolf Dornberger, for providing the necessary infrastructure.

Finally, we want to particularly thank Tomasz Janasz for preparing the
‘manuscript as well as Dr Matthias Born and Dr Agnes Koschmider for their careful
review and insightful comments which helped improving the quality of this work,

Pwo) 18

Bsstcomsat AManink ot shes Thomaton Marsemen Meaogy Anson <Previous chapter Heth > 2)

--- PAGE 17 ---
Q
@
a
a
”
©
oe

Companies across industries keep transforming their businesses to
stay ahead of the game. There are many successful transformations
to report: Apple, the former producer of computer hardware, is
now the most expensively evaluated company at NYSE. The
business model has changed dramatically from hardware-only to
integrated consumer solutions. This led to an increase in net
income from about US$1.3 billion in 2005 to almost US$26 billion

in 2011.' Apple's success is not only a result of the perfectionism
and the aura of its legendary leader Steve Jobs, but also based on
its strong ability to understand customer needs and to transform
along with the constant changes and advancements of today’s
markets.

Conversely, companies that do not transform their business fail.
Recent studies show that companies that did not see the need or did
not take successful actions to transform are no longer around. The
comparison of the Fortune 100 list from 1966 with the one from
2006 compellingly demonstrates that as many as 66 of those
companies don't exist any more. The rest of them have managed to
survive but only 19 are still featured on the mentioned list.*

One recent example of such a failure is Kodak. A market leader in
film-based business, Kodak at some point of time was not able to
deal with the technological change from film-based business models
to digital photography. In January 2012 the company eventually
filed for bankruptcy. Ironically, Kodak even had invented the digital
‘camera. However, the company was not able to tackle the
challenges of this new technology and to transform its business
model accordingly. Hence, the downturn of Kodak did not result
from its incapability to innovate but from its fear of change and the
consequences of a required transformation during a time when they
‘were very successful.

‘The important question is: What makes one company succeed in
their transformation and why do others fail?

SAP, the world-leader in ERP software solutions, is constantly
supporting companies to become best-run businesses. In the past,
SAP has helped many businesses around the world to transform
from good to great companies. However, we recognize that not all
companies have been completely successful in taking advantage of
proven SAP software products. For example, we observed that out
of five attempts to transform HR in global companies only one was
totally successful, two were partly successful (delivering some but
not all the benefits and taking longer than expected) and two were
failures, abandoned before completion at enormous cost.

Overall we recognize that only every third business
transformation project is completed on time, on budget and to
expectations.’ Furthermore we learn from our own research that 97
percent of all companies believe that they could derive even more
value from their SAP investments."

With this book, SAP is going beyond providing software and
services, but providing the best-in-class methodology that needs to
be applied for a successful business transformation. SAP has
established the Business ‘Transformation Academy, a global and
interdisciplinary network of experts from science and practice.
Under the leadership of the BTA, academia, representatives from
our strategic clients and the most knowledgeable SAP business
consultants have worked together in developing a holistic business

--- PAGE 18 ---
transformation management methodology that combines and
effectively integrates important individual disciplines such as
Strategy Management, Business Process Management and
Organizational Change Management to form a unified whole. This
methodology is aimed primarily at management in business and IT
organizations, providing practical support, forming a framework
that reduces complexity, and helping to bring about the expected
changes and added value of transformation. This book also
discusses important findings from a variety of transformation
projects and offers suggestions on how to increase the long-term
transformational readiness of organizations. In doing so, we want
to make another contribution to ensure a successful future for our
customers and partners.

Lars Alexander Gollenia

1 Statista (2011), Net income of Apple Inc. 2011:

‘www. statista.com/statistics/155091/net-income-of-apple-inc-since-2008 (accessed
April 2012).

2 Vermeulen, Freek (2010), Business Exposed: The Naked Truth About What Really
Goes on in the World of Business (Harlow, New York: Financial Times/Prentice
Hall).

3 The Standish Group, New Standish Group report shows more project failing and
less successful projects: www.standishgroup.com/newsroom/chaos_2009-php
(accessed May 2012).

4 SAP AG (2009), Value Management: Driving Success Through Best Practices:
‘www bta-online.com/kb/2p=141 (accessed May 2012).

ivevsomet Aiank Mabes asaestna Mace Mettaoy =

< Pretomchote, Netehpte > (0)

--- PAGE 19 ---
"

Bes eae oi

curren 1
Introduction

AxELUML AP AG)

1A Overview:

‘The ability to manage business transformation is vital for companies to stay
‘competitive. Business transformation implies fundamental and complex
‘organizational changes, not only within companies but also across the entire value
‘chain, This can also radically change the relationship between a company and its
wider ic and social envit ‘Typical examples of

tr are} ing business pr , business model

mergers and acquisitions, or cross-functional and (inter- or intra-) organizational
restructuring actions (Uhl and Pimmer, 2011).

Sustainable and successful companies react quickly to changing business
‘environments and provide innovation in terms of client offerings and organizational
structures. Furthermore, the ability to predict future demands and trends, or even to
‘reate new markets, relies on the capability to execute and implement a business
transformation.

Only a minority of companies managed to transform themselves successfully.
‘Various problems occur during the transformation process, including lack of top-
level management support, poor implementation and execution of the
transformation process, lack of skills and competences, resistance against changes,
‘or conflicts of interests.

‘The nation process is complex and time-c ands not
‘only by all major core disciplines of an organization but also by its environment,
‘such as customers, competitors, government and regulators, as well as investors. In
‘other words, transformation always occurs within an entire ecosystem. In order to
‘execute a successful transformation process, the management of a meta-routine is
crucial.

BIM? provides a holistic and integrative perspective on the organization and the
entire complexity of ts ecosystem. It does not reinvent the individual management
Aisciplines but rather provides a framework that integrates individual ones. The
basis ofthe framework are the Meta Management disciplines, which provide the
foundations for the success of other management disciplines including Strategy
Management, Value Management, Process Management, Risk Management,
‘Transformational IT Management, Competence and Training Management, and
Program Management. Each individual discipline is well developed, including a large
body of knowledge supporting them, and targets a specific group of professional
people. Although, each group is very valuable for the organization, there exists a
strong tendency for separation and a lack of integration different
departments. Many sources refer to this fragmentation of the organization as a major
reason for failure during the transformation process and for the increased risk of,
resistance.

ne MorvaTION:

4. Lack of a holistic, integrative, and scientifically proven business transformation
‘management methodology (Lahrmann etal, 2011).

2, Low success rate of business transformation projects (less than 4o percent) (Isern
etal., 2009).

‘This book presents BTM? as a new approach to business transformation

sment and provides a holistic and integrative met to address the
Aifficulties in all kinds of transformation projects. Under the leadership of the
Business Transfo (BTA), an interdiseiplinary team comprising 30

thought leaders from psychology, information technology, strategic management,
process management and social sciences joined together to create a “g60-degree”
‘view of what business transformation means and how business transformation can
‘be successfully executed by organizations. In general, one expert from SAP AG and.
‘one expert from SAP customers, as well as an academic expert, collaborated in each
chapter.

‘ONJECTIVES OF THE BIDE? HANDBOOK:
4. Provide guidance in planning and executing business tra projects.
2. Provide a holistic, integrative, and generic approach.

43. Address different types of transformation projects.

4. Combine knowledge of all organizational discipli

In to existing| , methodologies and pr the three
distinctive areas of this book are:

1. Providing a comprehensible, adaptable, holistic and integrative approach to
of strategic relevance, a conceptually robust and practical method to achieve this

--- PAGE 20 ---
‘was missing. BTM? provides such a holistic and integrative methodology.

2. Emphasizing the balance: ional and emotional aspects of
transformation. Many sources refer to business transformation asa technocratic
‘exercise, where the success depends on an accurate diagnosis of need and an
appropriate selection of communication means. Failure is justified by poor
requirements analysis or insufficient communication. However, the emotional
readiness of employees to absorb and accept transformation initiatives cannot be
underestimated. This handbook specifically considers the rational and emotional
aspects of business transformation.

{3 Providing an execution guide. This handbook discusses a wide range of theory
‘and practice to understand the phenomenon of business transformation.
However, itis primarily a practical work. Often, managers in business
transformation contexts know what to do, and yet they fail to execute. This
phenomenon is an enduring feature of organizational life; in this book,
highlighting how to close the knowing-doing gap is a major priority.

Within this handbook, we provide new content on key elements of business
transformation management and new insights from case studies of recent business
tu both and , which were used to develop and
test the methodology. The book is intended for a wide audience: reflective managers,
consultants, C-level executives and academics ~ indeed, everybody who is involved
in business transformation.

NTE VALUE PROPOSITION:
4. First integrative and holistic business transformation management methodology.
2. Provides a with clear and vding methods.

4 Validated through leading universities and business schools.
4, Intensive research and case studies.

5. “Think tanks” for focus topics.

6. Provides best practice templates and accelerators.

‘Background on Business Transformation Management

Tr ion is a common pt for most, if not al, organizations. On the
‘one hand, exogenous changes such as sustainability, technological innovations,
slobalization, economic conditions and the changing nature of the workforce have a
P impact on the way organizati ness (Arthurs and

2006; Eisenhardt and Sull, 2001). On the other hand, endogenous changes such as
product innovation, restructuring and new business model adoption also potentially
result in large-scale transformation and consequently a disruption in the workplace
(Donaldson, 1987; Eisenhardt and Bourgeois, 1988). Organizations require an
excellent ion process in order to sustain competitive:

‘There exists a great body of literature designed to guide managers and their
‘companies through the change process, and certainly there is an enormous amount
‘of material, both in academic and practitioner literature, which provides solid
prescriptions as to how transformations are executed and delivered (see, for
‘example, Bogner and Barr, 2000; D’Aveni, 1994). From the practical point of view,
awareness and understanding of the key concepts are well established, but the
integration of these concepts and their execution within transformation programs is
Jess well understood. From an academic point of view, theoretical work on

hhas coalesced a series of that provide a
reassuring abstraction but are largely silent on the practicalities of linking elements
in a coherent and effective manner, particularly when this entails dealing with the
‘complexity involved in most transformations.

Yet, despite the plethora of books, cases and how-to manuals, the transformation
process remains a body of failure. One reason for failure in the transformation
process is that it addresses the future. Therefore, transformation represents an,
‘experiment, which, due to different exigencies or unintended consequences, often
tums out in different ways than originally anticipated. In addition, transformation
always involves people, and so the issues of personality, attitude, capability to change
and political behavior emerge, which are, by their nature, very difficult to predict and
‘control. Considering the overall impact, the management of business transformation
plays a critical rote.

Business transformation management isthe holistic management of extensive,
‘complex changes on which the organization’ future success strongly depends
(FHNW, 2012).

ach tra tion process is ‘consisting of various elements.
However, the connections between these elements are either not developed o
articulated, or they become fuzzy as the business transformation progresses,
particularly to the people who are on the receiving end (Davenport, 1993; Galbraith,
1982). The problem of unconnected elements results from the assumption that
‘change is linear and a unitary process or routine. Business transformation is not a
unitary routine but a meta-routine, representing a set of routines which must be
Joined together in order to function properly (Feldman and Pentland, 2003). This is
rooted in the idea of dynamic capabilities, the set of practices and processes that are

Rc a aaa ae ae eee rere

--- PAGE 21 ---
et al, 2007; Teece et al, 1997). As such, we clearly differentiate between traditional
change efforts and the of business tra i
‘Change management focuses on behavioral changes and only considers a small set of
<learly defined goals, whereas business transformation management provides a
holistic view of the entire organization, considering complex changes to the business.
Nevertheless, the fundamentals of both are based on the same principles (Doz and
‘Thanheiser, 1993). These have been developed over a long period of time and.
represent a solid conceptual and general knowledge of the entire change process. An
important concept with respect to change management is called step models (Jick
and Peiperl, 2002). These models identify a number of core activities and.
recommend an optimal execution route in order to maximize the success of the
‘change process. The core of these models is a classic formulation of three phases:
‘current state, future state and transition state, usually supported by a gap and force-
field analysis (Kotter, 1990; Lewin, 1972). Step models are discussed in numerous
‘change management literature and set the path for consultancy interventions in

‘An essential ic of the isa combination of
rational elements ~ for example, diagnosing need, shaping the vision and monitoring,
progress ~ and emotional ~ for example, ‘commitment,

‘with the vision, and building affinity and identity with the change.

‘Step models produced a wide variety of course books for managing change,
‘concerning leadership, culture, influencing staff, and embedding change and
maintaining momentum,

However, there are two major issues raised by the usage of step models. First, they
imply a linear approach to change management, with each step leading to the next.
Feedback loops are included generally, in the models, but essentially these are
mechanistic approaches to change. Second, there is very litle in the models to show
the nature of the linkage between each step, so although each individual element of
the model is outlined, how the overall change process is handled is less clear. This is
problematic, both theoretically and practically. In theoretical terms, how change is

as a collection of routit ns a missing piece in our i
‘with step models, and though there have been calls to approach change from a
holistic point of view, such calls have not been taken up in this tradition. In practical
terms, how transformation is enacted not justin a piecemeal way but in an additive,
synchronized has little by way of precedent in the extant lit

Fora meta-routine such as business transformation, the coordination between
separate management disciplines is essential. It is vital to address the identified
issues if business transformation management is to be effective. The first is that
‘business transformation is a multilevel phenomenon. Behavior at the individual level
‘will affect both group and organizational outcomes in terms of change. Similarly,
‘change imposed from the top of the organization will have direct and indirect effects
‘with levels lower down. Given the complexity of organizations, the interactions
between levels will be complex and often non-linear.

1.3 Distinction to Other Frameworks and Methodologies
‘There are a number of approaches which do seek to take a holistic view; however, the
‘existing approaches do not consider the key requirements to business

Hon. In this section, we outline the di and advantages of BTM?
in comparison to traditional frameworks and methodologies.

[ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE

Enterprise Architecture (EA) describes an approach to manage the rational efforts
‘such as blueprint development or implementation with the aim to deliver a solution
‘of the highest quality to the customer's satisfaction. It is an TT-driven fra and
focuses on describing the architecture of an enterprise in order to improve the
effectiveness and efficiency of the business. The foundation of Enterprise
Architecture isto analyze the current business situation and to define relevant goals
tobe reached in the future.

EA ad big: and small whether in IT systems,
‘business processes or data. It helps to understand what exists in the business now
‘and what it will look like in future, where change takes place and happens, and to
‘reate artefacts that model these changes so everyone is clear. Despite ongoing
efforts to further develop the business focus, value focus and/or strategy focus of EA
frameworks, the main value proposition of EA management is to align IT solutions
better with business needs. As a consequence, EA management would not be used,
for example, to assess how much transformation an organization needs, how much
‘transformation can be achieved in a certain time frame, whether an organizations
‘culture needs to be (and can be) changed, whether political powers in an
‘organization support or inhibit a certain transformation, just to name a few
examples.

In contrast, BTM? intends to support the business in defining and implementing,
significant business transformation. As a consequence, it would not be used to
manage a pure data migration or a technical upgrade where no business change is
involved. It would also not be used to manage small, incremental change even if the
‘business side is affected.

‘The addressed problems differ in their extent — while BTM? focuses on
fu I busi EA is applied for IT/business alignment,
and to manage incremental changes as well. EA management specifies the “what”

--- PAGE 22 ---
{and therefore both the as-is state and the state that should be reached in order to
achieve certain goals. BTM's primary object is the “how” process that focuses on the
‘capabilities in the firm in order to ensure the best execution and situational adoption
of this plan (e.g. in terms of ROI). In the end, both approaches aim for cost reduction
and value creation. However, due to significant differences in users, goals, value
creation logic, control, width, “deepness” mandatory skills and organization, EA
management and BTM? should be regarded as different management approaches
(Winter et al, 2012).

Lean management is a longer-term process of continuous improvement. It takes
time to develop the values and practices that this requires in all parties concerned.
Adopting a holistic approach, targets, methods and tools are combined in such a way
that, ultimately, an appropriate corporate culture is created in which everyone
‘automatically asks themselves: “What can I do better today than I did yesterday?” So
‘the employees themselves give the impulses for specific improvements (bottom-up),
thereby, ng a chain of many small Alean tra isnot
‘geared primarily towards cost reduction but towards the continuous quality and
efficiency improvement of processes and products, with savings being a natural

cor . In order to imp Jean professionally, itis very
helpful to establish a relevant organizational unit, which develops methods and
5. Ithas a consi influence on the of the transformation if

managers lead by example, and practice the targets and principles of lean
management themselves.

In contrast to lean management, business transformations are operated top-
down, have a clear objective and define benefits to be achieved. The changes involved
usually have a huge effect on the entire company. The key question here is about
effectiveness: “Are we doing the right thing?” So the degree of change within a given
period of time is correspondingly high and, therefore, aso the risk of failing, The
transformations referred to, and other practical experiences, have shown that a
holistic approach is required to do full justice to the complex nature of business

transfor Since both the ey and the ruthl oft
transformations are on the increase, it makes a great deal of sense to establish the
appropriate organizational and methodological ies as fixed ts in
‘company.

‘To manage the respective challenges correctly, one has to differentiate between a
restructuring approach in the sense of business transformation, and the
implementation of lean management. Bottom-up evolutionary change corresponds
to lean transformation and, based on the same rationale, top-down revolutionary

corresponds to business transformation. The di and similarities are
summarized in Table 1.1.

Table 6 oflean andi
| Role of managers | umporant [veryimporant_—_|
[or [Highty [High
DexINSey > NRA WORK

‘The McKinsey 7s framework is a management model to assess and monitor changes
in the internal situation of an organization. The framework consists of seven core
‘elements of an organization: structure, strategy, systems, skills, style, staff and
shared values. An organization performs well under process of change if these
‘elements are aligned and mutually reinforced (Peters and Waterman, 1984).

‘The approach describes diagnostic techniques rather than an analysis or
implementation technique. Therefore, itis useful in analytics terms but does not
consider specific aspects of the change elements or their linkages. BTM? provides
this holistic and integrative methodology.

‘The balanced scorecard approach identifies a number of core areas, such as

financial, Process and people (Kaplan and Norton, 2003). It provides a
utility to define and. per res and targets (not ly
eco jones), and develop a balanced target system. the balanced

‘scorecard is used to control and measure the progress and achievement of the
defined targets. This approach shows the inter-linkages between the various areas
and is helpful in providing guidance to meta-management; however, it does not

resent a methodology for the process of tr: ing
1.4 Structure ofthe Book
This is designed to. a tal need in our un ling of

‘transformation. In the extensive transformation literature as well as in much
‘company practice, there isa lack of a holistic and integrative business

--- PAGE 23 ---
\ausrotinauivis uiauagemean MICUNRIUIYR. AAC aut UE HE QLRAUUUR 9 WY PLU
such a methodology. BTM? is generic enough to serve all different types of
‘transformation programs but itis important to emphasize that the expertise and
intuition of the transformation manager is needed to adjust the method to the
specific context and requirements ofthe particular organization.

Business transformation ranges across the entire organization and implies

in a variety of disciplines. This each indivi
discipline in detail and is organized in the following chapters:

omarion
Sue wager

=
=
——
Sd

——
——
——

—
a

Figure 14 Structure of the handbook

Chapter 2: Meta Management provides the general framework to ensure the
integration and success of the other management disciplines. In this chapter, we
‘establish the general conditions of BTM? and provide guidance how to execute it.

Chapter 3: Strategy Management analyzes the needs and the causes for business
transformation, as well as transformation readiness. In this chapter, we explain how
to develop a successful transformation strategy, vision and roadmap. Strategy
‘management assesses the organizational readiness and possible strategic risks, and
‘outlines the expected results of business transformation.

Chapter 4: Value Management covers the objectives of business transformation
and explains how key stakeholders can define business benefits and necessary
‘changes in order to realize those objectives. The emphasis of this chapter lies in the

of clear ing of the {to be achieved, the measu
responsibilities and change needed.

Chapter 5: Risk Management elaborates on strategic and operational risks, which
right jeopardize the success of the business transformation. The chapter develops
approaches to mitigate and manage the identified risks along the enablement phase.
In addition, risk management establishes emergency guides for upcoming or
unidentified risks during the execution phase.

(Chapter 6: Business Processes Management defines the scope of process changes
‘and the expected improvements in performance. In this chapter, we explain how
‘existing processes are discovered and (re)designed and new processes are
introduced. Furthermore, the scope of discretion to change processes and align them
to the local environment is discussed. The chapter also presents how process changes
are implemented and their performance is evaluated.

Chapter 7: Transformational IT Management assesses to which extent IT.

are essential to enable a I busi yrmation. The chapter
provides a technology acquisition and deployment plan to create the new and
necessary business information and systems architecture. Furthermore, we explain
the required i ion and testing p of the new: jes and the
development of the operational service(s) to ensure their effective utilization and
performance.

Chapter 8: Organizational Change identifies the required types of
‘changes and analyzes their impact on various parts of the organization, as well as the
‘external ecosystem. The chapter explains how to select change approaches that
handle the change types and respect the stakeholder interests during the business
u \. Furthermore, we describe how to produce a change plan in order to
deliver the performance levels required without excessive business disruption.
Finally, the chapter summarizes roles and responsibilities for carrying out the
‘business transformation, and shows how to manage stakeholder relationships and
establish isms for monitoring the effectiveness of both implementation and
‘subsequent organizational performance.

Chapter 9: Competence and Training Management focuses on the organizational
or ies and individual skills as critical of busi
‘transformation and future businesses. The chapter explains how to identify new or
‘enhanced competences and skills, as well as roles and people, required during

mation. Furthermore, we dis 1 facilities and material
in order to support staff and others, as well as provide estimations if they have been
effectively deployed.

(Chapter 10: Program and Project Management considers the program
‘governance structure, roles and team structures, and reporting relationships to
‘enable “best practice” program and project approaches and techniques to be
‘deployed in executing the business transformation. The chapter determines how the
‘overall program can be delivered through manageable combinations of projects that
make the most effective use of available resources and how costs, quality and time
‘will be monitored and controlled.

--- PAGE 24 ---
(Chapter 11: Case Study: Motostars ~ Implementation of a Global HR System in
‘an Automotive Company describes the protracted, challenging and costly attempts
‘fa fictional automotive company to transform the strategic alignment of its HR
department by implementing a shared service center and HR IT system. The chapter

— Ordena: aS

(Chapter 12: Lessons Learned from Business Transformation Case Studies

ions
consider the development of new products and services as wel as the restructuring
and reorganization of core business functions and introduction of global processes
and systems,

= Se
mmm

S++ SSTrs=
‘cia (cae SES ee aa =
aes Ses SS =
es Se ae Se a ers
oe er EE ee
SS SS SSS
7S = ee SS
Tr Se = SEs
= ee Ee

igure 1.2 The BEM? ~ Big Picture

‘The most important activities of each management disciplines are summarized in

BTM? is.a generic framework which can be applied to different business
transformation use cases, such as of Enterprise Resource Planning
7 ion of: i , business process: reing or
post-merger integration.

‘The methodology presented in this handbook is not meant to be a cookbook that
describes the exact ingredients of a meal and the concrete procedure how to cook it.
Instead, the goal is to outline and describe all relevant aspects of business
transformation approaches, and to provide guidance in order to ensure that
important aspects during business transformation are not neglected or forgotten.
‘The handbook targets the management groups that focus and specialize in business
transformation procedures. BTM? connects the leadership aspects with functional
and subject-specific disciplines in order to provide a holistic approach and
simultaneously reduce the irrational effort (see Figure 1.3) of a business
transformation.

Figure 13 Irrational and rational efforts in business transformation

ibtiography |

Arthurs, Jonathan D. and Busenitz, Lowell W. (2006), Dynamic capabilities and
venture performance: the effects of venture capitalists, Journal of Business
Venturing 21, no. 2, 195-215.

Bogner, William C. and Barr, Pamela S. (2000), Making sense in hypercompetitive
environments: a cognitive explanation for the persistence of high velocity
competition, Organization Science 11, no. 2, 212-26,

D‘Aveni, Richard A. (1994), Hypercompetition: Managing the Dynamics of
‘Strategic Maneuvering (New York: The Free Press).

Davenport, Thomas H. (1993), Process Innovation: Reengineering Work Through
Information Technology (Boston, USA: Harvard Business School Press).

Donaldson, Lex (1987), Strategy and structural adjustment to regain fit and

per in of contingency theory, of Studies

24, m0, 41-24.

Doz, Yves L. and Thanheiser, Heinz (1993), Regaining competitiveness: a process of
isational |, in Strategie Thinking: Leadership and the Mc

of Change, edited by John Hendry, Gerry Johnson and Julia Newton (Chichester,
New York: Wiley).

Eisenhardt, Kathleen M. and Bourgeois, LJ. (1988), Politics of strategic decision
‘making in high-velocity environments: toward a midrange theory, Academy of,
‘Management Journal 31, 00. 4,737-70-

Eisenhardt, Kathleen M_ and Sull, Donald N. (2001), Strategy as simple rules,
Harvard Business Review 79, no. 1, 107-16.

Feldman, Martha S. and Pentland, Brian T. (2003), Reconceptualizing

--- PAGE 25 ---
organizational routines as a source of flexibility and change, Administrative
‘Science Quarterly 48, no. 1, 94-118.
FHNW (2012) Business transformation management,

‘management/business-transformation-management?set_language=en (accessed
April 2012).

Galbraith, Jay R. (1982), Designing the innovating organization, Organizational
Dynamics 10, no. 3, 5-25-

Helfat, Constance E., Finkelstein, Sydney, Peteraf, Will M.M., Singh, Harbir, Teece,
David and Winter, Sidney (2007), Dynamic Capabilities: Understanding
‘Strategic Change in Organizations (Malden, MA: Blackwell Pub.)

Isern, Josep, Meaney, Mary C. and Wilson, Sarah (2009), Corporate transformation
under pressure, McKinsey Quarterly April (McKinsey & Company).

‘Jick, Todd D. and Peiperl, Maury A. (2002), Managing Change: Cases and
Concepts (London: McGraw-Hill).

Kaplan, Robert S. and Norton, David P. (2003), Keeping your balance with
customers, HBS Working Knowledge, http: //hbswk.hbs.edu /item/3588.html
(accessed March 2012).

Kotter, John P. (190), A Force for Change: How Leadership Differs from
‘Management (New York: Free Press, Collier Macmillan).

Lahrmann, Gerit, Winter, Robert and Uhl, Axel (2011), Transformation
‘management survey: current state of development and potential of

nation mi in practice, 360° ~The ‘Transformation
Journal June, no. 1,29-37.

Lewin, Kurt (1972), Need, force and valence in psychological fields, in Classic
Contributions to Social Psychology, edited by Edwin Paul Hollander and
Raymond George Hunt (London: Oxford University Press).

Peters, Thomas J. and Waterman, Robert H. (1984), In Search of Excellence:
Lessons from America’s Best-run Companies (New York, NY: Warner Books).

‘Teece, David J. (2007), Explicating dynamic capabilities: the nature and

ndations of (sustainable) enterprise pe
‘Management Journal 28, no. 13, 1319-50.

‘Teece, David J., Pisano, Gary and Shuen, Amy (1997), Dynamic capabilities and
strategic management, Strategic Management Journal 18, n0. 7, 509-33.

Uhl, Axel and Christoph (2011), Transdisciplinary knowledge for
transformation: the diverse potential ofa global network of experts, 360° — The
Business Transformation Journal June, no. 1, 21-8.

‘Winter, Robert, Townson, Simon, Uhl, Axel, Labusch, Nils and Noack, Jorg (2012),
Enterprise Architecture and Tran the di and synergy
potential, 360° — The Business Transformation Journal forthcoming.

Pw ans

(esenomat Atunsnnket Mabe Taste Maine Maney 4 < Preouschgter Nxtenapter > 0

--- PAGE 26 ---
"

Bes eng oi

curren 2 a
Meta Management
PILE STILES (Cambri Joe Bain Sco,

‘SCHL UML (EAP A) an PAL. STRATIL (5A Att
“Techs Verwatens Gat

2.4 Overview

Every business transformation is different. The success depends on the complex
interplay of actors in a multi system. According to this ing, the
focus of meta management as the fundamental discipline in BTM? lies in providing a
frame that helps to manage the complexity of business transformation.

This chapter presents Meta ment as 4 discipline for
transformation, which is based on a holistic and integrative management approach.
Meta Management is business-driven value-oriented, and integrates three pillars,

ly: ise nation lifecycle and A
‘business transformation process is only successful ifthe leaders are aware of their
roles and communication and have established a solid culture. These meta
‘management principles are also sketched in this chapter since their implementation
‘constitutes an important basis for the success of the overall BTM? framework.

In summary, the following (general) guidelines need to be to a
‘successful business transformation project:

1. Orchestrate the individual management disciplines as an integrated and holistic
approach.

2. Specify the cascade of the overall transformational goals for each management
discipline and organizational member.

4 Install and establish the transformation lifecycle with the four phases: envision,
‘engage, transform and optimize.

4. Assign roles and involve the business transformation manager in the process of
transformation.

‘5 Create commitment across all involved parties and facilitate the buy-in from all
important stakeholders and employees.

6. Cultural environment is set by skiliful use of communication in order to provide a
‘lear purpose and good understanding of transformation need, benefits, risks and
‘change needed.

‘OBJECTIVES OF THIS CHAPTER: ®
4. Get an understanding of Meta Management as the foundation of the BTM?.
2. Provide guidance how to use Meta Management within an enterprise.

2. Pillars of Meta Management
‘Meta Management provides the ing frame for different management

Aisciplines (e.g. Strategy Management or Risk Management) and offers the linkages
among the ment disciplines, ip, culture and communication which

allows the transformation process to be effective. In summary, the method has the
following advantages:

+ It provides an iterative lifecycle model (envision, engage, transform, optimize),
which allows understanding business transformation as a holistic process,

+ It offers an overall business transformation structure, including m
layers, formal and informal management roles.

+ It focuses on the dimensions of the balanced scorecard for planning and controlling
‘measures. Thus, meta management reuses a widely used performance management
method.

+ Itdelivers decision criteria for choosing the right leaders and promoters for key
positions and facilitates transformational leadership.

+ Ithelps to create culture and values on the basis of transformation principles and
{guidelines to internalize and institutionalize the transformation goals,

+ It provides communication and engagement principles, and supports feedback
loops.

‘This chapter does not provide a detailed cookbook. It is much more a coherent
and consistent framework that reduces complesity, but which still must be adapted
to the specific company by using the experience of involved individuals. Each
‘company and each business transformation is different. Thus, simply copying,
“recipes for success” from one company can produce disastrous results at another.

2:21 BUSINESS TRANSFORMATION GOAL SETTING.
‘The first important pillar of Meta Management is dealing with management
Aisciplines, which are coherently integrated within this approach. BTM? includes
several management disciplines: Strategy Management, Value Management, Risk
Management, Business Process Management, Program and Project Management,
‘Transformational IT Management, Organizational Change Management, as well as
‘Competence and Training Management. Typically, each management discipline has

--- PAGE 27 ---
‘a foundation set of knowledge, requirements and processes, which traditionally have
their own set of assumptions, theory and terminology, rendering them largely
‘opaque to colleagues in other disciplines. In turn, this can result in an unconnected
‘overall process, which risks fragmentation and a lack of clarity and cohesion across
the entire change chain. To overcome such risks, BTM? integrates and extends these
disciplines, and provides a multidisciplinary view on business transformation.

‘The intention of Meta Management with respect to management disciplines isthe ©
“orchestration of the overall set of these disciplines within change management, as set
‘out in Figure 2.1.

—

—\
}

Figure 2.1 The Meta Management framework

‘The eight management disciplines are chosen in a logical way and are of two
types.

1. Directional

‘The three disciplines of strategy management, value management and risk
management can be referred to as the strategy loop of the BTM?. Here, the
transformation strategy is defined considering time and budget restrictions as well

‘as associated risks. Moreover, the directional disciplines of BTM? create the case for
action and vision of the future and set the direction for the transformation effort.

2 Prablement *
Itencompasses the management and synchronization of changes ranging from IT
through process to organizational, plus the creation of new competencies through
training and education, orchestrated through an organizational program
management capability. The last of these is not about creating a “super-manager”
‘but having people a all levels in the transformation who are well trained and
knowledgeable about transformation. “Enablement” can also be referred to as the
feedback loop of the BTM®, where the strategy is being implemented and lessons

|. This learning leads to the adj of the t
strategy.

‘CHALLENGES CONCERNING THE MANAGEMENT DISCIPLINES:
1. To understand interdependencies between management disci
2. To orchestrate the management disciplines efficiently.

Business transformation has to balance economic, social and technical aspects. This
requires the involvement of fields such as management, psychology and IT, which
‘are mirrored in the nine management disciplines.

2.2 TRANSFORMATION LIFHCYCLE

‘The second pillar of meta management is a transformation lifecyle, which provides
an overall map of the change territory and allows understanding of the iterative
nature of business transformation. Based upon the transformation lifecycle, the
business transformation can be efficiently organized. The mistake that hampers a
‘smooth business transformation is considering the transformation process as strictly
linear; in essence, the transformation process is iterative and goes through different
stages in recurring cycles. Therefore, a stage model with recurring phases is
required. Figure 2.2 shows the four steps: envision, engage, transform and optimize.
‘The management disciplines described in Section 2.2.1 are involved in all stages of
the transformation lifecycle model since almost any aspect, from the transformation
rationale to implementation options, may need to be revisited as the transformation
and business context evolve. Inevitably, however, the emphasis will be more on the
directional disciplines inthe early stages and the enablement disciplines later.

In the following, we summarize the four phases of the transformation lifecycle and
show the outcome and the requirements for each phase.

mito
This phase embraces the “why” as well as the “how” question of change. “Why is,
‘business transformation needed and how capable is the organization to manage the
t ion?” This phase di the need for busi tion. In
addition, the strategy and vision in dealing with the change need are developed. This
step therefore combines both analytical capabilities with creativity and foresight. A
further goal ofthe “Envision” phase is to create commitment to the developed
strateev within the ton management team. Vision is usually at the heart of the

--- PAGE 28 ---
transitional process (Collins, 2003) but this does not necessarily mean grand vision
— that is, the vision for the entire organization. On occasion, transformation may
take place with a department ora business unit. Nor does it mean that business
transformation requires visionary leaders (Goffee and Jones, 2000) if this is taken to
mean charismatic, guru-like figures. It simply indicates that business transformation
rust have a clear focus and objective. A major question for managers
capable are we as an organization to do this and to get a stakeholder agreement on
the plan?”

‘How

i i

pecs,
Soe ce
Transform

Figure 2.2°The transformation lifecycle

apected outcome
1. Recognition of the need for business transformation
2. Identification of strategy and vision

eulrements
4. Analytical capability
2. Creativity
3 Foresight
Pngave *
‘This phase represents the mobilizing of commitment in the organization.
Involvement and communication are essential here, as well as the establishment of
discrete projects to deliver change and drive momentum. Engagement would entail
<dclivering both behavioral and attitudinal buy-in to the transformation. For that,
transformation requires a clear understanding throughout the entire organization of
‘what change is required, why it is required, how it is to be achieved and measured,
‘and who is responsible. Detailed planning and continuous alignment with the
‘business functions is required in order to gain commitment throughout the entire

}. The invol within the middle and employees
especially is required to facilitate the transformation process.

{apected tome
4. Communication of transformation
2. Establishment of discrete projects

Requirements
1. Detailed planning
2, Alignment with business functions

raaform
‘Transformation could include reorganization, new business processes and
relationships, including creating new business entities, such as shared service
centers, relocation and redeployment of staf, creating and utilizing new capabilities
and enhancing employee competencies, and changing their behavior, attitudes and
shared values. People need to understand the need for transformation and commit to
‘apace which is acceptable to them while enabling inhibiting walls between
departments and businesses to be removed. The rational and the emotional elements
have to be brought together to win hearts and minds.

It also usually involves transformations to the organization's IT capabilities,
operations, business pr systems, technology and Changing the IT
‘successfully at a speed which allows the organization to remain competitive is often
the critical enabler of a transformation.

apected outcome:
4, New business units (e.g. service centers)
2, New business processes

3. New relationships

Requirement
4. People’s understanding and commitment

2. Changing the IT successfully

Optimise

‘Transformation must be embedded and internalized as the new “business as usual”.
‘The institutionalization of transformation — ensuring that quick wins are
consolidated, processes and achievements are measured, and any laggard behavior is
‘addressed — will create the conditions for effective business transformation and
‘ensure that change capability is enhanced.

--- PAGE 29 ---
Expected outcome: =
1, Measurement of processes and achievements
2. Laggard behavior is eliminated

Requirements
1. Internalize, institutionalize, and optimize transformation
2. Create stability

Business transformation in practice is often messy and, to some employees
‘engaged in it, unclear, as multiple activities vie for attention and the realities of
dealing with obstacles confounds the best-laid plans. The iterative nature of change
‘must therefore be encompassed. This is one of the most difficult management
‘capabilites. The constant iteration and the preparedness to return to phases of the
‘ycle to solve problems and reinforce messages is a key element of the
‘transformation process.

1. The iterative nature of business transformation must be encompassed.

2. To deal with unintended consequences.

43. Effective and efficient change of IT.

ry esac:

‘The constant iteration and the preparedness to return to phases of the cycle to solve
problems and reinforce messages.

‘The ability of the transformation agent to move between the phases of the
transfo and to review the implications of change i jons and
deal with unintended consequences is highly valuable and rare. Senge (2006) argued
that change management has both theory in abstract and theory-in-use, the latter
being the real enactment of the change process. Usually, theory-in-use represents a
deep level of behavior and attitude, and reaching this level will not take just one
meeting or one set of training activities.

This, of course, raises the question of who will be the transformation agent in such
‘holistic and iterative process. This topic will be addressed in the next paragraph.

2.3.3 MANAGEMENT ROLES INVOLVED IN META MANAGEMENT
‘The four phases of the ion lifecyele are by 7
roles.

In change management theory, an often neglected aspect ofthe process is the
need to build a coalition (Jick and Peiperl, 2002). Though this appears implicitly in a
‘number of change models, the dimensions of the team needed and their roles has
‘been largely missing from major change conceptualizations. In the practical sphere,
the composition of GE's transformation project teams in terms of a champion (high-
level supporter of the change process), sponsor (responsible for operational
accountability) and project manager (who oversees the day-to-day running of the
‘business transformation) has been a strong pillar in terms of identifying the roles
required. However, this approach has been light on detail over the particular s
accountabilities of each level, and also there is no real acknowledgment of the
importance of the informal management roles required to make change happen. In
the following we highlight a number of management roles, both at a formal and
informal level, required in order to execute meta management (see Figure 2.3).

Pl
- | so

Figure 2.3 Organizational structure of Meta Management

farmal management roles
‘The formal management roles have a hierarchy reflecting both expertise and power.
Atthe apex isthe executive steering committee, which is responsible for the creation
of the meta management framework and facilitating capability, culture and the
environment for change.

“The business transformati takes strategic decisions and the
‘overall transformation program from beginning to end. He or she reports in the role
‘of akey adviser tothe executive steering committee and has a complete overview of
all change programs, plans programs together with program managers, and
considers dependencies between programs. His or her key interest isto make the
‘overall transformation strategy happen and to realize the proposed business change
and value. He or she stays in this role for the entire transformation roadmap, from
the early planning (envisioning) phase until the optimization phase.

--- PAGE 30 ---
sre prvi taunggct SKECID MRE INN ANGE PAGES LES RE
‘business transformation goals and decides on policy, governance, reporting,
document standards and program structures, and is accountable for finance,
controlling and resource management of the program, as well as the benefit
realization of his or her program. He or she also needs to break down this program
into manageable projects, select the right project managers, coordinate the
interdependencies ofthe projects, and build the bridge between project, program
and over transformation strategy.

‘The project manager initiates, plans, executes and closes a project, and is
accountable to the program manager for accomplishing the stated project objectives
‘with respect to value, quality, cost, time and scope.

Itisa central tenet of effective teams that clear roles, responsibilities and
accountabilities are assigned (Katzenbach and Smith, 2005). This formal delineation
‘of key management roles for transformation gives a more explicit characterization
‘than current approaches, and the dual directional arrows stress that this is not a
purely hierarchical approach but one which favors feedback loops at every touch-
point. What is also important is the addition of the informal set of roles, which
facilitates transformation within organizations. The informal side of organizations

transformation (Cooper and Argytis, 1998).

‘CHALLENGES CONCERNING FORMAL MANAGEMENT ROLES:
4. To find people with domain knowledge and power.

2. To assign roles, responsibilities and accountabilities appropriately.

KEY MESSAGE

‘An organization with these particular management roles has clear roles and
responsibilities that help to drive business transformation as an integrated program
‘of manageable projects. This favors feedback loops.

In the following, several informal roles are described which are empirically well
founded, especially in the literature about innovation management (Gemiinden et
al, 2007).

‘The power promoter provides sponsorship atthe highest level of leadership and
the most powerful ever for transformation. He or she empowers the transformation
program and project managers but does not mix sponsorship with project
management. Power is used only exceptionally and where itis absolutely necessary
todrive nation Misuse of power creates distrust and resistance.

‘The relational promoter delivers social competence, charisma and persuasive
power, combining a strong network with a certain level of expert knowledge. With
extensive relationships and a sound knowledge of internal matters, the relational
promoter creates the willingness to change. This frequently requires the support of
“opinion leaders” to implement transformation, and the relational promoter plays
the role of intermediary due to his or her considerable social expertise and
‘experience in situations of conflict. Usually people trust this person because of his or
her personality and their long working time and commitment to the company.

‘The functional provider gives the transformation program a very high level of
expert knowledge. He or she has considerable interest (and experience) in the topic
‘of transformation and works in the line. This informal roe is also very important
‘because the functional promoter can answer specialist questions with expert know-
how and has a good reputation as a specialist in the organization.

We find these informal management roles at all described levels of,
transformation: atthe overall transformation level, the program level and the project
level. In terms of content, the promoters differ in their degrees of specialist detail:
strategie, tactical or operational.

‘The combination of these (informal) management roles in itself requires a great
deal of coordination. For this to be ensured, the business transformation manager
will be involved in the whole ofthe transformation process. This puts great demands
‘on an individual since a transformation agent runs a number of risks, including
isolation, being negatively perceived, unable to reintegrate back into the organization
‘and being made a scapegoat in the event of poor execution (Beer and Nobria, 2000).
‘Soa good degree of courage, resilience and spirit are required on the part of the
‘business transformation manager (Bossidy et al., 2002). In addition, of course, the
skill and behavioral set for such an individual is unevenly distributed in the
population — individuals who possess such a repertoire are highly sought after and
valuable. Part of an organization's responsibilty to ensure its sustained isto
develop and retain such individuals.

1.To find people with sociality and perspicacity (in particular an appropriate
2. Great deal of coordination.

2.3 Meta Management Principles

The tion purpose and the highest transformation goals must be
‘communicated, and guidelines to create cultural “ground” for transformation must

ly

--- PAGE 31 ---
be established.
‘Meta Management also provides guidelines to internalize and institutionalize the

tr purpose and goals. A al business tran is gre
‘on the following principles:

+ Communication and coordination: communicate and “live” the vision.
+ Leadership: “Walk the talk.”
+ Culture and value: define values and facilitate internalization.

‘These principles are explained in the next sections.
2.5: NUSINESS TRANSFORMATION ORJECTIVE

Fora meta-routine such as business transformation, the coordination between
separate management disciplines is essential. An approach that has gained broad
acceptance is the balanced scorecard. As we stated earlier, although the balanced
seorecard does not describe a change process, it nevertheless provides a valuable
model by which different management disciplines can be integrated through the
identification of mutually supporting goals.

‘The balanced scorecard is an ideal tool for a well-balanced goal definition within a
‘business transformation project. Goals are operationalized through key performance
indicators (KPIs) and serve as a basis for value management, evaluation and
feedback. The recognition given to the different aspects of organizations is
important. Ata very broad level, change has been classified into economic aspects
‘and organizational aspects (Beer and Nohria, 2000), with the economic aspects
tending to dominate, primarily because of their greater capability to be measured
and often the immediacy of their impact. However, the organizational aspects are no
less important, given the need to build both employee and structural capability into
the organization to ensure sustainable success. The dual requirement to build
‘economic and organizational capability, highlighted by Beer and Nohria, is given a
fine-grained working through, with the core financial and process metrics aligned
‘with customer and people dimensions.

‘The other major benefit of the balanced scorecard is its relative simplicity in terms
‘of breaking down the major aspects of the strategy and, for our purposes, the
transformation goals, and enabling clear linkages between the core activities.

it provides a clear rationale for the cascading of tra tion goals
‘through and across the levels of an organization. In this sense, the balanced
scorecard provides strong support for the communicative aspect of the transition.

KEY MESSAGE:
‘The balanced scorecard is an ideal tool for a well-balanced goal definition within a
‘business transformation project.

23:2 COMMUNICATION AND COORDINATION
For transformational efforts to be successful, the transformation agenda must be
able to deal with communication within and between departments and businesses.
However, what is often overlooked is the need to develop a common understanding
‘of a transformation effort asa first principle. This essential first step ~ the
‘Communication Principle — has often been an implicit ingredient in transformation
‘efforts rather than an explicit one, but the whole change enterprise rests on this step.
‘Without a compelling articulation of the need for transformation, the mobilization of
tment from the will be not jing. Communication involves:

+ the communication of reasons for transformation ("why can't we stay the same”) is
needed — that is, its purpose and the main goals;

+ establishing a common language to ensure unambiguous interpretation of key
concepts ~ for example, through a glossary; and

+ the communication of transformation values, principles and guidelines to create
the cultural “ground for transformation.

Specifically this principle is not responsible for communication within and
‘between individual disciplines. Though this activity is very important, it forms part
of the regular communications process within organizations.

Difficulty with communication has long been viewed as a major contributing
factor in the lack of transformational success. The importance of communication in
‘change processes is undoubted and there are numerous models and practical
prescriptions, highlighting communication intensity and channel choice (Garvin and

Roberto, 2005). At the heart of communication approaches is a basic process
‘framework which identifies:
1. the characteristics of the sender of the message;
2. the content of the message; and
4 the characteristics of the recipient.
‘Under the first dimension rests the credibility and trustworthiness of the sender.

‘The second dimension addresses the issue of tailoring the message and the salience
of its content. The third dimension identifies the capability of the receiver to
understand the message (their absorptive capacity) and also the motivation of the
receiver to act upon it.

--- PAGE 32 ---
‘ne nee to segment staxenoiers to ine transtormation process 1s a requirement
in order to gauge reaction to the change and the degree of acceptance and resistance
that is encountered. The literature identified a number of typologies of stakeholder
identification that address different tiers of business transformation:

+ 1st tier: Those imminently affected by the business transformation — for
example, people working in HR being relocated through the creation of a shared
service center.

+ 2nd tier: Those directly affected by business transformation — for example,
people from the HR department affected through changed business processes.

+ 3rd tier: Those indirectly affected by transformation for example, internal and
external customers of HR through an altered HR service delivery.

‘Naturally, each of these tiers may have different attitudes towards the
transformation program, ranging on a broad continuum from highly accepting of the
transformation to strongly resistant. Those on the first and second tiers who are
positive about the transformation would become ambassadors for the program and
‘would aid in spreading the and the vision of the i i
those indirectly affected is also important since though they may not be in the

of their effect on organizational morale, should they distribute
negative messages, is considerable (Hardy, 2009). Figure 2.4 shows the four
‘dimensions of the balanced. ( financial, process and people) in
‘combination with the three tiers in order to address the specific communication
needs within the organization.

Figure 2.4 The dimensions of communication within BTM

One fundamental enabler for an effective transformation process is the

of a clear line of sight the overarching organizational goals
‘and the goals defined for the individual employee. This means that the cascade of
‘overall transformational goals must be made specific for each management
discipline and organizational member. Furthermore, the cascaded goals must be
‘meaningful for the employee in terms of motivational content as wel in relevant
language that enables them to understand both “What's in it for me?” and “What am
1 to do?”. Though ication is important, obviously, for such a
process to work, itis clear that acceptance of the transformation message is
dependent not only on the message content but also on the credibility and
trustworthiness of the leadership.

‘This means that “one message fits all” does not achieve the desired objective.
Depending on the respective target groups’ functional and hierarchical affiliation
‘within the company, the communication must be individually adapted. Naturally,
this does not mean that contradictory information should be provided; the
‘communication of strategic objectives is standardized but it must be adapted for
individual target groups in terms ofits significance.

(CHALLENGES CONCERNING THE COMMUNICATION PRINCIPLE

1, Need to segment stakeholders to the business transformation process.

2. Identification of a clear line of sight (define transformational goals for each
‘management discipline and organizational member).

4 Individually adopted communication principles.

299 LEADERSHIP

‘Once the transformation process is accepted, leaders need to help employees to
interpret proposals for transformation (Garvin and Roberto, 2005). Skilled leaders
use “frames” to provide context and shape perspective for new proposals and plans.
Because transformation initiatives are open to numerous interpretations and
filtering, it s important that employees are helped to gain a shared and consistent
understanding of what the transformation requires. A prime mechanism is the
«establishment of a clear working language for the transformation process, in which
all major concepts are defined — for instance, in a glossary — and measures are
identified and understood. This shared language of transformation can be a constant
reference point as the change moves into different areas ofthe organization, where
<ifferent professional and technical languages can distort the meaning of the change
concepts.

‘The basis for leadership is to build an organization that can effectively achieve its
‘goals. There is a wide range of leadership theory, from instrumental approaches to
inspirational ones (Bass and Avolio, 2012); all center on the nature ofthe
relationship between the leader and the followers. In light of the arguments from the

--- PAGE 33 ---
resource-based View OF the Tim tnat compeuuve aavantage stems 1rom VaruaDie,
rare and hard-to-imitate resources (Barney, 1991; Wright and McMahan, 1992), and
the related literature on the importance of using talent for developing ideas and
‘sustaining success, the emphasis on transformational leadership (Bass and Avolio,
2012) is not surprising. It is no coincidence that the transformational agenda in
transformation management should mesh with the dominant view of

tr 1 ip. BTM? anew ip approach, which has
the following characteristics:

+ The role ofthe business transformation manager must allow for sufficient
responsibilities and power to manage the overall transformation.

+ The business transformation manager must have the respective competences and.
capabilities for such a complex task.

For the relationship between the leader and the follower, the dimensions include
the following:

+ Provide vision and sense of mission, gain respect and trust,
+ Use symbols to focus efforts, express important purposes in simple ways.
+ Promote intelligence, rationality and careful problem-solving.
+ Give personal attention, treat each employee individually.
+ Live the transformation: “Walk the talk.”
+ Be clear in what is accepted and what is not.
+ In conflicts, find fair solutions and avoid winners and losers.
‘The link between transformational leadership and involvement is direct ~
transformational leadership embodies the idea of empowerment and involvement
(Bass and Avotio, 2012). Furthermore, implicitly bound up with leadership style is
the issue of organizational culture. Traditionally, leadership style has direct effects
‘on the culture of an organization and vice versa, showing the example that others
‘might imitate and also articulating the key values. All organizations have cultures of
some kind, and there is huge variation, ranging broadly from integrated (unified #
culture) to differentiated (a set of subcultures with potential for either harmony or
conflict) and fragmented (no clear coherence among sub-groups) (Conyon and
Leech, 1994). These are not static descriptions but rather represent a dynamic, with
organizations becoming more or less unified over time depending on changes both
within and external to the firm.

‘CHALLENGES CONCERNING THE LEADERSIP PRINCIPLE:
1. Sufficient responsibilities and power to manage the overall business
transformation.

2. Respecti ‘es and capabilities for the transformation process.

EY MESSAGE:

Intersection as wide as possible between the leadership role, his or her competencies
and his or her responsibilities. Moreover, the position of a transformational leader
must be seen as a position with high reputation: leaders need to be selected carefully,
they need to have shown outstanding achievements in earlier change projects and
their career path must be planned clearly.

23.4 CULTURE AND VALUE.

In addition to the shared language, itis important that a cultural environment is set
by skillful use of communication. For communication to work, there must be a

cognitive where employees 1d what is being p and what it
means for them. However, there must also be an emotional aspect to the
tion, to ensure both yielding to the: and commitment to

it, Ensuring that the cultural ground is fertile isa major task of the communication
principle. Employees need to feel that the organization has a purpose and that the
‘change will contribute to their sense of what the organization stands for and is
‘congruent with its core values.

‘To move towards the unified end of the continuum, the following three elements
are required:

1. the right people;
2. leadership example; and
{3 socialization (Robbins and Judge, 2009).

Socialization involves the immersing of employees into the values and objectives
of the transformation, and the internalization of these objectives and values (Schein,
1995). Central to this isthe instilling of a sense of belonging, together with a non-
coercive approach to the transformation, allowing autonomy for the employee. In
‘essence, the journey between the axes (see Figure 2.5) finds resonance in the
Aistinction ‘and commitment (V 1985). Control represents a
strong behavioral focus on compliance enforced by appropriate incentives and
sanctions, but commitment, at an affective level, entails the sense of identification
‘with the business transformation and the belief in the overarching goals of the
process (see Figure 2.5).

= = aA

--- PAGE 34 ---
Sec
Figure 2.5 Core values and internalization as part of Meta Management

In Figure 2.5 the two key are combined, namely communication pri
and intrinsic basic needs. First, the communication principles cover partner-oriented
‘or relationship-oriented approaches, comprising the aspects of appreciation,
‘empathy and openness. Employees who are appreciated during the transformation
process will have higher commitment and positive intent towards it. Empathy is
important in understanding what people are going through as the business
transformation affects their working lives and relationships, and openness is crucial
order to bring any: tive voices to the table or to ‘conflict and

Second, the intrinsic basic needs highlight the requirement to focus on motivation
in the transformation process, rather than pure rewards and sanctions. Again, there
‘are three fundamental elements. First, the transformation must be driven by
‘autonomy ~ people must be given responsibility and freedom to enact the
transformation process. The alternative isto get somebody to do something by using
‘extrinsic motivation tools such as rewards or sanctions, but itis not possible to force
people to like something. Second, the competence need highlights the importance of
‘employees moving outside their comfort zone to embrace new practices and skills.
‘Third, the sense of belonging identifies the need for individuals to belong to an

ive group or 1, one that has clear identity, and whose transformation
is sound and compelling.

Addressing both the communication principles and the intrinsic needs will
increase the internalization of the business transformation objectives, leading to the
‘greater likelihood of the effectiveness of transformation.

However, itis possible to internalize new forms of behavior, although this
presupposes voluntariness, social integration and a feeling of doing the right thing.

‘CHALLENGES CONCERNING THE CULTURAL PRINCIPLES:

4. Define values and facilitate internalization.

2. Set up a cultural environment by skillful use of communication.

‘CHALLENGES CONCERNING THE META MANAGEMENT PRINCIPLES:

1. Overcoming the inertia of organizations.

2. Need to develop a common understanding of a transformation effort (meta-
communication).

43: Find skilled leaders who provide context and shape perspective for new proposals
‘and plans.

4- Clear working language.

5. Skillful use of communication.

REY MESSAGE:

1. Communicate principles such as appreciation, empathy and openness.

2, Motivate intrinsic basic needs such as autonomy, competence needs and sense of
belonging.

{3 Addressing both the communication prineiples and the intrinsic needs will
increase the internalization of the transformation, leading to the greater likelihood
of ts effectiveness.

2.4 Conclusion

‘The meta management chapter summarizes the guiding elements to create the right

‘environment for successful business transformation. The chapter reflects leadership

principles, core values and behaviors, and communication principles, as well as
nal that facilitate ion,

Business transformation is a complex and difficult process. The reason for that is
the amount and diversity of stakeholders and interests, unclear expectations and
responsibilities, and ineffective leadership and communication resulting in
resistance, conflicts, anarchy and lack of support. Such complexity explains why
‘many business transformation initiatives do not succeed, because there is no “meta
management” of the overall process. This concept has rarely been discussed in the
traditional change management literature. This chapter outlined some of the
fundamentals of the meta management concept building on well-established
principles, theories and experience from a number of disciplines, including stage
models, stakeholder management, the balanced scorecard and transformational
leadership.

One of the staples of change management research concerns the planned or
‘emergent nature of change. In this chapter, tra ion is conceptualized as a
planned activity, but within meta management, there is flexibility to alow for
‘changes in the environment and for fresh information to be factored into the overall
process. In this way, Meta Management may be likened to a dynamic capability,
bringing together different elements of change and allowing for their combination
and recombination to ensure the sustained effectiveness of the organization. Laree

--- PAGE 35 ---
‘companies can suffer from sluggishness, inertia, bureaucracy, silo structures, poor
‘communications, disenfranchised management and employees, and stifled =
entrepreneurial spirit, which, in combination, tend to inhibit or even prevent

innovation, integration and learning. Understanding transformation from a holistic

perspective is essential if the processes and relationships that regulate change are to

be leveraged effectively. In the following chapters, we explore the various disciplines

‘that make up organizational transformation.

Bibliography

Barney, J. (1991), Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage, Journal of
‘Management 17, n0. 1,9-120.

Bass, Bernard M. and Avolio, Bruce J. (2012), Multifactor leadership questionnaii
the benchmark measure of transformational leadership, 2012:
_www.mindgarden.com/products/mlq,htm (accessed March 2012).

Beer, Michael and Nohria, Nitin (2000), Cracking the code of change, Harvard
Business Review 78, no. 3, 133-41.

Bossidy, Larry, Charan, Ram and Burck, Charles (2002), Execution: The Discipline
of Getting Things Done, 1st ed. (New York: Crown Business).

Collins, James C. (2003), Der Weg zu den Besten: Die sieben Management-

ipien fir dauerhaften Ui oly (Mi Deu
‘Taschenbuch-Verlag).

‘Conyon, Martin J. and Leech, Dennis (1994), Top pay, company performance and
corporate governance, Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 56, no. 3,
229-47.

‘Cooper, Cary 1 and Argyris, Chris (eds) (1998), The Concise Blackwell
Encyclopedia of Management (Malden, Mass: Blackwell Business).

Garvin, David A. and Roberto, Michael A. (2005), Change through persuasion,
Harvard Business Review 83, n0. 2, 104-12.

Gemiinden, Hans G., Salomo, Séren and Holzle, Katharina (2007), Role models for
radical innovations in times of open innovation, Creativity and Innovation
Management 16, no. 4, 408-21.

Goffee, Robert and Jones, Gareth (2000), Why should anyone be led by you?,
Harvard Business Review 78, n0. 5, 62-70.

Hardy, Ben (2009), Morale: definitions, dimensions and measurement, unpublished
PhD thesis (Judge Business School, University of Cambridge).

Jick, Todd D. and Peiperl, Maury A. (2002), Managing Change: Cases and

Katzenbach, Jon R. and Smith, Douglas K. (2005), The Wisdom of Teams: Creating
the High-Performance Organization (London: McGraw-Hill).

Robbins, Stephen P. and Judge, Tim (2009), Organizational Behavior, 1gth ed.
(Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall).

‘Schein, Edgar H. (1995), Unternehmenskultur: Ein Handbuch fiir Fihrungskriifte
(Frankfurt: Campus Verlag).

‘Senge, Peter M. (2006), The Fifth Discipline: The Art and Practice of the Learning
Organization (New York, London: Crown Business).

‘Walton, Richard E. (1985), From control to commitment
Business Review 63, n0. 2,77-84.

Wright, Patrick M. and McMahan, Gary C. (1992), Theoretical perspectives for
strategic human resource management, Journal of Management 18, no. 2, 205
320.

the workplace, Harvard

< Prevousenotar exten > 0

--- PAGE 36 ---
”

geese agi

curren 3,
Strategy Management

AXELUML (SAP AG), DOMINIC HOUTLDER (Landon asin Sct DANIEL SCHMID (SAP AG) and
MICHAEL. VON DER HORS (Car Sytem Gt)

Overview

‘This chapter presents how organizations or organizational units can successfully
plan transformation alignments and implementations. A frequent cause of failure is
an erroneous or inaccurate planning of a transformation strategy. This chapter
systematically guides through the six major steps of developing a transformation
strategy and explains the integration of essential aspects such as transformation
need, transformation readiness, stakeholder management, options for action and the
integration of a transformation plan,

Strategy management primarily addresses the “envision” phase of the
transformation lifecycle, where a strategy is developed. Strategy development refers
tothe selection of appropriate team members, collection of data, analysis of
transformation needs and readiness, design of a business vision and a business
model, and the definition of an integrated transformation plan.

1. Understand how to develop a business transformation strategy.

2. Familiarize with methods and tools for business transformation strategy
development.

4. Learn how to analyze an organization's transformation readiness.

4. Learn how to develop a solid business transformation strategy.

14.2 Hhusiness Traneformation Stratexy

‘Successful business transformation depends on a well-defined strategy. The strategy
ition phase of our methodology links the trat ion program to the
fandat in the business’ envi and corporate direction. These

changes represent the triggers for transformation.

We believe that a business transformation must have robust strategic triggers iit
isto: at all. These may relate to sustainabili ornew i
‘such as cloud computing or ubiquitous computing (Weiser, 1999), which are
facilitating completely new business models and rendering existing ones obsolete.
Intensifying global competitive pressures (Porter, 2004) (new competitors, buyers’
bargaining power, suppliers’ bargaining power, alternative products or services),
demographic trends (growth in India, South America, India, and contraction in
Europe, the USA and so on), and even failures within the enterprise can act as robust
strategie triggers for transformation.

‘Sometimes the trigger for a business transformation is not strategic, but has more
to do with the “ego” of the business leaders or key stakeholders. Ultimately, these
transformations fail for lack of market acceptance or at an even earlier stage if not
accepted by employees, In other cases, difficult personnel decisions were taken too
late — for certain key persons were not soon ‘even though,
itwas evident that they were to the busi ion due to self-
interest. Asa result, the entire transformation process took longer than planned and
the image ofthe program suffered long-term damage.

‘The step-by-step methodology described below for developing the business
transformation strategy takes into account the complexity of the transformation
itself At the same time, it makes allowance for the fact that various management

plies, such as Risk M , Value Management,
Management, Organizational Change Management, Transformational IT
Management or Competence and Training Management, are required to elaborate
the concepts involved.

‘The strategy method presented here is based on six logic steps and describes the
first phase (envision) ofthe transformation lifecycle introduced in Chapter 2, Meta
Management. Nevertheless, the strategy is subsequently being re-evaluated also in
later phases, ic. engage, transform and optimize (see Figure 3.1).

--- PAGE 37 ---
Developing the strategy provides answers to the following questions:

+ What are the business transformation drivers and how do they affect the existing
business model?

+= What options does the enterprise have to act and what isthe vi
enterprise? How should it position itself?

+ What impact will the business transformation have on the value chain? Which
parts ofthe value chain need to be optimized?

+ What is our future competitive edge and what additional value can be realized by
the business transformation?

+ What are the strategic risks associated with the various transformation options?

+ What are the technological requirements forthe future business model? What
adjustments need to be made?

+ Which partners are required to realize the business model?

+ How well is the enterprise organized and how experienced and motivated is the
‘management?

+ Does the enterprise have the experience required to adapt its processes and
‘organization in line with new challenges? How loyal are the employees?

+ How is the business transformation path structured?

33 Procedure for Developing the Business Transformation Strategy

jon for the future

‘The following methodological steps (see Figure 3.2) are intended to find the answers
tothese questions.
Each project starts by describing the subject matter and scope. In this phase, itis
to select the right and project , and ensure that all of
those involved have a common understanding of the project. A strategy phase
predominantly, but not exclusively, involves the company’s management. The next
step entails clarifying the company’s economic starting point — that is, its market
position, competitors, product and service portfolio, key revenue and expenditure, as
‘well as its strengths and weaknesses. The third step involves analyzing the acute
‘transformation need and its causes as well as the organization's readiness to

1m. Following this, the of action and future mission statement are
‘Step 5 contains a detailed description of the future business model

including the produetion and product portfolio, as well as the future core processes,

future organization and IT archit to demo the sustai of the

‘business model. Finally, a rough business transformation plan is elaborated that
includes an estimate of the costs and benefits as well as the key steps required to
‘conduct the business transformation. The six steps are explained in detail in the
following sections.

Figure 3.2 The six steps involved in developing a business transformation strategy
|. STEP ws PROMECT STARTUP

‘The importance of the Project Startup step is often underestimated, with most
project sponsors attempting to shorten it significantly. It is often argued that the
transformation strategy is important and that results are expected as quickly as
possible. Yet, just as in other projects, neglecting certain initial aspects frequently
has far-reaching consequences. Failure to include a key stakeholder or knowledge
‘expert, for example, can have a profound negative impact. For this reason, the
requirements and duties in the project startup step should be elaborated with the
‘same due care as in the other steps within the project. Figure 3.3 summarizes the key
characteristics ofthis step.

Figure 3.3 Project startup
9.gSTEP 2: AS DATA COLLECTION

A record of the initial situation is an essential prerequisite for accurate business
as the entire analysis is based on a i fon of the data related
to the factors that shane the develooment of the comoanv. This means that both the

--- PAGE 38 ---
‘external and internal factors that will affect the future “transformed” company must
‘be analyzed. The data required to do so must be of high quality; that is, it must be
both conclusive and transparent. Among the key data that must form part of this
analysis are external factors such as economic trends, the competitive environment,
developments, sustainability aspects and technology drivers, as well as specific
industry trends. In addition, the current mission statement must be scrutinized and
critically assessed. This involves questions regarding the core mission and business
and their contributions to earnings, as well as competition-related resources and
‘capabilities: management, procurement, production, sales, technology, innovation
and financing, This information is retrieved methodologically by analyzing data from
accounting, interviews with and employees, exami partners
and competitors, and including research data. The result is a holistic picture of the
‘enterprise. Figure 3.4 summarizes the key characteristics of this step.

+ erga crenen meee

(3.3.1 STEP 9: ANALYSIS OF TRANSFORMATION NEEDS AND CAUSES

Figure 3.4 Avis data collection

This is one of the most important phases in the development of a business
transformation strategy and is based on the experience that excessive business
transformation pressure does not build up overnight but can peak across various
phases. For this reason, the phase is divided into series of stages (“Lack of
transformation awareness and transparency”, “Lack of stakeholder commitment’,
“Lack of transformation strategy”, “Lack of business success” and “Lack of liquidity”)
that a proactive and healthy enterprise passes through when it “ v
and insolvent.

‘The most effective solution is to take a proactive enterprise and perform a
transformation analysis to investigate the effects that the transformation drivers
have on the enterprise as well as the associated opportunities and risks. For
‘companies in other stages, however, an analysis of the situation and crisis
assessment is an integral part of the appraisal. It is important to understand that a
sustainable transformation cannot be brought about without removing the causes of,
all crisis situations (GroB, 2009). Figure 3.5 outlines the different stages of the
transformation need, which are explained in the following.

‘Case sty example: a

We were struck by an incident at a conference with the topic of business
transformation. A delegate who was, to put it discreetly, rather stout of body rose up
and said: “Transformation never really can work. Look at me: Iam fat, but that is
ime, itis part of my identity, and I get along fine. There are always imperfections but
‘we have to live with them.”

In one sense, he has a point. All of us have imperfections and, as in the academic
notion of path dependency, certain events and experiences have led us to where we
are now. However, the reason why he is not willing to change is because the pressure
is not high enough yet. But the rejection of change is foolhardy. The dangers of
inertia are serious; from this individual's point of view, the onset of diabetes and
then progressively worse symptoms. No doubt he feels that he will be the one
‘exception to this decline, but we know without doubt that he will get progressively,
‘worse. And we know too that at some point, it will be too late for him to ever get back
to full health — the chance will have been missed. At an organizational level, the
‘complacency that sets in reduces information search, challenge withers away and
there isa to react to new ci At some point, if

transformation is introduced (usually when a crisis occurs), it is too late to restore
the health of the company fully.

Stage o

Proactive ~ The y monitors the develop {ness environment,
Cen Gn Ei ee
‘degree of flexibility in terms of the period and options available for readjustment.

Stopes
Alack of awareness and transparency on the part of management with regard to
transformation needs creates the basis for future problems such as a lack of
stakeholder co during the mation process. The

however, are not visible at this point in time.

Stage 2

--- PAGE 39 ---
‘The stakeholders are not in agreement about the future company orientation. There
are personal conflicts at top management level. Key changes in direction are blocked.
In many cases, decisions regarding personnel are not taken or the wrong personnel
‘choices for key positions are made. The i > are not
‘evident at this point in time.

= 5

ES ===

Stages
‘The company starts to lose key clients because it has not adapted to the change in
requirements. It also experiences a in sales and stocks start to

‘grow. The company responds by reducing overtime and introducing short-time
‘work. It fails to make the necessary product developments and investments in

human capital, or it makes the wrong investments, Growing dissatisfaction among,
management and employees can also give rise to a loss of core know-how. In turn,

this can benefit jon and pr /among the
Stages
Operating results are no longer reliable. In addition, the absence of positive results is
preventing the mi team from implementing key projects. Key stakel
no longer have confidence in management. Fundamental problems are ignored,
slossed over or even |. Corporate presents a major busi

ial that the values and conceptions. Any change

processes involving corporate culture must be supported by the workforce. A.
continued or progressive crisis will harm a positive corporate culture and can
significantly impede business potential.

Stopes

This stage is characterized by capital consumption and a negative cash flow. The
‘company loses credibility and experiences more and more difficulties in raising the
‘capital itso urgently needs. In turn, this frequently leads to a later bankruptcy. The
‘company culture is further damaged or even destroyed.

Asthe: y's need to transform i , 80 does the pressure to do so as
‘quickly as possible. At the same time, its scope becomes more restricted as certain
barriers arise (GroB, 1997). These become evident in Stage 4 at the latest — if not
carlier— and are generally due to a loss in confidence on the part of key customers or
‘suppliers, with the result that the company can no longer raise the financial
resources it needs. These obstacles are also referred to as market exit barriers when
the abandonment costs, for example, can no longer be funded, or also market entry
barriers if the capital for a regional expansion, for example, is lacking, The term
“employee and management barriers” (see Figure 3,6) is used to describe situations
‘where the workforce’s resistance to transformation is too high, and is primarily
‘caused by communication that is unsatisfactory or too late. Resistance to
transformation often stems from management level because the higher a person isin
the company hierarchy, the more he or she has to lose and the greater the risk of
image loss (Schein, 1995; Simon, 2007).

‘To obtain a reliable estimate of the business transformation need and elaborate
‘sustained transformation concepts, a selection of the methods and tools (presented
in Appendix A of this book) must be deployed.

Alongside the recognized analysis methods used in strategy development, which
are mainly geared to market conditions, competitors and a company’s core
‘competencies, analyses that take a closer look at an organization's transformation
readiness are becoming more and more important. These analyses are based on the

that ies with similar strategies achieve different
results even. the litions and their core ies are similar.
‘Consequently, itis important to know what factors affect the implementation of the
‘business transformation. According to our research team, these are in particular:
‘organizational readiness, process readiness and IT readiness. Even though itis
4ifficult to make these “constructs” perceptible and thus measurable, we will atempt
to establish an initial estimate here.

Figure 3.6 Transformation barriers

--- PAGE 40 ---
Organizational readiness

‘Normally, the people in an organization do not tend to change; without a willingness
to change, however, the company cannot adapt quickly enough to new challenges. It
‘goes without saying that the readiness to change ofthe workforce is directly linked to
the process and IT readiness. Itis unlikely that a company will have reached a high
level of process or IT maturity and still have a limited organizational readiness. This
may be the ease, however, if corporate culture is destroyed as a result of
mismanagement, for example, and employees consciously oppose change, as can
actually occur in one of the later stages of the transformation need.

Generally, an organization's experience and willingness with regard to
te canbe by the level of ion throughout the
‘company. Organizations with a lower transformation maturity frequently have
predominantly local centers of power. In this case, change throughout the company
is often hindered ata local level.

‘To promote collaboration in these decentralized structures, companies initially
strive to establish a centralized organization, which, once empowered, aims to

central initiatives. The prescribed or forced > generally a
meet with relatively little acceptance and their success remains limited. This
illustrates that leadership competence plays a key role in an organization's
transfor ness. If insuffici licts are either sidestepped or tackled
ina socially reduced manner.

In the first case, key decisions are frequently taken too late or not at all in order to
‘conceal the conflict. The second case results in winners and losers ~ usually dictated
by the balance of power. In turn, this ereates a continuous cycle of conflict and often
aan increasing conflict escalation.

Enterprises that already demonstrate a high degree of collaboration in certain
‘areas across the company have usually left these stages. They have established cross-
‘company organizational units (such as shared services), which provide services for
the company itself, its vendors or customers. Thinking in local or largely centralized
structures has been replaced by a form of thinking that is geared more to the
interests ofthe company as a whole. Collaboration itself is governed by uniform rules
and values. At the highest level of maturity, collaboration between local and
centralized structures is in a spirit of partnership where mutual respect is shown for
alli and decisions are based on the| tothe entire iy. Here,
‘even employees question their own working practices independently and show a
willingness to adapt to a shift in conditions. Such ies could also be described
as learning organizations with a culture that essentially regards change as something
positive and fosters trust the and the as well
as between centralized and decentralized organizational units.

‘Process readiness
‘Transformations are generally associated with significant process changes - that is,
‘changes to the way in which the company works. Experience of process management
is extremely beneficial when it comes to changing and optimizing processes. The less
process management experience a company has, the more complex and lengthy the

will be. Many locally different processes o many exceptions to the

P are an indication that a ny has insufficient p

management experience. In this case, generally no process owners have been defined
that could configure eross-departmental processes. Other indications include
‘excessive process loops, integration gaps, or undue control and approval steps. Ifa
‘company has gained a certain level of process management expertise, it may have
already standardized certain processes throughout its organization and defined
initial responsibilities for process standardization. At the next maturity level, process
‘owners have been defined for all cross-company processes and process know-how is,
‘well established throughout the company. Ifthe entire organization thinks in
processes, endeavors to improve these processes permanently and adapts itself
flexibly to new requirements, it can be regarded as having a high level of process
management maturity.

readiness
‘The ability to adapt processes flexibly to new requirements generally requires an

appropriate IT infrast . Studies have shown, that differ ®
considerably in terms of the state of development of their IT. Companies with a low

state of development frequently have many heterogeneous IT solutions that are

by a cumbersome set of In most cases, data is
Aifficult, the systems are inflexible, there are many data silos and the quality of the
data is poor. Generally, no global have been ‘Companies at a

slightly higher level of development often have cross-company applications for some
key processes and mission-critical data has been standardized throughout the
‘organization. And yet there is no corporate-wide IT strategy and still many local and
heterogeneous systems. Not until a company-wide IT strategy has been defined,
standards for systems and data established, and local standalone systems

ically replaced (where expedient and. ) can the IT infrastructure be
regarded as mature. At an extremely high IT maturity level, however, the company
has global and integrated IT-systems and uses state-of-the-art technologies
cfficiently in order to organize its IT operations in a flexible and cost-effective

--- PAGE 41 ---
transformation strategies (see Figure 3.7).

In summary, it can be held that a company’s transformation readiness is,
‘extremely important for planning a transformation. In particular, it determines the
radicalness with which a transformation can take place. In addition, the time
available for the transformation plays a major role in this context. In general, a small
interdisciplinary team is required for the analysis phase that applies the 80/20 rule
to produce reliable results in a relatively short time and with reasonable effort.

(CHALLENGES CONCERNING THE FIRS THREE STEPS: PROJECT STARTUP. AS18 DATA COLLECTION

1. Develop a common understanding of the project, create an efficient working
‘environment and compose a “winning team” (including key stakeholders and.
knowledge experts).

2. Analyze the (ex. ic trends, the competitive envi and
internal factors that will affect the future “transformed” company.

4 Perform a transformation analysis to investigate the effects that the
transformation drivers have on the enterprise as well asthe associated
‘opportunities and risks.

4- Measure the organization's willingness with regard to business transformation by
the level of collaboration.

ry atest:

‘Companies can gain an advantage ( to es with similar

transformation strategies if they consider organizational readiness, process

readiness and IT readiness during the implementation of the business
transformation),

33-4 STHPS 4 AND 5: DESION BUSINESS VISION AND BUSINESS MODE.

‘The objective here is to develop a sustainable business model for the company. This
‘entails investigating the core competencies of the company or performance
potentials of certain individuals as well as developing new core competencies.
Experience shows that companies with merely average competencies can “survive” at
best. Those that perform below average are in a constant struggle for survival.
According to and Gale (1987), ies that have undergone a. 7
transformation generally improved their quality position, won market share, and/or
‘cut production costs.

Figure 3.7 Transformation readiness
‘The aim of the: transfe istoii the value of the: i

‘which can be achieved through consolidation, risk reduction, or growth. The
‘company’s mission statement plays a key role here and should motivate employees
to implement the goals ofthe transformation. This is extremely important because
‘employees have to abandon their habits and learn new skills. It can also mean that
some of the workforce will lose their jobs. The mission statement conveys a sense or
‘orientation by giving employees an idea of how the company will look in the future
and how it will prevail in the market,

‘The mission statement includes a description of the field of operations, the
required resources and the value system of the company. The goal is to ensure that
‘employees identify with the company’s mission statement and this ean only be
achieved if the value systems do not contradict one another. The mission statement
should also be described in a tangible manner that enables it to be applied to specific
‘goals. In other words, it must provide the direction and level of difficulty for the key
‘goals. As such, the mission statement plays a central role in coordinating resources
in the context of a transformation.

‘A description of the mission statement, therefore, must encompass all ofthe key
aspects of a company (see Figure 3.8). In addition to the business areas, production
and sales program, the development of the value chain and manufacturing
penetration, as well as the required resources and corporate values have to be
described. Simon (2007) illustrates how important a mission statement can be. In
his experience, the “hidden champions of the 21st century” ~ SMEs that have
reached the leading position in their market — set themselves apart from their
‘competitors primarily due to their strategic orientation.

--- PAGE 42 ---
Acompany’s mission statement must be coherent and a successful strategy
‘ensures that the key implementing measures are coordinated effectively. This
requires a systematic consideration of the mutual dependencies involved. The
mission statement is coherent if company’s strengths are developed and its
‘weaknesses dismantled, and if strategy and organization are mutually compatible.
‘Coherence also means, however, that the strategy and expectations of the enterprise
‘environment fit.

Mission and strategy include (Doppler and Lauterburg, 1994):

+ marketing and sales methodology;

+ product and procurement processes;

+ research and development projects;

+ financing potential;

+ workforce structures;

+ supply of management and qualified personnel; and
+P system.

‘The mission statement and strategy are geared towards four key efficiency
criteria:
1. profitability;
2. sustainability;
3. market share;
‘The objective here is to identify permanent unique selling points that are perceived
and valued by the customer. These can include cost leadership through economies of
scale, efficient business processes and low-cost personnel structures.

Forming the mission statement intially entails deriving the strategic measures. A
total of five basic strategies are available here:

1. Cost ip: achieved by realizing ies of scale, reducing trar
‘costs and establishing low-cost structures in areas of fixed costs.

2. Quality leadership: differentiated by the benefits perceived by the customer.

{3 Time leadership: a particular form of tangible customer benefit is punctuality,

time savings, or the ability to develop products and bring them to the market and
‘customer more quickly (time to customer, time to production, time to market).
Innovation leadership: the ability to develop new products and services through
‘creativity and market knowledge, and thus always remain one step ahead of the
‘competition.

+5. Network and partner leadership: providing optimum coverage for and control of
the value chain through an intelligent choice of the right partners.

Nowadays, however, itis not absolutely essential for companies to focus on
‘exactly one of these strategies and then become leader. On the contrary, a better
approach isto pursue several strategic options (see Figure 3.9) and combine the
‘various strategies in such a way that this combination represents a unique selling
point in itself. The initial situation and its analysis are important factors in the choice
of strategy. Companies with a high need for transformation must determine their
strategie direction and, above all, secure their survival in the short and medium
term. In this contest, the transformation readiness (see Figure 3.7) of the
‘organization must be considered. In many cases, the transformation need is
underestimated and the transformation readiness overestimated. As a result, either
the transformation goals are too low or the organization is simply overburdened.

Figure 3.9 Strategie options

‘The development of an appropriate transformation strategy requires opposing
t rion needs with transformation readiness. The combination of both facets
leads to the definition of corresponding strategic options.
situation:

‘ongoing observation
If the pressure to transform is low and if the company has a high transformation
readiness, it should continue to monitor its business environment and operate
proactively.

a

--- PAGE 43 ---
Overcome stakeholder crisis (rf, 2004)

If both the pressure to transform and the transformation readiness are low (for
‘example, due to stakeholder conflicts), there is usually still enough time to pursue all
‘options for action. First, however, the stakeholder crisis must be overcome. This is

not always a simple undertaking — in some cases, the solution requires personnel
‘changes. From a consultant's perspective, the situation is particulary difficult ifthe
specific customer is the actual cause of the problem. Here, the solution requires
particular sensitivity. The solution should also entail a rethink of corporate

we By opt ie the company’s ability to
transform its business can be enhanced. In some eases, this can only be achieved by
appointing the best people to key positions. Once these problems have been solved,
the: ‘can opt for consolidation or a strategic realignment.

Strategic realignment (Kruger, 2000)

If the pressure to transform its business is high and the company is also able to do
0, a direct strategic realignment is also a feasible option and can be realized by
initially strengthening its core business. Suitable measures here include brand
profiling, closer positioning of core competencies in a niche market, building,
strengths and dismantling weaknesses, and leveraging environmental and market
‘opportunities, as well as technological opportunities.

A further option isto extend the ’s core business, for by offering,
‘complementary products and services or integrated solutions. The company could
also attempt to transfer its products, brand, or other areas of expertise to new
applications. This can be done, for example, by transferring core products to new
‘customers or regions or resources and capabilities to new areas of business in order
to leverage synergy effects.

Another option is to tap into new success potentials, for example, through
developing innovative products or processes, ramping up core competencies,
‘opening up to partnerships, or introducing dynamic network structures along the
value chain.

Consolidation an focus (Hammer and Champy, 2008)

If the company, however, is under a significant pressure to act and has only limited
transformation readiness, its only option for securing its survival is to overcome the
product and sales crisis by consolidating and: ing on its core business. This
initially i reducing iti the focus here is on cost efficiency.
‘The company may also have to divest itself of certain divisions that are less efficient
or sell them. Outsourcing or offshoring certain areas or individual business processes
too are potential initiatives if they produce cost savings.

(CHALLENGES CONCERNING THE DESIGN OF BUSINESS VISION AND MODEL:

1. Investigate the core competencies of the company or performance potentials of
certain individuals as well as develop new core competencies.

2. Describe the mission statement in a tangible manner that enables it to be applied
to specific goals. Provide the direction and level of difficulty forthe key goals.

{3- Consider the mutual dependencies of the key implementing measures.

4, Establish transformation strategy.

KEY MESSAGE:

Nowadays, it is not absolutely essential for companies to focus on exactly one of

these strategies and then become a leader. On the contrary, a better approach is to

pursue several strategic options and combine the various strategies in such a way

that this combination represents a unique selling point in itself.

Another option is to focus on the company’s core competencies. This ean mean o
ng on key basic req ‘or focusing on products and

markets where the prospects of success are good. However, it may also be expedient

for the company to focus on those markets or products where its competitors are

weak.

Once the company’s mission statement and transformation strategy have been
‘established, the next step is to describe its future business model. This entails the
production and sales program, the sales and marketing plans, purchasing strategy,
key research and development products, financing options, workforce planning and
‘qualification planning, as well as the IT architecture and IT planning.

{33.5 STEP 6: DEVELOP INTEGRATED TRANSFORMATION PLAN
‘Once the future business model has been developed, its implementation is planned.
before a final decision is taken by top I ion plan
contains a “high level” plan of all the necessary transformation steps, the associated
‘expenditure, an estimate of the monetary and non-monetary benefits, and the
strategic risks. At the same time, a rough description of the target organization and
the ion model during the tra ion isco ‘The transformation
plan contains elements of all the management disciplines such as Program and
Project Management, Business Process Management, Value Management,
‘Transformational IT Management, Organizational Change Management, Risk
‘Management, and Competence and Training Management. Success requires a close
<ovetailing of all these management disciplines and intensive dialogue between all of
the experts involved in planning.

--- PAGE 44 ---
{ne ousiness transtormauon pran Degins with Une GeSIgn OF te transiormauon
framework (meta level). This requires an analysis of the necessary management and.
‘communication style as well as the values of the future company. Ifthe company has
‘enough time to complete the transformation, a participatory management style that
promotes autonomy can bring about success. This also fosters identification with the

’s future mission and that its imp! tion is largely
planned and designed by the employees themselves. In turn, it promotes motivation
and entrepreneurial thinking within the company. The transformation plan should
bbe tailored to open and objective communication. This means that the reasons for
the transformation (case for action) are presented objectively and the pros and cons
are discussed. The situation does not have to be exaggerated to conjure up a crisis
situation if one does not actually exist.

Ifthe company is under considerable pressure to complete its business
transformation, it should nevertheless act with as much autonomy as possible and as
much control as necessary. It goes without saying that the most important thing is to
‘secure the company’s survival, and the measures required to do this should also be
imp! jiately. Nevertheless, it is precisely at this point that intensive

regarding the ‘and the ission st is
‘essential to signal that this approach is only temporary while itis necessary to secure
the survival ofthe organization.

Itis also important to discuss and identify the key formal and informal roles for
the transformation at an early stage. These include the top managers of the divisions
that will be affected most by the transformation and that are crucial to the
transformation. A decision should also be taken on the top sponsor (power *
promoter) ofthe tra tion and who the business transformation rs will
bbe. It is also advisable to decide on who will support the business transformation as
the expert promoter and who can be relationship promoter. The steering committee
for the transformation should also be appointed as the future decision-making body.

From a process management perspective, the key changes in the process
“organization that are required to describe the future business model should be
determined. Starting from a rather abstract level, the processes that will change are
identified and the target profile for these processes is described.

As a result, the need for change can be determined and the associated
improvement potentials derived. In addition, the measures that are required to bring
the company’s process management maturity to the level necessary for the
transformation should be planned.

Once the need for ion has been ned, the
‘management measures can be derived. Furthermore, an initial stakeholder matrix is
‘and an estimate is carried out for the key’ ders as to what extent

they will be affected directly or indirectly by the change and whether their attitude
‘towards the business transformation is positive, negative or neutral. Following this,
key change management measures are defined.

The| ated with the process: are outlined in brief and - if
possible ~ the monetary value is calculated. A monetary evaluation is not always
possible, particularly if key strategic changes are involved. Value added can also be

‘that does not result directly from the p Ne the
“objective is systematically and realistically to record and represent all ofthe key
value-added aspects of the business transformation.

A further investigation should be carried out as to whether the job requirements
associated with the process changes necessitate specialist or interdisciplinary
‘employee qualifications. An initial analysis should indicate the key qualification and
training requirements.

1. Analyze the necessary management and communication style as well as the values
of the future company.

2. Tailor the communication plan in order to enable open and obj
‘communication.

4. Discuss and identify the key formal and informal roles for the transformation at an
‘early stage.

4, Determine the key changes in the process organization that are required to
describe the future business model.

‘5 Analyze initially key qualification and training requirements.

6, Review the future IT architecture and compile an implementation plan.

Itis precisely at this point that ication regarding the and

the planned mission statement is essential to signal that this approach is necessary

to secure the survival of the organization.

Changes to process flows usually also impact the company’s IT. The future IT
architecture has already been recorded as part of the IT maturity assessment. In
addition, provisions must be made for adapting or implementing applications that
are required as a result of the process changes. For this reason, the future IT
architecture must be reviewed and an implementation plan compiled.

All of the measures are then subjected to a transformation risk assessment using
the “360” Strategic Risk Assessment” approach (see Chapter 5, Risk Management).
By applying this approach, information can be collected from a variety of

--- PAGE 45 ---
perspectives ~ from managers, employees, partners, specialists and IT departments,
‘as well as external experts. To provide greater transparency and a better overview,
the connections between strategy, processes, need for change, training requirements,
TT, benefits and risks are represented in a business transformation network.

‘34 Conctusion

‘Strategy management primarily addresses the envision phase of the transformation
lifecycle and is concerned with strategy development. In this chapter an approach
‘was presented to develop a strategy for business transformation by taking into
account the complexity of the transformation itself, The approach is based on the
following six steps:

1. Establish a “winning team” out of key stakeholders and develop a common
understanding of the project.

2, Analyze the external and internal factors that will affect the future of a company to
be transformed.

4 Investigate the effects that the transformation drivers have on the enterprise as
well as the associated opportunities and risks.

4, Design a business vision.

5. Develop a sustainable business model for the company.

6, Implement the transformation plan.

‘To obtain a reliable estimate of the busi nation need and to
sustained transformation concepts, a selection of appropriate methods and tools is.
presented briefly. Factors affecting the implementation of the business
transformation are also summarized. According to our research team, these are in
particular organizational readiness, process readiness and IT readiness.

{tis worth mentioning that an integrated transformation plan considers all BTM?
Aisciplines. Such a plan is necessary since the weakest element might determine the
‘success or the failure respectively of the business transformation. Consequently, an
interdisciplinary strategy team is also significant. Thus, a well-developed
transformation plan and strategy strongly contribute to a successful business
transformation.

ENVISIONING THE ORGANIZATION ~ AN FXCURSION BY DOMINIC HOULDER
Many transformation initiatives fail, or succeed only after a painful series of restarts
and revisions. A typical dénouement, as our case studies show,
“transformational” IT initiative running into the sand, over budget and with missing,
deliverables, in the wake of non-cooperation, rejection or even sabotage by key
stakeholders in the organization. A key insight from our case studies is that the all
the transformational initiatives need to follow, not lead, a vision of the organization.
A major souree of transformational failure is allowing organization design to become
‘consequence of the transformation process, rather than its guiding principle.

Envisioning the desi at the start of the transformation pr
‘most obviously helps to ensure buy-in from its stakeholders and eases the
subsequent task of change management. But it is crucial for a more fundamental set
‘of reasons that relate to the drivers of transformed company performance.

‘Maximizing shareholder value is a central performance objective for most
‘companies, and finance theory shows that this depends on achieving sustainable,
profitable growth. In general, the triggers for transformation are concerns about
"untapped opportunities for profitable growth that the company is unable to realize,
‘or even concerns about the drivers of profitable growth tipping into reverse.
Profitable growth depends on competitive advantage in exploring and exploiting
‘opportunities, which ~ as the strategy literature shows ~ in turn hinges on the
possession of “strategic resources” that are the building blocks for creating customer
value, and which are also scarce, and hard to imitate or substitute.

‘What exactly are these resources? In a world of increasingly knowledge-intensive
businesses these strategic resources, in plain terms, are people. To transform
performance, we need, in the end, to transform people — that is, to free individuals to
unleash their own personal competitive advantages, to do their tasks of value
creation superbly, collaborating effectively with others. The cradle for this is what we
describe as the “organization”: the structures, processes, systems, culture and
policies that when transformed will enable people to accomplish great things,
realizing opportunities and removing obstructions.

‘Transformational aspirations are often couched in terms that are fami
‘meaningful to those at the top of companies and those who advise them ~
shareholder value, market position, value chains, ecosystems, processes and the like.
But to ensure success, the envisioning phase of a transformation must ensure that all
‘of these can be translated into what the transformational change means for
individuals and their jobs, and are embedded in the definition of the target
‘organization that will make individual transformation possible.

In addition to defining the target organization ~ the people, processes and
purpose of the future ~ the envisioning phase needs to include a definition of the
‘enabling organization that will work within the organization as a whole to bring
about the transformational change.

The Target Organization
Our case studies of global businesses show a shared pattern of transformation. In the

and

--- PAGE 46 ---
tatest, most ortr ‘ese compames are ine
process with a vision of people, their jobs and organization design. But to get to that
point has, in all eases, been a struggle. The companies in our case studies have
learned the hard way that definition ofthe target organization is key to
transformational success.

In their early yeas, like many global leaders these companies were centralized
around their home countries or core businesses, where, typically, key customers,
partners, efficient capacity and expertise were all co-located. As they developed a
slobal footprint, the early organization model was one of core and periphery: the
core being the home country or primary activity, and the periphery arising from
‘emerging opportunities in more remote geographies or product markets. Power was
typically concentrated at the center, often expressed through strategic plans tightly
‘governing activities through a hierarchy.

Ina first phase of transformation, all of these companies decentralized with
increasing vigor during the 1990s. In some cases this mirrored the growing
importance of markets and supply sources beyond the traditional heartland, and the
rise to power of country managers who demanded autonomy commensurate with the
size of their budgets. In another case, decentralization mirrored the diversification of
the group across three distinct industries and 130 operating companies, leaving litle
scope for the center to act other than as a holding company. Another company in our
set of case studies decentralized under the culture shock of merger: only a loose
‘combination of two very different organizations — one a trusted, high-quality
provider, the other a low-end producer in the same sector — was possible given the
4ifferent histories, values and positions. Our case studies i anew
corporate ‘hich was conceived in the late 1990s as a
‘organizationally separate from its parent: an island of technology, with its own
partner ecosystem, product strategy and route to market, without any connection to
the parent company’s IT architecture, business processes or systems.

Allied to these company-specific factors was the rise, during the 1990s, of,

m i ng the virtues of autonomy and silty so as to
‘enable fast responses to local opportunities and laser-ike focus on local
performance. The corporate parenting role, in many cases, became one of financial
control - focused on outputs — rather than strategic planning. At local level,
heterogeneous processes, policies and systems tended to proliferate in this period, in
all the cases that we studied. Centralization was out of fashion: IBM, Japan and the
Soviet Union had all gone wrong simultaneously. This first phase of transformation
had an organizational vision at its core: setting people free from But
freedom came ata price.

Despite the virtues of local autonomy, the companies in our sample found that

ization brought with it mounting di which after 2000 — gave
rise to efforts to reverse the trend to varying degrees. From a global perspective,
there were increasing opportunities for labor cost arbitrage: consolidating activities
into low-cost locations. Consolidating hitherto local activities provided benefits that
‘went beyond cost savings: knowledge-intensive activities could be aggregated into
slobal hubs, bringing centers of expertise up to the level needed for sustainable
‘organizations meant that opportunities for synergy and knowledge transfer could be
missed. All of these factors could tip the balance of competitive advantage or
disadvantage at the business level. At the level ofthe corporation as a whole, it was
‘becoming apparent that the decentralized model could not be controlled, other than
through high-level and usually historic financial data, and this had become less
acceptable in an era of greater risk. Corporate leaders saw a greater need to move the
global enterprise more swiftly as new opportunities and threats emerged. As well as
slowing down responsiveness at a global level, the complexity of different local
P ; and policies gave rise to costs that tobe
through simplification and a measure of recentralization.

This was the backdrop to the more recent phases of transformation seen in our
‘ease studies from 2000 to 2010. But despite the obvious economic benefits to be
‘gained through recentralization, in all the cases that we studied the transformation
initiatives encountered varying degrees of organizational obstruction. Local
‘autonomy had been a hard-won prize for many senior managers. This would not be
‘given up without a compelling argument that went beyond the projections of cost
‘savings that were typical of business cases made at the time. The winning arguments
‘were those that defined an organizational vision that would enable key stakeholders
to do their jobs excellently.

In two of our case studies, for example, success in HR transformation initiatives,
after 2005 depended on the core proposition that — far from undermining the
autonomy of HR directors and their business partners ~ more effective global
collaboration and support would empower them to perform their local roles far more
effectively. The creation of global hubs as centers of excellence in learning and
development, for example, gave in-country HR directors access to world-class
resources that could not be matched locally. The global standardization of policies
‘and the centralization of administration in global delivery centers reduced
‘complexity and saved costs. But more vitally it freed HR directors to concentrate on
the core of their task — supporting the business partner with excellent HR advice.
Here, the organizational vision was one of connectivity: localizing where autonomy
‘was critical to value creation, and globalizing where scale was critical to supporting,
value creating activities at a world-class level.

--- PAGE 47 ---
ine nist, wang phase ot transt imine ms we stuaiea
‘aimed to release individuals from the old bureaucratic constraints. But over time this
‘turned out to be insufficient: the more recent phases of transformation have focused.
‘on restoring connectivity where this adds value to people's jobs, creating connected
lobal powerhouses rather than fragmented islands of activity. In this new phase of
te ion, defining the target organization ~ how vty will help
individuals rather than constrain them in old bureaucratic ways — is key to success,
‘as key stakeholders will recognize that the move away from decentralization entails a
loss of freedom. The corresponding gain needs to be clearly spelled out.
‘Transformation inevitably entails conflict: between old and new and — vitally,
‘between those whose task isto enable change, and those whose task is torun the
‘existing business, Indeed, conflict drives transformation as we have seen in the
dialectical process of change from centralized through decentralized to connected
‘organizations in our case studies. To ensure that conflict does not derail the
transformation, defining and safeguarding the enabling organization is critical,

‘The enabling organization is comprised of the people and processes that make
transformational change happen. It is much more than a project team: it owns the
transformation strategy; it may often be permanent, charged with enabling

waves of ion across functions, geographies and time.
itis a distinct organization within the company, the boundaries around it allow the
1g businesses to} running effectively with mi disturbance and

Aistraction while the transformation is in progress. Because managing conflict is a
central role for the enabling organization, its definition during the envisioning phase
needs to show how conflict will be managed.

Here are Four Key Principles
‘The first is to ensure that the enabling organization is given power and protection
from the top of the y. In our most case studies, the enabli

‘organization was directly championed by the CEO or board-level function head (in
the case of the HR transformations we studied), and those leading it reported
directly to the C-Suite. Championship entails commitment: again, in the

‘case studies we explored, the CEO or function head had identified their own,
personal success or failure with the transformation agenda. This meant “burning
bridges” through public statements of objectives, so that yielding to pressures for
delay or reversal from opposed stakeholders would carry too humiliating a personal
price.

“The second isto bring the contfcts within the boundaries of the enabling
“organization. The full range of stakeholders needs to be given a voice: not just for the
sake of buy-in but because they will represent the reality test for the definition of the
target organization and implementation pathway. The conflicts in our case studies
‘were rich sources of learning, leading to valuable breakthroughs in the context of a
lear commitment to change.

‘The third is to make the definition of the enabling organization personal.
Organizations are peopl ed through p by a purpose. Individuals
ill need to see their role in the enabling organization defined in terms of their
personal task and career. This matters, because in too many cases being part of a
transformation project has meant career death for talented, high-potential people:

‘of enmities aroused by conflict, the absence of familiar performance metrics
‘enshrining success or simply too much time spent away from running the
‘businesses, which are usually the source of recognition and power. It matters all the
more because the enabling organization will need to include some of the company’s
best people who cannot be squandered and who will need to be convinced about
their future p In effect the enablis ization needs to be asa
positive top talent career track, with well-envisioned selection criteria, metrics,
development and exit paths.

‘The fourth is to ensure that the enabling organization becomes the source of key
appointments in the target organization. f those running the businesses have had
‘experience of the transformational task, they are more likely to understand the
‘meaning of further phases and make conflict between old and new fruitful rather
than destructive. And, as we found in our ease studies, where transformation is.
becoming continuous, this provides the basis for a confident transformational
culture to permeate the target organization as it takes shape.

‘ibiography|

Buzzell, Robert D. and Gale, Bradley T. (1987), The PIMS Principles: Linking
‘Strategy to Performance (New York, London: The Free Press).

Doppler, Klaus and Lauterburg, Christoph (1994), Change-Management: Den
Unternchmenswandel Gestalten (Frankfurt/Main, New York: Campus).

Grof, Paul J. (1997), ie Prifung der Sanierungsfahigket im Rahmen der
Insolvenzordnung, Wirtschaftspriffer Kammer Mitteilungen (WPK-Sonderheft),
Dezember, 4-20.

Gro8, Paul J. (2004), Die Wahrung, Einschitzung und Beurteilung des .Going-
Concern’ in den Pflichten- und Verantwortungsrahmen von Unterneh-
‘mensfdhrung und Abschlussprifung (Teil 2), Wg — Die Wirtschaftspriffung 57,
no. 24, 1433-50.

Grof, Paul J. (2009), Wesentliche Gesichtspunkte der Erarbeitung von IDW ES 6:
zu den Hintergriinden und Neuerungen des IDW Standards: Anforderungen an

--- PAGE 48 ---
die Erstellung von Sanierungskonzepten, WPg ~ Die Wirtschaftspriifung 62, no.
5,231-45.

Hammer, Michael and Champy, James (2006), Reengineering the Corporation: A
Manifesto for Business Revolution (New York: Harper Collins).

Kriiger, Wilfried (2002), Excellence in Change: Wege zur Strategischen
Erneuerung, 2nd ed. (Wiesbaden: Gabler).

Porter, Michael E. (2004), Wie die Krifte des Wettbewerbs Strategien beeinflussen,
Harvard Business Manager, no. 10, 49-61.

‘Schein, Edgar H. (1995), Unternehmenskultur: Ein Handbuch fiir Fuhrungskrifte
(Frankfurt: Campus Verlag).

‘Simon, Hermann (2007), Hidden Champions des 21. Jahrhunderts: Die
Exfolgsstrategien Unbekannter Weltmarktfihrer (Frankfurt/Main: Campus).
‘Weiser, Mark (1999), The computer for the 21st century, ACM SIGMOBILE Mobile

Computing and Communications Review 3, 00.3, 3-1

sear

Pa a8

< Pome choter Net ehoter > (0)

--- PAGE 49 ---
=

Bezsenegoi

curren 4
Value Management

os waRD Sesto mows: C Fecal
‘Sees AC) and STEPHAN AMLING (SAP AG)

44 Overview

‘This chapter describes an approach and a set of tools and techniques that
‘organizations can use: a) to identify the potential business value of a transformation,
b) to decide whether the investment is both worthwhile and achievable, and then c)

to the ‘of value through to livery. The value
approach here is based on pr iques for identifying,
Pl and evaluating the ‘ofa business transformation. It

‘depends on the engagement of stakeholders in the preparation of the business case
and benefits plan to create the knowledge and commitment required to realize the
benefits.

‘OMHCTIVES OF THIS CHAPTER:

4. Develop an understanding of what is meant by value and benefit in the context of
business transformation.

2. Demonstrate why Value Management is an essential and continuing activity
throughout the transformation lifecycle.

43. Understand how to use the key tools and techniques of Value Management within
the four phases of envision, engage, transform and optimize.

42 Vale Management in Business Transformation
‘The management of It payofs begins prior tothe investment anu continues through post
implementation.

(Kohli and Devaraj, 2004)

‘The same is true of Value Management in all business transformations, whether or
not they are enabled by IT. It is an essential activity at all stages of the
transformation lifecycle, ifthe maximum value is to be gained from the changes.

Value does not just mean the financial benefits expected to be gained from the
‘business transformation: it i all the impr that are perceived as

by the organization’s internal and external sta ‘These can range
from measurable performance improvements to opinions about the organization,
how it conducts itself and the image it presents to the world.

Value is one of the three directional management disciplines along
‘with Strategy Management and Risk Management. Together these provide the
rationale for the business transformation and establish a realistic understanding of
‘what can be achieved and the main factors affecting success. The evidence from the
transformation case studies shows that if any of these three disciplines is overlooked
‘or done poorly, the transformation will deliver fewer benefits than anticipated or
may not even be completed.

{In business transformations over an extended period, it is likely that many aspects
ofthe value expected will be uncertain, as will be the resources and costs required to
‘complete the later phases of work. Hence it may not be possible to produce a reliable
‘business case that can enable the approval and allocation of al the funds required at
the start ofthe transformation. Organizations deal with this in a number of ways,
including:

wuthorize all the funding based on the initial estimate of value, but require regular
reappraisal of the expected value through interim reviews or “health-checks”
uring implementation;

+ accept the initial estimates, but only authorize expenditure for transformation
‘component projects which can be clearly justified, while reserving funds for later
allocation, when the further phases of work and the benefits become more obvious,
‘This implies that each component project may require a separate business case;
and

+ link approvals to the annual budget cycle, only authorizing expenditure for the
parts of the program to be undertaken in the current financial year, but including
estimates for the later work in future year financial forecasts.

Which of these or other options is chosen will largely depend on the financial
control and investment policies ofthe organization, but will also be influenced by the
predictability of economic and business conditions during the transformation
period. The approach to value management described in this chapter can be adapted
to these and other alternative ways of managing the financial risks
associated with extensive and extended transformation programs. The
transformation lifecycle is also designed to allow for these different ways of dealing
‘with the uncertainties involved.

In the envision phase the emphasis is on determining what new or additional
value the busi tion could create for the. in relation to its
‘business strategy and factors that determine success in the industry.

During the engage phase that strategic value is translated into specific benefits

--- PAGE 50 ---
‘that should accrue to the organization, its customers, trading partners and all
internal stakeholders ifthe changes proposed can be achieved successfully.

{As the transform phase evolves each of those benefits, now owned by specific
stakeholders, is tracked and reviewed to ensure that itis still achievable. Benefits
may increase in value as the effects of the changes are better understood or decrease
if prove difficult to i and lly. Iterations in the
‘overall transformation process should be, atleast in part, driven by the increased
{knowledge of the actual value that the changes can deliver. Ensuring that the value
‘expected is still achievable ifthe business context or priorities change significantly,
may even require re-envisioning the whole transformation and redefining the overall
value it is trying to achieve.

Reviewing what has been achieved and ensuring the new value can be sustained or
‘even enhanced as the changes become business as usual isa key aspect of the
‘optimize phase. This should also include an assessment of further potential benefits
that could now be achieved, but were not apparent before the changes had actually
‘been made, as well as actions to recover any benefits that have not as yet been
realized but still ean be.

‘The value approach described in this chapter is mainly derived from
the benefits management process and toolkit (Ward and Daniel, 2006) which is
already in use in many organizations around the world. In this context the definition
‘of benefits management can be adapted to be:

“The process of organizing and managing so that the potential value from a
business transformation is actually realized.”

Abenefitis as an advantage provided to specific groups or individuals. A
key premise of benefits management is that benefits only arise from changes made
by individuals or groups, and these changes must be identified and managed
successfully. “Benefits realization” and “change management” are therefore
i ly linked. Its origins are in improving the business value delivered from IT-
‘enabled transformation programs and projects, but organizations are now using i
for a wide range of large business change programs, since many of the issues are the
‘same, with or without IT. Like the meta management model, it is an iterative process
and there is a close alignment between the components of both.

Figure 4.1 shows the overall Value Management process and how the activities
relate to the four phases of the transformation lifecycle.

Figure 4.1 Phases of the BTM? Value Management discipline

ur research surveys (see Ward et al., 2007, and Ward and Daniel, 2008) have
shown that although organizations recognize the importance of these activities the
majority do not believe they carry them out very successfully and this may explain
‘why the majority of change programs fail to deliver all the value expected. Table 4.1
‘summarizes the findings from over 200 international organizations. The results
show there is much that organizations ean gain from a comprehensive value
approach applied the ion lif

‘Table 4.1 Levels of satisfaction with key Value Management activities

43 Value Identification

In the envision phase of a new business transformation initiative itis essential to
identify and agree the underlying reasons why change is necessary and why the
status quo is no longer a viable option. This requires an analysis of the external and
internal drivers affecting the organization's and future perfor oreven
its survival. This analysis i dis in Chapter 3, Strategy’ and itis
important that the resulting drivers are specifi to the organization and its situation
and they capture both the need for transformation and the timescale within which it
hhas to be accomplished.

‘The business transformation should be a response to one or more drivers,
normally formulated in outline by the executive team during development of the
business strategy, but in defining the objectives and overall scope of the
transformation the drivers need to be verified and made explicit: “Why do we need to
‘change and why now?” The drivers also need to express the expected consequences,
‘of not changing and should help define the aspects of the business that need to
change.

For example, an external driver could be:

--- PAGE 51 ---
‘Weare losing too many: vet our service levels and
expectations which our main competitors can now achieve 90 percent ofthe time.
Oran internal driver:
Our rate of new product introductions is below the level required to replace the profits from
obsolescent products inthe neat three years.

43:1 THE BUSIVESS TRANSFORMATION PORTFOLUO

Based on the drivers, the business transformation can be classified according to the
‘overall business impact expected and the nature of the business and organizational
‘changes that will be required in terms of the balance of:

a) to pr or ‘constraints, relative to
}b) innovations to create and exploit new capabilities or opportunities.

‘The different types of transformations can be classified using the portfolio matrix
shown in Figure 4.2. In this context, most transformations will be either strategic,
involving innovations, or key operational, removing constraints to remaining
‘competitive, or a combination of both. Strategic transformations may also have high
potential components ~ new options to be evaluated — and aspects of key
‘operational transformations may include elements that are clearly support ~
removing or replacing inefficient or costly processes. Some transformations will
include elements of all four types. In general, success depends on first removing the
problems and constraints, after which required innovations become easier to
‘accomplish and also further opportunities emerge (Peppard and Ward, 2005).

If the initiative is entirely support or high potential in nature it should be
managed as a discrete project, not a transformation. From experience itis important
to make this distinction to prevent escalation of non-critical initiatives to become
major organizati programs. Evidence from some of our cases, especially
in the HR area, shows how easily this can happen, when the main benefits result
from procedural efficiencies, but achieving them somehow requires the
implementation of global HR data bases.

Figure 4.2 The transformation portfolio matrix

By considering all the current and planned transformation initiatives as an
investment and change portfolio, management can begin to assess the implications
of the overall extent of the changes itis expecting to happen, the resource
‘commitments that implies and also potential risks that may be ereated. It also
‘enables priorities to be set and the relationships among the pr to be explored
to optim i ion for key avoid “digging up the
road too often” and mitigate the potential effects of organizational “change fatigue”.

4.3.8 SETTING OBJECTIVES FOR BUSINESS TRANSFORMATION
‘The objectives for any transformation or project should “paint a picture” of what the
‘world is expected to look like if itis completed successfully, expressed ina few,
preferably no more than five, concise statements that everyone involved can
understand. They should be quite specific, defining the transformation so that it
‘cannot be confused with any other initiative or project. Each objective should have
an explicit link to one or more of the strategic drivers to demonstrate why achieving
it matters.

‘They should also, as far as possible, comply with the concept of SMART
“objectives: Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant and Time-bound, but equally
importantly they should “tell a story” that makes sense to all the key stakeholders,
‘such that they want to contribute their knowledge and time. That often implies that
they can see benefits for themselves in the achievement of one or more of the
“objectives. From experience, the sequence of expressing the benefits also matters for
three main reasons:

1. Externally facing objectives that will benefit customers will have broader
‘organizational acceptance than objectives that suggest benefits to particular
internal groups.

2. Positive, creative objectives about new or better things that will happen should
‘come first, since they are more likely to encourage action than negative or

3. The story being told should be memorable, ifthe transformation is truly
‘worthwhile. And having more than five objectives makes the story too difficult for
most people to remember.

For example, in the UK NHS Long Term Conditions (eg. diabetes) Program,
restructuring the objectives to:

+ first describe how patients’ health and quality of life would improve;
+ then how services would be better organized to reduce clinical risks and be less
stressed by emergencies;

--- PAGE 52 ---
+ finally how efficiencies would be achieved to reduce waste and cope with increased
patient volumes,

led not only to more buy-in to the changes from clinicians, but also enabled more

‘Pragmatic and acceptable approaches to achieving the changes to be identified.

Although the initial business transformation objectives should be set in the
‘envision phase, by the executive management team, they frequently require some
revision during the engage phase, when both the specific benefits that can be realized
are clearer and the potential changes are understood in more detail. Ifthe objectives
‘are modified, the new ones must be agreed by all the main stakeholders and
endorsed at executive level. Setting the initial objectives also often helps identify who
the key stakeholders are and who at the executive level would be the most effective
transformation sponsor.

‘In many transformations these activities are rushed through, since itis not always
‘appreciated that in being precise and rigorous about the objectives, shared
assumptions are being explored and agreement reached concerning what the
transformation is not about, as well as what itis expected to achieve. This helps
prevent later into dis streams of activity as some st

‘or protect their own i with disregard for, or even at the
‘expense of achieving the overall value expected ~ this is known as “segmented
institutionalism” (Kumar et al., 1998), a very destructive force which explains the
underachievement of many change programs, including some of our ease studies.
‘Vagueness or ambiguity at the start leaves considerable scope for misunderstanding,
and divergence later.

43 PROM ONJECTIVES TO HENEFTTS.

As mentioned above, the benefits management rationale is that benefits and changes
are inextricably linked and have to be considered at the same time, rather than
‘reating a list of benefits and later working out how to achieve them. The business
‘ease should not only explain the value to be delivered from the investment, but also
provide adequate evidence that the value can actually be achieved.

For strategic transformations the value will result mainly from innovating in the
products or services the organization provides, or the markets and customers it
serves or by conducting business in new ways or a combination of these. In the case
of SMART, the transformation was intended to deliver all of these: a new product for
‘anew customer segment to be manufactured and sold through a new business
model.

Key operational transformations on the other hand tend to deliver value

with rationalizing or redesigning existing pr relationships and
structures to improve aspects of performance, for example, through greater
consistency, reliability, efficiency and faster response times. These in turn should
result in meeting customer expectations, achieving required margins and making
more effective use of organizational resources and capabilities.

Before a robust business case can be produced, a number of questions need to be
considered. The answers are used to help develop the investment case and also a
viable change management plan to deliver the benefits.

1. What specific benefits will be realized by particular stakeholders if each of the
investment objectives is achieved?

2. How will each benefit be measured?

‘3. Who “owns” each benefit and will be accountable for its delivery?

4. What changes are needed to achieve each benefit?

‘5. Who will be responsible for ensuring that each change is successfully made?

6, How and when can the identified changes be made?

‘The knowledge required to address these questions is unlikely to be found in any
‘one individual, but will be distributed across a number of people, who must be
Drought together normally in a workshop mode to provide the answers. A technique
to both facilitate this process and document the results is the benefits dependency
network, a template for which is shown in Figure 4.3.

43.4 BENEFITS DEPENDENCY NETWORK

Each transformation objective is examined from the perspective of different groups.
of stakeholders to identify the benefits they will gain when the objective is achieved.
‘This should be done preferably by the representatives of the group, but in some cases
it will have to be on their behalf (e.g. for customers) at the workshop. But any proxy
‘benefits should be validated with the stakeholders themselves later.
Investment objectives and benefits differ inthe following way: the objectives are
‘the overall goals or aims of the transformation, which are agreed by all relevant

In ; are adv provided to specific groups or
individuals as a result of meeting the overall objectives. Provided the benefits to
<ifferent parties do not give rise to conflict, there is no need forall stakeholders to
agree each benefit. For most transformations meeting each of the objectives will
provide benefits toa number of different stakeholders, so while an investment may
have only three or four objectives, it may well produce a large number of benefits.
‘This definition of benefits also implies two things: if no-one wants the benefit, it
does not exist and the benefit is defined by the stakeholder(s) concerned. Initially it
is important to capture the benefit in the words that the stakeholder uses, rather
than in generic terms. hath to eain the commitment to achieving it and ensure its

--- PAGE 53 ---
fully understood. For example, a busy hospital nurse would see the

benefit of a reduction of time spent on paper work as being able to spend more time
‘on patient care. If this is expressed by management as “increased nursing efficiency”,
it fails to capture the main purpose of nursing, which is to provide high-quality care.

‘Source: Reproduced with permission from Ward Joba and Daniel, Hizabeth (2006), Benefits
‘Management: Delivering Value from IS & IT Investments (Chichester: Wily)

For each benefit expressed the first test is “How will we know it has been
achieved?” or “Can it be measured?” Measures can be subjective opinions and in
some cases have to be, but it is preferable ifa more objective measure can be
identified. For benefits that survive this test the next stage isto identify the changes
that will have to be made if the benefit isto be realized. Changes can be categorized
into three types: business changes, enabling changes, and facilities and technology
(ee Figure 4:3):

Business changes are permanent changes to working practices, processes, structures
‘or relationships that are required to be implemented and sustained to deliver the
benefits.

Enabling changes are typically “one-off” changes which are prerequisites for making
the business changes or to bring the new technology or facilities into effective

tion. Enabling changes involve such tasks as defining and agreeing new job
roles and responsibilities, redesigning processes, establishing new performance
management systems and training in new business skills. One enabling change that
is often ov is“ issioning” the old p and ensuring,
practices are actually stopped. Designing a new process or business model is an
‘enabling change, whereas carrying it out to meet performance expectations is a
‘business change. There is also often some confusion between benefits and changes:
for example, “standardized or consistent processes” are often quoted as a benefit, but
in reality are just changes; the benefit could be, for example: “reduced loss of orders
due to unpredictable service levels” or “reduced staff training costs”.

possible, but normally need to be connected through other enabling or business
‘changes to deliver business benefits.

‘The network is created by working from back from the objectives through benefits
that should be gained, to the changes and new capabilities required to produce the
benefits. It is then “Joined up” from left to right to assess whether the combinations
‘of changes are sufficient to deliver the benefits and in turn the transformation
“objectives. It should clearly show the combinations of changes needed to deliver each
benefit and also all the benefits that should result from a particular change or set of
changes.

Reviewing the network may reveal further changes that are needed, or additional
benefits that could result from the changes proposed. Equally, some of the benefits
may prove not worthwhile when the changes needed to achieve them are too
difficult, costly or risky. Ifit appears that a large number of the benefits depend on
very challenging or high risk changes the network should be explored to find ways of
phasing or breaking down the changes to be more manageable or trading off some of
the benefits to reduce the risks of not achieving others.

4949 THELINTTIAL MUSINESS CASE

‘Once the network is believed to represent the main elements of the business
transformation and it appears to be feasible, a first-cut business case assessment can
be prepared by making an overall “order of magnitude” estimate of the likely costs of
the and giving executive the opportunity to decide ifit is an
investment they are willing to make to achieve the objectives. A thorough financial
‘evaluation of the benefits will be made before the final business case is prepared, as
‘will be discussed later in the chapter, but at this stage the decision is whether to
proceed further into the engage phase, not to implement. Issues of ownership and
measurement are also discussed in more detail later.

Figure 4.4 shows an example part of a network for a transformation of the
European marketing and sales activities in a paper manufacturer, associated with the
implementation of a new Customer Relationship Management (CRM) system.

--- PAGE 54 ---
Figure 4.4 Part ofa CRM-enabled transformation network

‘Source: Reproduced with permission from Peppard, Joe, Ward John and Daniel, Elizabeth (2007),
“Managing the realization of business benefits from IT investments, MIS Quarterly Executive 6,0 1,15
35.

4.6 THE PROCESS 18 AS IMPORTANT AS THE PRODUCT.

Problems ar often the result of ether a lack of common understanding ofthe purposes of changes or
sliferent perspectives on how to achieve them succesfully.
(Ramiller and Swanson, 2003)

‘The process of developing the through the involvement of the main
stakeholders in the transformation is an effective way of both gaining acceptance of

the need for change and also achieving a consensus on how the changes can be

‘accomplished. Even though the network will be revised as more detail is added

regarding the changes as the transformation proceeds, it is an effective way of
‘communicating what itis expected to involve, along with the argument as to why it is. *
needed, the objectives and the overall value expected to be realized.

‘CHALLENGES CONCERNING THE VALUE IDENTIFICATION:
1. Identify strategic drivers and establish the initial business transformation
objectives.
2. Classify the business transformation based on the strategic drivers according to
the overall business impact and contribution expected.
{3 Identify the potential benefits and main changes needed to achieve them.
4, Make an initial assessment of the transformation business case based on the
potential benefits and an estimate ofthe likely costs.
KEY MESSAGE:
If it appears that a large number of the benefits depend on very challenging or high
risk changes, the benefits dependency network should be examined to find ways of
phasing or breaking down the changes to be more manageable, or trading off some of
the less important benefits to reduce the risks of not achieving others.

4-4 Plan Benefit Realization

Identifying “owners” for both the benefits and changes is an essential aspect of the
‘engage phase and should be done before the final business case is prepared, to
increase the commitment of the main stakeholders to its contents (see Section 4.4.1).
In addition, a baseline analysis is required to establi performance levels
for each of the main benefits, so that the estimated improvement is realistic (see
Section 4.4.2). Based on these results, the final business case is prepared (see Section
4-4-3) and a benefit realization plan is created, which not only explains the required
steps and responsibilities, but also the dependencies between changes and benefits
(Gee Section 4.4.4).

4444 AOREEING OWNERSHIP OF THE ENEFTTS AND CHANGES

dentifying “owners” for both the benefits and changes is an essential aspect of the
‘engage phase and should be done before the final business case is prepared, to
increase the commitment of the main stakeholders to its contents. “Owners” are
those named individuals or job role holders who accept responsibility for doing all
they can to make the changes happen successfully, o to work with those making

to ensure that the fare achieved. Each “box” and benefit on
the network needs to have an owner or in some cases joint owners. This makes clear
the roles, responsibilities and accountability of managers and other stakeholders in
the transform phase. The network shows how those roles and responsibilities are

among st ‘groups: who ‘on whom. The boxes highlighted in
Figure 4.4 show three significant changes that were combined as one project, within
the transformation program, for which the sales director took personal,

Itis also the role of the benefit owners to describe the benefit in the business case, *
how it will be define the and decide it ean be

‘quantified and valued in advance, as described later. Equally it will be the owners’
task to measure the extent to which it has been achieved after implementation of the
relevant changes.

Having prepared an outline business case that argues that overall the business
tr ion can deliver the required tion to the business strategy at an
acceptable cost, further work is needed to refine the business case, not just to obtain
funding but as a way of gaining organizational commitment to carry out the changes.
Included in that is a baseline analysis for each of the main benefits to establish

‘current performance levels, so that the level of potential improvement is realistic and

--- PAGE 55 ---
‘can be quantified as far as possible.
This involves two main steps.

1. To establish whether there are current measures in place which provide the data
and if not, ifthey can be established at an acceptable cost to define the current
position.

2. The organization can use xrking or other data to compare its level of
performance with others to understand the degree of improvement that can
reasonably be achieved and then whether the changes proposed will be likely to
deliver that improvement. There is normally a wealth of benchmarking data
available within an industry for established processes and practices, but ifthe
‘changes are innovative or radical, it will be necessary to look at other industries or
‘carry out some form of prototype, pilot or experiment to explore and evaluate the
potential for improvement.

Itis important to establish “where we are now” in relation to each of the benefits
to help build as robust and accurate business case against which success will,
eventually be |. But also an of the: situation will
normally reveal priority areas for improvement within the transformation and help
‘schedule the changes to deliver some “quick wins”. For example in the CRM network
above, it was soon clear that as many as 70 percent of the A&P campaigns ran behind
schedule, mainly due to over-estimating resource availability. The introduction of
project planning tools quickly improved the accuracy of the. and

the problems, the delays and uncertainties were causing in both marketing and sales.

An line also i the ity ofthe ion for many
leading to greater commitment and it {in improving the

situation. Often (and some of the case studies showed this), management ambitions

for the transformation may not have much relationship to the situation in

many parts of the organization. For example in some of the global HR programs, the
value of “transparency” to make better use of organizational resources and skills did
not fit with the reality of the very limited movement of staff across different business
units or countries and the existing programs for staff development within each unit.
‘The baseline analysis will also help gain stakeholder buy-in during the engage phase,
if they believe the improvements are both worthwhile and achievable, given the
‘current situation. This can help overcome a major issue that has caused many
‘business transformations to fail, and could be observed in some of our case studies:
‘There may be a major disconnect betceen the strategic intent ofa decision t implementa system,
and the resulting aetons that must be completed
(Bancroft et al., 1998)

443 DETAILED BUSINESS CASE

In our surveys it was somewhat disturbing to find that although most organizations
require business cases to be produced for most projects and programs, especially
‘when IT expenditure is involved, many were less than satisfied that the business
‘eases had a significant influence on the success of the investment. We found that
although 96 percent of organizations develop business cases for most project
investments, 69 percent are not satisfied with the quality or usefulness of those
‘business cases. Motives for developing business cases and levels of satisfaction were
expressed as:

4. To secure the investment budget: 93 percent (63 percent were satisfied).
2. To identify all the potential benefits: 76 pereent (46 percent were satisfied).
3. To secure business commitment to implementation: 79 percent (37 percent were
satisfied).
4-Asa basis for ng the: ofthe t: 78 percent (38 per
were satisfied).

‘his suggests that the main purpose of the business case isto obtain funding and
they generally achieve that - it's only after that the problems arise. The ultimate
purpose of a business ease is to commit the organization to achieving the benefits
‘expressed in it and this does not appear to happen often enough. Other studies have
produced similar conclusions (Ross and Beath, 2002). Part ofthe reason is the
continued insistence in many organizations on a mainly or even exclusively financial
‘case. While the aim of any business case is to express as many of the benefits as
possible in financial terms, an exclusive focus on such benefits can result in a
number of issues, for example:

+ encouraging of based on inadequate
evidence;
+ making unrealistic assumptions to claim sufficient financial benefits to provide the
necessary return in relation to the costs;
+ discouraging innovative projects since the financial benefits of innovation may be
less certain;
+ focusing on purely efficiency gains from improved individual processes, but often at
the expense of overall organizational effectiveness; and
+ understating the organizational costs of implementation, such as process redesign,
restructuring and training.

‘The results of our surveys confirm that the more successful organizations include
wider range of benefits in their business cases than the less successful, especially

--- PAGE 56 ---
benefits associated with innovation and improved co-operation, both internally and =
‘with trading partners. Although these benefits are more difficult, but not impossible,

‘to quantify they provide a more complete view of the business value that many
transformations produce. The less successful organizations tend to limit the benefits,

included to those associated with efficiency improvements and cost savings. While

‘some senior managers are primarily interested in the financial benefits, many other
stakeholders, such as customers and employees can be more interested in the

“softer” or more subjective benefits. It is these benefits, rather than the financial

‘ones that are likely to lead to greater commitment from those stakeholders to

making the investment successful.

hens relied depend on fair balance of benefits the:
and its stkeholders. The issue of gain sharing is of critical importance. with no apparent benefits
to them, stakeholders ar ely 1 resist the system,

(Surison, 1996)

Having identified the potential benefits from the transformation they can be
‘analyzed and reviewed in terms of their nature and value using a structuring
“approach, whereby each benefit is described in the model shown in Figure 4.5.

SIRet, eee megs Oe gs ames ang Me

rmoaomon Suge ennene esteem tee

canaries

Figure 4.5 for: the benefits and the eave

‘Source: Reproduced with permission from Ward, John and Daniel, Hizabeth (2006), Benefits
Management: Delivering Value from IS & IT Investment (Chichester: Wile)

This framework classifies or structures the benefits according to two factors: the
type of change that gives rise to the benefit and how much is already known or can be
determined about the benefit before the investment is made — the degree of
explicitness. Each of the benefits expected is placed within one column and one row
‘of the framework. This clearly shows the mix of financial as well as more subjective
benefits and the types of business changes necessary to deliver them. This activity of
structuring or analyzing the benefits, rather than simply compiling a list of benefits,
4s found in most business cases, encourages greater discussion and evi 7
gathering about the expected benefits and helps to produce a more robust and
deliverable business ease.

‘The first stage of using the framework is to classify each expected benefit
according to the main type of change needed to realize it, as shown in the columns in
Figure 4.5. It may seem simplistic to relate each benefit to one of only three causes,
but benefits arise because:

4. the organization, its staf or trading partners can do new things, or do things in
new ways, that prior to this transformation were not possible; or

2. the organization can improve the performance of activities it must continue to do,
i.e. do things better; or

‘3 the organization can stop doing things that are no longer needed to operate the
business successfully.

Senior management is often more interested in the benefits which enable new
activities or innovations or that stop waste, rather than merely doing things better
and the purpose of most transformations should include creating new and removing
‘old practices.

Having placed each benefit in a column, the next step is to assign each benefit toa
row of the framework. An important feature of locating benefits in the rows is the
provision of evidence. Any benefit can be initially allocated to the observable
benefits row. Evidence must then be provided, by the benefit owner, to move it to the
rows above, which represent increasing levels of explicitness and knowledge about
the value of the benefit.

merle benefits
‘Some benefits can only be “measured” by opinion or judgment and they are often
described as intangible, soft or qualitative. While subjective judgments are
acceptable a clear statement of the criteria to be used to assess achievement and also
‘who is appropriate to make that judgment needs to be agreed. Assessment by
‘qualified people is often the only way of determining whether some benefits, such as
improved staff morale or customer satisfaction, have been realized. However, ifthese
have been tracked for a period of time through surveys, it may be possible actually to
‘measure, rather than merely judge the benefit. While “soft” benefits, even in total,
are unlikely to be sufficient to justify the changes, they must not be ignored or

. They may acerue to large ‘of stakeholders, whose in
are essential to the realization of the more substantial organizational

benefits.

Meanie bene

‘These are benefits where there is already an identified measure in use or where one

--- PAGE 57 ---
can be easily put in place. However, importantly, itis not possible to estimate in
‘advance how much performance will improve when the transformation is completed.
‘Wherever possible, existing measures, particularly if they are part of the

‘organizational performance measurement system or its KPIs (key performance

indicators) should be used, to ensure that achieving the benefit is seen as integral to

delivering the business strategy. As above, it will also mean that the current baseline ®
is already known. If there is no existing measure or itis deemed too difficult oF

‘expensive to set one up, then the benefit is “relegated” to observable and suitable

subjective criteria for evaluation identified.

Quentfiabe benefits

In addition to being able to measure performance before and after the investment,
‘quantifiable benefits are those where the expected size or magnitude of the
improvement can also be reliably estimated. As quantifying benefits inevitably
involves forecasting the future, the challenge is to find ways of doing this that are as
accurate and robust as possible. A number of approaches to overcoming this
‘quantification problem are discussed briefly below. From our research, one of the
‘common weaknesses of many i ‘eases isthe lack of evidence provided to
‘substantiate any assumptions made in quantifying the benefits. Without legitimate
‘quantification, it will be difficult, if not impossible to calculate a realistic financial
value. Hence the step between measurable and quantifiable is the most critical in
converting a qualitative argument to a sound economic case for investment.

Pinancal bens
‘These are benefits that can be expressed in financial terms, based on sufficient
‘evidence that shows that the stated value is likely tobe achieved. Hence all financial
benefits are the result of applying a financial value or formula to a “proven”
‘quantifiable benefit, i.e. one supported by credible evidence. The financial benefits
‘ean then be combined to calculate an overall estimated economic value of the
transformation, and in combination with the expected costs, the rate of return or
payback. While these financial evaluation techniques are well known and often used,
there is only value in them if the underlying data on which the financial calculations
are based are reliable and can be verified. Even those organizations which apply
financial appraisal techniques rigorously appreciate that basing decisions solely on
‘estimated financial values will limit the types of business investments it makes,
(Kohli and Devaraj, 2004).

‘The analysis of the BTM? case studies showed that many of the business cases
‘were quite vague, based on a benefits vision, rather than an evidence-based set of
‘benefits and an understanding of how they could be realized. There was a clear
relationship between successful completion of the business transformation and the
development of a comprehensive and rigorous investment case which demonstrated
that the value expected was achievable.

‘Matorica data and modeling or smaation

Ifa benefit results from stopping doing something, then the size ofthe expected
benefit can usually be estimated from existing internal historical data. Iti often
important to establish evidence over a relevant time period, such as a year or
through a peak in the trading eyele. However, it may only be necessary to sample the i
data to find sufficient representative evidence from which the overall value can be
extrapolated.

‘This may not be enough to determine how performance will improve when the
new capability and associated changes have been implemented. In such cases,
modeling or simulation can be useful. For example, a police force was interested in
introducing a new crime and incident recording bureau through which both the
public and police officers would report crimes and incidents, ensuring a single source
‘of complete information to reduce delays and costs in subsequent activities, such as
investigation, reporting and even prosecution. However, while they had existing data
‘about crime and incident patterns, they did not know how this would translate into
«alls to the new bureau. Simulation software provided by the vendor of the call
center system allowed them to model likely call patterns based upon their existing,
knowledge of crime and incident occurrences. Combined with case history data, the
‘costs that could be avoided were estimated.

Lnenchmarking and reference sien
Benchmarking is commonly used in a number of industries as the starting point for
improvement programs and can be a valuable approach to quantifying benefits, in
relation to “best practices” in the industry, or in comparable processes in other
industries. Some examples of benchmarking approaches are shown in Figure 4.6.
Although benchmarking is helpful for identifying potential improvements to
‘established processes and practices for obvious reasons, it is less useful when trying
to quantify the benefits from innovations. Unless the innovation is the first of its
kind in the industry, there will be some “reference” or exemplar sites where similar
‘changes have been made. Assuming information can be obtained (legally, itis also
important to understand where the organization started from, in performance terms,
in order to assess how much of the improvement they have achieved is relevant and
feasible. Of course, where organizations believe they are achieving an advantage
from an innovation, it is unlikely that they will be willing to share all the secrets of
their success, so the information gained from or about them has to be treated with a
degree of caution.

--- PAGE 58 ---
to prac R
Pilot projects may be necessary to identify, confirm and evaluate the benefits that
‘ean be achieved from new business models and ways of working, To provide
convincing evidence requires studying a comparable control group still working in
the old way. In the CRM example shown above, the new processes for campaign
management and sales follow up were trialed on a campaign in one market, while the
‘same campaign was run traditionally in another, similar sized market. The new
processes delivered nearly 50 percent higher sales, which, even allowing for the
additional enthusiasm in the tral site (known as the “Hawthorne effect”) indicated
that a 20-30 percent increase would be achievable for most campaigns.
In addition to the benefits a full business case must obviously include all costs
and an ‘of the associated risks. It is important toi ng costs
associated with the outcome of the transformation as well as the one-off costs
associated with new technology and achieving the changes. Generally the majority of
technology and facilities costs are relatively easy to estimate, even if sometimes
4ifficult to control during implementation. However, the costs associated with
‘making business and organizational changes are less predictable and are often either
imated or not at all. From our evidence, it is the cost of these
changes, particularly when they affect a wide range of stakeholders that leads to the
significant cost overruns often reported for large transformations, even though
nearly 60 percent of our survey respondents believed they were generally good at
estimating costs.
Interms of the investment risks, there are well-established ways of
mati ial and technical risks. However, itis often the willingness or ability
‘ofthe staff within the organization to make the business or organizational changes
‘that prevents the benefits from being achieved. This is where the development of the
benefits dependency network provides a means of assessing not just overall project
risk but risk in relation to each benefit. By considering the difficulty of making each
‘change required to deliver a particular benefit, the risks of not achieving the business
‘ease can be assessed. The value of the particular benefit at risk will then suggest the
importance of taking action to avoid or mitigate the risk. Risk management is
discussed in depth in the next chapter.
Overall the business case should “tell a story” of what is expected to happen and
‘why, starting with the strategic drivers, leading to the transformation objectives,
then the detailed benefits, the major changes involved and expected costs, plus an
understanding of the risks which need to be managed to avoid the transformation
delivering less than expected or even fail altogether.

44-4 PLANNING HENEFTT REALIZATION s

‘The final business ease should be supported by a benefit realization plan which
explains not only the activities, responsibilities, timescales and resources needed,
‘but also the relationships and dependencies between the changes and benefits. It
should contain:

+2 full description of each of the benefits and changes, with responsibility and
actions needed for delivery clearly defined and agreed;

+ measures forall the benefits and, where appropriate, estimates of the expected
value of each benefit at the end of the transformation and when the benefit should
be realized;

+ measurements to establish the current baseline at the start of the investment;

+ agreed ownership of all the changes and actions in place to address all the
stakeholder issues that may affect the achievement of the changes (the

of stakeholder i and issues is di ‘in Chapter 8,
Organizational Change Management);

+ the evidence or criteria to be used to assess whether each change has been
successfully carried out; and

+ complete and fully documented benefits dependency network to show all the
benefit and change relationships.

‘The plan is produced by analyzing the benefits dependency network — almost all,
the information needed is on the network. As well as describing the activities on the
network and their relationships, itis valuable to look at the benefit streams: sets of
‘and benefits that can be and. without depending on other
so that early ‘or “auick wins” can be: Optimizing this mav

--- PAGE 59 ---
‘mean breaking down some of the larger changes to create opportunities for earlier
realization of some benefits. These sets of related changes and benefits can become
either discrete phases or even sub-projects within the transformation.

5 of benefit and ‘templates used by one organization, that has
adopted the benefits management approach can be found in Appendix B of the
handbook. They also include columns to accommodate revisions as the
transformation proceeds. Further columns can be added for recording the actual
achievements. These will ater be input to the benefit review process described in
Section 4.5.2.

The; of the real plans are normally developed and
finalized during the engage phase, in a series of workshops attended by those
ponsible for and benefits. Me and criteria will

‘be also agreed, along with resources required and working arrangements among the
stakeholders involved and also technical professionals and other experts and
‘specialists, such as HR managers, who can undertake some of the change activities.

Each change or benefit item in the plan should also identify if there are any key
milestones when its achievability needs to be reviewed, either due to the need to
validate assumptions or test whether intended changes can actually be made
successfully. Also, if any events or issues external to the program are likely to affect
the: ~ for example, ions or acquisitions ~ changes in the market
conditions or the consequences of other change initiatives become known. Some of
the changes will probably be major projects in themselves which deliver some of the
benefits much earlier than the overall transformation. Achievement of these may
suggest better ways of making subsequent changes and could either increase or
decrease the potential value of later benefits.

In cases of extensive but simil across a number of business units or
locations, the plan could include one or more pilot implementations to test whether
the changes actually work and deliver the expected benefits. In a number of our case
studies this happened, but in some the selected pilots were not representative of the
‘overall organization and the results were not convincing, leading to reduced
‘commitment elsewhere. This was particularly the case when the pilot was in a small,
unit or one where the changes were simpler and benefits more limited than in a
larger more complex business unit.

However, in the Hilti case (vom Brocke, Petry and Schmiede, 2011) the piloting
not only showed how the changes and most of the benefits could be achieved, but
also enabled an improved implementation plan for the roll-out across the
‘organization, to deliver more customer benefits than originally anticipated.

‘CHALLENGES CONCERNING THE PLANNING BENEFTT REALIZATION:

4. Assigning ownership to each change and benefit on the benefits dependency
network.

2. Agree to measurements and success criteria for all benefits and changes and
actions and resources required to implement them.

43. Base the quantification and value of benefits on an accurate current baseline and
‘evidence from sources such as historical data, benchmarking or reference sites.

4- Consider a pilot implementation to test whether the changes actually work and
deliver the benefits (optional).

5. Identify all costs and risks and prepare a rigorous, detailed business case,
‘supported by a benefit realization plan, to which the main stakeholders have
signed up.

KEY MESSAGE

‘Some of the changes will probably be major projects in themselves which deliver

‘some of the benefits much earlier than the overall business transformation.

Achievement of these may suggest better ways of making subsequent changes and

‘could either increase or decrease the potential value of later benefits.

4.5 Fxecuting the Benefits Plan and Evaluating Results

‘The benefits plan is a component of the overall program plan for the business
transformation. During the Transform phase, the benefits plan is executed and
monitored (Section 4.5.1) and the achievement or otherwise of the benefits reviewed

c 4.5.2) by the program ‘and managers of the co it projects,
lead stakeholders and the governance group.’

45:4 EXECUTING THE RENEYTIS PLAN

‘The benefits plan should be maintained and updated as an integral part of the
transformation plan. Both the benefits dependency network and the detail in the
benefits and change templates should reflect the current expectations of the
Program.

As the transformation evolves, inevitably the plans will have to change, due to
‘changes in resources and personnel plus unexpected events or problems that have to
‘be assessed and dealt with. Therefore it is wise to plan for one or more “value
reviews” or “health-checks” to revalidate the transformation business case, once
‘some of the more important changes have be carried out or if the business case has
become less valid, in some aspects, due to issues or developments elsewhere. The
starting point for any interim review should be the existing benefits plan and ask:
“What is the effect on the benefits and our ability to achieve them?” This should

--- PAGE 60 ---
[cuoue tat aucun ances are apprUpaaue wo He Uvcraat atnnonaatnoH UUELLED,
rather than just the immediate management or business problem and that all the
stakeholders undi the implications and are i in decisions to
change the plan.
‘A major pharmaceutical company introduced “benefit health-checks” in 2008 for
major IT-enabled change projects in the R&D function. On average this increased
the benefits achieved, from new knowledge gained from the early changes, and also
reduced timescales and costs for delivering other benefits through revisions to the
‘change plans. The process also uncovered problems in some projects which resulted
in scope reduction and even abandonment, when it was clear few, ifany benefits
‘would now be obtained.

While it is desirable to check the progress of activities affecting all the benefits, it
is essential to understand whether the key or headline benefits ~ those few, maybe
3-6, against which the success ofthe transformation will eventually be judged, are
still achievable. Some should be the main financial benefits, but others that affect the
organization's KPIs are often equally important and a balanced scorecard approach
‘or dashboard is usually helpful in tracking overall progress against the value
‘expected. Costs will normally be tracked carefully, but parallel tracking of the
‘benefits provides executive management with a holistic, balanced view of the
transformation’s progress, so that they can decide to intervene ifthe pattern is

‘causing concern.

When the main and value from the business t ion will be
should be explicit dates in the ion plan. In a large: ion project
several evaluation reviews will be necessary, as significant benefits should accrue
Jong before itis completed. In one case we studied, the second and third phases of a
major transformation were dependent for funding on savings made in the first phase
(Rayner etal, 2001). One of the factors that differentiates successful from less
‘successful companies in their programs and projects is the management resolve to
evaluate them after completion. As shown in Table 4.1, most organizations we
surveyed considered this a weakness, but over 70 percent of the more successful at
least carried out reviews, compared with under 40 percent of the less successful.
Given that nearly 60 percent of the less successful ones admitted overstating the
‘benefits to gain investment approval, these variations are not really surprising.

Once sets of related technology or facilities have been established and the
‘enabling and business changes implemented, there should be a formal review of
‘what has and has not been achieved. This is aimed at maximizing the benefits gained
from the particular investment and increasing the benefits from future investments.
As suggested earlier interim reviews should be carried out at key points during the
program, to help steer it towards success, but also because waiting until the end
reduces the scope for learning how to improve the implementation. The purposes of
evaluation reviews involve both assessment of the results ofthe transformation itself
‘and organizational learning as shown in Figure 4.7.

igure 4.7 Key elements ofthe review process

‘Source: Adapted with permission from Ward, John, and Danie, Hizabeth (2006), Benefits Management:
Delivering Value from IS & IT Investments (Chichester: Wiley)

‘The evaluation should involve all key stakeholders and focus on what has been
achieved, what has not (or not yet) been achieved and why, and identify further
action needed to deliver outstanding benefits, if possible. The reasons for lack of
benefit delivery may be due to misjudgments or lack of knowledge in preparing the
benefits plan or problems during its execution. Another aspect of this review is to
identify any unexpected benefits that have arisen and understand how they came
about. This again may prove valuable input to improve the early stages of future
projects. Equally any “disbenefits” or negative consequences that resulted should be
‘understood in order take action to overcome them, if that is possible, and to avoid
them in future projects. A structure for such a review meeting and the main
deliverables is suggested in Figure 4.8.

Itis worth stating that any post-implementation review should not become a
“witchhunt”; it must be an objective process with future improvements in mind, not
away of allocating blame for past failures. Ifit is seen as a negative process, honest
appraisal and a constructive critique of what has happened become impossible and
the whole process falls into disrepute or is not carried out.

--- PAGE 61 ---
Figure 4.8 Model of the review process inputs and outputs,

‘Source: Reproduced with permission frm Ward John and Daniel, Hizabeth (2006), Benefits
Delivering Value from IS & IT (Chichester: Wiley)

EVALUATING THE RESULTS:

1. Carry out interim reviews or health-checks to ensure activities affecting benefits
achievement are progressing satisfactorily.

2. Check if the key o headline benefits are still achievable or have increased or
decreased as the transformation has evolved.

13: Review the transformation business case if significant to the
risks or costs invalidate the existing investment justification,

4, Identify any unexpected benefits that have arisen and understand how they came
bout and also the reasons for any expected benefits not being achieved.

Ney Mess

‘The reasons for lack of benefit delivery may be due to misjudgments or lack of

knowledge in preparing the benefits plan, problems during its execution or changes

‘outside the transformation that made them unachievable.

4.6 Establishing the Potential for Purther Benefits

Having reviewed what has happened, it is equally important to consider if further
improvements are now possible following the completion of the business
‘transformation (or major part of it), in the light of the new levels of business
performance that have been achieved (Section 4.6.1) and ensure that benefits
achieved are sustained over time (Section 4.6.2).

4:6: IDEESTHFYING FURTHER BENEFITS

‘This should be a creative process involving the main stakeholders and any others
‘who may be able to contribute, using the increased knowledge now available to
identify new opportunities and the benefits they offer. These benefits may be
achievable through additional business changes alone or may require more
technology investment. Any worthwhile benefit opportunities should result in

ions to considering. there isa business case for further i

Alternatively further can often be achieved by tuning pr adjusting
how activities are performed or additional training and can be considered as
business as usual.

If this is not done, many available benefits may be overlooked. For maximum
‘value to be gained from the transformation, benefit identification should be a
continuing process from which other beneficial change projects may be defined. As
‘suggested in Figures 4.7 and 4.8, this exploration should initially be part of the
review process, since the knowledgeable stakeholders are together and it encourages
forward thinking rather than merely contemplating the past.

46:2 ONGOING MONITORING OF TIE BENETS

{In most cases the review and assessment of potential further benefits is not just a
‘one-off process, since it results in actions to recover benefits or realize new ones and
this may take some months after implementation to complete. Equally some benefits
‘can decay after implementation, especially if, over time, old practices creep back in
‘or new problems emerge. Ensuring they are sustained is part of the optimize phase
and monitoring the ongoing performance levels is necessary, for up to 12 months in
some cases.

Ina multi-year transformation, some aspects will be in the optimize phase while
‘others are still being implemented, and benefits in some areas will be cumulative or
additive as further changes are completed. At the same time some changes may not
produce the benefits expected, for explicable reasons. For a large transformation it is

to describe the annual values of benefits ‘and then review the
‘actual benefits delivered in that year. This can be particularly important for financial
benefits that have been included in future years’ budgets. In some organizations this
is done at the project or program portfolio level to assess how well both decision
making and implementation are being accomplished.

Figure 4.9 combines the main rationales for the stages and types of reviews often
needed to monitor overall performance.

--- PAGE 62 ---
Figure 4.9 Ongoing reviews of value delivered

‘Source: Adapted with permission from Ward, John and Daniel, Hizabeth (2006), Benefits Management:
Delivering Value from IS & IT Investments (Chichester: Wile)

‘CHALLENGES CONCERNING THE ESTABLISHDIENT OF POTENTIAL FOR FURTHER BENEFITS:

1. Identify the further improvements now possible in the light of the new levels of
‘business performance that have been achieved.

2. Continue to monitor the benefits achieved to ensure they are sustained over time.

Fora large transformation it may be advisable to describe the annual values of

benefits expected and then review the actual benefits delivered in that year.

47 Conclusion

‘Value management is a continuous activity throughout the transformation lifecycle,
not just something which is done to develop the business case or justify the
investment costs. Our research and working with organizations over the last 15 years
hhas shown that success in delivering value from projects and transformations can be
increased by:

+ having comprehensive and rigorous business cases;

+ adopting a value management process which includes benefit realization plans;
+ linking the benefits to the specific changes needed to deliver them;

+ agreeing ownership of the benefits and changes; and

+ carrying out post-implementation reviews of benefits achieved.

‘The credibility ofthe story that the business case tells about why change is
needed, the benefits the organization and each stakeholder will gain and how those
‘can be realized, will influence the level of commitment of those involved. The case
studies also show the clarity ofthe objectives and benefits that are expected has a
significant influence on the success of the business transformation and even on
‘whether it will be completed. In a number of the cases the value was vague, often
rather generic and not specific to the situation of the organization, leading to a lack
of credibility in the: for ‘or lack of interest and engagement by
‘some important stakeholders. In some of the cases, although the business case was
attractive, there was little evidence presented to demonstrate how the benefits
described could be achieved.

Value does not imply financial value alone; it includes all the improvements that
are perceived as beneficial by both internal and external stakeholders. Some are able
to be estimated in advance in terms of the level of improvement that can be achieved
from the intended changes. That relies on having a known baseline at the start of the
transformation plus evidence that justifies the estimate of the future level of.
achievement. Other cannot be forecast, but itis still important to measure them after
the changes have been made. In fact, the certainty of post implementation review of
the value eventually achieved is an organizational discipline that encourages rigor in
formulating and implementing the benefits realization plan.

Bibliography,

Bancroft, Nancy H., Seip, Henning and Sprengel, Andrea (1998), Implementing SAP
R/3: How to Introduce a Large System into a Large Organization, and ed.
(Greenwich, CT, USA: Manning Publications).

Jarison, Jaak (1996), Toward more effective management of information technology
benefits, The Journal of Strategic Information Systems 5, no. 4, 263-74.

Kohli, Rajiv and Devaraj, Sarv (2004), Realizing business value of information
technology i ts: an organizational process, MIS Quarterly E 3
10, 1, 55-70.

Kumar, Kuldeep, van Dissel, Han G. and Biell, Paola (1998), The Merchant of Prato
revisited: toward a third rationality of information systems, MIS Quarterly 22,
no, 2, 199-226.

Peppard, Joe and Ward, John (2005), Unlocking sustained business value from IT
investments, California Management Review 48, n0. 1, 52-70.

Peppard, Joe, Ward, John and Daniel, Elizabeth (2007), Managing the realization of.
business benefits from IT investments, MIS Quarterly Executive 6, no. 1, 15-25.

Ramiller, Neil C. and Swanson, E. Burton (2003), Whether, when, and how to

with informati : what do empirical studies tell us?,

Information Systems Working Paper, The Anderson School at UCLA.

Rayner, Paul, Ward, John and Franken, Arnoud (2011), Project portfol
‘management in the IT industry: how an IT company successfully took its own
medicine, Cranfield University, School of Management.

Ross, Jeanne W. and Beath, Cynthia M. (2002), Beyond the business case: new
approaches to IT investment (2002), MIT Sloan Management Review 43, n0. 2,
5-9.

vom Brocke, Jan, Petry, Martin, Schmiede, Theresa (2011), How Hilti Masters
‘Transformation, 360° ~ The Business Transformation, June, no. 1, 38—
51. Ward, John and Daniel, Elizabeth (2006), Benefits Management: Delivering
Value from IS & IT Investments (Chichester: Wiley).

Ward, John and Daniel, Elizabeth (2008), Increasing your odds: creating better
business cases, Cutter Benchmarking Review 18, no.1.

--- PAGE 63 ---
‘Ward, John, Hertogh, Steven and Viaene, Stiin (2007), Managing benefits from
18/TT investments: an empirical investigation into current practice, in 4oth

Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS'07): 206a. *
: and of the ie in depth in Chapter 10,
Program and Project Management.

pcan ns

(ssdesomant Alok Rabes Taman Maroanen Mtaloy abe Minera < Preoue chapter extent >

--- PAGE 64 ---
"

Bes eng oi

curren 5

Risk Management

[RENT FURNEALX Gast Univ, Sc Desire and entice), TOMASZJANASZ(SAP AD).
“THOMAS SCHILD (SA AG and ROBERTO KLIMMIK Serer Beara)

58 Overview
Risk M; provides fu jdance to the planning, development and
effective execution of a business transformation. Hence, itis essential that busi

transformation managers seek to manage those risks that relate to the process of
transforming an organization towards a desired future state and those risks that
relate more to the possibility that this desired state becomes either obsolete or sub-
‘optimal. In other words, effective risk management is needed to minimize the
‘unpredictability associated with transformation related initiatives. Moreover,
‘successful business transformation requires that sufficient attention be directed.
towards managing different categories of risks at both the strategic and operational
levels

Organizations need to go beyond simply addressing risks that are inherent to an
individual business transformation since, in isolation, such aggregation provides
‘only limited guidance to those seeking to understand and manage the complex
interdependencies that surround strategic risks. Such risks have been found to

present some of the largest to 1 business transformation,
‘Consequently, effectively managing strategic risks supports successful business
transformation.

Risk management within BTM? involves the following steps:

4. Envision: 360° strategic risk assessment addresses the identification and
assessment of strategic risks. Risks can be identified using such tools as scenario
planning. The outcome ofthis step is a strategic risk map with a consistent and
aligned 360° view on key strategic risks for the business transformation.

2. Engage: Risk analysis and Risk response plan involves the assessment of
underlying business cases of proposed transformations in light of potential risks.
Generally speaking, the impact of risks is assessed based on cost, schedule and
deliverables.

43. Transform: Execute risk response plan and monitor risks refer to the monitoring
‘of the emergence of risk events or execution of planned responses. During this
‘step a status report of risks is provided to the steering committee of the
transformation program and program reviews are conducted at set milestones.

4- Optimize: Review and evaluate risks encompasses inspection and improvement of
risks and opportunity identification. This step is most likely to be successful if an
‘open risk dialogue is created between management and the board and critical
alignments of strategy development and execution are monitored.

‘OMJECTIVES OF THIS CHAPTER:

4. Develop an understanding of different categories of risk.

2. Conceive Risk Management as a basis for managing risks across all management
Aisciplines of BTM2.

{3 Understand how to employ Risk Management within the four phases of envision,
engage, transform and optimize.

5.2 Risk Management in Business Transformation

Risk ean be defined as any uncertainty surrounding future outcomes that might have
positive or negative implications for these outcomes (see, for example, International
‘Standards Organization, 2009, or Project Management Institute, 2004). As such,
risks can simultaneously represent a threat to the success of a business
transformation and an opportunity to enhance or extend the value of such a
transformation. Given that risks arise when uncertainty is present, risks are both

lespread and of fu importance to jonal efforts. Varying,
degrees of risks are encountered in almost every initiative that an organization might
undertake, Effective risk management is, therefore, essential to the success of these
initiatives, particularly when they are as broad and complex in their scope as
business transformation,

[S21 CLASSIFICATION OF RISKS
Risks can be classified as strategic or operational. Effectively managing strategic
and operational risks require that the differences between the two categories is
clearly understood. Examples for each of these two risk categories are provided in
Table 5.1.

‘The first category, strategic risk, is represented by those risks that are inherent to
‘an organization's strategy formulation and execution. These risks typically relate to
assumptions and decisions that have been made concerning markets, customers,
products, mergers, acquisitions and other top-line management activities. Strategic
risks include external risk drivers, such as technology shifts, changes in customer
ability af comnany to achieve stratesie ahiectives an 2 twn- ta ive-vear harizan

--- PAGE 65 ---
Strategic risk can be further divided into internal and external risks. Internal
risks are inherent to a company's strategy formulation and execution and they thus
relate to decisions about markets, customers, products, M&A activity and other top-
line business decisions. External risks lie outside of “normal” expectations and thus
appear rapidly and with little warning, The relevance of an external risk to a business
‘transformation is dependent on the extent to which it will impact the likely future
assumed in the planning and development of the business transformation. Thus, for
‘example, the appearance of a disruptive technology might only be considered a
relevant risk ifthe benefits of a business transformation are dependent on the
continued dominance of an alternative to this technology. Although the impact of an
‘external risk and the likelihood that it will occur can be extremely difficult to
‘quantify, in practical terms the extent to which risks can be quantified falls on a
continuum that ranges from wholly ifiable to wholly quantifiable. External
risks can then be understood as those risks such as economic turmoil and the
‘breakdown of entrenched political regimes that fall toward the less quantifiable end
of this continuum.

‘Table 5.1 Examples of different strategic and operational risks

‘Strategle risks

“+ Market risk divers

‘+ Technology risk drivers

|© Regulatory and compliance rik drivers

‘+ Macro economic risk drivers
Social sk drives

1+ Enviconmental rik drivers

© Geopolitical risk drivers

‘The second category, operational risk, focuses primarily on risks that have the
potential to impede the extent to which a specific business transformation achieves
its stated objectives. On the operational level, risk management helps to ensure that
‘particular business transformation initiative takes an organization to where it had
planned to be. Operational risk management aims to provide direct, ongoing support
to the routine execution of business transformation initiatives rather than providing
‘guidance to their overall direction. Operational risks can thus be more narrowly
understood as any uncertainty that could impact the likelihood that a specific
‘business transformation will be successful.

In many ways, the difference between strategic and operational risk relates to a
distinction that is widely made between business and project risk (Office of
Government Commerce, 2009). While strategic risks are primarily related to
‘business risk, risks on the operational level more typically relate to risks that are
inherent to specific business transformations. Despite the somewhat narrower
perspective associated with operational, it should be clear that strategic and
‘operational risks are closely inked and, asa result, share many of the same
Processes.

Given the narrower focus of operational risks, it becomes clear why efforts to
manage such risk tend to focus more on minimizing unwanted outcomes over
identifying and pursuing opportunities. At the project or program level itis usually
far more important to deliver on specific objectives than itis to pursue
‘enhancements and extensions to these objectives. Project and program managers
«will, for the most part, be primarily concerned with risks at the operational level
‘while business transformation managers will need to maintain a much broader focus
‘on risks that encompasses strategic and operational risks.

Businesses operate in a highly interconnected environment that is regularly subject,
to rapid, unexpected change. Major events that were once thought to be highly
unlikely or relatively isolated in their impact have now been observed to occur with
some degree of frequency and to have globally significant consequences. This has
challenged organizations to manage risk more effectively, particularly at the strategic
level. Effectively managing busi tion now requires an organization to
‘g0 beyond simply aggregating the operational risks of individual business
transformation programs. In isolation, such aggregation provides only limited
‘guidance to those seeking to understand and manage the complex interdependencies
that surround strategic risks. Given that these risks have been found to represent
some of the largest threats to successful business transformation, the past decade
thas witnessed a fundamental shift in our understanding of business transformation
risk and how this risk should be managed. In particular, there has been a shift away

a eee traninwel ob .

--- PAGE 66 ---
toward an understanding that more fully encompasses operational and strategic
perspectives (see Figure 5.1).

Figure 5.1 Maturation of Risk Management

‘Strategic risk management provides a comprehensive risk management
framework that extends from the initial conceptualization of a business
‘transformation through to the program that is developed to deliver planned benefits
‘and the individual projects ereated to implement this program. A key advantage of
strategic risk management is the ability to discover important risks that can impede
‘an organization's efforts to fulfill short- and long-term strategies.

(Over the past several decades numerous processes for managing risks have been
developed and used to support the management of almost every conceivable form of
‘organizational initiative. This has resulted in the incorporation of best practice risk

management p to widely ional standards and
bodies of knowledge.’ Despite the diversity of perspectives that have been offered
and i ive of whether the is ison strategic or operational risk, risk

management consists in essence, of four key steps: the identification of relevant
risks, analysis and evaluation of relevant risks to determine their significance,
development of a plan to respond to those risks considered particularly significant,
‘and ongoing monitoring and reporting of risk-related issues (see Figure 5,2).

‘These four steps are supported by an overarching risk management plan or
framework and by efforts to review and improve the risk management process on an

Dasis. A risk t plan or policy provides the overarching,
‘organizational framework for conducting risk management. This framework helps to
‘such things as an organization's approach to managing risk, its tolerance

for risk, the scope of contingency planning, how much contingency will be allocated
to address risks, how contingency resources are allocated, the requisite reporting and
monitoring of risk, and the relative importance of parameters such as risk impact
and probability of occurrence. An effective risk management framework offers an
‘organization a number of important benefits including greater transparency
surrounding the risks that are being faced, opportunities to adapt quickly to

ing ci improved decision making and greater consistency across
business transformation initiatives that helps to facilitate rapid redeployment of
‘organizational talent.

Figure 5.2 The Risk Management process

153 Risk Management in BTM

Economic theory argues that risk or uncertainty must be present in order to achieve
positive value and that the amount of value extracted is proportional to the level of
risk that is present. Risk management as part of BTM? seeks to take advantage of
this principle by systematically identifying, assessing, responding to and monitoring,
the threats and opportunities that surround business transformation initiatives.
Emphasis centers primarily on those external risks and opportunities that can
impact the mid- to long-term business value that business transformations yield.
Unlike traditional risk management approaches, the focus of the strategic
perspective within BTM? risk management is of particular importance and
distinguishes the BTM? approach from other methodologies. Risk Management in
BTM? offers a wider focus than traditional risk management as it tries to manage
risks enterprise wide in an integrated and collaborative fashion, taking into account
the basic idea that many risks are connected within and sometimes beyond the
borders of an enterprise.

Effective strategy execution has remained a top priority for senior management even,
after the recent financial crisis and economic downturn. However, while
‘organizations may have had risk management processes, they did not always adjust
strategies when new risks emerged or risk levels changed. In addition, not all
‘organizations included the consideration of risks and how they would be managed in
setting strategic and operating plans. To overcome these traditional barriers,

--- PAGE 67 ---
‘organizations need to ensure that Strategy Management and Kisk Management
‘operate hand in hand. Without aligning the two, businesses are limiting the full
‘potential oftheir strategies as they are executing without any knowledge of potential
threats that could inhibit their success. A strategy developed and executed without
‘understanding the associated risks is inherently flawed. To combine strategy and
risk, tohhave a tray risk-intelligent business strategy, organizations must clearly
understand their exposure to both strategic risk and execution risk. BTM?, as a
holistic and integrative methodology, provides this connection between the risk
management discipline and the strategic perspective.

Within the context of BTM2, strategic risk management is primarily concerned.
‘with identifying broad-based, externally-driven risks and exploring the implications
that these risks have for the suitability of business transformation plans. The process
of strategic risk management thus helps to ensure that transformation initiatives are
pursued in alignment with business objectives while still considering the possibility
that chosen transformations may prove ill-suited to future needs. In essence,

strategic risk sment in BTM? on ing whether an is
pursuing business transformations that move it in directions that will be appropriate
tothe future.

In the business transformation approach, risk management is tightly integrated with
the other management disciplines of BTM?, Risks need to be identified for every
individual management discipline (see Figure 5,3). The responsibility of risk
‘management is to ensure that all disciplines are executed and implemented as
anticipated. For example, the discipline of Competence and Training Management
has to ensure an appropriate skill set within the project team.

Figure 5.3 Manifestation of Risk Management in BTM?

Risk management within BTM? can be seen as providing overarching guidance to
‘business transformation by steering it towards opportunities and away from some of
‘the many pitfalls that could be overlooked by considering only impediments to the
‘execution of specific business transformations.

‘The importance of risk management to both the planning and execution of
‘business transformation places it as one of the three management disciplines of the
directional type while simultaneously extending across all of the BTM? disciplines of
the enablement type (see Figure 5.4). Hence, it is the integration of Risk
M i with Strategy Mé and Value M that provides
overall direction to business transformation. Strategy management, value
management and risk management serve, respectively, to identify the need for

ness transt the value that planned business transfor
initiatives hold for an organization and highlight the ways in which this value can be
maximized.

Achieving this level of sophistication means that strategic and operational risk
‘management must be tightly integrated into the development of an overall
transformation strategy and into the risk management processes that surround the
‘execution of business transformation. Such integration helps to ensure that business
transformation programs are appropriate to both current and future business needs.
It also permits those involved in the execution of a transformation to identify when
the potential to take advantage of a specific opportunity arises and to flag this
Potential to those in a position to act upon it. By incorporating the capacity to
respond rapidly to emerging threats and opportunities in this way, transformation,
programs can be both radical in scope and dynamic in character. Asa result,
“organizations will be less likely to persist with business transformations that were
intended to respond to future scenarios that have become much less likely.

Figure 5-4 Directional BTM? disciplines

However, as an organization moves from the envisioning phase towards the
phases of engagement and transformation, the nature of the risks that are of primary
concern shifts toward those risks that are specifically related to the execution of a

--- PAGE 68 ---
Parneuiar mauve. in otner woras, empnasis shits away trom viewing Nsk as a
driver of change and toward viewing risk as a threat to the successful execution of a

transformation project or program

‘CHALLENGES CONCERNING THE HTD RISK MANAGEMENT:
1. Understand that risks are associated with strategy.

2. Provide guidance for risks of all management disciplines.

‘3. Evaluate appropriate pursuit of business transformation with future plans.

{5.3.3 BUSINESS TRANSFORMATION RISK MANAGEMENT PROCESS

‘The standard risk management process can be mapped to the BTM? Risk
Management discipline. Therefore, we consider the four stages of the transformation
lifecycle: envision, engage, transform and optimize (see Figure 5.5).

Figure 5.5 Phases of BTM? Risk Management

‘The first phase, envision, focuses on the strategic perspective of risk management,
‘where the aim is to identify risks before they lead to a crisis. In addition, the first
phase analyzes the strategic course of actions and ‘on tra tion risks,
During the second phase, engage, risks are analyzed in detail and response plans are
‘created. The third phase, transform, actively manages the different risks by
‘executing risk response plans. Finally, the risks are evaluated and reviewed in phase
four, optimize. The particular phases and their activities are explained in detail in the
next four sections.

15-4360" Strategic Risk Assessment

As we highlighted in Section 5.3.1, the strategie perspective is an integral part of
BTM? risk management. Its used to identify a comprehensive set of possible events,
‘and scenarios that could compromise an organization's ability to achieve its strategic
“objectives and could threaten commercial interests or intangible values such as
reputation and brand image. Its the scope of the potential threats and the focus on
‘external factors and organizational growth that differentiates “strategic risk
management” from “operational risk management” with the latter being more
focused on preserving value.

While operational risk management often applies a “bottom-up” approach,
‘employing risk registers and sophisticated software packages, strategic risk
management often adopts more of a “top-down” approach (see Figure 5.6).

‘The identification and assessment of strategic risks is performed in the envision
phase. In the following, we explain the relevant activities in more detail.

ejection
coments

7+ \q

Figure 5.6 Top-down and bottom-up risk assessment
{5-41 DISCOVERING STRATEGIC RISKS

External risk drivers encompass technology shifts, changes in customer behavior,
and competitive moves that could impact, either negatively or positively, the ability
to achieve business transformation objectives. Broadly speaking, such risks can be
‘categorized as being related to customers, competitors, social and geopolitical
factors, capital markets, economic conditions, technology, environment, regulations
and compliance. In contrast to external risks, internal risks typically relate to people,
processes and products. Given the importance of external risks to risk management,
the process of identifying risks needs to incorporate an outside-in view from external
analysts and experts.

Strategic risks and their drivers are tightly woven within a context of ever-
changing market dynamics. As a result, effective risk management requires thorough
monitoring of changing conditions in the external environment and comprehensive
assessment of the impact of the underlying risks. The process of risk management
‘thus becomes an iterative one in which risk drivers can be seen as driving the
strategic environment toward one of many possible futures. By linking risks to risk

--- PAGE 69 ---
<rivers and future scenarios in this way, risk management permits an organization to
identify and implement the transformation programs needed to face the most likely
future scenarios. I tion of these transformations ‘over time, to
‘anew market dynamic.

S42STRATEGICRISK MAP

Early identification of strategic risk can be supported through the establishment of a
risk radar that directs attention to the most salient risks while maintaining an ability
‘to monitor for the appearance of newly salient risks. The notion of risk radar can
best be understood in relationship to the notion of a strategic risk map (see Figure
57).

While a strategic risk map provides a comprehensive overview of all potential
risks facing an organization, the process of strategic risk assessment narrows
attention to those points on this map that are particularly relevant to an organization,
and its transformation plans. Assessing strategic risk can be a difficult and time
‘consuming effort. Although a number of tools and techniques are available (see
Appendix C), one particularly useful approach relies on rigorous, integrative use of
scenario planning techniques (Schoemaker, 1995) and formal statistical methods

‘such as cluster analysis. While scenario planning techniques can be applied to
strategic risk assessment without the use of formal statistical methods, these formal
greatly facilitate the process of data analysis and improve the rigor of the
This is particularly important given the large of parameters

involved and the considerable degree of interdependency among these parameters.

SUS
= = a =

Figure 5.7 A strategic risk map with external drivers

‘The process of scenario planning requires that an organization identify its
market context and likely future scenarios based on key risk drivers and their
interdependencies. These future scenarios are then considered in relation to
‘business objectives and planned transformation initiatives to understand how risk
rivers might impact the extent to which the direction that an organization is taking,
‘will correspond to possible futures. This assessment can thus serve to identify the
key risk drivers that threaten to steer a business environment toward less desirable
futures. As such, it underscores the most important risk drivers on a strategic risk
‘map and fosters the formulation of suitable Key Risk Indicators (KRIs) that can be
used to monitor and predict those internal and external events that are most likely to
threaten a business transformation.

‘Undertaking a thorough tof t
potential risks offers a of to organi
an unbiased view on transformation risk, it also supports:

cases in light of
In addition to providing

+ better validation of the financial analysis that supports a business case and its key
assumptions;

“ tion of risks in a that takes u into account based on
input from key stakeholders and external experts;

+ preparation of an overview of major risks and proposed response strategies to
better support the decision making process; and

+ better management of risks in the execution phase ofthe transformation.

‘CHALLENGES CONCERNING THK 30” STRATEGIC RISK ASSESSMENT:

4. Define a strategic risk map.

2. Assess the underlying business case of any proposed transformation.

{3 Consider risk interdependencies as well as qualitative and quantitative aspects of
risks.

KEY MESSAGE:

Underscores the most important risk drivers on a strategic risk map and ensures that

risk interdependencies as well as qualitative and quantitative aspects of risks are

considered before a board decision is made.

‘To summarize, strategic risk identification should aim to:

+ identify key interdependencies among both internal and external risks drivers that
could affect multiple transformation initiatives and might hinder the overall
execution of the business transformation;

+ identify potentially disruptive factors from external risk drivers; and

--- PAGE 70 ---
+ provide a broader view on uncertainties.

{5:5 Rish Analysis and Risk Response Plan

‘Once the action for transformation has been identified based on scenario planning
and other techniques, it becomes necessary to assess the underlying business case of
any ion in the phase. A ofa i
business case involves undertaking deep dives into those risk areas identified during
the envision phase as well asthe identification of specific operational risks. These
deep dives provide an unbiased view on every transformation initiative. It gives
‘transparency to the top risks associated with individual initiatives and offers a
detailed overview of specific risk areas that have the potential to significantly impact
the achievement of a successful business transformation.

SS RISKIDENTIFICATION
Given the complexity of transformation projects, their inherent novelty and the large
‘number of risks that are typically present, it can be extremely difficult to effectively
identify and categorize all significant risks. It is for this reason that the risk
identification effort should aim to incorporate a diversity of perspectives and focus
almost exclusively on risk identification. Ideally, risk analysis, evaluation and the
development of risk responses should be deferred at this stage in order to ensure
focus and avoid expending needless effort developing responses to risks that are
ultimately deemed unimportant. Nonetheless, it may be necessary to integrate risk
identification, risk analysis and risk evaluation into a single risk assessment effort if
availability of key participants is limited. While this can ereate some challenges,
considerable preliminary guidance is available both in relation to the categories of
risks that may be salient and in relation to techniques that can be used to facilitate
the process (see Appendix C).

‘The sign of each risk can be. by
‘each of the key benefits ofthe transformation as identified during the process of
‘value management. Linking risks to benefits inthis way helps to ensure that
identified risks are truly significant to the business transformation and that all of the
key risks that might impact expected benefits have been identified. An important
‘consideration during the assessment of transformation business cases is ensuring
that risk interdependencies as well as qualitative and quantitative aspects of risks are
considered before a board decision is made. Notable interdependencies among risks
‘ean significantly increase the overall threat that is being faced.

Risk identification is not a solitary effort and its effectiveness can be enhanced
considerably through the designation of transformation risk champions.
‘Transformation risk champions are, in essence, functional area specialists who are
‘working on a transformation initiative. Such individuals offer a unique perspective in
that they are closely involved in the business transformation and are thus quite
familiar with its objectives. At the same time, they offer a business perspective based
‘on their specific functional expertise and they the tra tion's risk
drivers and how these influence the business (see Figure 5.8). For example, a
purchasing manager involved in a transformation deals regularly with supply chain
risk as part of his or her job function. Since this makes such individuals inherently
sensitive to supply chain risk, they are well situated to serve as effective champions
for supply chain risks related to a transformation.

In addition to drawing on the expertise of risk champions, the process of risk
identification can be further optimized and simultaneously made more dynamic by
relying on an iterative process that repeatedly cycles between top-down and bottom-
up perspectives (see Figure 5.6).

Extensive research and practical experience with risk identification has led to the
formulation of a wide range of risk categorization frameworks or breakdown
structures that can be especially useful in identifying operational risks. Since
‘operational risks are typically of a more routine character, these frameworks help to
‘ensure that thorough consideration is given to all of the risks that a transformation
project might face (see, for example, Jourda and Michaelson, 2009). As such, a risk
‘breakdown structure represents the operational equivalent of a strategic risk map
(see Figure 5,7). There is, in fact, some degree of overlap in the categories of risk
‘suggested by many risk breakdown structures and those suggested by strategic risk
maps. The following categories of IT project risk are, for example, identified by
McKeen and Smith, 2004:

for

NEC

===.
Figure 5.8 Transformation risk champions

+ financial ~ risks: to the finanei that a project ultimately delivers:
— low or excessively conservative estimates of costs and benefits;

— incorrect assumptions concerning foreign exchange rates;

+ technology — risks related to the specific technologies being implemented:

--- PAGE 71 ---
~ scalability problems (too much success);
= obsolescence;
~ rapid or delayed adoption by competitors;

+ security — risks related to unauthorized system access and use:
user authentication difficulties;
—weak control and authorization;

information ~ risks related to such things as the accuracy and availability of the
information provided by a system:
privacy impediments;
~ decision errors due to missing or incorrect information;
unexpected availability of a data conversion tool;

+ people ~ risks related to the people charged with implementing and using a system:
com sh ngs and discovery of unexpected competencies;
burn-out;
~ conflict;

inadequate or superior change readiness;

+ business process ~ risks related to the processes that a system must support:
~ changing business needs;
= discovery of additional opportunities to rationalize processes;

+ management ~ risks related to management support and oversight of a project:
= management turnove
~ shifting attention.

Risk breakdown structures or categorization frameworks can be used in two key
‘ways. They can be used either asa starting point in the risk identification effort or
‘subsequent to other risk identification efforts as a means of verifying that important
categories of risk have not been overlooked. In identifying risks on the operational
level, itis important to recognize that these risks can extend beyond the
transformation project itself to include such issues as operational failures, economic
‘shocks and natural disasters such as the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster in 2011.
‘Similarly the impact of risk events can readily extend beyond the scope of the
transformation effort to include such things as damage to corporate or brand
reputation and an inability to produce key products with one example being the
Deepwater Horizon oil spill in 2010. Thus, irrespective of the particular merits of a
‘specific categorization framework, itis important to go beyond the use of such
frameworks to ensure that risks have been thoroughly identified.

A of formal techniques and data sources are available to assist with this
cffort. Salient among these is the Delphi method (see Appendix C). Variants of this,
method have been widely used to elicit consensus among groups of relevant experts
concerning key project risks (Schmidt et al, 2001). Similarly, an essential element of
the Risk Diagnosing Method (RDM) isa procedure for ensuring that project
stakeholders put forth important risks irrespective of the implications that these
risks might have for the initiative or for an organization's political dynamics (Keizera
tal, 2002). Although the RDM was originally developed for use in product
development projects, it can be used to elicit the risks of transformation projects and
programs. RDM may be particularly valuable in organizational cultures that are less =
‘open to public debate and criticism. Other tools and techniques for identifying
strategie and/or operational risks are summarized in Appendix C.

(5.52 RISK EVALUATION
While it is possible for risks to be identified by a wide range of individuals and
‘groups working either within or outside of an organization, analysis and evaluation,
‘of these risks is best performed by individuals with suitable expertise. Risk analysis
and evaluation may, however, be integrated into a single risk assessment process
depending on organizational circumstances. Irrespective of the approach taken, the
purpose of risk analysis and evaluation is to understand the relative significance of
identified risks. Inthe context of strategic risk management this effort serves to
highlight the most needed transformations and to establish the extent to which
planned transformations will be suited to future circumstances. In the context of
‘operational risk the process of risk analysis and evaluation serves to
ighlight those risks that are in need of risk response planning. Thus, while strategic
and operational level assessments create a need for specific responses, the nature
and scope of the responses that result wll differ considerably.

Risk evaluation is essentially a two-stage process that involves first determining
the likelihood that risk events will occur and then evaluating their potential impact.
However, more sophisticated approaches tend to incorporate some consideration for
issues such as risk appetite, the speed of risk onset and risk ownership to provide a
more comprehensive overview of risk. In determining risk likelihood and impact it is
possible to use both qualitative and quantitative techniques. Qualitative techniques.
assess likelihood and impact using categorical values such as low, medium and high.
Although this approach is quite common, it is also common for quantitative values to

lie these categorical values. For , an impact estimated at less than 1
percent of total budget might be considered a low-impact risk while an impact of
greater than 10 percent might be considered high impact. Irrespective of the
‘approach taken, itis essential that all such scales be clearly defined in the risk
management framework. This ensures that they are understood and used

consistently by all stakeholders throughout the course ofa transformation initiative

--- PAGE 72 ---
Although the occurrence of a risk event can have implications for many aspects of
a business transformation, it is particularly important to consider its implications for
thetr ion’s cost, and deliverables. Assessing the impact of risks on
these dimensions makes it possible to direct particular attention to those risks
having significant implications for the dimension or dimensions deemed most
important to the success of a transformation. For example, it may be particularly
important to benefit achievement that a certain stage of a transformation be
‘completed within a specified time frame and, asa result, schedule-related risks
‘would be regarded as being especially important during that stage. Incorporating
such considerations requires, that the basis for a tr ion’s benefits
‘be established in advance and clearly linked to specific changes through the
application of sound value management practices.

Once all risks have been assessed for their impact and likelihood, they can be
prioritized by placing them on a matrix such as that shown in Figure 5.9. Risks
falling in the “dark” regions (usually illustrated in red color) of this matrix are of
‘greater significance and should therefore receive greater attention in the risk
response planning effort as well as during risk monitoring and reporting. Note,

hat separate, ‘ofthe impact of risk on
such as cost, schedule and deliverables necessitates the development of risk matrices
for each of these dimensions unless impacts are first toa ‘unit,

‘Thus, itis often preferable to express all risk impacts in monetary terms. It can, for
‘example, be difficult to determine whether a schedule delay of three months
represents a larger impact than a 5 percent cost increase or a modest scope reduction
unless all of these potential impacts are expressed using a common currency. Doing
‘so does, however, require that effort be expended to understand the costs associated
‘with a three month delay and the costs of the specific scope reductions that might be
necessary. Depending on the circumstances being faced, a three-month delay may
result in such things as additional costs to continue operating a legacy system, lost
reventues and increased labor costs. Similarly, the impact of benefits stemming from
‘an opportunity to complete a business transformation three months early should
also be expressed in monetary terms in order to clearly identify and capitalize on
those upside risks with the greatest potential.

Figure 5.9 Risk portfolio,

Efforts to establish the impact of risk events must aim to be broadly inclusive. For
‘example, in evaluating opportunities itis important to recognize that the “impact” of
‘an opportunity actually represents its value and this value can come in many forms
and arise from a wide range of sources. Value might, for example, be found in
increasing employee satisfaction, fostering positive relations with a local community
‘or enhancing brand reputation.

‘An important aspect of transformation risk assessment is the need to aggregate
the preceding analysis to understand the overall risk of a transformation initiative
and to fully assess interdependencies among all risk events. Overall risk can be
‘evaluated by, for example, placing upper and lower bounds on transformation
initiative estimates to reflect all identified risks. Such bounds on individual estimates ~
‘ean then be aggregated to determine upper and lower bounds on overall estimates.
In addition to this relatively simple approach, more advanced techniques such as
Monte Carlo simulation (see Appendix C) make it possible to establish statistically,
based intervals on estimates and to: the implications of
interdependencies. Real options techniques and the use of risk option mappings can
also be helpful (see, for example, Benaroch etal, 2007). Appendix C offers a brief
‘overview of these and other tools that are available to assist with the process of risk
assessment,

(5.59 DEVINE RISK RESPONSE PLAN.

Risk responses are developed in accordance with risk management policy for those
risks that have been assessed as significant. The risk response plan or risk register
describes specific risks, notes the likelihood that each will occur, establishes who is
accountable for monitoring and responding to each risk event, and outlines suitable
to these risk events. The: and i ion of an effective

risk response plan requires the commitment of key stakeholders in order to ensure
that timely action is taken should a risk event occur and to ensure that needed
resources are available to support any required action. Having a plan to address a
critical issue such as an unexpected lack of change readiness is likely to be of little
‘value if management is unwilling to fund the actions that the plan calls for or ifthe
plan requires too long to initiate.

Once all identified risks have been evaluated and prioritized, plans can be

--- PAGE 73 ---
‘developed to respond to those strategic nisks that fal on the risk radar and those
‘operational risks that have been assigned the highest priorities. It is important to
recognize that the purpose of risk response development is not to entirely eliminate
risk since this is clearly impossible. Rather, its purpose is to prepare for the most
significant risks faced by a transformation project and to effectively address those
risks that are actually encountered. Thus, prior to developing responses, the
‘minimum risk priority level warranting the development of a response must be
determined. This cut-off point will clearly be impacted by the risk tolerance of the
“organization and key project stakeholders. While cut-offs should generally be part of
the risk fra in some cases it may be ry to direct explicit
effort to better understanding the risk tolerance of key stakeholders so that risk
response efforts are seen as appropriate to the specific transformation being
undertaken,

In the case of strategic risks where it may be difficult to assess the likelihood of
‘occurrence, efforts to increase preparedness may be the most appropriate response.
Under most other circumstances, there are four general approaches that can be used
to address or respond to risks (Project Management Institute, 2004). These are risk
prevention, isk transfer, risk reduction (mitigation) and risk acceptance.

isk prevention avoidance)

Risk prevention enco ‘any action that aims to elimi ng that is
presenting a risk. Avoiding risks altogether may appear to be the preferred response
to high-priority risks though avoiding such risks can prove very difficult to
accomplish in practice. Nonetheless, it may, for example, be possible to change the
scope of a business transformation project to eliminate the use of unproven
technology in favor of more established technology. Caution is, however, warranted
since these kinds of actions can introduce entirely new set of risks and might also
undermine a significant portion of the value of the undertaking, For example, not
centering a business to avoid the risk of loss also precludes the possibilty of earning,
profits. Examples of risk responses that rely on risk prevention include not buying a
property or business in order to avoid legal liability or using open standards to avoid
the risks of proprietary lock-in.

ik raster
Risk transfer involves the transfer of responsibility for the impact of a risk event to
‘an outside party. Transferring risk is, in many cases, an expensive way to address
risk since it frequently involves the purchase of insurance or the need to insist on
robust warranty clauses that can drive up costs. In addition, for many risks itis
‘simply not possible to transfer risk. Examples of risk transfer include the purchase of
liability insurance to protect an initiative against unexpected legal threats or the use
of a fixed price contract to transfer risks associated with technical complexity.

isk reduction (mitigation)

Risk reduction or mitigation involves manipulating the significance ofa risk event
for a transformation initiative. Risk reduction is often the preferred method for
‘addressing notable risks that cannot be avoided. Efforts to reduce risk can include
‘changing the likelihood ofa risk event, altering its impact and/or increasing the
‘chances that its occurrence will be detected before it poses a serious threat. For
‘example, concerns that employee dissatisfaction will undermine commitment can be
mitigated by routinely evaluating satisfaction to ensure that it does not fall toa
problematic level. Other examples of risk reduction include outsourcing of technical
‘work to reduce the technical risk faced by an organization that has limited in-house
expertise.

isk acceptance

Risk acceptance involves accepting the loss or benefit that would arise should a risk
‘event occur. The risk that important team members might leave an organization
‘before completing their work on a transformation may, for example, be accepted if it
is believed that the likelihood of this happening is relatively low. Since itis never
possible to eliminate all risk, accepted risk will likely be quite significant in a large
transformation project even if none of the accepted risks are significant on their own.
Although this might seem to be undesirable, sometimes it is enough to simply
heighten awareness of risks so that those involved in a transformation can be
‘mindful of signs that they might arise and take preemptive action. As noted
previously, accepting risk also presents the potential to take advantage of
‘opportunities.

Contingency plans need to be developed for particularly significant risks before
accepting them is |. For 7 the risk that nal
‘change readiness differs considerably from what was anticipated may involve
planning for how the pace of change can be slowed or redistributed if readiness is too
low as well as identifying additional opportunities that could be captured if readiness
proves higher than expected.

Risk response planning does not end with the development of risk response plans.
An important aspect of the planning process is to ensure that ownership of risks is,
assigned to specific individuals. Accountability for the most significant risks will
‘generally be assigned to higher levels of authority within the organization given the
typically higher value at risk and wider scope of resources that will be required to
respond (see Figure 5.10 and Figure 5.11). Prior to proceeding it is also necessary to
evaluate response plans to ensure that they are technically feasible, financially

--- PAGE 74 ---
justified in light of the expected benefits ofthe transformation and can be
implemented under the circumstances in which they will be implemented. Iti, for
‘example, essential that sufficient time is available to implement response plans. This
‘can be supported by establishing, in advance, the time that is likely to be available
between when the occurrence of a risk event is detected and when the
implementation of a response must be completed.

Evaluation of risk response plans can be supported through the use of cost-benefit,
analysis to determine the suitability of plans in relation to the magnitude of the
threats that are posed. In extreme cases this analysis may even suggest that an
initiative be abandoned if, for example, a cost effective response cannot be devised
fora high-likelihood, high-impact threat. Risk response planning and execution
‘must also remain cognizant of the business value of the transformation to ensure
that this value is not undermined by the risk response effort. Appendix C

izes a ‘of other tools such as seenario planning and lder
analysis that ean be useful in developing and evaluating risk response plans.

motte ne

‘CHALLENGES CONCERNING THE RISK ANALYSIS AND THE RISK RESPONSE PLAN:

+ Find appropriate transformation risk champions.

+ Apply risk categorization frameworks or breakdown structures that can be
especially useful in identifying operational risks.

+ Prioritize risks by placing them on a matrix with the dimensions cost, schedule and
deliverables.

+ Determine the minimum risk priority evel.

+ Gain commitment of key stakeholders to ensure that needed resources are available
to support any required action.

KEY MESSAGE:

An important aspect of transformation risk assessment is the need to aggregate all

related analysis to understand the overall risk of a business transformation and to

fully assess interdependencies among all risk events.

{5.6 Haecute Risk Response Pan and Monitor Risks

A significant portion of the value of the risk management effort is extracted during
the execution of a transformation. De of acompr risk register
with thorough response planning is of limited value if little effort is made to monitor
the emergence of risk events or execute planned responses in a timely manner,
Hence, itis essential that criteria are in place to determine when a risk has been
actualized. These criteria or KRIs must be monitored on a regular basis to ensure
that escalation and response plans are triggered when needed. When used with
‘escalation criteria, KRIs help to keep management informed of emerging strategic
and operational risk, The response plan and monitoring of risks is executed in the
transform phase.

‘Throughout business transformation itis essential that regular risk review =
meetings take place to monitor the occurrence of risk events, close risks that are no
longer relevant, identify potential new risks and opportunities, and assess the
progress and effectiveness of risk responses that have been initiated. Conducting a
‘sound risk review meeting requires that the risk management plan be kept current
‘and that it incorporates all feedback obt relation to the risks surrounding a
transformation initiative. Since this is an ongoing process, it facilitates observation
‘of changes in risks and the identification of new opportunities that result from

in business imperative or methodology. A. ry of risk review meetings
should be provided as a status report to the program steering committee. This
‘summary also provides a convenient communication mechanism that can help link
risks on the operational level to risks on the strategic level.

‘The use of leading KRIs with good predictive capabilities is critical to the
successful management of transformation risks. As such, the identification of
effective KRIs should be based on a structured design approach. Given the nature of
risk, some of the same tools used to monitor the progress of a transformation project

--- PAGE 75 ---
‘ean also be used to monitor risk. For example, unfavorable cost and schedule
variances might suggest that a transformation effort is not going as planned and may
‘be experiencing certain risks. Further to this, tools such as root cause analysis and
cost-benefit analysis can be used to evaluate the occurrence of a risk event to ensure
‘that the planned response remains appropriate in light of what led its occurrence.
Appendix C identifies a number of other tools that are of potential value in
‘supporting the process of risk monitoring and reporting.

‘An important benefit of ongoing risk monitoring and reporting throughout the
course of a business transformation is the potential it creates to rapidly identify and
leverage opportunities as these arise. This helps to avoid being caught in the pursuit
of obsolete objectives and ensures that ongoing action remains appropriate to the
strategic risk environment in which an organization operates. As such, the process of
risk monitoring and reporting serves as a form of “health check” on the
transformation program as well as its supporting projects. Both the progress and
viability of the transformation can be reviewed and revised based on the emerging,
risk environment highlighted during this check. However, the dynamic change that
the monitoring and review effort can trigger serves to highlight the importance of
linking both strategic and operational risk to the processes of Organizational Change
‘Management and Competence and Training Management. Responding to a
particular risk might, for example, require distinct skills and competencies. Business
that risks at every level have forall aspects of the direction and enablement types of
‘business transformation.

THE RISK PLAN AND RISK
1 Changing the likelihood of a risk event before it poses a serious threat.

2. Identify Key Risk Indicators (KRIs) to determine when a risk has been actualized.
+. Conduct sound risk review meetings.

KEY MESSAGE:
Important benefits of ongoing risk monitoring and reporting throughout the course
of a business tra jon are keeping risks updated, obtaini jing feedback

‘and the potential it creates to rapidly identify and leverage opportunities as these
arise.

15:7 Review and Evaluate Risks *

‘The final stage ofthe risk management framework is to review and improve risk

management efforts and identify opportunities. This step is performed in the

‘optimize phase. Reviewing risks is an ongoing process in order to determine change

in risks and also to identify new opportunities resulting in change in business

imperative or methodology. Identifying opportunities requires the creation of an
ization wide mi imed at stimulating new ideas to risk.

‘The following processes facilitate the risk review process:

ale sessions: Lessons at the end of each lifecycle provide data
points needed for risk reviews.
+b) Financial results: Financial result analysis like cash flow analysis, profitabi

volatility and other ratio analysis helps to evaluate the effectiveness of risk
responses.

©) Audits: Internal and external audits strengthen risk management processes and
‘ensure minimization of exposure.

On mates: Independent estimates of cost and quality can
provide comparison data points for planned deviations from a transformation
program.

«) Executive commitment: Commitment from executives is an important aspect of
the review process.

new opportunities resulting in changes in business imperatives or
methodologies.

2. Create organization-wide mindset.

KEY MESSAGE:

Reviewing and evaluating risks is an iterative and ongoing process.

58 Conclusion

Risk management helps an organization to recognize when it needs to change while
‘simultaneously permitting it to recognize the opportunities that risks present. Given
these insights, managers are better equipped to select the right transformation

initiatives and to pursue these initiatives most effectively. Effective management of
risk at both the strategic and operational levels is essential to transformation success
ssiven the considerable uncertainty involved and the magnitude of the risks that are

present.
Acknowledgment ~ This chapter was delivered in cooperation with the office of
Global Strategic and Product Risk Management of SAP AG.

Bibliography:

Benaroch, Michel, Jeffery, Mark, Kauffman, Robert and Shah, Sandeep (2007),
Option-based risk management: a field study of sequential information

--- PAGE 76 ---
nent decisions, Journal of Me Information
24, n0. 2, 103-40.

a tional rds Organization (2009), Risk — Principles and
Guidelines, 1S 31000:2009: www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail?
«snuumber=43170 (accessed March 2012).

Jourda, Catherine and Michaelson, Christopher (2009), Exploring emerging risks:

ling Enterprise Risk (ERM) to, ‘emerging risks,
PricewaterhouseCoopers.

Keizera, Jimme A., Halman, Johannes LM. and Song, Michael (2002), From
experience: applying the risk diagnosing methodology, Journal of Product
Innovation Management 19, 0. 3, 213-32.

McKeen, James D. and Smith, Heathe A. (2004), Making IT Happen: Critical Issues
in IT Management, and ed. (Chichester: Wiley).

Office of Government Commerce (2009), Managing Successful Projects with
PRINCB2, sth ed. (London: The Stationary Office).

Project Management Institute (2004), A Guide to the Project Management Body of
Knowledge: Third Edition (PMBOK Guides), 3rd ed. (Newtown Square, PA:
Project Management Institute).

‘Schmidt, Roy, Lyytinen, Kalle, Keil, Mark and Cule, Paul (2001), identifying

project risks: an international Delphi study, lof Management
Information Systems 17, no. 4, 5-36.

‘Schoemaker, Paul J. (1995), Scenario planning;

Management Review 36, n0. 2, 25-40.

tool for strategic thinking, Sloan

1 Among the more salient of thee are the PRINCE2 mathod offered by the UK Office of Government

‘Commerce (OCC), the Project Body of (PMBOK) from the Projet
(PMD, 18031000 from the Or (180) and the integrated
for isk from the Commitce of 07 (C080) of
‘the Treadway Commission.
2 See Chapter 3, Strategy Management, or frther discussion surrounding the ok of risk in ding
Dusines transformation

|tacwomnet | Asoncoskst sonia Tineomston MicsoenenMeoy Rok anager: «rena csoter

entenptr > 0

--- PAGE 77 ---
"

Bez, en aoi

Business Process Management

9, YORE EROCKE (Urry of Lichter), SIATIN PETRY (BSAC) an THOMAS GONSER (SAP A)

61 Overview

Business Process Management (BPM) has evolved as one of the most important
‘management capabilities today. Also in BTM? it plays an essential role as an
‘enabling factor for successful business transformations. Where does this importance
‘come from? The answer is fairly simple: Since “processes” essentially are “what
do", ing organizations essentially means changing an

“organization's processes. Therefore, the body of knowledge on contemporary
Business Process Management can contribute a lot to BTM?,

‘The specific focus of BPM within BTM? essentially ies on the design of new
processes implementing new business practices. In particular, BPM within BTM?

the following steps (referring to the tra ion lifecycle) for

transformation success:

+ Envision: ereate the big picture of process management. Essential steps comprise
both designing an enterprise process framework and assessing the organizations
Process maturity.

+ Engage: conduct specific action in order to perform process-related work. Most
significantly, this involves both analyzing as-is processes and innovating to-be
processes. In addition, a governance structure needs to be put in place to frame the
implementation of new processes.

+ Transform: conduct work aiming at i ing the new processes according to
the to-be processes. This relates to technical implementations but also to

izational it ions comprising the definition of performance
indicators as part ofthe process controlling.

+ Optimize: carry out continuous monitoring in order to find ideas for continuous
improvement of the processes.

‘onvcrIvEs oF Ta CHAPTER:
1. Understand how to implement a transformation strategy in operational business.
2. Learn different methods and languages for business process design.

4 Learn that process management does not equal process modeling, but rather
requires a careful consideration and mediation between IT, business and people-
related tasks.

4, Understand how to use BPM in the transformation lifecycle.

(62 What eB =

‘The relevance of BPM is widely recognized in both industry and academia. The
Gartner Group (MeDonald and Aron, 2010), for example, identified the
improvement of business processes as atop issue on the CIO's agenda for the sixth
year in a row. At the same time, BPM has emerged as an important field of research
(Roseman et al, 2008; van der Aalst and ter Hofstede, 2005; vom Brocke etal,
2014; mur Mueblen and Indulska, 2010). With its roots in a number of well-known
approaches such as workflow management, business process re-engineering and
total quality management (Harmon, 2010), BPM to date stands for an integrated
‘management approach (Roseman and vom Brocke, 2010). As such BPM secks to
develop organizational capabilities facilitating excellence and innovation in business
‘addressing a wide range of applications (Hammer, 2010; Zairi, 1997).

Why are business pi ‘so important and why is
Management a top issue on the CIO's agenda? The relevance of BPM essentially
‘originates from the nature of process. In fact, all operations in a company ~ or any
‘other type of organization are performed by processes. In this regard, process
means what companies actually do. In other words, process is how work is done. So,
‘no wonder that processes are everywhere and that processes are vital for economic
‘success in all kinds of business. Very naturally, this also holds true for business
transformation. Infact, business transformation can be perceived as changing,
processes. There are running processes in place, we invent new processes and this all
means changing and replacing p ‘and also communicating and learning
process change.

What them is the nature of process? According to Hammer and Champy a process
simply is “a set of activites that put together produce a value to a customer”
(Hammer and Champy, 1993). Thus, focusing on customers as well as thinking in
activities are indeed two major characteristics of process-orientation. When
‘engineering processes, further details are considered in order to analyze processes
‘such as the “self-contained, temporal and logical order of those activities” (Becker
and Kahn, 2011) as well as the characteristic of business processes to “realize an
“organizational objective or policy goal” within a given “set of conditions” (van der
‘Aalst and van Hee, 2002). The most essential characteristics of processes are
displayed in Figure 6.1.

--- PAGE 78 ---
sel

Given this understanding of process, what is so special about process thinking in
‘management? In fact analyzing workflows in organizations has already been part of
the genes in early contributions on management (Taylor, 2006) and organizational
design (Nordsieck, 1955; Kosiol, 1976). A major reason i the integrative power of
processes. Since processes are the place where work actually occurs, all elements
relevant for managing work somehow relate to process. Therefore, taking a process-
‘oriented perspective helps to align various elements, most notably related to: task,
technology and people (Kosiol, 1976). In Figure 6.2, we give an example of different
aspects typically to be aligned following the notion of process. The various aspects
nicely illustrate the integrating nature of process: that focusing on processes greatly
helps coordinating di implementing and managing operations
in an organization.

With the ability to integrate, process-thinking contributes to a major challenge in
today's business, namely IT business ali Cc and Ve nan,
1993; Luftman, 2005). P provide a linking bridge and bi
(vom Brocke, 2011), since they operationalize business needs and can, thus, serve as
‘blueprint for technical implementations. At the same time, new technology may
inspire new ways of doing business that can be evaluated according to their impact
‘on processes generating business value. Hence, while structure may follow strategy
(Chandler, 1962) oF vice versa, process thinking is a good lens to align both strategic
and structural considerations. Vital to value generation is also the role of people. In
most cases the alignment of [T and business essentially works through people who

tand business-related tasks and are of leveragi TT to fulfil
these tasks (vom Brocke et al, 2011). In this regard human resource management is
important in BPM as it provides for developing the right competences to perform
processes most efficiently. The interplay of tasks, people and IT jointly creating value
through processes is summarized in Figure 6.3.

Figure 6.5 RPM driving value through an alignment of task, technology and people

In order to master the alignment of FT and business more specifically, process
‘models are designed. These models are representations of processes that can be
‘specified on various levels of abstraction and from different angles. The business
process pyramid by Harmon (2004) may serve as an example to further illustrate the
role of process models in the wider Enterprise Architecture (see Figure 6.4).

‘The process pyramid by Harmon (2010) describes corporate business process and
‘change efforts in terms of levels that, ideally, should be considered simultaneously.
At the enterprise level, organizations coordinate their processes across the entire

prise. This comprises aligning p ‘with strategies and defining BPM
‘governance and measurement systems for the entire organization. At the business
process level, organizations are exploring a wide variety of new approaches to
process analysis and redesign that intend to support the enterprise wide strategy
leveraging both technical and human resourees on the implementation level to
‘support process work.

‘Talking about process models, a sharp value-focus needs to be taken. We have
witnessed of extensive process modeling initiative that has but deli
little to no value. Hence, finding both the right level of detail and the right extent of
modeling activities is crucial to the success of BPM. We thus cal for a value-oriented

--- PAGE 79 ---
approach to process management that reflects both economic consequences of single
actions and aims to assure a positive return on investment in process transformation
(vom Brocke et al, 2010; vom Brocke and Grob, 2011). One powerful means to
improve the efficiency and effectiveness of process modeling is reusing conceptual
‘models that have proven successful in certain organizational context. Hence,
reference models play an essential role in value generating modeling activities (vom
Brocke, 2006).
While process modeling is a strong element of a BPM methodology, the

‘of business pr needs to be from an organizational
wide perspective. Recent studies suggest that actually six core elements of
‘contemporary BPM need to be considered, namely: methods, IT, governance,
strategic alignment, people and culture (Rosemann and vom Brocke, 2010). These

are derived from ‘on BPM maturity (de Bruin, 2007;
Harmon, 2004, 2007). They can be used in order to assess the current maturity level
‘of an organization (SEI, 2006) and to develop strategies to further develop its BPM.
maturity according to the speci factors for one organi

Figure 6.4 The role of process in Enterprise Architecture

Source: Harmon, 2010)
{tis important to consider that ~ while this chapter takes a focus on
methodological issues of BPM complementing BTM? — a successful BPM

needs to take into account all six factors mentioned above. In fact, most BPM
initiatives that failed did actually overemphasize the modeling part of processes, as
mentioned above. To our experience itis essential to learn using BPM methods and
technology as a tool but at the same time to carefully consider strategic alignment
‘governance, people and culture in BPM. Successful companies manage to
systematically build capabilities in all ofthe six BPM core elements.

While these six core elements characterize contemporary BPM in general, there is
‘special focus on BPM as part of BTM?. This is because BTM is a holistic
management approach itself that considers dedicated aspects of transformation also
relating to strategic alignment, governance, methods, IT, people and culture itself. In
the next section, we, therefore, present the specific contribution BPM can make for
BTM? in more detail. We identify dedicated phases comprising major BPM activities
that interact with the other BTM? related management disciplines presented in this
book.

ive

‘CHALLENGES CONCERNING BPM:

1. Build the right competencies to perform processes most efficiently.

2. Describe corporate business process and change efforts in terms of levels
‘considering different factors that, ideally, should be considered simultaneously.

‘3+ Consider a value-oriented approach to process management that reflects both
economic consequences of single actions and aims to assure a positive return on
investment in business transformation.

KY MESSAGE:

Recent studies suggest that actually six core elements of contemporary BPM need to

bbe considered, namely: methods, IT, governance, strategic alignment, people and

‘culture. Successful companies manage to systematically build capabilities in all of

the six BPM core elements (Rosemann and vom Brocke, 2010).

‘6.9 Business Process Management in Bases Transformation

As part of the BTM?, BPM serves as the enablement type of Meta Management.
Hence, results from Strategy Management, Value Management and Risk
Management set the scene and give direction, while other management disciplines
such as Program and Project Management, Transformational IT Management,
Organizational Change: and. and Traini

and support the BPM-related activities.

‘The specific focus of BPM within BTM? essentially lies on the design of new =
processes implementing new business practices. For that purpose BPM offers a wide
range of knowledge that can be leveraged. That said, itis obvious that BPM in this
sense focuses on methodological issues in particular while other elements of
contemporary BPM are partly covered in other chapters of BTM®. This particularly
‘becomes apparent considering the implementation of business transformation,
‘which is described in more detail in the chapters on Transformational IT

--- PAGE 80 ---
Management, Organizational Change Management, and Competence and Training
‘Management. Hence, BPM in BTM? mainly contributes to envision new processes
derived from strategy. It operationalizes them to an extent they can be implemented
regarding given organizational, technological and people-related conditions.

Introducing BPM as part of BTM2, we take a procedural perspective, in order to
‘capture major work steps related to the redesign of processes. With this, we follow
up on former contributions in the field, most notably (Becker et al., 2011; Harmon,
2007; vom Brocke and Rosemann, 2010b, 2010a). While we are in line with these
former contributions, our approach is specifically characterized by three aspects:

1. The approach is embedded in BTM2. With this, we do not present a standalone
BPM approach but rather essential steps where the BPM body of knowledge can
specifically add BTM?. In this regard, we particularly refer to the other chapters of
this book in order to complete the picture (see Figure 6.6).

2. The approach considers an ERP environment, most notably the SAP body of
knowledge on systems implementation (Snabe et al., 2009). While it also
comprises general aspects of process design, it particularly considers the context
‘of SAP systems and methods for process implementation.

{3 The presentation of the approach given in this chapter can only serve as a rough
‘guideline.

‘There are more detailed contributions on the various aspects covered, 80 we
recommend further reading. While the description cannot be complete, we do hope,
however, to capture most important issues for practice that may also stimulate
further exploitation.

Figure 6.5 shows how the transformation lifecycle is mapped to various activities
related to BPM.

i as
Figure 6.5 Phases of BPM in TM
lifecycle shows the typical phases to run through in a business

process redesign project. Given BTM2, BPM has various interfaces to the other
disciplines as displayed in Figure 6.6.

‘The transformati

Figure 6.6 BPM interfaces to other management disciplines of BTM

BPM receives diverse input from the 1s giving direction in BPM, namely
‘Strategic Management, Value Management and Risk Management:

+ Strategy Management: provides the overall direction for the BPM activities in
BIM2, Both business vision and business model give an orientation where to the
transformation should lead. In addition, the business transformation plan provides
farther detailed information as to timeline and budget of the transformation

+ Value Management: provides an orientation on major value drivers of the process
area subject to business transformation. In addition, results from benchmarking
and value scenario planning serve to provide a frame and thus operationalize
targets for the to-be pt - Both the performance off
process designs and the process controlling related activities directly make use of
value management results.

+ Risk Management: provides a picture of various risks related to business
transformation. The knowledge risks are vital to BPM since processes have to be
designed to manage these risks. Therefore, the results from both 360° strategic risk
assessment and plan risk strategy are important to design processes that meet
strategic objectives, generate preferable value and also make sure risks are
considered and managed properly.

Building on the direction for business transformation, BPM envisions and oo
‘specifies processes that actually prove to operate the to-be state of business. Since

BPM only provides the blueprint for new processes, further activities are needed to
‘actually implement processes according to this blueprint. For this purpose, BPM has

the four following interfaces of enabling BTM? management disciplines:

1. Program and Project Management: serves to manage transformation projects and
programs related to the implementation of the new processes. The discipline
‘essentially receives the to-be models from the BPM discipline together with
‘specifications related to governance structures, controlling measures,
implementation plans and constraints for the run and monitor phase. It serves to

--- PAGE 81 ---
linate the act to the imy tion of the new pi ;
particularly dealing with Transformational IT Management, Organizational
‘Change Management, and Competence and Training Management.

‘2. Transformational IT Management: serves to develop the IT infrastructure needed
in order to run the new processes. The discipline receives the to-be processes
along with corresponding specification of the implementation process and
<develops the IT infrastructure accordingly. In addition, also TT innovation may
‘enable new processes and, thus, in turn, may also generate new strategic options.

{3 Organizational Change Management: serves to provide the organizational frame

to bring the new pr to life in the organization. The phase
particularly receives the to-be models ‘with the governance
‘controlling measures and the considerations for the run and monitor phase.
Organizational change management makes sure that business transformation is
‘managed smoothly and that the new processes are supported in operational
business.

4- Competence and Training Management: serves to make sure that people's
‘competences are developed well enough to perform the new processes at best
performance. The discipline receives the to-be-models, governance structure,
‘controlling measures and expectations for the run and monitor phase. It steers
diverse HR processes providing the required competences through trainings and
recruiting initiatives.

In the remainder of this chapter, we will present the phases of BPM in BTM? in
more detail illustrating major tasks and methods for business process redesign. We
also make references to other management disciplines of BTM2,

(6.4 Process Maturity Level ofthe Company (Envisioning)

It s essential to first provide a good orientation before going into detail on special
issues of selected processes. A lot of process management initiatives get lost in detail
and, thus, miss focus and fail to contribute value. In order to set focus and direction,
two elements are particularly relevant: the process framework and the process
maturity assessment. The process framework serves to come up with a first
orientation of the p relevant in a certain business ti -
‘Successful process-oriented companies do have an enterprise process framework, for
instance. But also for selective areas process frameworks can be designed before
going into more detail Ideally, these frameworks fit on one page and are easy to

ber and, cate. On such a basis, the maturity of processes within this =
framework needs to be assessed. Processes can either be very emerging or highly
routinized to give an example. This has a strong impact on subsequent management
decisions and transformation tasks. Both elements, the process framework and the
process maturity assessment will be further described in the following sections.

(6.4: PROCESS FRAMEWORK

A process framework serves as map and, thus, helps to coordinate BPM activities.
‘The idea isto identify and. major building blocks of a i

and to relate these blocks to one another. This helps to focus on relevant areas and
also to master the interdependencies between different areas. There are several
“options for designing process frameworks (e.g. Becker etal, 2011) the easiest being,
straight drawing ofa picture meaningful for the people i inthe
project. The more initiatives launched in an organization the more standardized
these maps may be designed. One approach that has proven successful in a number
of projects is to structure a process framework on three layers. This approach is.
iMustrated in Figure 6.7.

a ee
eo |

Figure 6.7 Designing process frameworks on three layers

In line with the literature (Hammer, 2010; Becker et al., 2011) process
frau ‘can be built distinguishing core pr Support p and
‘management processes:

+ Core process: What is the system actually in place for? What value does it deliver
for its customers?

+ Support process: What resources and services are needed to make the core
processes work?

+ Management processes: What is needed to give the system the right direction,
evaluate current performance and initiate interventions?

‘The approach presented here suggests a general grouping of processes according,
to these three categories: Within each category, the project team is free to position,

their processes in a way itis meaningful forall stakeholders. Particularly within the
core-process area, structures have often been designed by project teams that have a
‘symbolic meaning. Examples are a wide range of letter-shaped frameworks, such as.
the retail H, the consulting C or the university U (Becker et al., 2011). In this regard,

the process framework has a strong symbolic power. It is an important element for

the identification of the team and serves as a powerful means for communication.

--- PAGE 82 ---
Another advantage of the process framework presented here is its applicability in
various business units and on different levels of abstraction. For instance, a process
area classified as a support process on a corporate scale (e.g, human resource
management) may well be further analyzed in more detail, while using cascading,
(see Figure 6.7). Applying the three-staged framework, again, this support process
‘ean be analyzed unfolding a core, support and management process area itself (e.g.
core, support and management related to human resource management). By means
of this, the approach is therefore suitable for both standardizing framework design
‘ona corporate scale and offering flexibility to analyze specific business areas more
specifically.

1. Identify and allocate major building blocks of a business environment and relate
these blocks to one another.

2. Create a process framework distinguishing core processes, support processes and
‘management processes.

Allot of BPM initiatives get lost in detail and, thus, miss focus and fail to contribute

value. Hence, process design in BTM? should start making sure that focus and

direction are set right for future phases.

(642 PROCESS SLATURITY MODEL,

In addition to capturing the operational environment of process areas itis vital to
understand the maturity level of processes ~ and process management capabilities ~
in these areas of interest. Most of today’s maturity models go back to the Capal
Maturity Model (CMM) developed by the Software Engineering Institute at Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA. This model was originally developed in order to
assess the maturity of software development processes. The basis for applying the
model is confirmed by Paulk et al. (1993) who stated that improved maturity results
“in an increase in the process capability of the organization”. CMM introduces the
concept of five maturity levels: by special requirements that are cumt

‘Today, a vast number of maturity models have been designed for special purposes.
Among others, Harmon (2004) developed a BPM maturity model based on the CMM
(Gee also Harmon, 2003). An overview on BPM maturity models is given by
Rosemann and vom Brocke (2010). The maturity levels being characteristic for these
models are illustrated in Figure 6.8.

A process maturity analysis places the maturity level of a ‘spl
along a scale tailored to its business process requirements. The approach accounts
for the context dependency of BPM. Henee, it is not intended that all companies
reach the highest level of maturity in all pr On the contrary, there is also
‘g00d reason to remain on lower levels of maturity, considering, for example, the
‘dynamics of a certain business area. Take for example a start-up company. A high
level of maturity in terms of well ized and pr could be
very dangerous for such an organization, since over-engineering could harm
‘creativity and flexibility needed to leverage opportunities. Once the organization is
‘growing, however, a greater need for rules and structures may be needed in order to
safeguard quality in well-established areas of business and to coordinate a greater
amount of people. However, once companies have reached an overall need for higher
process maturity, we still need to consider that some areas might need less rules to
foster creativity and flexibility. Typically, processes in research and design, to give an
‘example, are considered such areas, The maturity assessment intends to picture the
‘current maturity level processes in a certain area in order to learn how to evaluate
and potentially further develop the processes.

Assessing the maturity level of processes, specific evaluations need to be carried
‘out within the organization. Most CIOs and CPOs have a good understanding of,

ty levels oftheir p ‘even though no formal mi
system is used. Some companies distinguish levels other than the ones from CMM,
also depending on the maturity of the process management approach itself. The
longer the company is engaged in BPM, the more meaningful different stages of
maturity become. In order to apply a more systematic approach to maturity level
assessment, questionnaires and employee surveys can be used. Models such as CMM
provide criteria to fic levels of maturity. As an ‘we refer to the
BPM maturity by de Bruin (2007). Together with the comprehensive description
available on this model, the BPM maturity model may also serve as a good starting
point to develop an individual set of questions for maturity assessment in BTM2. In
Figure 6.8 we give an example of such a maturity model that has been further
discussed in Chapter 3, Strategy Management.

Adapting questionnaires for maturity assessment allows considering specific
requit of certain domain or business areas. It is possible to derive specific
measures for a process that is, for example, drawn from strategic measures of the
“organization. How mature is the process in the light of the company’s overall
strategy? These measures can be consolidated in an area-specific maturity level plan,
‘which represents the sequence of the targeted measures and focuses on the
‘company’s long-term objectives. At the same time, building on a standard for
maturity level assessment supports communication and allows for benchmarking,
How mature is a process compared to partnering companies or competitors? Often a
‘combination of standardized measures vlus company secific measures is used in

--- PAGE 83 ---
practice.
Considering the maturity level of processes is actually a vital element for all
subsequent decisions on business transformation. For instance, implementing
processes and process controlling in a specific business unit needs to consider
‘whether the maturity is either level one (non-organized processes) or level four
(managed processes). That said, we also need to account for lower levels of maturity
in order to not force organizations to structures implemented in software systems
that are too rigid for the organization. In fact, this is one of the big mistakes most
BPM initiatives made in the past decades. We need to consider that a lower maturity
level is not something negative per se but may well be grounded in the special
requirements of the business and then, process implementation and management
need to consider this. In particular, dealing with lower levels of process maturity can
be seen as one of the major challenge of today’s process implementation. Often, we
do not have the time to raise process maturity first before implementing or rolling
‘out more automated processes (or we should actually not even intend to do it due to
ial requi ‘of a business unit). Its rather the ‘of learning how to
provide sufficient IT support also for processes of low maturity and then, potentially
further develop the process as it evolves. At Hilti, for instance, process management
follows a solid core and flexible boundary-approach (vom Brocke etal, 2011), While
‘core components are highly standardized, innovative and evolving solutions are
integrated in information systems ecosystem at the same time. Software delivery
models, wg highly ‘and work-related appl provide
promising means to dynamically support processes by selected IT-related services.

Figure 6.8 Four stages of processes maturity and transformation readiness

‘CHALLENGES CONCERNING THE PROCESS MATURITY MODEL: =

a | process maturity analysis by placing the maturity level of 's
processes along a scale tailored to its business process requirements.

2, Assess the maturity level of processes by using questionnaires and employee
surveys.

‘3 Consolidate the measures in an area-specific maturity level plan, which represents
the sequence of the targeted measures and focuses on the company’s long-term

4, Interpreting the measurement results by relating the maturity level to the specific
requirements of an organization. A high level of maturity does not need to be a
‘g00d thing, It is rather about finding the most appropriate level regarding a
specific capability that supports the organizations’ requirements best.

eV MESSAGE:

‘The maturity assessment intends to picture the current maturity level processes in a

certain area in order to learn how to evaluate and potentially further develop the

processes. A lower maturity level is not something negative per se but may well be

‘grounded in the special requirements ofthe business and then, process

implementation and management need to consider this.

{65 BPM Governance and Process Design Engaging)

While modeling of processes marks a major part of BPM (Recker et al., 2009), we
need to push BPM beyond modeling in order to successfully support business
transformation. During the past years we witnessed companies investing in large-
‘scale modeling projects with little (to no) value contribution. One major reason of
this is that such companies neglected the organizational dimension of BPM (vom
Brocke and Roseman, 2010b). Among the organizational issues related to BPM,
process governance plays an important role. Its essential to make processes “real”
for people, comprising to assure processes are both meaningful and relevant in their
daily work, Hence, as one major element of engaging into BPM we focus on BPM
‘governance before we then cover issues of process design by modeling activities and
methods.

sums covennance =
In general, BPM governance refers tothe institutionalization of BPM in an
Inthe lit both the governance of p (Markus and

Jacobson, 2010) and the governance of process management as such (Spanyi, 2010)
are distinguished. So, the question is either (a) who is actually in charge of a process
‘or (b) who is in charge of certain process management activities? As part of BTM2,
we refer to BPM governance simply as all organizational activities that are relevant
‘when engaging in the transformation of business processes. This particularly
‘comprises the following aspects:

+ BPM roles and tasks: Make sure all activities relevant for a BPM initiative are

--- PAGE 84 ---
planned and assigned.

+ BPM terminology: Make sure all stakeholders speak the same language in terms of,
processes.

+ BPM methodology: Make sure all stakeholders follow the same approach and
produce valuable consistent results.

+ BPM tools: Make sure appropriate tool support is available to facilitate BPM
activities.

‘The management of BPM governance comprises taking according decisions and
implementing measures to actually adopt such governance structures within an
“organization. So, on the one hand, roles need to be defined, a terminology needs to
be agreed upon, a methodology needs to be chosen and tools need to be in place. On
the other hand, however, management needs to make sure that such governance
structures are actually lived by all employees. So, itis vital, for example, that roles,
are in fact taken and people are fully committed and empowered to their process
related tasks, The terminology needs to be understood and shared by all stakeholders
‘and the methodology and tools, likewise, need to be perceived as useful and easy to
apply by all employees.

While it may sound obvious that people actually need to adopt the governance
structure, most BPM initiatives that fail, actually do fail because of a lack of

7 ‘on the contrary, have how to

effectively set a good frame for BPM initiatives. In most cases, it has proven to start
‘small. Considering the most relevant aspects it is important to take decisions and to
‘g0 with these decisions allowing for continuous organizational learning processes.
‘The more the organization is its ty in BPM the more differentiated
the governance structures can become. In most companies, this is quite a natural
process once the organization starts learning and adapting these structures. In the
following, we will discuss essential elements of BPM governance in more detail

at led aks

In order to define roles and tasks, a decision matrix can be applied. In general, roles

‘such as the process owner, the process manager, the process participants, the

process analysts and the process sponsor can be distinguished. The process owner is
taking responsibility for a process. Process owners set target and budget for the

process and report results on the corporate level. They closely collaborate with a

process manager taking care of more operational issues related to the process (e.g.

sales executive). The process manager is responsible for reaching performance =
targets in budget and to coordinate different resources related to the process

accordingly (e.g sales manager). As such, process participants play a special role as

those employees essentially conducting work steps planned within the process (e.g.

sales person). While these roles characterize a typical primary governance structure,
secondary structures are added in order to support process innovation. Here, the

process analyst plays a major role whose role isto consult process managers (and

‘owners) in continuously reflecting and improving their business. Often, process

analysts are situated either in IT or business units. Some. ies start building
so-called BPM of serving as i for
process expertise (Roseman, 2010). Other companies also recruit so-called process
‘coaches, who actually accompany and mentor process owners implementing change
projects (Novotny and Rohmann, 2010). Since the alignment of both IT and business

is a major issue in process management, also rotation schemes can be applied having
process analysts and coaches move positions from IT- to business-related areas and

vice versa. In the end, companies need to find a solution that actually fits thei
individual background and context. The roles illustrated here may help providing
some sort of orientation.

Ps tery
Itis essential that all stakeholders speak the same language in terms of processes
(Becker et al., 2003). We have to make sure that all employees actually share the
‘same concept when using terms like order and check. Often, looking at process
descriptions, however, variances in the wording can be found, like check order or
‘evaluate order or prove order. 1s there a difference in meaning? Actually, in process
management itis essential to refer to items as precisely as possible. Synonyms
(different words for the same meaning) and homonyms (same words with different
‘meanings), in particular, shall be avoided. For that purpose organization need to
build up a process glossary comprising the most relevant terms of business.
Particularly, nouns and verbs need to be standardized in the sense that they have a
definite meaning and that only those nouns and verbs are used (e.g. in process
descriptions) that are part of the repertoire of standardized words. Building the
terminology of an organization, standards can be used that are under continuous
development in certain business areas and that can be adapted to a company-specific
‘environment (Hofreiter and vom Brocke, 2010).

dr mehadtoy
Itis essential that the BPM approach applied in an organization is clearly defined
and communicated to all stakeholders. All employees need to know why the initiative
is launched and what actions and results they can expect. Apart from informing
employees, gaining their support for the methodology turns out to be very important.
In a number of cases, however, employees keep reporting that the corporate BPM
{snot applicable wel in their specifi business and does hardly

--- PAGE 85 ---
any varue tor Weir day WORK. 1 SOME EXLEML, US TEIETS 10 EMAWENEES OL
between centralization and lization in organi

(Tregear, 2010). More specifically, however, this also reveals a major challenge that

needs to be taken seriously when defining the BPM methodology. This means that =
‘context factors for BPM in various business areas need to be taken

into account. BPM methodologies need to make sense for special business areas and

they also need to prove delivering value. BPM approaches ignoring this, by applying

‘one standard approach throughout the organization are very likely to fail. At the

‘same time, those approaches succeeding in being perceived as useful throughout the

‘organization will find it easy to sustain and grow. Hence, itis recommended only to

standardize to a certain degree but then also leave flexibility to adopt the BPM

methodology to certain business requirements, whether you examine for example,

the innovation process or the goods received process of an organization.

a tt eton

‘Once more and more business processes are analyzed within an organization, tool
‘support is getting increasingly important. One aspect is to organize the various
models captured within an organization. In this regard, tools offer services to archive
process descriptions in form of a process repository (Hammer, 2010). Considering
BPM as an ongoing management approach, also functions supporting the
maintenance and further development of process knowledge play an important role.
In this regard, it has been advocated that features supporting knowledge sharing and
Aiscourse need to be incorporated in BPM tools (vom Brocke and Thomas, 2006). To
date, new developments in the field of social media offer new opportunities to
‘support for collaborative BPM (Lind and Seigerroth, 2010; Richter et al., 2011) that
are also discussed within the context of enterprise 2.0 (Kemsley, 2010). While
selecting a tool for BPM is important, not too much time should be spent on
‘evaluating alternative products. While a good preparation of BPM is basically
recommendable, some companies actually spend too much time on selecting or
implementing tools and then fall short in actual process-related work. The most
important thing isto select a tool and start working with it. Following this notion,

the criterion of global standards and the support by a wide range of experts becomes
important. This ensures interoperability and also allows adapting tool support in line
‘with the evolving maturity in BPM of the organization.

‘CHALLENGES CONCERNING BPM GOVERNANCE:

4. Apply a decision matrix in order to define roles and tasks.

2. Make sure that all employees actually share the same concept (by using eg. a
process glossary).

43 Define the BPM approach applied in an organization and communicate it to all
stakeholders.

4- Organize the various models captured within an organization (by using a process
repository).

KEY MESSAGE:

‘While it may sound obvious that people actually need to adopt the governance

, most BPM initiatives that fail do so of a lack of.

‘These elements of the BPM governance set the frame for process-related work. =
‘This work is essentially characterized by process design, which is described in more
detail in the next section.
(652 PROCESS DESIGN

While we emphasize that BPM should not be limited to process modeling, the design.
‘of process models does certainly mark an essential element in BPM. Just like
architects building houses and designing urban space do not start building right
away, BPM architects also need to plan processes properly first. In fact, also looking
into the emergence of BPM, capabilities of actually being able to engineer processes
‘can be seen as a dist ‘of the BPM discipline. Hence, BPM provides a
‘sound package of methods to be applied in order to actually model processes before
starting to implement them in practice.

‘The power of a process model is that it serves to analyze a process and to evaluate

-ways of redesigning it. This is mainly of three tics of a

‘model that can be distinguished according to general model theory (Stachowiak,
1973):

1. Representation: a process model is a description of business, not the business
itself; hence it allows playing around with the process before actually changing,
business.

2. Abstraction: a process model provides a description that is actually reduced to the
‘most relevant aspects of processes; hence, it intentionally leaves out aspects that
are perceived as less important and, thus, helps to focus in process-related studies.

43: Intention: a process model provides a description that is meant to fulfill a certain
purpose. This purpose actually tells what aspects of a process are more or less
important to be incorporated in the model. Hence, basically, process model are
not wrong or right. They need to be designed in a way they are perceived to be
useful by people working on certain process-related issues.

With these characteristics in mind, designing processes needs thorough support
in practice in order to deliver value. According to BTM2, the following phases are

--- PAGE 86 ---
+ Calibration: serves to prepare modeling in order to ensure value contribution
through modeling.
+ As-is analysis: serves to depict the current state of processes and thus provides a
foundation for change activities.
+ To-be design: services to describe an alternative process design the process that
serves as a blueprint for the business transformation.
+ Solution transformation: serves to ensure process implementation, particularly
though mapping process models to software implementations.
Each phase will now be described in more detail. Given the limited space, we also
refer to further publications providing more insight into specific aspects of process
design.

cttrtion
‘Since process modeling is not a means in itself a phase of process calibration is,
recommended to start with. This particularly means to choose your targets first
before getting into detail extensively describing single processes. Methodologically,
the p provides a first good orientation. It basically helps to focus on
specific areas of the process landscape relevant for a specific business
transformation. In addition, it is important to further specify the objectives of the
transformation: What problem is addressed? What processes could be related to this
problem? Is there a benchmark for the performance of these processes regarding the
problem? What stakeholders are involved and what objectives do they have related
to the processes at hand? These are guiding questions providing important
information to both (a) identify processes for further evaluation and (b) derive
«criteria for evaluating alternative process design of these processes.

In order to support calibration, process portfolios can be designed according to
‘multiple evaluation criteria. One example, as presented by Hammer and Champy
(1993), is to distinguish between the need to reorganize and the process value (see
Figure 6.9). In addition, further evaluation criteria may well be applied, such as cost,
risk, strategic importance or frequency of processes (e.g. Becker et al, 2011).

ion
ecrgance

tow Te Pes
Figure 6.9 Process portfolio for process calibration
‘Source: Hammer and Champ, 1993,

Asa result the calibration phase provides the project team with alist of processes
to be further analyzed along with criteria for process improvement.

Av ating

‘This serves to describe the current situation of a business process in the focus of
interest. In BPM particularly graphical process modeling languages are applied in
‘order to describe processes. The objective is to provide a description of the processes
that is preferably clear and definite but easy to understand at the same time, Hence,
so-called semi-formal are commonly applied that provide st

constructs describing major elements of business processes, such as activities, flows
and logical connectors. An overview of contemporary languages is available in
Appendix D of this book.

According to an empirical study, the Event-driven Process Chain (EPC) isamong
the most commonly used languages in BPM projects (Davies et al., 2006). An
‘example of an EPC mode! is given in Figure 6.10. The example particularly shows the
intermediating role of processes, with process models integrating enterprise models
from various other views, i. data, functions, organizational and output view.

Figure 6.10 Process design using the ARIS framework
Selecting the right process modeling language, the specific context of process =

design activities in an organization needs to be considered. Once a greater amount of

process models as to be designed, process integration, for instance, becomes a major

--- PAGE 87 ---
issue. In addition, leveraging process models for multiple purposes, the adaptability
and extendibility of process descriptions isa valuable characteristic. Last but not
least, when considering process implementation, also vertical integration is highly
important. In this regard, modeling languages should support reusing conceptual
models for customizing and workflow management.

In general, good process modeling languages should provide both a core set of
constructs applicable for most ofthe processes and options of extending the process
description according to specific purposes. An emerging standard in BPM is the
Business Process Modeling Notation (BPMN) that is currently available in the
version 2.0 (see Object Management Group, 2011). The BPMN focuses on the
modeling of the logical ordering of activities (Havey, 2005; Weske, 2007). Until the
publication of version 2.0 the BPMN only provided a single diagram type for this
task: the Business Process Diagram (BPD). Unlike other process modeling languages
like the EPC or IDEF, the BPMN does not support multi-perspective process
modeling, eg. to describe value chains, organizational structures or data structures,

Since version 2.0 the BPMN provides means to model a global view on the
interaction of multiple collaboration partners (ie. to model distributed processes).
For this purpose the BPMN has been extended with a conversation diagram
c the within an, ion, ) and the choreography
<iagram (specifies a single conversation between two partners). Both diagram types
‘establish an external, inter-organizational perspective on the interplay of multiple
collaboration partners. Internal pr of individual process participants are then
modelled by means of BPD. The notation elements used in the BPD represent
<ifferent object types, which can be used to describe business processes (Object
Management Group, 2011). The BPMN distinguishes between flow objects,
connecting objects, swimlanes, artefacts and data objects. Figure 6.11 provides an

BPMN comprises many more notation than used in the example. The
jered here belong to the BPMN core and are the most frequently
applied elements in business process modeling (cf. zur Muehlen and Recker, 2008):

+ Flow objects are to connecting obj flows:
activities and specify the order oftheir execution.

+ Swimlanes allow for the description of responsibilities for the activity execution.

+ Artefacts serve to capture context specific particularities within a process model.
Annotations are frequently used for this purpose.

+ Data objects represent all information and documents which flow through a
process.

The example shows two internal p , which are within two pools.
This isa typical scenario for the modeling of distributed processes (choreography).
‘The processes or the process pools are connected by means of message flows. The
choreography is initiated by the internal process of Organization X. After Unit has
the first task, Unit 2 continues the process execution and sends a
to Organization ¥. The receipt of this message triggers the process execution in
Organization Y. In the course of this process execution a new message is generated
‘and sent back to Organization X. In the meantime, the internal process of
Organization X has been waiting until the receipt of the response of Organization Y.
On the receipt ofthe message, alternative tasks (Task 3 or Task 4) are executed
‘depending on the evaluation result of the conditions specified with the process
model.

i

Figure 6.11 Example of process model in BPMN

In general, as-is processes serve as a foundation to find options for process
improvement. In BPM a wide range of techniques is available, actually supporting to
craft ideas to further develop processes. A good set of examples is collected in the Six
‘Sigma approach, including cause and effect diagrams, pareto diagrams and root
‘cause analysis (e.g. Motorola, 2009; Conger, 2010). In BTM2, however, we face a
special situation, since results from strategic management, value management and,
risk management already predefine the direction for process (re)design in most
‘eases. In addition, more substantial rather than incremental changes are the subject,
of interest. In this situation, the analysis ofthe as-is models needs to specifically
focus on identifying specific areas in the processes affected by business
transformation. As a deliverable, these areas need to be identified and the expected
‘change to these areas needs to be outlined briefly. This sets the scene for the next
phase of to-be modeling.

Tote daign

‘The to-be phase is concerned with the future design of the processes. In principle,

--- PAGE 88 ---
the phase seamlessly continues the analysis ofthe previous phase by erafting
alternative future pictures of the processes of interest. Hence, from the modeling,
perspective, the same process modeling languages are used. In fact, most to-be
‘models actually evolve from the as-is models through revision and extension.

One element, however, that is particularly challenging (while underestimated in
most BPM approaches), is how to actually find the right to-be design. I fac, it isnot
the description of to-be models but rather the invention of the desirable to-be state
‘that is demanding in practice. How can you actually assure that a to-be process is
superior to another one? In conventional BPM literature, little guidance is provided
for this essential task of BPM. Those recommendations that are available are mostly
‘qualitative and remain rather abstract in a sense of avoiding unnecessary interfaces
or jn data formats. Those tions, as for to be derived
‘from lean management avoiding different types of waste (Ohno, 1988), help to find
ideas on how to improve processes incrementally. They provide little decision

+ in comparing alternative process regarding their
contribution to strategy.

{In contemporary BPM, however, complex design alternatives need to be evaluated
that can hardly be taken based on an intuitive assessment. How to use the cloud?
How to leverage mobile applications? Such decisions include a myriad of part
decisions with diverse parameters to be taken into |. Hence,

need to be designed helping decisic to exemplary design and
calculate alternative process variants. Since to-be models do not directly derive from
as-is models, potential models help to evaluate further evaluate economic
oi of process design (vom Brocke etal, 2009). The of potentials
models is illustrated in Figure 6.12.

‘The concept of potentials modeling intends to provide decision support in process

redesign. These methods facilitate computing the actual return on process

for specific design ives taking into specific
parameters of process design. That way, so-called potential models are designed
‘beforehand as candidates for to-be models result to further evaluation.

Apotential model covers relevant design alternatives to be compared with each
‘other in terms of their value proposition in a specific organizational situation. In
terms of decision theory, an ive represents one out of mult ve
decision choices (Grob, 1993). In the course of an information systems (re)design,
thus, several potentials models are compared in order to finally identify the most

i ive. The concept of potenti ing distinguishes factual and

value-oriented potentials that are considered as follows:

Figure 6.12 Finding to-be models via the evaluation of potentials models

+ The factual specification of design alternatives forms the foundation for further =
analysis. Considering the SOA example, this means e.g. to capture alternative
services for supporting individual functions ~ but also the various alternatives for
business process redesign.

+The i iated with the design alternatives are
documented and consolidated within value-oriented potentials models (e.g. by
‘means of financial measures).

+ On that basis, the alternatives can be compared and design decisions can
successively be modified.

+ Such an evolutionary approach makes it possible to create, compare and modify
potentials models until ~ from a decision maker's perspective ~ a beneficial
alternative has been identified. The latter finally represents the to-be model for the
subsequent implementation.

Asa key measure, the return on process transformation may serve as an example
to evaluate the performance of an alternative process design (see Figure 6.13). In
‘order to analyze the profitability of an alternative process redesign, both the
potential return and the investment needed is to be taken into account.

+ Assessing the return: Since a return can often hardly be quantified, both Total
Payments of Process Ownership (TPPO) with (process p’) and without (process p)
redesign are computed (level o and 1). The Return is then operationalized exactly
by the difference between the TPPO of p' and the TPPO of p.

+ Assessing the i The i is operationalized by the total payments
needed to conduct the business transformation from p to p’ the Total Payments of
Process Transformation (TPPT). The TPPT include, for example, initial payments
for licenses but also efforts for communicating and training new practices.

‘When assessing both TPPO and TPPT, long-term economic consequences need to
‘be taken into account. Hence, a dynamic calculation needs to be carried out
‘considering multiple periods in time. Often, a planning horizon of five years gives a
‘g00d indication, Summing up both the return (TPPO p'- TPPO p) and the

‘of payments in process (CTPPT), one representative series
AE cn et hd as Actin bo hana naan Ganesh floes A

--- PAGE 89 ---
his series of payments — so-called original payments — builds the foundation for
further computing the derivative payments resulting from the financial sector. These
payments include, for example, interest rates and taxes. Since the economic effects of
the process transformation have been aggregated in one representative series of
‘payments, well-established methods from investment accounting can be applied
here, like the net present value, the pay off period or the return on investment (Grob,
1993; vom Brocke and Grob, 2011).

eat

Figure 6.13 for the return on

Calculating the TPPO different levels of detail can be applied. In practice a two-
staged approach is often useful. First, a rough assessment based on expert opinion
‘can be conducted, Second, based on such first results, selected aspects of the
calculation can be detailed on demand. For such detailed calculation, also process
models can serve as a basis to further analyze resource utilization and frequencies of
certain process branches (vom Brocke et al, 2010). Former research has provided
models to evaluate the return of process transformation for a wide range of process
ion projects, includi i ing and out-tasking (vor.
Brocke, 2007) and utilizing customer communities (vom Brocke et al, 2010).
‘The return on process transformation is one measure for decision support in
P ign. In practice, this i ion can well it sion making,
‘which indeed needs to take into account a wider range of decision criteria. Once a =
decision for a to-be process has been made, both the to-be state and the set of
i to ‘business transformation are available. On that basis
«detailed roadmap can be developed particularly including solution transformation.

enn remtinnsto|

Most process management approaches actualy fll short closing the loop by actually
implementing to-be processes in an organization. Implementing processes needs to
consider both people- and IT-related activities (e.g. Harmon, 2010). While, following,
BIIM?, the process transformation is covered in a special phase, the solution

transformation step described here intends to prepare this transformation best. This
is done by actually mapping the to-be process to both human and techni

in order to make sure the to-be processes can actually be performed according to its
specification. In order to support this step, a process implementation matrix can be
designed showing the various relations (see Figure 6.14).

‘The process implementation matrix illustrated in Figure 6.14 applies the structure
‘of so-called RA(S)CI models (Responsible, Accountable, Supportive, Consulted,
Informed). The matrix has been extended in order to also assign IT resources. For a
more detailed analysis, different views can be taken when mapping the process to IT
resources:

+ Component view: map to-be processes to SAP solution components using SAP
solution composer.

+ Process view: map to-be processes to SAP services from the repository of the SAP
solution manager.

+ Data view: map to-be processes to SAP data objects.

o[ [#

Ea

a-a] a4

Figure 6.14 Process implementation matrix

Processes.

2. Design process portfolios according to multiple evaluation criteria.

43, Provide the project team with a list of processes to be further analyzed along with

4. Select the right process modeling language for the specific context of process
design in an organization.

‘5. Focus on identifying specific areas in the processes affected by business
transformation.

8 Waaleatt the secwinunic remantmonces of alternative nerves dnciene bw minancok

--- PAGE 90 ---
potential models.

7. Use the return on process transformation as an example to evaluate the
performance of an alternative process design.

‘8. Compare several potentials models in order finally to identify the most beneficial
alternative.

«9. Design a process implementation matrix showing the various relationships
‘between to-be processes and human and technical resources.

‘The power of a process model is that it serves to analyze a process and to evaluate
-ways of redesigning it. This is mainly of the ti

representation, abstraction and intention of a model. In addition to factual process
flows, however, also the economic consequences driven by a process design need to
‘be analyzed based on these processes models.

‘The solution transformation ensures that all factual considerations for the
implementation of the to-be process are decided upon and prepared. This provides a
‘good prerequisite for the implementation and controlling of processes.

{66 implementation of Processes and Controlling (Transforming)

With a focus on IT, this section describes the actual implementation of the to-be
processes according to the implementation matrix. With respect to people, this
particularly comprises to set up a controlling system. Actual execution of changes
regarding technology and people's behavior are is a focus of two management
Aisciplines of BTM2, namely Transformational IT Management and Organizational
‘Change Management. However, some related activities remain rounding up the BPM.
process.

(663 DESION AND IAPLEMENT PROCESS CONTROLLING

What gets measured gets done. This, indeed, also holds true for processes. In
particular, when it comes to changing the way people are: todo their work,
rement turns out to be essential. It is important to cate clear targets
and to also measure the results and take action on deviations. In BTM2, this part of =
business transformation is referred to as process controlling.
Contributions on process controlling go back to early work in management
accounting (Johnson and Kaplan, 1987). While the term process controlling is
particularly used in the German-speaki ity (Scheer and Breitling, 2000),
‘on an international scale performance measurement, and process performance
measurement in particular, are rather used instead (Heck and Moormann, 2010).
‘The topic has caught particular interest ever since Kaplan/Norton first published
their paper on the balanced scorecard in the early 1990s (Kaplan and Norton, 1992).
‘The idea is to define a set of comprehensive performance measures, also called Key
Indicators (KPD) or. Indicators (PPD) that are
derived from the corporate strategy and that lead local action at the same time.
‘Typically, not only monetary measures, but measures from different target
«dimensions are considered in order to assure long-lasting economic success. Infact,
the definition of performance indicator is instrumental for every type of,
management system. So, most management disciplines in BTM? would present
approaches to define specific KPIs related to their specific management area.
Designing and implementing a corporate performance measurement system
follows a certain pattern (Kaplan and Norton, 2008). The steps considered in BTM?
‘comprise the following:

+ Define area of application: specify the process to be measured.

+ Define process performance indicators: specify the measures to be used.

+ Design reports and cockpits: specify the format of presenting measurement results.

my reports and cockpits: technically realize the meast y
accordingly.

Among the various steps, finding the right process performance indicators (PPIs)
‘actually turns out to be the most central task. Since what gets measured gets done,
there is also the risk of measuring the wrong things and, thus, getting the wrong,
things done. There was, for example, a university, measuring the amount of
publications published on a yearly basis; however, it did not consider the quality of
these publications. The result was that a great amount of papers was published, most
‘of them, however, in poorly ranked but easy-to-get formats. Obviously, this was not
the desired result and, in fact, a serious threat to the university's reputation.

‘The process performance measurement matrix presented in Figure 6.15 helps to
find appropriate PPIs:

‘The framework suggests per ‘measures in to () target
dimensions and (2) as shown in figure 6.15 controlling objects. The essential element
‘compared to the conventional approach is to explicitly consider (and model) tailor-
made target dimensions. These target dimensions should be derived from the overall
strategy and, thus, be kept consistent over different processes. Conventionally, such
target dimensions comprise cost, time and quality of processes (Becker et al, 2011),
also extended by the dimension of flexibility and referred to as the devil's
‘quadrangle of BPM (Reijers and Limam Mansar, 2005).

--- PAGE 91 ---
‘Most companies, however, have their own very specifi value system derived from

the strategy that — following this framework — can be projected on each process to be
Alot of for are ly concerned with integratis
sustainability measures in their corporate management system. Such an extension
‘ean be achieved by, for example, adding according value dimensions, eg. for social

‘and environmental sustainability ( iam and vom 2011; Seidel etal,
2011), which ultimately led to the concept of Green BPM (vom Brocke et al. 2012).
Given the individually of target ions and py

‘areas, (3) process performance indicators can be defined. In principle, each value
dimension needs to be considered for each process. This ensures a maximum degree
of strategy implementation in the processes.

@ re ent omersrt
Soon
@® owe sacrcopens | 7 7] [=

lia
Se

>

Om
fe ach yc cera Each
meron!

Figure 6.15 Process performance measurement matrix

‘CHALLENGES TO IE ADDRESSED WITHIN DESION AND IMPLEMENT PROCESS CONTROLLING:
4. Specify the process to be measured.

2. Specify the measures to be used (process performance indicators vs. key

4 Specify the format of presenting measurement results.

4. Technically realize the measurement system accordingly.

KEY MESSAGE:

‘The measurement system needs to fit the individual strategy of an organization. In
‘addition, measures need to be meaningful for single employees. The process
performance measurement matrix can help to bring both perspectives together.

Performance indicators are used to set targets. As such, they need tobe defined in
a SMART way:

+ Specific: the measures and targets should be meaningful for both process executors
and owners.

+ Measurable: accomplishment rate and progress towards target values has to be
measured.

+ Aligned: PPIs should be aligned with strategies and higher goals, which is basically
assured following the performance matrix framework,

+ Realistic: process executers should be able to reach (and over perform) their targets
at best performance.

+ Time-bound: targets need to be bound to atime frame.

Once the PPIs are defined from a business perspective, the controlling cockpit can
‘be designed and implemented accordingly.
(60 IMPLEMENTATION OF DESIONED PROCESSES
‘The i tion ofthe pr comprises both and non-technical
aspects ofthe implementation. In concordance with the positioning of BPM in BTM?
(see Figure 6.6), further details on process implementation are provided in Chapter 7
(Transformational IT Management), Chapter 8 (Organizational Change
Management), Chapter 9 (Competence and Training Management) and Chapter 10
(Program and Project Management).

{67 Ru and Monitor (Opting)

An important success factor for BPM is to continuously revisit the processes
designed and to also reconsider decisions taken before, Most BPM initiatives that
have not pr inable, actually did not account for the continuous nature of
BPM. Once an organization ran through the various stages described above, BPM is
not over but it rather starts, since itis initiated and, now, needs careful management.
‘Continuously revisiting the processes serves essentially two purposes:

4. Tt serves to evaluate the processes regarding potential changes in the process
i Such: regularly oceur, e.g. due to i ment
or changing business requirements.
2. Revisiting the processes essentially contributes to make processes real for
‘on the commitment of people to the entire BPM initiative.

‘BTM? actually distinguishes four phases of optimizing business processes. A brief
tion into these phases may give an overview of the activities in this
concluding and continuous phase of BPM.

--- PAGE 92 ---
+ execuung anu measuring tie process: IRE SUFE Ua EXECULEU PrUCESSES are ”
‘measured regarding their performance. For that purpose process performance
indicators defined in process controlling are used. To-be values and as-is values are
compared providing valuable data for performance analysis.

+ Analyzing the results: try to understand root causes of variances both in positive
and negative direction leading to corrective action. While data analysis might not
be sufficient for the identification of all root causes it can, however, provide first
identifications of issues.

+ Empower employees: make sure to align process performance to the management
system of the organization. Process-oriented goals must be agreed upon in order to
assure commitment and foster process-oriented thinking, Employees need to feel
in charge, responsible and empowered for process performance. Recurring process
audits help implementing such an empowerment.

+ Process optimization eyele: finally, mechanisms for taking action need to be
implemented. On the one hand, this means to take advantage of quick
improvements. On the other hand, further improvement plans need to be
developed and launched out of the continuous optimizing cycle.

1. Evaluate the processes in order to support learning in process execution.

2, Regularly consider potential changes in the process environment that call for
adaptations in the process.

{3 Ask people about their processes and “talk process” on a daily basis in order to
make processes meaningful and real forall employees.

KEY MESSAGE

‘Once new processes are implemented and running, don’t think BPM is over. It rather

starts right over and over again. Research shows that those companies who have

proven BTM are those who have the skill of

‘building the capabilities needed to manage their business processes continuously.

(6.8 Condlsion

In this chapter, we pr BPMas; type of BTM2. We.

described how to proceed implementing a transformation strategy in operational

‘business. That said, we did not describe BPM as a standalone discipline but rather as

contributing set of competencies in BTM?.

Hence, further considerations need to be taken into account, in order to

yi and manage busi ion that will be further

ith in Chapters 7-10, ‘on: Transformational IT Mi

(Organizational Change Management, and Competence and Training Management,

and Program and Project Management.

Last but not least, we would like to make the point that, despite of all the good =
advice from research and practice, there is no blueprint or silver bullet to BPM. On
the contrary, a successful BPM initiative needs to carefully take into account the
‘specific organizational conditions. Hence, the methods we presented may rather
serve as a toolbox that, however, still needs to be commanded carefully. A good
assessment of the organization's specific situation and singularity is probably the
‘most important key to BPM success.
ogni
Becker, Jérg and Kahn, Dieter (2011), The process in focus, in Process

‘Management: A Guide for the Design of Business Processes, 2nd ed., edited by

‘J&rg Becker, Martin Kugeler and Michael Rosemann (Berlin et al.: Springer).
Becker, Jorg, Dreiling, Alexander, Holten, Roland and Ribbert, Michael. Specifying,

information systems for business process integration — A management

perspective, Information Systems and E-Business Management 1, no. 3 (2003):

231-263.

Becker, Jérg, Martin Kugeler and Michael Roseman (eds) (2011), Process
‘Management: A Guide for the Design of Business Processes, 2nd ed. (Berlin et
al: Springer).

Chandler, Alfred D. (1962), Strategy and Structure: Chapters in the History of the
Industrial Enterprise (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).

‘Conger, Sue (20108), Six Sigma and business process management, in Handbook on

‘Management 1: tion, Methods, and Inf

‘Systems, edited by Jan vom Brocke and Michael Rosemann (Berlin, Heidelberg:

Springer).

Davies, Islay, Green, Peter, Rosemann, Michael, Indulska, Marta and Gallo, Stan
(2006), How do practitioners use conceptual modeling in practice?, Data &
‘Knowledge Engineering 58, no. 3, 358-80.

de Bruin, Tonia (2007), Insights into the evolution of BPM in organisations, in ACIS
2007 Proceedings, Paper 43: http://aisel aisnet.org/acis2007/43 (accessed
March 2012).

Grob, Heinz L. (1993), Capital Budgeting with Financial Plans: An Introduction
(Wiesbaden: Gabler).

Hailemariam, Getachew and vom Brocke, Jan (2011), What is sustainability in
business process management? A theoretical framework and its application in the
public sector of Ethiopia, in Business Process Management Workshops: BPM
2010 International Workshops and Education Track. Hoboken. NJ. USA.

--- PAGE 93 ---
‘September 2010, Revised Selected Papers, edited by Michael zur Muchlen and
Jianwen Su (Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer).

Hammer, Michael (2010a), What is business process management?, in Handbook

(on Business Process Management 1: Introduction, Methods, and Information
edited by Jan vom and Michael R (Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer).

Hammer, Michael and Champy, James (1993), Reengineering the Corporation: A
Manifesto for Business Revolution, 1st ed. (New York, NY: Harper Business).

Harmon, Paul (2003), Business Process Change: A Manager's Guide to Improving,
Redesigning, and Automating Processes (Amsterdam: Morgan Kaufmann).

Harmon, Paul (2004), Evaluating an organization’s business process maturity:
wwwbptrends.com/publicationfiles/03-
(04%20NL%20Eval%.20BP%20Maturity%20-%20Harmon.paf (accessed March
2012).

Harmon, Paul (2007), Business Process Change: A Guide for Business Managers
‘and BPM and Six Sigma Professionals, 2nd ed. (Amsterdam et al.: Morgan
Kaufmann).

Harmon, Paul (2010), The scope and evolution of business process management, in
Handbook on Business Process Management 1: Introduction, Methods, and
Information Systems, edited by Jan vom Brocke and Michael Rosemann (Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer).

Havey, Michael (2005), Essential Business Process Modeling (Sebastopol, CA:
OReilly).

Heckl, Diana and M Sirgen (2010b), performance in
Handbook on Business Process Management 2: Strategic Alignment,
Governance, People and Culture, edited by Jan vom Brocke and Michael
Rosemann (Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer).

Henderson, John C. and Venkatraman, N.V. (1993), Strategic alignment: leveraging

ion technology for transforming organizations, 1BM. Journal 32,
no. 1,272-84.

Hofreiter, Birgit and vom Brocke, Jan (2010), On the contribution of reference
‘modeling to e-business standardization — how to apply design techniques of
reference modeling to UN/CEFACT's modeling methodology, in Business Process
‘Management Workshops: BPM 2009 International Workshops, Ulm, Germany,
‘September 2009. Revised Papers: 671-682.

Johnson, H. Thomas and Kaplan, Robert S. (1987), Relevance Lost: The Rise and
Fall of Management Accounting (Boston, Mass: Harvard Business School Press).

Kaplan, Robert S. and Norton, David P. (1992), The| i:
that drive performance, Harvard Business Review 70, n0. 1, 71-9.

Kaplan, Robert S. and Norton, David P. (2008), The Execution Premium: Linking
‘Strategy to Operations for Competitive Advantage (Boston, Mass: Harvard
Business School Press).

Kemsley, Sandy (2010a), Enterprise 2.0 meets business process management, in
Handbook on Business Process Management 1: Introduction, Methods, and
Information Systems, edited by Jan vom Brocke and Michael Roseman (Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer).

Kosiol, Erich (1976), Organisation der Unternehmung, 2nd ed. (Wiesbaden:
Gabler).

Lind, Mikael and Seigerroth, Ulf (2010a), Collaborative process modeling: the
Intersport case study, in Handbook on Business Process Management 1:
Introduction, Methods, and Information Systems, edited by Jan vom Brocke and
Michael Roseman (Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer).

Luftman, Jerry (2005), Key issues for IT executives 2004, MIS Quaterly Executive
4, m0. 2, 269-85.

Markus, M.L. and Jacobson, Dax D. (2010b), Business process governance, in
Handbook on Business Process Management 2: Strategic Alignment,
Governance, People and Culture, edited by Jan vom Brocke and Michael

Roseman (Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer).

MeDonald, Mark P. and Aron, Dave (2010), Leading in times of transition: the 2010
C10 agenda, Gartner: www.gartner.com/id=1280013 (accessed March 2012).

Motorola, About Motorola University: the inventors of Six Sigma, Motorola
Corporation: www.motorola.com/content jsp?globalObjectld=3079 (accessed
September 2009).

Nordsieck, Fritz (1955), Rationalisierung der Betriebsorganisation, 2nd ed.
(Stuttgart: Poeschel).

Novotny, Stefan and Rohmann, Nicholas (2010b), Toward a global process
‘management system: the ThyssenKrupp Presta case, in Handbook on Business
Process Management 2: Strategic Alignment, Governance, People and Culture,
edited by Jan vom Brocke and Michael Rosemann (Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer).

‘Object Management Group (2011), Business process modeling notation (BPMN):
version 2.0: www.omg.org/spec/BPMN/2.0/PDF (accessed March 2012).

‘Ohno, Taiichi (1988), Toyota Production System: Beyond Large-scale Production
(Cambridge, Mass: Productivity Press).

Paulk, M.C., Curtis, B., Chrissis, M.B. and Weber, C.V. (1993), Capability maturity

IEEE Software 10, no. 4, 18-27.

Recker, Jan, Rosemann, Michael, Indulska, Marta and Green, Peter (2009),
Business process modeling — a comparative analysis, Journal of the Association

--- PAGE 94 ---
_for Information Systems 10, no. 4, Article 1:
http: //aise1aisnet.org/jais/vol10/iss4/1 (accessed March 2012).

Reijers, Hajo A. and Limam Mansar, Selma (2005), Best practices in business
process redesign: an overview and qualitative evaluation of successful redesign
heuristics, Omega 33, no. 4, 283-306.

Richter, Daniel, Riemer, Kai and vom Brocke, Jan (2011), Internet social
networking: state ofthe art and implications for enterprise 2.0,

& Information Systems Engineering 3, no. 2, 89-101.

Rosemann, Michael (2010b), The service portfolio of a BPM center of excellence, in
Handbook on Business Process Management 2: Strategic Alignment,
Governance, People and Culture, edited by Jan vom Brocke and Michael
Roseman (Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer).

Rosemann, Michael and vom Brocke, Jan (2010a), The six core elements of business
process management, in Handbook on Business Process Management 1:
Introduction, Methods, and Information Systems, edited by Jan vom Brocke and
Michael Roseman (Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer).

Rosemann, Michael, Recker, Jan and Flender, Christian (2008), Contextualisation
‘of business processes, International Journal of Business Process Integration and.
Management 3, no.1, 47-60.

‘Scheer, August-Wilhelm and Breitling, Markus (2000), Geschiftsprozesscontrolling
im Zeitalter des E-Business, Controlling 12, 8/9, 397-402.

‘SEI (2006), CMMI® for development, version 1.2, Software Engineering Institute,
Carnegie Mellon University: www.sei.cmu.edu/reports/06tro08. pdf (accessed
March 2012).

Seidel, Stefan, vom Brocke, Jan and Recker, Jan (2011), Call for action: investigating

Proceedings of SIGGreen Workshop. Sprouts: Working Papers on Information.
‘Systems, 11(4):http://sprouts.aisnet.org/11-4 (accessed March 2012).

Snabe, Jim H., Rosenberg, Ann, Moller, Charles and Scavillo, Mark (2009), Business
Process Management: SAP Roadmap, 1st ed. (Bonn, Boston: Galileo Press).

‘Spanyi, Andrew (2010b), Business process management governance, in Handbook
(on Business. 2: Strategic Alignment, Got , People
‘and Culture, edited by Jan vom Brocke and Michael Rosemann (Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer).

Stachowiak, Herbert (1973), Allgemeine Modelltheorie (Wien, New York: Springer).

‘Taylor, Frederick W. (2006), The Principles of Scientific Management (New York:
Cosimo).

‘Tregear, Roger (2010b), Business p rdization, in Hi ‘on
Process Management 2: Strategic Alignment, Governance, People and Culture,
edited by Jan vom Brocke and Michael Rosemann (Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer).

vvan der Aalst, Will M.P. and ter Hofstede, Arthur H.M. (2005), YAWL: yet another
workflow language, Information Systems 30, no. 4, 245-75.

vvan der Aalst, Will M.P. and van Hee, Kees Max (2002), Workflow Management:
‘Models, Methods, and Systems, 1st ed. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).

‘vom Brocke, Jan (2006), Design principles for reference modeling: reusing
information models by means of aggregation, specialisation, instantiation, and
analogy, in Reference Modeling for Business Systems Analysis, edited by Peter
Fettke and Peter Loos (Hershey, PA, USA: Idea Group Publishing).

‘vom Brocke, Jan (2007), Service portfolio measurement: evaluating financial
performance of service-oriented business processes, International Journal of
Web Services Research 4, no. 2, 1-32.

‘vom Brocke, Jan (2011), Business process management (BPM): a pathway for IT-
professionalism in Europe?, in Emerging Themes in Information Systems and
Organization Studies, edited by Andrea Carugati and Cecilia Rossignoli
(Heidelberg: Physica-Verlag).

‘vom Brocke, Jan and Grob, Heinz Lothar (2011), Profitability of business processes,
in Process Management: A Guide for the Design of Business Processes, 2nd ed,
edited by Jorg Becker, Martin Kugeler and Michael Rosemann (Berlin et al:
Springer).

‘vom Brocke, Jan and Michael Rosemann (eds) (2010a), Handbook on Business
Process Management 1: Introduction, Methods, and Information Systems
(Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer).

‘vom Brocke, Jan and Michael Rosemann (eds) (2010b), Handbook on Business
Process Management 2: Strategic Alignment, Governance, People and Culture
(Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer).

‘vom Brocke, Jan and Thomas, Oliver (2006), Reference modeling for organizational
change: applying collaborative techniques for business engineering, in AMCIS
2006 Proceedings, Paper 88: http://aisel.aisnet.org/amcis2006/88 (accessed
March 2012).

‘vom Brocke, Jan, Becker, Jérg, Maria Braccini, Alessio, Butleris, Rimantas,
Hofreiter, Birgit, Kapo ius, K stutis, Marco, Marco de, Schmidt, Giinter, Seidel,

Stefan, Simons, Alexander, Skopal, Tomas, Stein, Armin, Stieglitz, Stefan, Suomi,
Reima, Vossen, Gottfried, Winter, Robert and Wryeza, Stanislaw (2011), Current
and future issues in BPM research: a European perspective from the ERCIS
‘meeting 2010, Communications of the Association for Information Systems 28,
no. 1, 393-414.

vom Brocke, Jan, Petry, Martin and Schmiedel, Theresa (2011), How Hilti masters

--- PAGE 95 ---
fo" —1ne. 1 4, no. 1, 30-47.

‘vom Brocke, Jan, Recker, Jan and Mendling, Jan (2010), Value-oriented process
‘modeling: integrating financial perspectives into business process re-design,
Business Process Management Journal 16, no. 2, 333-56-

‘vom Brocke, Jan, Seidel, Stefan and Recker, Jan (eds) (2012), Green Business
Process Management: Towards the Sustainable Enterprise (Berlin: Springer).
‘vom Brocke, Jan, Sonnenberg, Christian, Lattemann, Christoph and Stieglitz, Stefan

(2010), Assessing the total cost of ownership of virtual communities, in
Handbook of Research on Web 2.0, 3.0, and X.0: Technologies, Business, and
‘Social Applications, edited by San Murugesan (Hershey, PA, USA: IGI Global).

‘vom Brocke, Jan, Sonnenberg, Christian and Simons, Alexander (2009), Value-
oriented information systems design: the concept of potentials modeling and its
application to service-oriented architectures, Business & Information Systems
Engineering 1, 0. 3, 223-33.

‘Weske, Mathias (2007), Business Process Management: Concepts, Languages,
Architectures (Berlin et al.: Springer).

Zairi, Mohamed (1997), Business process management: a boundaryless approach to

tiveness, Busi 3,0. 1, 64-80.

‘zur Muehlen, Michael and Indulska, Marta (2010), Modeling languages for business
processes and business rules: a representational analysis, Information Systems
35,0. 4, 379-90.

‘Zur Muehlen, Michael and Recker, Jan (2008), How much language is enough?
‘Theoretical and practical use ofthe business process modeling notation, in
Advanced Information Systems Engineering 20th International Conference,
CAISE 2008 Montpellier, France, June 16-20, 2008 Proceedings, edited by
‘Zohra Bellahséne and Michel Léonard (Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer). =

Ce ane

aes sue ovens rece < Preousehoter Westenapter > 0)

--- PAGE 96 ---
"

Bes, eae oi

‘Tran tional I ion Technology (IT) thas dis
objectives. First of all, it evaluates the impact of current IT processes, IT
‘competencies and IT systems on business transformation ~ and vice versa.

‘Additionally, T onal IT M IT-related

for business tra ion, Trai ional IT M yent safeguards the
design, implementation, roll-out and deployment of business transformation. It
‘enables operations, maintenance and support of transformation deliverables. Last,
but not least, Transformational IT Management also covers operations (continuous,
improvement).

‘Transformational IT Management within BTM? addresses the following steps
(referring tothe tra ion lifecycle) for business ts

1. Envision: assesses and enables solution readiness ofthe organization. For this
purpose, an analysis of the organization's transformation maturity is conducted
with special focus on IT and operational capabilities.

2. Engage: defines to-be IT analysis and assesses gap to as-is. Defines the
application, data and technology architecture. Sets up a transformation roadmap.

Transform: deploys IT operations and services and implement IT governance.

4- Optimize: improves IT operations and services and manage IT lifecycle
‘management.

‘owecrIves oF THis cHLAFTIER:

10 ivities that guide Tra ional IT Mani

2. Learn about key success factors for Transformational IT Management.

4: Describe interdependencies between Transformational IT Management and other
management disciplines of BTM?.

‘7.2 Transformational IT Management in BTM =

‘Managing business transformati dns a key challenge for com
the fact that there are many methodologies and systematic approaches around.
Business transformations are triggered by different causes, eg, shifts on markets,
technology innovations, economical changes such as globalization or changes of soft
factors (Kotter, 1996). Regardless ofthe transformation trigger, it is crucial for
‘business transformation to align IT transformation with organizational
‘transformation (Ein-Dor and Segev, 1982). Such alignment is mutual because the
relationship of IT and business is mult ‘While many IT tra tion
might induce izational in order to be imp! ted lly, most
‘organizational changes require appropriate IT changes (Bauml, 2005).

‘Transformational IT Management needs to consider the double role of IT, being
‘sometimes the driver and sometimes the driven. Since both roles of IT are closely
related to the business, Transformational IT Management needs to be closely
‘connected to Organizational Change Management, Strategy Management, Processes
Management and other relevant management disciplines of BTM, While the
‘enablement type is focused on the context of BTM?, many elements of the proposed
methodology might also be applicable for an implementer role.

A key success factor for any form of business transformation is to ensure
systematic and transparent, i, engineered transformation. The professional use of

techniques and the integration of well-trained

‘specialist facilitate this key challenge. Various generic ‘can
and combined to manage IT transformation. In the context of BTM?,
% national IT’ is part of the type.

As depicted in Figure 7.1, Transformational IT Management covers the four
phases of the transformation lifecycle.

tantiated

+ Envision is addressed via Assess and enable solution readiness of the organization,
+ Engage is via Plan to-be IT re, operations and: and
Create IT transformation roadmap.
+ Transform is implemented via Deploy IT operations and services and Implement
IT governance.
+ Optimize is addressed via Optimize IT operations and services and Manage IT
lifecycle.
It should be noted that, like other management disciplines, Transformational IT
M on i i tion happen
‘and managing transformation — the actual implementation of transformation
projects is covered by existing development techniques from which only very few
‘exemplary ones can be briefly summarized here.

--- PAGE 97 ---
‘Transformational IT Management has several interfaces to other disciplines of

BIM2, As shove in Figure 7.2, the following disciplines contribute to
‘Transformational IT Management:

Figure 7.1 Interdependencies with other management disciplines

Figure 7.2 Tra 1 t0 other: of BTM?

Program and is linked to Tr ional IT. by
‘governing skills, resources, budget, time and other constraints. Transformational IT
‘Management has to deliver status updates and adhere to the release/deployment
plan supervised by Program and Project Management.

Business ‘Management the dynamic (pt ) and 1 =
aspects of the organization. Most relevant business requirements for any
‘Transformational IT’ initiative are derived from this discipi

Value Management defines, monitors and manages goals and KPIs to assure that

ness targets are met. Tr ional IT. initiatives need to build
"upon the processes, frameworks, goals, SLAs and objectives of Value Management to
‘ensure that transformation impact is achieved, and that business benefits are
realized ina systematic approach.

Risk Ma provides the fu and p to manage IT
risks. Transformational IT Management has to adhere to these fundamental
‘concepts and manage its risks accordingly.

Organizational Change Management does not only support the roll-out activities

and the organizational impl ion of the Tr IT
initiatives, but does also prepare transformation impacts like capacity adjustments
and competency As a consequence, Organizational Change M: ent

provides the link to Competence and Training Management.

(7.4 PROCEDURE FOR TRANSFORMATIONAL FT MANAGEMENT

This chapter describes the activities that guide Tre ional IT. As
ioned before, the on lifecycle is divided into the phases of envision,
‘engage, transform and optimize. In Step 1, the readiness of the organization is
land the is: for i ting the. For this

purpose, an analysis of the organization's transformation maturity is conducted with
‘special focus on IT and operational capabilities. This maturity assessment covers the

IT part of Enterprise Architecture (EA). ivities of this step are IT mi
‘evaluation, development of an architecture vision and review of the business
Step 2 covers pl of to-be IT operations and.

‘This includes the definition of the application, data and technology architectures.
Based on these results, the transformation roadmap is created in Step 3. In Step 4, IT
‘operations and services are deployed by leveraging the solution architecture and an
IT deployment plan. The implementation of governance is the focus of Step 5. In the
‘optimization phase of Step 6, IT operations and services are continuously improved.
‘Step 7 implements IT lifeeycle management by systematically managing IT

requests and a P

process for IT architecture.

Figure 7.3 summarizes the seven steps of Transformational IT Management. The
following sections describe each step in detail. Please note that the different amount
‘of text does not imply that certain steps are more important than others. The length
of subsections is due to differences in the amount, complexity and generality of
applicable techniques that are summarized here.

--- PAGE 98 ---
Figure 7.3 Seven steps of Transformational IT Management in BTM=

73) Assess and Enable Solution Readiness ofthe Organization,

‘Toassess and enable the solution readiness of the organization for Transformational
TT Management, several tasks have to be accomplished (see Figure 7.4). Belonging to
the envision phase, this step prepares the organization to build a broad overview of
its capabilities and achieve the necessary transparency for business transformation,
Ina first major activity, it has to be verified whether the organization is ready to
«deal with the specified scope of the intended business transformation. EA is
instrumental as a point of reference here. Since the scope of EA understood as “the
process of translating business vision and strategy into effective enterprise change by
‘creating, communicating and improving the key requirements, principles and
models that describe the enterprise’s future state and enable its evolution” (Lapkin et
4al., 2008) comprises people, processes, information and technology of the
‘enterprise, and their relationships to one another and to the external environment
(Lapkin et al, 2008), it goes far beyond Transformational IT Management. In the
context of Transformational IT Management, the use of EA documents and analyses
assure that planned initiatives, programs and projects the busi
and do not induce major IT/business misalignment problems.
‘The evaluation of current IT capabilities and services form another fundamental
activity. A comprehensive analysis of IT organization, IT support and IT operati
is at the heart of this activity. The results of the maturity assessment are gaps
between current and required capabilities, which build the basis for defining the
transformation roadmap in Step 3.

Figure 7.4 Assess and enable solution readiness of the organization

Based on the EA review and the identification of the current maturity level, an
architecture vision has to be developed. For this purpose, a review of architecture
best practices and principles is a key activity to derive a solid architecture vision.
Furthermore, comprehensive as-is and to-be architectures (business and technology)
have tobe In order to} a ness tran ion, the
value proposition for major stakeholders must be clearly defined and approved. This
is also an important link to risk management from this step.

‘The business architecture i a key starting point for IT transformation. Hence, it
must be reviewed and elaborated in sufficient detail. For this purpose, the business
architecture has to be broken down into an appropriate level of granularity. The gap
‘between as-is and to-be business architecture is identified in collaboration with
‘business process owners. On this basis, existing internal and external service
contracts have to be evaluated. Furthermore, sourcing strategies for filling gaps have
tobe considered.

Solution Readiness of an organization can be assessed with business capabilities
and business capability maps. They depict what the business is doing to reach its
goals and objectives. Business capabilities are a collection of functional facilities that
are essential for the enterprise to conduct business (Gur, 2009). They are the
functional equivalent to business processes. In contrast to fast changing business
p the set of business capabilities is i to be stable. Busi
‘capabilities are supported by applications and other IT resources and are thus an
important link between business and IT architecture (Kurpjuweit and Winter, 2009).
Figure 7.5 shows an. ‘of how a business capability can be: ized in the
‘course of assessing solution readiness.

--- PAGE 99 ---
Figure 7.5 Business capability assessment dimensions

1. Perform comprehensive analysis of IT organization, IT support and IT operations.

2. Plan an architecture vision based on a review of architecture best practices and

43: Define and approve the value proposition for major stakeholders.

4, Break down the business architecture into an appropriate level of granularity and
identify gap between as-is and to-be business architecture in collaboration with
‘business process owners.

5 Evaluate existing internal and external service contracts.

6. Consider sourcing strategies for filling gaps.

‘The use of EA documents and analyses assure that planned initiatives, programs and

projects support the business strategy and do not induce major IT/business

misalignment problems.

74 Tobe IT Ar ~ and and 18 Te
Development

‘This section outlines the two activities conducted in the engage phase of
‘Transformational IT Management.

‘7-4 PLAN TO-BE FT ARCHITECTURE, OPERATIONS AND SERVICES
After the organization's as-is situation has been <, the to-be IT architecture,
‘operations and services have to be specified. Therefore, Step 2 directly builds upon.
the results of Step 1. In practice, the to-be IT architecture covers three major areas:
applications, data and technology. Figure 7.6 depicts typical activities, methods and
deliverables of this step.

Following a top-down approach that also incorporates commercial off-the-shelf

(cots) lutions, the application layer is first, ing the
basis for the data and technology architecture. First of all, the application

it has to be doc as the transformation starting point.
Internal and provide guidance on how to develop the

application landscape and should therefore be applied if available. Building upon the
results of the first phase, a more thorough gap analysis reveals the deviation between
the desired to-be and the current as-is state.
Based on the findings of the application architecture assessment, the data and
ogy archi are derived. Analyzing ‘models and conducting a
‘gap analysis are also key activities to determine the data and technology architecture.
Evaluating sourcing options in more detail is another major activity in this context.

Figure 7.6 Plan to-be IT architecture, operations and services

ow THE or run ro.me rr OPERATIONS AND

4. Document the application architecture baseline as the transformation starting
point (apply internal and external reference models).

2. Derive the technology architecture based on the findings of the application
architecture assessment.

4. Analyze reference models and conduct a gap analysis in order to determine the
data and technology architecture.

4. Evaluate sourcing options in more detail

In practice, the to-be IT architecture covers three major areas: applications, data and

technology.

‘Creating the IT transformation roadmap, i.. the plan for implementing the to-be

tecture, operations and services is the next step in Trat ional IT
Management. This step builds upon the to-be IT architecture, operations and
services from Step 2. Key goal of this step is to develop a detailed transformation
roadmap that outlines the upcoming transformation activities and enables a reliable
‘execution. This activity involves lots of discussions with application specialists to =
provide the best to-be solution architecture.

In order to ensure a business case driven transformation process, the identified

--- PAGE 100 ---
{gap MMU Ue prioratize4 aU PUSSIDNE YUIER WES HEE WO DE ELADUTALEL, AUTEN
‘quick wins early is an important strategy in order to assure project success and
‘support by all relevant stakeholders including sponsors and project members.
‘Sourcing questions are key in creating the transformation roadmap. A critical
‘question with respect to software is make or buy, which has to be answered carefully
4s there are severe consequences depending on this decision, e.g. maintenance and
‘support costs as well as handling of upcoming change requests. Furthermore, the
‘extension of custom development has to be determined. External support has to be
determined, ic. ithas to be decided how many external resources will be leveraged
{for implementing the transformation roadmap. Key to successfully executing the
roadmap is organizational readiness. First of all, it has to be assured that there is a
‘comprehensive acceptance for the transformation project. Moreover, further
‘organizational requirements have to be identified in order to later on successfully
‘operate the solution.

Important activities of Step 3 are defining the build, the implementation and the
deployment plan (see Figure 7.7). These plans have to be handed over to program
‘management for monitoring and governance. Complementing these activities, a
transfor steering committee has to be set up. up, this
step covers the concrete project planning activities for subsequent steps.

Figure 7-7 Create IT transformation roadmap

1. Prioritize identified and elaborated possible quick wins to ensure a business case
driven transformation process.

2. Determine the extension of custom development.

4. Determine external support ie. it has to be decided how many external resources
\will be leveraged for implementing the transformation roadmap.

4, Define the build, the implementation and the deployment plan.

5. Set up a transformation management steering committee.

KEY MESSAGE:
Addressing quick wins early is an important strategy in order to assure project

-and support by all including and project
members.

7.517 Operations, Service Deployment and I Governance lmplementation

‘This section outlines the two activities conducted in the transform phase of
‘Transformational IT Management.

‘1.41 DEPLOY OPERATIONS AND SERVICES

Based on the transformation roadmap developed in Step 3, Step 4 follows the goal of
developing IT services and putting them into place, i. of assuring appropriate IT
Operations (see Figure 7.8). Two “extremes” of methods for IT Service Deployment
are illustrated in the Appendix E of this book. 1) Rational Unified Process (RUP)' has
its root in development from scratch (e.g. using JAVA, C++) and 2) Accelerated SAP
(ASAP) (SAP AG, 2007) represents methods for implementing COTS (commercial
off-the-shelf) software where certain standardized functionalities are already

imp! by the - Additionally, IT Infrast Library (ITIL) is
presented as an example for IT service operations (see also Appendix E).

Developing and deploying IT applications and services is a complex process.
Hence, building upon well-proven process frameworks is state ofthe art practice.
Iterative fray like RUP provide adaptable pr
frameworks, intended to be tailored by the indi izations along their
distinct needs.» More traditional development frameworks like the “V model”
represent software development processes, which put less emphasis on iterative
development but encourage linear development. There is also a growing number of
evolving agile processes (like Scrum or Sprint) that promise to overcome =
‘shortcomings of traditional approaches like long cycle times and late discovery of
design problems.

--- PAGE 101 ---
Figure 7.8 Deploy IT operations and services

‘To operate IT services, approaches like ITIL provide a rich set of best practices on
howto I?'services. These IT Service (ITSM) app: often
follow a process perspective and therefore have a strong linkage to continuous
improvement approaches like Six Sigma, Business Process Management or the
‘Capability Maturity Model Integration (CMMI).* ITSM is generally concerned with
the back office or operational concerns of information technology management ~
software development is not atthe core of ITSM.

‘The basic idea behind ITSM is to offer IT applications and complementing IT
services as well as other defined services to the business. As depicted in Figure 7.9, a
‘well-defined service comprises functional requirements, such as the need to produce
service report or to generate an invoice, as well as non-functional requirements
such as service availability, performance, accuracy and security. A service level
agreement (SLA)*is a part of a service contract where the level ofa service is
formally defined.

ITSM covers domains such as service support, service delivery and infrastructure

; support ‘on the user of the and on continuous
and appropriate service delivery. sub-processes are pr 5
and . Service support concentrates on the
ccustomer- jpment and provisioning of services by ice level
mi nt, capacity service continuity it, availability a
mi yent and financial service p {nto place. In general,
ITIL will define additional requirements from a solution development perspective,
‘¢, definition of common interfaces.

Figure 7.9 Key aspects of a service definition

(CHALLENGES CONCERNING THE DEPLOYMENT OF 1 OPERATIONS AND SERVICES:

1. Decide on a framework (e.g. V model, Scrum, Sprint) in order to develop and
deploy IT applications and services.

2. Decide on an approach to operate IT services and potentially on a continuous
improvement approach.

KEY MESSAGE

Developing and deploying IT applications and services is a complex process; hence,

building upon well-proven process frameworks is state-of-the-art practice.

‘74:2 DMPLEMENTIT GOVERNANCE
Governance covers decisions that define expectations, grant power or verify
performance.*It relates to management, cohesive policies, guidance, processes and
decision-rights for a given area of responsibility. Complementing IT operations and
deployment, an governance has to be set up to
‘successful Transformational IT Management. Step 5 addresses this topic and
‘establishes the ‘governance st and p (see Figure 7.10). All
these activities have to be based on an existing governance organization. The setup of
this organization might require organizational change management activities up-
front.
According to the IT Governance Institute (ITGI) there are five domains,
have to be addressed to ensure appropriate governance (Schwartz, 2007): strategic
lignment, value delivery, resource risk it and performance
‘measures. Linking business and IT together so that they work well is the goal of,
strategic alignment. The key challenge of strategic alignment lies in bringing
together the corporate side of business with the line-of-business and IT leaders.
‘Value delivery makes sure that the IT department delivers on the benefits promised
at the beginning of a project or investment. Resource management is about
ieving optimal use of Two key; of management are
‘creating the right organizational structures for high quality and efficient service
delivery as well as ensuring a highly skilled and motivated employee base. Risk
‘management puts a formal risk framework in place. This framework ensures
sufficient rigor around how IT measures, accepts and manages risk, as well as the
provision of reports on what IT is managing in terms of risk. Performance
rement is about ing IT performance and ling busi
impact. The most widely applied concept in this context is the balanced scorecard,
‘which examines where IT makes a contribution in terms of achieving business goals,
being a responsible user of resources and developing people. Exemplary, one
‘framework (namely COBiT) is presented in the Appendix E of this book, which

--- PAGE 102 ---
Figure 7-10 Implement IT governance

‘CHALLENGES CONCERNING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF IT GOVERNANCE: =

4. Bring together the corporate side of business with the line-of-business and IT
leaders.

2. Make sure that the IT department delivers on the benefits promised at the
beginning of a project or investment.

{3 Achieve optimal use of resources.

4, Pat a formal risk framework in place.

5. Use performance measures.

According to the IT Governance Institute (ITGI) there are five domains, which have

to be addressed to ensure appropriate governance: strategic alignment, value
livery, resource risk sment and per ‘measures.

or! and and IT Lifecycle

‘The optimization phase covers IT operations and services optimization, as well as IT
lifecycle management. Step 6 and Step 7 cover three major tasks, namely managing,
architecture requirements and i establishing a monitoring
and continuous improvement process and Application Lifecycle Management
(ALND (see Figure 7.11).

In order to establish a formalized of architecture requit and
change requests, several sources of inputs have to be taken into account: First ofall,
from IT (e.g. from solution architects) has to be systematically gathered. In

addition, a feedback loop to business and end users (eg. via service help desks) has
tobe established. To assure an adequate update policy, the deployment of solution
updates must be restricted and defined appropriately. Furthermore, on the basis of
continuous management process, services have to be improved, modernized,
replaced or retired on an ongoing basis.

‘To reach a next level in delivering IT services, the establishment of a continuous
‘measurement and improvement process is necessary. Measurement requires the
formal, planned monitoring of process execution and the tracing of results to
determine the performance of a process. The information gained in the
measurement process is then used to make decisions for improving or retiring
‘existing processes and/or introducing new processes. For this purpose, monitoring
tools and methods have to be put in place.

Tlifecyele management can be managed with the process of ALM. This is the
process of managing applications continuously throughout their entire lifespan, i.
including analysis and design, development, maintenance and decommissioning.
ALM brings the ideas of continuous improvement to the discipline of software
‘engineering and EA. ALM is enabled by processes and tools that facilitate and
integrate requirements management, architecture, coding, testing, tracking and
release management.

Figure 7.11 IT operations and services optimization and IT lifecycle management

4. Gather feedback from IT, eg. from solution architects.

2. Establish feedback loop to business and end users, e.g. via service/help desks.

{3 Restrict and define appropriately the deployment of solution updates in order to
assure an adequate update policy.

4 Improve, modernize, replace or retire services on the basis of a continuous
‘management process.

5. Establish a continuous measurement and improvement process in order to reach a

--- PAGE 103 ---
next level in delivering IT services.
ALM, which can be used to manage IT lifecycle management, is the process of
managing applications continuously throughout their entre lifespan, ie. including
analysis and design, development, maintenance and decommissioning.

7.7 Key Success Factors for Transformational IT Management =
Five factors affect the success of Transformational IT Management initiatives:

1. consider other frameworks and IT transformation relationship to it;
2, reuse proven and successful patterns, methods and principles;

43. use an appropriate level of detail to govern implementation;

4- apply the same framework on all levels; and

5. agree on KPIs to measure success.

‘These factors are described in the following.

ot rE FR AND THEIR REL TO TRAN ©

‘Well-accepted Transformational IT Management components exist in the domains

‘of development, operations 5 ypment and project
portfolio (Cf Figure 7.12). ; methods for business capability
‘management complement the four core domains. The key challenge of

Tr tional IT is therefore to select appropriate: ts

from different domains, adapt these to company specific requirements and integrate
them into a comprehensive yet agile approach.

Figure 7.12 overlap of for Tra 1

‘Source: Reproduced with permission of The Open Group. TOGAR® Version 9. ©2005-2012 The Open
Group.

For architecture development, frameworks such as TOGAF@™ or EABOK (Hagan, =
2004) can be used. A large number of development methods exist, e.g, waterfall ype
methods, various variants of the V model or agile development methods. These

models provide guidance on how to structure and manage the realization of a

solution. Operations management methods are dominated by ITIL.* Prominent
portfolio/project management methods are the PMBOK” or PRINCE2." Established
‘business capability methods are Motion (Lloyd, 2006) or Component Business

Modeling (Pohle et al, 2005).

72 REUSE PROVEN AND SUCCESSFUL PATTERNS, METHODS AND PRINCIPLES,

‘The second suecess factor results from applying proven and successful concepts like
patterns, methods and principles to ensure the reuse of best practices. This results in
‘benefits from preliminary work, especially from successful projects and solutions.
‘The experience captured in patterns, methods and principles helps project owners to
realize planned actions more efficiently and effectively. This ultimately saves money
and resources by not having to reinvent the wheel. Furthermore, using proven

ts fosters solution quality and pr ng important solution aspects,
Figure 7.19 presents a selection of such proven concepts subdivided into patterns,
methods and principles.

Figure 7.13 Proven and. and for Ts
TT Management
177.3 USE AN APPROPRIATE LEVEL OF DETAIL TO GOVERN IMPLEMENTATION =

‘The third success factor is to use an appropriate level of detail to govern
implementation. Clearly, itis not possible to govern every single project in full detail.
‘This would result in an unmanageable amount of work. Therefore, itis essential to
use an appropriate level of detail to govern implementation. Concerns of a large and
diverse group of stakeholders must be addressed in business transformation. These
include systems architects, project managers, sponsors, implementers and change
agents who participate in the business transformation, as well as customers,
‘employees, managers, system operators, outsourcing partners or the workers’
il. For software and information systems engineering, of - mostly

--- PAGE 104 ---
technical ~ hhave been published. In the of business tra ion,
also business concerns like business service implementation and business process
cfficiency should be considered. A transformation project must address the needs of
its stakeholders. Following the criterion of width, all aspects required to address
these needs should be covered. As a consequence, the scope of business
‘transformation must be broader than solely the IT architecture of an enterprise.
Following the idea that EA is the blueprint for transformation projects, problems
‘ean arise from over-specifying design decisions that should better be made in the
context of individual projects. Therefore, details such as class structures, detailed
data structures, mapping information of network adaptors to servers, workflow
‘specifications or product variant configuration should usually not be considered part
of that task. The broader the scope needs to be, the less detail can be regarded. Using.
EAas an illustrative example, Figure 7.14 illustrates this wide and flat
understanding.

igure 7.14 Using am. evel of detail to

‘Source: Air, Stephan etal. 2008

‘17-4 APPLY THE SAME FRAMEWORK OW ALLLEVELS
‘The fourth suecess factor is to use the same framework for different levels of detail
(capability architecture, segment a ). fone
fran is used, the ion on levels is
‘much easier because identical terminologies are used and thinking along the same
lines is fostered. This has the advantage that results can be exchanged between

ions and groups without causing “translation” p Furth 7
standardization and consistency are encouraged. Figure 7.5 illustrates the =
advantages of using the same framework on all levels.

Figure 7.15 Apply the same framework om all levels

‘Source: Reproduced with permission of The Open Group. TOGAR® Version 9. ©2005-2012 The Open
Grow.

‘79.5 AGREE ON KPIs TO MEASURE SUCCESS

Measuring success during a project as the fifth success factor has multiple
advantages. On the one hand, it allows having an overview over the project progress
and to adhere to chosen direction. On the other hand, a focused selection of
measurements can strengthen staffs awareness to the project and motivate them to
deliver high class deliverable. Therefore, a set of key performance indicators (KPIs)
should be defined.

KPIs help measuring progress towards defined goals. Regarding an IT project,
various kinds of KPIs can be distinguished, e.g. business KPIs, technology KPIs,
application KPIs, operational KPIs, data KPIs or people-related KPIs. Infact,
independent and isolated KPIs only have limited informative value. Therefore,
systems of dependent KPIs have been developed in the past to reach an integrated
and relevant overview of the project status. One of the most popular and widespread
KPI system is the balanced scorecard (Kaplan and Norton, 1992).

‘Measuring also asks for a systematic approach (Cooper, 2010). First of all, critical
‘success factors have to be defined. Critical success factors are the few key levers
where things must go right for the business to flourish: “Something that must
happen if a Process, Project, Plan, or IT Service is to succeed” (ITIL, 2007). Based on
the key success factors, KPIs are defined. They reflect the critical success factors of,
the organization. For KPIs to be effective, they must be specific, measurable, agreed,
realistic and time-based. KPIs can use both financial and non-financial metrics.
Metrics are used in conjunction with KPIs to measure the critical success factors.
‘They implement KPIs and are numerical measures composed of one or more
<dimensions like time, application or organizational unit.

‘CHALLENGES CONCERNING KEY SUCCESS FACTORS FOR TRANSFORMATIONAL IF MANAGEMENT:

1. Select appropriate components from different domains, adapt these to company
‘specific requirements and integrate them into a comprehensive, yet agile
approach.

2. Apply proven and successful concepts like patterns, methods and principles,

--- PAGE 105 ---
‘which ensures the reuse of best practices.

3. Use an appropriate level of detail to govern implementation.

4, Use the same framework for different levels of detail since the communication
‘within the organization on different level is much easier because of identical
terminologies.

‘5. Measure success during the project (use success factors, KPIs, metrics).

‘The scope of business transformation must be broader than solely the IT architecture

of an enterprise.

7.48 Conclusion

T national IT’ ‘on enabling, .
transformation happen and managing transformation — the actual implementation
of transformation projects is covered by existing development techniques from
‘which only very few exemplary ones were briefly summarized. The following seven
steps guide Transformational IT Management:

4. Prepare the organization to build a broad overview of its capabilities and achieve
the necessary transparency for transformation management.
2. After the organization's as-is situation has been assessed, the to-be IT
operations and services have to be .
{3 Develop a detailed transformation roadmap that outlines the upcoming,
activities and enables a
4, Develop IT services and put them into place, ie. of assuring appropriate IT
operations.
5-Set up an adequate go to ensure successful Trai onal IT
Management.
(6, Manage architecture requirements and change requests, establish a monitoring
and continuous improvement process and application lifecycle management.

This chapter also summarized the five key factors of Tra IT
Management:

1. Consider other frameworks and IT transformation relationship to i
2. Reuse proven and successful patterns, methods and principles.

4. Use an appropriate level of detail to govern implementation.

4- Apply the same framework on all levels.

5. Agree on KPIs to measure success.

Following the six steps above that guide Transformational IT Management and
‘considering these five key success factors contributes to a prosperous business
transformation.

Bibliography

Aier, Stephan, Kurpjuweit, Stephan, Schmitz, Otto, Schulz, Jérg, Thomas, André and
‘Winter, Robert (2008), An engineering approach to enterprise architecture
design and its application at a financial service provider, in MobIS 2008:
-Modellierung Betrieblicher Informationssysteme; Modellierung Zuwischen SOA
und Compliance Management; 27-28 November 2008, Saarbriicken, Germany:
115-30.

Baumél, Ulrike (2005), Strategic agility through situational method construction, in
Proceedings of the European Academy of Management Annual Conference
(BURAM2005), 4-7 May 2005, Munich, Germany.

‘Cooper, Larry (2010), CSFs, KPIs, Metrics, Outcomes and Benefits itSM Solutions:
\www.itsmsolutions.com/newsletters/DITYvol6isss,htm (accessed March 2012).

Ein-Dor, Phillip and Segev, Eli (1982), Organizational context and MIS structure:
some empirical evidence, MIS Quarterly 6, no. 3, 55-68.

Gur, Natty, Business capabilities (a practical guide) ~ part 1:
apn ny ut ain yal tp.» (accessed March 2011).

Hagan, Paula J. (2004), Guide to the (evolving) Enterprise Architecture Body of
Knowledge (EABOK): draft: 6 February 2004, The MITRE Corporation:
‘www.mitre.org/work/tech_papers/tech_papers_04/04_0104/04_0104.pdf
(accessed March 2012).

ITIL (2007), Glossary of terms, definitions and acronyms: V3, 30 May 2007, ITIL®
TT'Service Management: www.best-management-
practice.com/gempdf/ITIL_ Glossary_V3_1_24,pdf (accessed March 2012).

Kaplan, Robert S. and Norton, David P. (1992), The balanced scorecard: measures
that drive performance, Harvard Business Review 70, n0. 1, 71-9.

Kotter, John P. (1996), Leading Change (Boston, Mass: Harvard Business School
Press).

Kurpjuweit, Stephan and Winter, Robert (2009), Concern-oriented business
architecture engineering, in Proceedings of the 24th Annual ACM Symposium on
Applied Computing 2009, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, 8-12 March 2009: 265-72.

Lapkin, Anne, Allega, Philip, Burke, Brian, Burton, Betsy, Bittler, R. Scott, Handler,
Robert A., James, Greta A., Robertson, Bruce, Newman, David, Weiss, Deborah,
Buchanan, Richard and Gall, (2008), Gartner clarifies the of
‘www gartner.com/id=740712 (accessed March 2012)

Liovd. Mike (2006). Motion business architecture methodoloev. Microsoft:

--- PAGE 106 ---
no i co eh isin OA
sebethods Mtoe NonAKCAsntosencosncowonns ppt (accessed March 2012).

Pohle, George, Korsten, Peter and Ramamurthy, Shanker (2005), Component
‘www-935.ibm.com/services/us/ime/paf/510-6163-component-business-
models.paf (accessed March 2012).

SAP AG (2007), Proven methodology for rapid implementation of SAP solutions —
reduce costs, lower risks, and save time with ASAP”, SAP AG:
www.rgnow.com/literature/Proven-Methodology-for-Rapid-Implementation-of-
SAP-Solutions pal (accessed March 2012).

‘Schwartz, Karen D. (2007), IT governance definition and solutions, CXO Media Inc.:
‘www cio.com/article/111700/IT_Governance_Definition_and_Solutions

(accessed March 2012). *
| Wikipedia. “Rational Unified Process” 20: ht//de.wihipedia.or/wiki/Rational_Unitied_Process
(accessed March 2022).

2 Wikipedia. “Information Technology Infastrcture Library” 20124:
basp//e. wh eLibrary March 2012),

_§ Sore information i available at: Wikipedia. “TBM Rational Unified Process, 20120:
Itp://en.wikipediaorg/wiki/IBM_Rational_Unifed_Process (accessed March 2012).
4 Wikipedia. TT service management, 2012: htp//en wikipedia. org/wiki/ITSM (accessed March

2012).
3} “Servicelevel °, 20.2: itp:/ en.wikipedia og/wiki/Service_level
(accessed March 2012).

‘6 See, Wikipedia. "Governance", 2012: htp//en. wikipedia. org/ wiki Governance (accessed March

2012)

‘7 Wikipedia. "Application lifceyele management", 20123:

pen wikipedia org/ wiki/Apptication_tifeeyele_management (accessed March 2012),

‘8 TOGAP isa registred trademark of The Open Group inthe United States and other countries, More
on TOGAF is at The Open Group. 10 TOGAR®: Version 9.1‘Enterp

alton", The Open Group, 2012: www opemgroup.org/togaf (accessed March 2012).

‘9 TIL. "Welcome othe Offical ITIL Website" ITIL® IT Service Management, 2012: ww.

officials com/home home.aspe (accessed March 2012).

wProject “PMBOK® Guide and Pract aon:

www pi ort/PMBOK-Guide-and-Standardsasp (accessed March 2012).

{4 TLX Group. “What s PRINCE2? ~ PRINCE2 Definition”, 2012: www prinoea.com/what-s-prince2asp

(accessed March 2012).

|Iasivmmomot | Asoc toes Treat bancenet Mey 7 Tato geen < messenger netemstr > (0)

--- PAGE 107 ---
=

Bese ag oi

Organizational Change Management
‘LIVER KOKO (SAP AG, SERASTAN REICHE ESE Basie Scho an ERNST ALLA Vos A)

8.1 Overview

People and their abilities and motivations are one of the main wild cards in business
transformations (LaClair and Rao, 2002). Business transformation often involves a
of, ori ion of new to, the corporate which may lead
toa misinterpretation of corporate signals and values, and a shift in power
structures, both of which may entail serious constraints to the success of a business
transformation unless adequately managed (Kotter, 2010). Addressing and
‘managing these human elements through Organizational Change Management
therefore forms an integral part of every business transformation. Specifically,
‘change management deals with the people who have to change their ways of
working of a business tr ion. It deals with ions, their
needs, their abilities, their motivations, their concerns and their resistances. In
general, we that o% Change M: efforts should
‘specific interactions, interventions and coaching, as well as broad and personal
with the aim of aligning executives, involving and
‘engaging employees.
Organizational change management within BTM? addresses the following steps
0 ig to the BTM? tr tion life-cycle) for | ion
success:

1. Envision: Set upa for an effective organi change
with respect to governance and assess organizational change readiness.

2, Engage: Initiate a definition of a comprehensive communication strategy and
performance management that is related to both the particular transformation
project team and the organization at large.

3-Tra :: Apply and adopt st sider management,

‘management, and performance management.

4- Optimize: Receive feedback about the level of success of already implemented

interventions.

‘onsecrives oF THs CHAPTER:
1. Understand activities that guide Organizational Change Management.
2. Learn about organizational change monitoring methods.

‘3 Learn about an approach for communication management.

8.2 Importance of Organizational Change Management *

‘Transformation projects usually impact on a company’s different sets of resources,
includ izational, financial, and bi . What is distinct about the
latter resource type is that it is able to react ~ in often unpredictable ways ~ to a
particular business transformation, either by actively resisting a business
transformation, failing to adapt to a new order, or simply walking out of the door.

Business transformation is likely to gain sufficient acceptance if core members of
the organization can be united behind the initiative and empowered to act towards
project milestones. This chapter outlines a comprehensive organizational change
management approach that is highly integrated within BTM? and supports large-
scale business transformation.

The of ional Chi ‘can be assessed by
analyzing the main reasons for why business transformations fail, Both our own.
studies (see Chapter 11 Case Study MotorStars and Chapter 12 Lessons Learnt) and
‘existing research suggest that the majority of transformation projects continue to fail
due to non- 1 such as nor of the new solution, skill
problems, communication problems, or problems with project resources. In fact,
failure rates of transformation efforts reported in the literature reach up t0 70
percent (Beer and Nohria, 2000). According to Kotter and Cohen (2002) the high
failure rate is seldom related to technical reasons, but is more often a result of
human factors.

‘More importantly, evidence also suggests that effective organizational change
‘management activities have a tangible effect on the success of business

For: , one study idk avery strong tion between
the use of a set of change management best practices and the realized returns of
‘with strong change management capabilities are able to capture the potential impact
‘of planned transformation initiatives to a much greater extent.

An important characteristic of transformation projects is their complex and
multifaceted nature. This complexity stems from the different levels in an
“organization that are affected by the transformation and that call fora joint
orchestration of dit ‘pli with both tangible and ble
factors (see Figure 8.1).

--- PAGE 108 ---
‘The tangible factors are addressed by different disciplines of BTM?, for example
in the case of organizational processes (see Chapter 6 Business Process
‘Management) or individual skills (see Chapter 9 Competence and Training
M: 3). By contrast, Organizational Change Mf ‘mainly focuses on
the intangible factors associated with business tr. tion. One key that
any organizational change management approach must address concerns the
‘emotional processes that individual stakeholders experience as a result of a business
transformation and that include emotions as divergent as fear, hope and active
resistance (Vince and Broussine, 1996). The role of emotions can be explained by the
fact that a business transformation reflects a transition from an existing state of
‘comfort and security to an uncertain future state. Resistance is therefore a natural
response of emotional adjustment during an unstable period. Unless properly
addressed and managed, employees’ emotions can easily trigger negative reactions
‘and translate into open resistance to business transformation, as revealed by a lack
‘of motivation, rumours, internal conflicts, absenteeism or sickness.

Skea es
rena come
Trgtle {seme ts Arty
con | me army

cee Maat

one
mange) tame SE, te
Facts) sericea

Figure 8.1 Levels of transformation processes

‘The negative emotional curve that organizational members pass through during
the transition phase is commonly referred to as the valley of tears (Conner, 1992).
Depending on the scale of business transformation, the negative reactions may be
more pronounced and lasting. From this perspective, Organizational Change
Management can be considered as an approach to actively reduce the scope of
potentially negative reactions and leverage positive emotions inherent in business
transformation (see Figure 8.2).

Figure 8.2 Reduction ofthe valley of tears

This requires four distinet dimensions of activities:

1. Communication: Making sure that people are informed and have the opportunity
to formulate their wishes and concerns.

2. Motivation: Making sure that people accept the project and are willing to actively
assist. This may also involve actions to provide confidence forthe planned end
state of business transformation.

‘3: Empowerment: Making sure that people are allowed to participate and become
involved in business transformation.

4- Qualification: Making sure that people have the qualifications and skills to work in a
business transformation.

Itis important to note that the emotional reactions to a transformation by
Aifferent stakeholder groups may not always occur simultaneously and therefore
require separate attention. For example, top managers pass through the valley of
tears earlier than middle managers or employees because they are usually the first to
‘become involved in change processes. By the time front line staffs finally involved,
top and middle managers are likely to have already overcome their negative
‘emotions, with the risk of reacting impatiently to the concerns and questions of their
employees.

‘CHALLENGES CONCERNING THE IMPORTANCE OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE MANAGEMENT:

tangible factors associated with business transformation.

2. Address the emotional processes that individual stakeholders experience as a
result of a business transformation.

13. Reduce the scope of potentially negative reactions and leverage positive emotions
inherent in business transformation,

1. Focus o1

‘The majority of transformation projects continue to fail due to non-technical reasons.
such as non-acceptance of the new solution, skill problems, communication
problems or problems with project resources. In fact, failure rates of transformation
efforts reported in the literature reach up to 70 percent.

‘4: Organizational Change Management Approach of BTM?
‘Change management is a necessary discipline for any business transformation.

--- PAGE 109 ---
srowevety tie Urgamicativias nage manegeMTe gypractt UME MLS CAPE
is specifically targeted at large scale transformations that represent more radical
changes where potential resistance towards the transformation may be more
pronounced and the group of stakeholders potentially affected by the transformation
is relatively large. At the same time, while the effects of business transformation
reach beyond organizational boundaries and i groups
such as shareholders, strategic partners or suppliers, organizational change
‘management activities are mostly targeted at internal stakeholder groups.

‘The remainder of the chapter details a comprehensive methodology to deal with
‘changes and the people side in business transformation, drawing from best of breed
knowledge and experiences in the fields of organizational psychology, organizational

and human Briefly, the organizational change
management approach detailed below deals with five key steps and requirements
that need to be addressed in business transformation:

‘S-Up ond Governance m

This initial step the actions: to provide the foundation for an
‘effective organizational change management. This includes defining the
‘organizational change management charter, strategy and plan, as well as
‘establishing the organizational change management team.

Stealer Mangeret

‘The second step aims to assess existing attitudes among the relevant stakeholder

(groups). Based on this stakeholder analysis, appropriate intervention strategies for
stakeholders are derived.

nn Mangere
This step deals with designing effective communication activities to create positive
attitudes mess tra ion and i acceptance levels. It

bboth the definition of a comprehensive communication strategy and the design of a
specific communication plan.

Petemane Manaaenent

‘The fourth step concerns performance management activities that are related to both
the particular transformation project team and the organization at large. First, it
entails a set of instruments geared towards establishing a high performing project
team. Second, it involves the systematic use and/or adaptation of HR practices with
the aim of supporting business transformation.

Onpanaatra Change Monty
‘The final step consists of applying appropriate monitoring tools to assess
izational readiness and receive about the level of of

already implemented interventions.

‘The five organizational change management steps comply with BTM? and the
transformation life-cycle (Envision, Engage, Transform, and Optimize). Although
the five steps build upon each other, our organizational change management
approach should not be understood as strictly linear but rather as an iterative
process in which the steps are often addressed simultaneously and need to be
revisited at a later stage of business transformation (see Figure 8.3).

Figure 8.3 Overview and of the On Change:
‘within EM

8.4 Set-Up and Governance

Business transformation is too big to handle as a simple project. Therefore, a set-up
and governance step is necessary to define the organizational change management
approach, ie. scope, activities, tools, roles, responsibilities and resources that are
aligned with the overall project charter. The key objective is that the organizational
‘change management team delivers value to meet the agreed expectations.
Governance is an approach which is enterprise-wide and covers all activities to set-
up, develop, integrate and adopt continuously the change activities. So what needs to
‘be done to set the foundation for an effective organizational change management
‘team? The following activities serve as a guideline to navigate through this first step
of the organizational change management approach:

‘The first activity is to provide input to the development of a business case to validate
‘change management resources, budget, non-tangible business benefits and business
resource requirements.

Imig Asessment =

--- PAGE 110 ---
‘The second activity is to conduct interviews with key project stakeholders to gain an
initial estimation of change management needs. The questions should cover the

current situation, possible explanations, what should be changed, what must remain
fora il change, ete. The insights provided by these interviews lead to the

requirements for the change management charter.

runt Change Management Carer
‘The third activity is to agree on the scope of work and deliverables that the change
management team will deliver for the project. In a project sense this is the first step
of project management, but filled with the initial insights of the interviews.
unin Chane Management Srey

‘The fourth activity is to document a high-level approach to change and training
“objectives, and guiding principles within a project. The strategy drives the plan.
npn Rane Management Pan

‘The fifth activity is the definition of a detailed list of tasks and milestones to be able
to track progress of change management activities. Furthermore, this provides a
‘scope of work for the team and helps to align the expectations between change
management team and project management.

Select a Orginal Cy Managemen Te

‘After having decided on the plan, the next activity entails the appropriate
identification and selection of people as change management resources to support
the project.

‘rn nyt Cnge Manageme’ Tm

Depending on the gap between the competencies defined in the role description of a
team leader or team member training sessions must be provided to deliver the right
‘competencies.

‘The goal of these initial activities is to achieve a common understanding in a
systemic sense. However, other deliverables are also important, including a defined
plan of the change management activities and tasks, documentation of a high-level
approach (with objectives and guiding principles), identification of resources to
‘support, and provision of appropriate training to skill-up the team.

‘The following benefits could be achieved by ensuring a good Set-up and *
Governance:

+ Increased understanding of expectations and deliverables, the alignment of project
roles and responsibilities between the transformation project team and the change
‘management team.

+ Higher project buy-in, improved commitment, project team productivity and
morale.

+ Alignment of organizational change management project roles and responsibilities.

+ Increased success rates of project efforts.

+ Anticipation of project risks and definition of actions to mitigate risks.

‘To make this first step. itis to guarantee an early i

of the organizational change management team in the strategy phase to understand
the project requirements for the change management. The commitment from the
project sponsor should lead to a commitment of the teams to follow the prescribed
approach, standards and guidelines. Nevertheless the Set-up and Governance
process is a joint effort between the project team and the change management team
‘and results in a contract on which the scope of the deliverables within the project is
based.

‘The critical success factor is a full commitment to the Set-up and Governance
approach. This must be ensured by all contributing parties across the business
including project sponsors, project managers and the project team. In addition, the
larity ofthe project vision and the overall objectives need to be defined in the

nal ch On the Jevel a clear project
plan and deployment strategy must be documented, allowing the organizational
‘change management activities to be aligned with the overall project activities.

‘CIALLENORS CONCERNING SET-UP AND GOVERNANCE:
1. Provide input to the development of a business case.

2. Conduct interviews with key project st to gain an initial estimation of
‘organizational change management needs.

{3 Agree on the scope of work and deliverables that the change management team
will deliver for the project.

4. Document a high-level approach to change and training objectives, and guiding
principles within a project.

5 Define a detailed list of tasks and milestones to be able to track progress of
“organizational change management activities.

6. Identify and select people as organizational change management resources to
‘support the project.

7. Provide training sessions to deliver the right competencies.

‘To make this frst step successful itis necessary to guarantee an early involvement of
the change management team in the strategy phase to understand the project

--- PAGE 111 ---
requirements for organizational change management.

‘8.3 Stakeholder Management a

‘The stakeholder management step is one of the integral parts ofthe organizational
change management strategy. Project stakeholders include any individual or group
that may be impacted or influenced by project activities. Stakeholder are defined as
individuals, groups or organizations that are actively involved in business
transformation, or whose interests may be positively or negatively affected as a result
of project execution or project completion (Project Management Institute, 2004).
‘Stakeholders are critical to project success because they can (and often do)
ignificantly influence the development and outcome of a project. The effective
identification and of stakel is essential to the of
transformation. It is therefore the responsibility of project leaders and sponsors to
effectively manage these relationships within the organization's political
‘environment, by identifying the appropriate project stakeholders early on within
‘business transformation and to understand and address their capability and
willingness to transform.

{A project's suecess is related to stakeholder perceptions of the added value that is

in business both at large and for in particular,

and the nature oftheir relationships as stakeholders with the project team,
‘Therefore, stakeholder management isa critical success factor for any business
transformation. Ifstakeholders are not fully engaged itis likely that there will be
resistances to the implementation of the projects (Ward and Daniel, 2006).

‘The stakeholder management step has the following objectives:

+ identifying and listing all stakeholders who are impacted by, or who can influence
busi at the very beginning of the t Project

+ conducting high-level change impact analysis that the project will have on the
current organization and identified stakeholders;

+ evaluating, analyzing and recording the degree of support and importance of each
stakeholder;

+ aligning communication activities to reflect the needs and demands of specific
stakeholder groups;

” (groups) individually along all project
St the identification and analysis of all individual

stakeholders or stakeholder groups that are affected by business transformation. Itis
the basis for developing a plan at the individual and group levels to achieve
acceptance along the timeline of business transformation, to drive adoption and
‘minimize resistance. The stakeholder management approach includes three key
tasks (see Figure 8.4).

‘Stakeholder management helps to anticipate negative reactions to changes and
supports to derive appropriate strategies to overcome potential resistances, At the
‘beginning of business transformation all relevant project stakeholders have to be
identified, described and listed. This information helps to understand how many
people are affected by business transformation and where they are located
(functionally and geographically). The second task is to assess the high-level

organizational that ion will have on the
organization and different stakeholders. The high-level organizational change impact
analysis provides information about the intensity of the changes for different
stakeholder groups and supports the anticipation of possible reactions. During the
third task all relevant stakeholder groups are evaluated and analyzed based on two
dimensions.

‘The first dimension is related to the level of influence. This isthe ability of the
identified stakeholders to influence the project and is determined using a high to low
scale. For example, a high level of influence can result in decisions or actions from
this stakeholder being attributed to the success ofthe project and/or leading to
delays in timing, or may influence the overall scope and/or resourcing of the project.
Alow level of influence means that the stakeholders have little or no influencing
power over the progress or outcome of the change, although itis still important to
capture their perceptions to minimize potential resistance.

‘The second dimension refers to the attitude towards the project. Ths is the
attitude of the stakeholders to the project and can contribute to the successful
adoption of the change project. For example, the stakeholder(s) may have a positive
attitude to the project and is supportive of the project. A negative attitude to the
project may lead the stakeholders to withdraw support for the project and actively
‘seek ways of working around the changes. Each stakeholder can be rated according,

--- PAGE 112 ---
ro mese two 10 tour passe see rigure
£85, see also, Ward and Daniel, 2006).

‘The stakeholder portfolio matrix or stakeholder map (sce Figure 8.6) helps to
focus appropriate organizational change management activities that need to be taken
‘to mobilize each stakeholder (eg, management workshops, training).

‘The stakeholder portfolio matrix helps to derive organizational change
‘management activities that need to be taken to mobilize specific stakeholders
(especially opponents). organizational change management activities should be
targeted at engaging these stakeholders in order to get their commitment and to

ne transformation ‘and to fully realize the busi as
referenced within the business case. A revaluation of stakeholder groups on a
continuous basis helps to consider the ever-changing environments of projects that
Will affect stakeholder perceptions, interests, or priorities (Ward and Daniel, 2006).

In addition, a reiteration of the stakeholder analysis supports the measurement of
the impact of applied organizatic ivities on sta
attitudes, Therefore, it is strongly recom to repeat the st analysis

‘on a regular basis during the course of business transformation.

Figure 8.0 Stakcholdcr portfolio matrix and general stakeholder stratexies

‘Stakeholder management activities can be supported by organizational change =
agents or a change agent network. An organizational change agent (or change
champion) isthe facilitator of the change. He or she acts as a communication
‘conduit between the business and the project, facilitating two-way communication
‘with message updates and feedback on impacts and project perceptions. An
‘organizational change agent should be a well respected and influential team member
‘with strong knowledge of functional systems and processes as well as excellent
‘communication skills. They can be from any level in the organization. The
stakeholder analysis could be used to identify appropriate change agents throughout
the organization, e.., promoters or enthusiasts,

‘The organizational change agent network is an internal network of enthusiastic
and motivated organizational change agents that will generate awareness of the
impending change and the impacts that it will have on the different business areas. It
‘will support the management of organizational change issues on the ground while
providing feedback to the relevant project leadership and organizational change
management team,

‘The organizational change agent network builds an effective communications
‘channel, enabling individuals to commit to the proposed transformation faster. The
activities are on co ng consistent and timely to affected
‘business areas using face-to-face: ications wherever possible. The network
helps to tailor communication language, style, message and methods to target
audiences. In addition, the network assists with anticipating potential
‘communication or acceptance issues and reports them to the project leadership team
‘0 that adequate mitigation activities can be developed. Establishing and

intaining an organizational agent th the overall project
syele can be as an important and factor of any
stakeholder management.

‘The benefits of stakeholder management for the business include:

+ increased understanding of expectations and required behaviors;

+ engaged, involved and informed stakeholders;

+ higher management buy-in, improved commitment, business and project team

« faster response times enabled through the appropriate identification of
stakeholders, from business requirements through delivery to embedment;

+ increased success rates of project efforts;

+ anticipation of project risks and definition of actions to mitigate risks;

+ high and equal quality standard forall transformation projects.

--- PAGE 113 ---
‘The benefits of stakeholder management for the project management include:

+a standardized approach for stakeholder management activities ensuring a high
and equal quality standard forall transformation projects;

+ higher management buy-in, improved commitment, project team productivity and
morale;

+ better understanding of expectations and required behaviors and better
management of stakeholders;

+ faster response times enabled through the appropriate identification of
stakeholders, from business requirements through delivery to embedment;

+ increased success rates of project efforts; =

+ increased understanding of expectations and required behaviors;

+ improved commitment, business productivity and project team member morale;

+ stakeholder management helps to identify anticipated project risks, where actions
can be anticipated and planned correctly on time, instead of reacting to issues.

It should be noted that achieving these benefits requires certain conditions that
have to be fulfilled. Strong commitment from project sponsor and project teams
regarding the organizational change management approach, standards and
‘guidelines is to an effective st St
‘management activities are the basis for all subsequent organizational change

Activities and, th are: y for each
transformation. It should be clear that the project manager owns the stakeholder
process and the organizational: team provides
‘support to fulfil all related activities. These activities are a significant part of the
project lifecycle and should be reassessed on a continuous basis, particularly when
changes to project scope and/or timelines occur.

In general, the following three critical success factors are important for an
cffective stakeholder management with respect to specific business transformation.
Firstly, full commitment to the stakeholder management approach must be ensured
from all contributing parties across the business including project sponsors, project
managers, and project team. Secondly, a clear project vision, well defined objectives
and project plan to enable stakeholder activities. Thirdly, an early identification and.
continuous review of stakeholder groups is necessary to optimize stakeholder
acceptance during the overall project lifecycle.

‘CHALLENGES CONCERNING STAKEHOLDER MANAGEMENT:

1. Identify stakeholders, understand and address their capability and willingness to
change.

2. Identify, and list all project stak

{3 Assess the high-level organizational change impacts that the transformation
project will have on the current organization and different stakeholders.

4, Evaluate and analyze stakeholder groups based on their level of influence and
attitude towards the project.

5 Repeat the stakeholder analysis on a regular basis.

KEY MESSAGE:

‘The organizational change agent network is an internal network of enthusiastic and

motivated change agents that will generate awareness of the impending change and

the impacts that it will have on the different business areas. It wll support the

management of organizational change issues on the ground while providing feedback

to the relevant project leadership and change management team.

{6 Communication Management =

‘Communication is sometimes viewed as a very soft and vague topic. However, after
having identified the stakeholders as described in the previous section and using the

P in this it avery powerful enabler for business
transformation. The key objective isto rapidly generate involvement and build
‘ownership of the process changes among the key stakeholder groups. Its about
‘explaining the benefits and impacts in relation to the expectations of the different
stakeholders.

{A professional approach to communication requires the appropriate tools and
templates which are mentioned in this section. These should also be provided for
other departments and functions to enable a consistent approach. Furthermore, an
cfficient feedback process forall stakeholder groups should be established to have a
strong two-way ication. The following tasks guide through the
(see Figure 8.7).

Figure 8.7 Communication management process
Tak: ap Common

Itis crucial to set-up the communication activities in a structured way. This means
‘current communication resources, creating the infrastructure for ongoing
‘communication, ete. A communication needs analysis is a useful initial tool to
identify the needs and desires of the stakeholders and translate them into

--- PAGE 114 ---
‘communication needs within several contexts. This could be combined with
identifying the current knowledge ofthe stakeholder groups.

‘To assess the current communication resources a communication channel
analysis is very helpful (see Figure 8.8). Since there are many channels that can be
used for communication, it has to be decided which means is appropriate.
Depending on their reach and their scope of influence, the channels may entail video
‘messages or e-mail from the CEO, coffee talk with executives up to using an
internet/intranet portal and face-to-face dialogue with managers. Following the
formal structure of the chain of command, the managers would be informed first. A
‘more informal way is to use organizational change agents that are local colleagues
‘supporting the local needs.

{As in every strategic work the goals, approach and outcomes of all communication
activities should be defined clearly to ensure guidance and coherence across the
business.

Figure 8.8 Credibility of communication tools

Source: ith fom Brad, and Betsy
Communication” ia Communication Workd March/April no. 2 (2005)

Tk 2: Pon Comma
‘This task is about establishing communication activities for the project itself
(according to the program management). Putting the steps above into a plan ensures
specific communication and a necessary overview of all activities. The key messages
and have to be identified. The developed ication plan (see Figure
8.9) supports the development and planning of speci ication activities for
stakeholders. It provides an overview of the communication activities. The most
important element of this plan isto establish a mechanism for obtaining feedback.
‘The following communication plan is an for which i ion should be
included.

Figure 8.9 Communication plan
Tk are Camm =
While a communication plan is an important condition for executing the
‘communication activities, in reality there will be several obstacles that need to be
addressed. This step is to develop content for events and actions. Selecting and
preparing the communicators, using different channels to reinforce the same
‘message and providing the communication plan within the project team lead toa
very st and powerful way of delivering the right at the right “point
‘of change”. This is the precondition for the success of the events that are promoted.
and launched. With the help of a communication activity log (see Figure 8.10) a solid
of the activities is possible. It is also ry to ensure timely
responses for the established feedback channels.

‘cerns ___

Figure’

10 Communication activity log

‘Controlling the communication activities is an ongoing process which should be
initiated when the first activities start. This entails the use of the communication
activity log (see Figure 8.10) combined with reviewing and reporting on quantity and
‘quality of feedback. This feedback should be supported by feedback events with
‘sponsors, conducting focus groups with employees to air issues and the scheduling of
regular Q&As recording the feedback. With the given control data the success can be
‘measured and modifications of the plan can be implemented as required.

‘The deliverables are stakeholder-specific messages and activities. This

approach for iat ‘a high and equal

‘quality standard for all projects and a better understanding and management of the
stakeholders. It should lead to a faster response time from business requirements
through delivery to embedment and therefore to an increased success rate of project
efforts. Understanding the expectations and required behaviors result in improved
‘commitment, productivity and project team member morale.

--- PAGE 115 ---
‘To ensure these benefits, itis necessary that the stakeholder analysis has been
performed and the ownership of the communication activities has been agreed on,
‘because the organizational change management team is not the communication
‘owner and as such it should not be seen as representing the business in the messages
being developed and’ |. The the of the key} ication and
training materials must be developed and provided by an appropriate business
representative, e.g, subject matter expert. The communication activities are
‘considered a significant part of the project lifecycle and should be reassessed on a
‘continuous basis. This ensures that any amendments to project scope and/or the
timeline are reflected in realigned communication activities.

‘The critical suecess factors include the clarity ofthe project vision and overall
“objectives, and a clear project plan and deployment strategy that enable
‘communication management activities to be aligned with the overall project
activities. Full commitment must be ensured from all contributing parties including
‘management sponsors at the top and line levels. An early identification and,
continuous review of stakeholder groups combined with an effective, frequent and
proactive two-way communication both top-down and bottom-up will optimize this
‘communication approach. It is also necessary to have the full business support and
‘endorsement to ensure an appropriate level and skill of resources to support the
‘communication activities.

‘CHALLENGES CONCERNING COMMUNICATION MANAGEMENT:
1. Identify the needs and desires of the stakeholders and translate them into
‘communication needs within several contexts.

2. a ion analysis to assess the ication

resources.

3. Establish a ism for obtaining fe ofthe ication activities.

4- Use a communication activity log to avoid during executi

5. Use a communication activity log combined with reviewing and reporting on
ity and quality of for controlling of ication activities.

KEY MESSAGE:

‘The change management team is not the communication owner and as such it
should not be seen as representing the business in the messages being developed and
delivered. Therefore, the content of the key communication and training materials
must be developed and provided by an appropriate business representative, ea
subject matter expert.

| Performance Management

‘The fourth step of our Organizational Change methodology
performance management. In general, performance management can be understood
as the process of establishing a work context in which people are enabled to perform
tothe best of their abilities. It entails the entire work system that begins with the
definition of required jobs and ends with an employee leaving the organization. In
the: ‘of a transformation project, performance ivities are
related to the particular project team and the affected organization at large. Both sets
of activities are mainly situated along the second and third stage of BTM2 (see
Figure 8.3). The following sections will discuss each dimension in turn.

The| ion project team is and wholly accountable for the project
deliverables. How project teams perform throughout the project lifecycle will have an
impact on the success of the project. Itis therefore necessary to ensure that the
project team is a cohesive unit from the outset and that its collective success is
recognized and celebrated. To ensure a high performing project team throughout the
entire project lifecycle, the scope of performance management entails four areas of
interventions.

A first aspect concerns the formation of the project team. This requires the
identification of individuals with complementary skills and role preferences in order
to assemble a balanced team. Self-assessment tools such as the Belbin team
inventory (Belbin, 1993), which measures an individuals relative preference across
nine distinct team roles, may help with deciding on the team composition. Itis also
important to conduct team building events with the entire project team to encourage
relationship building, develop acceptance for different individual character types,

ify and potential conflits, and highlight areas for improving
performance. A second requirement refers to the provision of appropriate team
recognition. It is essential that key milestone achievements are identified and
celebrated. Similarly, high performance, especially if t collectively achieved, needs to
be properly acknowledged while also communicating achievements with the business
to attract positive PR across the wider organization. Third, through its operation the
transformation project team builds a relevant stock of knowledge about key
transformation challenges, potential resource constraints or crucial interfaces in the
‘organizational structure. Given the temporary nature of the project team, itis
important to establish an explicit process that allows knowledge to be codified and
shared between internal and external project team members to ensure that the
intellectual property is retained in the business upon project closure. Fourth and
finally itis necessary to continuously refresh and check project team relationships,
collective performance levels and knowledge transfer to maintain best practice

--- PAGE 116 ---
‘throughout the whole project lifecycle. This can be achieved through regular project
‘check questionnaires that are to be filled out by project members. The results of,
these project checks need to be presented to the team and should lead to
recommendations for how project management can be improved.

‘There are additional performance management activities targeted at the
‘transformation project team that may foster high team performance levels. For
‘example, large-scale transformation projects tend to have an emergent nature that
makes it difficult to plan all necessary activities at the outset. Therefore, individual
‘team members need to receive continuous training and development to be able to
face changing project needs. Its also important to provide tangible incentives and
rewards that are linked to a regular performance feedback process in order to
‘motivate and positively influence the project team members. Similarly, it is helpful
for other parts of the organization to contribute to and actively support the project
team work. Further, roles and responsibilities, as well as goals and incentive plans
need to be aligned to ensure that all project members are fully accountable and
‘execute their work consistent with the project deliverables.

Following from the above, a systematic performance management targeted at the *
transformation project team entails three distinct benefits. First, the measures
described above help to optimize the project team relationships which will translate
into a higher quality of performance and team outputs, thereby increasing project
success. Second, the measures facilitate both the internal and external transfer of
knowledge with the aim of developing internal capabilities of the organization. This
is specifically important if future transformation projects are conceivable. Third,
‘explicit support forthe project team will lead to improved commitment, productivity
and project team Tt should be noted that achieving these
assumes that certain conditions can be met by the wider organization:

+ The communication regarding the adoption of performance management KPI's
with respect to the project is actively supported and delivered by project
‘management and its sponsors.

+The annual HR sm that underpins the perfo i strategy
already exists within the HR business process.

+ A project budget is available for the capability development and recognition
activities that were identified above.

‘CHALLENGES CONCERNING THE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT ~ PROJECT TEAM:

4. Identify individuals with complementary skills and role preferences in order to
assemble a balanced team.

2. Identify and celebrate key milestone achievements.

43, Establish an explicit process that allows knowledge to be codified and shared
between internal and external project team members to ensure that the
intellectual property is retained in the business upon project closure.

4. Refresh and check project team relationships, collective performance levels and
knowledge transfer to maintain best practice throughout the whole project
lifecycle.

5. Align incentive plans to ensure that all project members are fully accountable and
‘execute their work consistent with the project deliverables.

KEY MESSAGE:

It is important to provide tangible incentives and rewards that are linked to a regular

performance feedback process in order to motivate and positively influence the

project team members.

Ata broader level, the following critical success factors can be derived on which
ive performance activities regarding the transformation project
team rely:

+ Full commitment of the project/program manager to the performance
‘management strategy.

+ Provision of development and recognition activities within the project budget ™
forecast.

+ Regular communication with the project team to feedback stakeholder perception.

+ Regular review to validate and identify further interventions to optimize the
efficacy of development and recognition activities.

‘While itis important to ensure an effective functioning of the project team over the
‘course of the whole transformation, performance management activities reach
beyond the team context. In particular, performance management should also
involve the active use and adaptation of the existing HR infrastructure in an
to support the tion project and create ip and

acceptance within the business. At a general level this requires a detailed review of
the entire set of HR processes and practices to understand which of the existing ones
could be used more systematically and which new instruments would need to be
adopted.

Performance management in this broader sense may involve a variety of practices
to support business transformation. For example, it is important to align
with: that are able to: ically desired behavior. In

--- PAGE 117 ---
this regard, 360° feedback serves as a multi-source appraisal mechanism that can
provide detailed information about project-related progress and goal achievement.
Other practices include the systematic use of job rotations to move employees with
positive attitudes and potentially high influence into critical and highly visible
Positions while relocating resisting employees into less critical/visible positions.
‘Similarly, for those employees that are made redundant due to the transformation,
specific (out-)placement strategies need to be devised and implemented.
Furthermore, suggestion schemes encourage employees to actively share suggestions
and/or voice concerns related to the planned transformation, thereby signalling to
staff that their involvement is valued. Overall, itis important to consider the entire
talent management system that covers the acquisition of adequate people for the
transformation initiative, their continuous development, and their long-term
retention in the organization. Below, two exemplary practices are reviewed in greater
detail.

Key to any organizational change effort is that it requires a review and adaptation
‘of the existing compensation systems because incentives act as a powerful signal of
‘what is considered desired behavior within the organization. Depending on the
phase of the change or transformation project, different incentives may gain in
relative importance (Lawler, 2000). During the initial stage of unfreezing existing
routines, pt and and opening up the: for change, itis
important to foster a motivation for developing change efforts. From the perspective
‘of the incentive system, this requires the design and adoption of profit sharing, stock

ip or other forms of variable pay that explicitly jcompany
perfor In ison, the change i ion phase | primarily on
‘encouraging employees to develop new skills and adopt the change. To support these
objectives, the incentive system can introduce bonus programs specifically geared
towards change implementation or the achievement of new performance targets.
‘Similarly, rewards may be allocated based on the acquisition of new skills and
knowledge, or entirely new employment contracts need to be designed to better
reflect changing job and task requi ‘The final phase that consists of ensuring,
the ongoing operation under the changed end state focuses on creating the necessary
motivation and capabilities to perform effectively. Compensation practices such as
pay-for-performance systems that focus on strategic performance targets and are
directed at the attraction, development and retention of high performers can support
these objectives.

The: in devising incenti is to combine and ally =
introduce temporary compensation system changes that will prompt the
i tation of business tra ion, and permanent ones that are intended

to become part of the organization's ongoing operation. Iti the permanent incentive
system changes that are necessary to have a lasting impact and facilitate the
Potential implementation of future changes. The specific design of compensation
practices should be guided by the transformation project-related objectives and their
translation into a goal-setting system:

4. Definition of project-related objectives: In a first step, itis essential to develop
performance and behavioral objectives that support the key milestones within the
project life cycle. This also entails an identification of the target stakeholder
‘groups to be included in the performance management strategy.

2, Review and alignment of objectives and incentives: In a second step, the identified
objectives need to be translated into tangible and relevant KPI targets that may be
‘valued by the individual and can be measured and rewarded by the business. The
identified KPIs need to be validated and signed off by the project sponsors.

‘Integration of objectives and incentive systems: Finaly, its important to work
with the appropriate business function and stakeholders to integrate the approved.
KPI targets into individual performance scorecards. In addition, mid-point
scorecard review check point needs to be established to ensure that the KPI targets
continue to be aligned with project scope.

Large-scale transformations have numerous repercussions for the existing talent
management system. For example, the nature and scope of required competences
may change as roles and responsibilities are altered during business transformation.
Performance management therefore needs to re-configure the entire talent
management cycle to reflect organizational change efforts. This requires
interventions concerning talent acquisition, talent development, and talent
retention. From the perspective of talent acquisition, itis important to attract and
select the right people that can implement and “live” the organizational change
efforts. To reflect changing needs in talent acquisition, existing job descriptions need
‘to be modified and new responsibilities defined. The output is then to be translated
into existing selection methods to ensure that the new skills and competencies are

explicitly considered during the selection process. It may also be to revise
the recruitment and selection strategy if other channels of talent acquisition need to
be! into. For example, itis that the tr i the need

for jobs with an interdisciplinary scope which can only be filled by candidates with
‘expert training from specific institutions. Further, existing employer branding
activities need to be reviewed to assess whether they adequately address the
modified candidate pool.

‘Talent development is concerned with ensuring that all required competencies
and skills are available within the organization. During organizational change efforts,
talent development also plays an important role in signalling what is considered as,

--- PAGE 118 ---
the new shared values and exemplary behaviors. First, this requires the definition of =
‘modified and/or new competences as well as the design of a training and
development infrastructure that allows employees to develop these competences in a
‘timely and ongoing manner. Similarly, performance evaluations need to be adapted
to reflect the development and application of the new skills and competences. It is
important that these changes are clearly communicated to employees at the outset of,
the performance review cycle to create realistic expectations. If talent development
requirements change more radically asa result of the transformation project, it may
also be necessary to establish revised development and career tracks for employees.
For example, it may be necessary to maintain a separate career track for technical
‘experts that are essential to the implementation and future operation of the
‘transformed organization.

Finally, talent retention aims at ensuring that high performers and key promoters
of the organizational change efforts remain in the organization. This not only
requires an adaptation of the incentive system described earlier but may also involve
explicitly differentiating between core and peripheral employees to help focus and
prioritize retention efforts, especialy at the outset of the transformation initiative,
‘Talent retention practices may differ in their scope and time frame depending on
‘whether additional transformation projects are to be envisioned in the near future.
‘Talent retention practices can also be more responsive in nature, for example in the
«ease of specific retention bonuses, or of a preventive type such as fostering a
‘supportive working environment and providing opportunities for employees to
become actively involved in the transformation project (Reiche, 2008).

4. Align transformation-related objectives with goal-setting and incentive systems as,
well as with feedback schemes that are able to systematically evaluate desired
behavior.

2. Design and adopt profit sharing, stock ownership or other forms of variable pay
that explicitly reward company performance.

3. Reconfigure the entire talent management cycle to reflect organizational change
efforts.

EY MESSAGE:
It is important to consider the entire talent management system that covers the
isition of adequate people for the transformation initiative, their continui

development and their long-term retention in the organization.

‘52.3 OUTCOMES AND SUCCESS FACTORS FOR PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT

For performance management activities related to the use and adaptation of HR
practices to effectively support the transformation projec, itis crucial to establish
continuous alignment with the wider context of the project. This alignment involves
three distinct dimensions:

1. Alignment with the transformation project itself: The performance management *
activities need to be aligned with key performance indicators and milestones as
derived from the transformation project to positively influence stakeholder
‘enrollment.

2. Internal consistency among HR practices: The various elements of the HR
infrastructure need to be aligned with each other to send consistent messages to
the different stakeholders and can be leveraged to promote behavioral changes.
For example, ifthe transformation leads to the establishment of separate
development and career tracks, their different requirements need to be reflected
in the organization's recruitment and selection activities.

43. Fit with overall corporate strategy: Performance management needs to ensure a fit
‘and re-alignment of the HR system with the new strategy of the organization. To
that end, the HR infrastructure serves as the necessary set of tools and
i that facilitate achi of the organization's strategic objectives.
For example, the new strategy that emerges from business transformation will
translate into different talent requirements.

the complexity of large-scale transformation projects, ensuring this
alignment is not limited to a single point in time but requires continuous review and
interventions to reflect the changing needs during business transformation.

‘Through its various activities, performance management entails three distinct
benefits. First, leveraging the HR infrastructure helps to embed the project
‘ownership within the organization, thereby ensuring greater sustainability of the
transformation initiative. Second, performance management activities geared
‘towards the business allow a better prioritization of project activities vis-d-vis
‘competing initiatives because potential goal conflicts can be detected more easily
and hence avoided. Third, a systematic tion of HR processes will pr
the support tools necessary to facilitate project success. Again, achieving these
‘benefits assumes that certain conditions can be met by the wider organization,
including clear communication concerning the adoption of performance
management KPIs by key management stakeholders and a general availability of an
‘underlying HR infrastructure to support the performance management strategy. At a
broader level, the following critical success factors can be derived on which effective

--- PAGE 119 ---
run ‘to tne pertormance m: strategy trom ait parnk
stal ‘across the organisation including project sponsors, line t
and HR.

+ Importance of the right timing to change incentive systems. Ifthe incentive system
is changed too early, right behavior may be induced, but for the wrong reasons, i.e.
required behavior is incentivized without changing the necessary cultural values
and norms. Changing the incentive system has to go hand-in-hand with instilling
new values, it cannot precede culture/value change.

+ Tangible and relevant KPIs are aligned with project plan objectives, deliverables
and timeline.

+ Timely review of milestones to ensure continued relevance of KPIs and alignment
with the project scope.

‘CHALLENGES! TH OUTCOMES AND SUCCESS FACTORS FOR: wo
1. Align performance management activities with KPIs and milestones as derived
from thet ion project to positively i staki enrollment.

2, Align various elements of the HR infrastructure with each other to send consistent
messages to the different stakeholders.

{3 Ensure a fit and realignment of the HR system with the new strategy of the
organization.

Given the complexity of large-scale transformation projects, ensuring the three
imensions of alignment is not limited to a single point in time but requires

‘continuous review and interventions to reflect the changing needs during business

transformation.

‘4.8 Organizational Change Monitoring

Organizati itoring, ‘on general monitoring activities, eg,
‘business readiness. It provides the opportunity to check the transition of impacted
stakeholders by gathering and analyzing feedback and specific information on the
project situation. It answers the following questions:

+ Are the impacted stakeholders transitioning in the right direction?
+ Are they transitioning within the planned time frame?
+ Are any extra activities or redirection necessary?

Readiness for organizational change of the affected stakeholders is a major
success factor to any transformation program. To ensure the change readiness, a
change: strategy has been established and specific.

activities have been defined during the whole transformation project lifecycle. The
‘evaluation of the impact of organizational change management activities delivered
and of the recommended organizational change management strategy requires a

specific monitoring approach, eg, definition of meaningful measurement categories.

If the results provided by the organizational change monitoring activities are
ignored, a significant success factor will be disregarded.’

Furthermore, scheduling organizational change monitoring activities avoids
typical failures derived from lessons learnt from transformation projects (see Table

8.1), In addition, organiza itoring will ensure that. 5
specific and operational goals are set; highlighting the seriousness and stability of
the intended as well as ng the value of having organizational

management activities in business transformation.
‘An objective and of the change process:
improvement, early adaptation of the organizational change management strategy
‘and is considered as a key success factor. In addition, itis vital to have project
ip’s commitment to the organizational itoring approach.

‘Table 8. Typical lessons learned from other transformation projects

valuation of the organizational change ‘Measure goal achievement on a regular bass
readiness/user acceptance/satisfaction was | right from the start ofthe project and during
‘measured only once and too late (eg. after | the whole project lecycle

gove).

"9, to cover all

‘Only single measures are applied that are | Use a mix of organizational change
‘groups and different perspectives.

--- PAGE 120 ---
‘The scope of the organizational change monitoring is to measure the impact of
‘organizational change management activities (eg. stakeholder management,
‘communication management, or performance management). Organizational change

itoring activities are linked to the people: of the project (e8.,
readiness, acceptance, motivation, commitment). They should be seen as
‘complementary to the project controlling activities that are traditionally focused on
hard project aspects (e.g, budget, time, and scope). Organizational change
monitoring has three main objectives:

1. Evaluation of the organizational change management strategy:

+ Assessing the level of overall busi and readiness of i
stakeholders.
+ Reviewing the quality and effectiveness of the organizational change
strategy and specific organizational change activities
(eg,, stakeholder, communication, ry, and skill m ) for the
Project.

2, Regular feedback on the project:

+ Providing the organizational change management project team advisor as well as
the project manager with regular and general feedback on stakeholders’
perception of the transformation project.

+ Ensuring “softer” feedback comes back to the project (eg, informal
conversations, general thoughts, coffee machine corner discussions).

‘3. Continuous improvement process =
+ Deriving and prioritizing appropriate activities to improve organizational change
strategy, eg., better ication of business benefits.

+ Facilitating a continuous improvement process (measuring the impact of follow-
up activities).

+ Ensuring knowledge transfer and usage of experiences for developing best
practices for subsequent projects.

‘The organizati monitoring approach combines different methods and
tools to} the impact of organizational change ivities and the
‘overall strategy. These methods and tools are structured along two dimensions:

1. Focus of organizational change monitoring acti

ea Ea Spey

current situation of busi ion with regard to the organization's

readiness to accept the change, the achievement of organizational change
objectives (attitude ex, satisfaction) and

organizational change management related risks.

+ Evaluation of a specific organizational change management activity: Evaluating,
the effectiveness and efficiency of specific organizational change management
activities applied, eg., a specific event or workshop.

2, Frequency of organizational change monitoring activity:

+ Once: The monitoring activity will be applied only once during the
implementation process, eg. after a specific activity.

+ From time to time: The monitoring activity will be applied more than one time,
eg, to make attitude changes visible.

Based on these two dimensions itis possible to structure common change
management monitoring activities in a general approach (see Figure 8.11). The
application of the right mixture of organizational change monitoring tools avoids
blind spots and enriches overall organizational change monitoring.

‘Typical organizational change monitoring methods are described in Appendix F of
this book.

Organizational change monitoring has several benefits for the change
‘management team as well as for the project manager and project sponsor of a
transformation program:

Benefits for the change management team:

+ Enables about the effect of organizational
activities and the overall organizational strategy.
+ Supports the refinement of the organizational change management strategy and the
alignment of organizational change management activities.
+ Ensures continuous impro\ P during the project i tion as
well as for subsequent business transformation.

Benefits for project managers and project sponsors:

‘Fieure 8.11 Oreanizational chance monitorine approach

--- PAGE 121 ---
+ Supports the evaluation of the overall organizational change management effort on
the basis of predefined organizational change management success criteria, KPI's
and milestones during the project charter preparation.

+ Contributes to the overall project risk and issue management and status reporting.

+ Avoids blind spots during the project by covering the people side of business
transformation.

‘There are several assumptions and critical suecess factors that should be
considered for the organizational change monitoring step. The organizational change
‘management team has agreed the success criteria, KPI's and milestones at the
beginning of business tr ion with the project: and project
‘The effectiveness of the organizational change management strategy and activi
will be evaluated against these criteria during the project life cycle. Senior project
leaders must be open for receiving feedback about stakeholder’s project perception.
Any kind of project feedback should be treated in a constructive and action oriented
way, ie. no disregard of negative feedback, no finger pointing, and using feedback
for improvement activities. In addition, the change management team should have
‘access to all relevant project stakeholders in order to involve them in appropriate
‘organizational change monitoring activities.

‘Most of the applied organizational change monitoring methods are based on
interviews and/ or questionnaires. In order to get the most reliable information from
the people involved, it is important to follow four basic quality standards (see Table
82).

To the benefits of Organizational Change Mi itis mandatory
to define specific and measurable organizational change management objectives
before the transformation project begins. A broad range of different key performance

(KPIs) is available to the impact of Organizational Change

Management in business transformation. In Figure 8.12, possible KPIs are =
structured according to the project phase in which they might be used.

Before go-live, most KPIs focus on awareness of the transformation project within
the organization as well as on monitoring the project’s progress from a
“organizational change management perspective. During go-live, the KPI focus is on
‘end-user readiness. After go-live, most KPIs focus on the acceptance of new
processes and applications as well as the satisfaction of different stakeholders. Other
indicators are targeted at the sustainability of change after go-live, such as the
‘number of requested process changes and reduction of support efforts.

Defining the right KPIs to the ‘of Organizational Change
Management is an important precondition, but it is also necessary to define the right
tools or methods to obtain this information. The following list summarizes several
tools or methods:

+ surveys and interviews covering different topics, such as change readiness and
acceptance;

+ workshops with the business and/or organizational change agents;

+ pre- and post-go-live evaluations — Finding out the expectations of people before
the project and asking them again after the project is six months live;

+ benchmarking against own projects and/or other companies’ projects (if data is,
available).

Surveys are considered an appropriate tool for evaluating the acceptance of end
users with respect to new business processes and IT applications. Furthermore, in
contrast to interviews, surveys offer the possibility of involving a large group of end
users in transformation projects. Especially after go-live or during global rollouts,
impacting several assets the project management gains broad feedback about the
implementation process. This feedback can then be used for a subsequent
‘continuous improvement process. Nevertheless, the use of surveys requires a strong,
‘management commitment and a professional methodology.

‘Table 8.2 Quality standards for organizational change monitoring activities

Quality standard | Description

The par in any survey 9) follows
strictly the standard of anonymity t should not be posible to
attribute any kindof result to a specific person.

Voluntariness| ‘The participation in any survey should be considered as voluntary.
Transparency Results ofthe monitoring activites should be made available to all
the participants

Strive for improvements | All monitoring activities should be accompanied by a strong

‘commitment to improving the project situation it necessary. The
activity plan has to be communicated to all people involved in the
‘monitoring activities.

--- PAGE 122 ---
Figure 8.121 KPIs for: the! of On Change

‘Source: Kobnke, 2006.

[CHALLENGES CONCERNING ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE MONITORING:
1. Establish a change management strategy and define specific change management
activities during the whole transformation project lifecycle.

2, Assess the current situation of business transformation with regard to the
“organization's readiness to accept the change.

4. Evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of specific organizational change
‘management activities.

4- Apply monitoring activity during the implementation process.

Key MESSAGE

Before go-live, most KPIs focus on awareness of the transformation project within
‘the organization as well as on monitoring the project's progress from an
“organizational change management perspective.

89 Conclusion

‘This chapter has outlined a comprehensive organizational change management
approach that aims to support the planning and preparation, implementation and

ion, as well as continuous monitoring of business tr Its distinct
‘benefit lies ina focus on managing the intangible factors that are inherent in and
have the potential to derail business transformation. Successfully addressing the
‘human side of business transformation to achieve far-reaching acceptance and buy- =
in of the proposed transformation is critical for the overall success of any
‘transformation initiative,

Bibography

Beer, Michael and Nobria, Nitin (2000), Cracking the code of change, Harvard
Business Review 78, no. 3, 133-41.

Belbin, R.M. (1993), Team Roles at Work (Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann).

Cohen, Dan S. and Kotter, John P. (2005), The Heart of Change Field Guide
(Boston, Mass: Harvard Business School Press)..

‘Conner, Daryl (1992), Managing at the Speed of Change: How Resilient Managers
‘Succeed and Prosper Where Others Fail, ist ed. (New York: Villard Books).

Kohnke, Oliver (2006), How effective change management works: results of a
European study 2006, SAP Business Consulting:
wwe docstoc.com/docs/14980084/How-effective-Change-Management-works
(accessed March 2012).

Kotter, John P. (2010), Leading Change: Why Transformation Efforts Fail (Boston,
‘Mass: Harvard Business Press).

Kotter, John P. and Cohen, Dan S, (2002), The Heart of Change: Real-life Stories of
How People Change Their Organizations (Boston, Mass: Harvard Business
School Press).

LaClair, Jennifer A. and Rao, Ravi P. (2002), Helping employees embrace change,
‘McKinsey Quarterly, no. 2,17-20.

Lawler, Edward E. (2000), Pay system change: lag, lead, or both?: A commentary on
‘Wruck, Ledford and Heneman, in Breaking the Code of Change, edited by
Michael Beer and Nitin Nohria (Boston, Mass: Harvard Business School Press),

Project Management Institute (2004), A Guide to the Project Management Body of
‘Knowledge: Third Edition (PMBOK Guides), grd ed. (Newtown Square, PA:
Project Management Institute).

Reiche, BS. (2008), The configuration of employee retention practices in
‘multinational corporations’ foreign subsidiaries, International Business Review
17, n0. 6, 676-87.

Vince, Russ and Broussine, Michael (1996), Paradox, defense and attachment:

ing and working with emotions and relations underlying ional
change, Organization Studies 17, no. 1, 1-21.

‘Vogt, Peter (2004), Awareness to action: connecting employees to the bottom line,
Communication World March/April, no. 2,22-6.

Ward, John and Daniel, Elizabeth (2006), Benefits Management: Delivering Value

from IS & IT Investments (Chichester: Wiley).

‘Whitworth, Brad and Riccomini, Betsy (2005), Management communication,
Communication World March/April, no. 2.

1 We refer to Cohen and Kotter (2005) fran example ofa change readiness questionnaire.

Prono caper

nostenptr > 0

--- PAGE 123 ---
"

Bes, eae oi

Competence and Training Management

umastort puna (anes ot and te naRrcER,
(Sue andPLORIAS BLUMER Unive Api Sines nd Arts Norte Sized)

‘9. Overview

Business transformation requires a longer-term and often major change in the

of team and the For example, when
transforming an HR department from an administration-oriented unit to one
providing strategic consulting, not only the. for transformation, for

‘example, in the area of leadership, must be trained. Numerous team members
previously working primarily in administrative roles must first be prepared and
suitably trained with regard to their new strategic consulting competences (see also
‘Chapter 11, Case Study).

Competence and Training Management provide qualification and enablement of
selected key groups with respect to (1) the competences required for business
transformation and (2) the strategic core competences vital for the company’s future
success.

Competence and Training Management within BTM? addresses the following,

phases (referring to the BTM? transformation lifecycle) for business transformation
success:

+ Envision and engage: During these phases, the company’s need and objectives are
specified with respect to business transformation strategy implementation. The
need and objectives are then compared with the results of the as-is analysis,

+ Engage, transform and optimize: These phases develop training measures for the
identified gaps, foster the “learning transfer" and, eventually, analyze the success of
the measures.

‘OnJECTIVES OF HS CHAPTER

4. Understand major influence on learning and the development of competences.

2. Lean how to acquire particular competences that are needed for business
transformation.

‘3. Understand the significance of an appropriate working environment.

‘9.2 Significance, Definition and Scope

‘Our own experiences, as well as numerous literary examples, show the major
significance of team in busi ion projects. For a
broadly based McKinsey study came to the following conclusion: “When
‘organizational transformations succeed, managers typically pay attention to people
issues” (Keller et al, 2010), People issues are examined as part of BTM? both from
an organizational change management as well as a competence and training,
management perspective; whereas Organizational Change Management - to put it
‘simply ~ focuses primarily on the will and attitudes of team members and
‘management towards business transformation, Competence and Training
‘Management inthis section concentrates on the knowledge, ability and skills ofthese
target groups. For a business transformation project to succeed, the work between
‘managers and team members, and in particular the building of capacities, for
‘example, in the area of leadership skills, are of enormous significance. Preparing and
training the team members for their new tasks within the context ofa transformation
project are also highlighted as factors in the success of a business transformation
(Dingens and Bach, 2009).

Competence management is significant for the whole of personnel development,
and includes tasks from restructuring, long-term qualification and career planning to
the ofteam and the: ;. ly, it is about
realizing measures forthe promotion of strategically important competences
resulting from the planned/actual analysis comparison. In this chapter, however, we
‘ill focus on competence and training management measures in business
‘transformation projects. Accordingly, we introduce methods that we deem suitable

in such specific A ‘methodological engay though desi
‘would go well beyond the scope of this chapter. Readers will ind, however,
to more extensive discussions of the i

In the context of a business transformation the methods cannot generally be used
in a non-selective way. The necessary measures are used specifically and selectively,
that is, on certain individual target groups. However, the discipline of Competence
and Training Management is not only restricted to qualifications that are necessary
for the transformation process itself, but also targets those who must cope with the
‘company and team members after the transformation.

Competence and Training Management in the context of business transformation
involve the following key questions:

+ Current and future tasks: Which tasks are being tackled in the company, now and
in the future?

a

--- PAGE 124 ---
+ Current and future competences: Which competences are needed for this? Which
competences are required to achieve the desired objective?

+ Gaps and measures: What is the gap between current and future competence
requirements? Which measures enable this gap to be bridged?

+ Transfer and evaluation: How can the acquired competences be applied and.
successfully evaluated?

+ Work environment: How must the working and transformation environments be
configured so that they promote the development of competences?

In this chapter, typical competence and training management processes and their
associated methods are presented. Here too, however, the proposed approaches
‘must on no account be perceived as rigid instructions in the sense of a recipe, but
should be correspondingly adapted with regard to the specifics of the respective
business transformation — every business transformation is different - such as the
targets, focus, magnitude, duration or urgency. For this reason, those methods
presented in the chapter are to be seen as a set that should be applied and used in a
specific context. The level of competence management and training offerings that
‘exist in the company are also crucial. The more extensive they are, the easier the
systemic application is also within the context of a complex and possibly turbulent
business transformation. We are fully aware that even the best training measures can
‘only influence competences of team members toa certain degree. At least as
important are the working environment and structures, as well as the personal and
biographical prerequisites ofthe team members, who can prove to be a great help or
hindrance to learning. Here, we can devote only a certain amount of time to this
topic (see Section 9.3). The working environment and the whole transformation
context, however, are discussed at length in Chapter 2, Meta Management.

‘The competence and training management process within the context of
business transformation can summarily be characterized as follows: First, in the
strategy development step strategic objectives and focal points must be described in
terms of the identified target group competences (step 1). In the subsequent steps of,
strategy implementation, first, the needs and objectives are specified in the need
analysis step (2) and then compared with the results of the as-is analysis (3). For
identified gaps, training measures are developed in step 4. After all, the aim of this
training is to address identified gaps. The success of training (5) depends largely on
the application and use of the acquired knowledge in various working contexts. The
earning transfer must be fostered and, eventually, the success of the measures has
tobe analyzed (step 6). Throughout al steps, the circumstances of the working and
transformation environment must be considered as they have a major influence on
learning and the development of competences. Figure 9.1 summarizes the process
and illustrates how the various steps from Ci and Training M: a fit
into the BTM? transformation lifecycle.

‘When applying the whole model, flexibility is required with respect to the
‘characteristics of the company, the size and type of transformation process, and the
respective target group. For example, if it involves communicating leadership

to the busi i ible, this must be done
relatively quickly in the engage phase. If, however, team members are being trained
to operate an HR IT platform, for example, as part of an HR transformation, this
measure is carried out at a much later stage.

‘9.24 PREPARATION AND STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT

Asestablished at the outset, transformation projects are often associated with

‘in the team | competence requit which should be worked
‘out as part of a strategy at the beginning of a transformation project. For this
purpose, target groups must be identified at a “high level” in view of the company’s,
future value chain and associated tasks and competences have to be specified. This
‘ean be done based on the stakeholder groups that are ascertained in the
‘organizational change management discipline (see Chapter 8, Organizational Change
Management). The two dimensions to be distinguished according to the definition
must again be considered here:

Figure 9.1 Overview of the Cé and Tra

1. those competences that are needed to change the company ~ that is, to even enable
it to be successful in the future; and

2. those strategic core competences that are changed by the business transformation
and are becoming increasingly important in achieving future success in the market
~ that is, after the business transformation.

‘The fallewine chomld heln to thie, Wake One

--- PAGE 125 ---
racing car spins off the track, a team’s
speedy repairs, is needed to get the car back on course. As soon as this has been
achieved, other competences — for example, quick reactions or skilful driving — are
needed to manoeuvre the car back into pole position. However, this distinction is,
‘sometimes only analytic in nature because, for example, leadership competences,
‘which are to be given particular consideration during a business transformation,
should continue to be fostered after the transformation has ended.

This is particularly valid in view of the fact that business transformation does not
represent a one-off, isolated process that is to be concluded once and for al, but has
much more the character ofa recurring eycle that takes place at many levels.

‘The competence strategy is an independent part of the transformation strategy,
although this is primarily developed on the basis of important findings from the
‘other management disciplines. Because only from a forecast ofthe market,
development and of the company’s targeted future position can the future team
members’ tasks and resulting necessary competences be derived. Development of the
‘competence strategy is also based on the results of the stakeholder analysis in
accordance with the organizational iscipline. Inthe
“performance management” step of this discipline, the HR systems are also aligned
with the change objectives, thereby supporting sustained behavioral change.

Developing a competence strategy as part of business transformation does not
<iffer in terms of its methodology from elaborating other competence and HR
strategies, and is done using the usual tools, for example, holding interviews,
‘workshops and meetings, as well as including various stakeholder groups, such as
‘educational managers, customers, team members, employees’ representatives and
‘experts from the areas of competence management, training management and HR.

4. Identify target groups to define team members’ competence requirements.
2. Derive future team members’ tasks and resulting necessary competences based on

‘company’s targeted future position.

{3 Develop a competence strategy.

EY MESSAGE:

‘The competence strategy is an independent part of the transformation strategy,
although this is primarily developed on the basis of important findings from the
(9.2.8 NEED ANALYSIS.

In the need analysis, the competence strategy is specified and operationalized: with
the help of the job families and job profile cards tools, the target groups can be
‘specified in accordance with the competence strategy and attributed with
‘corresponding competence requirements.

Job fain

‘To better structure future competence requirements and target groups, the job
families tool can be used. job families consolidate different job positions or roles
using similar competence areas. This means that from a company’s perspective,
resources can be grouped together and effective training programs devised to further
develop these specific competences. For team members, core areas of their (future)
development, which they need for their career planning, become transparent.
Examples of structuring factors that can be considered for the development of job
families are roles (such as project manager, business transformation manager,
technical expert or general management), functional areas (such as research and
development, production, logistics, finances, HR and so on), hierarchies (such as
division managers, institute directors, employees, assistants and so on) or
‘geographical criteria (global, national, regional).

With competence structuring, we focus on a comprehensive competence concept
that includes cognitive competences (knowledge), functional competences (skills), as
‘well as meta and social competences (for example, leadership skills or general
problem-solving skills) (Winterton et al, 2006). Figure 9.2 shows an example of how
‘various hierarchical positions with comparable competence areas (but different
parameters) can be structured.

Figure 9.2 Example of competence requirements ata jb family level
Job profilecard

‘While job families provide an overview display of target groups, job profile cards
‘enable the requirements at a position level or individual level to be selectively
visualized (see Figure 9.3). Job profile cards help to determine the necessary core

--- PAGE 126 ---
‘competences at an individual protagonist level and can also be used for recruiting
measures. They also ensure the consistent description and comparability of future
Job profiles. Determining the requirements at this individualized level is,
recommended for core groups involved in the business transformation, such as a
business transformation manager.

Figure 9.3 Job profile cards

‘CHALLENGES CONCERNING THE NEED ANALYSIS:

1. Group resources together in order to devise effective training programs.

2. Determine the necessary core competences at an individual protagonist level and
use them for recruiting measures.

4 Structure competence requirements and target groups.

4, Selectively visualize the requi at a position level or individual level.

(9.3 ASIN AND GAP ANALYSIS
In the next step, the defined requirements are compared with the actual situation at
present and important gaps and training needs are identified for the respective

target groups. The process can be split into two steps as follows:

“nats af the current competence landscape in accordance nth the defined target group an competence
reairements

Application of the methodology when determining com depends on the
‘current competence management level. The higher the quality, the more data can be
directly retrieved from it. Other HR sources, for example, information from
‘employee and management assessment, quality reports, yellow pages or supervisor
reports, can also be used and analyzed. The less information can be retrieved from
the existing systems, the more crucial itis to generate primary data. For this purpose
‘a methodological repertoire is available, which can be used depending on the
‘transformation context, such as the resources, company size and scope of the

While group interviews (focus groups) can be sufficient for carrying
‘out job analysis and for determining the currently existing competences in small
“organizations, to achieve usable results, quantitative procedures, such as
‘questionnaires, tend to be used in larger organizations in addition to qualitative data
collection. Transformational and transactional leadership competences can be
determined quantitatively (Avolio etal, 1999; Bass, 1990; Bryant, 2003). Managers
‘with transformational competences can motivate and inspire their team members
‘without explicit incentive systems such as and punishment. For key posit
in a transformation program, for example, when determining the competences of a
business: nation consi ‘more time-consuming methods such
‘as 360° feedback or in-depth interviews are appropriate.

Actual planned stvation comparison and gap analysis
When! ing the actual situation with the results ofthe previ out
need analysis, job families (on a generic level) and job profile cards (for an individual
level) can again be used for identifying and visualizing differences (see Figure 9.4).
Representations such as these make it easier to complete the identification of
‘qualification requirements.

At this point, it should be noted that in addition to using the right competence
tools, the manner of implementation also plays a major role. In business

Hon at an HR organization of a major munications company, the
following implementation factors in particular were viewed critically: Integration
‘with organizational processes, and recognition isms (cf.
performance in Chapter 8, Organizational Change M ), the

lose involvement of participating individuals not only in the planning and
structuring phases but also the implementation phase, the use of numerous
as well as ng and evaluating the competences (Morris,

1996).

‘With major strategic changes, it might not be possible to offset all changed
‘competence requirements with training measures. In this case, job profile cards can.
also prove very useful when recruiting new team members who bring with them the
required competences. There are also numerous examples where, in the scope of
transformation projects (such as acquisition and merger), not only individual new
team members were taken on but completely new companies were purchased to fill
“competence gaps” (Pollack, 2009).

--- PAGE 127 ---
Figure 9.4 Gap analysis at job family level

1. Analyze information from employee and management assessment, quality reports,
yellow pages or supervisor reports.

2, Determine qualitatively and quantitatively transformational and transactional
leadership competences.

‘3. Compare the defined requirements with the actual situation at present.

4, Identify important gaps and training needs for the target groups.

For key positions in a transformation program, for example, when determining the
‘competences of a business transformation manager, considerably more time-
‘consuming methods such 360° feedback or in-depth interviews are appropriate.

(9.44 CURRICULUM PREPARATION AND TRAINING.
‘Once competence gaps and training requirements have been identified at job
families and job profile cards level the next step involves preparing the training
‘curriculum. A number of aspects and issues must be considered here:

+ Specify earning objectives and scope: What should be learned? What should the
learners be able to do/know after training?

+ Identify internal/external training products/providers or develop new training, =
offerings.

+ Structure and compile training and ereate a curriculum.

+ Prepare (individual) training plans and time schedules.

First, the competence differences should be converted into concrete learning
objectives at a curriculum level and later at a course level. It must be ensured that
the learning objectives address the identified gaps. The next step involves analyzing
‘whether training products exist in the company itself or on the market that can
‘ensure that the learning objectives will be achieved.

This decision must be taken in view of strategic company objectives and
transformation objectives, the available budget, and other prevailing conditions,
such as learning prerequisites or media competences of the team members, trainer
experience, cultures and technological factors, for example, software architecture or
hardware equipment (Grihbiel and Schiefner, 2002). Ifthe competences are very
‘specific and of major significance for the company’s future success, outsourcing the
training to an external training provider would entail considerable risks, even in
spite of any cost-saving potential. In this case, the training is carried out by internal
providers, who might sill have to develop or expand the training courses.

However, attention must be paid to an appropriate level of didactic quality, both

‘when developing the company’s own training and purchasing external This
includes taking a balanced and varied combination of methods, learning forms,
Pe social and, on forms, and media into (Bac et

al., 2004; Leclereq and Poumay, 2005). Attention must also be paid to a balanced
didactic portfolio in view of the proximity to the working process; while abstract,
decontextualized knowledge can also be conveyed in seminars and training courses
away from the workplace, business transformation in particular requires practical
‘competences and therefore didactic measures that are close to the working process,
for example, coaching or mentoring programs or action learning ~ group-based
“actions” and the subsequent discussion using authentic problem scenarios (Revans,
1982).

‘The various elements that are developed and/or purchased on the market are
‘combined as overall curricula in accordance with the desired granularity and specific
training plans are drawn up for the target groups. The team of trainers, mentors and
‘e-learning authors must also be assembled. Since trainers for complex training tasks
in the context of business transformation usually also have to be trained, this must
‘be considered and scheduled as early as the start of step 4.

If the business transformation is inked to the implementation of software,
training sessions should be carried out a week before using the system. Particular
attention should be paid to ensuring that, during IT training, not only the operating,
steps are conveyed, but that “subject matter experts” explain and embed the
applications in the respective business. - While piloting is also
for non-IT-based training, its significance is essential when it comes to e-learning
training — for example, in the form of usability tests.

Itis important that the training measures are coordinated centrally and
‘uniformly. However, the ownership should be anchored in the respective business
area. Critical factors for suecess can be classified into three categories: resources,
time and budget. First, the management must be sufficiently committed and provide
the relevant “human resources”, such as trainers, authors and subject matter experts. =

--- PAGE 128 ---
The latter should also carry out a training review or provide expert input even before
this is done. Second, the timescale must not be too restricted. The time required for
planning and implementing training measures is often underestimated and the
‘organizational benefits of the training measures are generally communicated too
late. Third, there is also the risk of underestimating the costs of carrying out the
training for example, hiring rooms and providing training (information) systems
and tools.

cn mi PREPARATION AND TH

4. Convert competence differences into concrete learning objectives at a curriculum,
level and later at a course level.

2. Analyze whether training products exist in the company itself or on the market.

3 Take care of an appropriate level of didactic quality, both when developing the
‘company’s own training and purchasing external training.

4, Pay attention to a balanced didactic portfolio in view of the proximity to the
working process.

5. Assemble the team of trainers, mentors and e-learning authors.

6. Coordinate training measures centrally and uniformly.

KEY MESSAGE

Business tra ion requires practical competences and didactic

‘measures that are close to the working process, for example, coaching or mentoring

programs or action learning group-based “actions” and the subsequent discussion

using authentic problem scenarios.

‘9.8 TRANSFER AND EVALUATION

In the preceding sections, we have already mentioned the application and so-called
transfer problems, and in this part, we will take another more in-depth look at these
issues. The challenge of transferring the acquired knowledge and the skills from the
training to everyday (transformation) situations is conveyed in the following,
statement:

‘Most current training efforts donot result in a significant transfer of new sil or knowledge tothe
fob.

(Broad, 1997)

‘The transfer gap model (Wilkening, 2002) expresses this problem in a simplified
‘way as it shows how, immediately following the training phase, the “actual”
knowledge curve falls sharply as the target curve rises (see Figure 9.5). Although the
model is simplistic, it still clearly visualizes the competence gap between the actual
and target values and the significance of taking appropriate measures.

Pigure 9.5 Transfer gap model
Source: ith from Wilkening, Oto 8. (2002), =
ea er van in: der

ng: Mit on Bosch, Gore, Ope, Philip,

‘Siemens, Volkswagen, Weidmiller und Weka, sth ed edited by Hans-Christan Rieko (Wiesbaden:
Gabler,

‘There is a range of factors that influence transfer and application of knowledge.
‘The most important organizational influencing variables include the organization's
‘commitment to the training, the correlation between the department's objectives and
the learning and an open team for Atan
individual level, there are three important factors that influence the successful
application of what has been learned. First, discussions with the supervisor that
focus on directly applying this new knowledge and the skills acquired, the
‘supervisor's positive feedback and the degree of his or her involvement. Second, the
‘team members’ feedback to the learner plays a part. And third, there is simply the
‘opportunity to put all that has been learned into practice in everyday working,
situations (Lim and Johnson, 2002).

Especially during complex phases of business transformation, training in general
‘and ensuring the transfer in particular tend to be neglected. In view of the major
challenges and the practical transformation competences that these urgently
necessitate, this can lead to particularly negative consequences. To avoid making a
mockery of investments for training and to support their influence in practice, a
range of measures need to be defined and implemented in addition to workplace-
and only ends some considerable time after the training has been concluded. These
measures include managing the learning transfer in both the field of learning as well
as the field of application (Solga, 2011). The former envisage, for example, the use of
practical and authentic materials as a prerequisite for successfully applying what has
‘been learned to everyday working situations. Case studies or role plays can ensure
that transformation problems, for example, forthe training of transformation

--- PAGE 129 ---
planning and leadership behavior, are authentically conveyed. To increase
‘motivation and a sense of personal responsibility, for example, learning contracts
can be agreed individually with the participants even before the training measure
begins.

‘The degree to which they have been achieved is discussed after the training, for
‘example, with a coach. “Follow-up meetings” or “transfer days” specially arranged
for this purpose at which seminar participants repeat topics in a structured manner
and discuss the previous transfer and application of knowledge are also worthwhile.
‘The significance of transfer coaching by supervisors arises from the aforementioned
influencing factors and, together with the support of line managers and colleagues, is

timately critical to the level of Another -worth mentioning is the
integration of learning objectives in the regular performance review to ensure that
the transfer is through as ry and its degree of sev

‘The ultimate level of success of a training measure is gauged during the
‘evaluation. Typical mistakes that are made here lie in restricting the evaluation to
participant satisfaction and the cost ofthe training, An evaluation ofthe effect at a
‘business level as suggested, for example, by Kirkpatrick (1998) is also often left out.
During one broadly based study, a third of the participants were unable to make any
statement about the effect ofthe company’s training investment (Gryger etal,
2010). In accordance with comprehensive controlling approach, ie. the planning,
realization and evaluation of educational measures, an overall distinction should be
made| the three dimensions of ng ive and quali

‘benefit and cost factors. Monetary controls should include the cost and benefit
factors that can be measured in monetary terms — for example, training costs,
savings and, if possible, the calculation of the monetary business impact. Factors
that cannot be in yy terms but are quantifiable are also considered.
‘These could be, for example, time spent on the training and also time savings, which
are specified in hours or days. Afterall, criteria will emerge that can only be
determined on a qualitative basis but are no less important as result. The

‘or acceptance of team or are of
this (Grohbiel et al, 2010). It would be very oversimplified and foolhardy within the
context of a business ti fon to consider only short-term y

and to restrict the focus, for example, to the costs. Ensuring that training sessions
are oriented to higher-level transformation objectives is much more meaningful than
‘simple monetarization, even if evaluating these objectives does not always result in
something quantifiable.

‘CHALLENGES CONCERNING TRANSFER AND EVALUATION:

1. Understand the most important organizational influencing variables (e.g.
“organization's commitment to the training or the correlation between the
department's objectives and the learning content).

2. Define measures that manage the learning transfer in both the field of learning as
well a the field of application.

4. Agree individually learning contracts with the participants even before the
training measure begins.

4- Analyze the degree to which the learning contracts have been achieved after the
training, for example, with a coach.

5. Evaluate the effect ofthe training at a business level.

KEY MESSAGE:

Ensuring that training sessions are oriented to higher-level transformation

“objectives is much more meaningful than simple monetarization, even if evaluating

these objectives does not always result in something quantifiable.

‘9:3 The Significance of a Working Environment m

Instructional training, ‘ean only influence the com ypment and
learning of the team members to a certain extent. Whereas the learners’ biographical
and per or experiences are decisive in their

development (Bates et al., 2005), even the definition of work-based learning as
learning for, at and through work (Evans, 2011) shows the limited scope of train
Classical training offerings (for work) usually take place away from the workplace in
specially constructed training and further education In addition, 7
there are also informal and implicit forms of learning in a more immediate work
‘context ~ for example, learning from being accompanied by a coach at the workplace
(at work) - or the development of competences resulting from work itself (through
work) — for example, by solving a problem or working together with colleagues. For
all these forms, the context of work — which can be characterized by social, cultural,
‘temporal, spatial, technological or thematic dimensions — is vital; working
conditions that promote learning need to be created (e.g. Hardwig, 2006). Taking,
the work context into consideration for competence development and learning is
especially relevant against the background of a business transformation that is
characterized by particularly unstable conditions and uncertainty. Although putting
‘an environment into practice that promotes learning and transformation is complex
and can searcely be managed by individual positions or even individual educational
managers and trainers; it is of such significance for competence development that it
‘seems important at this point to identify some key basic principles of favorable
‘working and learning conditions. Further information about the context of business
transformation can be found in Chapter 2, Meta Management.

--- PAGE 130 ---
:n view of the complex dynamics of a rapidly changing working world (Hagel and
Brown, 2010), competence development and learning are firmly anchored in the
‘processes of experimenting with and trying out new things, solving problems
together and sharing knowledge with talented team members in authentic working
contexts. Collaboration that has an influence on learning takes place in a variety of,
‘extensive and rather loosely structured networks or communities (Fuller and Unwin,
2008) beyond company boundaries. According to Hagel and Brown (2010), this
learning can be fostered by technological support in the form of flexible pull
platforms. For example, IBM has implemented a search engine tool that enables
informal and network-like learning by also linking search requests to experts,
projects, discussions and so on (Veen et al, 2009). By using mobile devices such as
‘smartphones, the company has also improved the networking of and cooperation
team What is remarkable is that the team. didhardly =

use their devices to complete the devised HR training units, but to obtain necessary
information directly in the working process or to consult experienced colleagues. In
la, this stimulated contact and networking between the learners and people
beyond their own working groups, with weak ties (Ahmad and Orion, 2010). This
‘ean promote the dissemination of ideas and innovations beyond the team and the
‘organizational unit. Ideally, the low of information takes place according to the just-
in-time respectively pull principle (Hagel et al, 2009), as the above IBM example
shows. Also the pull platform from Toyota can be considered as an initial, albet still
limited approach to these principles.

‘ull platforms are essential to fostering learning onthe jb, since they make it easier to access

unexpected resources in unexpected ways and thereby encourage participants tory new
approaches.

(Hagel et al., 2009)

‘The management's attitude to the team members and to cross-company
‘cooperation is also of pivotal importance for the development of competences. If
‘cooperation and the sharing of knowledge are perceived as a zero-sum game or even
asa potential loss of personal property, the conditions for learning and the
development of talent are extremely unfavorable. In contrast, they are greatly
facilitated when open cooperation in the form of a collaboration disposition, even
‘beyond company boundaries, is taken for granted and perceived as an opportunity
from which everyone involved can learn and profit (Hagel et al., 2009).

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF Ew 5

1. Facilitate an open working and learning culture characterized by the sharing of

2. Foster collaboration that has influence on learning by technological support in the
form of flexible pull platforms.

KEY MESSAGE:

If cooperation and the sharing of knowledge are perceived as a “zero-sum game” or

‘even as a potential loss of personal property, the conditions for learning and the

development of talent are extremely unfavorable.

‘9-4 Comelusion.

‘Competence and training management mainly address qualification and enablement
Of peers required to fulfill the business transformation. Competence and Training,
Management consists of six steps:

1. Identify target groups ata high level in view of the company’s future value chain. ==
and specify associated tasks and competences.

2. Specify and operationalize the competence strategy.

‘3. Compare the defined requirements with the actual situation at present and
identify important gaps as well as training needs for the respective target groups.

4, Prepare the curriculum.

5. Train the curriculum.

6. Transfer the acquired knowledge and the skills from the training to everyday
(transformation) situations.

Finally, this chapter discussed the significance of a working environment and in

particular of pull platforms, which foster learning.

ibtiography

Ahmad, Nabeel and Orion, Peter (2010), Smartphones make IBM smarter, but not
as expected, Training & Development.

Avolio, Bruce J., Bass, Bernard M. and Jung, Dong I. (1999), Re-examining the
components of transformational and transactional leadership using the
Multifactor Leadership, Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology
72, M0. 4, 441-62.

Bachmann, Gudrun, Dittler, Martina and Tesa, Gerhild (2004), Didaktik und
Lemen, UNI NOVA Wissenschaftsmagazin der Universitit Basel, Neues Lernen,
no. 98, 15-17.

Bass, Bernard M. (1990), From transactional to transformational leadership:
learning to share the vision, Organizational Dynamics 18, no. 3, 19-31.

Bates, P., Hunt, Will and Hillage, J. (2005), Learning at work: strategies for
widening adult participation in learning below Level 2 via the workplace: a
scoping study, Report 052230, Learning and Skills Development Agency.

--- PAGE 131 ---
Broad, Mary L. (1997), Overview of transfer of training: from learning to
performance, Performance Improvement Quarterly 10, no. 2, 7-21.

Bryant, Scott E. (2003), The role of transformational and transactional leadership in

ing, sharing and exploiting ional knowledge, ‘of Leadership
& Organizational Studies 9, no. 4, 32-44.

Dingens, Angelika and Bach, Norbert (2009), Ziele definieren — sicher Ankommen.
Professionelle Steuerung von Veriinderungsprozessen und der Beitrag des Human
Resource Managements, KPMG Studie, KPMG AG.

Evans, Karen (2011), Work-based learning ~ setting the scene, in Work-based
‘Mobile Learning: Concepts and Cases, edited by Norbert Pachler, Christoph
‘Pimmer and Judith Seipold (Oxford: Peter Lang).

Fuller, Alison and Unwin, Lorna (2008), Towards expansive apprenticeships: a

ey tn tae be bag pr TLRP.

Grohbiel, Urs and Schiefner, Mandy (2002), Die E-Learning-Entscheidungsmatrix,
in Handbuch E-Learning, edited by Andreas Hohenstein and Karl Wilbers (Koln:
Dt. Wirtschaftsdienst).

Grohbiel, Urs, Stoller-Schai, Daniel and Plimmer, Christoph (2010), E-Learning:
Den Mehrwert steuern, PERSONAL, no «1.

Gryger, Liz, Saar, Tom and Schaar, Patti (2010), Building organizational
‘McKinsey Global Survey results, McKinsey Quarterly (McKinsey & Company).

Hagel, John and Seely Brown, John (2010), Six fundamental shifts in the way we ss
work, Harvard Business Review: http://blogs.hbr.org/bigshift/2010/08/six-
fandamental-shifts-in-the.html (accessed March 2012).

Hagel, John, Seely Brown, John and Davison, Lang (2009), Talent is everything, The
Conference Board Review: www.j n.com/t pthing:pdt
(accessed March 2012).

Hardwig, Thomas (2006), Worauf kommt es bei der betrieblichen Gestaltung,
lernférderlicher Rahmenbedingungen eigentlich an?, in Arbeitsprozessorientierte
Weiterbildung: Lernprozesse gestalten, Kompetenzen entwickeln, ist ed., edited
by Claudia Loroff, Katja Manski and Walter Mattauch (Bielefeld: Bertelsmann).

Keller, Scott, Meaney, Mary and Pung, Caroline (2010), What successful
transformations share: McKinsey Global Survey results, McKinsey Quarterly
(eKinsey & Company).

Kirkpatrick, Donald L. (1998), Evaluating Training Programs: The Four Levels,

‘and ed. (San Francisco, CA: Berrett-Koehler).

Leclereq, Dieudonné and Poumay, Marianne (2005), The 8 Learning Events Model
and its principles, LabSET, University of Lidge:
www labset.net/media/prod/SLEM.paf (accessed March 2012).

Lim, Doo H. and Johnson, Scott D. (2002), Trainee perceptions of factors that
influence learning transfer, International Journal of Training and Development
6,n0. 1, 36-48.

Morris, Deborah (1996), Using competency development tools as a strategy for
change in the human resources function: a case study, Human Resource
‘Management 35, 20. 1, 35-51.

Pollack, Andrew (2009), Roche agrees to buy Genentech for $46.8 billion, New York
‘Times: wwew.nytimes.com/2009/03/13/business/worldbusiness/13drugs.html
(accessed March 2012).

Revans, Reginald W. (1982), What is action learning?, Journal of Management
Development 1, 0. 3, 64-75.

‘Solga, Mare (2011), Férderung von Lerntransfer, in Praxishandbuch
Personalentwicklung, edited by Jurij Ryschka, Mare Solga and Axel Mattenklott
(Wiesbaden: Gabler).

‘Veen, Wim, Lukosch, Heide and de Vries, Pieter (2009), Improving organizational
learning through networked learning, in Fifth Conference Professional
Knowledge Management, Experiences and Visions: [WM 2009], March 25~27,
+2009 in Solothurn, Switzerland: 22~31.

Wilkening, Otto S. (2002), Bildungs-Controlling — Erfolgssteuerungssysteme der
Personalentwickler und Wissensmanager, in Strategien der
Personalentwicklung: Mit Praxisberichten von Bosch, Gore, Hamburg-

‘Mannheimer, Opel, Philips, Siemens, 1 Weidmiiller und Weka, 5th
ed., edited by Hans-Christian Riekhof (Wiesbaden: Gabler).

Winterton, Jonathan, Delamare-Le Deist, Frangoise and Stringfellow, Emma
(2006), Typology of Knowledge, Skills and Competences: Clarification of the
Concept and Prototype (Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the

< Pronoue chapter Netenapter > 0

--- PAGE 132 ---
"

Bese ag oi

RICKER, NORIZAN smerin and

10.4 Overview

Program M: serves as an overall vehicle for the tra ion effort
(Pellegrinetii, 2011). It aims to support the implementation of the decided strategy in
‘order to achieve the expected benefits in business transformations. A program is
asa group of related projects in a coordinated way to obtain

benefits and control unrealized when they are managed individually (Project
Management Institute, 2008). A project, on the other hand, is a temporary endeavor
undertaken to create a unique product, service or result, Projects tend to have
definite start and finish points, with the aim of delivering a predetermined output,
‘siving them relatively clear development paths from initiation to delivery. Programs,
con the exist to create value by enriching the of projects in
isolation (Lycett etal, 2004). Programs typically have a more strategic vision of the
desired end goal, but no clearly defined path to get there. Therefore, Program
Management is expected to deal with the uncertainty surrounding the achievement
‘of the vision, whereas projects work best where the outputs can be well defined. As
Project Management is embedded within Program Management, this chapter will
P ly focus on Program with Project being
discussed as a tangential topic.

Program and Project Management mainly address the engage phase, with some
also playing a role in the transform phase for business transformation success:

4. Engage: During this phase, programs are set up and executed to deliver the
specific benefits identified by Value Management. Furthermore, programs are
‘coordinated and its components and projects are integrated. Last, quality
requirements are identified and the need for additional capacity and skills is
‘evaluated.

2. Transform: This phase monitors the budget and time to ensure that they
are not ‘throughout the busi mation. It also

realistically how much effort it would take to complete a business transformation
in terms of duration and cost.

‘omncrivis oF rms cHarrex: Pa
LU the pr of Program and Project Mi
2. Understand the similarities and differences of skills between a project and
rogram manager.
g. Learn about success factors for achieving the objectives of Program and Project,
Management.

10.2 The Role of Business Transformation Program and Project Management

Program and Project Management is part of the enablement type of BTM? (see
Figure 10.1). Where the direction type provides the vision and ing,
‘course of action for business transformation, enablement ensures that the endeavor
is executed in alignment with the goals and objectives of the business
transformation. As such, program and project management function to provide a
‘comprehensive methodology to deal with program and project management in
business transformation by including the best of breed knowledge and experience in
the field of managing scope, teams and human resources. The approach, at an
‘operational level, an be complemented by known Program and Project Management
methodologies.

Although programs provide benefits through better organization of projects, they
do not in themselves deliver individual project objectives. Generally, the goal of
project mat ILX Group, 2012) isto ensure that such projects are organi
and controlled from initiation through to completion by organizing and planning
things properly prior to commencement. Once this has been established, itis
imperative to ensure that it continues to be organized and controlled, and when the
project is finished, all loose ends need to be tidied up. By contrast, the two
fundamental goals (ILX Group, 2012) of Program and Project Management are:

1. Efficiency and effectiveness goals — Incorporating an integrated approach to
particular aspects of management in business transformation, including
improving coordination, improving dey utilizing
effectively, effective knowledge transfer and greater senior management visibility.
2. Business focus goals ~ Aligning projects with the requirements, strategy, goals,
‘business drivers and ‘ofthe wider organization, by defining an appropriate
<irection for the embedded projects within a program, as well as for the program
as a whole via a more coherent communication to stakeholders involved.

‘Many organizations struggle to execute major transformation programs
successfully due to a range of reasons. Firstly, priorities and accountabilities are

--- PAGE 133 ---
‘often not clear to the involved participants (Morello and Olding, 2008). Also,
‘bureaucratic, ineffective and often manual management processes often hinder the
ability to 3rmation programs. lly. Furthermore,

resources and fragmented middle managers with lack of focus on what really matters
«ean also pose as a barrier (Spreitzer, 1996). The lack of up-front preparation and
‘thinking, as well as insufficient planning prevents structured reporting, thereby
resulting in a garbage in — garbage out syndrome. As a consequence, problems
identified in program and project management are often too late to deal with in the
process of transforming the organization.

Figure 10.4 and Project asan in
In response, Program and Project Management seeks to answer the following =
questions:

+ What isthe schedule, the involved resources and how should they work together?

+ How do we coordinate the different projects within a program and make sure that
they are aligned with the overall business transformation goals?

+ What are the scope and objectives of the underlying programs and projects?

+ How do we track time and costs and make sure that we are in line with the budget,
and value?

+ How do we make sure that we follow best practices in terms of quality of work and
the deliverables?

+ How do we make sure that we have the right people, and the right place and at the

+ How do we ensure delegation to outside providers and optimize the invested
capital?

+ How do we track progress and inform our stakeholders?

This chapter will proceed as follows. We will first outline the eight steps for
program and project in business transformation. Next, a description of,
the roles and responsibilities for program and project managers is presented,
followed by a discussion of the key skills required for these roles. The chapter then
concludes by outlining lessons learned, providing a list of dos and don'ts of program
‘management in business transformations, and summarizing the main results.

(CHALLENGES CONCERNING TIE BUSINESS TRANSFORMATION PROGRAM AND PROJECT
MANAGEMENT:

1. icate priorities and bilities toi participants.

2, Disburden resources and middle managers and communicate focus on what really
matters.

4. Tackle up-front preparation and thinking, as well as planning.

KEY MESSAGE:
Program and Project Management provide a comprehensive methodology to deal
‘with program and project management in business transformation by including the
“best of breed” knowledge and experience in the field of managing scope, teams and
human resources.

10.3 The Process of Business Transformation Program and Project Management

‘We define a business ion program and project framework
that comprises of eight steps, which address the abovementioned challenges
pertaining to the of business tion and thei projects.

As can be seen in Figure 10.2, the eight activities are mainly involved in the engage =
phase, with some also playing a role in the transform phase (see Chapter 2, Meta
Management, for a detailed description of the transformation lifecycle):

1. Program planning and governance — primarily secks to bring operational
strategies in alignment with the vision of business transformation and define
‘governing principles that establish the program structure.

2. Program and project integration management — focuses on establishing
‘coordination measures to manage business transformation, its components and.
projects towards the transformation goal.

43, Program and project scope management — ensures that all key stakeholders
involved approve of the extent to which the transformation effort will be executed.

4 Program and project time and cost management ~ defines the budget and time
frame required.

5. Program quality management — establishes an environment that identifies and

--- PAGE 134 ---
fulfills the quality requirements of the program.

6, Program human resource management — assembles the right people with the
required skills to fulfil their respective responsibilities and value delivery.

7. Program proc - the need for additional capacity
and skills, whether potential areas could be outsourced to.

8. Program reporting ~ ensures that the documentation of all changes, updates and
performances are registered in a manner that is known to involved stakeholders.

Figure 10.2 Activity level per process themes inthe four phases of the transformation
lifecyele

Details of these eight steps are outlined in the following subsections.
10.34 PROGRAM PLANNING AND GOVERNANCE =

In this first key step, the basic structure forthe program needs to be established.
Before a program can be executed, program managers need to define the program
ization and roles, define the pr and icati

<ifferent entities and so forth. Tools and accelerators that can facilitate such
‘engagement include program organization charts, standard roles, program

ion pr ple and program organization templates. Thus, the
approach can simply be seen as relying primarily on previous project and program
experience. Indeed, our own studies on business transformation project roles in the
United States and Asia-Pacific (Safrudin et al, 2011) show that the minimum
‘number of years taken to be considered as an experienced program manager is five
to ten years, while a project manager requires a minimum of three to eight years of
experience.

‘The deliverables for program planning include:

+ program management plan;
+ program goals, benefits and values;
+ program roadmap updates;
+ governance plan;
+ updated organization charts;
+ defined roles; and
+ escalation process.
Program and project management integrate all subsidiary program plans into a

cohesive overall program management plan. It also updates the program roadmap
accordingly if necessary. This is an iterative process, as competing priorities,

assumptions, deper and constraints are to address critical
such as business goals, deliverables, benefits time and cost. The program,

team, in conjunction with major st establishes the key
‘governance pri and that the. is in place to encourage
effective and appropriate governance.

Governance structures ensure that the program goals and objectives are aligned
‘with the strategic goals and objectives of the enterprise for which the program is
being developed. Effective governance ensures that the strategic alignment and the
value that has been promised are realized and benefits are delivered (Project
Management Institute, 2008):

‘Program governance isthe process of developing, communicating, implementing, monitoring, and
the polices, and witha given
The result a Jor efficient and sand dtivery
‘management focused on achieving program goals in a consistent manner, addressing appropriate
risks and stakeholder requirements

Program governance ensures that decision-making and delivery management
activities are on achieving program goals in a consis This
includes addressing appropriate risks and fulfilling stakeholder requirements,
Governance for programs is different than governance for most projects, because the
‘scope and impact of a program is typically complex and spans across multiple
projects and therefore project governance structures. Examples of factors
contributing to this complexity are multi-year timelines, competition
Projects for scarce resources, diverse stakeholder requirements, as well as inter
project and enterprise-level risks and issues.

Asan be seen in Figure 10.3, the task of program planningisto orchestratethe =
inherent projects in alignment with the business transformation strategy. Therefore,
tools and methods such as, but not limited to, program governance, multi-project
steering, change management, program marketing and others can facilitate the
deployment of multiple projects. Objective factors such as cost, schedule and scope

--- PAGE 135 ---
of the projects, will need to be aligned with the business transformation strategy as
delivered by the business transformation manager. Associated tools and methods
that may benefit such communication include strategic ro strategic scon
stakeholder management, strategic controlling and others.

igure 10.9 Programs link projects with the strategy of an organization

4. Integrate all subsidiary program plans into a cohesive overall program
‘management plan.

2, Update the program roadmap if required.

{3 Orchestrate the projects inherent in a program in alignment with the
‘organizational business transformation strategy.

4, Ensure that decision-making and deli activities are on
achieving program goals in a consistent manner.

KEY MESSAGE:
‘The minimum number of years taken to be considered as an experienced program
‘manager is five to ten years, while a project manager requires a minimum of three to,
‘eight years of experience.

103.2 PROGRAM AND PROJBCT INTEGRATION MANAGEMENT

Program and project integration management is a critical step because many
“organizations do not integrate these two disciplines together well (Lycett et al.,
+2004). This step ensures that the program, its components and projects, and all the
program activities from the program processes are well coordinated and integrated
(Gee Figure 10.4), in order to achieve the expected program benefits in a consistent
‘way. This process aims at planning the support structure that will enable the
program to successfully achieve its goals (Project Management Institute, 2008):

The! Area incdes the and activities needed
to identify define, combine. unify. and coordinate maltple components within the program as tell
as the varius and ies within the

‘management process groups.

To that end, a program support structure consists of:

+ core program management and governance teams;

+ resource planning and management (personnel, tools, facilities and finances);

+ program management framework (selected processes);

+ program management office; and

+ integration into the meta management structure of business transformation,
especially value management.

Specifically, program and project integration management describes an important
interface to BTM? (see Chapter 2, Meta Management) and also needs to correspond
‘with value management (see Chapter 4, Value Management). Moreover, integration
management also takes care of tactical issues and risks. Such issues are unplanned
‘events, concerns or disputes that may have an impact on cost, schedule, technical
architecture or other program areas. Therefore, issue management and control at the
program level also includes addressing the issues escalated from the constituent
projects that could not be resolved at the project level. These unresolved project
issues can impact the overall progress of the program and must be tracked.
Examples of methods and accelerators that can be used in this step include:

+ project management office start-up roadmap;
+ program change logs;

+ program change requests;

+ issue log files or databases; and

+ program risk management.

Deliverables that arise from program and project integration management
typically include:

+ program management plan;

+ update the program roadmap;
‘+ program roadmap updates;

+ governance plan;

+ updated organization charts;
+ defined roles; and

+ escalation process.

--- PAGE 136 ---
Figure 10.4 summarizes how program management performances the linkage
between the overall transformation management and the management of the

Figure 10.4 The link between transformation, Program and Project Management

1. Plan the support structure that will enable the program to achieve its goals
successfully.

2. Address key tactical issues and risks.

Unresolved project issues (unplanned events, concerns or disputes that may have an

impact on cost, schedule, technical architecture or other program areas) can impact

the overall progress of the program and must be closely monitored.

10.33 PROGRAM AND PROJDCT SCOPE MANAGEMENT =
While the high-level program scoping is done in the envision phase, the detailed
program scope is and lyzed in the: hase of
transformation. In this phase, the step program and project scope management
seeks to reach a with key st ‘on the program plan and
as well as on staffing key resources. The preliminary program scope isthe first
formulation of the program scope statement, which will be finalized in the program
This among several st ean be

‘with scoping workshops, with the aim of managing and adjusting the scope of
program and related projects over time.

‘The essential task of program scoping is to ensure that all key stakeholders of the
program achieve a common understanding of the program mandate and approve it.
‘Typical program key stakeholders include:

+ sponsors;
+ program manager (if already named);
+ Cx0s; and

+ future steering committee members.

Examples of tools, techniques and accelerators that can facilitate program and
project scope management include:

+ the SAP roadmap global ASAP template, for preliminary program scope definition;

+ the SAP FS project ‘methodology, for preliminary scope
development; and

+ the program charter, for commencing implementation planning for the program.

‘This step provides deliverables such as an approved program scope statement
(also called program charter) in relation to the vision, goals and objectives. The
program charter is the summary document that provides a solid foundation, which
helps to reduce risk and ensure a successful implementation.

4. Formulate the program scope statement, which will be finalized in the program
charter.

2. Manage and adjust the scope of the program and its related projects over time.

43. Ensure that all key stakeholders of the program achieve a common understanding,
of the program mandate and approve and commit to it.

KEY MESSAGE

Deliverables of program and project scope management is a program charter, which

is a summary document that provides a solid foundation, which helps to reduce risk

and ensure a successful implementation.

103-4 PROGRAM AND PROJECT TIME AND COST MANAGEMENT *

This fourth step aims to define the budget and time constraints for the different
‘components of the program and the involved projects. Managing time and cost are of
importance specifically in the engage and transform phases (see Figure 10.2). In the
‘engage phase, Program and Project Management is responsible for setting up and
‘executing programs that deliver the specific benefits identified by Value
‘Management. During the transform phase, program and project management is
responsible that the allocated budget and time are not exceeded throughout business
transformation, but also to consider realistically how much business transformation
‘would take to complete in terms of duration and cost. In doing so, management
needs to plan a project time frame in order to assign budgets to projects. This will

--- PAGE 137 ---
facilitate time reporting, costs providing and monitoring of expenses for business
transformation managers, as well as plan budgets for subsequent phases. In turn,
these activities support value management (see Chapter 4) by estimating the
‘boundaries of value achievement.

‘Some tools and accelerators that may assist in this step include program
controlling tools, program plans and budget planning procedures. The outcome of
these tools will provide deliverables such

+ capacity planning;

+ program controlling procedures;
+ actual and forecast charts; and
+ burn rate charts.

1. Plan a project time frame in order to assign budgets to projects.

2. Initiate time reporting, costs providing and monitoring of expenses for business
transformation managers, as well as plan budgets for subsequent phases,

KEY MESSAGE

Approject time frame will facilitate time reporting, costs providing and monitoring of

‘expenses for business transformation managers, as well as plan budgets for

‘subsequent phases.

103.5 PROGRAM QUALITY MANAGEMENT

‘The objective of program quality management is to implement a program

ment that. that quality requit are identified, and
fulfilled through all parts of the program and through all program activities and
related projects. Program quality management is thus the process of meeting the
‘quality required to ensure that not only deliverables of all projects are of adequate
‘quality, but that they can be combined to create the necessary capabilities that will
deliver the long-term objectives ofthe program. Therefore, quality management
activities include those atthe program level, pus all relevant and related activities
‘within the component projects. In practice, it is common for component projects to
have their own quality management function with individual management plans,
‘quality audit and control activities, deliverable checklists and quality metrics. For
this reason, some elements of quality management may be delegated from the
program level to the project level. Program quality planning isthe process of
identifying the quality standards of the program and determining how to adhere to
those standards within each of the involved projects. One way of doing so, for
‘example, is by means of SAP's quality management plan, which identifies relevant
‘quality assurance services within a program and describes how to achieve quality
‘throughout the program.

As depicted in Figure 10.5, program quality management entails a series of inputs
‘and outputs, where the input entails a value realization plan, program scope
management, stakeholder management plan and program management plan. The
process outputs include a quality management plan, program cost of quality and
process quality improvement plan. Tools that can be utilized in this step include
program quality management plan template, program cost of quality template and
process quality improvement plan template. The anticipated deliverables include
‘quality management plan, program cost of quality and a process quality
improvement plan. Three dimensions are defined to substantiate the program
quality management step, namely: program quality assurance, program quality
audits and program quality management control. These dimensions are described in
the following.

Figure 10.5 Program quality management
Param uty eran

This isthe process of executing quality audits at key milestones in the program, with.
a focus on ensuring the delivery of business benefits. The purpose of performing
‘quality assurance is to evaluate overall program performance regularly to provide
confidence it complies with the relevant quality standards. Quality assurance is a
prevention-driven process to prevent mistakes from entering into the program and
its component projects. Quality assurance control inspects both program and project
‘work to ensure that the deliverables are of quality to keep mistakes from entering in
the client's hands. Findings as an output lead to the need to issue a change request
that are needed for:

+ quality improvement — increase effectiveness of policies, procedures and processes
for added benefits to stakeholders;

+ corrective action — bring expected future performance in line with the program
management plan; and

+ preventive action — reduce the probability of negative consequences associated with

viak

--- PAGE 138 ---
‘The objective of quality audits is to ensure that the program achieves its business
benefits. This stems from the agreement and implementation of improvement plans
in response to the findings from the audits. Specific areas at the program level to
audit are:

+ effectiveness of risk management (see Chapter 5, Risk Management), particularly
in relation to the risks to deliver the long-term business benefits;

+ interfaces among projects and other initiatives within the organization that may
compete for limited resources or generate inter-project risk;

* with stake , including proactive consideration of their i
in the program and the impact of the changes on them; and

+ exploitation and use of lessons learned across projects.

‘ram gy management cond

‘This is the process of ensuring that program work and activities meet the defined
‘quality objectives and attributes. The purpose of program quality management
control is to monitor specific program deliverables and results to see if they fulfill
‘quality requirements, identify faulty outcomes and eliminate causes of unsatisfactory
performance at all stages of the quality loop. This is typically carried out throughout
the program delivery and closure phases, whereby quality reviews and checklists are
uused to see that the quality plans are executed at the project level. Quality
management control covers:

+ solution and services;

+ deliverables;

+ program and project management results;
+ cost, schedule and scope performance; and
+ achievement of defined values.

‘CHALLENGES CONCERNING THE PROGRAM QUALITY MANAGEMENT:

4. Execute quality audits at key milestones in the program, with the focus being on
‘ensuring the delivery of business benefits.

2. Agree and implement improvement plans in response to the findings from the
audits.

4g. Ensure that program work and activities meet the defined quality objectives and
attributes.

EY MESSAGE:

It is common for component projects to have their own quality management

function with individual management plans, quality audit and control activities,
i checklists and quality metries. Some of quality ent

‘may be delegated from the program level to the project level.

10.3.6 PROGRAM HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
‘This step ensures that companies have the right people, at the right place and at the
right time in order to execute a successful business transformation. In doing so,
program managers have to balance the available resourees in order to deliver the
‘optimized value to the program and set achievable targets and KPIs to the program.
team members. As part of program human resource management, performance
procedures and metries are defined and feedback is given to the line organization.
‘Simply put, this step manages and addresses human factor issues where post
program roles and responsibilities are defined, relocations are managed and
adequate career path are proposed. In essence, program human resource
‘management seeks to create the right working environment in order to manage
business transformations.

Examples of tasks that fall under this step include working with relevant HR
departments, relevant resource management, departments and the organizational
‘change management (OCM) leader, where applicable, As a result, deliverables will
typically include:

+ feedback reports;

+ work certificates;

+ capacity and load planning;
+ KPIs;

+metries;

+ communications; and

+ team events.

1. Balance the available resources in order to deliver the optimized value to the
program.

2. Set achievable targets and key performance indicators to program team members.

43. Define performance procedures and metries, and give feedback to the line

KEY MESSAGE:

Program hnman resonnee manazement seeks ta create the annronriate warkine

PT

--- PAGE 139 ---
environment in order to manage business transformations.

‘The purpose of the program procurement management step isto evaluate the need
for additional capacity and skills, as well as the selection of potential suppliers based
‘on needed skills and resources. In doing so, this step evaluates potential areas to
‘outsource or offshore, and also creates and negotiates all contracts for service
providers and suppliers. Guidelines and frame agreements are communicated to
project managers, which further requires the team to track progress as well as open.
issues. Other management tasks include managing the budget and make cost
control, as well as to manage quality of services and deliverables.

‘Some examples, tools and accelerators that can be used in this step are using,
‘contract templates, involving purchasing and legal departments, make use of
‘existing frame agreements and utilizing SAP ERP systems. The deliverables include:

contracts;
+ estimations;

+ invoice checking;

+ program controlling;
+ budget tracking,

aw THE PROGRAM PROCU

1. Communicate guidelines and frame agreements to project managers, and require
the team to track progress as well as open issues.

2. Manage the budget and implement cost controls, and manage quality of services
and deliverables.

10.4.8 PROGRAM REPORTING

Based on component project work results, program reporting collates and defines
program performance reports, incorporating the results from project audits and
project audits. This reporting is required so that program governance can evaluate
the program progress compared to the strategic plan, and raise any potential risk,
identified issues or necessary change requests, at program or component level. This
process aims to manage the program, according to the program management plan,
in order to ensure that its components remain aligned with the program’s strategic
directives and business case.

‘Monitoring should be performed throughout the program lifecycle, and should
include collecting, measuring and disseminating performance information, and
assessing overall program trends. In turn, this process provides program
management with the data necessary to determine the program's state and trends.
‘Such information is key to identifying areas in potential need of correction.
‘Considering potential changes to the program scope, the program reporting process
‘examines the cost, schedule, quality, human resources, communications, risk and
procurement impacts of the proposed change. Ifthe change is approved, impacts of
the approved change must be taken into consideration in the other program areas.
‘This process assesses the issues and escalates where necessary.

‘Techniques and accelerators that can be used in this step are program change
request, program change request log and templates for program performance report.
‘Typical deliverables provided by program reporting include:

+ approved change requests;
+ update change request log;

+ risk register updates;

+ issue log updates;

+ program performance report; and
+ benefit/value reporting.

[CHALLENGES CONCERNING THE PROGRAM REPORTING:
1. Evaluate program progress compared to the strategic plan, and raise any potential
risks, identified issues or necessary change requests, at program or component

level.
2. Monitor the program throughout its lifecycle, and collect, measure and
Aisseminate performance information, and assess overall program trends,

10.4 Roles and Responsibilities of Program and Project Managers

Having defined the steps and deliverables of Program and Project Management, we
now examine the key roles and responsibilities of both program and project,
‘managers in charge of these steps. The differences between program and project
management are not simply one of scale ~ the management processes are
fundamentally different (Pellegrinelli, 2011). The program manager's responsibility
is to balance resources between projects in order to optimize the program benefit
ivered. Program: ‘embodies a group of interlinked projects to
defined business objectives. Project: ‘on the other hand, a
series of inter-related activities to achieve a business objective. Thus, the project
manager's responsibility i to achieve three different goals for a given project:
‘quality, cost and time. We define the two key roles below.

a

--- PAGE 140 ---
‘The program manager is often directly responsible to senior management such as
the executive: , steering and busi z
‘The program manager is the management focal point between the organization and
the solution implementation partner during the whole business transformation
period, across multiple sites and multi-project business processes and solutions. In
that capacity, the program manager leads the program through its lifecycle, initiating
projects to achieve the objectives and resulting benefits agreed upon in the program
management plan, Managing a program thus involves providing direction and
‘guidance to the project managers, who are responsible for developing the products
and/or services, and i ing the solutions that will produce the program
benefits. The program manager manages the interdependencies of projects within
the program and other programs across the organization (see also leadership skills
mentioned in Chapter 2, Meta Management). They tend to draw from a strong
foundation of project management knowledge and ability. Working with customers
‘asa key and influential member of their business planning teams helps to ensure a

tinuing delivery of Another key task isto risks proactively for
the overall program.

Figure 10.6 illustrates an overview of the program manager's role throughout the
four phases ofthe transformation lifecycle, namely in the envision, engage,
transform and optimize. Throughout these phases, the program manager is
responsible for the following:

+ Direct the program and arbitrate conflicts with line management.

+ Ensure complete integration and timeliness of all activities.

+ Ensure that the implementation is on time and within budget.

+ Identify and supply required resources and approve team staffing in alignment with
Project manager.

+ Manage change, clarify and release change requests, if necessary with involvement
of executive sponsor.

+ Be the guardian of project seope and gap analysis.

+ Provide project management, methodology and approach support

+ Coordinate project planning and execution.

+ Ensure coordination with project and core teams.

+ Organize and participate in audits, gate reviews and interviews.

Examples of the typical tasks a program manager would do include the following:

+ Ensure overall team understanding and deployment of project approach.
+ Report program progress to steering committee.
+ Ensure quality of deliverables.

Emaion _Enanae rato. pamize

Figure 10.6 Main activities of the program manager

+ Initiate corrective actions with regards to results, time, priorities, budget and
quality.

+ Ensure day-to-day management of achievements, issues, deliverables execution.

+ Ensure team is trained and staffed to succeed.

1. Manage the interdependencies of projects within the program and other programs
across the organization.

2. Lead the program through its lifecycle, initiate projects to achieve the objectives,
and resulting benefits agreed upon in the program management plan.

{3. Manage the interdependencies of projects within the program and other programs
across the organization.

‘The program manager is the management focal point between the customer and the
‘organization during the whole customer engagement lifecycle, across multiple sites,
‘and multi-project business processes and solutions.

0.42 ROLE OF THE PROJECT MANAGER
‘The project manager is directly responsible to the program manager, particularly in
terms of the overall management of the planning, implementation and direction of
the project throughout the lifecyele from project initiation to go-live and support.
‘The project manager not only has to lead the project team, but is also responsible for
implementation, quality, deadiines and costs of the project. Furthermore, they are

--- PAGE 141 ---
also responsible for the planning, organization, coordination and direction of the
project, including risk management for the project. Other duties include providing

clarification and of change request, if ay with the i ofthe
program manager. Key responsibilities for a project manager t include the
following:

+ Define project organization in agreement with program manager.
Be for planning, organization, coordination and direction of the
project.

+ Be responsible for functionality, results, implementation, structure, quality,
deadlines, costs and values.

+ Clarify and release change requests, if necessary with the involvement of the
rogram manager.

+ Define and verify work packages together with team leads.

+ Escalate issues early to program management.

+ Manage and mitigate project risks.

+ Manage team leads.

+ Define and control project standards, performance and ensure compliance.

Several instances of the tasks carried out on the project level are as follows:

+ Ensure overall team understanding and deployment of project approach.

+ Ensure quality of deliverables.

+ Initiate and coordinate detailed phase planning.

+ Ensure day-to-day management of achievements, issues, deliverable execution.

+ Be responsible for testing, appoint key-users for regression testing, training and
support in alignment with program manager.

+ Establish a single point of contact for program manager.

‘CHALLENGES CONCERNING THE ROLE OF THE PROJECT MANAGER:

1. Plan, organize, coordinate and direction of a project, which also includes project,
risk management.

2. Provide clarification and of if ‘with the
involvement of the program manager.

KEY MESSAGE:

‘The project manager is directly responsible to the program manager, particularly in

terms of the overall management of the planning, implementation and direction of

the project throughout the lifecycle from project initiation to go-live and support.

1045 Key kills of Program and Project Managers
Having understood the tasks and responsibilities of those in charge of program and
project management, we now discuss the required skills and capabilities. This is
‘based on an analysis of 140 business transformations within the United States and
Asia-Pacific to identify the key skills in demand for program and project managers in
‘business transformation (Safrudin et al., 2011). Our findings indicate that the top
five skills for both a program and project manager are similar yet distinguished from
‘one another.

‘The main similarities between program and project managers in terms of skills
required include transactional ip experience, transformational leadership
skills, collaborating in cross-functional management disciplines and having
individual abilities that meets the requirements ofthe business transformation.
Firstly, both program and project managers must have transactional leadership
Bryant, 2003) experience atthe organizational level ~ that i, the effective process
of coordinating a particular project, or parts of a larger project ~ in achieving the
‘overall business transformation objective. They are required to have a proven track
record in coordinating the transition of an organization, technical and domain
knowledge. Secondly, both managers should encompass both functional and non-
functional skills, including leadership, interpersonal (soft) skills, communication,

P mn and negotiation, active i and the ability to employees.
In other words, they are required to have transformational leadership skills
(Bisenbach et al, 1999), to drive motivation, commitment and beyond-average
‘organizational performance. Third, both managers would have had experience in
pertinent management disciplines such as IT, financial,

risk and so forth, plus communicating and dealing with both vertical and horizontal
levels of management. Another sought skill from both program and project
‘managers are the personal or individual capabilities that meets the company’s
requirements, such as flexibility in travelling, creative and analytical abilities, work
‘ethics that adhere to the organizational values and so on.

‘The main difference identified from the analysis is that the program manager
requires business acumen, which relates to the knowledge, aptitude and capacity to
‘deal with stakeholders in order to deliver value towards business transformation.
‘This is inline with one of the main goals of Program and Project Management
(stated in Section 10.2), ic. business focus goals. The project manager on the other
hhand, must possess the exposure and competency in specific project management
methodology such as Six Sigma or PMI certification, leading projects and utilizing
project management tools, which is congruent with the other program management
goal, viz. efficiency and effectiveness goals.

Inessence, the key skills of both program and project managers are required to

--- PAGE 142 ---
meet the goals of program and project management as a whole. Furthermore, both
transformational and transactional leadership skills coexist together in business
transformation. The following sections will brief the capabilities and formal
‘qualifications required from the program and project managers in business
transformation.

Program managers differ from transformation managers in a sense that, the role of a
‘transformation manager is to manage the vision and value (value capturing), while a
program manager looks at the management of scope, budget and quality of business =
transformation. Program managers need to be able to take a strategic business

capability direction and translate them into a roadmap of projects and work tracks in
‘order to execute and deliver the intended value. This requires the experience

(typically five to ten years minimum) and the ability to evaluate broad business

issues by having strategic thinking and analytical problem-solving skills. They must

have the capability to break down complex problems in a simplified way, foster

ity of ideas and innovation by ing and ing analytical
assessments to test out and refine the various strategies where necessary. The
program also needs to have conflict mand ing

skills to help establish good rapport, and also the ability to clearly communicate in
‘an open and authentic manner in all situations with both business and technical
‘audience (at all levels). Thus, the program manager is charismatic, and must be an

ptionally strong comm equally adept a ing strategy and
‘execution by means of crafting a full range of clear, high-impact communication.
ability to ly and present ideas, i and results for

senior executives, as well as experience in significant senior management interaction
is highly regarded.

Stakeholder management is crucial in ensuring good client-relationship, including
business and negotiation skills to work with clients and business analysts to
<determine what features the project team will deliver, given constraints of time, staff
and quality. This requires the program manager to have thorough experience in

lentifying and addressing client needs, including: developing and sustaining strong
client relationships using networking, negotiation and persuasion skill to identify
‘and introduce potentially new service opportunities; preparing and presenting
complex written and verbal materials; and defining resource requirements, project
‘workflow, budgets, billing and collection. Thus, financial and analytical skills both at
strategic and functional levels are required, where program managers must be

in making high-quality decisions and taking decisive action.

solid understanding of how people go through a transformation and the
transition process is required from a program manager. The program manager has
solid experience asa team leader and a strong passion in supporting people and
aligning their values with that ofthe organization (Herold et al, 2007). Ths involves
leading teams to generate a vision, establish direction and motivate members, create
an atmosphere of trust, leverage diverse views, coach staff, and encourage
improvement and innovation. Thus, the ability to mentor less experienced project

in a highly and acing environment is essential to
‘create open environment conducive to freely sharing information and ideas. Prior
experience init ing transformation management, innovation and creativity

initiatives will be an advantage. In other words, program managers require creativity
skills in defining approaches to program activities or overcoming program execution,
hurdles.

Solid process, program and project management skills are required for this role,
including the ability to manage numerous priorities simultaneously while
maintaining a sense of urgency. Program managers need to be able to operate
effectively in an unstructured environment, and have strong, time management and
multitasking skills, including the ability to handle changes in business requirements
and set priorities across multiple projects. The program manager will have
experience in redesigning business processes with the ability to analyze poorly
defined areas and processes within a cross-functional organization. They are
‘effective in implementing new and improved processes, preferably ones which are of =
‘complex and global nature with a proven track recordin successfully managing and
delivering large-scale and diverse programs of change.

‘Typically, the program manager functions as an individual contributor role. As
‘such, the ability to balance program management with day-to-day hands-on
implementation is essential. Strong business acumen, exceptional project
‘management and multitasking skills and the ability to interact and engage across all
levels of staff will be key success factors. Due to the complex nature of business
transformation, program managers should have high level of initiative, is self-driven,
motivated, independent and comfortable working in a fast-paced, results-oriented
environment.

With regards to formal qualifications, our analysis on program management roles
indicate that companies typically require a Bachelor's degree (BA/BS) relevant to the
transformation discipline, with a preference for a Master's or MBA degree. PMP
certification or PMO background is useful, and strong Six Sigma experience, ideally
ata black belt level, is also a strong plus.

10.52 SKILLS OF THE PROJECT MANAGER

Project managers need to be able to work with customer and internal teams to
: ‘on schedule. within and with a

manage and tras

--- PAGE 143 ---
high level of customer satisfaction. Therefore, the project manager should have
project management skills and experience of successful project lead (minimum three
to eight years) would be ideal, including an in-depth understanding of project,
management best practices/methodologies, techniques, tools and project lifecycle.
Project managers are to update and improve the methodology based on learning and
‘customer requirements and feedback. Our analysis of the project management roles
indicates the demand to practically apply Six Sigma concepts, methods and tools to,
solve business problems. Further skills include budget accountabilities for project
capital and expense budgets, as well as experience in establishing effective metrics
and measures for project portfolios. The ability to provide sound governance, a
performance framework and clear direction the project team will be paramount as
the project manager deliver projects in alignment with the business transformation.

1. Take a strategic business capability direction and translate them into a roadmap of
projects and work tracks in order to execute and deliver the intended value.

2. Determine what features the project team will deliver, given constraints of time,
staff and quality.

{3 Understand how people go through a transformation and the transition process.

4, Lead teams to generate a vision, establish direction and motivate members.

5. Create an atmosphere of trust, leverage diverse views, coach staff, and encourage
improvement and innovation.

66, Handle changes in business requirements and set priorities across multiple
projects.

KEY aMESSAGE:

‘Strong business acumen, exceptional project management and multitasking skills

and the ability to interact and engage across all levels of staff will be key success

factors.

Business transformations embody projects to facilitate change. As such, change
management principles are conceptually integrated into project management
‘methods to drive results and support organizational change (Cowan-Sahadath,
2010). In effect, project managers work as change agents who will lead the

ization through the| ion, including ability to i and gain
alignment with people a all levels in the organization. They require the skills to drive
key initiatives from concept to delivery and craft transition plans to be executed in
projects. The project managers must also have the desire to work in a rapidly
changing environment, the ability to deal with ambiguity, and the ability to challenge
upwards and influence without direct authority, knowing when to escalate to ensure
alignment and timely completion of projects. Thus, multitasking skills in fast-paced
deadline intensive environment are essential, as is the ability to anticipate obstacles
‘and plan contingencies accordingly. This requires sound problem-solving,
‘capabilities to formulate approaches to problems in a rational manner by using
strategies that ensure comprehensive understanding and effective resolution.

‘As a magnitude of risks are susceptible in projects during the transformation
process, risk and process management capabilities are critical skills to be sought
from project managers. They will be quick in responding and providing resolution to
issues during the project, offering close acceleration and/or risk remediation by
utilizing root cause or gap analysis. Hence, project managers must have a thorough
knowledge of project controls processes such as change control, risks and issues

js Fesource mi and progress

etc. Project will also knowledge of planning and
scheduling processes with the ability to define, implement and maintain project
process guidance. This further requires process documentation and process
assessment skills in order to identify process shortcomings. Project managers will
also work with others to improve or transform processes. They will possess broad
‘cross-functional knowledge of business organizational processes to ensure that,
processes are not viewed as silos in that the organization does not remain
fragmented.

‘Similar to program managers, project managers too require supervision,
‘experience. They must have the ability to develop others through providing timely
‘coaching, guidance and feedback to help others excel on the job and meet key
accountabilities. Project managers must have the demonstrated ability to teach,
facilitate and effectively, and ng of team
members to successful completion of projects. It is also critical to be able to influence
‘and gain alignment with people at all levels in the organization, to partner with
peers, team members and demonstrate collaborative, effective A required
‘experience is the ability to successfully lead multiple teams working on different
transformational projects, as they will be significantly involved in workforce
planning and development. Therefore, project managers value the role of human,
capital and strive to optimally develop this resource for the benefit of the
corporation, and are flexible with changing priorities.

‘The ability to communicate technical issues in a clear and concise manner is a
critical skill required from project managers. Strong verbal and written
‘communication skills, with an ability to express complex concepts effectively in
simple business terms across all levels ofthe organization, are essential. Project
managers must have a proven ability to make tough decisions and to provide delivery

a

--- PAGE 144 ---
‘parameters. ints sin adaition to staxenoiaer management ana ait rouna reporting
‘experience whereby project managers are to develop an own transition
‘communication plan to ensure consistent understanding of the transition progress
to ensure shared commitment to an enterprise and mutually beneficial result, build
‘executive business-oriented relationships at the highest levels in pursuit of alliances
that will advance or protect corporate interests.

ur findings from the analysis of project manager skills show that a Bachelor's
‘degree (BA/BS) in a relevant discipline is demanded by transforming organizations.
Professional qualifications such as CISA, CISM, PMP, IT audit or IT risk
‘management experience with a professional services firm or equivalent will be
advantageous. Other listed qualifications include MBA or other tertiary
‘qualifications such as CPA, CMA, CFA or CA, dependent on the transformation,
Aiscipline. The project manager would ideally have a good understanding of lean Six
‘Sigma concept, and green or black belt certification in lean Sigma will bea plus, ie.
proven proficiency with Six Sigma methodology (Lean, DMAIC, DMADV, Kaizen).
10.6 Lessons Learned about Program and Project Management

Having defined activities, roles, responsibilities and key skills required to perform
Program and Project Management, we now define the essential success factors for
achieving the objectives of Program and Project Management. We encapsulate our
view of these success factors, derived from industry practical experience and
academic research, in Figure 10.7.

‘CHALLENGES CONCERNING THE SKILLS OF THE PROJUCT MANAGER:

4. Respond and provide resolution to issues during the project, offering close
acceleration and/or risk remediation by utilizing root cause or gap analysis.

2. Provide timely coaching, guidance and feedback to help others excel on the job
and meet key accountabilities.

4 Influence and gain alignment with people at all levels in the organization, to
partner with peers, team members and demonstrate collaborative, effective
teamwork.

4. Develop an own transition communication plan to ensure consistent

‘of the transition progress among key %

5. Collaborate effectively with others to ensure shared commitment to the enterprise
and mutually beneficial results.

6. Build executive business-ori ionships at the highest levels in pursuit of
alliances that will advance or protect corporate interests.

REY MESSAGE:
Project managers value the role of human capital and strive to optimally develop this
resource for the benefit ofthe corporation, and are flexible with changing priorities.

As depicted, we identify eight key success factors for Program and Project,
Mi tin BTM2, First, having a strategic vision and.
“objectives is an imperative prerequisite for managing busi nation. This
will enable program and project managers to align their in accordance with
the organizational goals, specifically with the strategic direction (Wischnevsky and
Damanpour, 2006) that will drive the transformation. Upon doing so, business
‘capabilities are to be analyzed as the second step. This ensures that the organization
has the resources and capacity to support and execute the steps required in Program
‘and Project Management. Once the capabilities are identified, the best options are
then determined to provide rs with a range of to
their steps. As every business transformation is unique (Morgan and Page, 2008),
the decision will need to be made based on business requirements, and subsequently
bbe divided into manageable and focused modules. This will ensure that work
packages are feasible enough to be executed within the allocated time and budget.
Another important factor is to carefully consider the risks involved and mitigation
strategies to manage the risks, roadblocks or obstacles (Kotter, 2010) throughout the

busi nation. Strong. ip is also a fundamental factor
(Cowan-Sahadath, 2010), as this will provide employees and co-workers with the
required direction and motivation to carry out the activities in a 5

Finally, the eighth success factor looks at revising progress and identifying the need
for intervention or re-evaluation, as itis imperative to shape and coordinate projects
in accordance with the context of a dynamic organizational environment
(Pellegrinelli et al, 2007).

Ad

Figure 10.7 Critical success factors for Program and Project Management

--- PAGE 145 ---
In conclusion, a summary of dos and don'ts of Program Management in business
transformation are summarized in Table 10.1:

‘Table 10.1 Dos and don'ts of and Project in

Dos Don'ts

‘Make sure you get strong sponsors at CxO__| Accept non-estimated deadlines.

level.

Have one project location (ata time. Compromise on quality

Build a strong project team. ‘Say “ts just an IT projet” (for IT/tT-enabled
business transformation)

Define dear common objectives. Try to achieve perfection.

Understand the politics. Run over budget.

Balance scope, resources and timing. Fall to update the business case.

Plan for “neutral” ongoing quality assurance | Delay a milestone more than once.

reviews to manage rss.

Use state ofthe at tools (project

management, testing, documentation, ec.)

Plan for regular steering committee (to

validate decisions eat).

Define dear scope change procedures.

Define business benefits and value to be

achieved.

10.7 Conclusion

Program and Project Management provide a comprehensive methodology in.
business transformation by including the best of breed knowledge and experience in
the field of scope, teams and . The two: tal goals
of Program and Project Management are business focus goals and efficiency and
effectiveness goals. Program and Project Management consist of eight steps in
‘business transformations:

4. Establish the basic structure for the program.

2. Ensure that the program, its components and projects, and all the program
activities from the program processes are well coordinated and integrated.

43 Reach a consensus with key stakeholders on the program plan and benefits, as
‘well as on staffing key resources.

4 Define the budget and time constraints for the different components of the
program and the involved projects.

5 Implement a program environment that ensures that quality requirements are
identified, understood and fulfilled through all parts of the program and through
all program activities and related projects.

6. Ensure that companies have the right people, at the right place and at the right
time in order to execute a successful business transformation.

7. Evaluate the need for additional capacity and skills, as well asthe selection of
potential suppliers based on needed skills and resources.

8. Define program performance reports, incorporating the results from program
audits and project audits.

Program and Project Management further provides a description of the roles and.

responsibilities for program and project managers and discuss key skills required for

these roles. Based on the eight activities, roles, responsibilities and key skills.

required to perform business transformation, success factors for achieving the

objectives of Program and Project Management were introduced.

tibtiography |

Bryant, Scott E. (2003), The role of transformational and transactional leadership in
creating, sharing and exploiting organizational knowledge, Journal of Leadership
& Organizational Studies 9, no. 4, 32-44.

‘Cowan-Sahadath, Kathy (2010), Business transformation: leadership, integration

and tion ~ a case study, Internati of Project Management 28,
no. 4, 395-404.

Eisenbach, Regina, Watson, Kathleen and Pillai, Rajnandini (1999),
‘Transformational ip in the of organizational change, of

Organizational Change Management 12, no. 2, 80-9.

Herold, David M., Fedor, Donald B. and Caldwell, Steven D. (2007), Beyond change
‘management: a investigation of and. is on
employees’ commitment to change, Journal of Applied Psychology 92, no. 4,
942-51.

ILX Group (2012), What is PRINCE2? ~ PRINCE2 definition:

‘www prince2.com/what-is-prince2.asp (accessed March 2012).

Kotter, John P. (2010), Leading Change: Why Transformation Efforts Fail (Boston,
‘Mass: Harvard Business Press).

Lycett, Mark, Rassau, Andreas and Danson, John (2004), Programme management:
a critical review, International Journal of Project Management 22, no. 4, 289~
99.

‘Morello, Diane and Olding, Elise, (2008), Rethinking change: practical realities of
successfull transformation, Go0154663, Gartner Research:

‘wor gartner.com /id=597614 (accessed March 2012).

--- PAGE 146 ---
deliver strategie agility, Strategic Change 17, 5-6, 155-68.

Pellegrinelli, Sergio (2011), What's in a name: project or programme?, International
Journal of Project Management 29, no, 2, 232-40.

Pellegrinell, Sergio, Partington, David, Hemingway, Chris, Mohdzain, Zaher and
Shah, Mahmood (2007), The importance of context in programme management:
‘an empirical review of programme practices, International Journal of Project
‘Management 25, 0. 1, 41-55.

Project Mi Institute (2008), The Standard for Prog wgement,
and ed. (Newtown Square, PA: Project Management Institute).

Safrudin, Norizan, Recker, Jan and Roseman, Michael (2011), The emerging
-management services of business transformation management, in PACIS 2011
Proceedings, Paper 160: hitp://aiseL.aisnet.org/pacis2011/160 (accessed March
2012).

Spreitzer, Gretchen M. (1996), Empowering middle managers to be transformational
leaders, The Journal of Applied Behavioral Science 32, no. 3, 237-61.

‘Wischnevsky, Daniel J. and Damanpour, Fariborz (2006), Organizational
transformation and performance: an examination of three perspectives, Journal
of Managerial Issues 18, no. 1, 104-28.

F

(Raz a8

[Saree Aisne nese nae Choon Tebow terme? (8

--- PAGE 147 ---
"

Bes eae oi

armen 1
Case Study: MotorStars — Implementation of a Global HR System in an
Automotive Company

a

‘nIsTORH PONMER (Unies Ape Shoes md Arts Netse Seiten) AXE UML (SAP
AG) ICHAEL BRANDENBURG (ESE Daina Sch) and ROMER GONTHER (SAPAG)

11 Overview:

Using a fictitious ease study as a basis, this chapter describes the protracted,
challenging and costly attempts of an automotive company to transform the strategic

of its HR department by it iting a fice center and HR IT
‘system. Faced with historically grown, organizational and sociocultural
ion pr as well as personal animosities and the resulting

‘micropolitical tactics of leading players, the group is on the verge of failing again in
its efforts. After an initial presentation of the evolutionary history and background,
the second part ofthis chapter discusses the overall complexity of the situation and
‘on the conflict-ridden relationshi the players ‘The
‘subsequent description ofthe strategic planning concept then presents a realistic
method of resolution that is based on the envision phase of BTM2. We describe how
the undertaking is implemented further from the perspective ofthe strategie
team in charge. Al this story is fictional, it does combine a
‘of elements that typically characterize an undertaking of this kind; it can, therefore,
ina sense be regarded as an authentic ease.
‘The case study presented in this chapter primary addresses the envision phase of
BTM? with the following steps: identification of scope and a rough project plan,
‘examination of triggers and drivers for the planned business transformation,
‘evaluation of benefits of the objectives from a strategie perspective and definition of
‘a transformation plan.

‘OBecrIves oF mms CHAPTER.
1. Understand problems and challenges of business transformation projects.
2. Understand how to use the management disciplines of BTM2,

4 Understand the application of BTM? in the envision phase.

14.2 The Case History =

‘This section summarizes the company’s history and the company’s goal. The case
study is built on the following company background.

MotorStars isan important player inthe global automotive market, It develops and offers weices

‘and components and related automotive services. The company operates inthe fields of cars, busses

cand trucks, and ‘These also form its {In 2010, he thre la
revenue of 25 billion euros. in Berlin, Germany, the

‘employs 100,000 associates who workin over 120 countries worldwide. Is main operating areas

‘are Germany, Prance and the USA.

142.4 COMPANY HISTORY

‘The company originated from the merger of PremiumDrive and CheapVehicle, two
German automotive companies, in 2000. Through the merger, two companies with
different histories, strategies and cultures were united into one global organization:
‘while PremiumDrive was perceived as a trusted, high-quality provider of
‘automotive-related products and services, CheapVehicle had a relatively poor image
‘due to several environmental scandals; CheapVehicle pursued its business goals
‘through an aggressive pricing strategy. The new and emerging culture of MotorStars
‘was inereasingly dominated by the norms and values of CheapVehicle. Although the
financial results after the merger were satisfactory, the company was challenged by
the clash ofthese different cultures and by a working atmosphere that was filed with
tensions and distrust. In addition to the cultural difficulties, the situation was further
by’ and non-standardized pr policies and sy
that varied across the company. The organization was further characterized by high
local autonomy and slow-moving functional silos.

‘CHALLENGES OF THE COMPANYS HISTORY:
1. Merger of a high-quality provider with a low-quality provider.

2. Combining different cultures and working atmospheres.

2 ing heterogeneous and non-standardized processes, policies and.

‘The human and intellectual capital and, thereby, the recruitment, professional
development and retention of motivated and high-performing employees was
perceived as erucial for MotorStars’ success. However, in view ofthis policy and with
regard to the 70,000 associates working in the company at that time, the global and
local HR departments had limited personnel. A total of 700 people were working in
the different HR departments after the merger. There was no overall HR concept but

rather a heterogeneous mixture across the company. The HR processes were not
harmonized on a elahal eeale Instead thew were cnnnarted individually hva number =

--- PAGE 148 ---
of different regional, local or business-unit-specific IT systems. There was a lack of
‘common standards and of a consolidated database. For example, the PeopleSoft HR
solution was used in the USA, UK and France, while SAP solutions were in place in
Germany, Switzerland and Japan. This resulted in a lack of transparency. It was — as
‘we will show — not possible to determine exactly the number of employees working,
in the company at any given time; and it was difficult to fill vacant management
positions quickly or to fulfill compliance requirements consistently.

(CHALLENGES OF THE GLOBAL HR PROUECT
1. Only limited HR staff available.

2. No overall and global HR concept available.

3. HR processes are not harmonized on a global scale.

In order to address these challenges, the Head of Corporate HR started a project in
2005 that was aimed at standardizing the HR processes and implementing a global,
‘web-based HR information system. For the planned duration of three years, a budget
‘of 80 million euros was approved by the executive board. After a planning and
blueprint phase and the development of a prototype, the roll-out was planned to take
place in France and would be followed by the company’s other main locations in
Germany and the USA.

‘The project's overall goals included:

+ implementation of standardized HR processes;

+ timely provision of accurate HR data;

+ improvement of the decision-making processes; and
+ reduction of HR operating costs.

Across the organization, a global HR information system would provide accurate
data on jobs, positions and related information in order to support the organization
and talent review processes. The company’s strategy of international expansion and
associated organizational change processes were expected to be supported through
harmonized HR processes and a multi-lingual and web-enabled system on a global
scale. The establishment of an organizational service structure was intended to
increase organizational efficiency and to reduce operational costs. Employees would
‘enter their data in online forms in real time and managers would be able to compile
precise and timely reports. While HR employees up until then had spent more than.
half oftheir time dealing with administrative processes, the envisioned system was,
expected to drastically reduce these kinds of activities. Instead, the solution would
‘enable them to devote their time to more strategic issues. This, in turn, was expected
to help transform and extend the traditional role of HR in the organization from an
‘administrative service provider to a more strategic consulting partner for the
business units.

From technical standpoint, the IT solution was planned to include: =

+ SAP R/3.as.a core transaction processing system;

+ SAP Business Warehouse for HR data in order to facilitate reporting and analysis
and, eventually, to improve managerial HR decisions; and

+ web-based enterprise HR portal solution that allows the personalization of data
and of the graphical user interface.

‘The initiative was set up as a pure HR project with limited involvement of the
Corporate IT department. The idea was to delegate the overall responsibility for the
technical part to an external partner: the mandate for the IT part was given to

a technology and IT consult v.
Even the software licensing was outsourced: acting as an intermediary,
BusinessComp had acquired software licenses from SAP with the intention to resell,
these to MotorStars. The project office was established in the USA with the idea to
closely involve this important, but relatively independent area of the company. For
this reason, however, the team was relatively isolated from the rest of the global
areas.

1. Standardization of HR processes.
2. Implementation of a web-based HR information system.
43: Reduce administrative work and focus on strategic issues.

1.2.4 TRANSFORMATIONAL CHALLENGES.

‘The project was considered complex ofits sheer scope; in the
project team had relatively little knowledge with respect to an effort ofthis size and
scale. At the outset, the team analyzed benchmarks and comparable cases in order to
ify best practices and . Across the reviewed cases, the
challenge of convincing local players, re-engineering existing processes and
transforming mindsets became evident. Analyzing the challenges ahead, the project,
team recognized technical complexities to be tackled and the importance of diligent,
culture-specific communication. The biggest problem, however, was seen in the
acceptance of the system by the various local players. These parties wanted to
their local wav of In the initial vlanning and preparation phase.

--- PAGE 149 ---
the project team was troubled by a number of additional analytical tasks burdened
by local HR departments. The team had to prove that their global system would also
‘work in the regional markets and outperform existing systems. From the very
beginning, they were confronted significant tension and power struggles. Particular
Aifficulties were faced when trying to establish a corporate compensation and
performance management system. The underlying motives originated from the
unresolved cultural tensions from the merger and from the established matrix
“organization with associated dual reporting lines which lead to unclear hierarchical
relationships. The main conflict occurred between the Corporate HR management.
and the HR management of the Car Division. Car was by far the largest and, from a
political perspective, the most powerful product line. Its division covered 80 percent
of the profit and employed 50 percent of the company’s workforce. The Head of Car
HR had to report primarily to the Car CEO and, secondarily, to the Corporate HR
management (see dotted reporting line on Figure 11.1 below).

After a period of unproductive power struggles and quarrels, so-called white
smoke meetings were arranged. The conflicting parties were invited to meetings and
‘were only permitted to return to work once they had worked out a solution accepted
byall parties. However, even this method did not result in the desired outcome. The
measures that had been agreed upon were not followed by the parties afterwards.
‘There was an overall lack of senior leadership support that did not go beyond the
funding of the project: senior management did not drive the overall implementation
‘and did not help to overcome the organizational tensions. Approaches such as the
redefinition of the project scope, enforced commitment of local HR organizations,
increased budget or extended project length were not given serious consideration.

‘The situat more and more p tc. An internal IT who
‘was at that time successfully implementing a global finance management system,
‘was asked for his opinion on the issue. The manager (who later became the Head of
ERP) recommended the project be halted and restarted from scratch at a later time.

4. Overall size, scope and technical complexity of the project.

2. Lack of experiences project members and unclear responsibilities.

4 Lack of acceptance by local players and missing guidance from senior
management.

14.2.5 A FAILED BUSINESS TRANSFORMATION

Instead of following the principles of promise less and deliver more, the project
‘team had merely created high expectations with regard to project goals in order to
secure the approved budget. This turned out to be a mistake, particularly in view of
the project's slow progress. After one and a half years a total of 40 million euros had
‘been spent while the defined targets had not been reached in any significant way.
‘The solution had not been implemented in any country and there was not even a
blueprint available. As a consequence, the overall project was cancelled. In the
meeting where this decision was made, the Head of HR Car commented that he “had
always been aware that this project had been doomed to fail”. The Head of Corporate
HR was dismissed and a with a background of production management was
nominated as his successor. The project stop was also a financial disaster for
BusinessComp, which was then unable to resell its previously acquired licenses from
‘SAP to MotorStars. The complete failure strengthened the power of the local and
regional departments, and fostered the growth of local HR IT solutions. As a
‘consequence, some of the local players did not only increase their local impat
‘even expanded it geographically.

they

REASONS FOR FAILURE:
1. Expectations with respect to project goal were set to high.
2. Definition of a too wide and complex project scope.

4. Lack of commitment from management.

1131 Problems Faced by Key Players

Against the background of aggravated tensions it is discussed in the following, how
interest and power of the key players involved affect, and further complicate, the
situation.

‘Three years after the project failure, the problems still remain unresolved.
‘Significant inefficiencies exist in most back office functions, whereby staff are tied up
in unnecessary tasks and, are wasted. Many local HR pi
‘comprised of out-dated practices, procedures and information systems. MotorStars
does not conform to required standards or best practices. Inadequate information
systems exist that are vulnerable to failure, functionally insufficient and technically

h ion is in je and often inaccurate. Its also
fragmented throughout different systems and maintained sporadically. Reporting is
<ifficult and both internal and external staff and managers are poorly informed. This
problem is further aggravated by the fact that the company has expanded: turnover,
profit, as well as the number of employees and affiliations have increased. This isa
development that made a global HR approach even more important.

--- PAGE 150 ---
‘Currently, there isa controversial and wide-ranging debate on a new approach.
‘While the main three competing parties are Corporate HR, Car HR and IT, a number
‘of personal conflicts between the actors also have to be taken into account (see
Figure 11.1).

‘The top management of the company demands this issue be solved. The CEO
believes that a global HR IT system is more efficient than many individual
installations. In addition, the CEO favors a global solution also for reasons of
prestige. While he recognizes the importance of cultural issues, his perception of HR
is focused on leadership development, performance, incentive and talent systems; he
is not so much interested in employee administration.

‘The CFO's interests are centered on a well-performing enterprise. He feels
personally offended by the immense waste of money in the first project and is,
sceptical with regard to the ability of the HR Department to run such a global
project. He is, however, aware of the need to establish a global reporting system. One
‘event in particular caused alarm bells toring: at an analysts’ conference, he and the
Head of Corporate HR were expected to present the latest facts and figures.
Discussing their slides shortly before their presentation they realized that they had
calculated a different number of employees: while the CFO's presentation featured
100,000 employees, the Head of Corporate HR was about to announce a total of
‘90,000 employees. The CFO is extremely interested in diligent headcount reporting
‘and realizes that this can be only achieved with an IT-based solution. However, he
<oubts that an overall HR system is needed for this purpose. He considers this a
“waste of money” and, in an informal meeting, he was heard to say, "Why do we need
an HR system in Timbuktu?”

Figure 11.1 Description of the hierarchical relations of and conflicts between the main
players

Corporate
‘The new Head of Corporate HR is a cooperative manager. As a manager with a
strong background in production, he has only limited experience of HR matters. His
moderating role is, however, respected across many organizations. In general he
tries to avoid conflicts, as the following statement shows: “Why should I get a bloody
nose if the organization is not ready for the system?”

‘The Head of HR Business Excellence is a member of the HR Council. The Head of
‘Corporate HR poached him from another company. There he had already had bad
‘experience with implementing a global HR project. He was hired to establish a new
HR delivery model and to harmonize and streamline the existing HR processes. Due
tothe short time that he has been working at MotorStars, his network within the
‘company and, in particular, his access to local HR representatives is limited. He is,
however, engaged in establishing relations with the IT and Car departments.

(Car Diesen

‘The Head of Car HR is the main antagonist of the Head of Corporate HR and also
‘opposed to the Head of ERP. He reports to the CEO of Car with whom he also
maintains a close relationship. He is by no means willing to leave the project.
leadership to the Head of Corporate HR ~ a task he claims for his division. Although
he has been held partly accountable for the first project, he blames his limited
responsibility as the main reason for its failure. While the Head of Car HR places
lity on top issues, he has only limited knowledge of
‘administrative HR processes. In order to gain control over the new HR project, he
has internally recruited the Head of HR Operational Excellence Caras a tactical
‘The Head of HR Operational Excellence Car was entrusted to achieve the same
goals as the Head of HR Business Excellence: winning control over the HR system.
While she comes from the field of quality management and also has limited
knowledge about HR. She reports to the Head of HR Operational Excellence Car and
maintains a good personal relation also with the Head of Corporate HR. However,
she would like to secure the mandate as project leader and is reluctant to share this,
with the Head of HR Business Excellence, with whom she is at odds. Another player
in the reporting line of Car is the Head HR Shared Service Center Germany. Starting,
from Germany, she has successfully expanded her shared service center concept to
‘countries such as Italy or Switzerland. She aims to expand further and become the
Head of the Shared Service Center Europe. She has formed a coalition with the Head

--- PAGE 151 ---
‘of HR Operational Excellence Car. Although she operates inthe field of IT, she isin
the reporting line for Car and, therefore, is in conflict with the Head of ERP systems
from IT as well as with the Head of HR Business Excellence.

0

Although the Corporate CIO heads the IT department, he is not on the Executive
Board. He reports to the Corporate CFO, who also controls the IT budget. The CIO
favors SAP | the global financial pr are based on SAP's
‘component (SAP ERP FI/CO). Moreover, the CIO was told to stay as close as,
possible to the standard processes so as to keep the cost of maintenance and further
development low. However, the CFO set other IT priorities for the CIO such as
‘outsourcing of basic IT infrastructure in order to cut costs. The CIO has only limited
‘experience of and interest in ERP systems.

‘The Head of ERP is a manager who implemented the global finance system (as
indicated above). Although he had several escalating conflicts during the project due
tohis aggressive communication style, he managed to complete it successfully. This
‘was largely due to the support ofa second, more moderate and careful manager. AS
he has recently managed to get his job title changed to Head of Corporate ERP, he is.
‘adamant about wanting to become the CIO of ERP. He is more than eager to be in
‘charge of the project. However, due to his lack of knowledge in the field of HR, he
has hired the Head of HR IT, who is a former consultant with both HR and IT skills.
He is obliged to cooperate with the Head of HR Operational Excellence Car and with
the other actors to find a jointly accepted way of managing the project.

In brief, there are protracted power fights between the Head of Corporate HR and
the Head of HR Business Excellence both from Corporate HR and the Head of Car
HR and the Head of HR Operational Excellence from the Car Division. The Head of
ERP ({T) is — due to his offensive style — in conflict with nearly all of the other
players. All the involved parties want to gain control over the transformation project.

14. Strategie Approach

‘This section describes how a method of resolution is planned from a strategic
perspective. In doing so, we will follow MotorStars’ Business Transformation
‘Strategy team, which will base its approach on the six steps outlined in the BTM?
‘envision phase (see Figure 11.2).

Figure 1.2 Envision phase in the BTM? context
‘ot PROUECT STARTUP AND AS18 DATA COLLECTION (STEPS 1 AND 2)

‘The relatively small team is staffed with representatives from the various parties
involved. It comprises of the Head of HR Business Excellence, the Head of HR IT,
the Head of HR Operational Excellence Car and the Head of the Shared Service
Center Germany (Car). The initiation commenced with identifying the scope, a rough
project plan and a budget of 120 million euros allocated to achieve the following,

of HR Data in order to improve the quality of reporting,
+ Implementation of a shared service model for HR in order to improve the overall,
quality of HR processes.

In addition, the plan envisages a greater role for HR as a strategic consulting
partner for the business units. To obtain a impression of the
situation, the team conducts a series of interviews with the representatives from
Corporate HR, the local HR managers from all three divisions, and with top

1, which serve as awareness-build As part of the as-is data
collection step, the wrong decisions taken in the past are also identified. The team.
starts by examining the mistakes of the previous project using the BTM?
‘management disciplines. It soon becomes evident that the strategic focus was too
broad and too vague with litle differentiation. This was compounded by the fact that
neither a business case nor a risk assessment had been conducted. Against this
background, exaggerated goals were communicated that gave rise to expectations
that could not be fulfilled. Similarly, a stakeholder analysis and management were
also and the potentials for conflict and existing tensions (organizational
readiness) were significantly underestimated. Additional factors that had a negative
impact included the wrong leadership approach with regard to third parties as well
‘as an incorrect estimate of the costs involved and a misjudgment of the required time
frame.
While mistakes were also made in the implementation phase, this analysis clearly

--- PAGE 152 ---
shows that key omissions and wrong decisions taken early on in the strategy phase
prevented the objectives of the project from being achieved. Consequently, this
section focuses on this phase, which, as already stated, is equivalent to the BTM?

1. Identify the scope, a rough project plan and a budget.

2. Conduct a series of interviews with representatives.

4, Identify wrong decisions taken in the past based on the management disciplines of
Bre?

1.4.2 ANALYSIS OF TRANSFORMATION NEEDS AND CAUSES (STEP 3)

In the next step, the team examines the triggers and drivers for the planned
transformation: A key driver is the need for greater support from HR for the
‘company’s expansion strategy in emerging markets. This is accompanied by pressure
from top management to simplify the complex process landscape by using IT-
‘supported processes and boost efficiency through the resulting standardization
‘effects. The current condition of the HR data is also unsatisfactory in that it is
imprecise and therefore makes decision making at executive level extremely difficult.
‘Since the incident with the discrepancy regarding the headcount figures, the CFO in
particular is immensely dissatisfied with the performance of HR.

Figure 11.3 Error analysis based on BEM?
Following the analysis of the business transformation needs and causes, the team
rates MotorStars HR at Stage 3 of the BTM? model (see Figure 11.4). Apart from the
financial disaster of the initial attempt, there has been no significant negative impact
‘on HR's core business. Nevertheless, a strategy is still lacking and the scope for
internal solutions is becoming more and more restricted as customers and other key
stakeholders have lost confidence. There is an immediate need for action as
‘otherwise there isa risk that the next transformation stage (Stage 4) will be reached,
thereby jeopardizing operative objectives.

‘MotorStars’ readiness forthe pending business transformation is determined
using the BTM? transformation readiness analysis. The process readiness is rated at
Level 2. While most of the HR processes are not harmonized at global level, some
standardized processes, such as in performance management, exist that are at least
performed globally in paper form. The IT readiness with regard to the HR systems is
clearly at the lowest level (Level 1). There are a variety of different, local applications
ranging from Excel sheets to SAP or PeopleSoft installations. There are no
consolidated data records or standards. As a result ofthe various systems involved,
the infor is imprecise and ted. The organizational readiness too must
‘be classified at the lowest level (Level 1). Due to the previous failed harmonization
projects, the local HR departments are in an even stronger position compared to
‘Corporate HR. There are certain regional kingdoms that are even about to expand
‘geographically.

r

on sty Ree ne ne nt) ~

Figure 11.4 Stages of transformation needs

--- PAGE 153 ---
Figure 11.5 Transformation readiness

KEY ACTIVITIES WITHIN ANALYSIS OF TRANSFORMATION NEEDS AND CAUSES:

1. Simplify the complex process landscape by using IT-supported processes and
‘boost efficiency through the resulting standardization effects.

2. Determine the readiness for the pending business transformation with the
transformation readiness analysis.

14.4.3 DESIGN BUSINESS VISION AND BUSINESS MODEL (STEPS 4 AND 3)

After completing the Transformation Readiness Analysis, the team evaluates the
benefits of the objectives from a strategic perspective. Given the current availa
problems of global HR data, inconsistent processes and lack of IT-supported
performance or compensation management, implementing an HR IT platform
harbours significant potential for boosting quality and transparency. The perceived
immediate benefits include the simplification of the global HR processes and
reporting as well as ensuring minimum technical and process standards in HR -
‘even in smaller countries. From a purely monetary perspective, however, the
business case for the HR IT solution is less compelling, Even though managing and
maintaining IT systems centrally does offer certain economic potentials, the costs
‘caused by the small, local IT solutions ~ in many cases Excel sheets ~ are
insignificant anyway.

In contrast, the purpose of introducing a shared service center is to leverage
Potential cost savings rather than boost quality. At 1:60, MotorStars’ HR-to-
‘employee ratio is now relatively low compared to the international benchmark of
1:80. From this perspective, cost savings could be achieved with the company’s
‘current 1,700 HR employees. However, due to political reasons and the company’s
‘overall positive performance, dismissing the employees is not under consideration.
Instead, the aim is to achieve a growth in productivity through the rising number of
‘employees throughout the company with the same number of HR employees.
Furthermore, by using the shared service center in Eastern Europe, labor arbitrage
advantages could be leveraged. Sharp price increases in these countries, however,
have to be taken into consideration. Due to the significant cultural and language
Aifferences i i is not considering the option of ing its
‘operations to India.

Using the previous analysis asa basis, the current situation at MotorStars HR can
be clearly graded in the business model. In short, the transformation need is medium
to high with a deep transformation readiness (Figure 11.6, top left quadrant). The
primary maxim of business transformation, therefore, is overcoming the stakeholder
crisis. As we will see later, this problem holds the key to solving the case.

As well as the various strategie methods, the prioritization and sequencing of the
‘two underlying objectives have to be defined. From a strategic perspective, the
following options are available in terms of when the shared service center and HR IT
solution are implemented:

1. Big bang: From a purely monetary perspective, itis advisable to implement the

shared service center and HR IT system at the same time a shorter project
uration will reduce costs. This approach, however, represents a strategic
redirection that requires many’ tobe din parallel,

‘complexity and thus heightens the risk of the project failing again. In view of the
failure ofthe last project, the willingness to take risks within the company and in
the project team is low. Instead, solutions that are less drastic are requi

2. A second option would also be a strategic redirection by prioritizing the
introduction ofthe shared service center with subsequent implementation of the
new HR IT solution by its staff. However, this approach is risky because the staff
do not have the know-how of designing these processes. The day-to-day work in
the center and implementation of the HR IT solution at the same time would
result in a dual burden. Similarly, it is questionable whether the local HR
“organizations would support a shared service center due to fear of losing their jobs
and petty rivalries.

4 Implementing the IT system and then setting up the shared service center seems
tobe the most viable solution for the team. By doing so, the team hopes to reduce
complexity and be able to use the global HR IT platform to implement the shared
service center; it regards setting up a shared service center using local solutions as
‘scarcely possible. While the complexity, risks and number of staff involved in the
project are lower, higher costs must be accepted due to the longer project.
duration. Since HR is not exposed to any significant cost pressures at present,
however, the strategy team is in favor of this option.

1. Evaluate the benefits of the objectives from a strategic perspective.
2. Design business model using the four strategic options.
43. Analysis of different realization methods.

=a SS

re tag

--- PAGE 154 ---
Figure 11.6 Strategic options
‘1-44 DEFINE INTEGHATED TRANSFORMATION PLAN (STEP 6)

In the following, we summarize the major milestones during the transformation
planning of the presented case study:

nd bane cate
Following the decision ps in the previous section, a separate business case is.
prepared for the HR IT system and the shared service platform. Given that the
greatest ry saving potentials will not be realized until the shared

center is set up, the business case for the HR IT solution is prepared firs. As already
indicated, the savings are considerably less and result from the shutdown of local
solutions and avoidance of future, local investments in new IT infrastructures.

However, these are offset by the implementation costs and cost of the ERPs. From a
purely monetary perspective, it is evident that this investment does not pay off.

Instead, it must be regarded as a strategic investment and consolidation (see Table
m1).

When pl the HR IT system, the strategy team opts for a , Selective
‘and focused approach that initially centers on the core aspects of the HR IT (HR

Core), such as HR administration and organizational management, since these are
‘easily standardized and also represent the prerequisites for global reporting and

‘other global processes. To demonstrate that global processes can also be realized, the
team plans to implement global, IT-based performance management. This course of
action appears to be favorable in that this process already works on a paper basis and
‘merely needs to be modelled electronically and (partially) automated. Other areas
such as learning, training and compensation management, which are handled very
<ifferently ata local level, have been excluded initially by the project team. The plan
is based on a step-by-step implementation covering various modules over a period of
five years.

‘Table 11.1 Classification of benefits: adapted according to Ward and Daniel (2006) =

(Gnteenal customers | gaps result in prompt

‘and management is _| and high-quality HR

expected asa resuit. | data. A further non-
“quantifiable aspect is
the improvernent in
‘data secunty.

eographica sequencing
With respect to implementing the system in the different regions, the team makes

the following considerations taking the stakeholder and organizational change
management aspects into account: The pilot implementation serves to demonstrate

the general feasibility ofthe project as well as to identify problem areas, such as

P that have not been clearly enough or difficulties. This is
toensure that these ‘ean be used for: it implementations.

‘Since the success of the initial roll-out is extremely significant for the entire project,

Italy is selected as it provides the most favorable prerequisites. All of the MotorStars
divisions are represented in Italy. On the one hand, the country is not too small and

thus can be accepted asa valid proof of concept should the implementation succeed.

‘On the other hand, since the political and organizational situation is not overly
‘complex, initial successes can be anticipated in the short term. Italy also has

processes that are relatively easy to standardize and also requires a new IT HR

solution. Countries that already have functioning, established local IT HR systems

‘and where resistance is expected are scheduled last. In this way, France will be the =
last country in which the system will be implemented this time, as it was here that

the initial attempt failed.

Germany, Switzerland and then the other European countries are scheduled to
follow Italy. Finally, the HR IT solution will be rolled out in Asia and then North
America. This regional focus is intended to prevent work from being ted in
parallel in more than two time zones.

budgeting and distribution of cont

‘The company plans that the local offices will contribute to the budget, which will be
allocated centrally. During the initial implementation in Italy, the costs will be
distributed in such a way that Corporate HR too will contribute financially to absorb
any additional costs that arise from the pilot implementation. Even though the

--- PAGE 155 ---
‘finance plan allows for the entire project to be budgeted, an overall budget will not
be proposed for the complete duration of the undertaking. Instead, the individual
‘subprojects will be budgeted sequentially. To prevent delays in releasing the budget,
it has been agreed that the budget for the next sequence will be released.
‘automatically as long as the milestones are met and no other problems arise. This,
‘sequential budgeting and execution is intended to ensure that the successful
implementation of effective IT systems in certain countries can be recognized if the
project is cancelled.

A lized roll-out is using the pr and a uni
methodology. Only those aspects that cover the requirements of several countries
will be integrated in the: . For this purpose, the standard pr of

the SAP HR component will be defined as a basis. Purely nice-to-have requirements
will not be included and local specifics only considered if these are either necessary
from a legal ive oF are justifiable by providing a uni ness advantage.
‘The onus of proof is on the local offices, which must substantiate why the standard
‘template does not meet their requirements. Any local special requests that are not
included in the template must be financed exclusively by the local offices.

Various standards are defined, however, depending on the size of the country
involved. Certain modules, for example, are mandatory for large countries and
‘optional for smaller ones. A readiness analysis is scheduled prior to each roll-out and
‘will be used by the country organizations to verify their readiness with respect to the
pending transformation. The results will allow each country to rectify any deficits
identified by the time the implementation begins.

Governance end mplementaton team
‘The governance structure insists on effective collaboration between local as well as
slobal IT and HR teams. For this reason, the HR IT implementation team comprises
‘both global and local employees. The global team collects, aggregates and transfers
knowledge and experience of the various implementations. At the start of a country
roll-out, the global team performs a fit-gap analysis in conjunction with the local
team based on the global template and taking local specifics into account. During the
‘course of the roll-out, the tasks are gradually transferred to the local team.
‘Transferring the data from the legacy to the new systems, testing, on-site training
and so on, are typical responsibilities that are performed entirely by the local team.

esolution of stakeholder conics

After a brief working period of two months, the strategy planning team presents the
high-level strategy to 80 managers at a global HR manager meeting. After the Head
of HR IT has presented the strategy in the plenary session, all four members of the
project team provide a detailed explanation of the strategy ina series of workshops.
During the course of this meeting, the team succeeds in securing buy-in from the
‘entire HR organization. It is decided that the outlined concept is on the right track
and should be elaborated further. The meeting enables the team to obtain and
reinforce the support of the entire organization — even ifitis still at a relatively
abstract level.

At this point, however, the old rivalries between Corporate HR, the Corporate
Lead Division Car and IT resurface. Each party wants to secure ownership and thus,
‘control ofthe project. The local offices as well as the members of the project team,
the Head of HR Operational Excellence Car and the Head of the Shared Service
Center Germany (Car) realize that their influence is threatened by the planned
implementation. The further project ead would come under Corporate due to the
involvement of the Head of HR Business Excellence. For this reason, the Car
Division increasingly begins to undermine the further course of the project.
Ultimately, the situation ends in a very emotional project team meeting that is called
by the Head of Corporate HR and to which the Head of ERP is also invited. In the
‘meeting, the Head of Corporate HR reemphasizes the significance of the project. He
fully aware that past differences have to be smoothed over ifthe project is to be a
‘success and the roles ofthe parties involved have to be uniquely defined. During the
course of the meeting, however, it transpires that, with the current team
constellation, the project threatens to fail for exactly the same reasons as the first
attempt did. Consequently, the Head of the HR Shared Service Center Germany is
removed from the project team and assigned other responsibilities internally. The
Head of ERP too is transferred toa different business function and replaced by an
‘external IT specialist.

Next, the project is approved by the Finance department and finally Car ean be
‘won over after the business case is presented by the Head of HR IT in an executive
board meeting. However, this required the following clarification and role allocation
prior to the meeting and was primarily initiated by the Head of Corporate HR: it was,
agreed that the Car Division would act as project lead. Car leads the project that itis
implementing as a vendor in conjunction with IT. Corporate HR assumes a control
and monitoring function in the steering committee, which consists of the Head of
Corporate HR, the Head of Car HR, the Head of HR Business Excellence, as well as,
the CFO and CIO. By doing so, the team was able to secure the strongest division
within MotorStars asa driver for the project and thus settle the stakeholder conflicts
between Corporate HR and Car. Even though Corporate HR is taking a step back as a
result and is performing merely a steering role, given the original personal and
‘micropolitical situation, a solution has been found whereby no side has to lose face.

--- PAGE 156 ---
‘The objective ofthis strategy is thus to overcome the stakeholder crisis firs, then
aspire to a consolidation with the IT solution, and only then complete a strategic
redirection by implementing a shared service center (see Figure 11.6).

1. The first proof-of-concept implementation is realized in the region with the most
2. Plan and distribute costs to individual subprojects.
4 Define a standardized roll-out scenario using predefined templates and a uniform

methodology.

4. Shift responsibilities from the global team to the local team in the course of project
‘execution time.

& i liate project results and. sta conflicts.

14.5 Conelusion =

‘This chapter demonstrates the importance of a comprehensive approach to business
transformation. Even seemingly simple projects, such as the implementation of
new information system, can have transformational impact and, accordingly, entail
unexpected and complex challenges. As shown, these are often rooted in people
issues such as micropolitical tactics of leading players than in technological matters.
c ly, efforts that are solely on the implementation of an IT system
‘are likely to fail. Instead, a systematic approach that includes knowledge and
methods related to strategy, values, risk, processes, program, technology and in
particular organizational change and learning needs to be taken into consideration.
By following a busi tion team in the strategie phase (envision), we
have exemplified the application of BTM?in a complex situation. In addition, this
‘contribution clearly shows the complexity of ‘transformation that more
often than not is cireular rather than linear. It also illustrates the importance of
reflecting on past mistakes and of incorporating the lessons learned into the new
roadmap. Sometimes a winner-loser situation is inevitable. In this case, every effort
should be taken to ensure that the losers are removed fairly so that new attempts are
not undermined by old rivalries.
Bibliography
‘Ward, John and Daniel, Elizabeth (2006), Benefits Management: Delivering Value
from IS & IT Investments (Chichester: Wiley).

ae 98

Hsivvsensot|Alinsht Rae Mahessen Masnenen Mele Cus tay Mor -hghienn es Obl Stem an amet Coney < preaouechgt Nextenapter +0)

--- PAGE 157 ---
"

Bes, eae oi

L Learned from the Bu ‘Transformation Case Studies

20108 WARD (Crt Unie, Schad of Management and AXEL CHL SAP A)

12:1 Overview

As part of the development of BTM®, 13 case studies of different types of business

transformation in large European ions across a range of industries were
oo ‘The industries were: ive, pharmaceuticals, construction, food, oil
and chemicals, financial services, ications and IT. The cases i

transformations to develop new products and services as well as restructuring and
reorganizing core business functions and introducing global processes and systems.
All the transformations involved changes in organization structures and
individuals’ roles, responsibilities and behaviors. Ina few of the cases this led to,
large-scale staff relocations and redeployments. All the cases included new and
significant investments in IT to enable the business transformation, but, in all but
‘one ofthe cases, IT benefits were not the main rationale for the transformation,

‘The cases were used to test, validate and enhance BTM®, This was possible
the cases lifferent levels of

+ Four were very: ieving all the main objectives of the ti 5
+ Five cases were partially successful as some expected benefits were achieved, but
not all.

+ Four were unsuccessful, achieving none of the transformation objectives or were
not completed. Most incurred substantial costs.

“This ratio is typical ofthe overall statistics of success rates for projects, programs
and business transformations.

‘The cases were developed and analyzed by teams consisting of experienced
academics, researchers, consultants and senior company managers. They involved
interviews with those involved in the business transformation and reviews of
relevant documentation. Each case was written up in detail by the team and verified
san aecurate record of events by the organizations concerned. Some have already
been published in 360° ~ The Business Tr c and others will be
Published in future editions.

“The cases have been analyzed using a numberof the BTM® models deseribed in
earlier chapters in this book. Initial assessment considered the strategic positioning
‘of the business transformation, then each was analyzed in terms of how extensively
and how wel the eight BTM? disciplines, such as Value Management and the
subdiseiplines within each, were performed. The analyses forall the eases were
compared to identify significant aspects which appeared to affect the level of success
achieved. Summaries and examples ofthese analyses are included in this chapter.
‘The companies have not been named since the details are confidential.

‘onsucrives oF Tats cnaPren:

1. Demonstrate how the evidence from a range of business transformation case
studies was used to develop and evaluate BTM?,

2, Understand the lessons learned from case studies of successful and unsuccessful
transformations.

3. Learn how each of the BTM? management disciplines can influence the success of
‘business transformation.

12.2 An Overview ofthe Cases and Outcomes
saa TIEsvecesses

cases

Global HR system and reorganization, implemented top-down in response to
‘external criticism of the company’s corporate governance. Organizational changes
preceded the IT implementation. The organization had learned from a previous
‘expensive failure to achieve the same transformation.

cases

TTenabled sustainability program which has been successful so far in creating,
initiatives and structures to address sustainability issues and reduce environmental
impact for the company and its customers.

Global customer service process transformation through new IT foundations and
‘business changes to act consistently as one global organization. It was an
‘change program, which was based on collaborative process redesign and
implementation through compromise not confrontation.

ney

Reorganization and rationalization into shared service centers for support functions

a

a

--- PAGE 158 ---
and implementation of new operational model with standardized processes and
‘common systems. The reorganization preceded the introduction of the new systems
and processes.

12.2.2 THE PARTIAL SUCCESSES

cme

‘The implementation of a corporate HR database, but the roll-out across all business
‘units was deferred due to lack of local benefits and increasingly difficult trading
conditions. Project is seen as a relatively low cost, learning experience.

1 tation of global HR. function, new HR. and systems: 50
percent of HR tasks worldwide supported by the new systems and further benefits
have been identified. Initial programr was TT-led and achieved little until taken over
by HR function as part of global business transformation.

‘The development of a service business capability to complement a successful product
strategy by creating a global center of excellence, sharing knowledge with customers
to develop high-quality valued services.

cases

The} ‘of new product to meet ofa St
‘segment, to be manufactured and delivered through a new business model: the
product proved popular, but the business model could not be made profitable.

integration of the new product (Case 8 above) into the main manufacturing,
logistics and sales organization to exploit traditional competences through the
adoption of standard processes and systems, to stabilize costs and reduce losses.

12.2: THE UNSUCCESSFUL

Avery expensive investment in a global HR system, functionally led, aimed at
reducing systems costs. There was no real business justification, few achievable
benefits and it was abandoned before completion.

case tt
Another failed global HR system: overspent, late and only partially implemented
prior to abandonment; it was a system few parts of the business wanted and the

benefits were very limited (the failed transformation that preceded the success
described in Case 1).

Rationalization and centralization of finance and accounting functions across
Europe, accompanied by new systems and processes. The program was abandoned
due to lack of business buy-in to a weak business case. A second attempt is now
underway, adopting a different approach.

casera

Introduction of common production planning and control processes and systems
across global manufacturing units. There was no real business case, due to variations
in products and manufacturing processes, no stakeholder buy-in and no internal
transformation capability. Pilot implementations failed and the project was
abandoned.

In the figures used to summarize some of analyses that follow, the cases are
known by the numbers above.

124 Strategic Positioning of Business Transformations

‘The transformation portfolio matrix shown in Figure 4.2 in Chapter 4, Value
Management, was used to position the transformations based on the expected
strategic impact as expressed in the transformation objectives. Figure 12.1 shows the
results of that analysis.

Figure 12.1 shows that those considered as both strategic and high potential,
aimed at creating or identifying competitive advantages were all atleast partially
‘successful. It could be concluded that the “positive” nature ofthe business
transformation intentions meant that there was litte stakeholder resistance to the
initiative and hence the organization was able to deploy its most capable resources.

Conversely all three that best fit the support definition ~ to reduce costs or
remove inefficiencies — were all unsuccessful. As will be argued later, in each case
‘what could be: red as operational p should not have_ the
argument for a major transformation, which increased the scope of the changes but
not the business benefits. Senior management engagement and support was limited
and the initiatives were given little priority, except in the functional area concerned.

--- PAGE 159 ---
Figure 12.1 The cases positioned on the transformation portfolio matrix

‘The five key operational transformations, aimed at overcoming or preventing real
‘or potential disadvantages, had mixed fortunes and the reasons for this are in the
detail of how they were managed, notin the strategic intent.

1244 Transformation Need and Readiness

‘The importance of a clear understanding of the need to transform — the drivers and
‘objectives — and the timescale within which it has to be achieved is discussed in
detail in Chapter 3, Strategy Management, Then assessing the organization's
readiness or capability to make the changes is essential to decide not only the best
‘approach to the business transformation, but also to define the transformation scope
‘so that the chances of success are increased. An adapted version of the Strategic
Options model (see Figure 3.9 in Chapter 3, Strategy Management) was used to
describe each case in terms of the importance of the business transformation and the
‘organization's apparent readiness as shown in Figure 12.2. How the transformation
need and readiness can be assessed is described in detail in Chapter 3, Strategy
Management.

Figure 12.3 shows the positioning of each of the cases on this matrix to describe
the mn at the start of each ion, based on the provided.

‘This analysis shows vividly that in all the unsuccessful cases the need for
transformation was relatively low; either there was no pressing need or there was
little agreement, at a senior level, that it was a business priority. In three of the cases
the need was argued only by one business function or the IT department. Asa
‘consequence the rest ofthe organization was unwilling to do the low priority, but
‘demanding and complex work involved: readiness was also low. Had the
“organizations undertaken such an analysis early in the business transformation,
failure and the significant resulting waste of money and resources could have been
avoided.

Figure 12.2 Strategic options: need and readiness

Poot emer
onto ea ——
re mm, son

In three of the four successful transformations the need was high — clearly
recognized as a priority — but initially the readiness was low, In these cases the
argument for change was endorsed at executive level and time and effort spent in the
‘engagement phase to achieve the buy-in of the rest of the organization and develop
the organization's ability to undertake the changes.

In the majority of those that were partially successful the transformation
readiness appeared to be high as well as the need. The reason they were not entirely
‘successful is perhaps best explained as over ambition or even over enthusiasm, due
torrather too many “positive” assumptions being made at the start and little

‘ofthe potential risks J. In one case this was. bythe
program team providing only positive feedback to management about progress and
not reporting aspects that would cause concern. In some cases assumptions about
the business environment were too optimistic and in other the envisioned new
business model proved not entirely viable.

One “outlier” ~ Case 9 ~ shows that the analysis is not always precise and that a
‘high does not always lead to increased transformation readiness: in this ease due to
major concurrent changes in senior personnel and the loss of key staff. The other —
(Case 2 — suggests that high readiness does enable opportunistic initiatives to explore
new business options and prove the value they may deliver.

‘Some initial conclusions can be drawn from these analyses to suggest why some
business transformations are more successful than others:

+ Business transformation needs to be driven by clear imperatives ~ the strategic
reasons to do it — which should be easy for everyone to understand. Ifthere is no
clear strategic imperative, it is likely to get stopped or lose priority, as there is no
real motivation to change.

--- PAGE 160 ---
+ All the successful ones had business imperatives that affected the whole
corporation's future not just a function a clear need to “transform the business”.
‘These imperatives were communicated throughout the organization. A lack of
strategic alignment creates risks which cannot be addressed later in the program.
‘Therefore initiatives need to be selected carefully.

+The business drivers provide the “case for action”: strategic, tactical and
‘operational issues should not be confused during the envision and engage phases.
In some cases, what were initially operational efficiency issues were developed
(sometimes with the help ofthe IT implementation partner) to become “strategic
opportunities”, which were not justified. None of these were successful. There can
bea tendency to make operational problems strategic, just to get them solved.

+ In most ofthe unsuccessful cases the complexity ofthe transformation was
underestimated and the adaptability, o readiness to adapt, ofthe organization
overestimated. Understanding the organization's readiness to transform is crucial
to deciding the transformation strategy. Transformation requires alot of energy
and resources and the amount of dedicated resource required inereases when
readiness is less.

+The I transfor had CEO and a C-level executive
leading or directing the transformation. Involvement should be real and visible: if
not, other executives will not see it as important and not spend time on it. Leading
the transformation involves communication of clear, consistent messages, time
spent on the program details and being actively involved in solving issues that

1245 Analyzing the Cases Using the BEM® Management Disciplines

In each of the sections that follow, how effective or ineffective management practices
across the eight BTM management disciplines (which are described in detail in the
preceding chapters) affected the evolution of the transformation and the eventual
‘outcome, in terms of the level of success achieved are discussed.

‘An overview model of the discipline relationships is shown in Figure 12.4. a

al
Figure 12.4 The direction and enablement discipline relationships (please also refer to
Figure 2.1)

Figures 12.5~12.7 show the BTM? disciplines and how they were performed in
three typical, example cases — one successful, one partially successful and one
unsuccessful. The analysis is based on the evidence presented in the case study write
up and in some cases evidence about a particular subdiscipline was not available. In
others a subdiscipline was “not applicable” normally because the transformation was
not completed. The performance of the individual activities in each discipline is
highlighted according to the color code at the bottom of each figure.

‘We differentiate between activities, which:

+ were performed and performed well;
+ were performed either only to some extent or not particularly well;
+ were either not performed or performed poorly;

+ do not provide any evidence in the case in order to decide; and

‘The pattern of the extent and quality of the discipline and subdiscipline
performances are typical of the cases in each of the three levels of success.

Findings for each of the eight management disciplines are now discussed, in turn,
before considering findings regarding the Meta Management aspects,

Figure 12.5 The pattern that is typical for a successful ease

--- PAGE 161 ---
Figure 12.6 Typical pattern for a partially successful case

Figure 12.7 An unsuccessful case - not completed
12:1 THE DIRECTION DISCIPLINES. a

‘These three examples clearly demonstrate a pattern that was consistent across
almost all the eases:

+ Ifthe majority of the directional disciplines were neglected or performed poorly,
the ion was either or not

+ With one exception, even if a minority of the disciplines were neglected or
performed poorly, or many were not carried out well or thoroughly the best that
was achieved was partial success.

In essence, the outcome of the business transformation could be predicted from
predominant color in the assessment of the directional disciplines. Hence an
appraisal during the envision and engage phases of how clearly and comprehensively
the transformation strategy, value and risks have been understood and.
‘communicated, will provide a strong indication of likely success.

Strategy Management

+ Transformations should start top-down with a vision of what the future will be, but
decide the actual content and process for change from the “middle out”, during the
engage phase, to make sure it’s doable, while also “keeping the shop open” and
‘maintaining business performance during the transformation.

+ Having a clear vision of the intended future business and organizational models
and then allowing compromises and trade-offs in the detail of how they are
implemented, is more likely to achieve stakeholder commitment than imposition.
In some cases, when the drivers demand urgent action a top-down, mandated

approach to: ion can also work, but tends to achieve st
compliance or acceptance rather than positive commitment.
+ Most business transfo involve at least two and, -

first to create a new capability and second to exploit it. In most cases the capability
‘was created, but was not (yet) always exploited, hence the benefits achieved were
often less than those originally envisaged. This is because creating a new capability
can be done “off-line”, separately from business as usual, but using and exploiting
it usually competes with other operational priorities.

Velue Management

+ In those that were not successful the transformation objectives and business cases
‘were often vague, based on a “benefits vision” rather than an evidence-based set of
benefits and an understanding of how to realize them. This makes it difficult for
some stakeholders to believe the transformation is worthwhile and commit the
required time and resources.
+ In some of the cases there was confusion between changes and benefits: for m
‘example introducing common global processes is a change, not a benefit. It may
create the potential for benefits, such as reducing costs or higher service levels.
+ Very often business benefits were overestimated, while the risks and the problems
in making the changes were underestimated, because otherwise it would be
difficult to get funds and resources. Realistic and evidence-based benefits are
needed.
+ Like many (so-called) strategic projects, instigated by senior management, the

ypment of a detailed business case seems ry. 3
transformations are business investments so investment board/governance bodies

--- PAGE 162 ---
should demand realistic business cases and also assess how successful the
investments have been, by reviewing the benefits actually achieved. The successful
ones all did this and most reviewed the progress of the investment, not just the
change program during implementation.

‘Rsk Management

+ Risk Management was often glossed over, but given that a high percentage of such
programs “fail”, it is best to identify and anticipate what could go wrong, before it
happens. The distinction between strategic and operational risks was often not
clear. As a result many risks only became apparent during implementation leading
toi costs, delays, scope reductions and even This
reluctance to explore the risks earlier may have been influenced by executive
instigation of the transformation, which can discourage negative feedback, making

it inadvisable or even career limiting to point out the potential risks.

+ To reduce risks, the transformation should be planned in short deliverable stages if
possible. This provides the following advantages:
~ Earlier delivery of some benefits.
~ Reduced vulnerability to changing business conditions.
— Easier to adjust the transformation to retain strategic alignment.
~ Earlier learning of the implications of the changes.
~ More manageable interactions with related programs.
~ Reduced risk of wasting resources, ifthe transformation scope has to change.
= Itprovides more opportunities to review the expected value to be realized.
— Governance structures are more effective and can be adjusted as the

transformation evolves.

+ Some business tran ions are unduly i by in senior
personnel rather than, ‘in business strategy. The and
priorities of individuals should not “corrupt” the organizational purpose of the
ation. ; this could be ‘na number of the less ful

cases, especially where the transformation objectives could be interpreted in
different ways.

2.5.2 THE ENAMLEMENT DISCIPLINES

Inainens Process Management

+The IT and process changes tend to be performed more successfully than
organizational changes, resulting in some benefits being delivered, even in some of
the less successful cases. But this rarely is enough to enable the transformation to
achieve its strategic objectives and the majority of the benefits.
+ Established or proven methodologies were applied in most of the cases; however, in
some the IT or process methodology dominated the overall implementation
approach, making the implementation of other changes more difficult.
+ In two of the unsuccessful cases the FT function followed a “traditional” needs
analysis approach and tried to satisfy all the expressed user needs, irrespective of
the associated process ‘would deliver business. ‘This
increased the scope to the point where the costs considerably outweighed the
benefits. In other cases, operational process issues were discovered (or deliberately
introduced) during i tion causing a reduction in potential or
inereased complexity and costs.

rogram and Project Management

+ Transformations cannot be fully planned in advance and have to adapt to both
changing business conditions and program achievements: this is not necessarily a
comfortable position for senior management and requires a knowledgeable,
accountable and empowered steering or governance group to oversee and, where
necessary, adapt the transformation program.

+ Effective management of the change content and benefits delivery is more
important than the efficiency of the process. The process should reflect not only the
transformation required but the organization's values, experience, capabilities and
culture.

+ The transformation manager needs to have expert knowledge in the area that is
being changed and also how to manage change in the specific organization. A key
skill is being able to reconcile the differing views of the change and resource
ir jons between senior rs and operational line Figure
12.8 shows the relationship triangle and research (Peppard and Ward, 200!
suggests that the priority early in the program should be to gain agreement
between senior and line management as to what the transformation entails, before
“negotiating” with senior management for the funds and dedicated resources
required. In some of the less than successful cases the “contract” between the
project team and senior management was agreed before the views of line managers
had been taken into account.

+ In some failure cases the organization relied heavily on the generic knowledge and
capabilities ofa third party supplier throughout both the directional and
enablement activities. In some cases this changed the nature ofthe transformation
towards what the supplier could do, not what was required. External suppliers can
only complement and not replace internal, organization specific knowledge and
capabilities.

--- PAGE 163 ---
Figure 12.8 The ine
“and senior management
+ In other failures the organization relied too much on the existing IT project
‘management approaches and hence did not effectively balance the IT and business
aspects ofthe transformation.

‘Transformational IT Management

oy cannot be entirely delegated to a partner. An it ion partner is
actually a supplier of products or services so there is always a potential conflict of
interests.

+The transformations whose main benefits were seen as IT cost reduction or

lization or are led by IT (including the CIO) were not. ful. Some
business transformations become only IT transformations, as the fist phase is
about replacing old IT and exclusively IT methodologies and approaches are used.

‘The result is that a transformation becomes just “IT replacement project”, with,
little oF no business involvement (Ward et al., 2005). Transforming the
organization's IT, should be considered as an oft transformation ~
not an end in itself (Gregor et al, 2006).

+ ITs often in a weak position in the context of a business transformation, due to a
real lack of business knowledge, but a perception that they know how it works: but
they only know how the IT systems work. This created conflict in some of the

nations. When IT “won” the the: ion was
"unsuccessful, but when it was clearly “business-led”, any potential conflict was
easily resolved.

Orvanizationel Change Management

+ These cases suggest that organizations should manage business transformations as
orchestrated, continuous, incremental sets of changes ~ co-evolving and co-
existing with business as usual priorities.

+The I transformations usually the organizational, people and
capability aspects of the first, then the process and IT aspects. The less successful
tried to do the reverse. As mentioned earlier, in all the unsuccessful cases only a
very limited or unrealistic organizational change readiness assessment was carried
out.

+ Understanding and addressing stakeholder issues and having a strategy for
accommodating or dealing with them as early as possible in the transformation is
vital — it is the core activity of the engage phase. The longer the time available to
transform, the more the stakeholder views can and should be included in how the
transformation is conducted.

+ Stakeholder engagement isa critical success factor in almost every business
transformation and early alignment or reconciliation of multi-stakeholder interests,
is very important. Getting this wrong will eause major problems throughout the
implementation due, for example, to dominance by the interests of a minority of
stakeholders or destructive negotiations between dissenting groups.

+ The methodologies used should enable all the main stakeholders to directly
contribute their knowledge and plan their involvement, not rely on expert
knowledge and interpretation of their “needs”. Outside or specialist parties are
there to enable the organization to transform, not transform it.

+The well-known “transition curve” describing how people and organizations
experience major change should be respected in the change management approach
adopted. The curve is shown in Figure 12.9 and Figure 12.10. A comprehensive and
sustained approach (as summarized in Figure 12.10) should ensure that the period
that people spend in the valley of tears characterized by uncertainty and even
disillusionment, is reduced to a minimum. The other curve also shows that

groups reach this point at different times in the transformation: senior
‘management concerns may have moved on, just at the time many line managers
and staff are under stress, usually due to change and business as usual pressures
colliding.

--- PAGE 164 ---
¥

Figure 12.10 The transformation experience curve (a)

+ In some cases the performance measures used to assess the program teams’
performance were too supply-side biased — looking at costs and timescales — which
did not allow sufficient flexibility to address unexpected change management
issues sufficiently during implementation. This led to a protracted “shakedown” or
optimization phase when aspects of the changes had to be reworked or further
changes made. This even occurred in some of the successful cases, increasing the
costs and causing delays, but not preventing eventual success.

Competence und Training Management

. existing .s part of the readiness analysis is important to
determine the strategy, becatise what can be achieved is a function of the amount of
‘work required to make the changes and the knowledge and skills that can be made
available at the required time. If some essential competences or skills are limited o
absent a strategy for developing them is needed early in the transformation.
Insufficient “gap analysis” was a contributory reason for the failure in at least two
of the cases.

+ In the successful transformations informing and educating people about what the =
intended future business should look like, helped them apply their existing
knowledge to determining how it could be achieved, but also exposed where that
existing knowledge was inadequate.

+ Where suppliers are providing essential competences those also need to be
appraised and managed ~ suppliers tend to both overstate and overestimate their
capabilities. Organizational and individual experience cannot always be transferred
from other projects, especially in other organizations. And the transformation may
‘compete with other priorities for the supplier, which can result in the substitution
of less competent staff (the “B-team”) to replace the initial team that was expected
to last the duration. And when people change, knowledge is always lost.

+ Suppliers, especially IT suppliers, can have undue influence over what is done
rather than just how it is done. Clearly the supplier wants their role in the

to be seen as: ul, but also profitable. Asa
however, sometimes even when the supplier only provides the “how” (technology,
‘methods, ete.) this can in effect determine what can actually be achieved ~ the how
drives the what.

12.6 Lessons Learned in Relation to the Meta Management Key Themes

‘Chapter 2 (Meta Management) introduced the structure, rationale and key elements
of BTM? and meta Italso considered higher-order organizatic
constructs or themes, which influence the performance of any type of business
transformation and also each other: communication and organization
culture and values. The underlying philosophy for the development ofthe approach
described in this book to managing transformations is shown in Figure 12

From the ease studies a number of lessons can also be learned about these more
‘general organizational topies.

igure 12.11 The underlying philosophy of BTM

tentersnip =
+ While the successful transformations demonstrated the importance of involvement
and leadership by a “C-level” executive, the cases also show that neither dictatorial
‘or autocratic leadership nor micro-management from the top work well and can
create resistance.

+The early transfer of “ownership” to a consortium or coalition of business
‘managers, who will actually deliver the changes or benefit from them and the
establishment of the core transformation team is the best way to develop the
capability to change. The leadership role is to provide a context for those groups to
build the business ease for the transformation and to trust and support their
decision making. One key decision that needs to be taken by the transformation
leader in ion is the mode of “change ageney” to be adopted. Our cases
show that either an “expert task force” or devolving responsibilities, usually
supported by peer-to-peer networks, can work, but a lack of role clarity is likely to
cause fragmentation and even disintegration of the initiative. This is discussed
farther below.

--- PAGE 165 ---
+ tne reaaersmp rote 1s parucuiany ermical m te envision ana engage phases, auring,
Which it is essential to achieve credibility for the program. A transformation leader
who, due to role or reputation, has little personal credibility in the context of what
is intended, is unlikely to achieve the necessary buy-in from other stakeholders.
‘This was clearly a problem in three of the unsuccessful cases — two have been
restarted under new leadership.

+ Probably the most testing challenge for the leadership role is identifying and
resolving any power or interest conflicts among the key stakeholders and the
business transformation team. This is never pleasant work but it often has to be
done to prevent or limit the damage discordant relationships can cause.

+ Many studies have shown that senior management “commitment” is essential in
transformation projects, but commitment is a vague term. The evidence from these
cases suggests sustained, continuous personal involvement in the governance of
the transformation is what it really means but it is not always easy for a busy,
ambitious executive to sustain that over the extended period required for most
transformations.

+ The business transformation leader, director or manager ~ many titles are used ~
needs explicit and visible public support from the executive team, Some executive
teams are dysfunctional with individuals pursuing different agendas. As our case
studies suggest, in such situations, undertaking a major business transformation is
probably unwise.

Communication

+ A common lesson from many of the eases ~ even the successful ones — is that no
‘amount of communication is ever enough. When asked, “What would you do
differently next time?", more and better communication was the most common
response.

+ Informing everyone in the organization why change is needed and the
consequences of not changing is one of the most important messages and needs
regular repetition. Being equally open about what the transformation is going to
‘mean, even ifit will be unpopular with some stakeholders, is important if the
credibility ofthe transformation is to be maintained. Evasiveness builds distrust or
suggests ignorance, both of which reduce credibility and commitment.

+ Inaddition, ensuring the communication strategy explains what is going on and

inthe of the recipients is essential ~ tailoring the to
the different audiences. Delivering it at the appropriate times when it is meaningful
in the working context ofthe recipients is also critica ifit is to be effective. In a
‘number of eases this was poorly done, creating undue expectations, unexpected

concerns and even suspicion.
+ Remembering that communication is a two-way process is often a weakness in the
tion process and ina of the less ful cases little

‘was paid to questions, concerns or feedback that the project team felt were
distracting or unimportant. It became clear later that if more attention had been
paid, serious problems could have been avoided.

Cature and values

+ All the transformations included significant changes in organizational roles,

ies and behaviors, and in the p «aspects of the culture at
least in some parts of the organizations. In many cases the changes were counter to
the prevailing culture or organizational norms. The successful transformations
recognized this was either desired or inevitable and addressed the organizational
issues first to ereate a new context within which to bring about further changes. As
‘mentioned earlier, the less successful deferred those changes until the new
processes and systems were defined. As a result the organizational changes and
behaviors had to fit the new processes, causing a steep and difficult learning curve
for the staff and managers involved or effective rejection of the new processes as
"unnecessary oF not fit for purpose.

+ Ina minority of cases the new business strategy that drove the transformation also
demanded a change in the organization's values: for example, loss of autonomy and
reduced discretion for opportunistic and tactical investment, consolidation to
achieve corporate control of resources and practices and the adoption of standard
Drocesses to achieve corporate rather local business advantages. Inevitably these

changes tensions and cultural and value di across the
business units and functions, which had to be either reconciled or overridden to
with the transformation. In the less ful ions these

tensions either could not or were not addressed and existing power structures
prevented or subverted the changes.

+ The structure and mode adopted to bring about the transformation should
normally reflect the organization's overall culture unless cultural change is
essential to achieve the business changes. This concerns both formal and informal
roles and the purposes of those roles in the exercise of power or the use existing or
the creation of new organizational relationships during the transformation. The
“task force” approach, which exercises the use of power, worked well when the need
to transform was urgent, the objectives were very clear and the means of achieving
them were known. In the opposite situations a more devolved approach enabled at
least one organization to extend the ambition of the transformation through
embedding learning and knowledge sharing processes into the program.

+ As the transformation proceeds it may be necessary to change modes and in turn
the governance of the program. In particular the creation of a new capability can be

--- PAGE 166 ---
carried out by a task force largely separated from day-to-day operations, but to
exploit the new capability can require different types of changes especially in a
‘multi-unit, multinational organization where the units are of different sizes and
‘maturities. This “transfer of ownership” from the transformation team to the

business units has to be planned carefully and, as in some of the successful cases,
tested through pilot implementations.

127 Conelusion

Every business transformation is different but not unique and lessons can be learned
from the experiences of others. While itis not possible to prescribe a methodology
‘that will meet the requi of every ion, the approach to i
BIM? co the knowledge of lead ies and experienced cor

and business managers plus lessons learned from studying a range of different types
of transformations in different organizations and contexts.

Business transformatic is the holistic of extensive,
‘complex changes on which the organization's future success strongly

Put another way: transformation is a way of achieving accelerated business
evolution whilst not damaging the current business performance. BTM? not only
includes theoretically sound and recognized best practices in each discipline, but also
how those practices can be combined and integrated into an overall approach to
‘successful transformation management.

‘The evidence from the case studies shows that the organizations whose approach
to managing transformations included management attention to the majority of the
BTM? management disciplines were more successful than those that did not.

Bibtography
Business Tr Academy (2011), 360° ~ The Business Tr ion
Journal: www.bta-online.com/36odegree (accessed March 2012).
Gregor, Shirley, Martin, Michael, Fernandez, Walter, Stern, Steven and Vitale,
(2006), The ional dimension in the realization of busi
value from information technology, The Journal of Strategic Information
‘Systems 15, n0. 3, 249-70.
Peppard, Joe and Ward, John (2005), Unlocking sustained business value from IT
investments, California Management Review 48, n0. 1, 52-70.
‘Ward, John, Hemingway, Christopher and Daniel, Elizabeth (2005), A framework
for addressing the organisational issues of enterprise systems implementation,
The Journal of Strategic Information Systems 14, no. 2, 97-119. =
1 Busines Tea Academy. 960" ~The Business Tr Journal, 201: wine ba
‘online com sodegre (accessed March 20:2)

(20s 18

1 sivnsoant|AMuink ot Maes Tanooathn Masounent Mtalgy 12ers sara Home Baas Tasman pans a Sen

< Predouschgter Nxtenapter > 0)

--- PAGE 167 ---
Bese aws oi

“Aa Methods for Strategs Development

SWOT suns seg pron mead Ra aah ana aco SN
eaten tromes ope won promos peered Re yee may eg
‘aren et pan ome eo sergcenar ra eae aes
a en fc cy Seay one co) ne

= cn prs Tey mar tO
secraca mcs panne suse tae seinptom tw aa nae Mar
Sows aspen tyery reste maa to on rary So pecs penn poe
oc rer cra sot ard em ae eae peg eng

en cr rot Tt)
Coe Phpeteed ‘macys

Che surps fe np rena sme raves psy an be ona tory
ore p eyara tin ae foto at eee nih ear Cb nl

Sane ae eee
Ere

1 See Wikipedia, 1 20%: btp:/ ide: wiki
(accessed March 2012).

2 See Tea,"

2009: wre. ej se

Portoiotecnik html (accessed March 2012).

Appendix 8

BIME Value Management

‘Template for Benefits — With Examples

osname enn Secrest
acs cl am
Cn or Ey
i ee ea re “oa
eames tray te [an
merece vttcny
rs
eset |Romen [Ramen |peactypeie” | |samy Mary how
Testi | See ran a) Baty 2% tian Semcwg
Siehae. s-rachnny |tnvime Conese rege 8 Seredom! pan
= Sees lorry Seay
fone” |lacenasoonen Someta (Siteiew |seemen
(Rater Sanaa
rate
Seg sa (Toren [Samer
Panotoo peared
ating ang oman ae soy 30.
‘tpn bdo
Tames Cages [Raha eyes
Coen ain Sennen
fori Soo \sovecees
aeons ied

--- PAGE 168 ---
Appendic
[BIM Risk Management ~ Methods and Toole

‘Ca Methods and Toate

n Jota 1 1 ——

ay, Ti Boer on

<— [S| Soe Teneo Sipe sam ne
cn emergent |store tO

--- PAGE 169 ---
| Porter, Michael. (1979). How competitive fores shape strategy, Harvard Business Review 57, m0. 2,
197-45.

2 Malone, Thomas W: (2004), Bringing the markt inside, Harvard Business Review 84, 90. 4, 106-14.

3 Paul J. (1998) tool for strategie oan | Review
36,00. 2,25-40.

‘4 Carpenter, Guy and Wyman, Oliver (2010). Excellence in Risk Management VI: Bevating the Practice
(of Strategic Risk Management (Marsh ln).

AppendisD
HIM tusiness Process Management

1.1 Modeling anunges for Procens estan

--- PAGE 170 ---
1 See Scheer, August- Wilhelm (2000), ARIS-Business Process Modeling. 3d. (Belin, New York:
‘Springer or Kelle, Gerhard, Nittgens, Markus and Scheer, August-Wilhem (1992), Semantische
ierang auf der Gru Prozefiketten (EPO,
des insttuts fr Wirtschafsinformati, edited by August-Wilbelm Scheer (Heft 89. Saabricken).
2 See Object Group, Unified Language: rg (accessed March 2012)
3 See Petri Carl A (1962), Kommunikation mit Automaten, dissertation (Technische Universitit
Darmstadt, Darmstadt) or van der Aalst, Will M.P. (1998), The application of Petri nets to workilow
‘management, The Journal of Circuits, Systems and Computers 8, 0.1, 22-66.
‘4 OASIS (2007), Web services business process execution language version 2.0 OASIS standard:
_tp// does oasis-pen.org/ wsbpel/2.0/0S wbpel-r2.0-0S pa (accessed March 2011).

‘5 OASIS (2006), ebXSIL business process specification schema technical specification v2.0.4:
tp /does. Lora /2.0-4/08)spec 204: pif (accesed March
200),

Appendix E

BIN Transformational IT Management

1 Methods or IF Service Deployment
Es RATIONAL UNIFTED PROCESS:

Rational Unified Process (RUP) provides a knowledge base, ie. guidelines, templates
and tools forall critical activities of the software development process. Within the
development of RUP in 1998, the founders agreed on a consistent notation language
for modeling, the Unified Modeling Language (UML). RUP Provides
‘guidance for an effective use of UML. RUP is built upon six key guidelines: develop
software iteratively, manage requirements, use component-based architectures,

model software visually, verify ‘quality and: to software. As
illustrated in Figure E.1, RUP’s process model is built upon two dimensions. The
zontal axis represents the Project's progress dimension and is expressed

in terms of eycles, phases, iterations and milestones. The vertical axis represents the
various disciplines that are relevant for the development process.

Software development projects are broken down into cycles. Figure E.t illustrates
‘one such eyele. A cycle is divided into four i the
“inception phase” (project setup and project scoping), the “elaboration phase”
(domain analysis and derivation of basic architecture), the “construction phase”
(software implementation) and the “transition phase” (training and deployment).
RUP phases can themselves be broken down into iterations. An iteration is a

loop with an or external asa result. This
release is an executable product, ic. a subset of the product under development,
‘which grows incrementally from iteration to iteration. The advantages of such an
iterative approach are that risks are mitigated earlier, changes are more manageable,
the level of reuse is higher and the project team is able to learn along the way.

In RUP, nine disciplines are regarded as relevant for software development. Six
core ing workflows are comp! by three core supporting
In busi ing (core engineering ), business pr are
‘documented on the basis of UML in order to establish a common problem
understanding for software engineers and business people. The goal of the
requirements workflow (core engineering workflow) is to define what the software
system should do, Uses cases are the means to depict requirements. Analysis and
design (core engineering workflow) show how the software system will be realized,
This workflow results in a design model being an abstraction of the source code. At
the core of design models are design classes. Implementation (core engineering
workflow) covers the organization of the code (subsystems, layers), the
implementation of components via classes and objects, the test of components and
the integration of the individual produced results into an executable system. Test
(core engineering workflow) is an iterative activity that is performed throughout the
‘whole project. Major aspects of testing are to verify the proper integration of all
software components and to check that all requirements have been correctly

ted. The: rkflow (core engineering ) produces
product releases, and’ the: to the end users. This i activities

--- PAGE 171 ---
like software packaging, distribution, installation, and providing help and assistance
to users. Configuration and change management as a core supporting workflow
handles the control of the numerous artefacts produced by different people and
‘teams working in the project. It avoids problems like conflicting changes. This
‘workflow also covers change request management. The goal of project management

Figure E.1 The two dimensions of RUP =

Source: Reprint Courtesy of International Business Machines Corporation © 2908, 2012 International
Busines Machines Corporation

{ea ACCELERATEDSAP (ASAP? =

‘comprehensive set of content, tools and knowledge
implementation, upgrade or enhancement of SAP
solutions. Although ASAP has been developed specifically for SAP solutions, many
‘components of the approach (e.g the roadmap) can also be applied to other

rdized | software: + ASAP ii three key,
‘designed to deliver rapid and reliable results: the Solution Composer tool, the SAP
Solution Manager application management solution and the ASAP roadmap. The
‘Solution Composer is a tool for planning, defining, documenting and communicating
‘business solution requirements. SAP Solution Manager is the SAP product for SAP

application ‘and administration. Thereby, it facilitates design,
documentation, testing, operations and monitoring of SAP solutions. The ASAP
roadmap details the activities involved in i ng, upgrading and

‘SAP solutions. It is enriched with sets of deliverables, accelerators, role descriptions
‘and checklists. Every ASAP project is divided into five phases that cover the entire
software project lifecycle (cf. Figure E.2).

Figure E.2 ASAP phases and key deliverables?

Project preparation isthe first ASAP phase covering project planning and =
preparation. During this phase, project goals are set, the high-level project scope is
defined, resource requirements are estimated and the project plan is documented.
‘This phase assesses key aspects before implementation begins: the degree of
readiness, current business processes, risks and opportunities among others, Major
activities are securing executive sponsorship, agreeing on roles and responsibilities,
and validating project plans and objectives. SAP Solution Manager can be set up in
this phase as a repository for solution implementation documentation,

‘The purpose of phase two (Business blueprint) isto gather business requirements
and achieve a common understanding of how the company intends to run SAP to
‘support their business. The result is the business blueprint, a detailed
documentation ofthe results gathered during requirements workshops. This phase is
characterized by two milestones. “Business scenarios defined” is the point in time
‘where high-level requirements for the business scenarios are identified and
described. “Business blueprint completion” is the point in time when the detailed
business blueprint is available, i.e. business scenarios and their corresponding
business processes, process steps and transaction requirements are identified and.
documented.

During Realization the functional and technical requirements are i ted
based on the business blueprint. The goal is to have a solution built and integration
tested, with end user training and documentation material prepared, and the
production environment designed and set up. Key deliverables of this phase are
baseline configuration, key development specifications, test plan, training materials
and plans, as well as plans for change and risk management. The baseline
configuration isthe configuration of the organizational structure, master data and
key business processes. Key development specifications cover interfaces, data

--- PAGE 172 ---
conversion programs, reports and required enhancements. The test plan includes an
integration test plan and test cases to ensure all processes integrate and run
‘smoothly before the data eutover.

‘The Final preparation procedures are completed during phase four to ensure
readiness to golive. The activities include end user training and preparing for the
ccutover. During this phase, volume and stress tests are conducted. Furthermore, user
acceptance tests ensure a smooth transition to go-live. This phase also serves to
resolve all critical open issues. On successful completion of this phase, the business
is ready to run with the new solution.

In Go-live and support (phase five) the implementation moves from project-
“oriented preproduction to live operation. First of all, a support organization has to be
set up. It has to be ensured that high-quality user support is available during the first
critical days of production. Also, this organization plays a vital role in supporting and
improving operations on an ongoing basis. Moreover, continuous software
‘monitoring and optimization has to take place during this phase as well. SAP
Solution Manager is a key means for performing this support and is moved from the
implementation project organization to the IT support organization.

{a Meat Practices for IT Service Management*

‘The IT Infrastructure Library (ITIL) i a collection of best practices for IT service
‘management and the leading approach in this domain. Services in the ITIL
terminology are understood as an instrument that brings additional value to
‘customers by realizing their requirements. Service management therefore requires a
set of specialized, organizational skills to bring customers additional value by
delivering services. By now, ITIL is available in version 3 and can be seen as a de
facto standard for IT service management. Figure E.3 illustrates the latest version of
the ITIL framework.

Figure E.g The ITIL framework*
Reprint Courtesy of Glenfis AG, www iti-forum.ch

‘The ITIL framework consists of five core areas that cover al stages of the service
lifecycle from the initial definition to service operation and optimization. Version 2
of the ITIL framework focuses on specific activities directly related to service delivery
‘and support and the versions should not be considered in isolation. The
five stages of the ITIL version 3 are servi ies, service design, servi
transition, service operation and continual service improvement.
At the center of ITIL service lifecycle management is service strategy. Service
strategy provides guidance on prioritization of service-provider investments in
services. Service strategy builds upon a market-driven approach. Selected key tasks
in this regard are service value definition, business case development and market
analysis. This book of ITIL has some overlaps with the IT strategy work stream.
design provides best practices on the design of IT services, processes and
other aspects of: -ment. In ITIL, design is understood to all
‘elements relevant to service delivery, rather than simply focusing on design of
technology. Service design howa solution i with the
‘business and technical envi t. Key pr of service design are
catalog, -ment, level Ir ment,
TTarchitecture management and supplier management. Here we have overlaps with.
‘business processes activities.
‘The objective of service transition is to build and deploy IT services. Furthermore,

transition that to are carried out in a systematic and
professional way. Major processes of service transition are i,
project application and cust orrelease and
deployment management.

Service operation describes best practices for ensuring the delivery of agreed
levels of services to end users and business customers. It is the part ofthe lifecycle
‘where the services and their value are actually delivered and realized. Monitoring of
problems and managing the adequate balance between reliability and costs are key
in service operation. Service operation i activities such as techni

application ‘operations and service desk.

Continual service improvement aims to align IT services to changing business

needs. This is realized by identifying improvements and implementing them into the
service portfolio. The focus of improvement is put on service quality from a business
perspective. However, process efficiency and improvements concerning costs of IT
processes are addressed as well. Key processes of continual service improvement are
service level m: service and reporting as well as continual
service improvement.

a Framework for Governance”
Control Objectives for Information and Related Technology (COBiT) is one of the
most widely applied frameworks for IT ling. Its best practices and

--- PAGE 173 ---
nave been aeveiopea ana upaatea py tne mnrormanon Systems Auer ana Lontrot
Association (ISACA) and ITGI since 1996. COBIT provides an internal control system
that helps to ensure that an organization's IT successfully delivers against business
requirements. To that end, delivery is linked to business requirements, IT activities

are organized into a generally accepted process model, the major IT resources are
identified that are to be leveraged and the management control objectives are

‘defined that should be considered.

In order to satisfy business goals, information needs to conform to certain control =
teria, which are to as business requi for fon. Seven

Aistinct yet overlapping information criteria are defined: effectiveness, efficiency,

confidentiality, integrity, availability, compliance and reliability.
‘The IT organization deli i goals by a set of pr that use
like people, skills and ngy infrastructure to run business

applications while leveraging business information and performing business
processes (efficiency and effectiveness). These resources, together with the
processes, constitute an Enterprise Architecture for IT,

Figure E.4 The COBIT framework
‘Source: COBIT 4.1 ©2007-2012 ISACA. Al ight reserved. Used by permission,

COBIT is based on applications, information, infrastructure and people as “IT
resources”. Applications are automated systems and manual procedures that process
information. Information is the data, in all forms, entered, processed and reported
by the information systems in whatever forms. Infrastructure is the underlying,
technology and the facilites that enable information processing. People are the staff
required to plan, organize, acquire, implement, deliver, support, monitor and
‘evaluate information systems and services.

COBIT defines four domains of IT activities in a generic process model. These
domains are plan and organize, acquire and implement, deliver and support, and
‘monitor and evaluate. This classification maps to IT's traditional responsibility

‘areas of planning, buildi ing and monitoring. The of
COBIT is illustrated by Figure E.4.
lan and organize addresses strategy and tactics in terms of how IT can best *

contribute to the accomplishment of business objectives. A proper IT organization as
‘well as technological infrastructure has to be put in place. Therefore, processes like

define a strategic IT plan and direction, define the information architecture, assess

‘and manage IT risks or manage projects have to be established.

In order to implement the IT strategy, IT solutions have to be identified,
developed or acquired, as well as implemented and integrated into business
p - Additionally, changes in existing ‘or in its maintenance have to be
addressed. All these aspects are addressed in the acquire and implement domain.

Deliver and support covers the actual delivery of services. This includes service
delivery, management of security and continuity, service support for users, and
management of data and operational facilities.

AILIT pr need to be regularly for their compliance and quality
‘with control requirements. Therefore, the monitor and evaluate domain handles
performance management, monitoring of internal control, regulatory compliance
‘and governance. a
|The overview about the Relational Unified Process inthis ection as well a the image of Figure
‘originates back othe flowing references: Rational Sftware Corporation (1998), Rational Unified
Process bet patces fo software development
‘wowauustana ab e/-mobs)/coursen/2000 winte/ese220/
pers rop_best_prctces/rup_bestpractices pal (aces March 2012), Wikipedia (20128, TM
Rational Usted Process: htp//en. wikipedia og/ihi/IBM_Rationa_Unifed_Proces (accessed March
2012) and Wikipedia (20120), Rational United Proce:
hitp//e wikipeia. org wiki/Ratonal_Unified_Proces (accessed March 2012),

2 The overview abot the AcceleratedSAP tthe ection tack othe following
SAP AG (2007), Proven for rai of SAP solutions ~ rece costs,

lower isk and save time with ASAP: www. ranow.com/ierature/Pronen-Methanblog-for Rapid

Implmentation-of SAP-Soutions pdf (acessed March 2012)

3 Sco Musil, Jan, and Raimar Hoekinger (2010), Th new ASAP methodology: overview ofthe new ASAP

methodology for implementation 7x and ASAP business add-ons, SAP AG:

‘weed. sp comni)/en/e/portal/ptrootdos/rary wid /1026829e-7165-20-0Sb6-

‘isdrogadg46eQuick ink-indexoveridlayout-trace 8438641495058 (accessed March 2012).

4The aboot the FTL! in this section back to the following
‘Wikipedia (a012b), formation Technology Infrastroctre Library:

p/n ii yk Te 7 Library (accessed March 2012)
5 See Glenfs AG, ITIL knowledge — sti /it/index pap

Mare 2012).

(0 The overview about the IF governance framework in this section, as wel asthe image in Figure E.4,
otiginate back to the following reference: IT Governance lstitute (2007), COBIT® 4:1: Framework,
Control ty Models (Roling 1: IT Governance
Institute).

--- PAGE 174 ---
Deve

< Previouchagt Noten > 0)
