--- PAGE 1 ---
Citation: Uzhakova, N.; Fischer, S.
Data-Driven Enterprise Architecture
for Pharmaceutical R&D. Digital 2024,
4, 333–371. https://doi.org/10.3390/
digital4020017
Academic Editor: Yannis
Manolopoulos
Received: 17 February 2024
Revised: 27 March 2024
Accepted: 11 April 2024
Published: 22 April 2024
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
Article
Data-Driven Enterprise Architecture for Pharmaceutical R&D
Nailya Uzhakova (née Sabirzyanova) * and Stefan Fischer
Institute of Telematics, University of Lübeck, 23562 Lübeck, Germany; stefan.fischer@uni-luebeck.de
* Correspondence: nailya.sabirzyanova@student.uni-luebeck.de
Abstract: This paper addresses the research gap in the realm of data-driven transformation by lever-
aging the Resource-Based View (RBV) theory and the dynamic capabilities concept to the contours of
a data-driven enterprise. It confronts the limitations of conventional digital and data transformation
programs, which often prioritize technological enhancements over crucial organizational and cultural
shifts. Proposing a more holistic perspective, the Data-Driven Enterprise Architecture Framework
(DDA) is introduced, emphasizing the domain decomposition and productization of an architecture,
distributed ownership, and federated governance, while ensuring the continuous harmonization
of data, application, and business architecture. A case study featuring a leading pharmaceutical
company illustrates the practical implementation of the DDA framework as a pillar of their Digital
Transformation Strategy. By integrating scalable and distributed data architecture into the overarch-
ing Enterprise Architecture landscape, the company has initiated their data-driven transformation
journey, showcased through their initial and very early results. This research not only offers valuable
insights for pharmaceutical organizations navigating the complexities of data-driven transformations,
but also addresses a research gap in the field.
Keywords: data-driven enterprise; enterprise architecture; dynamic capabilities; clinical trials;
pharmaceutical R&D; data fabric; data mesh; data domains; data products; data ownership model;
federated governance
1. Introduction
1.1. Data-Driven Enterprise. Why? What? How?
1.1.1. Why Become a Data-Driven Enterprise?
In today’s digital era, disrupted by the emergence of Big Data; AI; Internet of Things;
Robotic Process Automation; and Augmented, Virtual, and Mixed Reality, data have
become a critical resource and a top priority for many companies [1–4]. The value of data
has significantly increased over the years, with nearly 90% of an enterprise’s value now
attributed to intangible assets, including data [5]. Furthermore, digital companies including
Apple, Microsoft, Alphabet, Amazon, Tesla, Meta (Facebook), and NVIDIA were in the top
10 of the world’s biggest companies, as of 2022 [6].
The cost of data breaches is also on the rise, with the healthcare industry being the
most affected, with an average cost of USD 10.1 million in 2022 [7]. Studies and white
papers have also shown a direct correlation between a firm’s productivity and the intensity
of data leverage [8–12]. In addition, an extensive literature review conducted by Schweikl
et al. reveals the prevailing positive influence of IT investments on firms’ productivity
levels [13].
With data evolving from merely a potential competitive advantage to a vital necessity
for seamless integration, sustainable growth, and market survival, enterprises world-
wide are increasingly driven to become “data-driven”, embedding this into their business
strategies. The pharmaceutical industry (Pharma) exemplifies this trend, where the imple-
mentation of cutting-edge digital technologies such as AI, robotics, Big Data analytics, cloud
computing, embedded systems, adaptive manufacturing, and the Internet of Healthcare
Digital 2024, 4, 333–371. https://doi.org/10.3390/digital4020017 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/digital

--- PAGE 2 ---
Digital 2024, 4 334
Things (IoHT) is encapsulated within the concept of Pharma 4.0 [14]. This paradigm not
only aims to optimize pharmaceutical operations, but also to fundamentally transform the
entire pharmaceutical value chain.
A pivotal catalyst for the global surge in the adoption of Pharma 4.0 technologies
was the outbreak of COVID-19, making the pharmaceutical industry a realm of rapid
transformation in 2020 [15,16]. In response to the urgent need to manage the extensive
spread of the pandemic and avert the loss of millions of lives worldwide, pharmaceutical
companies swiftly mobilized to accelerate the implementation of digital technologies. For
instance, companies engaged in the development of vaccines embarked on innovative
approaches, leveraging the decentralization and virtualization of clinical trials to accelerate
research efforts, while mitigating the burden on hospitals and minimizing risks to trial
participants [17]. Furthermore, a diverse array of statistical models and data analytics
tools were deployed to predict and monitor COVID-19 cases across different countries [18].
By harnessing the power of data analytics, pharmaceutical companies could anticipate
outbreaks, allocate resources effectively, and inform strategic decision-making in real-time,
thereby enhancing the global response to the pandemic.
The potential impact of Pharma 4.0 is underscored by numerous studies, emphasizing
its capacity to enhance efficiency, accelerate time-to-market, mitigate risks, elevate product
quality and safety standards, foster innovation, and facilitate modernization [14–21]. More-
over, Pharma 4.0 is increasingly recognized as a pivotal enabler for achieving sustainable
development objectives within the industry, aligning closely with strategic management
agendas [15].
Within pharmaceutical research and development (R&D), data assume a paramount
role as the cornerstone of clinical development. The seamless flow of data across the
lifecycle—from collection and processing to sharing, analysis, and regulatory submission—
is indispensable for establishing the safety and efficacy of pharmaceutical products. Conse-
quently, the effectiveness of pharmaceutical R&Dorganizations in managing and leveraging
data significantly influences their overall business performance. By embracing data-driven
approaches, they can unlock numerous potentialities, as follows:
• Accelerated Drug Discovery and Design: Leveraging machine learning algorithms and
AI, data-driven R&D methodologies enable pharmaceutical companies to model and
analyze vast datasets encompassing genetic, molecular, and clinical information. These
approaches streamline the drug discovery process by uncovering hidden patterns,
identifying novel drug targets, and predicting therapeutic outcomes, thus reducing
time and resource requirements. Thus, several studies have demonstrated promising
outcomes in such areas as drug molecular design, retrosynthetic analysis, chemical
reaction outcome prediction, adverse events detection, virtual screening, peptide
synthesis, biomarker discovery, and others [22–30].
• PrecisionMedicineandTargetedTherapies: Byharnessingcomprehensivepatientdata,
including genetic profiles, biomarkers, and clinical histories, pharmaceutical firms can
develop personalized treatment regimens tailored to individual patient characteristics.
Data-driven insights facilitate the identification of the patient subpopulations likely
to respond positively to specific therapies, enabling the development of targeted and
more efficacious treatments [29,31–33].
• Optimized Clinical Trials: Data-driven analytics enhance the design and execution of
clinical trials, enabling pharmaceutical companies to identify suitable patient cohorts,
optimize trial protocols, optimize site-selection process, increase trial participant
recruitment, and maintain engagement [24,34].
• Drug Repurposing and Combination Therapies: Data analytics enable pharmaceutical
researchers to explore existing datasets and identify opportunities for drug repurposing
and combination therapies [35,36]. By leveraging insights from large-scale genomic, tran-
scriptomic, and phenotypic datasets, researchers can uncover novel indications for existing
drugs or synergistic combinations with enhanced therapeutic efficacy.

--- PAGE 3 ---
Digital 2024, 4 335
• Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics: By implementing data-driven approaches
including AI methods to pharmacovigilance, pharmacodynamics, and adverse event
monitoring, companies can detect and respond to safety concerns faster, more cost-
effectively, and with greater accuracy, decreasing regulatory risks and safeguarding
patient welfare [37–40].
In essence, the adoption of data-driven approaches holds immense potential for trans-
forming pharmaceutical R&D, driving innovation, enhancing efficiency, and, ultimately,
improving patient outcomes.
1.1.2. What Does Data-Driven Enterprise Mean?
Despite a growing firm’s aspiration to become a data-driven organization, postulating
it in their business strategies [41–43], the term “data-driven enterprise” has gained limited
scholarly attention [43–45]. In contrast with a discernible scientific research gap, it has
found extensive discourse in the business literature [46–51]. Commonly identified charac-
teristics of a data-driven organization include recognizing the strategic significance of data
and fostering a culture that harnesses data for informed decision-making [44,45,52–55].
However, defining a data-driven enterprise is no straightforward task, due to the dynamic
evolution of the “data-driven” concept, coupled with rapid transformations in both the
business and technological landscapes [52]. What was considered “data-driven” just a
few years ago is now deemed outdated, complicating the articulation of clear goals and
objectives for transformative programs and contributing to corporate skepticism regarding
the outcomes of data and digital transformation initiatives [45,52].
Building upon mainstream studies of digital transformation, we employ the Resource-
Based View (RBV), a well-established theory in strategic management, to delineate the
contours of a data-driven enterprise and data-driven transformation. The RBV conceptual-
izes organizations as collections of resources shaping their competitive advantage [56–60].
This perspective categorizes resources into assets and capabilities, with the latter facilitating
the utilization of assets to achieve defined outcomes [58,60]. Extending the RBV to the
realm of information technologies [60], we focus on applying the RBV framework to data,
as a strategic resource of a data-driven enterprise. In this context, data assets encompass
various elements such as datasets, metadata, data lineage, data products, data engineering
and analytics skills, data platforms, data architecture, infrastructure, standards, and more.
Possessing these data assets alone is insufficient for gaining a competitive advantage; an
organization must cultivate and evolve its data-driven capabilities. Consequently, we
define data-driven capabilities as the ability to deploy data assets, either independently
or in conjunction with other organizational resources, to support and enhance business
strategies and processes. It is crucial for firms to align these capabilities with their overall
business strategies, emphasizing that a transformation in how organizations utilize their
data assets is directed to maximize overall business value for a firm.
Thus, within the RBV framework and drawing on the extensive experience in digital
and data strategy consultancy projects of the first author, we propose a data-driven enter-
prise as an organization continually refining and enhancing its data-driven capabilities
to achieve and sustain competitive advantages. Examples of such types of data-driven
capabilities include data management and governance, analytics, data-driven decision-
making, data ingestion and integration, data storage, data cost optimization, development
of strategic alliances and partnerships, investment in new data technologies, and others.
Our definition highlights that a data-driven enterprise is not a static term or a “snapshot”,
but rather an organization that continuously evolves its data-driven capabilities to address
a rapidly changing business environment. Therefore, a data-driven enterprise is highly
dependent on an organizational ability to react and adapt to ecosystem changes efficiently,
which is often called “agility” or “strategic renewal of an organization’s business model,
collaborative approach, and eventually the culture” [52].

--- PAGE 4 ---
Digital 2024, 4 336
1.1.3. How to Become a Data-Driven Enterprise?
Thetransitiontowardbecomingadata-drivenenterpriseisanenduringtransformative
process, commonly identified as a data-driven transformation. This evolution is commonly
achieved within the strategic programs of a company, entailing a continuous journey.
Digital and data-driven transformations are interconnected realms, both rooted in recent
technological disruptions, exploring how enterprises respond to these changes—utilizing
digital and data resources, respectively. While the theory of digital transformation is
well-established in academic research [42–45,52–54], characterizing it as a reconfiguration
of how firms leverage digital technologies to innovate business models and enhance
operational processes [52–54], the concept of a data-driven transformation has recently
gained prominence, allowing the employment of analogous research methods and concepts
to explore how organizations evolve their data-driven capabilities.
To define data-driven transformation, we draw upon the dynamic capabilities theory
that originates from the RVB and focuses on continuous adaptation to a changing environ-
ment and building a competitive advantage [55]. Thus, the RBV defines two categories
of capabilities, as follows: ordinary and dynamic. Ordinary capabilities facilitate a firm’s
current operational, administrative, and governance processes, while dynamic capabilities
reconfigure internal and external competencies to drive transformative changes in future
operational modes, influencing the pace of change in ordinary capabilities [52,55]. Being
idiosyncratic, dynamic capabilities are challenging to replicate and necessitate intentional
development [61]. Drawing a parallel in pharmaceutical R&D, ordinary capabilities encom-
pass tasks such as clinical study capacity planning or the creation of regulatory submission
data, focusing on the status quo operations and business model. In contrast, dynamic
capabilities involve transformative changes, like the development and implementation
of a decentralized clinical trial model or the formation of strategic alliances with research
institutions, contributing to gaining a competitive advantage.
Consequently, we define data-driven transformation as the process of establishing
dynamic data-driven capabilities, strategically positioned to respond efficiently and explo-
ratively to changes in the business environment. Thus, a company should intentionally
deploy data assets to explore, investigate, and comprehend both internal and external
changes. This involves assessing potential outcomes and risks associated with various
strategies to address these changes, ultimately enabling the organization to make well-
informed decisions that align with their desired goals in a timely and qualitative manner.
Beyond facilitating efficient decision-making through data resources, data-driven transfor-
mation encompasses the initiation and refinement of novel data-driven business models
or the enhancement of existing ones. Our definition emphasizes that data-driven trans-
formation is not merely a set of capabilities to be implemented, but the development and
evolution of a firm’s capability to explore its business environment. This includes the ability
to react promptly to changes, identify emerging opportunities, and respond to them with
agility, utilizing both data resources and competencies. Consequently, our approach (see
Section 3.2) places paramount importance on establishing an organizational framework and
a corporate culture that fosters responsiveness. In this context, the evolution of data-driven
capabilities becomes a continuous and intrinsic part of the organizational journey, adapting
to the ever-changing dynamics of the business landscape.
Delving deeper into the dynamic capabilities theory, Teece categorizes dynamic capa-
bilities into the following three groups: sensing, seizing, and reconfiguring [62]. Sensing
involves identifying opportunities and threats in the business environment, seizing focuses
on extracting value from these opportunities, and reconfiguring entails the continuous
transformation of organizational routines and resources for sustainable growth [53,63].
This classification is widely acknowledged in the literature, with applications extending to
the domain of digital transformation [52,53,55–57,64,65]. Proposing an alternative typology
for data-driven transformation, we aim to provide companies with a structured approach
to progress through their data transformation journey. We define three levels of data-driven
capabilities that companies progress along to embrace data.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Digital 2024, 4 337
At the first “Supportive” level, data support strategic and operational decisions,
replacing reliance on instincts or outdated practices. If we compare this with the typology of
Teece, the supportive level most closely relates to the enhancement of ordinary data-driven
capabilities. Companies should leverage data to explore and understand customers and
customer journeys, business weaknesses and competitive advantages, and both partner and
ecosystem trends, and strategically act to improve customer experience, optimize financials,
and position the company in the market. Referring to Pharma, initiatives here can vary
from data quality and interoperability improvements, such as harmonizing International
Organization for Standardization (ISO) Country Codes across systems, to advanced AI
integration for disease analysis and treatment efficacy, e.g., AI analytics of clinical images.
The next level of data-driven capabilities is “Transformational”. Here, data assets
transform business models, enabling new digital products and services. For example,
decentralized clinical trials, enabled by new ways of collecting data from participants,
could potentially decrease site burden, improve the participant journey, reduce costs,
enhance data accuracy, and result in boosting participant recruitment and retention rates.
The transformational level closely relates to the dynamic type of capabilities.
At the third “Accelerative” level of data-driven capabilities, companies participate
in digital ecosystems, exchanging data with various sources, such as electronic health
records, clinical trial data, wearables, and connected devices. By exchanging data with
other organizations within the healthcare digital ecosystem or related ecosystems like
insurance providers, hospitals, and research institutions, pharmaceutical companies can
accelerate the outcomes achieved in the previous data-driven levels. Promising examples of
digital ecosystems include tokenization engine platforms like DATAVANT or HealthVerity,
which offer healthcare data marketplaces that allow consumers to connect their patient
data with third-party data in a privacy-preserving and secure manner. As more companies
join these platforms and exchange data, the pool of available data grows, making it easier
to identify patterns and insights that were previously hidden. This, in turn, can lead to
more effective treatments and better patient outcomes.
In addition to digital ecosystems, generative AI models like Chat GPT also play
a significant role in the “Accelerative” level of data-driven capabilities. These models
have the potential to revolutionize enterprise decision-making processes and accelerate
numerous business operations. For example, McKinsey estimated that generative AI could
contribute roughly up to USD 110 billion in additional value for the Pharma industry, with
the highest impact on the Pharma R&D function [66]. While many existing generative
AI models are open source and trained on publicly available datasets, their true value
is realized when they are exposed to internal enterprise data or other non-public digital
ecosystem data.
For instance, in the context of study protocol development, open-source AI models
can provide consolidated knowledge about clinical trial regulatory requirements, phases,
terms, best practices, and so on. By integrating internal data or Real World Data (RWD)
from non-public sources (e.g., Health Data Marketplaces), these models can generate
detailed responses tailored to specific requests, such as: “Create a Phase 2 trial protocol
for a Molecule XYZ for the treatment of Sjogren’s Syndrome. Please use the outcomes of
pre-clinical and 0–1 phases of the trials as well as all planning and forecasting, feasibility
studies outcomes and preparation materials”. While human experts still play a crucial role
in reviewing, refining, and adding domain-specific expertise to the generated protocol,
the AI-powered approach significantly reduces the time and effort involved in protocol
development.
Further evidence of the acceleration of a drug design process is a generative AI frame-
work for retrosynthesis prediction, named G2Retro. Retrosynthesis involves transforming
a target molecule into potential reactants, to identify synthesis routes. Studies have shown
that compared to manual estimation methods, G2Retro improves the accuracy and speed
of identifying reactions that work best for creating a given drug molecule [67].

--- PAGE 6 ---
Digital 2024, 4 338
These examples highlight how data-driven decision-making facilitated by generative
AI models can accelerate various processes within clinical drug development. This acceler-
ation has profound implications, potentially reducing the time patients wait for life-saving
treatments and alleviating the burden on physicians, researchers, and trial teams.
By embracing the transformative potential of AI and data-driven capabilities and
placing a strong emphasis on upholding ethical standards, data privacy, and security,
organizations can unlock new opportunities, drive innovation, and make a positive impact
in the healthcare industry and beyond. The shift towards a data-driven future is not only
advantageous but also inevitable in today’s digital landscape. Therefore, it is essential
for companies to proactively invest time and resources in understanding the implications,
developing the necessary skills, and establishing robust frameworks to ensure a smooth and
responsible transition into the data-driven future. This proactive approach will potentially
position the company as a leader in the industry. On the other hand, failing to embrace
this transformation will leave the company as a follower, subject to the disruptive changes
driven by the industry.
Notably, the specific order and prioritization in which a company progresses through
the levels may vary depending on the synergy between data-driven capabilities, goals,
resources, ecosystem readiness, and industry context. For example, some pharmaceutical
companies may prioritize the “Acceleration” level by extending their presence in digital
ecosystems early on, as the benefits of a connected data ecosystem can be particularly
impactful in the Pharma industry. On the other hand, some Pharma companies may slow
down in external digital collaboration, due to regulatory constraints and cultural acceptance
in specific markets (such as in Germany, France, and Poland) [68].
Three data-driven levels are not necessarily sequential stages of development, but
rather reflect differing levels of effort and expected value. At the Supportive level, data
are leveraged to automate or improve existing business processes, which often require
less investment compared to the Transformational level. Transformational changes entail
reshaping the company’s business model or introducing a new digital product to the
market, which requires more significant investments in terms of both time and resources.
It is crucial to emphasize that the successful implementation of data-driven capabilities
at each level necessitates a solid foundation, which is not solely dependent on technology,
but rather driven by a data-driven culture and organizational change [69]. Establishing this
foundation requires a substantial amount of effort, commitment, time, and readiness to
change, which is comparatively greater than the immediate outcomes.
The true value of data-driven transformation may only be realized over time and, as a
company evolves through the data-driven capability levels, it will generate a higher return
on investments (ROIs) compared to initial outcomes. This is why many companies that
embark on their digital transformation journey may not be content with the outcomes and
have become increasingly skeptical in recent years [4]. However, until this foundation is
established, the promising benefits of leveraging data cannot be fully realized. The next
chapter will detail how modern data-driven Enterprise Architecture looks and how it can
establish a solid foundation for successful data-driven transformation.
1.1.4. Challenges on the Journey towards Becoming a Data-Driven Enterprise
Despite the growing recognition of the potential benefits of leveraging data to improve
clinical trial operations, facilitate decentralization of clinical trials, reduce the burden on
participants and sites, and foster collaboration within and outside the healthcare digital
ecosystem, many organizations have struggled to achieve success in their data-driven
transformation initiatives.
Thus, a McKinsey survey found that most organizations could not achieve even one-
third of the expected outcomes from their data-driven initiatives [70]. Similarly, a report
from the BSC revealed that only 30% of digital transformation programs were considered
successful, while 44% were reported as having a neutral or mixed result, and 26% were
reported as failures [71]. Moreover, a study conducted by NewVantage Partners, starting

--- PAGE 7 ---
Digital 2024, 4 339
in 2019, has revealed that the percentage of companies that have been identified as “data-
driven” is decreasing, from 37.8% in 2020 to 23.9% in 2023, and the establishment of a
data culture within organizations has also been declining, from 26.8% in 2020 to 20.6% in
2023 [4].
It can be argued that the decreasing statistics reflect the rapid evolution of the expecta-
tions of data-driven transformation, which have outpaced the outcomes of investments in
this area. Nevertheless, the findings of studies highlight significant challenges that organi-
zations face in becoming truly data-driven. The literature mentions common barriers such
as a lack of clarity around goals and objectives, cultural resistance to change, insufficient
data quality, inadequate data governance and security, and a lack of data literacy and
expertise among staff [72,73].
However, these challenges are only the tip of the iceberg. This paper argues that a
data-driven Enterprise Architecture is an essential prerequisite for any digital transfor-
mation journey and could be compared with a nervous system, with data as nervous
impulses circulating within the whole enterprise organism and accelerating its perfor-
mance. Therefore, any fragmentary initiatives within an organization to improve data
integrations, enhance data management and decision-making, eliminate data silos, advance
data mastering, or implement data fabric toolkits will have limited outcomes without
a comprehensive data-driven architecture in place. Data-driven Enterprise Architecture
(DDA) is a comprehensive framework that encompasses how enterprise data are to be
utilized and perceived, for example as a sub product of systems and business processes, or,
conversely, as a “first-class citizen”, being a critical asset or product, and so on. It defines
how the data are to be organized, managed, and governed to achieve specific business
goals. This strategic foundation then leads to the selection of target-oriented resources,
such as technology, tools, infrastructure, and skills, that support the framework, automate
processes, and augment its capabilities.
A data-driven architecture is a nervous system of the entire digital transformation,
with data as nervous impulses circulating within the whole enterprise organism and
accelerating its performance.
Revisiting the lens of dynamic capabilities theory, numerous studies have delved into
the impact of Enterprise Architecture (EA) on a firm’s dynamic capabilities, showcasing
that EA enhances efficiency in managing digital technologies and IT investments and
significantly influences business value [74–78]. Additionally, these studies observe that EA-
driven capabilities serve as crucial enablers for operational or ordinary capabilities. Some
scholars argue that EA-driven capabilities contribute significantly to agility, adaptability,
and innovativeness, aligning enterprise resources with changing business needs and the
environment [79–81]. Consequently, these capabilities should be positioned at the core of
digital transformation.
Despite the existence of several empirical studies estimating the positive impact of EA
and EA-driven capabilities on digital and data-driven competencies, dynamic capabilities,
innovativeness, operational and IT efficiency, and overall agility, the realization of their
value remains a highly debated topic [74,75,77,78,81]. Our extensive consulting experience
with digital and data transformation programs shows that the value realization of the DDA
is not binary, but exists on a continuum, making it exceedingly difficult to distinguish the
specific benefits attributable to each element of the DDA. The benefits can be quite opaque
in comparison to a system implementation or process improvement that has immediate
tangible effects. This, in turn, complicates not only convincing stakeholders to commit, but
also defining metrics and tracking the success of the transformation on this foundational
phase. Nevertheless, a DDA is supposed to build a basis for data-driven transformation,
accelerating, harmonizing, and streamlining the outcomes of all subsequent data-driven
investments.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 presents the DDA frame-
work alongside the evolution of the Enterprise Architecture concepts. Section 3 provides
insights of implementation of the framework for pharmaceutical R&D organization at a

--- PAGE 8 ---
Digital 2024, 4 340
Pharma company that includes their background and motivation, applied methodology
of design and implementation phases, as well as preliminary results, limitations, and
recommendations. Section 4 concludes the work with key findings.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Enterprise Architecture: Definition and Evolution of the Concept
Why is centralized and layered Enterprise Architecture outdated?
Enterprise architecture (EA) is a discipline that has evolved over time to align an
organization’s IT systems with its business strategies and objectives [82]. The origins of EA
can be traced back to the 1960s, when the field of information systems was emerging as
a discipline. The need for a holistic approach to manage and integrate IT systems within
organizations led to the development of the first generation of EA frameworks. These frame-
works, including the Zachman framework [83], the Open Group Architecture Framework
(TOGAF), the NIST Enterprise Architecture Model, and the Federal Enterprise Architecture
Framework (FEAF) [84], provided a structured approach to design, manage, and align IT
capabilities with business needs via IT centralization and a layered EA approach. Figure 1
presents an original depiction of a Centralized Layered Enterprise Architecture, providing
an aggregated view of the first generation of EA frameworks. It illustrates centralized
layers such as Business Architecture, Application Architecture, Data Architecture, and
Technical Architecture, as well as core functions or teams that support or own these layers.
The rest of the paperis structuredasfollows: Chapter2 presents the DDAframework
alongside the evolution of the Enterprise Architecture concepts. Chapter 3 provides in-
sights of implementation of the framework for pharmaceutical R&D organization at a
Pharma company that includes their background and motivation, applied methodology
of design and implementation phases, as well as preliminary results, limitations, and rec-
ommendations. Chapter 4 concludes the work with key findings.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Enterprise Architecture: Definition and Evolution of the Concept
Why is centralized and layered Enterprise Architecture outdated?
Enterprise architecture (EA) is a discipline that has evolved over time to align an or-
ganization’s IT systems with its business strategies and objectives [82]. The origins of EA
can be traced back to the 1960s, when the field of information systems was emerging as a
discipline. The need for a holistic approach to manage and integrate IT systems within
organizations led to the development of the first generation of EA frameworks. These
frameworks, including the Zachman framework [83], the Open Group Architecture
Framework (TOGAF), the NIST Enterprise Architecture Model, and the Federal Enter-
prise Architecture Framework (FEAF) [84], provided a structured approach to design,
manage, and align IT capabilities with business needs via IT centralization and a layered
EA approach. Figure 1 presents an original depiction of a Centralized Layered Enterprise
Architecture, providing an aggregated view of the first generation of EA frameworks. It
illustratescentralizedlayerssuchasBusinessArchitecture,ApplicationArchitecture,Data
Architecture, and Technical Architecture, as well as core functions or teams that support
or own these layers.
Figure 1. Centralized LayeredEnterpriseArchitecture (EA)—aggregated view of the firstgeneration
of EA frameworks, created by the authors.
As EA has always been evolving alongside demanding business requirements and
theevolutionoftechnologies,aradicalchangeofthetechnologicallandscapeandbusiness
Figure 1. Centralized Layered Enterprise Architecture (EA)—aggregated view of the first generation
of EA frameworks, created by the authors.
As EA has always been evolving alongside demanding business requirements and
the evolution of technologies, a radical change of the technological landscape and business
environment over the last decades has emphasized the limitations of these frameworks.
First, the centralized and layered architecture is often inflexible and does not allow for the
rapid implementation of new digital capabilities, like cloud computing technologies and
the Internet of Things (IoT), which are becoming increasingly important for organizations
to remain competitive. Second, it may not be able to support the complex, dynamic, and
distributed IT requirements of modern organizations, especially in handling the three

--- PAGE 9 ---
Digital 2024, 4 341
main data challenges—volume, velocity, and variety. Third, the traditional approach often
results in siloed systems that do not effectively communicate and integrate with each
other, leading to redundancy and inefficiency, as well as inhibiting the transformation to a
data-driven organization.
Moreover, we argue that information silos are a consequence of inefficient EA. Silos
originate when the organizational environment does not provide the required capabilities
for efficient collaboration and information sharing between domain areas. As a result,
domains that have a focus on achieving their goals may not be motivated to put in extra
effort and resources to ensure discoverability and accessibility of their domain information
across an organization, or they do not realize if other domains could potentially benefit from
the data that they hold. For instance, someone working in participant recruitment may not
realize that making the data available for consumption can improve the work of a feasibility
selection or vice versa. This leads to a tendency for projects and domains to optimize locally,
ignoring the objectives of unlocking their silos (e.g., by building point-to-point integrations
instead of public or private APIs). Another fundamental reason for enterprise silos could
be the lack of the necessary cultural, organizational, and technological baselines coming
from the top.
To successfully navigate the complexities of data-driven transformation, organizations
need to re-evaluate their traditional EA approach and adopt a more flexible and adaptable
framework. This necessitates a shift away from the traditional centralized and layered
approach to a more modular and decentralized architecture that can quickly integrate
modern technologies and capabilities.
2.2. The Data-Driven Enterprise Architecture framework
In this chapter, we introduce the Data-Driven Enterprise Architecture (DDA) frame-
work, which we have developed as a solution to harmonize emerging trends in Enterprise
Architecture (EA), such as decentralization, modularization, democratization, socialization,
product thinking, domain-driven design (DDD), and agility, while emphasizing the critical
role of data as a strategic asset. DDA presents a paradigm shift from traditional centralized
layered architectures (see Figure 1) to distributed and federalized EAs (see Figure 2). It
focuses on creating a flexible, agile, and scalable architecture that aligns with the digital
capability needs of individual domains within the organization, while emphasizing a
cross-domain consistency and interoperability.
Digital 2024, 4, FOR PEER REVIEW 10
Figure 2. Principles of the Data-Driven Enterprise Architecture.
Notably, the DDA distinguishes from mainstream scientific concepts and business
practices due to its holistic approach. Unlike many existing approaches that tend to focus
on the transformation of application, business, and data architecture independently, DDA
emphasizes the continuous harmonization of these crucial architectural components to-
ward common domain business goals. Business practices have shown that decoupling ar-
Figure 2. Principles of the Data-Driven Enterprise Architecture.

--- PAGE 10 ---
Digital 2024, 4 342
Notably, the DDA distinguishes from mainstream scientific concepts and business
practices due to its holistic approach. Unlike many existing approaches that tend to
focus on the transformation of application, business, and data architecture independently,
DDA emphasizes the continuous harmonization of these crucial architectural components
toward common domain business goals. Business practices have shown that decoupling
architectural components over time may inadvertently lead to issues of inconsistency and
interoperability. Addressing these challenges at a later stage can often require significantly
more effort and resources compared to considering harmonization, continuous alignment,
and interoperability from the outset.
The DDA represents a pioneering framework for distributed and federated architecture
at a scale that breaks down architecture into domain-specific components, including
application, business, and data architectures, while keeping continuous harmonization
across these components and domains.
WhiletheDDAwasinitiallydesignedwithpharmaceuticalR&Dinmind, itisageneric
framework that offers fundamental architectural guidelines and principles for companies
expediting data-driven transformation. As such, it is adaptable to various industries and
can be customized and refined to align with the unique characteristics of each enterprise,
including internal and external factors such as industry, geographic location, strategic
goals, corporate culture, existing architecture, and more. In the following chapter, we will
demonstrate how the DDA was tailored to meet the specific requirements of a Pharma
company’s R&D division.
DDA Framework Principles
1. Domain decomposition
DDA promotes the decomposition of EA into autonomous domains (see Figure 3),
each logically grouped around specific business capabilities with well-defined boundaries.
This decentralized approach empowers each domain with its own autonomous Domain Ar-
chitecture (DA) that is decomposed further into Domain Application Architecture, Domain
Business Architecture, and Domain Data Architecture. While this distributed character of
an EA is aimed to foster agility, flexibility, and scalability in adapting to changing business
needs, an accelerative synergy effect is going to be achieved due to harmonization of all
components of the DA towards a common goal—to serve, enable, and accelerate Domain
Business Capabilities.
For instance, within the pharmaceutical R&D context, the Clinical Development Do-
main could incorporate the following capabilities that define its boundaries: Investigative
Staff Engagement, Study Management, Participant Data Capture, and more. Thus, the
grouping of the capabilities within one domain could be based on a common system land-
scape or stakeholders, connected business processes, and identifiable common domain
goals.
Decomposing EA into manageable domains requires strong leadership support, com-
mitment from domain experts, well-defined goals, and an understanding of the unique
value each domain contributes to the organization. It involves analyzing core business
processes, business users, system landscapes, and data flows to establish optimal domain
boundaries.
Importantly, while domain-specific business, application, and data architectures are
decentralized, the Infrastructure and Technology Layer often remains centralized to provide
a foundational backbone supporting the entire architecture. This centralized infrastructure
includes underlying technology, integration capabilities, and their governance processes,
but its extent may vary based on the organization’s specific needs.

--- PAGE 11 ---
Digital 2024, 4 343
Digital 2024, 4, FOR PEER REVIEW 11
changing business needs, an accelerative synergy eﬀect is going to be achieved due to
harmonization of all components of the DA towards a common goal—to serve, enable,
and accelerate Domain Business Capabilities.
Figure 3. Data-Driven Enterprise Architecture.
For instance, within the pharmaceutical R&D context, the Clinical Development Do-
main could incorporate the following capabilities that define its boundaries: Investigative
Staﬀ Engagement, Study Management, Participant Data Capture, and more. Thus, the
grouping of the capabilities within one domain could be based on a common system land-
scape or stakeholders, connected business processes, and identifiable common domain
goals.
Decomposing EA into manageable domains requires strong leadership support,
commitment from domain experts, well-defined goals, and an understanding of the
uniquevalueeach domaincontributes tothe organization. It involves analyzing core busi-
ness processes, business users, system landscapes, and data flows to establish optimal do-
main boundaries.
Importantly, while domain-specific business, application, and data architectures are
decentralized, the Infrastructure and Technology Layer often remains centralized to pro-
vide a foundational backbone supporting the entire architecture. This centralized infra-
structure includes underlying technology, integration capabilities, and their governance
processes, but its extent may vary based on the organization’s specific needs.
2. Productization and customer centricity
DDA places a strong emphasis on productization, transforming assets into products,
characterized by several core attributes, as follows:
• DefinitionandBoundaries:Productsarewell-definedentitieswithclearboundaries.
This means knowing exactly what the product is, what it encompasses, and what it
does not.
• Identifiable Purpose: Each product serves a distinct purpose, aligned with the or-
ganization’s ecosystem and value delivery.
• DomainOwnership:Eachproductisownedandproactivelymanagedbytherespec-
tive Domain.
• Customers or Potential Customers: Products revolve around customers, whether in-
ternal or external, ensuring alignment with their specific needs.
Figure 3. Data-Driven Enterprise Architecture.
2. Productization and customer centricity
DDA places a strong emphasis on productization, transforming assets into products,
characterized by several core attributes, as follows:
• Definition and Boundaries: Products are well-defined entities with clear boundaries.
This means knowing exactly what the product is, what it encompasses, and what it
does not.
• Identifiable Purpose: Each product serves a distinct purpose, aligned with the organi-
zation’s ecosystem and value delivery.
• Domain Ownership: Each product is owned and proactively managed by the respec-
tive Domain.
• Customers or Potential Customers: Products revolve around customers, whether
internal or external, ensuring alignment with their specific needs.
• Tangible or Measurable Value: Products are designed to generate tangible or measur-
able value, with well-defined value propositions for their customers or stakeholders.
The critical factor that sets products apart from mere assets is this focus on customers.
While the first two characteristics are also applicable to assets, the presence of customers,
whether external (such as end-customers, clients, partners, or regulatory bodies) or internal
(including other departments, teams, or domains), and the emphasis on delivering value to
them is what truly differentiates a product. Notably, not all assets are suitable for producti-
zation, and organizations should carefully evaluate their transformation into products.
Productization within DDA primarily pertains to Application and Data Architecture,
while Business Architecture guides the evolution of digital and data capabilities within data
and application products to meet business needs. This focus on productization is vital for
organizations seeking excellence in data-driven strategies for several reasons, as follows:
• Tailored Solutions: Application architecture and data products are tailored to meet
specific business needs, enhancing operational efficiency.
• Continuous Evolution: Products are designed for ongoing evolution, fostering long-
term collaboration among cross-functional domain teams throughout the product
lifecycle that differentiates from a project approach with a predefined timeline, scope,
and budget.
• Data-Driven Decision-Making: Data products empower teams with actionable in-
sights, facilitating data-driven decision-making.

--- PAGE 12 ---
Digital 2024, 4 344
• Resource Optimization: Concentrating resources on products that directly contribute
to business capabilities improves resource allocation.
• Competitive Advantage: Organizations leveraging application architecture and data
products gain a competitive edge by aligning products with customer needs and
industry trends.
• Scalability and Innovation: Products are inherently scalable and drive innovation by
encouraging creative thinking to enhance functionality and user experiences.
• Flexibility: Application architecture and data products are agile and adaptable, ensur-
ing long-term relevance.
In the context of DDA, Data and Application Products are structural components of
Domain Architectures (see examples in Table 1), providing tailored solutions that align
with the domain objectives and customer business needs, where:
• Application Product (AP)—a group of software components that provides specified
digital capabilities.
• Data Product (DP)—data entities that have a distinct purpose and value for the organi-
zation and are logically grouped for effective management and improvement. Besides
general product attributes (defined above), the additional data-specific attributes of
DPs encompass reliability (reflecting business accuracy that directly depends on the
quality of data); discoverability and understandability (encompassing self-describing
semantics, syntax, and usage metadata); composability of integral components such
as metadata, data lineage, access, and governance; and semantics.
Table 1. Productization of Domain Application and Data Architecture.
Characteristics Application Product Example Data Product Example
Definition and boundaries
(What is it? What is it not? What are the
components?)
Investigative Staff Training Application
Phase 2 Clinical Study Data for
COVID-19 Vaccine ABC
Feasibility Assessment Tool for Clinical
Studies (as software components
delivering this digital capability)
Feasibility Assessment Report for Clinical
Studies (as a combination of data
components)
Identifiable purpose
(What it serves for?)
Distributing training resources for site
staff involved in clinical studies and
recording the completion
Providing evidence of safety and
efficiency of the vaccine
A repository for a collaborative site
selection, based on their capabilities and
previous experiences with them
Support decision-making about the
feasibility of a study and incorporated
risks. Keep transparency of the decision
and ability to use it for future
assessments.
Customer(s)
(Whom it serves?)
Site staff, PII, and other study team
members
Internal: Study team, submission team,
and other R&D departments. External:
regulatory agencies, research
organizations, etc.
Study planning team and other R&D
departments and teams
Study planning team and other R&D
departments and teams, as well as
cross-organizational departments
Tangible or measurable value
(What value does it generate?
How could it be measured?)
Improved site satisfaction and clinical
trial operations (e.g., yy FTE savings, zz
points increase in the “Sponsor of choice”
assessment)
A prerequisite for an approval to market
the vaccine and receive a return on
investments. In addition, the data would
help to further investigate the disease
Increases efficiency and accuracy of the
feasibility assessment by digitalization
(e.g., xy FTE savings)
Increase in accuracy and efficiency of
decision-making about the feasibility of
the study and incorporated risks

--- PAGE 13 ---
Digital 2024, 4 345
These products serve as the foundational building blocks of Domain Roadmaps,
guiding strategic data-driven investments.
3. Actionable, Measurable, and Adaptable
The DDA framework is strategically oriented towards the continuous realization of
value through ongoing product improvement and the expansion of capabilities. To achieve
this, it is imperative to ensure that the framework is both actionable, measurable, and
adaptable.
Actionable: Actionability is driven by Domain Roadmaps, which consist of prioritized
product initiatives outlined on a Domain’s Roadmap. These product initiatives are typically
rooted in identified challenges or improvement opportunities and they come with clearly
defined, measurable value upon their implementation. For instance, within pharmaceutical
R&D, an Application Product initiative could involve the introduction of a “Feasibility
Decision Support” feature, enhancing the “Feasibility Operation” domain. This feature
might focus on predicting whether a study site in a particular country can meet enrollment
targets within specified timeframes.
Measurable: The implementation of product initiatives should yield measurable
outcomes, predefined prior to their execution. This approach enhances the efficiency and
transparency of investment decisions, aiding in the prioritization of initiatives within
Domain Roadmaps. Moreover, it enables the monitoring of value realization and provides
the flexibility to adapt when actual outcomes deviate from predefined expectations.
Adaptable: Defined actions and strategies related to product initiatives should un-
dergo regular review, based on preliminary outcomes and the resources utilized during
each realization phase. This ongoing monitoring and proactive adaptation are designed
to maximize the overall value achieved by product initiatives and to mitigate investment
risks.
For large-scale enterprises, we recommend the establishment of standardized sets of
measurable outcomes, often referred to as a “benefit realization matrix”. This matrix serves
to enhance transparency and comparability, facilitating informed decision-making and
alignment with the organization’s overarching goals.
4. Domain ownership and Federated Governance
DDA recognizes the importance of striking a balance between centralization and
decentralization through Federated Governance. To emphasize this principle, the DAA
approaches autonomous domains to take over accountability of Data and Application
Products, while a centralized DDA Governance Board plays a pivotal role in harmonizing
and aligning various aspects of data-driven architecture across different domains. Its
mission is to ensure that data-driven initiatives contribute to the overall business strategy
and drive successful digital transformation.
The DDA Governance Board acts as a collaborative forum, uniting representatives
from diverse domains, and could be extended via the introduction of IT, data manage-
ment, business units, and strategy teams. Together, they make informed decisions about
prioritizing initiatives, resource allocation, and aligning Domain Roadmaps, focusing on
strategic data and application projects that impact on digital transformation goals. Fur-
thermore, the DDA Governance Board monitors progress, evaluates performance against
value-realization metrics, and provides guidance to overcome challenges. It fosters knowl-
edge sharing, implementation of best practices, promotes data-driven decision-making,
and advocates for cross-functional consistency and interoperability.
3. Results of a Use Case of the Data-Driven Enterprise Architecture at a Pharma Company
3.1. Background of Pharma Company
Our case study focuses on a global R&D organization of one of the top five pharma-
ceutical companies (Global R&D). Given the highly regulated nature of the pharmaceutical
industry, the Pharma company is required to adhere to stringent data privacy and IT secu-

--- PAGE 14 ---
Digital 2024, 4 346
rity measures to navigate the complex regulatory landscape and fast-growing healthcare
digital ecosystem successfully.
In addition, the Pharma company faces the challenges posed by the rapid expansion of
the digital environment. This includes constantly exploring and assessing the feasibility of
the implementation of modern technologies such as generative AI, cloud computing, and
IoT, effectively managing the increasing volume, velocity, and variety of data, meeting the
heightened expectations of patients, sites, regulators, and other stakeholders for technolog-
ical innovations and fostering a culture of innovation and agility. Moreover, as the design
and architecture of each clinical trial are individual, the Pharma company must navigate
these challenges within an existing complex and dynamic Enterprise Architecture, while
focusing on regulatory compliance and high quality as leading principles. In addition,
the dynamic and complex character of the system landscape of such a large-scale global
company makes even capturing an existing architecture an enormous challenge, as an
architectural view of yesterday will not be actual today. This, in turn, creates an additional
barrier for a complex consideration of the Pharma company’s digitization initiatives.
To address these challenges, the Pharma company developed a Digital Transformation
Strategy (DTS), aiming to explore and implement strategies that leverage digital technolo-
gies to transform and accelerate clinical trial operations, bringing the best products and
outcomes for patients, sites, and the entire healthcare industry.
3.2. Methodology
The developed DTS methodology consists of four phases, as follows: Input and
Analysis, Future State Design, Build the Roadmap, and Execute the Roadmap (see Figure 4).
Digital 2024, 4, FOR PEER REVIEW 15
3.2. Methodology
The developed DTS methodology consists of four phases, as follows: Input andAnal-
ysis, Future State Design, Build the Roadmap, and Execute the Roadmap (see Figure 4).
Figure 4. Digital Transformation Strategy approach.
3.2.1. Phase I—Gain Input and Analysis
During Phase I, “Gain Input and Analysis”, all employees of the Global R&D organ-
ization, comprising approximately 10,000 individuals, were sent a short email survey to
respond to the question “What should be in a strategy for digital transformation, and how
do we enable it?”, which received over 200 responses, generating over 150 pages of ideas.
The responses underwent thorough analysis and were clustered based on relevant sys-
tems and categories, including Technology, People, Processes, Metrics, and Capabilities.
These delineated categories served as the foundational framework for the Future State
Design, as outlined in the section Phase II—Future State Design. To complement the sur-
vey, interviews with 37 stakeholders, representing the organization’s leadership, thera-
peutic areas, and key functions and programs, were conducted to further delve into this
question.
Notably, the DTS, including strategic initiatives, their structure, prioritization, met-
rics, and realization roadmap, was defined in close collaboration with core business rep-
resentatives and a company leadership team. This approach facilitated a strong alignment
between the strategy and core business needs. Moreover, as the strategy was “bottom-
up”, sourcing from the stakeholders’ digitalization demands, it ensured stakeholders’
commitment not only to the DTS definition, but also to its execution. In addition, collabo-
rative eﬀort to explore digital capability needs across diﬀerent departments created trans-
parency about common challenges, and a large volume of responses reduced risks of bias.
By grouping and categorizing the insights derived from the survey and interviews,
six key strategic pillars were derived to form the core structure of the DTS. Data Fabric
was identified as one of these key strategic pillars, receiving more than 90 out of around
200 responses, highlighting the weight of the data architecture transformation as a base-
line to enable the overall data-driven transformation of the Pharma company. Figure 5
highlights the groups of the most frequent business needs addressed towards Data Fabric
in this Phase.
Figure 4. Digital Transformation Strategy approach.
3.2.1. Phase I—Gain Input and Analysis
During Phase I, “Gain Input and Analysis”, all employees of the Global R&D orga-
nization, comprising approximately 10,000 individuals, were sent a short email survey to
respond to the question “What should be in a strategy for digital transformation, and how
do we enable it?”, which received over 200 responses, generating over 150 pages of ideas.
The responses underwent thorough analysis and were clustered based on relevant systems
and categories, including Technology, People, Processes, Metrics, and Capabilities. These
delineated categories served as the foundational framework for the Future State Design,
as outlined in the Section 3.2.2. To complement the survey, interviews with 37 stakehold-
ers, representing the organization’s leadership, therapeutic areas, and key functions and
programs, were conducted to further delve into this question.
Notably, the DTS, including strategic initiatives, their structure, prioritization, metrics,
and realization roadmap, was defined in close collaboration with core business representa-
tives and a company leadership team. This approach facilitated a strong alignment between
the strategy and core business needs. Moreover, as the strategy was “bottom-up”, sourcing
from the stakeholders’ digitalization demands, it ensured stakeholders’ commitment not
only to the DTS definition, but also to its execution. In addition, collaborative effort to
explore digital capability needs across different departments created transparency about
common challenges, and a large volume of responses reduced risks of bias.
By grouping and categorizing the insights derived from the survey and interviews,
six key strategic pillars were derived to form the core structure of the DTS. Data Fabric
was identified as one of these key strategic pillars, receiving more than 90 out of around

--- PAGE 15 ---
Digital 2024, 4 347
200 responses, highlighting the weight of the data architecture transformation as a baseline
to enable the overall data-driven transformation of the Pharma company. Figure 5 high-
lights the groups of the most frequent business needs addressed towards Data Fabric in
this Phase.
Digital 2024, 4, FOR PEER REVIEW 16
Figure 5. Business needs addressed towards Data Fabric.
3.2.2. Phase II—Future State Design
Following the presentation of the output of Phase I of the DTS to the Senior Leader-
ship Team and with their alignment to proceed, work on Phase II commenced. The objec-
tive of Phase II was to develop a future state vision for Data Fabric. Whilst the objective of
Phase I was to gain input on What should be enabled, Phase II focused on How to achieve it
with means of Data Fabric. Therefore, the approach of Phase II narrowed the core contribu-
tors to internal and external technology and data expertise.
Firstly, several workshops focusing on Data Fabric were conducted with internal ex-
perts for the following purposes:
• to brainstorm and ideate the future state of Data Fabric around the following five
categories: Technology, People, Processes, Metrics, and Capabilities
• to detail the five categories by defining four core components for each category that
correspond to the grouped and categorized needs derived from Phase I (see Figure
A1 in Appendix A)
The collaborative assessment, categorization, and prioritization of the insights by in-
ternal experts was a preliminary step to define a target vision of Data Fabric at the R&D
organization of the Pharma company. During the next step, the project team assessed a
Data Fabric concept outside the Pharma company’s ecosystem including its capabilities,
industry experience, core vendors, and external experts’ recommendations, as well as al-
ternative approaches such as Data Mesh and their compatibility. This brought the busi-
ness needs of the Pharma company and Data Fabric capabilities closer, including the im-
plementation of best practices.
The analysis resulted in the recognition of the fact that trying to fulfill the defined
business needs as fragmented capabilities of Data Fabric will have an extremely limited
outcome and a more fundamental and future-oriented data architecture framework, and
that incorporating organizational and mindset changes was required. This framework
should lay the foundations for steadily enabling and progressively addressing the evolv-
ing business needs in the data and digitalization area. One of the reasons for this is a rapid
transformation of the technological and business environment that impacts the business
requirements and expectations. Thus, the business needs addressed today may be less
relevant in the future, whilst their implementation could require years, especially in a
large-scale organization with a complex and dynamic EA, similar to that at the Pharma
company.
Figure 5. Business needs addressed towards Data Fabric.
3.2.2. Phase II—Future State Design
Following the presentation of the output of Phase I of the DTS to the Senior Leadership
Team and with their alignment to proceed, work on Phase II commenced. The objective of
Phase II was to develop a future state vision for Data Fabric. Whilst the objective of Phase
I was to gain input on What should be enabled, Phase II focused on How to achieve it with
means of Data Fabric. Therefore, the approach of Phase II narrowed the core contributors to
internal and external technology and data expertise.
Firstly, several workshops focusing on Data Fabric were conducted with internal
experts for the following purposes:
• to brainstorm and ideate the future state of Data Fabric around the following five
categories: Technology, People, Processes, Metrics, and Capabilities
• to detail the five categories by defining four core components for each category that
correspond to the grouped and categorized needs derived from Phase I (see Figure A1
in Appendix A)
The collaborative assessment, categorization, and prioritization of the insights by
internal experts was a preliminary step to define a target vision of Data Fabric at the R&D
organization of the Pharma company. During the next step, the project team assessed a Data
Fabric concept outside the Pharma company’s ecosystem including its capabilities, industry
experience, core vendors, and external experts’ recommendations, as well as alternative
approaches such as Data Mesh and their compatibility. This brought the business needs of
the Pharma company and Data Fabric capabilities closer, including the implementation of
best practices.
The analysis resulted in the recognition of the fact that trying to fulfill the defined
business needs as fragmented capabilities of Data Fabric will have an extremely limited
outcome and a more fundamental and future-oriented data architecture framework, and
that incorporating organizational and mindset changes was required. This framework
should lay the foundations for steadily enabling and progressively addressing the evolving
business needs in the data and digitalization area. One of the reasons for this is a rapid
transformation of the technological and business environment that impacts the business

--- PAGE 16 ---
Digital 2024, 4 348
requirements and expectations. Thus, the business needs addressed today may be less
relevant in the future, whilst their implementation could require years, especially in a large-
scale organization with a complex and dynamic EA, similar to that at the Pharma company.
As a result, the Pharma company’s Data Fabric strategy was primarily aimed at
establishing the foundation of Data Fabric, enabling iterative definition, implementation,
and progressive evolution of its capabilities, rather than solidly focusing on implementing
identified Data Fabric business needs. For that purpose, we created a Federated Leadership
Model (FLM) that grounded the base for the Data Fabric approach (see Figure 6).
Digital 2024, 4, FOR PEER REVIEW 17
As a result, the Pharma company’s Data Fabric strategy was primarily aimed at es-
tablishing the foundation of Data Fabric, enabling iterative definition, implementation,
and progressive evolutionof its capabilities,rather than solidlyfocusing onimplementing
identified Data Fabric business needs. For that purpose, we created a Federated Leader-
ship Model (FLM) that grounded the base for the Data Fabric approach (see Figure 6).
Figure 6. Data Fabric approach.
The FLM inherits a lot from modern organizational structures (e.g., matrix, flat, net-
work, and others). It significantly diﬀerentiates from traditional organizational models
that have functional or divisional pyramidal structures, impacting decision-making, com-
munication, flexibility, and teamwork. Traditional organizational models are primarily
based on a top-down hierarchy and have a direct-and-control leadership style. They, and
their combinations, are the most common models for large-scale companies because they
provide stability and foster functional specialization of employees, boosting accountabil-
ity and eﬃciency. However, the traditional models are prone to generate silos between
the teams, especially below the leadership levels. As information silos became one of the
majorbarriersinthewayofdata-driventransformation,companiesstartedtorethinktheir
organizations towards more cross-functional teams, flexible and decentralized structures,
more flat hierarchy, and a less directive leadership style that promotes more autonomy
and responsibility of the teams.
The Global R&D function has evolved from standard hierarchical structures incorpo-
rating elements of modern agile organizational models over time. The FLM did not aim
to reshape the oﬃcial organizational structure of the Global R&D organization, but rather
to generate an additional virtual federated layer upon the existing one. This approach re-
duced the size of organizational change and, consequently, the risk of resistance. How-
ever, as the employees were assigned additional tasks according to their FLM roles (on
top of their existing responsibilities), convincing them of the added value of their extra
eﬀort not only for the whole organization, but also for their individual functions was re-
quired. The second key success factor was a leadership support that prioritized the topic
and promoted its significance for the Pharma company.
Thus, the FLM embedded agility and cross-functional collaboration between silos
withinthecurrentorganizationalstructuretoeﬀectivelydrivedata-driveninitiatives.This
allows key knowledge brokers to share and push requirements and solutions for the
Figure 6. Data Fabric approach.
The FLM inherits a lot from modern organizational structures (e.g., matrix, flat, net-
work, and others). It significantly differentiates from traditional organizational models
that have functional or divisional pyramidal structures, impacting decision-making, com-
munication, flexibility, and teamwork. Traditional organizational models are primarily
based on a top-down hierarchy and have a direct-and-control leadership style. They, and
their combinations, are the most common models for large-scale companies because they
provide stability and foster functional specialization of employees, boosting accountability
and efficiency. However, the traditional models are prone to generate silos between the
teams, especially below the leadership levels. As information silos became one of the
major barriers in the way of data-driven transformation, companies started to rethink their
organizations towards more cross-functional teams, flexible and decentralized structures,
more flat hierarchy, and a less directive leadership style that promotes more autonomy and
responsibility of the teams.
The Global R&D function has evolved from standard hierarchical structures incorpo-
rating elements of modern agile organizational models over time. The FLM did not aim to
reshape the official organizational structure of the Global R&D organization, but rather to
generate an additional virtual federated layer upon the existing one. This approach reduced
the size of organizational change and, consequently, the risk of resistance. However, as
the employees were assigned additional tasks according to their FLM roles (on top of their
existing responsibilities), convincing them of the added value of their extra effort not only
for the whole organization, but also for their individual functions was required. The second
key success factor was a leadership support that prioritized the topic and promoted its
significance for the Pharma company.

--- PAGE 17 ---
Digital 2024, 4 349
Thus, the FLM embedded agility and cross-functional collaboration between silos
within the current organizational structure to effectively drive data-driven initiatives. This
allows key knowledge brokers to share and push requirements and solutions for the benefit
of both Global R&D’s stakeholders, such as therapeutic areas, sites, and study participants,
and internal users at a higher pace, with increased oversight and adaptability.
As depicted in Figure 6, the FLM defines the following three core elements:
1. Leadership: Data Domain (DD) leadership organizations responsible for defining
directions of DD evolvement, representing DD, and driving cross-domain alignments.
2. Execution: Cross-functional and autonomous DD teams that have end-to-end ac-
countability for DD Data Products (DPs) and drive the execution of DD strategies and
roadmaps. In addition to DD Teams, the FLM defines Data Fabric High Performing
Teams (HPTs) that are responsible for implementing integration, data visualization, a
shared semantic layer, and other data engineering tasks, as defined by the DD Teams.
3. Journey: The Data Fabric Maturity Journey is represented by the iterative implemen-
tation and steady evolution of Data Fabric capabilities that are driven by DD business
needs and derived from DD roadmaps.
3.2.3. Phase III—Roadmap
TheobjectiveofPhaseIIIistodefinearoadmapfromthecurrentstatetotheenvisioned
future state of the Data Fabric at the Global R&D. At the onset of this phase, an up-to-
date overview of the system landscape and data architecture was not available, making it
challenging to establish an architectural starting point for the roadmap. Creating such an
overview would require the implementation of tools and processes for EA management,
which was not feasible within the defined time horizon. Nonetheless, valuable insights
about the AS-IS application and data architecture, as well as forthcoming changes, were
gleaned from several related ongoing projects. This supports one of our key findings about
the need of continuous alignment with correlated ongoing initiatives to maximize the
overall benefits of any transformational program.
In addition, the outcomes of Phases I and II provided a broad business view of the
current state and identified pain points. By aligning these architectural and business inputs
with the defined future vision, we have defined a Data Fabric roadmap (see Figure 7).
Digital 2024, 4, FOR PEER REVIEW 18
benefit of both Global R&D’s stakeholders, such as therapeutic areas, sites, and study par-
ticipants, and internal users at a higher pace, with increased oversight and adaptability.
As depicted in Figure 6, the FLM defines the following three core elements:
1. Leadership: Data Domain (DD) leadership organizations responsible for defining di-
rections of DD evolvement, representing DD, and driving cross-domain alignments.
2. Execution: Cross-functional and autonomous DD teams that have end-to-end ac-
countability for DD Data Products (DPs) and drive the execution of DD strategies
and roadmaps. In addition to DD Teams, the FLM defines Data Fabric High Perform-
ing Teams (HPTs) that are responsible for implementing integration, data visualiza-
tion, a shared semantic layer, and other data engineering tasks, as defined by the DD
Teams.
3. Journey: The Data Fabric Maturity Journey is represented by the iterative implemen-
tationandsteady evolutionof Data Fabric capabilitiesthat are driven by DDbusiness
needs and derived from DD roadmaps.
3.2.3. Phase III—Roadmap
The objective of Phase III is to define a roadmap from the current state to the envi-
sioned future state of the Data Fabric at the Global R&D.At the onset of this phase, an up-
to-date overview of the system landscape and data architecture was not available, making
it challenging to establish an architectural starting point for the roadmap. Creating such
an overview would require the implementation of tools and processes for EA manage-
ment, which was not feasible within the defined time horizon. Nonetheless, valuable in-
sights about the AS-IS application and data architecture, as well as forthcoming changes,
were gleaned from several related ongoing projects. This supports one of our key findings
about the need of continuous alignment with correlated ongoing initiatives to maximize
the overall benefits of any transformational program.
In addition, the outcomes of Phases I and II provided a broad business view of the
current state and identified pain points. By aligning these architectural and business in-
puts with the defined future vision, we have defined a Data Fabric roadmap (see Figure
7).
Figure 7. Data Fabric roadmap.
Phase I: Foundation of Data Fabric
Figure 7. Data Fabric roadmap.

--- PAGE 18 ---
Digital 2024, 4 350
Phase I: Foundation of Data Fabric
Phase I is anchored in the FLM, where data leaders take ownership of the data vision
and roadmap within their designated DDs. These DD leads orchestrate key stakeholders,
define objectives, and drive execution. The core components of Phase I, as depicted in
Figure 7, are as follows:
1. Data Ownership Model that, in turn, consists of the following:
a. DDs and their leadership organizations
b. DPs are the most valuable data for the organization that is grouped to manage
it effectively. They are defined and owned by DDs.
c. DD roadmaps represent an actionable way to address, align, implement, and
track the continuous improvement of the DPs.
2. Federated governance framework that defines roles, responsibilities, decision-making,
and escalation pathways, enabling the efficient handling of data in a federated way.
Phase I necessitates significant organizational, functional, and cultural transformations
in how the Global R&D data are organized and governed. It involves defining which teams
are accountable for data, clarifying their roles and responsibilities and establishing the
role of data and their value within the organization. However, it can be challenging to
immediately discern the tangible benefits associated with each element of the foundational
phase, as their value may be realized over time, during the subsequent execution phase.
Consequently, a comprehensive change management effort was required to socialize the
framework. This effort involved conducting pre-assessments and presenting the draft
framework to stakeholders to integrate their feedback and refine the roadmap. This
approach contributed to a smooth and steady acceptance of the change and fostered
stakeholder commitment.
Phase II: Execution and Maturing of Data Fabric Capabilities
Phase II is dedicated to the execution of DD roadmaps, leading to the maturation
of Data Fabric capabilities. A core principle of this framework is its business orientation,
whereby the evolution of Data Fabric capabilities is primarily driven by DD business needs,
as defined in their roadmaps. DD teams are empowered with Data Fabric HPTs to drive
the execution of their objectives, ensuring conceptual, architectural, and technological
consistency in data engineering and integration initiatives.
Phase II consists of the following three core components:
• DDs execute their strategies and roadmaps, empowered by Data Fabric HPTs.
• Data Fabric HPTs implement integration, data visualization, and a shared semantic layer.
• The Data Fabric Maturity Journey, which represents the progression of Data Fabric
capabilities through structured levels, with an increasing ability to deliver.
Despite being named Data Fabric, Phase I of the strategy incorporates most elements
from the Data Mesh concept, showing that Data Mesh and Data Fabric can complement
each other effectively. Whilst Data Mesh lays the organizational and mindset foundation for
how enterprise data are organized and managed, Data Fabric establishes the technological
basis for the data architecture. By carefully blending the most suitable components of these
two concepts and customizing them to fit the specific needs of the enterprise, we developed
a comprehensive roadmap for implementation and evolution.
The ongoing debate between proponents of Data Mesh and Data Fabric often revolves
around the perceived superiority of one approach over the other. However, our case study
has demonstrated the effectiveness of a complementary approach. This approach has
garnered high acceptance and commitment from stakeholders and leadership, validating
its efficacy thus far.
By embracing the strengths of both paradigms, the Pharma company has fostered an
environment where organizational and technical aspects converge harmoniously. The FLM
adopted during Phase I enabled data leaders of distributed and autonomous DDs to steer
the data vision and roadmaps, facilitating the seamless orchestration of key stakeholders
and efficient execution of objectives.

--- PAGE 19 ---
Digital 2024, 4 351
As the Pharma company advances into Phase II, the focus shifts towards execution
and the maturation of Data Fabric capabilities. Establishing Data Fabric HPTs to implement
integration, data visualization, and a shared semantic layer, ensuring consistency and
cohesiveness across data engineering and integration initiatives, will empower DDs in
the execution of their designated DD roadmaps. The business orientation at the core
of the framework should emphasize that DD roadmaps, driven by business needs, take
precedence in guiding the evolution of Data Fabric capabilities. This approach allows the
organization to respond dynamically to emerging challenges and to capitalize on new
opportunities, while continuously improving its data architecture.
Data Mesh and Data Fabric can complement each other effectively. While Data Mesh
lays the organizational and mindset foundation for how enterprise data are organized and
managed, Data Fabric establishes the technological basis for the data architecture.
3.2.4. Phase IV—Execute the roadmap
The execution of the Data Fabric Roadmap commenced with the Phase I “Data Fabric
Foundation” components such as the Data Ownership Model (DOM) and the Federated
Governance Framework (see Figure 8).
steer the data vision and roadmaps, facilitating the seamless orchestration of key stake-
holders and eﬃcient execution of objectives.
As the Pharma company advances into Phase II, the focus shifts towards execution
and the maturation of Data Fabric capabilities. Establishing Data Fabric HPTs to imple-
ment integration, data visualization, and a shared semantic layer, ensuring consistency
and cohesiveness across data engineering and integration initiatives, will empower DDs
in the execution of their designated DD roadmaps. The business orientation at the core of
the framework should emphasize that DD roadmaps, driven by business needs, take prec-
edence in guiding the evolution of Data Fabric capabilities. This approach allows the or-
ganization to respond dynamically to emerging challenges and to capitalize on new op-
portunities, while continuously improving its data architecture.
Data Mesh and Data Fabric can complement each other effectively. While Data Mesh
lays the organizational and mindset foundation for how enterprise data are organized
and managed, Data Fabric establishes the technological basis for the data architecture.
3.2.4. Phase IV—Execute the roadmap
The execution of the Data Fabric Roadmap commenced with the Phase I “Data Fabric
Foundation” components such as the Data Ownership Model (DOM) and the Federated
Governance Framework (see Figure 8).
Figure 8. Data Ownership Model and Governance Framework.
Data Ownership Model (DOM)
The DOM operates as a catalyst to amplify visibility, quality, discoverability, and re-
usability of the Global R&D data, thus expediting the cultivation of a data-driven culture.
The key objectives of the DOM are as follows:
• Transparency of Global R&D Data: By structuring DDs and DPs, the DOM en-
hances the transparency of data, ensuring its clear organization and accessibility.
• Eﬀective Data Organization: The DOM defines the most valuable data for the organ-
ization, eﬃciently organizing and managing it to maximize its utility.
• Selective Data Improvement: The DOM facilitates targeted improvements in the or-
ganization’s data and their governance, guided by the DD roadmap.
• Enhanced Decision-Making: Business-oriented data ownership is identified, pro-
moting informed decision-making and data quality enhancement.
Figure 8. Data Ownership Model and Governance Framework.
Data Ownership Model (DOM)
The DOM operates as a catalyst to amplify visibility, quality, discoverability, and
reusability of the Global R&D data, thus expediting the cultivation of a data-driven culture.
The key objectives of the DOM are as follows:
• Transparency of Global R&D Data: By structuring DDs and DPs, the DOM enhances
the transparency of data, ensuring its clear organization and accessibility.
• Effective Data Organization: The DOM defines the most valuable data for the organi-
zation, efficiently organizing and managing it to maximize its utility.
• Selective Data Improvement: The DOM facilitates targeted improvements in the
organization’s data and their governance, guided by the DD roadmap.
• Enhanced Decision-Making: Business-oriented data ownership is identified, promot-
ing informed decision-making and data quality enhancement.
• Autonomous DDs: Autonomous DDs are established, reducing reliance on central
data teams and enabling end-to-end accountability for DPs within each domain.
Whilst the cornerstone of the DOM comprises the following three core constituents:
Data Domains (DDs), Data Products (DPs), and DD Roadmaps, the Federated Governance
Framework creates an underlying foundation for its efficient operation and governance.
1. Data Domains

--- PAGE 20 ---
Digital 2024, 4 352
In our case study, DDs signify logically clustered data elements, organized around
the organization’s specific R&D business capabilities, and is characterized by well-defined
contextual boundaries and dedicated ownership.
Defining the optimal boundaries for DDs necessitated a comprehensive assessment of
the business, data, and systems architecture of the Global R&D organization. This assess-
ment encompassed the analysis of the related Business Operations Process Frameworks
and the Organization Breakdown Structure, representing the business architecture, as well
as data flows and classifications that pertain to data architecture. A novel Application
Architecture Framework (AAF) was also integrated, including its Domain and Product
Structures, as well as the business capabilities they support.
This comprehensive approach allowed us to develop a DD structure, as illustrated in
Figure 9.
• Autonomous DDs: Autonomous DDs are established, reducing reliance on central
data teams and enabling end-to-end accountability for DPs within each domain.
Whilst the cornerstone of the DOM comprises the following three core constituents:
Data Domains(DDs),DataProducts(DPs),andDDRoadmaps,theFederatedGovernance
Framework creates an underlying foundation for its eﬃcient operation and governance.
1. Data Domains
In our case study, DDs signify logically clustered data elements, organized around
the organization’s specificR&D business capabilities,andischaracterized bywell-defined
contextual boundaries and dedicated ownership.
Defining the optimal boundaries for DDs necessitated a comprehensive assessment
of the business, data, and systems architecture of the Global R&D organization. This as-
sessment encompassed the analysis of the related Business Operations Process Frame-
works and the Organization BreakdownStructure, representing the business architecture,
as well as data flows and classifications that pertain to data architecture.A novelApplica-
tion Architecture Framework (AAF) was also integrated, including its Domain and Prod-
uct Structures, as well as the business capabilities they support.
This comprehensive approach allowed us to develop a DD structure, as illustrated in
Figure 9.
Figure 9. Data Domain structure.
The first column of Figure 9 depicts the initial six DDs where the first four DDs en-
compass the logically grouped Global R&D data, while certain DDs and Subdomains like
Product, Safety, Quality, and Regulatory Management lie outside the functional purview
of the Global R&D, yet contain data that are managed within the organization or holds
close relevance. Despite the apparent low granularity of the DD structure, these broad DD
areas are further divided into distinct subdomains, each inheriting the characteristics of
its parent domain. The last column on the right of Figure 9 displays the mapping of DDs
to APs (the Application Architecture Products defined within the AAF).
Figure 9. Data Domain structure.
The first column of Figure 9 depicts the initial six DDs where the first four DDs
encompass the logically grouped Global R&D data, while certain DDs and Subdomains like
Product, Safety, Quality, and Regulatory Management lie outside the functional purview
of the Global R&D, yet contain data that are managed within the organization or holds
close relevance. Despite the apparent low granularity of the DD structure, these broad DD
areas are further divided into distinct subdomains, each inheriting the characteristics of its
parent domain. The last column on the right of Figure 9 displays the mapping of DDs to
APs (the Application Architecture Products defined within the AAF).
A striking parallel was identified between the DOM and AAF objectives during the
DD structure definition. Both frameworks share the common goal of transforming the
EA towards a more adaptable, business-oriented model, in alignment with architectural
trends like Product Thinking, Domain-Driven Design (DDD), modularization, and de-
centralization. The fundamental distinction lies in their focus whereby AAF targets the
application layer transformation, while DOM addresses data architecture optimization.
Since data and applications are inherently interdependent, separating their architectures

--- PAGE 21 ---
Digital 2024, 4 353
into disparate structures would introduce unnecessary complexity and hinder potential
synergies. Moreover, maintaining separate data and application architecture structures
could introduce the risk of conflicts between these structures and their respective objectives,
necessitating constant alignment efforts and consequently increasing operational costs.
Although the AAF had commenced earlier than the DOM and had already defined
a new Application Domain (AD) structure with defined APs and cross-functional teams
“Squads” collaborating to evolve these APs, both frameworks exhibited strong interde-
pendence. Recognizing this dependency and the importance of synchronization and
harmonization, the DD structure was intentionally designed to align with the AD structure.
In Figure 10, the mapping of the AAF to the DD architecture is depicted. It shows that
the Pharma company’s DDs closely mirrored the AD structure, with specific exceptions that
are driven by logical data flow groupings and classifications. It is crucial to acknowledge
that a failure to consider data flows and their lifecycle when defining DD boundaries, and
a mere blind integration into the AD structure, holds the potential to inadvertently foster
the creation of new data silos. Such silos would counteract the fundamental objectives of
the DOM, thereby jeopardizing the intended fluidity of data movement and accessibility
across the organizational landscape.
ergies. Moreover, maintaining separate data and application architecture structures could
introduce the risk of conflicts between these structures and their respective objectives, ne-
cessitating constant alignment eﬀorts and consequently increasing operational costs.
Although theAAF had commenced earlier than the DOM and had already defined a
new Application Domain (AD) structure with defined APs and cross-functional teams
“Squads” collaborating to evolve these APs, both frameworks exhibited strong interde-
pendence. Recognizing this dependency and the importance of synchronization and har-
monization, the DD structure was intentionally designed to align with the AD structure.
In Figure 10, the mapping of the AAF to the DD architecture is depicted. It shows
that the Pharma company’s DDs closely mirrored the AD structure, with specific excep-
tions that are driven by logical data flow groupings and classifications. It is crucial to
acknowledge that a failure to consider data flows and their lifecycle when defining DD
boundaries, and a mere blind integration into the AD structure, holds the potential to in-
advertently foster the creation of new data silos. Such silos would counteract the funda-
mental objectives of the DOM, thereby jeopardizing the intended fluidity of data move-
ment and accessibility across the organizational landscape.
Thus, certain DDs converge or diverge from corresponding ADs based on shared or
distinct data flows. For instance, the DD “Planning and Forecasting” eﬀectively merges
two ADs, “Program Planning” and “R&D Capacity, Analytics, and Planning”, due to the
commonality of data feeds to these groups. Conversely, the DD “Investigative Staﬀ En-
gagement” maintains a direct one-to-one mapping with an AP of the AD “Clinical Devel-
opment”, reflecting specific data-related considerations. These exceptions illustrate the
flexibility and adaptability of the framework, reflecting the dynamic relationship between
application and data architecture.
Figure 10. Data-Driven Enterprise Architecture at the Pharma company’s R&D organization—cur-
rent state.
Figure 10. Data-Driven Enterprise Architecture at the Pharma company’s R&D organization—
current state.
Thus, certain DDs converge or diverge from corresponding ADs based on shared or
distinct data flows. For instance, the DD “Planning and Forecasting” effectively merges
two ADs, “Program Planning” and “R&D Capacity, Analytics, and Planning”, due to
the commonality of data feeds to these groups. Conversely, the DD “Investigative Staff
Engagement” maintains a direct one-to-one mapping with an AP of the AD “Clinical
Development”, reflecting specific data-related considerations. These exceptions illustrate
the flexibility and adaptability of the framework, reflecting the dynamic relationship
between application and data architecture.
This strategic alignment is further affirmed by the assignment of DD Lead roles to the
corresponding Business Domain Leads. This move underscores the ongoing integration of
the AAF and DD frameworks, solidifying their synergy.
Drawing from classic strategic management methodologies and the principles of
effective change management, securing stakeholder commitment emerges as a key for
the success of transformative endeavors [85–87]. This necessitated a concerted effort to
garner approval and alignment from DD Leads and Teams, ensuring organic assimilation

--- PAGE 22 ---
Digital 2024, 4 354
and enduring utility of the framework. The added complexity of DD Teams and Leads
concurrently taking on new roles alongside their existing responsibilities underscored
the need for comprehensively articulating the change’s value proposition—both for the
organization as a whole and for each specific function. This involved a series of thorough
reviews, assessments, and iterative refinements of the proposed structure and approach,
conducted collaboratively with each DD team.
Furthermore, this aligned yet adaptable structure garnered approval and acceptance
from the Senior Leadership Team, as well as from AAF Business and Technical Domain
Leads, marking the commencement of the DOM implementation (see implementation
approach details in Figure A2).
This intentional alignment, coupled with strategic exceptions, underscores the value
of continuous collaboration and steady integration of the AAF and DOM frameworks. This
approach should foster the future organic growth of the DDA, contributing to seamless co-
ordination between application capabilities and data assets, as well as the organic evolution
of the EA through well-coordinated efforts.
2. Data Products
Within the architecture of DDs, the foundational building blocks are DPs that are
defined as data entities that are important for the global R&D function’s business. These
are grouped and organized for effective management and improvement. The key attributes
of DPs encompass the following:
• Value on its own: DPs are selective combinations of data entities that actively support
the organization’s business capabilities and subsequently furnish tangible business
value. This inherent value is characterized by self-sufficiency, rendering each DP
meaningful in its autonomous context or “on its own”. Thus, for instance, metadata
could not be classified as a DP because it has no meaning without a related dataset.
• Domain Ownership: The DOM framework embodies a principle of entrusting the
stewardship, accountability, and progressive improvements of DPs to respective DDs.
While individual DP ownership is not mandated initially (only DD ownership), it
remains a dynamic prerogative for DD teams, with their Leads, to implement it, if
needed. This approach provided more flexibility and autonomy to DDs and reduced
the framework implementation’s complexity.
• Reliability: A hallmark of DPs lies in their capacity to faithfully mirror business
accuracy. To do so, a DP is adhering to quality benchmarks tailored to its distinctive
purpose. For instance, clinical data for regulatory submissions adhere to stringent
quality standards in terms of consistency, completeness, and accuracy, but could be
less stringent in terms of timeliness because it might imply lags between the trial event
occurring and its capture in a Clinical Trial Management (CTM) system. However,
timeliness of data captured from IoT devices could be critical to generate a valid
insight. Consequently, a DP should have a clearly defined purpose that determines
its quality requirements, which satisfy it becoming reliable. However, together with
the evolution of a DP and extension of use cases, the purposes of DPs will also be
extended. For example, a data model that consumes, among others, a participant
recruitment DP could generate some valuable insights for a reduction in retention
rates and could be incorporated into recruitment operations. In this case, based on
the new consumption purposes, the DP could have extended quality standards (e.g.,
additional metadata could be recorded). It is notable that although each DP has its
unique purpose, all of them should contribute to the common vision defined for a DD.
• Discoverability and Understandability: DPs are seamlessly discoverable through
standard tools like data catalogs, ensuring their accessibility within the system land-
scape. Additionally, their inherent structure promotes self-describing semantics, syn-
tax, usage, and inter-relationships.
• Composability: DPs consist of one or more constituent datasets, serving as their
fundamental building blocks. Beyond datasets, other integral components such as

--- PAGE 23 ---
Digital 2024, 4 355
Metadata, Data Lineage, Data Access and Governance, and Semantics contribute to the
holistic identity of a DP. Comparable to the assembly of Lego blocks or a Rubik’s cube,
where each individual block has a limited meaning, while their logical composition
into a DP generates a value [88].
The conceptualization of DP characteristics was underpinned by findability, accessibil-
ity, interoperability, and reusability (FAIR) principles [89] and the foundational tenets of
Data Mesh [90] such as product thinking for data, embodying the individual needs and
organizational and cultural aspects of the Global R&D.
Table A1 summarizes DPs that were defined by corresponding DD Leads and their
teams. However, it is now only the initial overview that depicts which data are produced
and consumed for operational purposes. In future, we expect that with the evolution of the
framework and the Global R&D’s maturity along the digital transformation journey, the
defined DPs will also evolve, by expanding their use cases, and new DPs will emerge.
Our DP methodology employs a DP card system that consolidates essential details
about the DP, including DD, Name, Purpose, Stakeholders, Data Management and Gov-
ernance specifics, Systems and Access information, and Business Process insights, in a
standardized and structured manner (see Figure A3). Notably, the DP card design strikes a
balance between two contrasting aims—reducing the number of DP card fields to prevent
resistance from DD teams and avoiding overlap with other tools (e.g., data catalog)—
while simultaneously broadening the scope of DP card fields to provide comprehensive
information about DPs.
By implementing DP cards, the Global R&D aims to offer a practical solution to the
challenge of data discoverability and to dismantle data silos. Previously, users encountered
difficulties when searching for and accessing data, even though several data catalogs
were available. Furthermore, identifying the data’s origins, lineage, associated business
processes, system sources, and relevant contact person or owner were complex tasks.
The DP cards will be consolidated into a DP catalog, functioning as a centralized “one-
point-shop” for pivotal data. This approach should enhance transparency, discoverability,
understandability, and the reusability of the organization’s data throughout the entire
company. Notably, the current project phase was more focused to define the DP card
structure and gather the DP information in a simple Excel template, while still exploring
a specific tool for its user-friendly maintenance and discoverability in the future. This
approach steadily defines the business requirements towards the required tool, whilst
continuing to fine-tune the approach.
Another aspect of the DP cards involves the consolidation of DP initiatives and
enhancement needs (see Figure 11). This segment encompasses investment plans and chal-
lenges related to specific DPs, along with the anticipated value upon realization. Once these
initiatives gain approval from the relevant stakeholders and the Data Governance Council
(see the decision-making workflow of the Federated Governance), they are integrated into
the DD Roadmap. Subsequently, core implementation activities and tracking metrics for
each initiative are documented within the DP card. This structured approach establishes a
feasible and controllable method for the ongoing enhancement of the organization’s data,
aligned with their business objectives.
If we draw a parallel to the AAF, a similar product-oriented approach is employed.
While the DOM defines DPs, the AAF refers to APs. Interestingly, the alignment between
these two concepts is evident through the parallel structuring of DP and AP cards. The
DP cards encapsulate information about APs, while AP cards establish a link to the cor-
responding DPs. This strategic linkage underscores the ongoing synchronization and
harmonization of the AAF and DOM frameworks. This alignment is maintained, while
still accommodating the requisite flexibility to prioritize objectives specific to Data and
Application Architecture within each respective framework.

--- PAGE 24 ---
Digital 2024, 4 356 Digital 2024, 4, FOR PEER REVIEW 25
Figure 11. Data Product framework.
If we draw a parallel to the AAF, a similar product-oriented approach is employed.
While the DOM defines DPs, the AAF refers to APs. Interestingly, the alignment between
these two concepts is evident through the parallel structuring of DP and AP cards. The
DP cards encapsulate information about APs, while AP cards establish a link to the corre-
sponding DPs. This strategic linkage underscores the ongoing synchronization and har-
monization of the AAF and DOM frameworks. This alignment is maintained, while still
accommodating the requisite flexibility to prioritize objectives specific to Data and Appli-
cation Architecture within each respective framework.
3. Data Domain Roadmaps
Integral to the DOM framework, the DD Roadmap stands as its third foundational
component. This dynamic roadmap plays a pivotal role by aggregating prioritized DP
initiatives and illustrating them along a timeline. In essence, the DD Roadmap functions
as a strategic compass, steering the course of the evolution of the Global R&D’s data ca-
pabilities. The essence of the DD Roadmap lies not only in its temporal portrayal, but also
in its profound alignment with the Data Governance Council (DGC). This alignment con-
tributes to conceptual coherence and cross-domain consistency for data-driven initiatives
within the realm of the Global R&D. As these initiatives span diverse areas of the enter-
prise, the DGC is an essential structure to uphold a cross-functional alignment and over-
arching perspective on data-driven transformation.
In the intricate landscape of the Pharma company, the realization of complex inte-
gration initiatives is going to be handed over to the Data Fabric HPTs, entrusted with the
crucial roles of maintaining architectural and engineering consistency, while driving ef-
fective implementation. This integration cycle completes the transformation journey from
strategic envisioning to on-ground deployment, orchestrated with precision and coher-
ence.
The strategic visualization oﬀered by DD roadmaps empowers the Global R&D to
judiciously allocate resources and synchronize projects with the overarching business ob-
jectives. As the landscape of data-driven initiatives evolves, the DD Roadmap remains a
living and adaptable document, mirroring the agile nature of the organization’s data evo-
lution journey. Thus, as new initiatives emerge and existing ones are accomplished, the
DD Roadmap maintains its relevance, steering the enterprise on a synchronized and pro-
gressive path towards improved data accessibility, quality enhancement, and heightened
utility.
Figure 11. Data Product framework.
3. Data Domain Roadmaps
Integral to the DOM framework, the DD Roadmap stands as its third foundational
component. This dynamic roadmap plays a pivotal role by aggregating prioritized DP
initiativesandillustratingthemalongatimeline. Inessence, theDDRoadmapfunctionsasa
strategic compass, steering the course of the evolution of the Global R&D’s data capabilities.
The essence of the DD Roadmap lies not only in its temporal portrayal, but also in its
profound alignment with the Data Governance Council (DGC). This alignment contributes
to conceptual coherence and cross-domain consistency for data-driven initiatives within the
realm of the Global R&D. As these initiatives span diverse areas of the enterprise, the DGC
is an essential structure to uphold a cross-functional alignment and overarching perspective
on data-driven transformation.
In the intricate landscape of the Pharma company, the realization of complex inte-
gration initiatives is going to be handed over to the Data Fabric HPTs, entrusted with
the crucial roles of maintaining architectural and engineering consistency, while driving
effective implementation. This integration cycle completes the transformation journey from
strategic envisioning to on-ground deployment, orchestrated with precision and coherence.
The strategic visualization offered by DD roadmaps empowers the Global R&D to judi-
ciously allocate resources and synchronize projects with the overarching business objectives.
As the landscape of data-driven initiatives evolves, the DD Roadmap remains a living and
adaptable document, mirroring the agile nature of the organization’s data evolution journey.
Thus, as new initiatives emerge and existing ones are accomplished, the DD Roadmap
maintains its relevance, steering the enterprise on a synchronized and progressive path
towards improved data accessibility, quality enhancement, and heightened utility.
Notably, mirroring the DOM, the AAF also entails the formulation of an AD roadmap,
which serves to aggregate AP investment projects and initiatives. Moreover, the strategic
alignment between DD and AD roadmaps is distinctly apparent. Significant DD initiatives,
with implications for APs, find their place within the corresponding AD roadmap. Con-
versely, items within the AD roadmap can foster data requirements that are addressed in
the DD roadmap. This interconnection between DD and AD roadmaps underscores the
strategic alignment of these frameworks.
At the time of writing this paper, the Pharma company’s DDs had not yet defined
their DD roadmaps. However, this crucial step was scheduled to be undertaken as part
of the maturity journey, once DPs were defined and key information, including existing
challenges and improvement initiatives, was populated in DP cards.

--- PAGE 25 ---
Digital 2024, 4 357
4. Federated Governance Framework
The Federated Governance Framework lies at the backbone of the DOM, presenting
an intricate balance between centralization and decentralization. This framework serves as
the connective tissue between strategic vision of newly defined structures, such as DDs
and DPs, and operational execution, ensuring that the data-driven evolution within the
Global R&D is both guided and agile.
• Centralized Facets of Governance
Centralization within the framework manifests through the Data Governance Council
(DGC), a dynamic forum encompassing DD and AD Leads, Subject Matter Experts (SME),
and stakeholders. The DGC functions as a nexus, fostering consistent communication
channels to align and enhance the quality of data practices. This Council should ensure the
conceptual consistency and synchronization of the Global R&D’s data management strate-
gies. Moreover, it expedites decision-making, ensuring that the value of data is maximized
both in the present and the future, thereby catalyzing data-driven transformation.
For this purpose, the DGC introduces the following:
• A DGC Charter that outlines the scope and objectives for creating and managing data
governance across the Global R&D, including accountabilities for functions supporting
data management efforts across the company.
• An operational model underpinned by distinct roles, responsibilities, and a robust
decision-making framework.
• Integration with the DOM Framework to harmonize and streamline data initiatives.
Notably, the AAF also has a centralized organ—the AAF Acceleration Squad—responsible
for the continuous alignment of AD topics, supporting cross-functional decision-making and
ensuring conceptual consistency of application architecture evolution. However, even if we
imply that AAF and DD structures tend to merge over time through continuous integration and
harmonization, the DGC and AAF Acceleration Squad will exist separately, keeping their focus
on data and applications correspondingly.
• Decentralized Empowerment
Decentralization materializes through the autonomy of DD teams that are the driving
force behind their respective DD objectives, orchestrate the evolution of DPs in alignment
with their individual DD roadmaps. This decentralized approach empowers DDs to act
as stewards of their data assets, fueling continuous growth and adaptability within their
designated domains.
By entrusting DDs with ownership, the Federated Governance Framework brings data
accountability closer to the business, where core business value exists, and emboldens agile
decision-making, tailored to the specific needs and contexts of each domain. This approach
mitigates bureaucracy and accelerates responsiveness, while contributing to efficient and
aligned decision-making of the Global R&D data. By harmonizing, prioritizing, and align-
ing data initiatives and DD roadmaps with the strategic direction of the Pharma company,
the framework optimizes resource allocation, allowing for the efficient achievement of
data-driven capabilities.
Moreover, recognizing that data transcends domain boundaries, the framework en-
courages collaborative efforts between DD Leads. This cross-domain collaboration should
ensure that data initiatives are not siloed, but rather orchestrated to create synergistic effects
that amplify their impact.
One of the core objectives of the framework was to establish an efficient process of
raising, aligning, and accomplishing data decision requests, which is depicted in Figure 12.

--- PAGE 26 ---
Digital 2024, 4 358
courages collaborative eﬀorts between DD Leads. This cross-domain collaboration should
ensure that data initiatives are not siloed, but rather orchestrated to create synergistic ef-
fects that amplify their impact.
One of the core objectives of the framework was to establish an eﬃcient process of
raising, aligning, and accomplishing data decision requests, which is depicted in Figure
12.
Figure 12. Federated Governance Framework.
Decision-Making Workflow within the Federated Governance Framework
1. Raising a Data Request or Initiative: Data requests or initiatives primarily originate
at the domain level, where any DD Team member, such as a Business Owner, System
Owner, Data Steward, or Data Domain/Subdomain Lead, can identify challenges,
risks, inconsistencies, or improvement opportunities. They can raise a request using
a specific request tool or directly during the DGC meeting by nominating the topic
in advance. The Request Tool ensures that every data challenge, proposal, or initia-
tive is captured and assessed.
2. Request Intake by the DGC: The DGC reviews and takes in the request for further
assessment.
3. Assessment and Alignment: The DGC assesses the request, identifying the impacted
data scope or DPs and the scale of change using the “T-shirt approach”. This leads to
thedefinitionofstakeholderstodrivecollaborativedecision-making.IfarelevantDD
is identified, decision-making authority shifts to the DD Lead. The DD Lead aligns
the change with stakeholders, such as system owners, business owners, data stew-
ards and sponsors, and presents the suggested decision to the DGC in the regular
DGC forum. For major changes or data investment initiatives, the DGC orchestrates
a validation of the suggested decision within the context of the overarching business
strategy, technical feasibility, and alignment with data governance and architecture
principles to ensure strategic and technological viability.
4. DGC Decision: The request is approved if the assessment and alignment confirm its
validity. Otherwise, it is either rejected or postponed, pending further clarification.
5. Actions and Metrics: The DGC supports the DD Lead to define actions and metrics
for the approved request or initiative that is incorporated into DP cards.
Figure 12. Federated Governance Framework.
Decision-Making Workflow within the Federated Governance Framework
1. Raising a Data Request or Initiative: Data requests or initiatives primarily originate at
the domain level, where any DD Team member, such as a Business Owner, System
Owner, Data Steward, or Data Domain/Subdomain Lead, can identify challenges,
risks, inconsistencies, or improvement opportunities. They can raise a request using a
specific request tool or directly during the DGC meeting by nominating the topic in
advance. The Request Tool ensures that every data challenge, proposal, or initiative is
captured and assessed.
2. Request Intake by the DGC: The DGC reviews and takes in the request for further
assessment.
3. Assessment and Alignment: The DGC assesses the request, identifying the impacted
data scope or DPs and the scale of change using the “T-shirt approach”. This leads
to the definition of stakeholders to drive collaborative decision-making. If a relevant
DD is identified, decision-making authority shifts to the DD Lead. The DD Lead
aligns the change with stakeholders, such as system owners, business owners, data
stewards and sponsors, and presents the suggested decision to the DGC in the regular
DGC forum. For major changes or data investment initiatives, the DGC orchestrates a
validation of the suggested decision within the context of the overarching business
strategy, technical feasibility, and alignment with data governance and architecture
principles to ensure strategic and technological viability.
4. DGC Decision: The request is approved if the assessment and alignment confirm its
validity. Otherwise, it is either rejected or postponed, pending further clarification.
5. Actions and Metrics: The DGC supports the DD Lead to define actions and metrics
for the approved request or initiative that is incorporated into DP cards.
6. Alignment with DD Roadmap: If an approved initiative or major change request
(T-size bigger than M) impacts DP or DD scope, it is integrated into the DD Roadmap.
This integration provides a clear timeline for execution, milestones, and metrics to
monitor outcomes. The DD Roadmap serves as the guiding blueprint for the evolution
oftheGlobalR&Ddatacapabilities, ensuringsynchronizedandharmonized initiatives.
7. Execution and Iteration: Data initiatives are executed within the scope of the DD
Roadmap, led by DD Leads. As initiatives are implemented, the framework supports
an iterative approach, allowing for continuous improvement and adaptation based
on emerging needs and insights. The Data Fabric HPTs, once established (see Section

--- PAGE 27 ---
Digital 2024, 4 359
“Phase II: Execution and Maturing of Data Fabric Capabilities”), will drive the imple-
mentation of complex data engineering and integration tasks, effectively bridging the
gap between DDs and the Integration Competence Center.
The Federated Governance Framework emerges as an exquisite synthesis of the cen-
tralized leadership of the DGC and the decentralized autonomy of DDs, encapsulating
the diverse facets of a modern data ecosystem. By distributing decision-making authority,
promoting cross-domain collaboration, and aligning data initiatives with strategic goals,
the framework should empower the enterprise to harness the full potential of its data
assets.
As of the time of writing this paper, the Federated Governance Framework, in con-
junction with the DGC and its operational model, was in the process of establishment.
Consequently, we cannot furnish specific evidence of its acceptance or the realization of its
value, at this point. However, it is anticipated that this framework will persistently evolve
and adapt, drawing from the insights garnered through its iterative implementation.
3.3. Preliminary Results
The current Data Domain (DD) structure at the Global R&D, though aligned with the
Application Domain (AD) structure, also reveals deviations, arising from the logical group-
ing of data flows. This underscores the reality that achieving a harmonized Data-Driven
Architecture (DDA) necessitates an incremental approach, especially within the complexi-
ties of a large-scale organization, featuring a multitude of stakeholders and intricate system
and business process landscapes. Consequently, the present DD structure stands as an
interim consensus towards the harmonized DDA vision where data, applications, and
business structures converge towards common domain objectives.
However, the alignment and integration extend beyond the DD and AD structures.
As is summarized in Table A2, the journey towards harmonization encompasses various
facets of the DOM and the AAF framework such as Products, Roadmaps, and Feder-
ated Governance mechanisms. It is crucial to acknowledge that the Pharma company’s
DDA framework is not aimed at realizing an ideal, fully integrated state, but rather an
optimal balance of harmonization and flexibility of the DOM and AAF. This optimiza-
tion implies incorporating strategic distinctions that preserve the necessary flexibility to
prioritize objectives that are specific to Data and Application Architecture within each
corresponding framework.
The essence of such a phased approach cannot be underestimated, as it contributes
to the gradual assimilation of change and mitigates resistance of transformative shifts,
enhancing stakeholder commitment. Despite the potential inefficiencies related to entering
and exiting interim phases in terms of effort, communication, and time, this approach
yields significant socio-psychological impacts and overall positive outcomes. Empirical
validation of this approach emerged from the Global R&D case study. While evaluating
potential DD structures initially favored the full integration of the AAF and DOM, the
complexity of the existing EA and the size of the incorporated change perceived risks of
internal resistance and associated costs outweighed the potential cost-effectiveness of the
immediate, complete harmonization of the frameworks.
This experience gives rise to a vital methodological insight, whereby significant
changes should incorporate one or more incremental interim phases. The number of
required interim phases depends on a range of factors, including the size of the change,
corporate culture, organizational structure, complexity, and the organization’s scale.
Each big change should incorporate one or more interim phases.
Moreover, if the project faces social resistance to the change, a step back to the previous
phase and a re-evaluation of the maturity journey towards the target view could be needed.
This incremental approach is an effective instrument to manage the overall success of the
digital transformation being a socio-technological transformation with a strong dominance
of social aspects.

--- PAGE 28 ---
Digital 2024, 4 360
In essence, the current alignment with deviations reflects the strategic approach that
seeks to create a flexible yet coherent framework, fostering a balance between the ideal
DDA vision and the realities of implementation within a dynamic organization like the
Pharma company. This strategic evolution, guided by the principles of incremental change
and informed decision-making, positions the Pharma company to seamlessly adapt its
architecture over time, while remaining responsive to the shifting demands of its industry
and stakeholders.
Although continuous value-realization is a core principle of the DDA, it is a subject of
extensive debates [77,78,80,81,84] and often extends over the long term. The success of this
phase primarily manifests in its acceptance and commitment within the organization, as
the DDA progresses along its maturity journey.
Evidence of this progress is drawn from the Stakeholders Feedback Survey, directed at
the Domain Leads, featuring the following three key questions:
1. In the journey to embed DDA, what has helped you the most? (a free-text question)
Responses provided insights, with the majority highlighting collaboration between
Domains and tight partnership as instrumental in the transformation journey.
2. Which aspects of support have been the most useful to date? (a dropdown question)
Eight out of ten respondents identified regular Acceleration Team Meetings as the
most supportive aspect, showcasing the importance of regular meetings between Domain
Team Leads and the Project Team.
3. In your opinion, how self-sustaining are the Domains? e.g., meeting on a regular
cadence, acting autonomously, tracking the performance of their OKRs? (with 1 being
the lowest self-sustaining and 5 being the most self-sustaining)
The analysis showed a high level of framework acceptance and sustainability for this
foundational phase of the project, reflected in an average score of 3.2 (with a range of 1 to
5). As the framework matures, this score is anticipated to rise, implying a reduced need for
extensive change management efforts. Currently, however, there is a recognized necessity
for an intensified socialization effort to foster a deeper understanding and broader adoption
of the DDA.
This initial phase indicates a high degree of stakeholder acceptance, with collaborative
efforts, knowledge sharing, and a community of practice emerging as significant instru-
ments for the sustainable evolution of the framework. Looking forward, an acceleration
effect on benefit realization for each DP and AP initiative is anticipated in the long term,
facilitated by the foundational principles of the DDA. However, this effect is cumulative
and may require time to manifest as the organization undergoes a transformative process.
3.4. Limitations and Recommendations
• Diverse Transformation Approaches
The process of defining and implementing the DOM at the Global R&D unveiled that
similar transformational programs were concurrently in progress across other divisions of
the Pharma company. Divisions such as Data Science and Commercial Operations were
pursuing comparable objectives, albeit with distinctive strategies. For instance, in the realm
of Commercial Operations, the distinct decision was made to omit the DD Layer. However,
this was accompanied by a heightened emphasis on DPs and their individual ownership.
This contrasts with the global R&D organization’s current approach, which delineates DD
ownership, while not explicitly accounting for individual accountability.
The existence of parallel transformational tracks beyond the Global R&D illuminates
the dynamic nature of architectural transformation within the Pharma company, where
diverse divisions adapt methodologies in alignment with their distinct contexts and re-
quirements. This observation underscores a significant proposition, whereby the pursuit
of harmonization extends beyond the AAF and DOM frameworks. It is evident that a
broader harmonization of Data Architecture frameworks across the Pharma company must

--- PAGE 29 ---
Digital 2024, 4 361
be needed. This could potentially entail the formulation of a comprehensive global Data
strategy for the Pharma company, serving as the overarching business strategy. Such a
strategy should align not only diverse architectural frameworks, but also define common
visions, principles, and definitions, while enabling efficient and flexible localization of the
strategy across the divisions.
Strategic agility, an essential factor for navigating the success of digital transforma-
tion, underscores the imperative of adapting to evolving market needs and technological
advancements [52,53,91]. Balancing centralization and decentralization in a data strategy
emerges as a pivotal approach, empowering organizations to maintain agility. Central-
ization of core data standards, principles, and governance components at a global orga-
nizational level provides a solid foundation, ensuring consistency and alignment with
overarching strategic objectives. Simultaneously, decentralizing the customization and
tailoring of data strategy elements to align with the specifics of business units or divisions
within the organization fosters adaptability and responsiveness. This balanced approach
enables organizations to swiftly adapt to evolving data needs, while upholding global con-
sistency and governance standards. It also contributes to agility in responding to changing
market dynamics and technological opportunities, thereby enhancing competitiveness in
the digital landscape.
This localization-versus-centralization balance of the data strategy is akin to defining a
common language, while allowing for local jargons and lexicons or professional terminolo-
gies used by subgroups. In this manner, diverse groups can communicate using a common
language, while retaining the flexibility to utilize a local language or professional lexicon for
specific purposes. Striking a similar balance between centralization and decentralization of
the Data strategy is crucial for the Pharma company. A corporate strategy aims to establish
a common “framework language” to ensure interoperability, while providing the necessary
agility and flexibility to adapt to division-specific needs.
Deviation from this balance towards centralization could lead to non-acceptance
and a lack of commitment, particularly if the unique needs and intricacies of individual
divisions are not adequately considered. It might also entail an unreasonable amount
of alignment effort to develop a global approach that can effectively accommodate the
diverse requirements of a large-scale organization. On the other hand, ignoring the need
for a global Data strategy and maintaining decentralized local strategies could result in
“misunderstandings” or a lack of interoperability between the divisions. For example, if
each division has a different definition of DPs and uses different technologies to store,
search, and share DPs, this approach might improve data transparency, discoverability, and
reusability within one division, but could create even more siloed data ecosystems within
the entire organization.
This balance is highly individual for each organization, being dependent on the
corporate culture, organizational structure, industry specifics, maturity of digital and data
capabilities, and many other internal and external determinants. Moreover, this balance
may evolve with the organization’s digital and data maturity. Companies may initially
adopt a highly centralized data strategy and gradually move towards decentralization, or
vice versa. In our case, elements of the data strategy were initially pursued separately in a
decentralized manner across different organizations within the pharmaceutical company.
However, as the need for a global data strategy became apparent at the global management
level, the initiative for a global Data Product strategy was launched.
Notably, as of the time of publishing this paper, a global Data Product strategy was ini-
tiated in the Pharma company that confirms that the expressed necessity was acknowledged
on the global management level.
Striking a balance between centralization and decentralization of the data strategy is
crucial. A corporate strategy should aim to establish a common “framework language” to
ensure interoperability, while providing the necessary agility and flexibility to localize the
framework towards division-specific needs.
• DDA: one size does not fit all.

--- PAGE 30 ---
Digital 2024, 4 362
While the results of this case study provide evidence of the iterative implementation
of the DDA framework within the Global R&D, it is important to note that the applicability
of DDA may vary across different organizations within the pharmaceutical R&D sector.
The unique design and implementation decisions made within the Pharma company were
deeply influenced by the organization’s internal and external factors, including corporate
culture, existing architecture, strategic objectives, ongoing initiatives, market conditions,
financial considerations, and more. Therefore, while the case study serves as a guiding
reference, its direct replication without careful adaptation may not yield the same results
in other organizational contexts. For instance, the Global R&D had already fostered a
culture of agility, robust cross-functional collaboration, and a readiness for continuous
improvement and change. This pre-existing disposition facilitated the acceptance and
commitment to transformative frameworks like DDA. Conversely, organizations with
more conservative or less mature enterprise ecosystems in these aspects might face greater
challenges in achieving a similar level of commitment, necessitating the consideration of
more extensive change management measures or a more iterative approach to bridge the
gap effectively.
Additionally, the fact that the AAF was initiated prior to the DOM framework allowed
the latter to benefit from several AAF elements, implementation learnings, and an estab-
lished acceptance of the transformation. Both frameworks share common core principles,
reinforcing their alignment. The iterative evolution of the DDA framework within the
Pharma company further underscores its context-specific nature. The journey towards the
current state of DDA was marked by continuous learning, adaptation, and refinement,
with each iterative step contributing to its maturation. It is worth noting that the current
comprehensive view of DDA was not entirely foreseeable at the project’s outset. The
insights gained from each phase played a pivotal role in shaping the subsequent phases.
However, the case study serves as a valuable resource for other pharmaceutical R&D
companies aiming to embark on a similar transformational journey. It provides a foun-
dational framework that offers reference points and a starting point for analysis. Yet, the
successful implementation of DDA requires a meticulous feasibility assessment and careful
iterative execution, tailored to the specific circumstances of each organization. The deep
integration of various elements, approaches, tactical decisions, and strategic visions must
be considered in light of the organization’s unique landscape.
• Productization and Customer Orientation
One of the primary objectives of the DOM was to shift data ownership towards the
teams responsible for its production. Given that data production primarily occurs within
the sphere of business operations, the Pharma company’s DDs and DPs were meticulously
designed with a primary focus on the existing operational usage of data. This operational-
centric approach was indispensable for addressing current business needs and securing
commitment from DD teams. However, it is essential to recognize that it represents just the
starting point of a more comprehensive journey.
While this initial approach was pivotal, it is equally crucial to explore the untapped
potential for deriving additional value from data by examining secondary data usages
and accommodating new use cases and data customers. Such an approach contributes to
gradually dismantling data silos that have naturally formed around operational data usage,
thereby fostering data reuse throughout the entire organization. This shift is instrumental
in maturing towards becoming a truly data-driven enterprise.
Consequently, the forthcoming phases of this transformation must expand their focus
beyond operational usage. It is imperative to delve into the potential use cases of new
DP customers, extending beyond the Global R&D. These may encompass Therapeutic
Areas, Medical Affairs, Commercial Operations, and Data Science, among others. Gaining
a profound understanding of their unique data needs and discerning how the global R&D
function’s data assets can be instrumental for them is paramount. This understanding
should serve as a foundation for initiating Proof of Concepts (POCs) and feasibility analyses.

--- PAGE 31 ---
Digital 2024, 4 363
Subsequently, new DPs can be conceptualized and developed, promoting cross-functional
and cross-company collaboration and facilitating the creation of value on a global scale.
It is crucial to acknowledge that expanding the scope of data usage represents a vital
step in the journey. However, it should not diminish the significance of the initial phases.
The foundation laid during these initial stages remains invaluable in establishing a robust
data architecture that can efficiently support and accelerate the subsequent phases of the
data-driven transformation.
• Replication of the Use Case
Acknowledging a potential concern about the use case replicability for another Pharma
company and, therefore, a risk of research bias, we would like to highlight the expected
usage of the results of this case study to mitigate these concerns. Firstly, we provide a
very high-level conceptualization of the DDA framework (introduced in Section 2.2) and
exemplify its individual tailoring for a Big Pharma company in Section 3. Our objective is
not to present a universally applicable use case, but rather to offer transparency regarding
the specificities of how DDA could be tailored, refined, and uniquely adjusted to meet the
specific needs of the Pharma company. While we understand the unique nature of our
case study, we believe that the approach and methods employed can serve as a valuable
guide for other companies in the pharma industry R&D seeking to define their unique
Data-Driven Enterprise Architecture.
4. Conclusions
In this study, we have addressed significant research gaps within the realm of en-
terprise data-driven transformation. Leveraging the Resource-Based View (RBV) and
dynamic capabilities theories, we have defined a data-driven enterprise and transforma-
tion, as well as proposing three levels of data-driven capabilities, as follows: supportive,
transformational, and accelerative. As follows, we developed the concept of Data-Driven
Enterprise Architecture (DDA), which forms the foundation for data-driven transformation,
accelerating the development of data-driven dynamic capabilities. The DDA stands out
from mainstream scientific concepts and enterprise practices due to its holistic approach.
Unlike many existing approaches that tend to focus on the transformation of application,
business, and data architecture separately, DDA emphasizes the continuous harmonization
of these crucial architectural components within each domain. In essence, DDA represents
a pioneering framework for distributed and federated architecture at a scale that decom-
poses architecture into domain-specific components, while considering their continuous
harmonization and alignment toward common domain business goals. This contributes to
a consistent and interoperable ecosystem across domains, making it a valuable approach
for organizations seeking a comprehensive architectural solution.
Although the DDA is a generic framework and could be theoretically applied for any
industry after corresponding adjustments, we have empirically validated it within the
pharmaceutical R&D ecosystem of the Pharma company. Herein, we summarize the key
conceptual and empirical findings that have emerged from the Pharma company’s digital
transformative journey and implementation of the DDA structural elements such as Data
Fabric strategy, the AAF and DOM, as follows:
1. Leadership and Stakeholder Commitment: Unwavering leadership support and
stakeholder commitment are crucial for the success of any transformative efforts. The
use case evidenced that intensive stakeholder involvement in defining the framework,
its objectives, and implementation strategy fostered ownership, broad acceptance,
and commitment to the change.
2. Actionable, Measurable, and Adaptable Strategy: A data-driven transformation
strategy must not only be conceptual, but also actionable, measurable, and adaptable
to succeed. The Pharma company’s Data Fabric strategy, the AAF, DOM, and other
structural elements of DDA addressed these objectives. The success of this phase is
primarily reflected in the acceptance and commitment garnered within the organiza-

--- PAGE 32 ---
Digital 2024, 4 364
tion. In the long term, an accelerative effect on the socio-economic outcomes of each
DD and AD initiative is anticipated that is facilitated by the DDA foundations (see
the Chapter “Value-realization”).
3. Prioritizing Organizational and Mindset Change: Successful socio-technological
transformation prioritizes organizational and mindset change before technology adop-
tion. DDA provides the foundation for this cultural and organizational shift that must
accelerate data-driven transformation in an agile and scalable manner during the
subsequent phases. While the concept of Data Fabric is inherently technology-centric,
it became evident during the exploration phase that merely implementing Data Fabric
technological advancements (such as knowledge graphs and active metadata) would
not move the Global R&D closer to its goal of fostering a data-driven culture and
empowering digital transformation for innovative medicine development. The crit-
ical factor influencing the value realization of any technological advancement is its
adoption rate, which hinges on having a solid organizational and mindset foundation.
Therefore, the Global R&D within the Foundation Phase of Data Fabric established
organizational structures such as DDs, cross-functional DD Teams, and their Operating
Models. These structures were put in place to effectively address business requirements
concerning Data Fabric technology, define implementation strategies, and closely monitor
business value realization (see the Chapter “Phase I: Foundation of Data Fabric”).
4. Federalization: DDA introduces the concept of federalization as a strategic balance
between centralization and decentralization. This approach emphasizes the devel-
opment of modularized domain architectures, marking a departure from traditional
monolithic methods. While encouraging autonomy within DDs and ADs, DDA
maintains interoperability and contextual consistency on a global scale.
Autonomous DDs and ADs can independently address domain-specific needs, fos-
tering innovation and agility. Simultaneously, central governance organizations like the
Data Governance Council (DGC) and the AAF Acceleration Squad harmonize and align
these autonomous entities, ensuring that the broader organizational objectives and strategic
directions are maintained. This balanced approach empowers the R&D ecosystem of the
Pharma company to leverage the benefits of both centralization and decentralization, while
achieving a cohesive and harmonized data-driven ecosystem.
5. Navigating Complexity Through Decomposition: DDA’s approach of decomposing
EA into smaller, cohesive domains such as DD and AD addresses the challenge of
managing complexity. Structuring these domains around core business capabilities
allows the Pharma company to focus on specific business functions and data require-
ments within each domain, while empowering DD Teams with required resources
and mechanisms to develop targeted solutions.
6. Assess Different Baseline Concepts for Optimal Data Architecture: The Pharma
company’s Data Fabric approach evidenced the importance of the exploratory assess-
ment of various baseline concepts related to data architecture, insights from industry
experiences, internal expertise, subject matter experts’ opinions, and the unique in-
ternal business needs of the enterprise to design an optimal Data Architecture. It
is crucial not to be confined to a single mainstream model, such as Data Mesh or
Data Fabric, as there is no one-size-fits-all solution in the realm of Data Architecture.
Instead, this process should be envisioned as constructing a customized model, akin
to assembling a set of Lego blocks. This model is constructed by selectively integrating
elements from various baseline concepts, tailored precisely to meet the specific needs
and goals of the enterprise.
Furthermore, this construction process does not conclude with a static solution but
evolves iteratively, adapting to changing requirements and insights. Throughout its matu-
rity journey, the model undergoes refinements and adjustments to ensure that it remains
optimally aligned with the enterprise’s evolving data landscape and strategic objectives.

--- PAGE 33 ---
Digital 2024, 4 365
This iterative approach contributes to the agility and responsiveness of the data architecture,
accommodating the enterprise’s dynamic needs effectively.
7. Synergy of Data Mesh and Data Fabric. The Data Fabric Strategy evidenced efficient
integration of the Data Mesh and Data Fabric principles. While Data Mesh laid the
foundational base of organizational structure and mindset for data management, Data
Fabric formed the foundation of the technological underpinnings. This harmonious
blend should facilitate structural realization of data-driven objectives through robust
and scalable technological solutions.
8. Collaboration and Alignment: Continuous collaboration and alignment with ongoing
projects within the Global R&D, such as AAF, as well as related initiatives across the
whole organization, along with the iterative and adaptable implementation of DDA,
are essential to mitigate the risk of creating “framework silos” and to emphasize
that all dependent elements of various frameworks work in harmony. Like Lego
blocks, these frameworks need not be identical in size or shape, but they must fit
together cohesively. Thus, the focus lies on ensuring the necessary interoperability and
compatibility between related elements of different frameworks. Even in cases where
DD and AD structures exhibit deviations, these frameworks incorporate mechanisms
like an integration of AD Leads into the DGC, mapping DPs with APs, and aligning
DDs with AD Leads to guarantee close collaboration, interoperability, and alignment.
This approach is supposed not only to enhance short-term success, but also make
the framework sustainable in the long run, as it fosters interoperability and maintains
conceptual consistency in strategic objectives (see the Chapter “Diverse Transformation
Approaches”).
9. Phased Approach: Breaking down transformation into manageable chunks, such
as the data-driven capabilities, domains, with their initiatives and implementation
roadmaps, improve efficiency of the program management by delivering transparency,
accountability, and contributing to stakeholder acceptance. In addition, transforma-
tional changes should incorporate one or more incremental interim phases. The
number of required interim phases depends on numerous factors, including the
size of the change, corporate culture, organizational structure, complexity, and the
organization’s scale.
In summary, this paper outlines a comprehensive DDA framework and early pre-
liminary insights of its implementation within the pharmaceutical R&D ecosystem of the
Pharma company embarking on the data-driven transformation journey. It underscores the
importance of leadership commitment, stakeholder integration, actionable and measurable
strategies, collaboration, cultural change, and business-centric approaches. Moreover, it
emphasizes the significance of interoperability between frameworks and the continuous
nature of value realization in data-driven transformations. We believe these key findings
provide valuable insights for organizations seeking to embark on similar transformative
journeys, offering guidance for creating an architectural foundation, leveraging data as a
strategic asset in the ever-evolving landscape in pharmaceutical R&D.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, methodology, validation, writing—review and editing,
N.U. and S.F.; formal analysis, investigation, resources, data curation, writing—original draft prepa-
ration, visualization, project administration, N.U.; supervision, S.F. All authors have read and agreed
to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Data Availability Statement: Data are contained within the article.
Acknowledgments: We thank the Pharma company’s Global R&D community for their openness for
scientific collaboration and contributions to the results of the paper.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

--- PAGE 34 ---
Digital 2024, 4 366
Appendix A
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Data Availability Statement: Data are contained within the article.
Acknowledgments: We thank the Pharma company’s Global R&D community for their openness
for scientific collaboration and contributions to the results of the paper.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Appendix A
Figure A1. Categorized Data Fabric components. Figure A1. Categorized Data Fabric components.
Digital 2024, 4, FOR PEER REVIEW 36
Figure A2. Execution journey of the Data Ownership Model. Figure A2. Execution journey of the Data Ownership Model.

--- PAGE 35 ---
Digital 2024, 4 367
Figure A2. Execution journey of the Data Ownership Model.
Figure A3. Data product card.
Figure A3. Data product card.
Table A1. Data Domains/Subdomains and Data Products.
Data
Domains
Planning
and
Forecasting
Study Participant
Study
Management
Investigative
Staff
Engagement
Product
Management
Others/Backlog
Subdomains
Portfolio
Planning
Budget
Management
Feasibility
Data Delivery
Standards
Medical Review
Statistical
programming
RWE
Clinal
Operations
Country
Operations
Business
Operations
Investigative
Staff
Engagement
Chemical
Process R&D
Discovery,
Product
Development
and Supply
Distribution
Safety
Management
Quality
Management
Regulatory
Management
Data
Products
Resource
Forecasting
OOP
Forecasting
Project and
Product
Attributes
Project
Milestones
Forecasting
Drivers
Resource
Capacity
Project
Accounting
(Valuations,
Actuals, etc.)
Time reported
Site
information
PI information
Study
information
Site feasibility
Pharmacokinetics/
Pharmacodynamics
datasets and
analysis
Phase 1 trials
patient data (Case
Report Form)
Phase 1 trials
source data
ADaM datasets
and metadata
Study intake data
DH Early
Assessment data
EHR data used in a
study
Lab data used in a
study
External
real-world
databases
Tokens
DH Technology
Enablement board
intake data
DH Capability
Master
requirements data
DH Technol-
ogy/Supplier
Qualification data
Training data
eConsent study
data
eCOA study data
In progress
Study site
data
Site identity
and access
management
data
Training data
Contracts
Enrollment
Data
Document
collaboration
Document
repository
Managed
Access
Requests
Site relations
management
Site communi-
cation
Site feedback
collection
In progress -

--- PAGE 36 ---
Digital 2024, 4 368
Table A2. Data Ownership Model (DOM) and Application Architecture Framework (AAF)—
comparison of key elements.
Elements DOM AAF Harmonization Distinctions
Structure Data Domains (DDs)
Application Domains
(ADs)
Iterative
harmonization
towards optimal view
(not full integration)
Exceptional deviation
based on logical
grouping of data
flows and data
categories
Products Data Products (DPs)
Application Products
(APs)
Alignment and
Mapping
DP and AP are
distinct elements
(although
interdependent)
Product cards DP cards AP cards Interlinked within DP
and AP cards
Cards have a different
structure specific to
their focus area
Roadmaps DD roadmaps AD roadmaps Strategic alignment
between DD and AD
roadmaps and
cross-reference of the
selective items
Distinct focus on data
and applications
correspondingly
Federated
Governance
Centralized Facets
Data Governance
Council (DGC)
Acceleration Squad Strategic alignment of
interrelated topics
Distinct focus on data
and applications
correspondingly
Decentralized Facets
Autonomous
cross-functional DD
Teams
Autonomous Squads
of cross-functional
AD teams
Harmonization
through close
correlation between
DD and AD Leads.
Thus, a Business AD
Lead is always a
member of DD team
DD and AD Teams
are autonomous in
their distinct focus
areas such as data
and applications
References
1. Hannila, H.; Silvola, R.; Härkönen, J.; Haapasalo, H. Data-Driven Begins with DATA; Potential of Data Assets. J. Comput. Inf. Syst.
2022, 62, 29–38. [CrossRef]
2. Coyle, D.; Manley, A. University of Cambridge. What Is the Value of Data? A Review of Empirical Methods; Bennett Institute for Public
Policy of the University of Cambridge: Cambridge, UK, 2022.
3. Assur, N.; Rowshankish, K. The Data-Driven Enterprise of 2025. McKinsey & Company. 28 January 2022. Available online: https:
//www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/quantumblack/our-insights/the-data-driven-enterprise-of-2025 (accessed on 12 November
2023).
4. NewVantage Partners. Data and Analytics Leadership Annual Executive Survey 2023: Executive Summary of Findings. 2023.
Available online: https://static1.squarespace.com/static/62adf3ca029a6808a6c5be30/t/63a477e23d7f9162b7771d6b/16717229
82363/WAVESTONE+NVP--+Data+&+Analytics+Executive+Leadership+2023--Survey+Findings.pdf (accessed on 12 November
2023).
5. Neely, A. Why You Should Be Treating Your Data as an Asset. Anmut. Available online: https://www.anmut.co.uk/why-you-
should-be-treating-your-data-as-an-asset/ (accessed on 12 November 2023).
6. Johnston, M. Biggest Companies in the World by Market Cap. Investopedia. Available online: https://www.investopedia.com/
biggest-companies-in-the-world-by-market-cap-5212784 (accessed on 12 November 2023).
7. Ponemon Institute; IBM. Cost of a Data Breach Report 2022; IBM Corporation: Armonk, NY, USA, 2022. Available online:
https://www.ibm.com/downloads/cas/3R8N1DZJ (accessed on 12 November 2023).
8. Brynjolfsson, E.; Wang, J.; McElheran, K. The Power of Prediction: Predictive Analytics, Workplace Complements, and Business
Performance. Bus. Econ. 2021, 56, 217–239. [CrossRef]
9. Ertz, M.; Sun, S.; Latrous, I. The Impact of Big Data on Firm Performance. In Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing;
Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2021. [CrossRef]
10. Müller, O.; Fay, M.; Brocke, J.V. The Effect of Big Data and Analytics on Firm Performance: An Econometric Analysis Considering
Industry Characteristics. J. Manag. Inf. Syst. 2018, 35, 488–509. [CrossRef]
11. Mikalef, P.; Boura, M.; Lekakos, G.; Krogstie, J. Big Data Analytics and Firm Performance: Findings from a Mixed-Method
Approach. J. Bus. Res. 2019, 98, 261–276. [CrossRef]
12. Gul, R.; Ellahi, N. The Nexus between Data Analytics and Firm Performance. Cogent Bus. Manag. 2021, 8, 1923360. [CrossRef]
13. Schweikl, S.; Obermaier, R. Lessons from Three Decades of IT Productivity Research: Towards a Better Understanding of
IT-Induced Productivity Effects. Manag. Rev. Q. 2019, 70, 461–507. [CrossRef]
14. Hariry, R.E.; Barenji, R.V.; Paradkar, A. Towards Pharma 4.0 in clinical trials: A future-orientated perspective. Drug Discov. Today
2022, 27, 315–325. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

--- PAGE 37 ---
Digital 2024, 4 369
15. Sharma, D.K.; Patel, P.K.; Shah, M. A comprehensive study on Industry 4.0 in the pharmaceutical industry for sustainable
development. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2023, 30, 90088–90098. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16. Tetteh, M.G.; Jagtap, S.; Salonitis, K. Pharma 4.0: Revealing drivers of the digital transformation in the pharma sector. In Lecture
Notes in Mechanical Engineering; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2023; pp. 528–535. [CrossRef]
17. Dulko, D.; Kwong, M.; Palm, M.E.; Trinquart, L.; Selker, H.P. From a decentralized clinical trial to a decentralized and clinical-
trial-in-a-box platform: Towards patient-centric and equitable trials. J. Clin. Transl. Sci. 2023, 7, e236. [CrossRef]
18. Eltoukhy, A.E.E.; Shaban, I.A.; Chan, F.T.S.; Abdel-Aal, M.a.M. Data Analytics for Predicting COVID-19 Cases in Top Affected
Countries: Observations and Recommendations. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020, 17, 7080. [CrossRef]
19. Hariry, R.E.; Barenji, R.V.; Paradkar, A. From industry 4.0 to pharma 4.0. In Handbook of Smart Materials, Technologies, and Devices;
Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2021; pp. 1–22. [CrossRef]
20. Inuwa, H.M.; Raja, A.R.; Kumar, A.; Singh, B.; Singh, S. Status of Industry 4.0 applications in healthcare 4.0 and Pharma 4.0. Mater.
Today Proc. 2022, 62, 3593–3598. [CrossRef]
21. Malheiro, V.; Duarte, J.M.; Veiga, F.; Mascarenhas-Melo, F. Exploiting Pharma 4.0 Technologies in the Non-Biological Complex
Drugs Manufacturing: Innovations and Implications. Pharmaceutics 2023, 15, 2545. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22. Dong, Y.; Wang, W.; Xing, Y.; Du, J.; Meng, Q. Data-Driven modeling methods and techniques for pharmaceutical processes.
Processes 2023, 11, 2096. [CrossRef]
23. Kumar, S.A.; Kumar, T.D.A.; Beeraka, N.M.; Pujar, G.V.; Singh, M.; Akshatha, H.S.; Bhagyalalitha, M. Machine learning and deep
learning in data-driven decision making of drug discovery and challenges in high-quality data acquisition in the pharmaceutical
industry. Future Med. Chem. 2022, 14, 245–270. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Vora, L.K.; Gholap, A.D.; Jetha, K.; Thakur, R.R.S.; Solanki, H.K.; Chavda, V.P. Artificial intelligence in pharmaceutical technology
and drug delivery design. Pharmaceutics 2023, 15, 1916. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. Dara, S.; Dhamercherla, S.; Jadav, S.S.; Babu, C.M.; Ahsan, M.J. Machine Learning in Drug Discovery: A review. Artif. Intell. Rev.
2021, 55, 1947–1999. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26. Koutroumpa, N.-M.; Papavasileiou, K.D.; Papadiamantis, A.G.; Melagraki, G.; Afantitis, A. A Systematic Review of Deep
Learning Methodologies Used in the Drug Discovery Process with Emphasis on In Vivo Validation. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2023, 24, 6573.
[CrossRef]
27. Tang, M.; Li, B.; Chen, H. Application of message passing neural networks for molecular property prediction. Curr. Opin. Struct.
Biol. 2023, 81, 102616. [CrossRef]
28. Paul, D.; Sanap, G.; Shenoy, S.; Kalyane, D.; Kalia, K.; Tekade, R.K. Artificial intelligence in drug discovery and development.
Drug Discov. Today 2021, 26, 80–93. [CrossRef]
29. Bhattamisra, S.K.; Banerjee, P.; Gupta, P.; Mayuren, J.; Patra, S.; Candasamy, M. Artificial intelligence in pharmaceutical and
healthcare research. Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2023, 7, 10. [CrossRef]
30. Nag, S.; Baidya, A.T.; Mandal, A.; Mathew, A.T.; Das, B.; Devi, B.; Kumar, R. Deep learning tools for advancing drug discovery
and development. 3 Biotech 2022, 12, 110. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31. Huo, L.; Tang, Y. Multi-Objective Deep Reinforcement learning for personalized dose optimization based on Multi-Indicator
Experience replay. Appl. Sci. 2022, 13, 325. [CrossRef]
32. Mhatre, S.; Shukla, S.; Chavda, V.P.; Gandikota, L.; Patravale, V. AI and ML for Development of Cell and Gene Therapy for
Personalized Treatment. In Bioinformatics Tools for Pharmaceutical Drug Product Development; Scrivener Publishing LLC: Beverly,
MA, USA, 2023; pp. 371–400. [CrossRef]
33. Quazi, S. Artificial intelligence and machine learning in precision and genomic medicine. Med. Oncol. 2022, 39, 120. [CrossRef]
34. Elkin, M.E.; Zhu, X. Predictive modeling of clinical trial terminations using feature engineering and embedding learning. Sci. Rep.
2021, 11, 3446. [CrossRef]
35. Yang, F.; Zhang, Q.; Ji, X.; Zhang, Y.; Li, W.; Peng, S.; Xue, F. Machine learning applications in drug repurposing. Interdiscip. Sci.
Comput. Life Sci. 2022, 14, 15–21. [CrossRef]
36. Krishnamurthy, N.; Grimshaw, A.; Axson, S.A.; Choe, S.H.; Miller, J.E. Drug repurposing: A systematic review on root causes,
barriers and facilitators. BMC Health Serv. Res. 2022, 22, 970. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37. Kumar, Y.; Koul, A.; Singla, R.; Ijaz, M.F. Artificial intelligence in disease diagnosis: A systematic literature review, synthesizing
framework and future research agenda. J. Ambient Intell. Humaniz. Comput. 2022, 14, 8459–8486. [CrossRef]
38. Obrezanova, O. Artificial intelligence for compound pharmacokinetics prediction. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 2023, 79, 102546.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
39. Chou, W.-C.; Lin, Z. Machine learning and artificial intelligence in physiologically based pharmacokinetic modeling. Toxicol. Sci.
2022, 191, 1–14. [CrossRef]
40. Chapman, A.; Peterson, K.; Alba, P.R.; DuVall, S.L.; Patterson, O.V. Detecting Adverse Drug Events with Rapidly Trained
Classification Models. Drug Saf. 2019, 42, 147–156. [CrossRef]
41. Teubner, R.A.; Stockhinger, J. Literature Review: Understanding Information Systems Strategy in the Digital Age. J. Strateg. Inf.
Syst. 2020, 29, 101642. [CrossRef]
42. Riedl, R.; Stieninger, M.; Muehlburger, M.; Koch, S.; Heß, T. What Is Digital Transformation? A Survey on the Perceptions of
Decision-Makers in Business. Inf. Syst. E-Bus. Manag. 2023. [CrossRef]

--- PAGE 38 ---
Digital 2024, 4 370
43. Hanelt, A.; Bohnsack, R.; Marz, D.; Marante, C. A Systematic Review of the Literature on Digital Transformation: Insights and
Implications for Strategy and Organizational Change. J. Manag. Stud. 2020, 58, 1159–1197. [CrossRef]
44. Mahboub, H.; Sadok, H. Contribution to a Better Digital Transformation Implementation: An Integrative Approach. In Machine
Learning and Artificial Intelligence; Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications; IOS Press: Amsterdam, The Netherlands,
2023. [CrossRef]
45. Schneider, M.; Kanbach, D.K.; Kraus, S.; Dabić, M. Transform Me If You Can: Leveraging Dynamic Capabilities to Manage Digital
Transformation. IEEE Trans. Eng. Manag. 2023, 1–15. [CrossRef]
46. Rashedi, J. The Data-Driven Organization: Using Data for the Success of Your Company; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2023. [CrossRef]
47. Hupperz, M.; Gür, I.; Möller, F.; Otto, B. What Is a Data-Driven Organization? In Proceedings of the Conference AMCIS 2021.
Digital Innovation and Entrepreneurship, Virtual, 13–19 August 2021.
48. Hebbar, P. 10 Indicators of a Truly Data-Driven Organisation; Analytics India Magazine: Bengaluru, India, 2019. Available online:
https://analyticsindiamag.com/10-indicators-of-a-truly-data-driven-organisation/ (accessed on 10 April 2024).
49. Janmeskens. The Road to a Data-Driven Organization: Navigating Data Dilemmas. Medium. 3 December 2023. Available
online: https://medium.com/@meskensjan/the-road-to-a-data-driven-organization-navigating-data-dilemmas-898c612895af
(accessed on 12 November 2023).
50. Thusoo, A.; Sarma, J.S. Creating a Data-Driven Enterprise with DataOps; O’Reilly Media, Inc.: Sebastopol, CA, USA, 2017.
51. Yang, H.-L.; Morgan, S.L. Business Strategy and Corporate Governance: Theoretical and Empirical Perspectives. In Business
Strategy and Corporate Governance in the Chinese Consumer Electronics Sector; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2011; pp.
23–46. [CrossRef]
52. Warner, K.; Wäger, M. Building Dynamic Capabilities for Digital Transformation: An Ongoing Process of Strategic Renewal. Long
Range Plan. 2019, 52, 326–349. [CrossRef]
53. Ellström, D.; Holtström, J.; Berg, E.; Josefsson, C. Dynamic Capabilities for Digital Transformation. J. Strategy Manag. 2021, 15,
272–286. [CrossRef]
54. Verhoef, P.C.; Broekhuizen, T.; Bart, Y.; Bhattacharya, A.; Dong, J.Q.; Fabian, N.E.; Haenlein, M. Digital Transformation: A
Multidisciplinary Reflection and Research Agenda. J. Bus. Res. 2021, 122, 889–901. [CrossRef]
55. Teece, D.J. The Evolution of the Dynamic Capabilities Framework. In FGF Studies in Small Business and Entrepreneurship; Springer:
Cham, Switzerland, 2022; pp. 113–129. [CrossRef]
56. Cannas, R. Exploring Digital Transformation and Dynamic Capabilities in Agrifood SMEs. J. Small Bus. Manag. 2021, 61,
1611–1637. [CrossRef]
57. Chirumalla, K. Building Digitally-Enabled Process Innovation in the Process Industries: A Dynamic Capabilities Approach.
Technovation 2021, 105, 102256. [CrossRef]
58. Helfat, C.E.; Peteraf, M.A. The Dynamic Resource-based View: Capability Lifecycles. Strateg. Manag. J. 2003, 24, 997–1010.
[CrossRef]
59. Curry, E.; Tuikka, T. An Organizational Maturity Model for Data Spaces: A Data Sharing Wheel Approach. In Data Spaces;
Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2022; pp. 21–42. [CrossRef]
60. Wade, M.; Hulland, J. Review: The Resource-Based View and Information Systems Research: Review, Extension, and Suggestions
for Future Research. Manag. Inf. Syst. Q. 2004, 28, 107. [CrossRef]
61. Teece, D.J.; Leih, S. Uncertainty, Innovation, and Dynamic Capabilities: An Introduction. Calif. Manag. Rev. 2016, 58, 5–12.
[CrossRef]
62. Teece, D.J. Explicating Dynamic Capabilities: The Nature and Microfoundations of (Sustainable) Enterprise Performance. Strateg.
Manag. J. 2007, 28, 1319–1350. [CrossRef]
63. Teece, D.J. Dynamic Capabilities and (Digital) Platform Lifecycles. In Advances in Strategic Management; Emerald Publishing
Limited: Leeds, UK, 2017; pp. 211–225. [CrossRef]
64. Soluk, J.; Kammerlander, N. Digital Transformation in Family-Owned Mittelstand Firms: A Dynamic Capabilities Perspective.
Eur. J. Inf. Syst. 2021, 30, 676–711. [CrossRef]
65. Witschel, D.; Döhla, A.; Kaiser, M.; Voigt, K.; Pfletschinger, T. Riding on the Wave of Digitization: Insights How and under What
Settings Dynamic Capabilities Facilitate Digital-Driven Business Model Change. J. Bus. Econ. 2019, 89, 1023–1095. [CrossRef]
66. Chui, M.; Hazan, E.; Roberts, R.; Singla, A.; Smaje, K.; Sukharevsky, A.; Yee, L.; Zemmel, R. The Economic Potential of Generative AI:
The next Productivity Frontier; McKinsey: New York, NY, USA, 2023. Available online: https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/
mckinsey-digital/our-insights/the-economic-potential-of-generative-ai-the-next-productivity-frontier#industry-impacts (ac-
cessed on 18 January 2024).
67. Chen, Z.; Ayinde, O.R.; Fuchs, J.R.; Sun, H.; Ning, X. G2Retro as a Two-Step Graph Generative Models for Retrosynthesis
Prediction. Commun. Chem. 2023, 6, 102. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
68. Bertelsmann Stiftung; Thiel, R.; Deimel, L.; Schmidtmann, D.; Piesche, K.; Hüsing, T.; Rennoch, J.; Stroetmann, V.; Stroetmann,
K. #SmartHealthSystems Digitalisierungsstrategien im internationalen Vergleich. Available online: https://www.bertelsmann-
stiftung.de/de/publikationen/publikation/did/smarthealthsystems (accessed on 12 November 2023).
69. Dykes, B. The Four Key Pillars to Fostering a Data-Driven Culture. Forbes. 28 March 2019. Available online: https://www.forbes.
com/sites/brentdykes/2019/03/28/the-four-key-pillars-to-fostering-a-data-driven-culture/?sh=6cf7bc367d90 (accessed on 12
November 2023).

--- PAGE 39 ---
Digital 2024, 4 371
70. LaBerge, L.; Smaje, K.; Zemmel, R.W. Three New Mandates for Capturing a Digital Transformation’s Full Value; McKinsey & Company:
New York, NY, USA, 2022. Available online: https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/mckinsey-digital/our-insights/three-
new-mandates-for-capturing-a-digital-transformations-full-value#/ (accessed on 12 November 2023).
71. Forth, P.; Reichert, T.; De Laubier, R.; Chakraborty, S. Flipping the Odds of Digital Transformation Success. BCG Global.
Available online: https://www.bcg.com/publications/2020/increasing-odds-of-success-in-digital-transformation (accessed on
12 November 2023).
72. Shein, E. 8 Reasons Why Digital Transformations Fail. CIO. Available online: https://www.cio.com/article/228268/12-reasons-
why-digital-transformations-fail.html (accessed on 14 November 2023).
73. Lawton, G.; Roy, M. 11 Reasons Why Digital Transformations Fail, Explained by Pros. TechTarget. 20 October 2023. Available
online: https://www.techtarget.com/searchcio/tip/Top-6-reasons-why-digital-transformation-failures-happen (accessed on 14
November 2023).
74. Van De Wetering, R. The Role of Enterprise Architecture-Driven Dynamic Capabilities and Operational Digital Ambidexterity in
Driving Business Value under the COVID-19 Shock. Heliyon 2022, 8, e11484. [CrossRef]
75. Van De Wetering, R. Enterprise Architecture Resources, Dynamic Capabilities, and Their Pathways to Operational Value. In
Proceedings of the Conference: International Conference on Information Systems (ICIS), Munich, Germany, 15–18 December 2019.
76. Van Den Berg, M.; Slot, R.; Van Steenbergen, M.; Faasse, P.; Van Vliet, H. How Enterprise Architecture Improves the Quality of IT
Investment Decisions. J. Syst. Softw. 2019, 152, 134–150. [CrossRef]
77. Ahlemann, F.; Legner, C.; Lux, J. A Resource-Based Perspective of Value Generation through Enterprise Architecture Management.
Inf. Manag. 2021, 58, 103266. [CrossRef]
78. Pattij, M.; Van De Wetering, R.; Kusters, R.J. Enhanced Digital Transformation Supporting Capabilities through Enterprise
Architecture Management: A fsQCA Perspective. Digit. Bus. 2022, 2, 100036. [CrossRef]
79. Van De Wetering, R. Understanding the Impact of Enterprise Architecture Driven Dynamic Capabilities on Agility: A Variance
and FSQCA Study. Pac. Asia J. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 2021, 13, 32–68. [CrossRef]
80. Törmer, R.L. Dynamic Capability Building In The Lego Group—Prospective Activities Vs. Reflective Learning In Preparation for
a Turbulent Digital Future. AIS Electronic Library (AISeL). Available online: https://aisel.aisnet.org/ecis2019_rp/136/ (accessed
on 12 November 2023).
81. Enterprise Architecture Artifacts Facilitating The Strategy Planning Process for Digital Transformations: A Systematic Literature
Review and Multiple Case Study. IADIS Int. J. Comput. Sci. Inf. Syst. 2021, 16, 46–62. [CrossRef]
82. Kotusev, S.; Kurnia, S.; Dilnutt, R. The Practical Roles of Enterprise Architecture Artifacts: A Classification and Relationship. Inf.
Softw. Technol. 2022, 147, 106897. [CrossRef]
83. Zachman, J.A. Business Systems Planning and Business Information Control Study: A Comparison. Ibm Syst. J. 1982, 21, 31–53.
[CrossRef]
84. Buckl, S.; Schweda, C.M. On the State-of-the-Art in Enterprise Architecture Management Literature, Technical Report; Technical
University of Munich: München, Germany, 2011.
85. Herscovitch, L.; Meyer, J.P. Commitment to Organizational Change: Extension of a Three-Component Model. J. Appl. Psychol.
2002, 87, 474–487. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
86. Armenakis, A.A.; Harris, S.G. Crafting a Change Message to Create Transformational Readiness. J. Organ. Chang. Manag. 2002,
15, 169–183. [CrossRef]
87. Meyer, J.P.; Herscovitch, L. Commitment in the Workplace: Toward a General Model. Hum. Resour. Manag. Rev. 2001, 11, 299–326.
[CrossRef]
88. Broda, E. Managing a Federated Data Product Ecosystem—Towards Data Science. Medium. 16 January 2023. Available online:
https://towardsdatascience.com/managing-a-federated-data-product-ecosystem-3c6bff94c728 (accessed on 12 November 2023).
89. Wilkinson, M.D.; Dumontier, M.; Aalbersberg, I.J.; Appleton, G.; Axton, M.; Baak, A.; Blomberg, N.; Boiten, J.W.; da Silva Santos,
L.B.; Bourne, P.E.; et al. The FAIR Guiding Principles for Scientific Data Management and Stewardship. Sci. Data 2016, 3, 160018.
[CrossRef]
90. Dehghani, Z. What Is Data Mesh? In Data Mesh: Delivering Data-Driven Value at Scale, 1st ed.; O’Reilly Media: Sebastopol, CA,
USA, 2022; pp. 49–50.
91. Teece, D.J.; Peteraf, M.A.; Leih, S. Dynamic capabilities and organizational agility: Risk, uncertainty, and strategy in the innovation
economy. Calif. Manag. Rev. 2016, 58, 13–35. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.