--- PAGE 1 ---
Citation: Vandevenne, N.; Van Riel,
J.; Poels, G. Green Enterprise
Architecture (GREAN)—Leveraging
EA for Environmentally Sustainable
Digital Transformation. Sustainability
2023, 15, 14342. https://doi.org/
10.3390/su151914342
Academic Editors: George Saridakis,
Bochra Idris, Yazid Abubakar
Abdullahi and Sandra Sookram
Received: 15 August 2023
Revised: 22 September 2023
Accepted: 22 September 2023
Published: 28 September 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
sustainability
Article
Green Enterprise Architecture (GREAN)—Leveraging EA for
Environmentally Sustainable Digital Transformation
Niels Vandevenne 1,*, Jonas Van Riel 2,* and Geert Poels 2,3
1 IC Institute, 2580 Beerzel, Belgium
2 Faculty of Economics and Business Administration, Ghent University, 9000 Gent, Belgium;
geert.poels@ugent.be
3 Flanders Make@UGent, CVAMO Core Lab, 9000 Gent, Belgium
* Correspondence: niels.vandevenne@inno.com (N.V.); jonas.vanriel@ugent.be (J.V.R.)
Abstract: Digital Transformations (DT) play an increasingly important role in academia and business,
yet their significant Environmental Footprint (EF) is often overlooked, sidelining their potential for
Environmental Sustainability (ES). This paper bridges this gap by integrating ES into the discourse of
DT, proposing Green Enterprise Architecture (GREAN) as a method for sustainable transformation.
Utilizing a Design Science Research approach, we developed an artefact outlining a comprehensive
strategy for embedding ES in DT across various layers of an organization. The tool’s need was
validated via a systematic literature review (SLR), highlighting the significant research gap in Green
Enterprise Architecture. The artefact provides concrete Courses of Action (CoAs) for incorporating
ES into the organizational strategy, business, data, application, and technology layers and proposes
relevant capabilities to address this. The paper further presents an ES-aware business capability
modelling, an innovative business modelling approach that integrates environmental sustainability
principles by using (in a novel way) the presentation and analysis methods that capability mapping
offers. The proposed artefact serves as a starting point for environmentally sustainable DTs. Future
research directions include in-depth exploration of each enterprise layer for ES, real-world validation
of our proposed tools and concepts, and the expansion of these into a full framework.
Keywords: enterprise architecture; environmental sustainability; digital transformation; capability-
based management; organizational strategy; sustainable digital business
1. Introduction
Digital transformation (DT) is becoming increasingly important, both in an aca-
demic [1] and a business [2] context, with events such as the COVID-19 pandemic having
triggered companies to speed up their plans for DTs [3]. DT is defined as “a process that
aims to improve an entity by triggering significant changes to its properties through com-
binations of information, computing, communication, and connectivity technologies” [4].
Based on an extensive literature review, Vial [4] presents a DT framework consisting of
eight building blocks: use of digital technologies, disruptions, strategic responses, changes
in value creation paths, structural changes, organizational barriers, negative impacts, and
positive impacts.
DT can play an important role in sustainable development and environmental sustain-
ability (ES). For instance, ref. [5] suggest that integrating the digital economy and the real
economy can help resolve the contradiction between economic growth and environmental
quality, after studying the relationship between industrial digitalization and enterprise
environmental performance showing a significant environmental improvement by reduc-
ing the number of pollutants produced in the front-end production process. In addition,
including ES in an organization’s value proposition can be an important differentiating
factor from both the customer and employee perspectives [6]. ES, however, is noticeably
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342. https://doi.org/10.3390/su151914342 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability

--- PAGE 2 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 2 of 39
absent from Vial’s [4] DT framework. ES, as defined by [7], involves responsible natural
resource management to meet current needs without compromising future generations.
Although Vial [4] acknowledges the necessity of incorporating ethical considerations like
corporate social responsibility in DT, the author overlooks the connection between ES
and DT.
As DT relies significantly on the application of Digital Technologies [4], not including
ESintheDTeffortcancausecompaniestomissoutonpotentialopportunitiesforreductions
in their environmental footprint (EF) when transforming the organization. The EF can be
expressed as the environmental consequences of the activities a company performs [8].
Even worse, organizations could be running the risk of ignorantly increasing their EF,
unaware of the potential negative effect a DT can have on ES. This potential negative
effect in terms of energy consumption and related greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions should
not be underestimated: Digital technology’s energy consumption increased by almost
70% between 2013 and 2020 [9]. In a 2019 study, the world’s collective footprint of CO2
equivalent emissions (a metric to compare different greenhouse gas emissions based on
theirglobalwarmingpotential)associatedwithdigitaltechnologywascalculatedtoaccount
for nearly 3.7% of all GHG emissions and is projected to double by 2025 [9]. This number
corresponds with a more recent publication comparing different estimation techniques,
resulting in an estimate of 2.1–3.9% of GHG emissions in 2020 being due to information
and communications technology (ICT) [10]. The major contributors to ICT emissions are
data centres (45%) and communication networks (24%) [11].
Even though these numbers are significant by themselves, the reality seems even more
dire. Freitag et al. [10] identify three main reasons why current ICT emission estimates are
underestimatedandwhyemissionswillcontinuetoincrease. First, processorefficienciesare
reaching a limit due to transistor size limits. Second, improvements in energy efficiencies
and processing power of ICT trigger an increased adoption of these technologies, leading to
rebound effects where efficiency gains are counterbalanced by demand growth. In addition,
a natural peak in emissions (e.g., due to a limited number of devices per person) is unlikely
due to trends such as the Internet of Things (IoT), which require little to no person-time
and can operate in the background, driving both embodied and use phase emissions for
devices, networks, and data centres. Third, current studies in ICT GHG emissions often
omit important energy-intensive ICT growth areas such as Blockchain Technology (BT,
including cryptocurrencies), IoT, and Artificial Intelligence (AI), leading to an incomplete
picture. Significant investment in the development and adoption of the latter technologies
will result in further GHG emission increases.
Recognizing the simultaneous challenges and opportunities of DT and ES, the Eu-
ropean Council has proposed a digital-driven shift towards a climate-neutral economy,
urging the need for policy frameworks to mitigate any environmental drawbacks of digital-
ization [12]. However, despite the introduction of initiatives to reduce or limit the GHG
emissions of ICT, there is a clear lack of incentives or enforcement mechanisms for the
decarbonization of ICT [10]. Policy makers are working towards the use of digitalization to
accelerate the transition towards climate-neutrality [12]; nevertheless, the urgency of global
warming does not afford the luxury of waiting for the enforcement of policies to trigger
a change in the right direction. Organizations need to proactively take up responsibility
for their EF and take action in lowering emissions. This kind of corporate environmental
responsibility requires organizational awareness concerning the EF throughout all layers
of the organization and leveraging transformational opportunities such as DTs to actively
decrease the EF.
In the review article Sustainability through digital transformation: A systematic
literature review for research guidance [13], the author concluded that research on the
relationship between DT and sustainability is extremely fragmented into sectors, functions,
and methods. The author found that published research is mostly industry-specific (e.g.,
agriculture or industry 4.0) or ICT theme-specific (e.g., big data or digital twins) and
concludes that the specificity of the sectors and contexts highly limits the generalizability

--- PAGE 3 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 3 of 39
and transferability of research findings and calls for a more generalizable approach. For
further research, the author proposes research questions such as “How can digital and
sustainability transformations be combined?” and “What factors influence the relationship
between sustainability and digitalization?” [13]. The growing prevalence of DT thus
presentsadistinctiveopportunitytoenhanceESthroughplannedorongoingorganizational
transformations. However, achieving this necessitates a comprehensive and practical
strategy supported by concrete tools and frameworks. This paper proposes that such a
strategy could be realized by employing an Enterprise Architecture (EA) approach. Van Riel
and Poels [14] define EA as serving three fundamental purposes: value creation, enterprise
coherence, and strategic alignment. EA coordinates the roles, processes, information,
applications, and technology necessary for an enterprise to fulfil its objectives, thereby
promoting value creation. It ensures enterprise coherence by integrating these diverse
resources into a unified, cooperative system. Strategic alignment, a pivotal aspect of EA,
involves transforming strategic resource decisions into an organizational blueprint. This
blueprint channels resources towards value creation, in harmony with strategic goals and
the overarching vision of the enterprise. Moreover, the EA approach can incorporate ES
objectives in the DT strategy, facilitating the strategic integration of sustainability aspects
into the organization’s digital transformation.
Several studies have also connected EA with ES [15–20]. However, they generally
remain very high-level and conceptual or are still in a preliminary research phase. As
such, they currently lack specific and actionable EA information, tools, and techniques to
leverage DTs for improving an organization’s ES. Other tools and frameworks exist to lower
an organization’s EF. Environmental Management (EM) systems such as ISO 14001 already
offer a holistic framework to manage, monitor, and control environmental issues, focusing
on, for instance, efficient use of resources and reduction of waste [21]. However, in the
realm of EA, organizations often adopt a multi-layered approach that covers various aspects
of their operations, such as the business layer, which defines governance and processes,
the data layer that determines how data are structured and managed, and the application
layer, which deals with software solutions. Unfortunately, the mentioned systems, such as
ISO 14001, fail to establish a clear link between DT and these diverse architecture layers
within an organization. This misalignment complicates the integration of DT initiatives
that should ideally span across these layers. Adding to the complexity, EM initiatives often
lack cohesion, being scattered across specific business units instead of being harmonized
throughout the entire enterprise [17].
Feroz et al. [22] presented research trends regarding DTs in the ES domain. The authors
concluded, however, that there is a lack of studies covering the capabilities required for
sustainably transforming businesses and incorporating digital technologies. As such,
Feroz et al. [22] propose a research agendum “Capabilities for environmentally sustainable
digital transformation”, including incorporating ES in the decision-making process at the
strategic level. The practice of Capability-Based Management is a recognized EA approach
towards achieving strategic alignment, enterprise coherence, and value creation [14]. In
this context, a capability is defined as the ability and capacity that enable an enterprise
to attain a given goal in a certain context [23]. Capabilities are realized through dynamic
configurations of four dimensions: people, information, processes, and technology [14,24].
Examples of frequently occurring capabilities include Develop Vision and Strategy, Develop
and Manage Human Capital, and Manage Information Technology [25]. For this study,
there are two ways in which applying Capability-Based Management can be relevant. First,
to improve the DT outcome and related ES, the configuration of the dimensions of existing
capabilities, often labelled as the operating model, will have to be aligned with the DT and
ES objectives. Second, it is expected that new capabilities will have to be sourced or created
in order to realize these DT and ES objectives.
This paper attempts to leverage the strength of EA in providing a holistic view of
an organization and guiding its DT while extending it with ES concepts, actions, and
tools to help incorporate ES into DT. We propose the term Green Enterprise Architecture

--- PAGE 4 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 4 of 39
(Green EA or GREAN) to represent this ES-extended EA concept. To achieve this, the
research in this paper focuses on answering the research question (RQ): How can EA
be leveraged as an actionable tool in supporting the inclusion of ES in current or future
DT initiatives? The final aim is to provide, next to an academic contribution, a first
framework for practitioners that can be used to indicate and assess areas where actions
can be taken to improve their ES. Our research advocates for a comprehensive Green EA
approach to ensure environmentally sustainable outcomes in digital transformations. This
paper primarily addresses the integration of ES into DT initiatives using the principles
of EA. While the significance of DTs and ESs grows, the incorporation of ES into DT
remains underemphasized. To remedy this gap, we introduce Green EA as an evolution
of traditional EA, which explicitly prioritizes ES and provides a bridge between DT and
ES in the organizational context. By consolidating existing (yet fragmented) research
and literature, this paper presents a novel representation of these insights, making them
actionable for organizations. Green EA, focusing on the Capability-Based Management
(CBM)approachandtheorganizationalstrategy, business, data, application, andtechnology
layers, empowers organizations to seamlessly integrate ES considerations throughout
their DT initiatives. As a result, businesses are equipped with a comprehensive view of
their environmental impact, allowing them to keep their digital advancements congruent
with sustainable practices. Furthermore, our unique contribution lies in curating the
extensive literature into Courses of Action (CoAs), which provide a first tangible base for
organizations to get started with these insights. This will facilitate translating academic
knowledge into a first form of pragmatic organizational strategies. The integration of
these CoAs into a capability map further enhances the practicability of the Green EA
framework. Utilizing CBM, we present a framework that allows organizations to align their
DT endeavours with sustainable practices. Another key contribution is the proposition of
an ES-aware business capability modelling approach, an innovative business modelling
approach that integrates environmental sustainability principles into the organization’s
capabilities by using (in a novel way) the presentation and analysis methods that capability
mapping offers.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: the next section (Section 2)
provides background information on the most relevant topics and reviews the related
research. Section 3 describes the research method, how the academic state of the art
concerning EA as leverage for ES has been studied, and the design and development of the
presented artefact. Section 4 then presents the artefact and its substantiation, forming the
core of this paper. Next, the findings are discussed in Section 5, where practical implications,
limitations, and future research are discussed. Finally, Section 6 presents the conclusions of
this study.
2. Background and Related Work
As discussed in Section 1, research on the relationship between DTs and sustainability
is insufficiently generalized, limiting the transferability of research findings. In addition,
there is a lack of studies covering the capabilities required for sustainably transforming
businesses and incorporating digital technologies. Also, existing systems do not offer a
clear link between DTs and the different architectural layers within an organization. There
is thus a need for a holistic and actionable approach supported by concrete and usable tools
and frameworks, for which EA is proposed. To validate the research gap of Green EA, the
academic state of the art concerning EA as leverage for ES is studied through a systematic
literature review (SLR).
A Boolean literature search has been performed on the databases Web of Science and
EBSCOhost. The search terms and fields of the first iteration are presented in Table 1. A
second iteration of the SLR was performed via Google Scholar: three searches were per-
formed using the search terms (1) Green enterprise architecture, (2) “Enterprise architecture”
environmental footprint, and (3) “Enterprise architecture” environmental sustainability.
Iteration 1 resulted in a total of 127 potential sources, including duplicates, while, for

--- PAGE 5 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 5 of 39
iteration 2, the first 10 results pages for each search were included. First, relevant papers
were selected through abstract scanning using the inclusion criteria: English language,
time period 2007–2022, sustainability refers to environmental sustainability, and the author
focuses on improving ES through the use of enterprise architecture. This selection was then
further trimmed by reading the entire paper using the same inclusion criteria. The SLR
resulted in 12 relevant references (Table 2). This rather low yield indicates a lack of research
on the topic.
Table 1. Search terms and fields used in the SLR of Green EA for Web of Science and EBSCOhost.
Boolean Search 1 Boolean Search 2 Boolean Search 3 Boolean Search 4
TITLE enterprise architecture
AND TITLE (environmental
footprint OR environmental
impact OR climate change OR
emissions OR environmental
sustainability OR environmentally
sustainable OR environmental
performance OR environmental
aspect OR environmental
objective OR green OR eco OR
sustainability OR sustainability
OR sustainable)
TITLE enterprise architecture
AND ABSTRACT (environmental
footprint OR environmental
impact OR climate change OR
emissions OR environmental
sustainability OR environmentally
sustainable OR environmental
performance OR environmental
aspect OR environmental
objective OR green OR eco OR
sustainability OR sustainability
OR sustainable)
TITLE enterprise architecture
AND ALL TEXT/FIELDS
(environmental footprint OR
environmental impact OR climate
change OR emissions OR
environmental sustainability OR
environmentally sustainable OR
environmental performance OR
environmental aspect OR
environmental objective)
ABSTRACT “enterprise
architecture” AND ABSTRACT
(environmental footprint OR
environmental impact OR climate
change OR emissions OR
environmental sustainability OR
environmentally sustainable OR
environmental performance OR
environmental aspect OR
environmental objective OR green
OR eco OR sustainability OR
sustainability OR sustainable)
Table 2. Articles resulting from iterations 1 and 2 selected for the SLR on EA and sustainability.
Authors Article Title
Alves, D. F. R.; de Campos, R.; Souza, F. B. [18] Sustainable Development within Enterprise Architecture
Debnath, S. [20] Exploring Green IS through the Lens of Enterprise Architecture
Perdana, E. G.; Sitohang, B.; Sastramihardja, H.
S.; Candra, Z. C. [26]
A Strategy Framework For Incorporating Sustainability Into Enterprise Architecture
García-Escallón, R.; Aldea, A.;
van Sinderen, M. [27]
On Enterprise Architecture Patterns: A Tool for Sustainable Transformation
Iseke, A. [28] An Enterprise Architecture Approach Towards Sustainability and Environmental Performance
Isom, P. K.; Miller-Sylvia, S. L.; Vaidya, S. [29] Intelligent enterprise architecture
Laumann, F; Tambo, T [19] Enterprise Architecture for a Facilitated Transformation from a Linear to a Circular Economy
Noran, O. [17] An Enterprise Architecture Approach towards Environmental Management
Pankowska, M. [30] Enterprise Architecture Modelling for Corporate Sustainability
Plessius, H.; Ravesteyn, P.; Slot, R. [16] Greening organizations: the Contribution of Enterprise Architecture
Sutherland, D.; Hovorka, D. S. [15] Enterprise Architecture as a Contributor to Sustainability Objectives
Unhelkar, B. [31] Green Enterprise Architecture using Environmental Intelligence
The usability of EA development methodologies to support enterprise sustainable
development has been studied by Pankowska [30] with a focus on Green ICT. EA is
positioned as ensuring transparency, credibility, comprehensiveness, and consistency for
corporate sustainability. The author states that since changes in an organizational strategy
lead to changes in EA, a sustainable strategy formulation must be followed by enterprise
engineering coupled with a feedback loop to update that strategy. The author concludes,
however, that existing EA frameworks poorly support ES [30]. The following references
mostly attempt to bridge this existing gap by extending EA frameworks or by proposing
new EA frameworks that include ES.
One of the earliest mentions of coupling EA with ES is presented by Isom et al. [29],
who propose the concept of Intelligent EA for Green and beyond to enable a green organ-
isation. Their work focusses mostly on the methodology of Intelligent EA coupled with
the concept of Smarter Planet, which involves a vision to bring a new level of intelligence
to the interaction of people, organizations, and systems. The authors briefly discuss a

--- PAGE 6 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 6 of 39
scenario with green initiatives from a technology–architecture point of view to enable
greening within and across the organization. Examples of such initiatives include server
storage virtualization, more efficient cooling, and using cloud services as enablers for green
enterprises [29].
Stating that environmental responsibility is fast becoming an important aspect of
strategic management and recognizing that the implementation of environmental report-
ing and management systems are often not properly integrated into the overall business
strategy, Noran [17] argues for the integration of EM projects into the continuous EA. The
author states that businesses are not achieving the maximum benefits from implementing
and operating EM projects and proposes achieving a synergy between the EM system and
the organization by presenting a reference architecture framework and meta-methodology
using EA artefacts. Noran [17] mentions the usually disjointed nature of EM efforts with
regard to the enterprise and discusses four key success parameters for EM projects that
are typically well-addressed by EA: (1) top-management support for the project champion,
(2) sufficient authority and appropriate human/infrastructure resources, (3) a suitable strat-
egy integrated with the general company strategic direction, and (4) a cross-departmental
approach. The author argues that EA can provide an overarching and life-cycle-based
approach for EM projects aiming to set up an EM system in an integrated and coherent
manner concerning the organization and its environment. For this, the author selected, as
the architecture framework, the Generalised Enterprise Reference Architecture and Method-
ology (GERAM) [32]. The author concludes that integrating EM into EA best addresses the
lack of EM integration with business and Information Systems (IS) and the pitfall that EM
initiatives need to be internally driven and permeating throughout the business to achieve
cultural change. The focus of the paper is facilitating EM implementation through EA. For
this, a few EA artefacts are described; these, however, remain at a conceptual level and are
insufficiently concrete to allow immediate application in a business context.
Leveraging the GERAM framework has also been discussed by Alves et al. [18], who
focus on the incorporation of sustainable development (SD) requirements into EA frame-
works. The authors discuss that none of the most common EA frameworks explicitly
consider SD and present guidelines to extend components of GERAM with ISO standards
and frameworks related to sustainability. They propose the incorporation of the ISO
frameworks ISO 9001 [33], ISO 14001 [34], and ISO 26000 [35] to achieve, respectively,
the economic, environmental, and social requirements of SD. Indicating the lack of SD
requirements in GERAM, the authors propose including a sustainability view in the frame-
work inspired by ISO 14001 to increase awareness of the enterprise and its involvement
in environmental practices through continuous improvement, including the management
of a green supply chain through, e.g., selection of suppliers [18]. The recommendations,
however, remain very high-level and conceptual, making them insufficiently actionable.
The term “Green Enterprise Architecture” was only encountered once in this SLR, in
the work of Unhelkar [31], who views Green EA as an all encompassing strategic approach
towards Green ICT within and across an organization. The author discusses the use
of green ICT systems, such as carbon emission management software, for greening an
organization. Capturing carbon emission related data, upgrading traditional business
intelligence systems to incorporate environmental data, and disseminating these data
through a green ICT portal is discussed [31]. The focus of the presented Green EA is
mainly on carbon emission management software and its incorporation in a concrete
solution architecture.
Sutherland and Hovorka [15] investigate the use of EA at two large natural resource
extraction organizations through a sustainability lens to reveal the ICT contribution to the
sustainability aspects of the organizational mission. The authors focus on sustainability
as composed of three aspects: environmental, economic, and social. Via semi-structured
interviews of high-level business managers and ICT professionals, they found that there
was generally (1) poor awareness of the sustainability vision from an architectural perspec-
tive and (2) little alignment thinking. In addition, they found that (3) ICT was not typically

--- PAGE 7 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 7 of 39
leveraged for achieving broader sustainability goals, awareness, and action. Furthermore,
(4) sustainability factors were not considered explicitly in EA approval boards or the ICT
architecture and governance, while some sustainability consideration was present in the
business architecture [15]. These findings are in line with those of Plessius et al. [16], who
performed semi-structured interviews in five various organizations to develop directives
on how EA can be used for green ICT. Interview questions were centred around three topics:
if and how sustainability is implemented in the architecture, if and how sustainability goals
are monitored by architects during implementation, and main sustainability concerns for
organizations. From these interviews, the authors concluded that (1) all visited organi-
zations have adopted sustainability goals, (2) only one organization linked sustainability
goals to EA, and (3) sustainability was not taken into account in decision boards handling
project prioritization and budgeting [16].
Sutherland and Hovorka [15] discuss that, while senior management’s direction of
the organization was focused on sustainability on paper, the vertical integration of the
sustainability agenda dissipated as the message filtered to lower levels of the organizational
hierarchy. They suggest that EA processes can provide alignment of an organizational
sustainability agenda with specific ICT initiatives by leveraging, among others, the follow-
ing opportunities: reducing duplication of technology resources, data analytics for energy
consumption, ecological reporting, and integrated sustainability planning [15]. However,
the paper is presented as exploratory research and the recommendations and opportunities
remain very high-level and conceptual.
Emphasizing the unclarity of how to integrate business strategy with ICT operations in
relation to sustainability, Plessius et al. [16] focus on how EA may contribute to the traceable
transformation from sustainability principles towards requirements on green ICT in the
field of higher education. The authors differentiate between greening of ICT (making ICT
itself more sustainable) and greening through ICT (using ICT to increase the sustainability
of other capabilities or processes). In view of this, the authors emphasize the paradox
where greening through ICT leads to the increased use of ICT (increasing, e.g., energy
consumption and materials use). Because of this, EA is proposed as an intermediate party to
prioritize projects regarding green ICT. The authors reference the Sustainable Information
Systems Management (SISM) model in how it guides in determining important areas for
aligning the sustainability strategy of an organization with its ICT and Information Systems
(IS) activities, but they state that it does not provide answers on how to implement such
an alignment. Leveraging EA, the authors present the SISM Revisited model: The SISM
model guides in the identification of areas of interest for aligning the sustainability strategy
of an organization with its IS/ICT activities, while the SISM Revisited model advises on
how to implement the alignments as well [16]. While promising, this paper is positioned as
research in progress and offers preliminary results without any follow-up research having
been found.
Taking the perspective of a circular economy, Laumann and Tambo [19] examine
the necessary steps for analysing and designing the EA model, aiming to facilitate the
transformation of an enterprise from operating in a linear manner to operating in a circular
economy model. The authors propose a new EA framework, named the Circular Econ-
omy Enterprise Architecture Framework (CEEAF). This framework suggests extending:
(1) business architecture to include the facilitation of the circulation of materials; (2) data
architecture to encompass supplier, age, materials, transformations, and usages to optimize
utilization; (3) technology architecture to include technologies that are capable of long
traces without the possibility of being amended (like BT) to trace quality aspects throughout
the lifetime of any goods; and (4) application architecture to include intelligent design
in sub-system interaction to support data flow related to the circulation of goods. The
authors also hint towards the use of a capability model to visualize the functions that
an organization wants to achieve and to facilitate strategic decision-making. The focus
of the paper is on a circular economy transition which provides an interesting aspect of
environmental impact.

--- PAGE 8 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 8 of 39
Recognizing the need for an overall system perspective (“big picture”) regarding the
greening of individual IS components, Debnath [20] proposes leveraging EA to handle
the multi-dimensionality of the involved areas and views. The author uses the Zachman
framework to explore the link between IS and its greening from the perspectives of different
stakeholders, utilizing the interrogative questions what, how, where, who, when, and why
regarding the greening of IS. The proposed scope of green IS is to enable the flow of informa-
tion reflecting the environmental embeddedness of business functions and processes, where
relevance and meaningfulness of information would allow people and processes to connect
and optimize environmental sustainability. The author mentions linking green IS to the
different organizational layers (business, data, application, technology) but, unfortunately,
does not offer any concrete methods or references for greening the different layers.
Perdana et al. [26] identify EA as the right tool in implementing digital transformation
towards a sustainable enterprise and address the lack of sustainability integration in
current EA frameworks. The authors propose a strategy framework for incorporating
sustainability into EA consisting of the building blocks motive, nature, object, method, and
output [26]. The proposed framework, however, is presented at only a very high level,
without clarity on how to implement it. García-Escallón et al. [27] propose a methodology
for the specification of EA patterns for sustainable organizations. The authors classified
characteristics of sustainable organizations and mapped these classes to the ArchiMate
modelling language, limited to the ArchiMate motivation layer. Examples of classes are
adoption factors, customers channels, and key partners. They proposed sustainability
patterns linked to the TOGAF architecture development method [36] where, for instance,
an Architecture Vision phase is utilized to define the architecture vision of a sustainable
organization. Validation of the methodology presented mixed results regarding usability,
and even confusion about the relationship between the architecture development method
and the proposed methodology [27].
Offering a much more concrete way to introduce ES into the enterprise, Iseke [28]
discusses the use of EA and ArchiMate for sustainability. The author maps environmental
concepts to the ArchiMate language, guided by the most common sustainability reporting
tools found in literature (ISO 14001, ISO 14031 [37], the Eco-Management and Audit
Scheme [38], and the Sustainability Reporting Guidelines G3 [39]) and expert evaluation.
Both a qualitative and a quantitative approach to environmental performance modelling
are presented, aiming to improve the organizational environmental performance from an
architectural perspective [28]. The author proposes a list of 22 environmental concepts
that are modelled using 9 original ArchiMate elements and 10 new ArchiMate elements
(specializations). For a quantitative analysis of environmental performance, Iseke [28]
proposes a combination of a bottom-up approach, where the environmental impact for
every business process and architectural component can be computed and cumulated, and
a top-down approach, where impact is assessed per action or actor (e.g., client request).
This quantitative approach enables the discovery of heavy polluters and the design of
a to-be architecture that is optimized for environmental performance; by coupling these
heavy polluters with the business criticality of the component, quick wins can be identified
for removal, replacement, or optimization. The proposed artefact was found to lower the
threshold for organizations to take action concerning environmental assessments within
the enterprise by making environmental performance parameters a part of the default
processes in EA modelling [28].
Although several papers discuss the combination of EA with ES aspects, most of them
remain very high-level and conceptual, making them insufficiently actionable to allow
immediate application in a business context. Other papers are still preliminary research
or discuss only a very specific aspect of ES or the layered organizational complexity. This
current lack of a holistic yet actionable and generalizable tool for including ES in DTs is
addressed by the presented research. Based on this review, the envisioned artefact will be a
framework and set of views that should fulfil the following requirements:

--- PAGE 9 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 9 of 39
• Solution objective 1: Guidance on which concrete actions to take throughout all of the
enterprise’s layers to optimize ES.
• Solution objective 2: Guidance on how to set up the required EA capabilities for
mapping and improving the EF throughout the different enterprise layers.
• Solution objective 3: Holistic insight into the entire enterprise’s environmental impact.
To meet the first objective, we propose to search scientific and non-scientific literature
and tools to find Courses of Action (CoAs) that represent knowledge for improving ES.
Next, to make the solution actionable and manageable, we propose CBM, with a strong
focus on applying capabilities and capability maps.
2.1. Capabilities
In the realm of Enterprise Architecture, the term “capability” refers to “what” a
business accomplishes to achieve a specific outcome, abstracting from details such as
where, when, by whom, and how these activities transpire [40]. According to [23], a
capability combines ability and capacity that equips an enterprise to meet an objective
within a given context. This definition includes “ability”, the competence in employing
resources, and “capacity”, the availability of diverse resources. These resources can be
adjusted to match the context to achieve the intended goals.
Capabilities are realized through the dynamic configuration of resources across several
dimensions, often indicated as people, information, processes and technology [14,24]. The
people dimension not only pertains to the competencies and expertise of individuals
required to execute specific activities but also encompasses organizational topics, such
as team structure, behaviour, and culture. The information dimension refers to the data
and knowledge essential for informed decision-making and execution. The processes
dimension outlines the sequential activities and workflows to achieve desired outcomes.
Lastly, the technology dimension encompasses the tools, software, and infrastructural
elements necessary to support, enhance, and streamline operations. This configuration,
which we refer to as the “how” of capabilities, allows an organization to create value and
achieve its goals. Thus, in addition to defining “what” actions to perform to realize its
strategic vision, an organization must outline “how” to perform them.
Aligning capabilities with ES objectives has implications across their four dimensions.
This alignment ensures that ES objectives are met and resonate with the goals of DT and
ES. Capabilities offer a structured perspective of an organization, thus fostering better
alignment, as highlighted by [14]. Delving deeper, Capability-Based Management (CBM)
capitalizes on analytical insights to guide decision-making, emphasizing alignment and
strategic execution. With its focus on an organizational structure rooted in capabilities,
CBM effectively translates strategic ambitions, ensuring the desired alignment [41]. This
becomes especially crucial in the milieu of Digital Transformation, as noted by [42].
Therefore, as part of the EA domain, CBM can be viewed as an actionable tool that can
support the incorporation of ES in ongoing or future DT initiatives. It provides a means of
conducting a gap analysis, presenting its outcomes, and crafting an execution roadmap,
taking into account what an organization needs to achieve, both with a focus on ES as well
as DT.
2.2. Capability Map
The effective management of these capabilities demands a structured framework,
commonly known as a capability map, which is a key component of the organization’s
overall enterprise architecture description [43,44]. This capability map offers a systematic
depiction of the organization’s capabilities, including those that are simply referenced,
planned, aspired to, or partially realized. Its representation may be graphical, as shown by
the simple example in Figure 1, or in a purely textual format, sometimes referred to as a
capability catalogue or library.

--- PAGE 10 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 10 of 39
The effective management of these capabilities demands a structured framework,
commonly known as a capability map, which is a key component of the organization’s
overall enterprise architecture description [43,44]. This capability map offers a systematic
depiction of the organization’s capabilities, including those that are simply referenced,
planned, aspired to, or partially realized. Its representation may be graphical, as shown
by the simple example in Figure 1, or in a purely textual format, sometimes referred to as
a capability catalogue or library.
Figure1.Exampleofagenericcapabilitymapshowingonlythehighest-levelcapabilitiesandhiding
any further hierarchical decomposition [14,25].
A significant advantage of a capability map is its stability, deriving from its emphasis
on the “what” of capabilities and the exclusion of the more variable “how” (the four di-
mensions). This leads to a representation that is relatively stable, as opposed to, for exam-
ple, process maps, whose scope can be unclear due to their dynamic nature. Easier to de-
fine, a capability map is similar to a process map in that both represent functional decom-
position with specific scopes. The uniqueness of a capability map, however, stems from
itsabstractionofthe associated dimensions suchas processes, whichcircumventsintricate
scope-related discussions. The relations between capabilities and processes can be part of
a further analysis when needed, but they should be kept out of the capability map. It is
noteworthy that multipleprocesses can realizea single capabilityand, conversely,a single
process can help actualize multiple capabilities. Keeping this complex relation out of this
viewhelpstokeepthemodelstableandclear.Thecapabilitymap’sclarityis,thus,another
benefit: by omitting intricate details associated with the four dimensions, the map serves
as a conceptual model that accurately portrays the organization’s functions without ex-
cessive complexity or detail.
2.3. Documenting Use Cases of Capability Mapping
In this study, we aim to use capability mapping (and, in extension, CBM). In order to
describe the use cases of capability mapping in this context, we use the template as pre-
sented by [42]. Based on the 5W1H framework, used for describing systems [45,46], the
template aims to capture the how, the why, and the who of such a use case. The docu-
mented use cases can be found in Appendices A and B.
Figure 1. Example of a generic capability map showing only the highest-level capabilities and hiding
any further hierarchical decomposition [14,25].
A significant advantage of a capability map is its stability, deriving from its emphasis
on the “what” of capabilities and the exclusion of the more variable “how” (the four
dimensions). This leads to a representation that is relatively stable, as opposed to, for
example, process maps, whose scope can be unclear due to their dynamic nature. Easier
to define, a capability map is similar to a process map in that both represent functional
decomposition with specific scopes. The uniqueness of a capability map, however, stems
from its abstraction of the associated dimensions such as processes, which circumvents
intricate scope-related discussions. The relations between capabilities and processes can be
part of a further analysis when needed, but they should be kept out of the capability map.
It is noteworthy that multiple processes can realize a single capability and, conversely, a
single process can help actualize multiple capabilities. Keeping this complex relation out
of this view helps to keep the model stable and clear. The capability map’s clarity is, thus,
another benefit: by omitting intricate details associated with the four dimensions, the map
serves as a conceptual model that accurately portrays the organization’s functions without
excessive complexity or detail.
2.3. Documenting Use Cases of Capability Mapping
In this study, we aim to use capability mapping (and, in extension, CBM). In order
to describe the use cases of capability mapping in this context, we use the template as
presented by [42]. Based on the 5W1H framework, used for describing systems [45,46], the
template aims to capture the how, the why, and the who of such a use case. The documented
use cases can be found in Appendices A and B.
2.4. Layers of Enterprise Architecture
According to The Open Group, the purpose of EA is to optimize, across the enterprise,
the often-fragmented legacy of manual and automated processes into an integrated envi-
ronment that responds to change and supports the delivery of the business strategy. EA
achieves this by effectively managing information and DT by providing a strategic context
for the evolution and reach of digital capabilities in response to the constantly changing
needs of the business environment [47]. Since ES can be viewed as an emerging business
need arising from the constantly changing business environment, EA is proposed as an
ideal tool for managing ES throughout the enterprise. Through the use of The Open Group
Architecture Framework (TOGAF)’s four primary architecture domains, business, data,
application, and technology [48], abbreviated as BDAT, EA aims to provide a transparent
and holistic view throughout all layers of an organization. Each layer can be described
by different models and views, while policies, principles, and guidelines guide an organi-
zation’s growth. The BDAT concept will be used to structure the remainder of this paper.
Given the importance of incorporating ES in the decision-making process at the strategic
level [22] and the strategic nature of DTs, an additional emphasis will be placed on the
strategy of an organization. Even though TOGAF describes this as part of the business
architecture layer, we prefer to add a separate strategy layer, as this allows us to look be-
yond the traditional concepts covered by business architecture. Adding this separate layer
results in the acronym SBDAT. Table 3 presents a brief description of the different layers.

--- PAGE 11 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 11 of 39
Table 3. SBDAT architecture layers, based on [48].
Layer Description
Strategy
The strategy layer formulates and represents the high-level strategic direction and goals of the organization. It
emphasizes the understanding of the organization’s vision, strategic objectives, and key performance indicators.
Moreover, it includes identifying the business capabilities required to achieve these goals. This layer is critical in
defining and aligning an organization’s strategic initiatives with its operational tactics, ensuring its activities are
consistently aimed at fulfilling the strategic vision.
Business
The business layer delineates the governance, organizational structure, and primary processes vital to conducting
business operations.
Data
The data layer encapsulates the organization of an enterprise’s logical and physical data resources, elucidating the
structure of its critical data assets and the resources needed for data management.
Application
The application layer offers a strategic blueprint for the deployment of individual applications, outlining their
interplay and relationships with the core business processes integral to the organization’s function.
Technology
The technology layer illustrates the logical arrangement of software and hardware capabilities essential to support
the rollout of business, data, and application services. This includes components like IT infrastructure,
middleware, network setups, communication systems, data processing capabilities, and adopted standards.
In understanding the intricate relationships between architecture layers and capability
resource dimensions within an organization, it is essential to recognize their complementary
nature. The architecture layers, encompassing strategy, business, data, application, and
technology, provide a foundational framework for delineating the design and operation
blueprint of an enterprise. On the other hand, capability resource dimensions populate
and breathe life into this blueprint, facilitating its operationalization. In practical scenarios,
however, they overlap and cannot be seen separately. The strategy layer is reflected by
the capabilities on the highest level, setting forth overarching goals and objectives. The
business layer, then, which delineates operational workflows and roles, aligns seamlessly
with the people and processes dimensions, charting out the human and procedural aspects
necessary for strategy realization. The data layer, focused on the architectural organization
of data, finds its operational counterpart in the information dimension, which details the
specific data content utilized in the organization. Lastly, the confluence of the applica-
tion and technology layers shapes the technological edifice of the organization, defining
requisite tools, software, and foundational tech components. The technology dimension
operationalizes this by detailing the deployment and usage of these technological assets
in daily enterprise functions. In essence, this symbiotic integration between architecture
layers and resource dimensions ensures that an organization’s design and operational
resources harmonize, fostering a cohesive and efficient organizational system. As such,
insights from each of the architecture SBDAT layers could impact specific capabilities, or
they could impact multiple capabilities by impacting the capability dimensions.
3. Method
To answer the RQ stated in Section 1, a Design Science Research (DSR) method is
proposed. This method is centred around the creation of artefacts and processes that help
solve problems in the environment (application domain) while contributing to the scientific
knowledge base [49]. Based on the DSR Knowledge Contribution Framework [50], the type
of knowledge contribution will be Improvement, as the EA application domain maturity
can be considered quite high, but the environmental sustainability solution maturity is low;
at present, EA frameworks offer insufficient insights and support on how to optimize the
ES during DTs. Following the DSR methodology proposed by Peffers et al. [51], the present
research will start with a Problem-Centred Initiation. The DSR methodology consists of
six phases: Identify problem and motivate, define objectives of a solution, design and
development, demonstration, evaluation, and communication [51].
The first phase of the DSR methodology consists of the identification and motivation
of the problem, as presented in Section 2.

--- PAGE 12 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 12 of 39
The second phase of the DSR methodology consists of the definition of objectives for
the solution. The artefact resulting from answering the RQs will be created from a general
perspective, not specific to a given industry or sector, and not based on a specific case
study. As such, it will be an attempt to close the gap of a more generalizable approach and
serve as a capability-building framework and source of insights for any organization that is
undergoing (or is planning to undergo) an environmentally sustainable DT. The artefact
objectives are defined based on the results of phase one, as presented in Section 2.
The third phase involves designing and developing the artefact. This artefact pivots
around the organizational SBDAT layers. For insights into how to incorporate ES within
these layers, keyword searches were conducted on Web of Science, Google Scholar, and
Google. By amalgamating scientific and non-scientific literature and tools, we sought a
balance between rigorous scientific foundations and tangible real-world insights. This
study does not aim for a systematic literature review (SLR) of each organizational layer,
but, instead, offers a practical solution, collecting and presenting existing knowledge in a
novel way. Consequently, a limitation lies in potentially overlooking significant references
from both scientific and non-scientific spheres.
The initial artefact presents concrete Courses of Action (CoAs) based on extant lit-
erature, guiding organizations on integrating ES across enterprise layers. Each CoA is
largely standalone, targeting specific ES objectives. For a systems-thinking perspective
on CoA implementation, we leverage Capability-Based Management (CBM) in alignment
with [14]. For the second artefact, we derive capabilities from these CoAs that enable the
concept of Green Enterprise Architecture (EA) within organizations. By drawing from the
APQC process classification framework [25], we discern which capabilities are enhanced,
or “greened”, by specific CoAs. For instance, “Manage business processes” evolves into
“Manage green business processes”. When APQC capabilities do not match directly, new
capabilities are introduced. A prime example is the absence of an APQC capability centred
on Artificial Intelligence (AI). In such instances, we have proposed new capabilities like
“Manage Green AI”, which serves as a subset of the broader and already existing “Analyze
emerging technology concepts” capability. It is crucial to understand that each CoA might
affect multiple Green EA capabilities. Advancing these Green EA capabilities empowers
the organization to pursue new CoAs promoting ES, creating a symbiotic relationship
between CoA and Green EA capability.
For the third artefact, an Environmentally Sustainability-aware business capability
modelling approach is proposed as a concrete CoA to provide a holistic one-page overview
of an organization’s environmental footprint (EF). ES-aware business capability modelling
refers to a business modelling approach that integrates ES principles into the organization’s
capabilities by using (in a novel way) the presentation and analysis methods that capability
mapping offers. This means that, when planning, executing, or evolving business capabili-
ties, considerations related to ES are central. It is an approach that does not just consider the
typical business metrics (like profitability, efficiency, or growth) but also places a significant
emphasis on the environmental impact and sustainability of these capabilities. It is about
leveraging the existing practice of capability mapping to ensure that, as a business evolves
and transforms its capabilities, it does so with a clear understanding and integration of
sustainable practices. In our framework, we started from an existing reference architecture
(APQC) and identified each capability that could be linked to relevant CoAs derived from
established literature. These specific capabilities can be included in the ES-aware capabil-
ity modelling as well. However, ES-aware capability modelling has a broader focus. It
provides a way to assess a capability based on Key Environmental Indicators (KEIs). The
defined CoAs can contribute to achieve these, but other, non-identified CoAs can contribute
as well. This ES-aware business capability modelling can be used to, first, assess the as-is
EF of the organization coupled with the organization’s business capabilities. As such, it can
serve as a baseline for ES performance and identifying ES initiatives. Next, it can be used to
measure ES progress by applying the CoAs and building the Green EA capabilities during
DT. This ES-aware business capability modelling is introduced as a concept and deserves a

--- PAGE 13 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 13 of 39
dedicated avenue for further research. A conceptual example is presented, composed of
capabilities based on the APQC process classification framework [25]. This example is then
coupled with CoAs and ES concepts from the scientific literature.
Phases four (demonstration) and five (evaluation) will be part of a future study, where
the proposed artefacts will be applied in a specific business context through case studies.
The effectiveness and suitability of the artefacts will be evaluated, and the design of the
artefacts will be iteratively improved. However, in Section 5, a first demonstration and
validation is proposed based on a fictional case and example. Phase six (communication)
will be in the form of a scientific publication.
4. Artefact Design and Development
This section presents the design and development of the artefact that should meet the
requirements described in Section 2. The artefact is structured around the organizational
SBDAT layers, which are discussed in their respective sections, and is based on insights
from academic and professional literature. In each layer, CoAs are proposed that are taken
from or inspired by existing scientific and grey literature. From these CoAs, impacted
capabilities are derived that need to be adapted, built, or acquired in order to enable the
practice of Green EA. Next, a one-page overview of an organization’s environmental impact
is proposed by combining business capability mapping with a subset of the proposed CoAs.
4.1. Strategy
As mentioned by Feroz et al. [22], capabilities for environmentally sustainable DTs start
with incorporating ES in the decision-making process at the strategic level. This section
presents Strategy Courses of Action (SCoA) and their resulting Green EA capabilities.
The presented references are the result of both a keyword search focused on the concepts
strategy and ES and practical experience in the field of EA (as part of grey literature).
Figure 2, at the end of this section, presents a conceptual model that explains the way
these CoAs can contribute to the organizational goal of improving ES. The target audience
for Strategy Courses of Action (SCoA) is senior management, as they define the strategic
choices. Indirectly, lower managerial levels are also addressed, as they require strategic
direction, and the SCoAs provide boundaries and targets for defining solutions that realize
the strategic ambitions that are set by senior management.
Instead of relying on superficial changes in fragmented pockets of an organization,
organizations that are looking to prosper in the green economy need to embed ES into their
corporate vision, strategy, and objectives [52]. In a recent PricewaterhouseCoopers (PWC)
Australia publication, el Kadi [53] discusses that an EA approach can help make digitally
enabled environmental, social, and governance (ESG) decisions easier, and, as such, it can
helptoaddressthecomplexityofknowinghowandwhattoimplementwith regardstoESG.
The author links ESG responses to brand image and reputation and references a growing
body of evidence recognising the role played by ESG values in driving employee value
propositions, financial performance, prosperity, and sustainability, as well as in attracting
investment [53]. EA tools are suggested to aid in the implementation of ESG. For instance,
heatmaps are maps with, e.g., business functions, capabilities, and applications enhanced
with a colour code to highlight priority issues. Value chain mapping offers insights into the
ESG impact of the supply chain, as well as data capture on important ESG practices (e.g.,
data on emissions of supply partners). In addition, the author mentions the availability of
ESG reporting applications that support sustainability management [53]. From this, two
concrete SCoAs can be proposed: (SCoA1) Embed environmental sustainability into the
corporate vision, strategy, and objectives, and (SCoA2) implement ESG reporting tools and
processes. These CoAs help build the capabilities define the green business concept and
long-term vision and ESG reporting (Figure 3).

--- PAGE 14 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 14 of 39
CoAs can contribute to the organizational goal of improving ES. The target audience for
Strategy Courses of Action (SCoA) is senior management, as they define the strategic
choices. Indirectly, lower managerial levels are also addressed, as they require strategic
direction, and the SCoAs provide boundaries and targets for defining solutions that real-
ize the strategic ambitions that are set by senior management.
Figure 2.A visual summary of the Strategy Courses ofAction and the use of EA principles in achiev-
ing ES goals. Modelling language = ArchiMate.
Instead of relying on superficial changes in fragmented pockets of an organization,
organizations that are looking to prosper in the green economy need to embed ES into
their corporate vision, strategy, and objectives [52]. In a recent PricewaterhouseCoopers
(PWC) Australia publication, el Kadi [53] discusses that an EA approach can help make
digitally enabled environmental, social, and governance (ESG) decisions easier, and, as
such, it can help to address the complexity of knowing how and what to implement with
regards to ESG. The author links ESG responses to brand image and reputation and refer-
ences a growing body of evidence recognising the role played by ESG values in driving
employee value propositions, financial performance, prosperity, and sustainability, as
well as in attracting investment [53]. EA tools are suggested to aid in the implementation
of ESG. For instance, heatmaps are maps with, e.g., business functions, capabilities, and
applications enhanced with a colour code to highlight priority issues. Value chain map-
ping offers insights into the ESG impact of the supply chain, as well as data capture on
important ESG practices (e.g., data on emissions of supply partners). In addition, the au-
thor mentions the availability of ESG reporting applications that support sustainability
management [53]. From this, two concrete SCoAs can be proposed: (SCoA1) Embed envi-
ronmental sustainability into the corporate vision, strategy, and objectives, and (SCoA2)
implement ESG reporting tools and processes. These CoAs help build the capabilities de-
fine the green business concept and long-term vision and ESG reporting (Figure 3).
Figure 2. A visual summary of the Strategy Courses of Action and the use of EA principles in
achieving ES goals. Modelling language = ArchiMate.
Sustainability 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 15 of 41
In an EY publication, authors Rogers et al. [6] discuss the variability and nuance in a
consumer’s view of sustainability. They mention that many people would be willing to pay
more if a product reflected their specific agenda and that consumers will look beyond a
brand to consider the sustainability of the full value chain. Results of their EY Future Con-
sumer Index suggest that 84% of global consumers say sustainability is important when
making purchase decisions, and 43% would buy more from organizations that benefit soci-
ety, even at a higher cost. On the other hand, 47% say it costs too much to purchase sustain-
ableproducts.Inaddition,64%wouldbepreparedtobehavedifferentlyifitbenefitssociety.
The authors also highlight geographical differences in sustainability priorities: e.g., 53% of
German consumers are most concerned about climate change when asked about sustaina-
bility;thisfallstoonly38%intheUS.Also,thewillingnesstopaymoreforsustainablegoods
differspercountry.Forinstance,18%intheUScomparedto36%inGermany.Globally,35%
ofGenZconsumersarewillingtopaymorecomparedwith28%ofBoomers[6].Theauthors
listwaysinwhichconsumersaresettingahighbarregardingsustainabilityexpectations for
companies; for example, 73% of global consumers believe brands have a responsibility to
make a positive change in the world, and 80% of global consumers believe brands must be
transparent about their environmental impacts [6]. The authors propose making sustaina-
bility part of the company culture and to embed it into everyday decision-making towards
a common goal [6]. The following two SCoAs are, then, to: (SCoA3) Embed sustainability
into the company culture, and (SCoA4) be transparent to customers about ES. These con-
tribute to the capability manage green culture (Figure 3).
Figure 3. Proposed Green EA capability map for building the necessary capabilities to include ES
into DTs. Language = ArchiMate.
A recent example of how to embed sustainability into the company culture is pre-
sented by Patagonia founder Yvon Chouinard, who stated “we are turning capitalism on
its head by making the earth our only shareholder” [54]. Although this might be a rather
extreme example, it does highlight the importance of viewing the earth as a stakeholder
Figure 3. Proposed Green EA capability map for building the necessary capabilities to include ES
into DTs. Language = ArchiMate.

--- PAGE 15 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 15 of 39
In an EY publication, authors Rogers et al. [6] discuss the variability and nuance in a
consumer’s view of sustainability. They mention that many people would be willing to
pay more if a product reflected their specific agenda and that consumers will look beyond
a brand to consider the sustainability of the full value chain. Results of their EY Future
Consumer Index suggest that 84% of global consumers say sustainability is important
when making purchase decisions, and 43% would buy more from organizations that benefit
society, even at a higher cost. On the other hand, 47% say it costs too much to purchase
sustainable products. In addition, 64% would be prepared to behave differently if it benefits
society. The authors also highlight geographical differences in sustainability priorities:
e.g., 53% of German consumers are most concerned about climate change when asked
about sustainability; this falls to only 38% in the US. Also, the willingness to pay more
for sustainable goods differs per country. For instance, 18% in the US compared to 36% in
Germany. Globally, 35% of Gen Z consumers are willing to pay more compared with 28%
of Boomers [6]. The authors list ways in which consumers are setting a high bar regarding
sustainability expectations for companies; for example, 73% of global consumers believe
brands have a responsibility to make a positive change in the world, and 80% of global
consumers believe brands must be transparent about their environmental impacts [6]. The
authors propose making sustainability part of the company culture and to embed it into
everyday decision-making towards a common goal [6]. The following two SCoAs are, then,
to: (SCoA3) Embed sustainability into the company culture, and (SCoA4) be transparent to
customers about ES. These contribute to the capability manage green culture (Figure 3).
A recent example of how to embed sustainability into the company culture is presented
by Patagonia founder Yvon Chouinard, who stated “we are turning capitalism on its head
by making the earth our only shareholder” [54]. Although this might be a rather extreme
example, it does highlight the importance of viewing the earth as a stakeholder of the
company. By doing so, the interests of the environment are systematically taken into
account in company decisions. The next CoA (SCoA5) is, then, to include planet Earth as a
company stakeholder. Including ES in an organization’s strategy and values is the first step
in the realization of a reduced EF.
One way EA can support the realization of sustainable strategy and values is through
architecture principles (APs). Principles are general rules and guidelines that inform and
support how an organization sets about fulfilling its mission. They are intended to be
enduring, are seldom amended, and help define and guide the organization, from values
through to actions and results [55]. One such AP could be to always include ES in future
transformation projects. A specialization of this could be that environmental impact (mea-
sured through, e.g., energy consumption) will be included as a quality attribute (QA) [56] in
architecture trade-off analyses when choosing new architectures or technologies. Figure 2
presents the use of APs in achieving the goal of improving the organization’s ES. The
next course of action is to (SCoA6) identify APs for green strategy execution, building the
capability create and publish green EA principles (Figure 3).
The driving forces for an organization to include ES in its strategy are important to
understand. In their literature review on integrating corporate sustainability into strate-
gic management, Engert et al. [57] summarize organizational influences, supporting and
hindering factors, and internal and external drivers for the integration of corporate sustain-
ability. In doing so, they provide a helpful summary of the key issues to be considered by
managers when integrating corporate sustainability into strategic management. The main
drivers are legal compliance, competitive advantage, cost reduction, economic performance,
innovation, social andenvironmental responsibility, risk management, corporatereputation,
and quality management. A subset of these drivers is presented visually in Figure 2.
Regarding the economic drivers, Rode et al. [58] warn us to not only rely on a business
case discourse for adopting sustainability practices, as this could be counter-productive in
trade-off situations where sustainability actions are not justified by economic benefits. They
mention that people driven by a discourse of environmental responsibility show higher lev-
els of approval for cost-intensive investments in sustainability and, thus, suggest balancing

--- PAGE 16 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 16 of 39
business case drivers with environmental responsibility and education [58]. Attempting to
understand the interrelationship among the psychological driving factors of Green ICT/IS
adoption by organizations, Dalvi-Esfahani et al. [59] found that the three most important
factors in adopting Green ICT/IS were “monetary cost-benefit assessment”, “Green ICT/IS
attitude”, and “awareness of consequences”. The authors propose motivating managers to
behave more pro-environmentally and to select individuals for managerial positions who
value environmental sustainability [59].
Hu et al. [60] examined key drivers and effects of firms’ Green ICT practices (sys-
tematic efforts to incorporate ecological principles and energy-efficiency operations into
the technology lifecycle) via survey data from a diverse set of 304 firms in Taiwan. They
distinguish between Green IS and Green ICT: Green IS is the development and use of infor-
mation systems that contribute to sustainable processes, and Green ICT focuses on energy
efficiency and technology equipment utilization. The authors focus on Green ICT and
propose a hierarchical view of key drivers, categorised as contextual factors, firm-specific
considerations, and firm practices, and identify customers’ and equity holders’ attitudes as
the most important determinant of a firm’s green practices, followed by the firm’s internal
readiness, industry norms, and environmental awareness [60]. They emphasize the impor-
tance of a firm’s internal readiness being a crucial antecedent of its Green ICT practices and
suggest the allocation of sufficient resources and obtaining the necessary capabilities to
respond to external pressures in the environment [60]. Loeser et al. [61] found that Green
IS strategies, and the implementation of Green ICT/IS practices, lead to organizational
benefits in the form of cost reductions, corporate reputation enhancement, and Green
innovation capabilities. The authors propose that Green IS practices, beyond ICT-focused
Green ICT measures, can add substantial corporate benefits beyond cost reductions. Re-
garding drivers of Green IS adoption, Baggia et al. [62] studied survey data from 156 small
and medium-sized enterprises and concluded that Green IS endeavours lead to increased
organizational benefits through improved efficiencies. The authors mention the importance
of enhancing employees’ attitudes towards green issues and Green IS and that Green IS
adoption is often constrained by skills deficits and knowledge limitations [62]. Improving
the internal readiness of an organization by increasing skill and knowledge levels is thus a
crucial step in both Green IS and Green ICT adoption. This could be achieved by using EA
practices that incorporate sustainability. The final strategic CoAs are, then: (SCoA7) Raise
awareness of environmental consequences, (SCoA8) include environmental awareness in
the hiring process, and (SCoA9) invest in Green IS/ICT capabilities. SCoA7 and SCoA8
contribute to the capabilities manage green culture and create green organizational design.
SCoA9 builds the capability develop and manage green IT business strategy (Figure 3).
While green practices in the business layer are maturing (Section 4.2), the main focus
seems to be on business process improvements. To bridge the gap between green strategy
and execution, Capability-Based Management (CBM) can be applied. CBM, as proposed by
Van Riel [41], leverages capability as a foundational concept upon which the organization
can be managed, particularly in transformations. To link CBM to ES, an ES-aware business
capability modelling approach is proposed to provide a one-page overview of an organi-
zation’s EF and how environmental impact links to the organization’s core capabilities.
As such, it could provide an essential tool for top management to gain awareness of their
organization’s EF and to make conscious investment decisions that serve in the realization
of the organization’s strategy, both green and otherwise. While this ES-aware business
capability modelling is now only briefly introduced and deserves a dedicated avenue for
further research, a conceptual example is presented in Figure 4. The presented generic
business capability map is composed of business capabilities based on the APQC process
classification framework [25]. It visualizes a RAG (red, amber, green) evaluation of each
capability concerning its overall performance and fit. Scoring is performed on the four
dimensions people, processes, information, and technology as a basis for analysis and
allocation of resources [14]. The idea is to include ES in each of these four dimensions.
Depending on the organization’s green strategy, the weight of the ES aspect in the scoring of

--- PAGE 17 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 17 of 39
the dimensions will vary. For instance, an organization with a focus on lowering its overall
EF will assign a large weighting factor to ES in all of its capabilities, while an organization
focusing only on green production will assign a large weighting factor to ES in its core
production capabilities, but, for instance, not necessarily on its supporting capabilities.
The environmental performance in each of these dimensions can be augmented by, among
others, undertaking the proposed CoAs in this paper and building Green EA capabilities.
Taking the capability “Manage business processes” as an example, the “people” dimension
can be improved by (SCoA3) embedding sustainability into the company culture, (SCoA6)
raising awareness of environmental consequences, and (SCoA7) including environmental
awareness in the hiring process. As such, this capability can be transformed into “Manage
green business processes”. Opportunities for improving the processes, information, and
technology dimensions will be discussed in the following sections.
Sustainability 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 18 of 41
capabilities, for instance, to identify which capabilities are differentiating, strategic, or
core to the value proposition. To summarize, ES-aware business capability modelling can
be used to first assess the as-is EF of the organization coupled with the organization’s
business capabilities and serve as a baseline for ES performance. Next, it can be used to
identify ES initiatives and the potential EF impact of other initiatives and projects. Finally,
it can be used to measure ES progress by applying the CoAs and building the Green EA
capabilities during an organization’s DT. A final course of action is, then, to (SCoA10)
adopt the practice of CBM and the use of ES-aware business capability modelling, build-
ing the capability develop and manage green business capabilities (Figure 3).
Figure 4. A generic example of an ES-aware business capability map with a RAG (red, amber, green)
evaluation of 3 example capabilities.
Figure 4. A generic example of an ES-aware business capability map with a RAG (red, amber, green)
evaluation of 3 example capabilities.
In addition to including ES in the four dimensions of existing capabilities, the proposed
Green EA capability map (Figure 3) can be used to make existing capabilities green or to
introduce new capabilities in the organization which are needed to improve ES and execute
the proposed CoAs. This is presented in Figure 5 as capabilities with a dashed outline. The
ES-aware business capability map can also be used to apply overlays focussing specifically
on the EF by cumulating KEIs from the underlying processes. For instance, the capability
“Deliver Physical Products” might be realized by 12 underlying business processes, each
with their calculated CO2 impact (KEI1) and water usage (KEI2); the cumulated CO2
impact and water usage of this capability (and others) can be included in the business
capability map to provide a holistic one-page overview of the entire CO2-impact and water
usage of the enterprise. This kind of capability–KEI overlay can be added quantitively
and/or through heatmapping (see Figure 4). This could then be used to steer the decision-
making process on where to invest to lower the EF. This decision-making process can be
facilitated by also applying pace layering [63] to the business capabilities, for instance, to
identify which capabilities are differentiating, strategic, or core to the value proposition.
To summarize, ES-aware business capability modelling can be used to first assess the as-is
EF of the organization coupled with the organization’s business capabilities and serve as a
baseline for ES performance. Next, it can be used to identify ES initiatives and the potential
EF impact of other initiatives and projects. Finally, it can be used to measure ES progress
by applying the CoAs and building the Green EA capabilities during an organization’s
DT. A final course of action is, then, to (SCoA10) adopt the practice of CBM and the use

--- PAGE 18 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 18 of 39
of ES-aware business capability modelling, building the capability develop and manage
green business capabilities (Figure 3).
Figure 4. A generic example of an ES-aware business capability map with a RAG (red, amber, green)
evaluation of 3 example capabilities.
Figure 5. Gap analysis of Green Capabilities.
Figure 2 presents an example of how these CoAs relate to ES goals using the EA mod-
elling language, ArchiMate. Within this framework, Courses of Action are devised to fulfil
a specific goal, which is influenced by various drivers, both internal and external. When
establishing Courses of Action aimed at a particular goal, it is vital to adhere to specific
principles. These principles act as guiding parameters or boundaries. The underlying
motivation for setting these goals is to facilitate positive value creation. Ultimately, this
created value, designed to cater to distinct stakeholders, can be quantified and gauged
(assessment) through well-defined targets and metrics.
4.2. Business
The business layer of an enterprise offers ample opportunity to incorporate ES into an
organization’s operating model, capabilities, and processes; concepts such as the Sustain-
ability Balanced Scorecard (SBSC), Green Business Process Reengineering, Green Business
Process Management (BPM), and Green Six Sigma are gaining increasing attention in the
academic literature [64–69]. This section presents Business Courses of Action (BCoA) and
their resulting Green EA capabilities. The presented references are the result of both a
keyword search focused on the concepts business and ES and practical experience in the
field of EA. As discussed in the introduction, an important gap in the current research
on the relationship between DT and sustainability is that published research is mostly
industry or sector-specific, limiting the generalizability and transferability of the research
findings. To address this gap, the presented CoAs in the business layer are not specific to an
organization or sector, but focus, rather, on broadly applicable, mainly managerial, aspects.
Starting from a decision-making perspective, the addition of strategically relevant
environmental, social, and ethical considerations to the traditional Balanced Scorecard (BSC;

--- PAGE 19 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 19 of 39
used to balance financial and non-financial success measures) is known as the Sustainability
Balanced Scorecard (SBSC) [67]. In their review article, Hansen and Schaltegger [67] inves-
tigate how the architecture of the BSC can be adapted to include corporate sustainability.
The authors refer to the architecture as the ensemble of the core element (1) performance
perspectives coupled to (2) strategic objectives, as measured by Key Performance Indicators
(KPIs), which lead to financial success through (3) cause-and-effect chains. The SBSC is
differentiating because it explicitly recognizes sustainability-related objectives and per-
formance measures and allows management to address goals in all three dimensions of
sustainability (economic, environmental, and social) [67]. The authors propose a generic
SBSC architecture that can guide decision-makers in including environmental and social
aspects in their business; as such, it can serve as a basis for company-specific SBSCs. In
addition to KPIs, the concept of Key Ecological Indicators (KEIs) has been proposed to
properly measure the environmental impact of business processes [68,69]. The authors state
that traditional KPIs often provide insufficient data concerning environmental aspects and
that green requirements might result in a trade-off between KPIs and KEIs. Examples of
KEIs include energy consumption, water consumption, carbon footprint, and recycling [69].
The first two BCoAs are (BCoA1) define KEIs and (BCoA2) adopt the SBSC. These BCoAs
help build the capability develop and set green organizational objectives (Figure 3).
To reduce an organization’s environmental impact, the authors [68,69] propose a four-
phased approach and architecture, termed green business process engineering, consisting
of four layers: (1) strategy, (2) sensing and monitoring, (3) analysis and management,
and (4) adaptation. In their architecture, they emphasize the need for a holistic perspec-
tive, including people and infrastructure in the end-to-end business processes. In brief,
layer (1) is used to define KEIs, layer (2) measures the KEIs, layer (3) analyses the as-is
with identification of key problem points (e.g., highest environmental impact), and layer
(4) reengineers the business processes towards an optimal to-be [69]. The authors use pro-
cess maps combined with, for instance, heat mapping to transition from the as-is towards a
greener to-be.
From the perspective of BPM, another emerging field of Green BPM has the goal
of reducing the environmental impact of business processes. In their systematic review
of Green BPM, Couckuyt and van Looy [66] propose the following definition: “Green
BPM extends the optimization of cost, quality, time, and flexibility of business processes with an
environmental sustainability dimension. This means that Green BPM concerns the modelling,
deployment, optimization and management of business processes with dedicated consideration paid
to their environmental consequences. To facilitate successful Green BPM, organizational capability
areas (i.e., culture, structure) should also be considered as important”.
A concrete way to add an ES dimension to BPM is to extend existing modelling
notations with ES constructs, such as emissions, energy consumption, and paper con-
sumption [66]. These constructs, analogues to the mentioned KEIs, help to map out the
environmental impact of given business processes and to set a baseline for ES improve-
ments. To achieve ES objectives, Couckuyt and van Looy (2020) summarize relevant
management concepts that are described in the academic literature. These include (1) KEIs
linked to an environmental strategy as an extension of KPIs, (2) maturity models to improve
ES capabilities, (3) sustainability frameworks, (4) ES roles and responsibilities, (5) external
ES relationships, and (6) ES in project management. KEIs help in planning and defining the
environmental performance of organizations, while maturity models for environmental
capabilities and sustainable ICT help to determine and improve performance. Regarding
ES roles and responsibilities, the importance of, for instance, top management involvement
with ES strategy and KEIs and business architecture in ES adaptation is emphasized [66].
A distinction is made between Business Process Lifecycle (BPL), BPM, and the more
holistic Business Process Orientation (BPO), including organizational capabilities such
as culture and structure [70]. In their study to determine which BPM-specific capabili-
ties contribute to the society-related performance of an organization, Couckuyt and van
Looy [70] surveyed 13 BPM capability areas. While all 13 capabilities were positively linked

--- PAGE 20 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 20 of 39
to society-related performance outcomes, four BPM capabilities stood out with the highest
importance: “process-based external relationships”, “process-oriented values, attitudes
and behaviours”, “process-oriented organization chart”, and “process-oriented governance
bodies”; these four indicate the importance of a managerial approach to Green BPM adop-
tion. From their findings, the authors propose decision-making guidelines for practitioners
in adopting Green BPM in their organization. These guidelines include focusing on the four
most influential BPM capabilities. Regarding “process-based external relationships”, Green
BPM should be addressed from a broad perspective beyond the organizational borders (e.g.,
including supplier selection based on sustainability criteria). Regarding “process-oriented
values, attitudes and behaviours”, Green BPM adoption requires working on the appro-
priate culture, including training programs and internal guidelines. Green BPM adoption
should also be reflected in the organizational structure, which includes “process-oriented
organization chart” and “process-oriented governance bodies”, by, for instance, assigning a
Chief Ecological Officer responsible for the green strategy or defining sustainability owners
or a sustainability board in the organization [70]. Additional CoAs thus include: (BCoA3)
Adopt the use of Green BPM, (BCoA4) include ES in project management, (BCoA5) identify
external ES relationships, (BCoA6) define ES roles and responsibilities, and (BCoA7) im-
plement sustainability organizational structures and governance bodies. These CoAs help
build the capabilities manage green business processes and create green organizational
design (Figure 3).
The authors also note that practitioners should be aware of restrictions resulting from
the organizational context. They found that Green BPM adoption is dependent on the
contextual factors “organization size” and “competitiveness” while being independent of
“organization location”. Differences in Green BPM adoption per sector were not statistically
significant; however, they did find some evidence that Green BPM adoption differs per
organization sector, where sectors that are not inherently linked to environmental policies
or regulation are likely to experience more difficulties in Green BPM adoption [70]. To
enable improved Green BPM adoption, Couckuyt and Van Looy [71] identified Green
BPM maturity levels and propose a maturity model consisting of four levels: “Green BP
immaturity”: A low representation of all capabilities; “Green BPL maturity”: A high repre-
sentation of lifecycle capabilities and a medium representation of management, culture, and
structure capabilities; “Green BPM maturity”: A high representation of all capabilities with
an emphasis on lifecycle capabilities; “Green BPO maturity”: An advanced representation
of all capabilities. Specific examples of each level include (1) Green BPL maturity: ES
constructs are included in BPM notations. Processes are benchmarked and optimized for
ES. (2) Green BPM maturity: KEIs are adopted and linked to the environmental strategy.
Well-defined ES roles and responsibilities are in place. (3) Green BPO maturity: Employees
consider their daily resource usage and ES impact and receive relevant training. Sustain-
ability governance is ensured by assigned ownership, a sustainability board, and a Chief
Ecological Officer [71]. The next course of action is, then, to (BCoA8) adopt maturity models
to improve ES capabilities.
Toachieveexpectedsustainabilitybenefits, Bezerraetal.[72]proposeaframeworkthat
links organizational capabilities to sustainability benefits. They discuss broad categories
of capabilities such as the “ability to cooperate with other companies to jointly address
sustainability challenges” and the “ability to develop technologies, products, and processes
aiming at sustainability goals”. As such, they provide guidelines on which capabilities can
be developed to improve specific sustainability benefits [72]. Depending on the business,
sector, and value discipline of the organization, many more greening initiatives exist to
decrease the environmental impact of the business layer. E.g., organizations that focus
on operational excellence [73] could benefit from Green Lean Six Sigma, which is an
emerging approach towards environmental sustainability in conjunction with operational
achievements [64]. Product-centric organizations could transition from a linear economy
operating model to a circular economy operating model using the Circular Economy
Enterprise Architecture Framework proposed by Laumann and Tambo [19]. Depending

--- PAGE 21 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 21 of 39
on the specific business context, the next course of action is to (BCoA9) investigate other
relevant concepts such as Green Six Sigma and EA for Circular Economy, building the
respective capabilities develop green lean/continuous improvement strategy and manage
green product and service life cycle (Figure 3).
4.3. Data
Data, collectively, is often equated to “the new oil” because of its immense potential
value. This, however, has a double meaning, given that the global data footprint is doubling
every two years [10]. To reduce the data-related EF, this section presents Data Courses
of Action (DCoA) and their resulting Green EA capabilities. This section also discusses
the EF of AI and related CoAs, even though AI algorithms can also be categorized in the
application layer. A key role of AI is to help create insights and value from large amounts
of structured and unstructured data. In addition, data and AI have a close and reciprocal
relation since AI also contributes to the volume and velocity of data [74]. The presented
references are the result of both a keyword search focused on the concepts data, AI, and ES
and practical experience in the field of EA.
Freitag et al. [10] discuss opportunities, threats, and threat mitigations regarding the
climate impact of big data, data science, and AI. Opportunities for decreasing the climate
impact include, e.g., smart cities, grids, logistics, and agriculture with a concrete example
of optimizing energy use for building heating and lighting. The authors also touch upon
the emerging field of computational sustainability, where technologies such as AI are used
to help the achievement of SD goals [10]. The flip side, however, is climate impact threats
from the ever-increasing data footprint. Lucivero [75] also addresses the threat that the
data revolution imposes on SD due to its EF and aims to draw attention to the ethical
implications of the data revolution’s EF. The author mentions the often-perceived imma-
terial nature of digital data: e.g., the term “cloud” suggests something impalpable and
untouchable, obscuring the materiality of the infrastructure, its geographical presence, and
its environmental impact. This is in contrast to the extent of natural resource requirements
(materials, water, energy, etc.) of high data volumes and the environmental impact of the
disposal of end-of-life computing hardware [75]. In addition to energy and materials, data
centres consume water indirectly through electricity generation and directly through cool-
ing [76]. Lucivero [75] suggests that more care must be taken in assessing data initiatives,
taking into account their environmental impact; a key action for this is raising awareness of
the EF of data, including pollution caused by data centres, apps, and computing services.
Raising this awareness on both the individual level and organizational levels can trigger the
reduction of emissions caused by data production, use, and storage through behavioural
changes [75]. A first concrete DCoA is then to (DCoA1) raise awareness of the EF of data
production, usage, and storage throughout the organization. This CoA contributes to the
capability define and execute green business information lifecycle planning and control
(Figure 3).
As part of Amazon Web Services Well-Architected Framework–Sustainability Pillar,
the use of data management practices and data patterns to reduce the provisioned storage
and resources required for workloads is proposed [77]. Actions include understanding
the data storage technologies, managing the data lifecycle to be more efficient, reducing
performant storage when requirements decrease, and deleting data that are no longer
needed [77]. AWS proposes eight best practices for environmentally sustainable data
patterns: (1) implement a data classification policy, (2) use technologies that support
data access and storage patterns, (3) use lifecycle policies to delete unnecessary data,
(4) minimize over-provisioning in block storage, (5) remove unneeded or redundant data,
(6) use shared file systems or object storage to access common data, (7) minimize data
movementacrossnetworks, and(8)backupdataonlywhentheyaredifficulttorecreate[77].
The use of environmentally sustainable data patterns is then proposed as the next course
of action (DCoA2), contributing to the capability define and maintain green business
information architecture (Figure 3).

--- PAGE 22 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 22 of 39
According to Freitag et al. [10], AI is particularly susceptible to having a large future
EF given the number of resources needed to train AI models. An extreme example is
the estimation of emitting 284 tonnes of CO2 from training just one machine learning
algorithm for natural language processing, while more typical cases are estimated to emit
about 4.5 kg per model [10,78,79]. While these numbers will vary immensely form case to
case, the authors mention the importance of becoming aware of wasted and redundant
computation in training AI models [78]. It is thus important for organizations to undertake
steps in gaining insights into their AI EF and to apply practices that reduce the AI footprint.
Schwartz et al. [80] advocate the increased research in and use of Green AI, which they
define as research that yields novel results without increasing computational cost, and,
ideally, reducing it. This is in contrast to Red AI, which results in rapidly escalating
computational costs and the environmental impact thereof [80].
Four concrete key practices that reduce the carbon (and energy) footprint of machine
learning (ML) workloads are proposed by Patterson [81]. These four practices can be
immediately applied as the next concrete data courses of action: These include (DCoA3)
selecting efficient ML model architectures that reduce computation, (DCoA4) using pro-
cessors and systems optimized for ML training, (DCoA5) computing in the public cloud
rather than on-premises, and (DCoA6) map optimization, picking the location with the
cleanest energy. The authors state that applying these four practices together could reduce
energy consumption by 100-fold and emissions by 1000-fold [81]. DCoA3, DCoA4, DCoA5,
and DCoA6 help build the capability manage Green AI (Figure 3).
4.4. Application
When building applications and software architectures, ES can be taken into account
by lowering the energy consumption of applications. To reduce the application-related EF,
this section presents Application Courses of Action (ACoA) and their resulting Green EA
capabilities. The presented references are the result of both a keyword search focused on
the concepts application and ES and practical experience in the field of EA.
According to Kazman et al. [82], the energy consumption of applications should be
managed as a quality attribute (QA), just like any other architectural quality, and it should
be included in the trade-off analyses against other QAs: e.g., energy use vs performance
and availability. The author proposes the use of design, prototyping, and experimentation
to substantially improve an application’s energy usage, emphasizing the need for both
models and prototypes: models allow for reasoning about architectural QAs and their
trade-offs, while prototypes allow empirical testing and incremental improvement [82].
According to Fonseca et al. [83], measuring energy consumption to provide a baseline when
introducing changes is the first step towards energy awareness. From this, two concrete
ACoA are proposed: (ACoA1) integrate energy consumption as a QA in software architec-
tures, including its measurement, and (ACoA2) use prototyping and empirical testing to
optimise an application’s energy efficiency. These ACoAs contribute to the capability de-
velop and manage green service/solution architecture (Figure 3). When managing energy
consumption as a QA, tools such as tactics-based questionnaires can be used that focus on
energy efficiency. Bass et al. [56] propose such a questionnaire, with questions on resource
monitoring, resource allocation, and reducing resource demand to assess the degree to
which an architecture employs specific tactics for managing energy efficiency.
Fonseca et al. [83] propose a manifesto for energy-aware software containing nine
principles of energy awareness: (1) public awareness is key for widespread adoption,
(2) incentives for software stakeholders should be provided, (3) energy-aware software
engineering should be a priority for every stakeholder, (4) education and professional
training should cover energy-aware software by default, (5) broad adoption requires
attention to usability, (6) energy awareness should be engineered throughout the lifecycle,
(7) software quality should not come at the expense of energy awareness, (8) energy
awareness demands dynamic adaptability, and (9) we value measures over beliefs (and
reliable trends over precision). The authors state that software engineers have never

--- PAGE 23 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 23 of 39
been taught to consider the energy consumption of the software systems they create and
that the majority of practitioners and researchers are ignorant of energy concerns. The
authors offer concrete advice including (1) asking clients about their energy requirements
and propagating them to developers, testers, and operations personnel and (2) providing
training about the design and creation of energy-aware software, making it a standard
competency of every ICT practitioner [83]. These can be summarized as the two next
ACoAs: (ACoA3) include energy use in the requirements engineering process, and (ACoA4)
train ICT personnel in energy-aware software practices, a more specific CoA compared
to SCoA3. These ACoAs help build the capabilities understand business requirements
for green IT capabilities and develop and manage green service/solution architecture
(Figure 3).
In addition to software architecture contributing to energy-efficient applications,
the choice of programming language can have a significant impact on energy efficiency.
Pereira et al. [84] compared the energy efficiency of 27 programming languages used to run
10 well-defined benchmark programming problems, analysing the results according to the
language’s execution type (compiled, virtual machine, and interpreted). They found that
compiled languages (e.g., C and C++) were the fastest and most energy-efficient, consuming
on average 120 J to execute the solution compared to 576 J and 2365 J for virtual machine
(e.g., Java and C#) and interpreted languages (e.g., Python and PHP), respectively. The top
five languages that consumed the least amount of energy were C, Rust, C++, Ada, and
Java. The bottom five languages were Perl, Python, Ruby, JRuby, and Lua. The energy
consumption was mostly due to the CPU, accounting, on average, for about 89%; the
remainder was assigned to DRAM [84]. This also indicates the importance of optimising
compiling processes to reduce CPU cycles.
4.5. Technology
This section presents Technology Courses of Action (TCoA) and their resulting Green
EA capabilities covering Green ICT, infrastructure, and emergent technologies such as the
Internet of Things (IoT) and Blockchain Technology (BT). The presented references are
the result of both a keyword search focused on the concepts ICT technology and ES and
practical experience in the field of EA.
When linking the technology layer of an organization with ES, Green ICT/IS adoption
provides a holistic starting point. This field focuses both on the greening of ICT itself and
on leveraging ICT to reduce the EF of processes. The use of specific maturity models to
assess and improve the adoption of Green ICT has been gaining increasing attention [85–87].
Hankel et al. [85] found that many factors influence the adoption of Green ICT, the most
important ones being strategic alignment, leadership, culture and beliefs, ownership, and
knowledge. The authors emphasize the importance of using tools like the SURF Green ICT
Maturity Model (SGIMM) in gaining awareness, identifying improvement areas, generating
suggestions on how to improve, and measuring progress [85]. Lautenschutz et al. [87]
compared seven Green ICT maturity models and mentioned that all models aim at raising
awareness and identifying Green ICT improvement areas, but they emphasize different
aspects; no model is all-encompassing, and its usefulness depends on the task at hand [87].
The authors used this comparison to extend the SGIMM to include missing topics. The
addition of extra topics made the model more comprehensive, but also more complex and
time-consuming to use [87]. The complexity of such maturity models has been identified
as a hurdle by Foogooa and Dookhitram [88], who propose a simple self-assessment tool
to assess the maturity of an organization’s Green ICT based on a simple questionnaire
in four categories: equipment lifecycle, end-user computing, enterprises and data centre,
and ICT as a low carbon enabler. This kind of simpler tool reduces the need for trained
consultants and, thus, reduces the threshold for smaller organizations to improve their
Green ICT maturity [88]. Brand et al. [89] propose their own Green ICT maturity model
that includes support on capabilities required for organization-wide adoption, identifying
six capability domains where a baseline competence is required to adopt Green ICT: Vision

--- PAGE 24 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 24 of 39
and Strategy, Planning and Execution, People and Culture, Process, Technology and Data,
and Governance. Depending on the organization’s size, structure, and goals, different
Green ICT maturity models can be selected. A first TCoA (TCoA1) is, then, to choose a
Green ICT maturity model that fits the organization and use it for an as-is assessment and
subsequent improvement roadmap. Although Green ICT maturity models encompass a
broader scope, the emphasis on technology supports its inclusion in the technology layer.
This TCoA helps build the capability deploy green services/solutions (Figure 3).
Regarding emergent technologies, Freitag et al. [10] discuss opportunities, threats, and
threat mitigations concerning the IoT. The authors identify opportunities such as smart
cities that provide better public services at lower environmental costs and decarbonising
the energy supply chain by creating Smart Grids. However, these opportunities come
with inherent threats, such as the rapidly rising number of devices and their associated
data traffic, which both affect ES. These threats can be mitigated by embracing the Green
IoT, which focuses on ensuring that the IoT’s own environmental costs, both embodied
and use phase, are taken into consideration when moving toward a smarter society and
environment [10]. The next concrete CoA is then to (TCoA2) assess the environmental
impact of IoT projects and include this in the project business case, contributing to the
Green Technology capability manage the Green IoT (Figure 3).
Continuing on emergent technologies, BT can be a double-edged sword concerning ES
and requires significant consideration before adopting it in an enterprise or organization.
BT presents ample opportunities to improve ES, such as enhancing the sustainability of
the supply chain through, e.g., increased transparency; however, a significant threat is the
enormous electricity requirements for BT, particularly with regard to cryptocurrencies [10].
Kouhizadeh and Sarkis [90] discuss the potential of BT in greening supply chains by de-
scribing several BT use cases throughout the following supply chain stages: (1) upstream
vendor/supplier management, (2) upstream purchasing, inbound logistics, and inventory
management activities, (3) internal operations and production activities, (4) downstream
activities, and (5) closing-the-loop activities. A concrete example includes using BT to
optimise product life cycle assessments using actual and transparent product data instead
of estimations [90]. Achieving green procurement through the use of BT and the IoT is
discussed by Rane and Thakker [91] who propose an architecture that includes BT and
IoT for green procurement, including, e.g., energy and waste management. Additional
BT use cases include, e.g., vehicle tracking, warehouse selection, and emissions and com-
pliance monitoring [90,91]. Given this variety in ES opportunities, the next CoA is then
to (TCoA3) identify opportunities throughout the organization where BT can improve ES
(such as supply chain). This TCoA helps build the capability manage the Green Blockchain
(Figure 3).
The flipside of BT is its potentially large negative impact on ES through its high energy
consumption. Due to its high energy requirements and carbon footprint, activities such
as Bitcoin mining have been restricted or banned by several regulators [92]. Because of
this downside, it is important to analyse the balance between improving the ES of specific
use cases through the use of BT and its associated EF cost (electricity use, carbon emission,
hardware lifecycle, etc.). Considerations such as the BT goal (outcome of the use case), the
type of BT used, and the source of energy used can help in justifying the high energy usage
of BT [92]. Regarding the type of BT, Sedlmeir et al. [93] discuss the importance of BT design
choices concerning their energy consumption. They compare different BT architectures and
conclude that Proof of Work (PoW) BTs, such as Bitcoin, are energy intensive by design
and thus consume the highest amount of energy per transaction. PoW is the consensus
mechanism used to append new blocks to the chain [93]. The authors discuss alternative
consensus mechanisms that result in a BT that consumes several orders of magnitude less
energy per transaction, such as public Proof of Stake (PoS) or private Proof of Authority
(PoA) mechanisms [93]. When considering the adoption of BT in an organisation, it is
highly important to select low-energy BT platforms and architectures and to balance the

--- PAGE 25 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 25 of 39
use case outcome against the EF associated with the use of BT (TCoA4), again contributing
to the capability manage the Green Blockchain.
Taking ES into account on the infrastructure level could provide an important argu-
ment in an enterprise’s (or government’s) cloud strategy. It is possible to include ES in the
infrastructure layer of an on-premises data centre, as proposed by Iseke [28], through a
bottom-up approach that allows for the calculation of the CO2 emissions and energy usage
for each component in the infrastructure layer and subsequently identifying optimization
opportunities such as public cloud storage replication. Public cloud providers provide tools
to lower the environmental impact of workloads and work continuously towards lowering
the energy requirements and carbon emissions of their data centres on a large scale [94,95].
To reduce the EF associated with public cloud workloads, the major public cloud providers,
such as Google Public Cloud, AWS, and Microsoft Azure, provide tools, training, and in-
sights for lowering carbon footprint and architecting for sustainability. To define, build, and
run sustainable software applications, Microsoft provides a training course on Sustainable
Software Engineering, an emerging field that combines climate science, software, hardware,
electricity markets, and data centre design [96]. Tools such as the Google Carbon Footprint
dashboard can be used to measure, report, and reduce carbon emissions [97]. Using these
kinds of tools enables enterprises to actively manage their public cloud carbon footprint by,
e.g., shifting workloads to data centres that have a higher percentage of carbon-free energy
usage or shifting workloads to times of day where more renewable energy is available [97].
As part of Amazon Web Services Well-Architected Framework, AWS includes a Sustainabil-
ity Pillar that provides design principles, operational guidance, best practices, potential
trade-offs, and improvement opportunities for increasing the sustainability targets of AWS
workloads. The proposed best practices include region selection, user behaviour patterns,
software and architecture patterns, data patterns, hardware patterns, and development and
deployment processes [98]. Using these kinds of public cloud training, patterns, and tools to
assess and optimise carbon footprint and electricity usage is proposed as the next course of
action (TCoA5), contributing to the capability develop and manage green service/solution
architecture (Figure 3).
Given these large-scale greening efforts and the availability of tools to reduce workload
EF, a move from on-premises towards the public cloud could potentially entail significant
improvements in the environmental impact. The final CoA would then be to (TCoA6)
calculate the CO2 emissions and energy usage of on-premises infrastructure and identify
ES improvement opportunities inherent to the public cloud, contributing to the capability
develop and manage green service/solution architecture (Figure 3).
4.6. Artefact Summary
The previous sections discussed the design and development of the artefact structured
around the organizational SBDAT layers, based on insights from academic and professional
literature. This section summarizes the proposed artefact, which consists of:
1. A set of concrete CoAs that organizations can take to embed ES into each of the enter-
prise layers: strategy, business, data, application, and technology (answering RQ1).
2. An overview of the necessary capabilities for Green EA. These capabilities can be built
so that an organization can create the possibility to follow the proposed courses of
action (answering RQ2).
3. Two examples of CBM in the form of capability map use cases, focusing on analysis
related to ES objectives (answering RQ3).
Below, we present the different parts of the solution artefact and an indication of how
to apply these in practice.
4.6.1. Set of Concrete CoAs and Their Relationship to the Relevant Capabilities
The set of concrete CoAs, based on the existing (scientific) literature, is presented in
Table 4. Organizations can take the CoAs to embed ES into each of the enterprise layers.
The table provides a good overview of all CoAs and where additional information can be

--- PAGE 26 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 26 of 39
found, besides the information presented in Section 4. An overview of the related proposed
capabilities can be found in Table 5. This table presents an overview of the proposed Green
EA capabilities and their relation to the proposed CoAs, with additional actions, processes,
and roles that should facilitate the realization of these capabilities and, by extension, the
CoAs. When no additional actions, processes, or roles for a given capability have been
discussed in this paper, this is indicated by N.A. (not applicable).
Table 4. Overview of the proposed courses of action (CoAs) for including ES into the SBDAT layers
of the organization.
Courses of Action (CoA)
Based on
Reference
Strategy Layer
SCoA1. Embed environmental sustainability into corporate vision, strategy, and objectives [52]
SCoA2. Implement ESG reporting tools and processes [53]
SCoA3. Embed sustainability into the company culture [6]
SCoA4. Be transparent to customers about ES [6]
SCoA5. Include planet Earth as a company stakeholder [54]
SCoA6. Identify architecture principles for green strategy execution [55]
SCoA7. Raise awareness of environmental consequences [60,62]
SCoA8. Include environmental awareness in the hiring process [60,62]
SCoA9. Invest in Green IS/ICT capabilities [61]
SCoA10. Adopt the practice of Capability-Based Management and the use of ES-aware business capability modelling [14]
Business Layer
BCoA1. Define Key Ecological Indicators [68,69]
BCoA2. Adopt the Sustainability Balanced Scorecard [67]
BCoA3. Adopt the use of Green Business Process Management [66,70]
BCoA4. Include ES in project management [66,70]
BCoA5. Identify external ES relationships [66,70]
BCoA6. Define ES roles and responsibilities [66,70]
BCoA7. Implement sustainability organizational structures and governance bodies [66,70]
BCoA8. Adopt maturity models to improve ES capabilities [71]
BCoA9. Investigate other relevant concepts such as Green Six Sigma and EA for Circular Economy [19,64]
Data Layer
DCoA1. Raise awareness of the EF of data production, usage, and storage throughout the organization [75]
DCoA2. Use environmentally sustainable data patterns [77]
DCoA3. Select efficient ML model architectures that reduce computation [81]
DCoA4. Use processors and systems optimized for ML training [81]
DCoA5. Compute in the public cloud rather than on-premises [81]
DCoA6. Perform map optimization: picking the location with the cleanest energy [81]
Application Layer
ACoA1. Include energy consumption as a quality attribute in software architectures, including its measurement [82,83]
ACoA2. Use prototyping and empirical testing to optimise an application’s energy efficiency [82]
ACoA3. Train ICT personnel in energy-aware software practices [83]
ACoA4. Include energy use in the requirements engineering process [83]
Technology Layer
TCoA1. Choose a Green ICT maturity model that fits the organization and use it for an as-is assessment and subsequent improvement roadmap [85–88]
TCoA2. Assess the EF of IoT projects and include this in the project business case [10]
TCoA3. Identify opportunities throughout the organization where BT can improve ES (such as supply chain) [90,91]
TCoA4. When adopting BT in an organisation, select low-energy BT platforms and architectures, and balance the use case outcome against the EF
associated with the use of BT
[93]
TCoA5. Apply public cloud training, patterns, and tools to assess and optimise carbon footprint and electricity usage [96–98]
TCoA6. Calculate the CO2 emissions and energy usage of on-premises infrastructure and identify ES improvement opportunities inherent to the
public cloud
[28,94,95]

--- PAGE 27 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 27 of 39
Table 5. Overview of the proposed Green EA capabilities, their definitions (based on [25]), and how
to build them using the proposed CoAs and additional actions, processes, and roles.
Green EA
Capability L1
Green EA
Capability L2
Proposed Definition
(Based on [25])
CoAs Additional Actions, Processes, and Roles
Green Strategy Define the green
business concept and
long-term vision
Construct a forward-looking
conceptual framework for the
organization’s business activities,
incorporating environmental
considerations. Analyse internal
capacities, customer needs, and
market shifts to shape a
sustainable business model.
SCoA1 • Introduce KEIs linked to an environmental strategy.
Green Strategy ESG reporting Reporting and disclosing
environmental, social, and
governance (ESG) performance
metrics and initiatives,
contributing to transparent
sustainability communication.
SCoA2 • Implement ESG reporting applications.
• Capture data on important ESG practices.
Green Strategy Manage green culture Plan, design, and implement
change initiatives with a focus on
cultivating an environmentally
conscious culture.
SCoA3;
SCoA4;
SCoA5;
SCoA7;
SCoA8
• Embed ES into everyday decision-making towards a common
goal.
Green Strategy Create and publish green
EA principles
Formulate and publish
fundamental eco-friendly values
(principles) aligned with
organizational goals to guide IT
decisions and actions, serving as
the bedrock of enterprise
architecture.
SCoA6 • Include ES in all future transformation projects.
• EF will be included as a QA in architecture trade-off analyses.
Green Strategy Create green
organizational design
Develop a resource design that
enables the organization to
achieve its objectives sustainably.
Forge a cohesive framework to
align various roles, governance
structures, and processes into an
environmentally conscious and
seamless entity.
SCoA7;
SCoA8;
BCoA4;
BCoA6;
BCoA7
• Ensure ES governance by assigning a sustainability board
and a Chief Ecological Officer.
• In adopting sustainability practices, balance business case
drivers with environmental responsibility and education.
• Motivate managers to behave more pro-environmentally.
• Select individuals for managerial positions who value ES.
• Improve internal readiness by increasing skill and knowledge
levels to enable sustainability practices adoption.
Green Strategy Develop and manage
green business
capabilities
Execute essential activities vital to
the organization’s sustainable
operation across functions.
Encompass process management,
quality assurance, environmental
management, and more, ensuring
a holistic sustainable approach.
SCoA10 • Enhance the environmental performance of people, processes,
information, and technology by applying the CoAs.
• Apply overlays focussing specifically on the environmental
impact by cumulating KEIs from the underlying processes.
Green Business Develop and set green
organizational objectives
Formulate overarching
eco-friendly goals driving the
organization’s mission.
Collaborate with business units to
set environmentally responsible
short- to long-term targets aligned
with the mission.
BCoA1;
BCoA2
• Recognizes sustainability-related objectives and performance
measures.
• Introduce a trade-off between KEIs and KPIs to guide
decision-makers in including environmental aspects in their
business.
Green Business Manage green business
processes
Govern and enhance processes
with an eco-conscious approach.
Manage frameworks, define
processes, and optimize
performance sustainably.
BCoA3;
BCoA5;
BCoA6;
BCoA8
• Use KEIs to properly measure the environmental impact of
business processes.
• Adopt maturity models to improve ES capabilities.
Green Business Develop green
lean/continuous
improvement strategy
Devise strategies for continuous
eco-friendly process enhancement,
optimizing operations, and raising
sustainability standards.
BCoA9 • N.A.
Green Business Manage green product
and service life cycle
Oversee the introduction,
operation, and retirement of
offerings, measuring their
sustainable performance and
revising as needed.
BCoA9 • N.A.
Green Data Define and execute green
business information
lifecycle planning and
control
Devise strategies for the
eco-conscious management and
flow of an information system’s
data from creation to obsolescence,
ensuring responsible data lifecycle
planning and execution.
DCoA1 • Take ES into account when assessing data initiatives.

--- PAGE 28 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 28 of 39
Table 5. Cont.
Green EA
Capability L1
Green EA
Capability L2
Proposed Definition
(Based on [25])
CoAs Additional Actions, Processes, and Roles
Green Data Define and maintain
green business
information architecture
Strategize and administer the
organization’s information and
content sustainably. Design an
architecture for eco-friendly
information collection,
communication, and resource
management.
DCoA2 • Adopt data management practices and data patterns to
reduce the provisioned storage and resources required for
workloads.
• Manage the data lifecycle to be more efficient.
• Reduce performant storage when requirements decrease.
• Delete data that are no longer needed.
Green Data Manage Green AI Develop and deploy AI
technologies that prioritize energy
efficiency, resource conservation,
and responsible data usage.
Optimize algorithms for reduced
computational requirements.
DCoA3;
DCoA4;
DCoA5;
DCoA6
• Apply practices that reduce the AI footprint.
Green
Application
Develop and manage
green IT business
strategy
Steer the IT domain with a
comprehensive sustainable
strategy. Define IT architecture,
manage the portfolio, innovate
responsibly, and assess
performance, focusing on
sustainable value.
SCoA9 • Develop and use information systems that contribute to
sustainable processes.
Green
Application
Develop and manage
green service/solution
architecture
Design eco-friendly architecture
for IT services and solutions.
Balance business and
sustainability constraints, promote
existing architecture, and manage
exceptions responsibly.
ACoA1;
ACoA2;
ACoA3;
ACoA4;
TCoA5;
TCoA6
• Adopt tools such as tactics-based questionnaires that focus
on energy efficiency.
• Adopt a manifesto for energy-aware software.
• Adopt programming languages that are less
energy-consuming.
Green
Application
Understand business
requirements for green
IT capabilities
Grasp current and future IT needs
through an environmental lens,
aligning technology with
sustainable business objectives.
ACoA3;
ACoA4
• Ask clients about their energy requirements and propagate
them to developers, testers, and operations personnel.
Green
Technology
Deploy green
services/solutions
Implement IT services/solutions
with an eco-conscious deployment
strategy. Plan, execute, and
manage changes while overseeing
the responsible release of IT
services.
TCoA1 • N.A.
Green
Technology
Manage the Green IoT Implement IoT solutions that are
ecologically responsible,
emphasizing energy-efficient
sensors, sustainable data
transmission, and lifecycle
management. Maximize
environmental benefits by
minimizing energy consumption
and reducing electronic waste.
TCoA2 • N.A.
Green
Technology
Manage the Green
Blockchain
Design and utilize blockchain
technology with a strong focus on
ES. Minimize energy-intensive
consensus mechanisms, optimize
data storage and validation
processes, and integrate
eco-friendly practices to ensure
blockchain’s positive contribution
to a greener digital ecosystem.
TCoA3;
TCoA4
• N.A.
4.6.2. Green EA Capability Map and Use Case
Figure 3 displays a capability map that highlights the pertinent Green capabilities.
Organizations can leverage this map as a foundational tool to guide, oversee, and regulate
the integration of these capabilities.
For organizations eager to harness this map, several methods of deployment exist.
Initially, the map serves as an introductory framework to ascertain the necessities. Taking
into consideration the diverse stakeholders and the strategic aspirations of the organization,
decisions must be made regarding which Green capabilities are essential and to what
degree they are required. This entails the organization determining the necessity of each
capability, then deciding whether to transform existing capabilities, cultivate new ones, or
opt for acquisition/outsourcing. Furthermore, the extent of ambition associated with each
capability must be evaluated. The ambitions could range from minimal to high.

--- PAGE 29 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 29 of 39
Subsequently, to manifest this vision, determinations must be made for each pertinent
capability regarding the required configuration of people, processes, information, and
technology. The third phase involves conducting a fit-gap analysis. For every capability
outlined in the Green EA capability map, the objective is to assess and elucidate how
congruent an organization’s current state is with its predefined ambitions from the first and
second steps. Given the organization’s strategic ES goals and aspirations, a gap analysis
is executed for each capability across four dimensions: process, people, information, and
applications/technology. This analysis yields a comprehensive overview, pinpointing areas
of overinvestment or underutilization in relation to the strategic ambitions and importance
attributed to each capability. This third step is documented as a capability map use case
in Appendix A. A visual representation of this can be found in Figure 5: Gap analysis
of Green Capabilities. Those capabilities highlighted with a dashed outline have been
modified to be “green” or have been recognized as new additions within the Green EA
capability paradigm.
4.6.3. ES-Aware Business Capability Modelling
The final component of the proposed solution artefact introduces an ES-aware busi-
ness capability modelling approach, described in more detail in Appendix B. Within this
method, the complete capability map of the organization (encompassing more than just
the previously mentioned Green EA capabilities) is enhanced with a RAG (red, amber,
green) evaluation for each capability. This assessment signifies the environmental impact
evaluation, offering a comprehensive visual representation of the entire enterprise’s en-
vironmental footprint (EF) using ES-aware business capability modelling. The aggregate
environmental impact, symbolized by capability-KEIs, is illustrated via this heatmap visu-
alization. This ES-aware business capability modelling provides a panoramic view of the
organization’s entire EF, complementing the discussions on Green Capabilities addressed
in the preceding section. Both capability modelling approaches can be combined on one
map, but, for the sake of clarity, we have omitted this in our examples.
5. Discussion
As discussed in the introduction, DTs provide a unique opportunity to improve an
organization’s ES. Unfortunately, ES is insufficiently taken into account during DTs. To
bridge this gap, EA is proposed as a tool for linking DTs to ES. However, currently, there
are insufficiently specific and actionable EA publications, tools, and techniques. To address
this, a set of research questions have been proposed and answered. This section will
discuss the paper’s contributions and practical implications, its limitations, and future
research opportunities.
5.1. Contribution and Practical Implications
As a result of the performed SLR, the current state of the art concerning the combina-
tion of EA and ES was found to be limited to a very conceptual level, making it insufficiently
actionable to allow immediate application in a business context. This paper seeks to close
this gap between academic research and practice by offering a holistic, yet actionable and
generalizable, tool for embedding ES into DTs through EA.
The main RQ presented in the introduction “How can EA be leveraged as an actionable
tool in supporting the inclusion of ES in current or future DT initiatives?” is answered by the
consolidation of the three proposed solution objectives. Solution objective 1 is attained
by providing an overview of concrete CoAs (Table 4) that can be taken in each of the
enterprise SBDAT layers, resulting in the inclusion of ES in an organization’s strategy,
business, data, application, and technology. The capabilities needed for the realization of
Green EA have been discussed throughout the text and have been summarized in Figure 3,
fulfilling solution objective 2. Table 5 presents an overview of the proposed Green EA
capabilities and how to start building them using the proposed CoAs and additional actions,
processes, and roles based on the presented literature. Neither the Green EA capabilities

--- PAGE 30 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 30 of 39
nor the proposed actions are meant to be exhaustive, but rather to provide a starting
point for growing the capabilities needed to align DTs with ES. Furthermore, our study
did not include the weighing or scoring of the Green EA capabilities in practice, as this
would require a model for scoring these capabilities in order to be able to compare them
objectively. However, there is a certain sense of priority when it comes to implementing
these capabilities. The capabilities in the strategic layer should receive the highest priority,
as they provide the guidance required for the other layers. After all, an organization cannot
implement solutions if there is no clear vision on where to go. Similarly, it can be argued
that some of the capabilities in the business layer would be required for making the right
decisions in the technology, application, and data layers. Once again, as technology aims to
serve and support business processes, it should be clear what these processes will be.
Solution objective 3 is attained by introducing the concept of ES-aware business
capability modelling, an example of which is presented in Figure 4, providing a tool
for organizations to create a high-level holistic view of its environmental impact and
subsequent opportunities for improvement. ES-aware business capability modelling is
proposed because of the current gap between green strategy and execution, since the main
focus of green practices in the business layer is on business process improvements, lacking
a holistic approach. The combination of these three artefacts is proposed as an actionable
tool to help organizations include ES in current and future DT initiatives.
The scientific contribution of this paper is twofold. Firstly, by addressing the conspic-
uous gap in the literature concerning the integration of EA and ES, the study pioneers a
holistic, actionable framework that marries these two vital paradigms. This synthesis not
only extends the boundaries of what is currently known but also establishes a tangible
pathway for their practical confluence. Secondly, the proposed model provides a starting
point for future research and can be expanded as a Green EA framework, offering best
practices and more detailed guidance on how to implement these.
Concerningthepracticalbenefits, theartefactsshouldallowtheorganizationsadopting
them to have a structured set of actions and focus domains (capabilities) that can help them
drive their ES effort and combine it with their DT effort. By adopting the already existing
practices related to CBM and elevating these with a new ES focus, organizations should
be able to start transforming ambitions related to ES into actionable initiatives. However,
possible challenges are identified: First, adopting the GREAN framework to the fullest
implies embracing CBM and capability-oriented thinking. Organizations with low EA
maturity might find this more difficult to perform. They can stick to the proposed CoAs
as a source of inspiration. Second, the defined CoAs provide guidance (e.g., on where to
start looking for areas to improve), but they provide no tangible directions other than those
provided by the identified studies from which they were derived. Future research should
look into elaborating on these CoAs and what they mean for the different capabilities in
terms of people, processes, data, applications, and so on.
Given the extensiveness of each of the enterprise layers, this paper does not offer an
exhaustive set of actions or views concerning the subject of ES. Practitioners are suggested
toselecttheactionsthat aremostrelevantorvaluablefor theirspecificsituationandtostudy
the referenced publications for a deeper understanding of the topics. For organizations
that are new to the concept of ES, GREAN can provide foundational guidance. These
organizations just starting to embark on their sustainability journey can use Green EA, as it
provides an introductory roadmap. It offers them a first structured overview to understand
and prioritize ES within their DT initiatives. The artefact offers a starting point of how to
initiate the integration of digital strategies with sustainability goals, ensuring they start on
the right footing. For organizations that have been undertaking steps towards better ES,
GREAN can provide means for enhancement and realignment. Organizations that have
some sustainability measures in place can utilize Green EA to identify gaps, realign their
strategies, and further integrate environmental considerations into their digital efforts. The
capability-based approach embedded in the artefact can aid in refining and optimizing
existing processes, ensuring a more holistic and effective integration of sustainability.

--- PAGE 31 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 31 of 39
Finally, for more advanced organizations in the domain of ES, GREAN can serve as a
critical evaluation tool, allowing these organizations to check and fine-tune their sustainable
digital practices.
5.2. Artefact Validation
A thorough artefact validation through case studies is planned for a follow-up study.
However, a first validation through a fictive case study can already indicate the usefulness
of the artefact. For this fictive case study, we present Company Z, a retail company that is
planning to undertake an organization-wide DT.
5.2.1. Case Context
In recent years, Company Z has grown through several mergers and acquisitions.
The largest companies were allowed to retain their way of working, their systems, their
processes, etc. At present, Company Z comprises five business units that each have
their operating model. Company Z has now decided to undertake a DT and to identify
opportunities for uniformization throughout the business units. After engaging an outside
consultancy organization for help, Company Z has decided to merge three of the five
business units. In addition, they have decided to uniformize the supporting capabilities,
such as managing IT and some of the core capabilities such as managing supply chain. The
approach to facilitate this uniformization is centred around business process alignment
throughout the organization coupled with the adoption of a new enterprise resource
planning and supply chain software.
The CEO of Company Z has launched several initiatives in recent years to improve
the company’s environmental footprint, but none have successfully managed to create a
holistic and lasting change. In light of the current DT, which will trigger a fundamental
change in the organization, the CEO has decided to leverage this opportunity to embed ES
into the core of the organization. The CEO tasks Company Z’s Enterprise Architect to create
a plan for making this a reality. After scouring the existing literature, she has decided that
the presented Green EA framework can be used to incorporate ES into their current DT.
5.2.2. Identifying CoAs
The Enterprise Architect reads through the CoAs presented in Table 4 and immediately
identifies several opportunities to include ES in the organization. First, she learns about the
importance of including ES in the organization’s strategy and realizes that, although several
ES initiatives have been launched, Company Z has no clear strategy on ES, nor does it
have a way to measure progress. She proposes to embed ES into corporate vision, strategy,
and objectives (SCoA1) and to implement ESG reporting tools and processes (SCoA2).
In addition, she realizes that ES is currently not taken into account in new or existing
projects, and she decides to identify architecture principles for green strategy execution
(SCoA6), such as environmental impact (measured through, e.g., energy consumption) will
be included as a quality attribute (QA) in architecture trade-off analyses when choosing
new architectures or technologies. When reading through the remaining SBDAT layers,
the Enterprise Architect identifies several more CoAs that can be immediately applied to
the current DT, ranging from defining ES roles and responsibilities (BCoA6) to assessing
the EF of IoT projects and including this in the project business case (TCoA2). One CoA
that stands out is adopting the use of Green Business Process Management (BCoA3). Up
until now, the business processes of the different business units have been charted through
the use of Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN) to facilitate their uniformization.
However, no attention has been paid to the environmental impact of these processes,
causing Company Z to miss out on the opportunity to fundamentally improve its ES.
5.2.3. Using the Capability Map
To communicate her findings to the CEO, the Enterprise Architect utilizes the Green
EA capability map presented in Figure 3. Using this viewpoint, she is able to show that

--- PAGE 32 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 32 of 39
her proposed CoAs are embedding ES throughout all the layers of the organization, that
these CoAs impact certain existing capabilities, and they even trigger the creation of new
capabilities. Leveraging the technique of CBM, she is able to show that building the
needed green capabilities requires investments in the four dimensions that make up these
capabilities. The proposed CoAs are a good first step for immediately including ES into
the ongoing DT. However, Company Z needs to invest in people, processes, information,
and technology to become a green company. From this discussion, the CEO identifies a
few additional capabilities in which Company Z should invest to become a true green
company, such as manage green culture, as this would impact the people dimension of
all capabilities. To obtain a clear view of the organization’s holistic environmental impact,
the Enterprise Architect proposes to adopt the practice of CBM and the use of ES-aware
business capability modelling (BCoA10). She proposes building a capability map for the
organization similar to Figure 4. Using this view, she first focuses on the capabilities
that are most impacted by the DT. For instance, she is able to show that the capability
manage supply chain currently has a very high environmental impact; she is able to show
this by cumulating the KEIs used in her newly proposed Green BPMN. By performing
this step, she shows that the dimension processes needs ES improvement. In addition,
the dimension data needs improvement since insufficient environmental data are being
captured throughout the supply chain. She is now also able to show that there is a lot of
variability in the ES of the supply chain processes throughout the different business units,
and she proposes uniformizing the processes based on the most environmentally friendly
business unit. By adopting this method for other capabilities, the Enterprise Architect can
build a dashboard showing the environmental impact of Company Z on a page. Company
Z is now aware of its ES and can steer investments for improving its ES, focusing first on
the capabilities that are being impacted most by the ongoing DT. The Enterprise Architect
has thus provided a tool for the organization to measure its environmental impact and
to consciously and continuously improve its ES while growing towards becoming a truly
green company.
5.3. Limitations and Future Research
The presented paper has several limitations throughout multiple aspects of the re-
search. Firstly, regarding the SLR on green EA: This included many different keywords
concerning environmental sustainability. However, the term “Enterprise Architecture” was
always included; as such, other holistic greenifying approaches akin to EA could have been
overlooked. Concerning the different enterprise layers (strategy, business, data, application,
and technology), it was not the goal of this paper to perform an SLR for each of them but
rather to provide actionable pointers for each layer. As such, a limitation of this paper is
that important scientific and non-scientific references and greenifying actions might have
been overlooked. To address this limitation, future research might entail performing a
systematic literature review of each of the discussed enterprise layers concerning ES. This
would give a more complete picture of the current state of the art in how to pursue ES
throughout the organization. Another limitation of this paper is in the means of artefact
evaluation: Since this paper has been produced through desk research and analysis of
existing literature, future research avenues could focus on the validation of the proposed
artefacts. Observational evaluation is recommended in the form of case or field studies to
properly evaluate the use and effectiveness of the artefacts in a business environment.
Additional recommendations for future research include the concept of ES-aware busi-
ness capability modelling, further extending and formalizing the method and validating
its impact on ES in a business environment. A next course of research could be expanding
and strengthening the model towards a full framework, which can be used to include best
practices and more detailed guidance on how to use certain proposed capabilities. Best
practices regarding people, processes, information, and technology could be investigated
and added in a manner similar to that used to define KPIs for each of the proposed Green

--- PAGE 33 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 33 of 39
EA capabilities. The final aim of this research could then be to use the framework as an
implementation and even as an audit tool.
6. Conclusions
Digital Transformation (DT) is growing in importance in both academic and business
settings, with events like the COVID-19 pandemic further accelerating this trend. Although
DT has the potential to significantly impact sustainable development, there is often a lack
of focus on Environmental Sustainability (ES) within these transformation efforts. There
is a clear need to include ethical considerations, such as corporate social responsibility,
into the DT process. Current research on the relationship between DT and sustainability
lacks the transferability of research findings to applications in organizations. Additionally,
few studies focus on the specific capabilities needed to transform businesses sustainably
while integrating digital technologies. This paper introduces Enterprise Architecture (EA),
known for offering a clear and comprehensive view of all layers of an organization, as a
potential solution to the problem of integrating DT with ES.
By making use of EA, and, specifically, Capability-Based Management (CBM), this
study provides a way for organizations to understand their structure and guide their DTs.
The integration of this with ES strategies and tools leads to a new concept: Green EA. Using
a Design Science Research (DSR) approach, the Green EA artefact was developed, with its
knowledge contribution type being “Improvement”. This artefact serves as a capability-
building framework and source of insights for organizations aiming for environmentally
sustainable DT.
To validate the need for Green EA, a Systematic Literature Review (SLR) was con-
ducted. This review showed that the existing literature often lacks practical application
in the business world. To address this gap, the proposed artefact was designed around
the organizational SBDAT layers, suggesting specific Courses of Action (CoAs) based on
established literature. These CoAs guide organizations on how to integrate ES into every
layer of their enterprise. Furthermore, these CoAs were used to identify the capabilities
needed to enact Green EA within organizations. A significant proposition made is an
ES-aware business capability modelling approach, aiming to give organizations a clear
overview of their environmental impact by leveraging business capability mapping [14,42].
Environmental Sustainability-aware business capability modelling refers to an innovative
business modelling approach that integrates environmental sustainability principles into
the organization’s capabilities, by using (in a novel way) the presentation and analysis
methods that capability mapping offers. This approach encourages organizations to look
beyond typical business metrics with a strong emphasis on environmental impact, ensuring
that, as businesses evolve, they prioritize and incorporate sustainable practices.
For organizations beginning their journey towards environmental sustainability, this
paper can be a starting point. For organizations that are already on this journey, the
proposed artefact can serve as a reference model. It is important to note that the actions
proposed here are not exhaustive. Practitioners are encouraged to choose actions that
best fit their specific contexts and dive deeper into the provided literature for a richer
understanding. For future research, a deeper look into each enterprise layer regarding ES
and the translation of the CoAs into actionable guidelines for implementation would be
beneficial. It is also relevant for future scholars and practitioners to validate the suggested
artefacts through real-world case studies to determine their value and effectiveness in
a business environment. Future researchers could focus on expanding the Green EA
capability model, transforming it into a more comprehensive framework that guides and
audits an organization’s environmental sustainability efforts. Finally, the proposal of
ES-aware business capability modelling, while still in its early stages, requires further
exploration and development. Defining relevant KEIs, as well as novel analysis and
reporting methods based on the capability map, would certainly enrich and improve this
practice and make it more relevant for practitioners.

--- PAGE 34 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 34 of 39
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, methodology, writing—review and editing: N.V., J.V.R.
and G.P.; investigation, validation, formal analysis, writing—original draft preparation: N.V. and
J.V.R.; data curation, project administration: N.V.; supervision, G.P. All authors have read and agreed
to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: No new data were created. Data are available through the refer-
enced sources.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Glossary
Acronym Definition
ACoA Application Course of Action
AI Artificial Intelligence
AP Architecture Principle
BDAT Business, Data, Application, and Technology
BPL Business Process Lifecycle
BPM Business Process Management
BPO Business Process Orientation
BSC Balanced Scorecard
BT Blockchain Technology
BCoA Business Course of Action
CBM Capability-Based Management
CEEAF Circular Economy Enterprise Architecture Framework
CoA Course of Action
DCoA Data Course of Action
DSR Design Science Research
DT Digital Transformation
EA Enterprise Architecture
EF Environmental Footprint
EM Environmental Management
ES Environmental Sustainability
ESG Environment, Social, Governance
GERAM Generalised Enterprise Reference Architecture and Methodology
GHG Greenhouse Gas
ICT Information and Communications Technology
IoT Internet of Things
IS Information Systems
KEI Key Ecological Indicator
KPI Key Performance Indicator
PoA Proof of Authority
PoS Proof of Stake
PoW Proof of Work
QA Quality Attribute
RQ Research Question
SBDAT Strategy, Business, Data, Application, and Technology
SBSC Sustainability Balanced Scorecard
SD Sustainable Development
SGIMM SURF Green ICT Maturity Model
SISM Sustainable Information Systems Management
SLR Systematic Literature Review
SCoA Strategy Course of Action
TCoA Technology Course of Action
TOGAF The Open Group Architecture Framework

--- PAGE 35 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 35 of 39
Appendix A. Use Case 1—Gap Analysis
Use Case Name ES Use Case 1—Gap Analysis
Use case goals
(What and Why)
Based on the capabilities in the Green EA capability map, the purpose is to analyse and present how well an organization is
performing related to its Green ambitions.
Use case description (How)
Based on the strategic ES goals and ambitions of the organization, a gap analysis is conducted for each capability on four dimensions:
process, people, information, applications/technology. This provides a good overview of where there is an overinvestment and
where there is an underfit (and an additional investment is needed) compared to the deemed strategic importance.
Producer (Who) Possible Creator Expected contribution
Any analyst or architect (facilitator) with input from
key stakeholders.
n Interviewing the stakeholders, consulting documentation and other data;
n Creating an assessment of each relevant capability on four dimensions;
n Indicating on the map.
Consumer (Who) Consumer Interest
n Senior Management (C-level);
n Business experts/managers;
n IT experts/managers.
Aligning on what domains need to be improved, requiring investment, and
what domains should be downgraded or outsourced.
Mapped information (How)
A “status” on the capabilities, indicating whether or not the current quality level of the capability is aligned with the strategic ES
ambitions.
Reporting format (How)
Traffic lights: Capabilities receive a “traffic light” for each of the four dimensions. The colour of the light indicates what the status is,
compared to the p7reviously made decisions (e.g., five colours, representing severely underfit; slightly underfit; fit for purpose;
slightly overfit; severely overfit).
Preconditions
A capability map should be present and accepted by the different parties.
Strategic ES goals/ambitions should be clear and agreed upon.
Appendix B. Use Case 2—KEI Analysis
Use Case Name ES Use Case 2—KEI Analysis
Use case goals
(What and Why)
Based on the entire capability map of the organization, the purpose is to analyse and present how well each capability is performing
related to defined KEIs. The final purpose is to understand how well an organization is performing compared to its ES objectives and
to take action where needed.
Use case description (How)
Based on the entire capability map of the organization, KEIs can be defined for each capability. Examples are use of water or use of
electricity. Targets (KEIs) should be set based on this, and an indication is given related on how well the organization is performing.
Producer (Who) Creator Contribution
Any analyst or architect (facilitator) with input
from key stakeholders.
n Interviewing the stakeholders, consulting documentation and other data;
n Creating an assessment of each relevant capability on the KEIs.
n Indicating on the map.
Consumer (Who) Consumer Interest
n Senior Management (C-level);
n Business experts/managers.
Aligning on what domains need to be improved, requiring investment, and
what domains should be downgraded or even outsourced.
Mapped information (How) A “status” on the capabilities, indicating whether or not the capability meets the expected levels for certain KEIs.
Reporting format (How)
Traffic lights: Capabilities receive a “traffic light” for each of the four dimensions. The colour of the light indicates what the status is
compared to the previously made decisions (e.g., three colours, representing underperforming, performing at the right level, or
overperforming).
Preconditions
A capability map should be present and accepted by the different parties.
KEIs with measurable targets should be defined, clear, and agreed upon.
References
1. Kraus, S.; Jones, P.; Kailer, N.; Weinmann, A.; Chaparro-Banegas, N.; Roig-Tierno, N. Digital Transformation: An Overview of the
Current State of the Art of Research. SAGE Open 2021, 11. [CrossRef]
2. Blake, M. 100 Stats on Digital Transformation and Customer Experience; Forbes: Jersey, NJ, USA, 2019.
3. Koetsier, J. 97% of Executives Say COVID-19 Sped up Digital Transformation; Forbes: Jersey, NJ, USA, 2020.
4. Vial, G. Understanding digital transformation: A review and a research agenda. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 2019, 28, 118–144. [CrossRef]
5. Wen, H.; Lee, C.-C.; Song, Z. Digitalization and environment: How does ICT affect enterprise environmental performance?
Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2021, 28, 54826–54841. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6. Rogers, K.; Cosgrove, A.; Copestake, J. The CEO Imperative: Make Sustainability Accessible to the Consumer. EY. Available
online: https://www.ey.com/en_lu/consumer-products-retail/make-sustainability-accessible-to-the-consumer (accessed on
24 June 2021).
7. Goodland, R. The Concept of Environmental Sustainability. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 1995, 26, 1–24. Available online: http:
//www.jstor.org/stable/2097196 (accessed on 24 June 2021). [CrossRef]
8. Galli, A.; Wiedmann, T.; Ercin, E.; Knoblauch, D.; Ewing, B.; Giljum, S. Integrating Ecological, Carbon and Water footprint into a
“Footprint Family” of indicators: Definition and role in tracking human pressure on the planet. Ecol. Indic. 2012, 16, 100–112.
[CrossRef]

--- PAGE 36 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 36 of 39
9. The Shift Project. LEAN ICT towards Digital Sobriety; The Shift Project: Paris, France, 2019.
10. Freitag, C.; Berners-Lee, M.; Widdicks, K.; Knowles, B.; Blair, G.S.; Friday, A. The real climate and transformative impact of ICT: A
critique of estimates, trends, and regulations. Patterns 2021, 2, 100340. [CrossRef]
11. Belkhir, L.; Elmeligi, A. Assessing ICT global emissions footprint: Trends to 2040 & recommendations. J. Clean. Prod. 2018,
177, 448–463. [CrossRef]
12. European Council. Digitalisation for the Benefit of the Environment: Council Approves Conclusions. Consilium.Europa.Eu.
Available online: https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2020/12/17/digitalisation-for-the-benefit-of-
the-environment-council-approves-conclusions/ (accessed on 17 December 2020).
13. Guandalini, I. Sustainability through digital transformation: A systematic literature review for research guidance. J. Bus. Res.
2022, 148, 456–471. [CrossRef]
14. Van Riel, J.; Poels, G. A Method for Developing Generic Capability Maps: A Design Science Study in the Professional Sport
Industry. Bus. Inf. Syst. Eng. 2023, 65, 403–424. [CrossRef]
15. Sutherland, D.; Hovorka, D.S. Enterprise Architecture as a Contributor to Sustainability Objectives; ECIS: Kristiansand, Norway, 2014.
16. Plessius, H.; Ravesteijn, P.; Slot, R. Greening Organizations: The Contribution of Enterprise Architecture. 2013. Available online:
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:54908805 (accessed on 14 August 2023).
17. Noran, O. An Enterprise Architecture Approach towards Environmental Management. In Enterprise Architecture, Integration and
Interoperability; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2010; pp. 44–55.
18. Alves, D.F.R.; de Campos, R.; Souza, F.B. Sustainable Development Within Enterprise Architecture. In Advances in Production
Management Systems; Initiatives for a Sustainable World, Springer International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2016; pp. 552–559.
19. Laumann, F.; Tambo, T. Enterprise Architecture for a Facilitated Transformation from a Linear to a Circular Economy. Sustainability
2018, 10, 3882. [CrossRef]
20. Debnath, S. Exploring Green IS through the Lens of Enterprise Architecture. Diamond Jubilee National Convention of IIIE Role
of Industrial Engineering in Industry 4.0 Paradigm (ICIEIND 2018). 2018. Available online: https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/327964306_Exploring_Green_IS_through_the_Lens_of_Enterprise_Architecture (accessed on 18 June 2023).
21. ISO 14001:2015; Environmental Management Systems. International Organization for Standardization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2015.
22. Feroz, A.K.; Zo, H.; Chiravuri, A. Digital Transformation and Environmental Sustainability: A Review and Research Agenda.
Sustainability 2021, 13, 1530. [CrossRef]
23. Bērziša, S.; Bravos, G.; Gonzalez, T.C.; Czubayko, U.; España, S.; Grabis, J.; Henkel, M.; Jokste, L.; Kampars, J.; Koç, H.; et al.
Capability Driven Development: An Approach to Designing Digital Enterprises. Bus. Inf. Syst. Eng. 2015, 57, 15–25. [CrossRef]
24. Maglio, P.P.; Vargo, S.L.; Caswell, N.; Spohrer, J. The service system is the basic abstraction of service science. Inf. Syst. e-Bus.
Manag. 2009, 7, 395–406. [CrossRef]
25. APQC. APQC Process Classification Framework (PCF) Cross Industry. Available online: https://www.apqc.org/resource-
library/resource-listing/apqc-process-classification-framework-pcf-cross-industry-excel-7 (accessed on 26 September 2019).
26. Perdana, E.G.; Sitohang, B.; Sastramihardja, H.S.; Candra, M.Z.C. A strategy framework for incorporating sustainability into
enterprise architecture. In Proceedings of the 2020 8th International Conference on Information and Communication Technology
(ICoICT), Yogyakarta, Indonesia, 24–26 June 2020; pp. 1–6.
27. García-Escallón, R.; Aldea, A.; van Sinderen, M. On Enterprise Architecture Patterns: A Tool for Sustainable Transformation. Lect.
Notes Bus. Inf. Process. 2021, 417, 858–882. [CrossRef]
28. Iseke, A.-C. An Enterprise Architecture Approach towards Sustainability and Environmental Performance. University of Twente.
Master’s Thesis, University of Twente, Twente, The Netherlands, 2020.
29. Isom, P.K.; Miller-Sylvia, S.L.; Vaidya, S. Intelligent Enterprise Architecture. IBM J. Res. Dev. 2010, 54, 1–2. [CrossRef]
30. Pankowska, M. Enterprise Architecture Modelling for Corporate Sustainability. In Building Sustainable Information Systems;
Springer: Boston, MA, USA, 2013; pp. 365–376. [CrossRef]
31. Unhelkar, B. Green Enterprise Architecture using Environmental Intelligence. Int. J. Green Comput. 2011, 2, 58–65. [CrossRef]
32. Bernus, P.; Nemes, L.; Schmidt, G. GERAM: The Generalised Enterprise Reference Architecture and Methodology. In Handbook on
Enterprise Architecture; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2003; pp. 21–63. [CrossRef]
33. ISO 9001; Quality Management. International Organization for Standardization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2017. Available online:
https://www.iso.org/iso-9001-quality-management.html (accessed on 21 September 2023).
34. ISO 14001; Environmental Management. International Organization for Standardization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2017. Available
online: https://www.iso.org/iso-14001-environmental-management.html (accessed on 21 September 2023).
35. ISO 26000; Social Responsibility. International Organization for Standardization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2017. Available online:
http://www.iso.org/iso/home/standards/iso26000.htm (accessed on 21 September 2023).
36. The Open Group. (n.d.-b). Introduction to the ADM. Available online: https://pubs.opengroup.org/architecture/togaf8-doc/
arch/chap03.html (accessed on 18 June 2023).
37. ISO 14031:2013; Environmental Management—Environmental Performance Evaluation—Guidelines. International Organization
for Standardization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2013.
38. European Commission. Eco-Management and Audit Scheme (EMAS). Available online: https://green-business.ec.europa.eu/
eco-management-and-audit-scheme-emas_en (accessed on 27 September 2023).

--- PAGE 37 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 37 of 39
39. Global Reporting Initiative (GRI). G3 Guidelines of the GRI Sustainability Reporting Framework; GRI: Boston, MA, USA, 2005.
40. Business Architecture Guild. A Guide to the Business Architecture Body of Knowledge (BIZBOK Guide)—Version 8.0. 2019.
Available online: https://www.businessarchitectureguild.org/ (accessed on 18 June 2023).
41. Van Riel, J. Strategy Execution through Enterprise Architecture: Capability-based Management as a Foundation for Successful
(Digital) Transformations. In Proceedings of the Doctoral Consortium Papers Presented at the 34th International Conference on
Advanced Information Systems Engineering (CAiSE 2022), Leuven, Belgium, 6–10 June 2022.
42. Van Riel, J.; Poels, G.; Viaene, S. Exploring Capability Mapping as a Tool for Digital Transformation: Insights from a Case Study. In
Enterprise, Business-Process and Information Systems Modeling; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2023; pp. 243–255. [CrossRef]
43. Wißotzki, M. The Capability Management Process: Finding Your Way into Capability Engineering. In Business Architecture
Management; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2015; pp. 77–105. [CrossRef]
44. Zdravkovic, J.; Stirna, J.; Grabis, J. A Comparative Analysis of Using the Capability Notion for Congruent Business and
Information Systems Engineering. Complex Syst. Inform. Model. Q. 2017, 10, 1–20. [CrossRef]
45. Sowa, F.; Zachman, J.A. Extending and formalizing the Framework for Information Systems Architecture. IBM Syst. J. 1992,
31, 590–616. [CrossRef]
46. Chung, S.; Won, D.; Baeg, S.H.; Park, S. Service-oriented reverse reengineering: 5W1H model-driven re-documentation and
candidate services identification. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Service-Oriented Computing and
Applications, SOCA’ 09, Taipei, Taiwan, 14–15 January 2009; pp. 178–183. [CrossRef]
47. The Open Group. (n.d.-c). The TOGAF Standard. Available online: https://pubs.opengroup.org/togaf-standard/introduction/
chap01.html (accessed on 28 December 2022).
48. The Open Group. (n.d.-d). TOGAF Core Concepts. Available online: https://pubs.opengroup.org/architecture/togaf9-doc/
arch/chap02.html#tag_02 (accessed on 23 April 2023).
49. Hevner, A.R.; March, S.T.; Park, J.; Ram, S. Design Science in Information Systems Research. In Source: MIS Quarterly; (Volume 28,
Issue 1). 2004. Available online: https://www.jstor.org/stable/25148625 (accessed on 14 August 2023).
50. Gregor, S.; Hevner, A.R. Positioning and Presenting Design Science Research for Maximum Impact. MIS Q. 2013, 37, 337–355.
[CrossRef]
51. Peffers, K.; Tuunanen, T.; Rothenberger, M.A.; Chatterjee, S. A Design Science Research Methodology for Information Systems
Research. J. Manag. Inf. Syst. 2007, 24, 45–77. [CrossRef]
52. Deloitte; IEMA. A Blueprint for Green Workforce Transformation. 2022. Available online: https://www2.deloitte.com/uk/en/
pages/consulting/articles/green-skills-for-green-economy.html (accessed on 14 August 2023).
53. El Kadi, R. An Enterprise Architecture Approach to ESG. PWC. Available online: https://www.pwc.com.au/digitalpulse/esg-
enterprise-architecture.html (accessed on 11 May 2022).
54. Conn, C. Patagonia Chair: ‘We Are Turning Capitalism on Its Head by Making the Earth Our Only SHAREHOLDER’. Fortune.
Available online: https://fortune.com/2022/09/14/patagonia-chair-we-are-turning-capitalism-on-its-head-by-making-the-
earth-our-only-shareholder-charles-conn/ (accessed on 14 September 2022).
55. The Open Group. Architecture Principles. Available online: https://pubs.opengroup.org/architecture/togaf8-doc/arch/chap29.
html#top (accessed on 6 May 2023).
56. Bass, L.; Clements, P.; Kazman, R. Energy Efficiency. In Software Architecture in Practice, 4th ed.; Pearson Education, Inc.: London,
UK, 2022.
57. Engert, S.; Rauter, R.; Baumgartner, R.J. Exploring the integration of corporate sustainability into strategic management: A
literature review. J. Clean. Prod. 2016, 112, 2833–2850. [CrossRef]
58. Rode, J.; Heinz, N.; Cornelissen, G.; Le Menestrel, M. How to encourage business professionals to adopt sustainable practices?
Experimental evidence that the ‘business case’ discourse can backfire. J. Clean. Prod. 2020, 283, 124618. [CrossRef]
59. Dalvi-Esfahani, M.; Ramayah, T.; Nilashi, M. Modelling upper echelons’ behavioural drivers of Green IT/IS adoption using an
integrated Interpretive Structural Modelling Analytic Network Process approach. Telemat. Inform. 2017, 34, 583–603. [CrossRef]
60. Hu, P.J.-H.; Hu, H.-F.; Wei, C.-P.; Hsu, P.-F. Examining Firms’ Green Information Technology Practices: A Hierarchical View of
Key Drivers and Their Effects. J. Manag. Inf. Syst. 2016, 33, 1149–1179. [CrossRef]
61. Loeser, F.; Recker, J.; Brocke, J.V.; Molla, A.; Zarnekow, R. How IT executives create organizational benefits by translating
environmental strategies into Green IS initiatives. Inf. Syst. J. 2017, 27, 503–553. [CrossRef]
62. Baggia, A.; Maletič, M.; Žnidaršič, A.; Brezavšček, A. Drivers and Outcomes of Green IS Adoption in Small and Medium-Sized
Enterprises. Sustainability 2019, 11, 1575. [CrossRef]
63. Gartner. Pace-Layered Application Strategy. Available online: https://www.gartner.com/en/information-technology/glossary/
pace-layered-application-strategy (accessed on 12 February 2023).
64. Farrukh, A.; Mathrani, S.; Taskin, N. Investigating the Theoretical Constructs of a Green Lean Six Sigma Approach towards
Environmental Sustainability: A Systematic Literature Review and Future Directions. Sustainability 2020, 12, 8247. [CrossRef]
65. Couckuyt, D.; Van Looy, A. Green BPM as a Business-Oriented Discipline: A Systematic Mapping Study and Research Agenda.
Sustainability 2019, 11, 4200. [CrossRef]

--- PAGE 38 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 38 of 39
66. Couckuyt, D.; Van Looy, A. A systematic review of Green Business Process Management. Bus. Process. Manag. J. 2020, 26, 421–446.
[CrossRef]
67. Hansen, E.G.; Schaltegger, S. The Sustainability Balanced Scorecard: A Systematic Review of Architectures. J. Bus. Ethic. 2014,
133, 193–221. [CrossRef]
68. Nowak, A.; Leymann, F.; Mietzner, R. Towards Green Business Process Reengineering. LNCS 2011, 6568, 187–192. [CrossRef]
69. Nowak, A.; Leymann, F.; Schumm, D.; Wetzstein, B. An Architecture and Methodology for a Four-Phased Approach to Green
Business Process Reengineering. LNCS 2011, 6868, 150–164. [CrossRef]
70. Couckuyt, D.; Van Looy, A. An empirical study on Green BPM adoption: Contextual factors and performance. J. Software Evol.
Process. 2020, 33. [CrossRef]
71. Couckuyt, D.; Van Looy, A. An exploration of green business process maturity based on ecolabels. Bus. Process. Manag. J. 2021,
27, 1999–2020. [CrossRef]
72. nbsp; Bezerra, M.C.; Gohr, F.C.; Morioka, S.N. Organizational capabilities towards corporate sustainability benefits: A systematic
literature review and an integrative framework proposal. J. Clean. Prod. 2020, 247, 119114. [CrossRef]
73. Treacy, M.; Wiersema, F. Customer Intimacy and Other Value Disciplines; Harvard Business Review: Boston, MA, USA, 1993.
74. O’leary, D.E. Artificial Intelligence and Big Data; Harvard Business Publishing: Brighton, MA, USA, 2013.
75. Lucivero, F. Big Data, Big Waste? A Reflection on the Environmental Sustainability of Big Data Initiatives. Sci. Eng. Ethic 2019,
26, 1009–1030. [CrossRef]
76. Mytton, D. Data centre water consumption. NPJ Clean Water 2021, 4, 11. [CrossRef]
77. AWS. AWS Well-Architected Framework Sustainability Pillar Data Patterns. 2022. Available online: https://docs.aws.amazon.
com/wellarchitected/latest/sustainability-pillar/data.html (accessed on 14 August 2023).
78. Biewald, L. Deep Learning and Carbon Emissions. Available online: https://towardsdatascience.com/deep-learning-and-
carbon-emissions-79723d5bc86e (accessed on 18 June 2019).
79. Strubell, E.; Ganesh, A.; McCallum, A. Energy and Policy Considerations for Deep Learning in NLP. arXiv 2019, arXiv:1906.02243.
80. Schwartz, R.; Dodge, J.; Smith, N.A.; Etzioni, O. Green AI. 2019. Available online: http://arxiv.org/abs/1907.10597 (accessed on
14 August 2023).
81. Patterson, D. Good News About the Carbon Footprint of Machine Learning Training. Available online: https://ai.googleblog.
com/2022/02/good-news-about-carbon-footprint-of.html (accessed on 15 February 2022).
82. Kazman, R.; Haziyev, S.; Yakuba, A.; Tamburri, D.A. Managing Energy Consumption as an Architectural Quality Attribute. IEEE
Softw. 2018, 35, 102–107. [CrossRef]
83. Fonseca, A.; Kazman, R.; Lago, P. A Manifesto for Energy-Aware Software. IEEE Softw. 2019, 36, 79–82. [CrossRef]
84. Pereira, R.; Couto, M.; Ribeiro, F.; Rua, R.; Cunha, J.; Fernandes, J.P.; Saraiva, J. Ranking programming languages by energy
efficiency. Sci. Comput. Program. 2021, 205, 102609. [CrossRef]
85. Hankel, A.; Heimeriks, G.; Lago, P. Green ICT Adoption Using a Maturity Model. Sustainability 2019, 11, 7163. [CrossRef]
86. Hankel, A.; Oud, L.; Saan, M.; Lago, P. A Maturity Model for Green ICT: The case of the SURF Green ICT Maturity Model. In
Proceedings of the 28th EnviroInfo 2014 Conference, Oldenburg, Germany, 10–12 September 2014; pp. 33–40. Available online:
http://www.surf.nl/en/knowledge-and-innovation/knowledge-base/2014/surf-green-ict-maturity-model.html (accessed on
14 August 2023).
87. Lautenschutz, D.; España, S.; Hankel, A.; Overbeek, S.; Lago, P. A Comparative Analysis of Green ICT Maturity Models. EPiC Ser.
Comput. 2018, 52, 153–167. [CrossRef]
88. Foogooa, R.; Dookhitram, K. A self green ICT maturity assessment tool for SMEs. In Proceedings of the 2014 IST-Africa Conference
and Exhibition, IST-Africa 2014, Pointe aux Piments, Mauritius, 7–9 May 2014. [CrossRef]
89. Brand, V.; Razavian, M.; Baris, O. Development of a Capability Maturity Model for Organization-Wide Green IT Adoption. In
Business Modeling and Software Design; Shishkov, B., Ed.; Springer Nature: Cham, Switzerland, 2023; pp. 163–179.
90. Kouhizadeh, M.; Sarkis, J. Blockchain Practices, Potentials, and Perspectives in Greening Supply Chains. Sustainability 2018,
10, 3652. [CrossRef]
91. Rane, S.B.; Thakker, S.V. Green procurement process model based on blockchain–IoT integrated architecture for a sustainable
business. Manag. Environ. Qual. Int. J. 2019, 31, 741–763. [CrossRef]
92. Kshetri, N.; Voas, J. Blockchain’s Carbon and Environmental Footprints. Computer 2022, 55, 89–94. [CrossRef]
93. Sedlmeir, J.; Buhl, H.U.; Fridgen, G.; Keller, R. The Energy Consumption of Blockchain Technology: Beyond Myth. Bus. Inf. Syst.
Eng. 2020, 62, 599–608. [CrossRef]
94. Welsch, C. As the World Goes Digital, Datacenters That Make the Cloud Work Look to Renewable Energy Sources. 2022.
Available online: https://news.microsoft.com/europe/features/as-the-world-goes-digital-datacenters-that-make-the-cloud-
work-look-to-renewable-energy-sources/ (accessed on 14 August 2023).
95. Google. Carbon Free Energy for Google Cloud Regions. Available online: https://cloud.google.com/sustainability/region-
carbon (accessed on 13 March 2023).
96. Microsoft. The Principles of Sustainable Software Engineering. Available online: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-gb/training/
modules/sustainable-software-engineering-overview/?ocid=AID3038246&WT.mc_id=green-9537-cxa (accessed on 12 March 2023).

--- PAGE 39 ---
Sustainability 2023, 15, 14342 39 of 39
97. Google. Carbon Footprint. Available online: https://cloud.google.com/carbon-footprint (accessed on 12 March 2023).
98. AWS. AWS Well-Architected Framework Sustainability Pillar. Available online: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/wellarchitected/
latest/sustainability-pillar/sustainability-pillar.html (accessed on 15 December 2022).
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.