--- PAGE 1 ---
Journal of Industrial Engineering and Management
JIEM, 2021 – 14(1): 15-24 – Online ISSN: 2013-0953 – Print ISSN: 2013-8423
https://doi.org/10.3926/jiem.3279
Building and Development of an Organizational Competence
for Digital Transformation in SMEs
José Manuel González-Varona , Adolfo López-Paredes , David Poza , Fernando Acebes
INSISOC - University of Valladolid (Spain)
josemanuel.gonzalez.varona@uva.es, aparedes@eii.uva.es, poza@eii.uva.es, fernando.acebes@uva.es
Received: July 2020
Accepted: November 2020
Abstract:
Purpose: The new competitive environment characterized by innovation and constant change is forcing a
new organizational behavior. This requires a digital transformation of SMEs based on collective
performance determinants. SMEs have particular characteristics that differentiate them from large
companies and a model that allows them to identify, leverage and develop their digital capabilities can help
them to advance in digital maturity.
Design/methodology/approach: An in-depth review of the existing literature on digital transformation
and organizational competence was carried out on Scopus and Web of Science to identify the digital
challenges faced by SMEs, and what digital capabilities they have to develop to face these challenges. In
order to obtain the necessary information for the refinement of organizational competence for digital
transformation model, six experts were interviewed; three of them are academics and the other three are
professionals with management responsibilities in SMEs. We used semi-structured interviews, to keep the
interviews focused and facilitate cross-data analysis between experts. In addition, it allowed us the
possibility of analyzing new relevant aspects that could arise during the interview.
Findings: As a result of this study, we have developed a refined model of organizational competence for
digital transformation that allows SMEs to identify and develop the digital capabilities necessary to advance
in the digital transformation, refined with the opinions of six experts consulted. We were able to observe
the importance of organizational learning and organizational knowledge to advance the digital
transformation of SMEs.
Originality/value: The developed model is useful for SME managers to know what the initial starting
situation is, what the digital gaps are and to be able to plan the actions to develop the necessary digital
capabilities to advance towards digital maturity.
Keywords: digital transformation, organizational competencies, SME, digital maturity, digital economy
To cite this article:
González-Varona, J.M., López-Paredes, A., Poza, D., & Acebes, F. (2021). Building and Development of an
Organizational Competence for Digital Transformation in SMEs. Journal of Industrial Engineering and Management,
14(1), 15-24. https://doi.org/10.3926/jiem.3279
-15-

--- PAGE 2 ---
Journal of Industrial Engineering and Management – https://doi.org/10.3926/jiem.3279
1. Introduction
The integration of the so-called digital technologies is generating a progressive and unprecedented digitalization
that encourages innovation and transformation of companies (Legner, Eymann, Hess, Matt, Böhmann, Drews et
al., 2017). This is why organizations will have to develop a new portfolio of digital transformation capabilities that
allows flexibility and responsiveness to the rapid changes required to generate new value propositions for customers
and transform operating models (Berman, 2012).
The focus of the business world has changed substantially to face the digital transformation of their businesses in
the last five years. While initially the main concern was to convince senior executives to need business change, there
is now wide recognition that digitally transforming businesses is a necessity. These executives are looking for
models adapted to the characteristics of their companies to guide their transformations (Gurbaxani & Dunkle,
2019).
Although digital technologies are no longer reserved for large companies, SMEs have inherent characteristics such
as: more limited resources, more limited specialization capabilities, etc. that represent a clear disadvantage for the
development of digital capabilities (North & Varvakis, 2016). Currently, research aimed at responding to this
challenge is scarce, the number of studies on SMEs digitalization is not high, and it does not focus on capabilities
but mainly on processes (Blatz, Bulander & Dietel, 2018; González-Varona, López-Paredes, Pajares, Acebes &
Villafáñez, 2020; Mittal, Romero & Wuest, 2018; Pham, 2017).
To bridge this gap and contribute to expanding research on the relationship between digital transformation (DT)
and digital capabilities, the main objective of this research is to develop a model of organizational competence for
digital transformation (OCDT), refined with expert opinions. The expert opinions are important to ensure the
usefulness, usability and quality of the developed model.
The research results will help to understand the many ways in which DT capabilities building can take place and
how it can become an OCDT to advance digital maturity and contribute to effective and continuous DT in
organizations. The rest of the paper is structured as follows: in section 2, we address the theoretical framework of
DT and organizational competence. In section 3, we describe the research work and the OCDT. In section 4 the
results of the study are presented, and the refinement of the model, in section 5 the main conclusions regarding the
object of this research work.
2. Theoretical Background
DT is increasingly becoming the generally accepted means of achieving organizational goals, including
transformations in key business operations that affect the organization's products and processes, as well as its
structure and business concepts (González-Varona, Poza, Acebes, Villafáñez, Pajares & López-Paredes, 2020; Hess,
Benlian, Matt & Wiesböck, 2016).
New digital technologies have the ability to develop new products and services, improve existing ones, as well as the
customer relationship (Johnson, Christensen & Kagermann, 2008). They are also capable of developing new ways
of organizing business, changing the vision and strategy, organizational structure, processes, capabilities and culture.
In this sense, DT involves the reinvention of the company, as well as the markets and industries in which it
operates.
Vial (2019) suggests a definition of DT as “a process that aims to improve an entity by triggering significant
changes to its properties through combinations of information, computing, communication, and connectivity
technologies”. DT is a multidimensional phenomenon driven by technology that affects society, politics and the
economy, creating disruptions in the markets that require strategic responses from companies to remain
competitive. For digital technologies to become an essential part of value creation, companies must implement
structural and organizational changes that allow them to face the changes necessary to achieve the established
objectives.
New digital technologies are available to all SMEs in the market, but simple adoption or use does not ensure that
they are a source of competitive advantage. Available research suggests that getting companies to stay in the market
-16-

--- PAGE 3 ---
Journal of Industrial Engineering and Management – https://doi.org/10.3926/jiem.3279
and take advantage of digitalization will depend on how digital technologies are combined with organizational
capabilities (Sousa & Rocha, 2019).
Sanchez (2004) defines organizational competence as "the ability to maintain the coordinated deployment of assets
in a way that helps a company to achieve its objectives". According to Teece, Pisano and Shuen (1997) is an
integrated group of specific assets that includes individuals and groups that can perform distinctive activities that
constitute organizational routines and processes. These competencies are often viable across multiple product lines
and can be extended outside the enterprise to include partners.
Jarvidan (1998) defined the concepts of core competence, competencies, capabilities and organizational resources,
in order to create a universal understanding of these concepts. In addition, he established a hierarchy according to
the difficulty in achieving higher levels and the increasing value they bring to the organization.
At the base of the hierarchy are the organizational resources, which constitute the inputs for the creation of value
in the organization. At the second level are the capabilities that are the ability of the organization to exploit its
resources; they consist of business processes and routines that direct the interaction between the resources.
Capabilities are distinguished by having a functional basis. Competencies are on the third level of hierarchy, they are
a multifunctional integration and coordination of capabilities, a set of skills and know-how housed in a strategic
business unit. Finally, at the highest level are the core competencies.
For a SME, that is the subject of this paper, digital capability refers to the organization's readiness to drive the
digital agenda and become a digital company, as indicated Uhl & Gollenia (2016) in reference to commercial
entities. It is a prerequisite, for initiating and advancing the transition to digital maturity, that SMEs develop digital
capabilities, and it is therefore important to know what the key dimensions of digital capabilities are, as they can be
measured and used to support a digital business model (Ng, Tan & Lim, 2018).
3. Research Design and OCDT Development
An in-depth review of the existing literature on digital transformation and organizational competence was carried
out on Scopus and Web of Science to identify the digital challenges faced by SMEs, and what digital capabilities
they have to develop to face these challenges.
The search focused on articles written in English. A selection was made based on its content and theme, focusing
on the identification of the drivers of DT in SMEs, as well as their role in developing an organizational
competence. Resulting in 72 relevant articles, to which another 18 were added as a result of an additional search. All
these articles were read in their entirety. Also, we detected there was a very important increase in the number of
relevant papers since 2010, specifically more than 80% were published in the last 3 years.
The results obtained serve as the basis for the development of an OCDT model according to Javidan's hierarchy of
competencies model (Javidan, 1998), then the model was refined with the information obtained from the results of
semi-structured interviews with 6 experts.
González-Varona, Acebes, Poza and López-Paredes (2020) developed the OCDT model focusing on DT's internal
perspective, which affects managers and employees who make decisions about the adoption of new digital
technologies, the structure of SMEs and the way work is organized, although there will be an external context in
which the SME operates.
We can see the OCDT model in Figure 1, following the hierarchy at the base we can see the elements of
competence, physical, human and organizational resources available to the SME that will facilitate success in the
DT. Capabilities constitute the dimensions of ability to exploit the available resources.
This study allowed the development of an OCDT model that can help SMEs identify and develop the DT
capabilities to advance the DT of their business model. This model takes into account the specific characteristics of
SMEs and is better adapted than other models that allow advancing in digital maturity but were designed to be
applied in large companies, as the maturity models developed by MIT Center for Digital Business and Capgemini
Consulting, McKinsey & Company or Forrester Research Inc.
-17-

--- PAGE 4 ---
Journal of Industrial Engineering and Management – https://doi.org/10.3926/jiem.3279
Figure 1. Organizational Competence for Digital Transformation. Source: González-Varona, Acebes et al. (2020)
4. Framework Refinement
In order to obtain the necessary information for the refinement of the developed model, six experts were
interviewed; three of them are academic professionals and the other three are professionals with management
responsibilities in SMEs, whose activities are linked to competence-based management and organizational strategy.
The interviews were carried out between November 2019 to January 2020, lasted approximately one hour and a
half with each of the experts.
The objectives for collecting the data were to obtain expert opinion on the validity of the model for developing an
OCDT and advancing the DT of SMEs. Also, to obtain information on the suitability of the dimensions described
and the elements of competence that constitute and develop them. Another aspect to take into account was to
know the experts' opinion on the use of OCDT within SMEs for decision-making.
We decided to use semi-structured interviews, to keep the interviews focused and facilitate cross-data analysis
between experts (Carson, Gilmore, Perry & Gronhaug, 2001). In addition, it allowed us the possibility of analyzing
new relevant aspects that could arise during the interview.
The use of semi-structured and in-depth interviews gave us the opportunity to develop the responses, where we
wanted the interviewees to explain or expand on the information provided. The interviewees can use words or
ideas in a particular way, so the opportunity to deepen these ideas gave us the possibility to add meaning and depth
to the data obtained.
In addition, they can derive the interview to aspects that we did not initially consider, but that may be important for
understanding and help us to address the research question and objectives. On the other hand, semi-structured
interviews offered the interviewee the possibility of listening to themselves thinking about alternatives that they had
not previously considered. As a result, we have obtained a rich and detailed set of data. It should be noted that the
data collected may be influenced by the way in which we interact with the interviewees (Silverman, 2007).
The interviews with the experts were carried out on the basis of a predefined script, in a semi-structured way, and
allowed for an understand the constituent elements of the model and their relationships. The selected experts were
the following:
-18-

--- PAGE 5 ---
Journal of Industrial Engineering and Management – https://doi.org/10.3926/jiem.3279
Academic 1, is Professor at the University and has been teaching for more than thirty years in the business
organization, marketing and market Research Department. He graduated in Industrial Engineering and obtained his
PhD. on applications of agent-based simulation to economic analysis.
Academic 2, is Professor at the University and has been teaching for more than twenty years. He has been involved
in several research projects on the application of multiagent systems technology, in particular on business
intelligence, etc.
Academic 3, is Senior Lecturer at the University. He graduated in Industrial Engineering. In addition, he is the CEO
of a technological SME that develops software applications.
Professional 1, is currently a Strategic Management Consultant with focus in digitalization, over 25 years of
experience in agrofood industry, where he has been CEO of a multinational firm more than a decade.
Professional 2, is Senior consultant in SME management consulting and technological development, with more
than thirty years of professional experience.
Professional 3, is Manager in SME focus on implementation of strategic plans through the launch, organization
and push of projects with more than twenty years of professional experience.
The use of semi-structured interviews has allowed experts to express their opinions freely, and has also given us the
opportunity to raise questions a priori suggested by our model (Saunders, Lewis & Thornhill, 2009). The interviews
were in person and began with generic questions that allowed users to express their opinions on the capabilities and
dimensions of the developed model before moving on to more specific questions to ensure that the data covered
similar areas. Thus, It allows a comparison between the answers provided by each of the experts. The semi-
structured approach facilitated the conversational nature of the interviews and the relationship with the interviewer.
The interviews began with a definition of the used terms, such as how organizational competence or DT are defined,
and how we define and separate the different dimensions of the OCDT, as well as the different elements of
competence that make up each dimension. First, interviewees were asked to speak freely about how an OCDT model
could respond to the need to advance DT for SMEs over time. They were also asked what, in their opinion, are the
most important elements of competence that should be part of each of the identified dimensions of competence.
The semi-structured interviews allowed us sufficient flexibility to explore new questions that arose during the
interviews. We had the possibility to adapt the questions to the level of knowledge of the experts on the subject.
Interviewees may have experience and knowledge in applying study concepts but may lack the terminology used to
define OCDT. The formulation of the interview questions was adapted to the educational level and background of
the interviewees, although they were asked about the same topics. All this allowed us to obtain quality data and
increase the reliability and credibility of our OCDT model.
They were guided to talk about: 1) governance; 2) organizational alignment; 3) organizational culture;
4) technological characteristics and 5) employees, following the structure of competence dimensions of the
developed OCDT model. Finally, the interviewees were asked to evaluate the importance of the elements of
competence of each dimension, previously identified in the literature.
The results of the interviews were interpreted according to Saunders et al. (2009: page 535), who suggest that "the
results section may also contain textual citations from the interviewees," since "this is a particularly powerful way in
which you can convey the richness of your data. Often, a brief literal quotation can convey with penetrating
simplicity a particularly difficult concept you are trying to explain", and therefore it is suggested to "capture
accurately what the respondent said" (Saunders et al., 2009).
4.1. Findings
Firstly, all the interviewees explained the importance of organizational factors to advance in DT of SMEs, with
special importance given to management support. The commitment to digitalization in SMEs is closely related to
management philosophy. If management is committed to the importance of digitalization, the DT of SME will be
-19-

--- PAGE 6 ---
Journal of Industrial Engineering and Management – https://doi.org/10.3926/jiem.3279
higher. As one interviewee said, "a certain level of management maturity is necessary to advance in digitalization;
and advancing in DT of SME provides a framework that enhances the level of maturity”.
Although SMEs generally have little hierarchical organizational structures, employees can play different roles and
specialization is not very high (González-Varona, López-Paredes, Pajares et al., 2020), one interviewee emphasized
the possibility that there are differences in the development of OCDT at different levels or departments of the
organization.
An important factor identified by three of the interviewees was the need for an information culture "it is necessary
that information flows between all employees of the SME. In addition, the information must be relevant and of
good quality".
The information culture can be define as "the socially shared patterns of behavior, norms and values that define
the importance and use of information in an organization" (Choo, Bergeron, Detlor & Heaton, 2008; Choo,
Furness, Paquette, Van Den Berg Detlor, Bergeron et al., 2006).
We can identify four types of information culture in an organization: the results-oriented culture in which the aim is
to make it easier for the organization to compete and succeed in the market, the culture of following rules that
allows internal operations to be controlled and rules and policies to be strengthened, the culture of the relationship
that is managed to encourage team spirit and belonging, internal communication and participation, and finally, the
risk-taking culture, in which information is managed to encourage innovation, creativity and the generation of new
ideas. The information culture of an organization is related to organizational effectiveness (Choo, 2013).
In research by Marchand, Kettinger and Rollins (2001), with a survey of rather than thousand senior managers, they
identified three "information capabilities" that an organization needs to develop to improve its performance:
information technology practices, management practices of information and information behaviors and values.
Therefore, an open information culture involving the exchange of information should be particularly important for
the development of an OCDT and that is why in our improved model we included “information” as a new element
of competence within the culture dimension.
Interviewee Focus Contributions
Academic 1 Vision and strategy. Digital
leadership
Highlight the relevance of management's unequivocal commitment to DT
and the development of managerial competencies. Visualization of the
organization context to identify DT enablers.
Academic 2 Organizational learning
process and organizational
knowledge
Relevance of analysing links that indicate the reasoned causal relationship
between the elements of competence, in order to better understand the
dynamics of DT capabilities development during the organizational learning
process.
Academic 3 Organizational alignment
and organizational
structure. Digital maturity
Importance of organizational alignment to facilitate better performance and
foster agility in an environment dominated by change. Differences in OCDT
development between levels or departments in SMEs should be prevented.
Professional 1 Personal competencies.
Importance of personal
characteristics
Collaborative communities of practice play a special role in creating, sharing
and sustaining organizational learning and knowledge development. The
personal innovation capacity of employees, the willingness to change and new
ways of working facilitate the development of digital capabilities.
Professional 2 Technology selection,
acceptance and use
Emphasis on reliability and adaptation to the real needs of SMEs. The
technology must be part of the organization's know-how for its acceptance
and use after the implementation.
Professional 3 Information culture.
Organizational
effectiveness
Importance of information flowing through organization. The information
has to be relevant and of good quality. Information culture is related to
increased organizational effectiveness.
Table 1. Synthesis of interviews contributions
-20-

--- PAGE 7 ---
Journal of Industrial Engineering and Management – https://doi.org/10.3926/jiem.3279
Another interviewee emphasized the importance of the technological characteristics of the solutions to be adopted,
“one of the fundamental determinants for advancing DT, accepting it and being part of the SME's know-how, is
that the technology must be reliable and adapts to the real needs of SMEs”. When there are reasonable doubts that
the technology will fulfill its functions under certain conditions or provide functionalities that are unlikely to be
used, it is likely that its acceptance and use will be less.
All interviewees agreed that individual personal characteristics are very important for the development of employee
capabilities. One interviewee indicated that "training employees in accepting and using new digital technologies is
very important". Another interviewee said that "employees have different personal profiles: someone have
leadership skills and like to make decisions, others are creative and outgoing, someone are controlling and
organized", when people of different personalities and qualities come together it is easier to generate different
ideas, each employee has a different way of doing their tasks, different skills and their own character, this makes a
complementary team.
Another interviewee indicated that individual characteristics such as "curiosity, desire to advance, necessity for
personal development and even confidence in the use of technology" are very important, the capability for
personal innovation makes it easier for employees to develop their digital capabilities. In this sense, another
interviewee indicated that "the willingness to change and new ways of working" also reinforce these capabilities.
Figure 2. The refined model of Organizational Competence for Digital Transformation
Several interviewees identified as a relevant factor the perception by employees of the obligation to advance in DT.
If employees perceive a lack of commitment in senior management it will be much more difficult for them to
accept the necessary changes and will be an impediment to the development of the OCDT. Therefore, a clear
commitment reflected in the vision and strategy of the SME will be of great importance. There must also be clear
leadership in this regard, which does not allow doubting the need and obligation of DT, this will make it easier to
develop an OCDT.
Although we have developed the OCDT model from an internal perspective, some interviewees identified the external
competitiveness of SMEs as an important factor that will serve as an enabler for DT. The existing competition in the
market in which SMEs operate makes DT necessary and therefore developing an OCDT is very useful.
Based on the review made of the existing literature in WoS and Scopus on digital transformation and organizational
competence (González-Varona, Acebes et al. 2020) that allowed the development of the OCDT model in Figure 1
-21-

--- PAGE 8 ---
Journal of Industrial Engineering and Management – https://doi.org/10.3926/jiem.3279
and the subsequent review by experts that allowed the improvement of the model (Figure 2); we constructed a
conceptual definition of Organizational Competence for Digital Transformation as:
“SMEs ability to integrate people, resources, technology, processes, structure and culture in a digital
transformation with a government and strategy that supports them. The Organizational Competence for
Digital Transformation must be specifically aligned with the mission, vision and strategy of the company;
and its purpose must be to achieve the objectives set by the management and ensure continuous progress
in digital maturity, serving as a basis for achieving a competitive advantage”
5. Conclusion
This model will allow SMEs to identify the necessary digital capabilities and develop those that are not available.
Thus, it will help the digital transformation of business models with the aim of generating competitive advantages
that will enable SMEs to successfully adapt to the new competitive environment generated by digital technologies
and characterized by innovation and constant change. We believe that a model based on organizational
competencies can help SMEs advance in their digital maturity in the sense proposed by Kane (2017) to refer to the
capacity to respond to change early.
In our research, we have identified the most important challenges that SMEs face in their DT and what are the
most relevant organizational DT capabilities that SMEs need to be developed in order to advance in their digital
maturity. DT capabilities can constitute an OCDT according to the model that we have developed, which will allow
SMEs to advance in their digital maturity.
All companies have DT capabilities, these can be developed and become a DT competence. This competence will
allow SMEs to advance in the digital maturity of their business. The results of the research contribute to a better
understanding of all the processes that allow the advancement of DT and its relation to the training and
development of the competence elements that constitute the DT capabilities in SMEs. Our model is based on
organizational learning and organizational competence theories and models.
The developed OCDT model will help to fulfill the strategic organizational objectives and resource assignment
towards DT based on organizational competencies, regarding organizational culture, systemic view of the process
and organizational learning.
Furthermore, in the refined model we identify organizational knowledge as a strategic resource for the formation
of the elements of competence and the advance in the development and maturity of the OCDT. It would be
important to research actions needed to promote, retain, share and use organizational knowledge, how training
programs and other types of business actions can help.
We propose future studies to establish links indicating the causal-logical relationship between the elements of
competence, as proposed by one of the interviewees, in order to better understand the process of organizational
learning and the dynamics of training and development of the elements of competence during the organizational
learning process. Another need identified by one of the interviewees was to develop a planned process to enable
management to initially identify the capabilities and elements of competence in SMEs.
We also propose future studies based on deepening and widening the scope of research, through a greater number
of interviews, case studies and progress in the digital maturity of SMEs thanks to the implementation of the
OCDT model; to check the viability and usefulness of the model.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication
of this article.
Funding
The authors received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
-22-

--- PAGE 9 ---
Journal of Industrial Engineering and Management – https://doi.org/10.3926/jiem.3279
References
Berman, S.J. (2012). Digital transformation: opportunities to create new business models. Strategy & Leadership,
40(2), 16-24. https://doi.org/10.1108/10878571211209314
Blatz, F., Bulander, R., & Dietel, M. (2018). Maturity model of digitization for SMEs Maturity model to measure the
status of digitization in SMEs. 2018 IEEE International Conference On Engineering, Technology And Innovation
(ICE/ITMC). 345 E 47th St, New York, NY.
Carson, D., Gilmore, A., Perry, C., & Gronhaug, K. (2001). Qualitative marketing research. London: SAGE.
Choo, C.W. (2013). Information culture and organizational effectiveness. International Journal of Information
Management, 33(5), 775-779. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2013.05.009
Choo, C.W., Bergeron, P., Detlor, B., & Heaton, L. (2008). Information culture and information use: An exploratory
study of three organizations. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 59(5), 792-804.
https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.20797
Choo, C.W., Furness, C., Paquette, S., Van Den Berg, H., Detlor, B., Bergeron, P. et al. (2006). Working with
information: Information management and culture in a professional services organization. Journal of Information
Science, 32(6), 491-510. https://doi.org/10.1177/0165551506068159
González-Varona, J.M., López-Paredes, A., Pajares, J., Acebes, F., & Villafáñez, F. (2020). Aplicabilidad de los
Modelos de Madurez de Business Intelligence a PYMES. Dirección y Organización, (71), 31-45.
https://doi.org/10.37610/dyo.v0i71.577
González-Varona, JM, Acebes, F., Poza, D., & López-Paredes, A. (2020). Fostering Digital Growth in SMEs:
Organizational Competence for Digital Transformation. En Luis M. Camarinha-Matos; Hamideh Afsarmanesh;
Angel Ortiz (Ed.), Boosting Collaborative Networks 4.0 (pp. 237-248). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-62412-5_20
González-Varona, J.M., Poza, D., Acebes, F., Villafáñez, F., Pajares, J., & López-Paredes, A. (2020). New Business
Models for Sustainable Spare Parts Logistics: A Case Study. Sustainability (Switzerland), 12(8), 3071.
https://doi.org/10.3390/SU12083071
Gurbaxani, V., & Dunkle, D. (2019). Gearing up for successful digital transformation. MIS Quarterly Executive, 18(3),
209-220. https://doi.org/10.17705/2msqe.00017
Hess, T., Benlian, A., Matt, C., & Wiesböck, F. (2016). Options for Formulating a Digital Transformation Strategy.
MIS Quarterly Executive, 15(2), 103-119.
Javidan, M. (1998). Core Competence: What Does it Mean in Practice? Long Range Planning, 31(1), 60-71.
https://doi.org/10.1016/s0024-6301(97)00091-5
Johnson, M.W., Christensen, C.M., & Kagermann, H. (2008). Reinventing your business model. Harvard Business
Review, 86(12), 50-59.
Kane, G.C. (2017). Digital maturity, not digital transformation. MIT Sloan Management Review. Available at:
https://sloanreview.mit.edu/article/digital-maturity-not-digital-transformation/
Legner, C., Eymann, T., Hess, T., Matt, C., Böhmann, T., Drews, P. et al. (2017). Digitalization: Opportunity and
Challenge for the Business and Information Systems Engineering Community. Business and Information Systems
Engineering, 59(4), 301-308. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12599-017-0484-2
Marchand, D.A., Kettinger, WJ., & Rollins, J.D. (2001). Information Orientation: The Link to Business Performance. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Mittal, S., Romero, D., & Wuest, T. (2018). Towards a Smart Manufacturing Maturity Model for SMEs (SM3E). In
IFIP Advances in Information and Communication Technology, 536, 155-163. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-99707-0_20
-23-

--- PAGE 10 ---
Journal of Industrial Engineering and Management – https://doi.org/10.3926/jiem.3279
Ng, H.Y., Tan, P.S., & Lim, Y.G. (2018). Methodology for Digitalization - A Conceptual Model. 2018 IEEE
International Conference on Industrial Engineering and Engineering Management (IEEM) (1269-1273).
https://doi.org/10.1109/IEEM.2018.8607457
North, K., & Varvakis, G. (2016). Competitive Strategies for Small and Medium Enterprises. In Competitive Strategies
for Small and Medium Enterprises. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-27303-7
Pham, Q.T. (2017). Measuring the ICT maturity of SMEs. In A Knowledge Management Approach for Ensuring the Success
of IT Industries in Vietnam (1-24). Nova Science Publishers, Inc.
Sanchez, R. (2004). Understanding competence-based management - Identifying and managing five modes of
competence. Journal of Business Research, 57(5), 518-532. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0148-2963(02)00318-1
Saunders, M., Lewis, P., & Thornhill, A. (2009). Research Methods For Business Students. Financial Times/Prentice Hall.
Silverman, D. (2007). A Very Short, Fairly Interesting and Reasonably Cheap Book about Qualitative Research (2nd ed.).
SAGE.
Sousa, M.J., & Rocha, Á. (2019). Digital learning: Developing skills for digital transformation of organizations.
Future Generation Computer Systems, 91, 327-334. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2018.08.048
Teece, D.J., Pisano, G., & Shuen, A. (1997). Dynamic capabilities and strategic management. Strategic Management
Journal, 18(7), 509-533. https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(199708)18:7<509::AID-SMJ882>3.0.CO;2-Z
Uhl, A., & Gollenia, L.A. (2016). Digital Enterprise Transformation. In A. Uhl & L. A. Gollenia (Eds.), Digital
Enterprise Transformation: A Business-Driven Approach to Leveraging Innovative IT. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315577166
Vial, G. (2019). Understanding digital transformation: A review and a research agenda. The Journal of Strategic
Information Systems, 28(2), 118-144. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis.2019.01.003
Journal of Industrial Engineering and Management, 2021 (www.jiem.org)
Article’s contents are provided on an Attribution-Non Commercial 4.0 Creative commons International License. Readers are
allowed to copy, distribute and communicate article’s contents, provided the author’s and Journal of Industrial Engineering and
Management’s names are included. It must not be used for commercial purposes. To see the complete license contents, please
visit https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.
-24-